ALEXENA; 

OB, TUB 

Castle of Santa Marco. 

A ROMANCE, 
IN THREE VOLUMES. 



Vcl.III.Pa<ye35. 




BAOCjtS Sf- 



ALEXEN A ; 

0»5 THE 

Castle of Santa Marco, 

A romance; . 

IN THREE VOLUMES, 



EMBELLISHED WITH ENGRAVINGS. 



*i Ye gods of quiet and of sleep profound! 
Whose soft dominion o'er this castle sways ; 
And all the widely silent places round. 
Forgive me, if my trembling pen displays 
What never yet was sung in mortal lays.'* 



VOL. III. 



LonDon: 

Printed at the Minerva Press, for 
A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-ST. 

1817. 



V. 3 



ALEXENA; 



OR THE 



Castle of Santa Marco. 



CHAPTER I. 

*• O ! bid me lesip ■ ■ 

From off the battlements of ycnder tower; 

Or chain me to some steepy mountain's top. 

Where roaring hears and savage lions roam ; 

Or shut me nightly in a carnal-house, 

O'er-covered quite with dead men's rattl'ing bones> 

With reeky shanks, and yellow chapless sculls ; 

Or bid me go into a new-made grave, 

And hide me with a dead man in his shroud ; 

Things, that to hear them told, have made me tremble ; 

And I will do it, without fear or doubt. 

To live an unstained wife to my sweet love." 

RoM. & Jdl» 

>T HILE Montane and his unfortu- 
nate servant were pursuing- Louisa 
through the deserted chambers of the 
caslle, Alexena lay senseless in the 

VOL. III. A 



JS ALEXENA ; OR TH-E 

armoury, until Carracci sent Clarissa 
to her assistance, vvlio found her so 
ill, that she was obliged to call on the 
chieftain, and beg he would bear her 
to her apartment. He was then endea- 
vouring to sooth Louisa, who had 
been safely conveyed by him into a 
subterranean chamber, and was almost 
inconsolable, in consequence of being 
separated from our heroine ; but, on 
hearing her melancholy situation, she 
resolved to brave every peril, and see 
her once again before their final sepa- 
ration, though Belzo positively swore 
lie never would allow her to return ; 
therefore, it was not without many 
tears, and the earnest entreaties of 
Clarissa, that he suffered her to accom- 
pany him ; but having, at length, as- 
sented, he first despatched Monfrane to 
watch the monk, and prevent him from 
burying Hugo in the cemetery. 

When Alexena re2:ained her men- 
tal powers, she found herself in the 
arms of the robber, who bore her 
swiftly along-, through many secret 






CJISTLE O^ SANTA MARCO. 3 

patliways ; but >vhGre tliey led, she 
was unable to demand, yet felt little 
uneasiness, \vhen she saw her friends 
on each side of her. Carracci was 
pleased by the silence she observed, 
as it seemed to say she confidently re- 
lied on his honour; and when extreme 
weakness compelled her to rest her 
head on his bosom, it thrilled with 
delight. Mortimer was envied for an 
instant; yet Carracci became more 
seriously interested for his welfare 
than ever ; and as to Alexena — woe 
betide those who dare breathe her 
name with disrespect ! as the grave 
alone could hide them from his ven- 
geance. His every thought was so 
devoted to her service, (hat his eyes 
beamed with such excessive brightness, 
that their lightnings served for torches 
to guide him on his way ; and had he 
been attacked while she rested on his 
shoulder, they would have blighted the 
forms of his enemies — scorched them 
to the very bones — withered their 

A 3 



iA * . ALEXIN a; or the 

strenacth^ and overvvlielmed them witiji 
confusion. You might 

*' — — Ken the manner of his gait ; 
He rises on his toe : that spirit of his 
In aspiration lifts him from the earth," 

^s he moves forward with his lovely 
burthen, who, in a few moments, he 
placed in a chair in her own apartment, 
>vhere every thing remained in the 
same situation in which she had left it. 
Clarissa was now obliged to say that 
Louisa could not remain wilh her any 
longer, as her life liad been proscribed, 
and would certainly fall a sacrifice 
to the unrelenting barbarity of either 
Acasto or the monk, if she was not 
immediately removed to a place of 
safety. This was sad tidifsgs ; but 
Alexena loved her friend too sincerely 
to entertain one selfisli wish ; on the 
contrary, being assured of the necessity 
of the measure, she insisted on its in- 
sriant execution, though the separation 
should prove a death-blow to her peace. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARGO. O 

Gurracci admired the fortitude, the 
patience, with which she supported this 
painful trial, and blessed her, as he 
retired into an adjoining' chamber, 
where he waited until such time us 
Clarissa and Louisa had assisted her 
to undress, and when they again joined 
him, he was deliirhted to find she had 
been soothed by their promises of 
meeting- her, at least, once every other 
day, and oftener, if possible. 

^Vhile they pursued the frightful 
])ath which led to the cavern, whose 
horrors Louisa had yet to encounter, 
she asked numberless questions re- 
spectinf^ Lord Mortimer, who, she was 
dreadfully shocked to hear, had been 
dangerously ill for the last fortnight, 
and was only then slowly recovering. 
Agitation, and the unwholesome air of 
the subterraneans, had undermined his 
health, and almost reduced liim to the 
last extrernity ; but, father Zelo's skill, 
aided by a naturally good constitution, 
with the uiiremitting attention of his 
friends and domestics, subdued th<5- 



t) alexena; an the 

disease, and promised to restore healili 
and happiness; as Belzo had been in 
Rome, \vhere his mission was crowned 
with success, and promised joy and 
felicity to all those, about whose wel- 
fare our readers may in any wise be 
interested. 

Let us now return to Montano, who 
Yve left tortured by all the pangs which 
rend a guilty soul. On regaining his 
chamber, he cursed his misfortune, until 
early dawn, and then rose for the purpose 
of seeking Don Philip, who he was sur- 
prised to find already dressed. Much 
astonished, he entreated to know 
the meaning of such an unusual cir- 
cumstance, and was almost petrified, 
on beii5g ififornied, that a courier from 
Italy, had brought in the course of 
the night, a letter ffom one of Don 
Philip's trusty agents, which stated, that 
an accurate and true account of all 
their recent tratisactions were laid 
before tl>e Inquisition, by the ponlifT 
himself, with strict injunctions to the 
holy tribunal, to bring the perpetra- 



GA5TLE or SANTA MARCO. f 

iots to immediate punishment; ** and 
you see/' continued Acasto^ '' that you 
are the first on the list ; and not a 
single soldier or domestic have escaped 
the proscription." 

*' Since we are so unfortunate/' said 
Montano, *' it is better that all are 
included, as it will convince them, 
nothing but a desperate resistance can 
ensure their safety." 

*' 1 am iiiclined to think/' observed 
Don Philip, " that there is at least one 
traitor in the castle ; yet, who in my 
lioushold can it be: all are named, 
except Margaret, and she has not ihfi 
power to do mischief, even if she had 
the inclination." 

*' Let me see the list/' anxiously de- 
manded the monk, " as you may have 
overlooked it rather negligently." 

Acasto placed it in his hands, and he 
kaving read it wiih great attention, 
after a thoughtful pause, said, " there 
are three namqs not written here, but 
to one only can suspicion attach." 

" Name the three/' demanded Do:. 



8 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

Philip, " that I may exterminate 
them" 

*' Fernandez, Ijarco, and Vv'illiams, 
the? English seaman." 

*' On the fidelity of the two first I 
Mill stake my existence, but as to the 
other, the succeeding hour shall be his 
last ; and the two former must he im- 
prisoned, until I hear from Home." 

" Father Ambrose can easily satisfy 
you/' replied the monk ; '^ 1 know him 
well ; he is in the confidence of the 
chief inquisitors, besides being a mem- 
ber ; therefore, you are most fortunate 
in having such a friend." 

'^'That is not what interests me at 
present," he pettishly muttered, "go 
instantly, tell Fernandez to seize 
Williams, and order all the soldiers and 
domestics to attend in the great hall at 
noon, as I then mean to read this letter, 
and shew them ihe "reainess of their 
danger." 

" I do not approve of those precipi- 
tate measures," said Montano, ''and if 
I may oiTer my advice, you will not 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 9 

persist in such an intention, as the 
consequence will be obviously this ; — 
the fears of the inquisitorial tortures may 
induce many to endeavour to escape, 
and should this happen, the consterna- 
tion w'lW become general, and it is 
likely, will end in mutiny, if not in 
n>urder.'' 

While they yet remained undeter- 
mined how to act, a second courier 
arrived, whose information almost drove 
Don Philio distracted. The kiu2: had 
discovered the falsehood of his accusa- 
tion aii-aiiist Don Mi^fuel, and iu consc- 
quence thereof, set an enormous price 
on his head ; he had also been publicly 
impeached by Henri Count Bolerno, 
as a murderer and outlaw, and with 
having- imprisoned Alexenade Guzman, 
for the iniquitous purpose of compel- 
ling her to receive his hand ; in v.hich 
numerous offences, he was aided and 
assisted by one Montano, a monk of the 
Dominican order, who had recently 
been tried in effigy, found guilty, and 
fcurnt, tor sacrileiiiouslv robbinir thi^ 

A 5 



10 ALEXENA; OR THK 

monasteiy of his order ; and further, 
that the said monk did commit murder, 
in the presence of the said Henri, in 
tlie court-yard of the Castle of Santa 
Marco, and the soldiery of Don Philip 
in the passes of the Pyrenees. 

'•' What say you to all this?" said 
Acasto, when he had finished, " Did I 
not read it distinctly?'* 

'' Oh ! plain enough ; but the quere 
is, how shall we escape the joint venge- 
ance of the king and inquisition ?" 

*' There is no safety in the neigh- 
"bouring kingdoms, not even in Eng- 
land, nor in France, as the power of his 
liolinessis acknowledged everywhere." 

*' Then," exclaimed iMontano, "here 
\Te shall stand the hazard of the die, 
and perish rather than yield ; but, it 
were well this Alexena was your v.ifr^ 
as if slic could once be induced to 
acknowledge you as her husband, the 
Guzman family would save you on 
their own account, and,, probably, by 
their unbounded influence, hush this 
business altogether." 



iTASTLE or SANTA MARCO. 11 

'* Confounded ass that I am! I would 
jiever Iiave(houi>'lit of that. — Yes, yes* 
Alexena^, thou shalt be niine^ and save 
the life and fortune of Acasto." 

'' I hope Louisa is safe/' said Mon- 
tano, interrupting him, *' as she will be 
demanded at our hands ; therefore, if 
Hu2:o missed her, all is well." 

'* Let instant search be made, and if 
found, she shall not behold heaven's 
light, until you bestow the nuptial 
blessin.<r on Alexena and mvself." 

The monk now heartily despised 
Acasto for his versatilitv.asone moment 
he was sad, and ready to expire in 
despair; the next almost frantic with 
joy, about that which it was possible 
might never happen ; and while he 
gave orders to Torqiio, to have (he 
castle carefully examined, the former 
was devising the most likely means to 
induce our heroine to submit to this 
detested marriage. The result of his 
deliberations were, that Vjm Philip 
should use force, unless she consented 
^'ith^igosd grace ; and rnsfanlly af(er 



Jg alexena; on the 

advised liim to that effect. lie 
readily assented to tlie necessity of the 
measure^ and desired the monk to try 
every means, except tliose by whicls 
her life mioht be endanijrercd : and that 
lie would be guided by his advice. 

" Then 1 promise you success ; the 
proud girl shall willingly be your's, 
Aviihout suffering any tortures,, except 
a few mental ones, which we could not 
effect our purpose without resorting 
to. I shall bring her before you, and 
unless she is all you can wish, deliver 
her over to my government, and leave 
the rest to me." 

Thus Montano flattered him with 
sanguine hopes of speedy success, and 
instantly afJer went in pursuit of Alex- 
ena, with whom he returned, accom- 
panied by Torquo, who attended to 
say, that every habitable part of the 
castle had been investigated, but Louisa 
could not be found, and m.ust, therefore, 
liave sought shelter in those chambers 
which had been disused for several 
years past. 



•m- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO. J.I 

'' It is not now material/' said Don 
Philip; '' lo-morrow, or in a few days 
liencej we will seek her there." 

" She may starve in the mean^time^ 
or expire in terror," observed the monk. 

" 1 do not wish to be troubled about 
her at present, as I have many other 
things to think of, which are of greater 
importance ; therefore^ be so good as 
to drop the subject." 

" May I request to know what are 
Don Acaslo's commands?" timidly de- 
manded our heroine, who had been 
listening to this dialogue. 

*' IMay you? — Oh, Ladj Alexena, 
forgive this excessive rudeness; and 
believe me, I shall feel most unhappy^ 
if I have, even unintentionally, offended; 
but my mind has been sotortured about 
that young woman, who had the honour 
to wait on you this some time, and 
who has now either thought proper to 
withdraw from the castle, or secret her- 
self, that 1 was likely to expire with 
srief and terror." 

'' Oh ! yes ; very likely; but am I to 



It alexena; or the 

iinderfstandj I have been brouglit here 
merely to have this most unpleasant 
news communicated in the presence of 
\\\G wretch who has driven her to the 
dreadful allt^rnative of " 

"Of what?" demanded Acasto. 

'' You must finish tlie sentence^ as I 
cannot." 

" Well, whether am I to suppose 
she has escaped in the disguise of a 
soldier, or leaped from the battlements?* 

" Louisa could never entertain a 
thought of suicide ; therefore^ I think 
the former is most likely." 

" And Williams is gone off with her,.. 
to conduct her in safety to court." 

" I should be delighted was that 
really the case, and I sincerely trust 
you have prophesied the truth, (hough 
1 am aware what you have ah'cadysaid 
has been for the purpose of both fret- 
ting and insulting me." 

Torquo now entered, and Acasto 
ordered him to bring up Williams, that 
lie might convince Donna Alexena, her 
feu.spicicns were groundless respecting 



CASTLE OF SANTA T.IAIIGO. I3V 

Signiora Louisa's escape ; but \Tas 
tlniuderstruck on lioarin^^ ho could not 
lie found, and that both Larco and 
Fernandez were also missing. 

'' Fly !" excUiimed Acasto, who wa& 
now outra^-eous; " fly ! and order every 
court arid tower to be searched^ and 
shouhl Ihe fni^iiives be found, conduct 
<hom to the keep instantly. Now,. 
Donna Alexena, hear me: letters from 
Rome and Madrid^ which I received 
last niarht, state, that Louisa's brothcv 
was in this castle some time ago, and 
after his liberation, went instantly to his 
majesty, before whom he laid a state- 
ment, in which he accused me of many 
enormous crimes, which never were 
eommilted ; but the consequence is, my 
life is endangered, and there is no pos- 
sible means by which I can escape, ex- 
cept by marrying, or sacrificing you ^ 
now, as my personal safety renders one 
orthe otlicrabsolutelynecessary, I think 
it best to be thus exi)licit, and here are 
the letters, which must remove every 
doubt oi^ the truth of what I have 



IS alexena; or the 

stated. From this, you can form an ^ 
idea of the perils by which I am en- 
compassed, and the utter impossibility 
that exists, of your having- any thin«j 
to expect from my clemency, unless you 
consent to be mine; should you bless 
me with your hand, my future life shall 
be devoted to your happiness ; if not — 
oh! drive me not to the cruel alter- 
native ; your form, beautiful as it is, 
must fall beneath the stiletto of an 
assassin. The existence of every in- 
dividual beneath these walls, call on - 
me to decide instantly; therefore, in 
two hours, prepare either to receive my 

hand, or the monk will inform you 

of the rest." 

Don Philip then hurried from the 
chamber, in order to seek his trea- 
cherous domestics, and to assemble his 
soldiers, on whose fidelity to himself, 
and incorrigible wickedni3ss towards the 
rest of mankind, he determined to rely, 
and in his opinion of them he was not 
mistaken, for when he informed them of 
llieir dang-cr, and his determination to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAF.CO. 17 

resist, he was received with loud accla- 
mations. Ill the mean time, our 
heroine sat in the chamber in which he 
had left her, praying- for fortitude to 
support her through the last sad scene, 
as she had ah-eady resolved to die 
ratiier than marry him ; and while in this 
state of mental torture, Montano fre- 
quently passed through the chamber, 
to observe, whether Don Pliilip had any- 
thing- to expect, and was surprised to 
find her quite calm and collected, 
though she refused to answer his ques- 
tions, or even drop a sentence, from 
which he miiiht form an idea of her 
resolution ; but the two hours having 
expired, Acasto re-appeared, and on his 
entrance, begged to know her final 
determination. Our lieroine then rose, 
and with a firmness which surprised 
both him and the monk, said, "she was 
resigned to her cruel and undeserved 
fate, yet freely forgave him, and all her 
other enemies ; requesting, if she was 
to die, that she might not he insulted iu 
her last moments^ and relied, that the 



18 ALES.ENA ; OE TUE 

manner of it would be as speedy, aud 
^Tith as Utile pain, as possible. 

Acasto beheld her with adiniratlon, 
bordering on pity, but on finding his 
hopes blasted by her resignation, he 
burst into a violent fit of rage, and 
exclaimed, '' Infatuated woman ! from. 
Montano only can you expect clemen- 
cy ; my oath, my honour^ is pledged to 
my soldiers, who with me have openly 
bid defiance to the king and holy 
tribunal; but, lest we should be de- 
feated, I have pledged myseli^ to^ 
remove every living witness who can 
injure us. Believe me, my heart never 
f^ustaiiied so severe a trial as it has 
done within this last hour ; your 
obstinacy has novv^ removed every sha- 
dow of future comfort of your life. I 
cannot save you ; but tliis j-our last re- 
quest shall be attended to. — IMontano, 
let her die by tlie sword, dagger, 
poison, or suffocation ; which ever fancy 
may point out as the gentlest method 
of destruction ; humanity forbids me to 
say more ; — Alexena, fare^^cl ! a!id mn; 



CASTLE OF EAKTA MARCO. 19 

angels waft you on celestial wings to 
paradise." 

*' One word more, Don Philip ; stay, 
1 conjure you," faultered our heroine. 
*' Siiould Lord Mortimer ever become 
your prisoner, save and send bim to Ijis 
own country, and I will pray for you 
with my latest breath/' 

" May lightnin<^s — no, never — he 
dies by this hand, if ever in my power; 
but, repent — say you are mine, and let 
him live, for " 

'' Enough! Don Acasto. Father, lead 
on ; 1 am ready to brave your most 
cruel torments ; for as promises are 
but wind, I much fear you will not lose 
this opportunity of feasting your eyes 
on the aixonized form of the afhanced 
wife of that Mortimer, who defies vour 
malice, and will, as sure as justice 
reigns in heaven, punish you." 

" When ladies are feverish, bleeding, 
I understand, relieves them," replied the 
monk ; "" and a? you seem unwell, it is 
my intention to try the experiment." 

Acasto now rushed from the cham- 



20 ALEXEKA ; OR THE 

her, while the former stamped on the 
floor^ and was instantly attended by 
Torquo, and two savage ruffians, who 
he ordered to bind Alexena, and con- 
vey her to the western tower." 

*' There is no necessity for rudeness^ 
siiiniors. I will walk there, and submit 
without a murmur, or offering Iheslii^ht^ 
est resistance." The men now appear- 
ed unwHling- to obey ; while the monk 
liavins: observed their expressive looks, 
and conceiving' her beauty and inno- 
cence mi2:ht induce them to save her, 
ordered them to follow him, but to 
wait without, and be in readiness, should 
he require their assistance. Torquo 
had, by this time, bound the fair hands 
of his victim behind, and having 
thrown a veil over her, led the way to 
the fatal prison, which she had scarce 
entered, before Montano placed her en 
a bench, at the same time saying, " it 
was his intention, notwithstanding 
n\\ her ill treatment, to give her the 
choice mentioned by Don Philip." 
Onr heroine gazed wildly round ; there 



-(•ASTLE OF SANTA MATICO. 21 

;\vas 110 friend nigh ; and Acasto had 
really given orders for her execution. 
Death hovered over her ; there was no 
means of escape; no tears could move 
the obdurate Montano, who, on finding 
she would not make a choice^ bound 
one of her arms, which he uncovered ; 
yet, for a moment, i(s snowy v. hile- 
ness delayed his purpose ; it felt so 
soft, was so elegantly formed, so round, 
so beautiful — but it was Alexena's. — 
The monster frowned, and prepared a 
lancet, while he said, *' Lady, commend 
yourself to heaven, for you have only 
a few moments to live; as, being young-, 
your blood will flow quickly ; and, I 
suppose, it is unnecessary to say, I 
shall drain those veins of their last 
jdrop — Torquo, hold her." 

" I repeat it is unnecessary,"* she 
replied ; " I am resigned." 

Torquo retired behind the monk, 
who had taken Alexena's hand, and 
while he raised the instrument of death, 
observed — "The point of tisis is poi- 
soned ; a touch ensures destruction. 



fS alexeha; oa rii2 

Dne moment is yet allowed ; will you* 

marry Acasto ? or shall I ." She 

heard him not ; her eyes were rivetted 
to the form of Carracci, who stood in 
a breach formed in the wall, and was 
at that instant, by liis gestures^ medi- 
taUni»: the most direful veno'eance. He 
irnashed his teeth, shook his mailed 
arm, and when the monk raised his, 
with the intention of perpetrating- his 
horrible purpose, the former stamped 
his foot with such violence, that the 
chamber shook, and before either Mon- 
tano or his assistant could ascertain 
the cause, the floor fell from beneath 
their feet, and they were precipitated, 
with dreadful violence, into an apart- 
ment below, from which their groans 
ascended, giving a convincing proof 
that they had not fallen into a bed of 
down. The boards instantly resinned 
their former position, and then Carracci 
advanced into the room, and while he 
Unbound our heroine, said, " Fear 
nothing; I am always watchful of your 
safety; and, if it please God, a very 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. S3 

fe'.v days shall expire before I restore 
Vou to liberty and your friends, many 
of whom have already arrived, and arc 
in my cavern ; but as it is incumbent 
on me to be absent for a short time, I 
request you will not irritate Acasto by 
a steady refusal of his hand, and before 
it is possible for him to resort again to 
harsh measures, his power shall end 
for ever." 

" Oh ! why not save me now V' she 
exclaimed ; " why not restore me to 
the arms of my Louisa V' 

" Believe me, I would most v»illin<*'- 
ly ; but the attempt would be attended 
by destruction ; for if the castle was 
too minutely examined, all our private 
paths would be discovered ; and there 
are other reasons which I have not time 
to explain. So, may heaven bless you ! 
— Farewel !" 

He now disappeared ; and the soldiers 
who waited without having become 
impatient, knocked at the door, and 
were admitted by Alexena, who, on 
entering-, were surprised to find her 



24 alexena; or the 

alone; but became tenified/on obserr- 
ing (he chamber had but the one door, 
through which they had entered, and 
that Montano could not have passed 
through that without their knowledge. 

*' Lady/' said one of the men, in a 
stammering voice, '' may I ask what 
has became of the monk and Torquo V* 
A deep groan now rolled along the 
walls, which encreased their terror, 
while Alexena replied — *• Heaven, in 
its mercy to me, snatched them from 
this room, the floor of which has open- 
ed, and they have fallen, I know not 
whither." 

'' Into a lake of brimstone, I fear," 
observed Pedrillo; ''and tliat is the 
end Bill Williams has prophesied for 
both, an hundred times." 

" Where is that good creature?" in- 
quired our heroine. 

'' We do not know, lady: but it is 
suspected, he, Fernandez, and Larco, 
have 2:one off tosrether in the Brioan- 
tine, as she has been missed from her 
usual anchorage." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. tj 

" Have they been pursued ?" 

"No; that was impossible, as Don 
Philip has but one other vessel, v^hich 
is many leagues from this, and it was 
in her that you were conveyed from 
13ayonne." 

*' 1 trust," continued Alcxena, " that 
his escape is unquestionable, as he is a 
kind, good-natured fellow." 

^ Tliat he is, lady, and brave as a 
lion ; but vvhat are your confimands ? 
shall we relate what we have heard to 
Don Acasto ? if we do, he will order 
this floor to be torn up in search of the 
fether." 

'" Oh, certairdy !" she replied, " and 
i am reprehensible for detaining you so 
long, when the wretched man may re- 
quire your assistance." 

" Reprehensible ! — oh ! the virgin 
will forgive you that offence; as it is 
not clear to us, but he has had orders 
to murder you." 

"■ And did you not know it?" she 
demanded. 

VOL. III. B 



fO ALEXENA ; Ott THE 

" Know it ! exclaimed Launcelot — 
" Saint Jago forbid ! I never was 
backward in cutting throats in a battle ; 
but am not altogether so great a scoun- 
drel as to turn assassin, and murder 
women. If that was Montano's errand 
liere, I hope he will never grope his 
way into the world again ; and for my 
own part, I shall not serve such masters 
an hour longer, if I can help it." 

" Nor I, neither," said Pedrillo; 
''^ and may a plague rot them all," 

They now left the apartment, and 
•went in search of Margaret, who they 
promised to send to our heroine as 
fcoon as possible. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAP.L'O. £7 



CHAP. II. 



If thou didst but consent 



To this most cruel act, do but despair ; 

And, if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread 

That ever spider twisted from her womb 

Will serve to strangle thee; a rush will be 

A beam to hang thee on ; or, vvould'st thou drowQ 

thyself, 
Put but a little water in a spoon, 
And it shall be as the ocean. 
Enough to stifle such a villain up." 

King John. 



V? IIILE MonJano was tormenting 
our lieroinGj Acasto v\as busily em- 
ployed searching for Louisa, who he 
was most anxious to discover, as if he 
had her again in his power, he made 
no doubt but Alexena would consent, 
rather than allow her to be poisoned, 
which it was his intention to threaten 
to do, unless the former gave him her 
hand. He had, by this time, given over 
the idea of being able to seize Fernandez 
or his companions ; therefore, his search 
was entirely confined to the former, 
who he every moment expected to find 



B 2 



'28 alexena; or the 



in some desolate chamber; but lus 
labours ended in disappointment, and 
be V, as about to give up tbe fr'uitless 
attempt, wlren the moans of" some per- 
sons in distress excited his attention ; 
having ascertained from whence tlicy 
proceeded, he ordered the door of an 
adjacent cell, "which light had never 
visited, to be burst open, and tlien dis- 
covered JMontano and Torqno King on 
the lloor, almost sensele^^s from cold 
and loss of blood. Astonished beyond 
measure at this extraordinary circum- 
stance, he assisted them to the hall, 
from which they were removed to their 
chambers, extremely ill; and several 
hours elapsed before either could satis- 
fy his impatient curiosity. On hear- 
ing what had occurred, Alexena was, 
exami^ned as to her knovvleclge of the 
event; but avoided an explanation, by 
saying that a messenger of an All- 
seeing Providence had thus punis'hcd 
them for their wanton cruelty. 

The monk received instructions not 
to inflict any bodily torture oa the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 29 ' 

person of our heroine ; bnt by every 
ingenious art, to work upon her fears, 
and although he, lieretofore, felt an 
unnatural pleasure in tormenting, it 
never was his inte^.tion to destroy her ; 
but Hugo's deatii, and the bruises 
which he liad received in his fall from 
her chamber^ wound his debased mind 
to a state ofsavage ferocity, beyond idea 
brutal, and he then impatiently looked 
forward to the hour when renovated 
strenirth svouid enable him to wreak 
Ids vengeance on her. In a week lie 
was able to walk on the ramparts, and 
in less than a fortnight had our heroine 
ones more under his tntorai^e, who, 
after suiferinij: innumerable insults from 
his barbarous treatment, was, at length, 
condemned to be chained in one of the 
■ most gloomy dungeons, and starved, 
liutil such time as her stubborn spirit 
feliould yield to Acasto's wishes ; and 
scarce had this horrible sentence been 
protiounced, ere the monk carried it 
into execution. It vvould be tedious 
to eniimerate all the argv.ments Don 



50 ALEXENA; OR THE 

Philip used to persuade her to aban- 
don her lover's hopeless cause ; but 
let it suffice, she was immovable, 
and Avas, in consequence, borne by 
^lontano into the most frightful of the 
subterranean prisons known to him, 
and as he passed through the windings 
of the vanity avenues which led to them, 
lie taunted Alexena with every expres- 
sion likely to add to her mental suffer- 
ings. " I bear you/' said he, '^ to a 
rocky couch, where a stone shall be 
your pillowy and chains your only 
covering ; there, in gloomy damp- 
ness, you may feast on reflection, and 
when your lips are parched with thirst, 
lick the mothy dew off the clammy 
walls; but it is possible, if you call loud 
enough, Mortimer will hasten to your 
assistance, and, assuming some seraphic 
shape, bear you through the regions 
of the air, to his native clime, where 
you will become a convert to that mon- 
strous doctrine which again spreads 
her demoniac wii)o:s round his devoted 
land ; for know — its guardian angel. 



6ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 31 

Mary, the queen^ sleeps with hey 
fathers." 

The monk had now reached a fliirht 
of stone stairs, which terminated in a 
low, but spacious cavern, and in it, at 
regular distances, there were small, 
square doors, through which, cries and 
j^roans of anguish, accompanied by 
the clanking of chains, were distinctly 
heard. 

''Are not those sounds deiiijhtful:" 
demanded Montano. — " Do they not 
raise your drooping spirits? — Oh! they 
certainly must; and, to prove how 
sincerely 1 wish to make you comfort- 
able, you shall have an adjoining 
chamber. — Look here ! — what think 
you of this?" 

The inhuman villain now dragged 
her into a loathsome vaults in which 
there was a miserable flock bed, half 
rotted by damp, and nigh devoured by 
vermin, with a small table, whereon 
.some meat and bread was already 
placed ; a rocky bench served for a 
chair, and to it were fastened several 



32 ALCXENA ; OR THE 

massy iron chains. Moiitano raised his 
]amp, that she might, at one vicvy, see 
all its liorrors, then set it down^ and 
prepared to chain her to the wall. 
Her conrage now waA'ered ; twice she 
was about to demand liberty on his 
owh terms ; but the visions of fancy 
presented the trembling- shade of Lord 
Mortimer, which seemed to upbraid 
her with inconstancy, and not bein^ 
able to bear the torturing picture, she, 
with a sigh, presented her beauteous 
hands to the monk, who instantly loaded 
them with fetters ; while, with a demo- 
niac grin, he observed, they were 
charmiiiij weddinir bracelets. '' You 
yet want the zone of brilliants," he 
continued ; " but here they are ;" then 
encircled her waist with a strong, though 
light chain. " By my beads, you look 
killingly lovely, and a bold adventurous 
knight seeing you thus, could not do 
less than raise the castle from its foun- 
dations, for sheltering such an instru- 
ment of cruelty as myself; but that 
you may have some food for the mind 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 3S 

in this solitude, observe me :" — He now 
drew forth from his bosom, a small box 
of powder, wliich he shook over the 
viands on the table, and rubbed it on 
them with his hands. — " This powder 
is a deadly drug, endowed with the 
sin^^ular property of giving lengthened 
and exquisite tortures to tliose Mho 
maybe obliged to taste it. Its smell' 
is pleasant, and invites the appetite; but ' 
beware — you know its baleful influence, 
and if yon eat of those provisions, you 
can only blame yourself for the conse- 
quences.'' 

*' Wretched man, heaven forgive 
you !" said Alexena, as the monk with- 
drew;'' but he having heard her, turned 
on his heel, and in a pathetic voice 
murmured : 

" Lovely mourner, dearest damsel of 
this cave, farewel !" The massive door 
now clashed alter him, and shut oi!i* 
poor heroine within i!s doleful prison, 
deprived of light — of food — of every 
comfort ; chained in darkness — toads 



24: ALEXENA ; OR THE 



her companions, and the groans of 
fellow-sufferers, her only means of 
judging- she was in the vicinily of human 
creatures. Where then vvasCarracci, 
or Mortimer, or Williams, or Louisa, or 
any of her friends? were they all igno- 
rant of her melancholy fate? Alas! 
the succeeding hours too clearly prove 
Ili3y were. When nature at length de- 
manded nourishment, she found the 
terrors of her situation encrease ; there 
was nothing to appease its clamorous 
cravings, but the poisoned viands, or 
the black and venemous reptiles, whose 
s;laring eyes were the only lights which 
bhone on the humid walls of her dun- 
geon ; every succeeding minute en- 
creased the pangs of hunger, and with 
frantic screams she vainly endeavoured 
to recal the obdurate monk ; echo 
mocked her with the repetition of her 
cries, but none came to her assistance ; 
she rattled her bonds, that their clank- 
ing might fright the horrors of solitude, 
and by repeated exertions of this 
description, she became so much 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO, 35 

fatig'ucd, that sleep promised to snatch 
her for a few hours from misery ; but, 
ao'ain unkind fate wreaked her wi(h 
frii^htful dreams, and the cold paws of 
a monstrous toad, whose eyes, to her ima- 
gination, blazed brighter tlian torches, 
awoke her out of one scene of despair, 
to plunge her into a still more frightful 
one. She shrunk from the noxious 
animal, and with the chain, pushed it 
from the door of its rude habitation, 
which lay behind the rock, that the 
moment before had supported her head. 
Hunger inflicted the most direful pangs, 
and reduced herto the dreadful alterna- 
tive of choosing poison, rather than 
suffer any longer, but on attempting to 
reach the (able, the chain was too short, 
and she could not touch it. At this 
moment of despair, Montano entered 
with an olio, whose savory smell was 
sufficient to invite a languid appetite; 
but, Alexena's was not of tliat descrip- 
tion; yet, she had scarce tasted it, ere 
a hollow voice, which seemed to issue 
&om the rocky ceiling of the dungeon, 



56 ALEXENA; OR THE 

commanded her not to feast on that 
Avhicli was thickened with the blood of 
]jer murdered friend, Louisa. The 
monk started. Oiir heroine turned 
deadly pale, and the accursed dish 
would have fdllen from her hands, had 
it not been timely prevented ; while she, 
sickening at the idea of having tasted 
two or three morsels, turned away ia 
horror and disgust, which completed 
the wishes of her vile tormentor. Thus, 
her want of refiection as^ain caused her 
innumerable sufferings ; for had she 
not seen her cousin safe under Car- 
racci's protection, there might be just 
grounds for attending to the late mys- 
terious caution ; but the agitation of 
her mind concealed its Harins: false- 
hood, and the mere mention of such a 
circumstance deprived her of every 
wish to eat, which her brutal gaoler 
no sooner observed, than he stamped 
his foot, and Torquo entered with a 
long iron instrument, formed like a 
ha:;d-vicc^ in which he threatened to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 27 

squeeze her jaws to pieces, if she did 
not instantly swallow the food he had 
provided. 

" It is not made of blood/' he gruffly 
muttered, " nor any thing' filthy ; there- 
fore, partake of it quickly.' She re- 
fused, and Acasto's steward advanced 
with the terrible machine. 

" Oh ! 1 will do as you require/' ex- 
claimed our heroine." 

" Well, despatch ; for I have yet 
much business to attend to." 

She took the food ; looked at it; but ; 
revolting nature forbade her to taste, 
and the tears which fell from her pale 
cheeks evinced her encreasins: disgust. 
, Montano, having now become impa- 
tient, grasped and shook her, while she 
dropped on her knees, and with uplifted 
hands, besought him not to force her 
inclination. 

" Give me the iron," he vociferated, 
" and I'll try to coax her appetite." 

'' Oh, heaven ! — let me go ; — I will 
eat." 

Again it was placed before her; and. 



SS ALEXENA : OR 1I1E 

With deep sighs^ whicli the cold perspi' 
ration that trembled on her brovY 
proved the pahi of, she forced down a 
few mouthfuls, then faultered — *' I can 
eat no more ; you may kill me, if 
you will." 

" Finish it every morsel, or I will 
inflict horrible tortures.^ — Here, Tor- 
quo, put out her eyes." 

The old villain drew forth a clasp- 
knife, and prepared to execute the 
savage order, and again Alexena 
shrieked — " I will! — I will!" and was 
about to comply with the monk's cruel 
mandate, when the food was dashed 
from her hand by a reeking scull, which 
fell at Torquo's (eet. Montano saw, 
and turned to leave the prison ; but 
had not power to move, until he was- 
stunned by a blow on the head, from 
another that was more frightful than 
the first, and with difficulty escaped a 
third, which wrung against the door the 
moment it had closed after him. In 
his fright he forgot one of the lamps, 
and il served to shew our distressed and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2£ 

terrified heroine a most fnglitfui crea- 
ture, similar to that which had saved 
Louisa from Acasto's da*>-g-er. In one 
hand it l)randished a wrencliing'-iron, 
while in the other it held a human head, 
and, on observing Alexena, lauglicd 
horribly, then, with a blow, broke the 
chain which bound her to the rock, and 
scampered back into the gloomy recess. 
She beheld this strange creature with 
infinite terror, yet had not power to 
speak, though she felt confident the 
form was real; but, being now at liber- 
ty to examine her dungeon, she lifted 
the lamp, and in a very few minutes 
after began to explore it, having first 
gathered up the chain that remained 
about her waist, and rolled her liand- 
kerchief round those (hat confined 
lier wrists, to prevent their clanking. 
Thus prepared, she wandered into the 
savage windings of the cavern, and 
having, in a short time, reached a vast 
number of rocks, which were so close 
together that there was scarce room to 
pass, she paused ; but proceeded en 



40 ALEXENA; OR THE 

rinding they constituted a part of ihe 
cave, and seemed to support it in many 
places, while tlieir projections formed 
doorways and uncooth arcades of a 
most gloomy and terrifying descrip- 
tion; yet she fearlessly proceeded, and 
after passing innumerable turnings, saw 
the faint rellection of a distant light, 
Hopes of escape lent her speed and 
strength to encounter many rude masses 
of rock over which she ventured ; and, 
at length, having peeped from behind 
the projection of one, discovered a large 
vase of oil burning on the ground, and 
a crescent hanging from the vaulty ceil- 
ing, which distinctly served to show 
the horrors of the place. A savage 
creature sat on a coffin quite close to 
the lamp, with a scull between its legs, 
on which it beat time to a melancholy, 
mournful tune ; presently it stopped, 
and took up this extraordinary musi- 
cal instrument, which it smelt, then 
grinned, laughed, and tossed it back 
and forward ; sometimes bursting into 
violent (its of rage, dashing the bones 



tJASTLE OF SAx\TA MARCO. 41 

about, aud yelling' most hideously. 
The form of this unfortunate creature 
\vas encompassed with part of a heavy 
chain, which it ratltled, and shook with 
vain efforts to disengage the festering 
iron from its almost naked body; and 
while our heroine yet observed this sad 
scene, a female approaclicd almost as 
miserable as the maniac ; but who, as 
her voice was familiar, she beheld with 
greater terror ; yet could not recal 
to her imagination any one to whose 
it bore a resemblance. The perecra- 
nium plciT/er received her v^^ith mucli 
civility, and pulled the coffin into the 
middle of the dungeon, on which she 
sat down, and then asked him how he 
felt, and if Torquo supplied him with 
a sufficient quantity of food. To this 
he seemed inattentive, and without 
noticing lier question, offi3red to relate 
the story of his late journey into the 
world. 

*' Pray let me hear it?" 

" Willingly ; listen then, and pay 
particular attention." — 



42 ALEXENA t OR THE 

** Little Hoiribraclio, with the red 
sliauks, catne out of tlie clouds last 
nii^ht, and broke this chain, and told me 
I ini<>ht o'o forth, for these walls were 
rotten; then breatlsed on my face, and 
uixiii, that would preserve me from in- 
fection." 

" Did you go?" demanded his com- 
panion; while she evidently belield him 
with pity. 

" Yes, certainly, and saw the most 
strauirc things that imagination can 
form ; the world vvas rotten, and every 
person in it; ali animals were alike, and 
desolation prevailed universally; the 
air was unsuiTerably bad ; rivers stood 
still, and emitted a deadly stench ; those 
that walked in the streets were only 
half human, their flesh ^^as rotten on 
their bones, and had tliere been a breath 
of wind, it v.'ould have blown it 
away. Curiosity led me into a 
chnrcli, where two lovers were about 
to be married, and as soon as the cere- 
mony was performed, the husband 
kissed his wife, but what wasithe conse- 



GASTLE OF SANTA MARCO . 45 

qiience, the flesh fell from the cheeks 
of both, and they screamed, and detest- 
ed each other. Neighbours met and 
shook liands, and this motion of friend- 
ly greeting, stript the decayed covering 
from those members; they then depart- 
ed, cursing the hour of their birth, 
until they spit their tongues from their 
putrid mouths. At lengthy the sky 
partook of the general plague, and fell 
in heavy masses; yet, when it struck 
the house tops, it caused no noise, and 
crushed the inhabitants, v\ithout their 
seeming to feel the pains of death. 
One man got dust in his eyes, and iu 
the attempt to relieve himself from the 
agony which it inflicted, rubbed these 
most useful members from their sockets^ 
accompanied by a large portion of the 
face, then sat down and howled, until 
another out of compassion knocked 
him on the head ; but the exertion 
which the latter used, rent his shoulder 
from his body, making a hideous gash, 
into which filthy insects crept, and fed 



Ai alexexa; or the 

on his vitals, until he died vomiting 
imprecations. Next came too young 
men,, who had apparently escaj)ed the 
contas^ion, riinnins; towards each other, 
but when quite close, I found they had 
no eyes, and in their darkness, they 
struck together, instantly a yell announc- 
ed the pair.fnl shock, down came their 
ratdinsr bones, and they expired flesh- 
less skeletons! I now v.andercd on 
into tlie great square of Madrid, where 
the holy tribunal held an auie da fe, 
but the fires were rotten, and the criiiii- 
iials walked unliurt ihroui>'ii the harmless 
llames; at this moment, a wind arose, 
that carried with it millions of putrid 
smells, adding misery to misery, and con- 
tagion to contagion ; the storm dashed 
one man against the other, and house 
tumbled against house ; all fell together, 
and with screams and curses, became 
nothing ; one was left, he stood nigh 
me, and I asked the meaning of such 
universal destruction ; but on opening 
lijs mouth to answer, I saw the inside 



CAStLE OT SANTA MARCO. 45 

was rolten, and his voice being lost in 
putridity, I heard hiin not. The w'md 
now ceased, and I then proceeded to 
Valladoiid ; but there the cahn was 
worse than the storm : Steeples fell 
piece-meal on the heads of the wretches 
r.ndcrneath, without having given the 
' slightest indication of such fatality. 
Long, rank weeds sprung up in the 
streets, and smothered the inhabitant5^ 
who vainly endeavoured to struggle 
throuoh them. The land was covered 

o 

with rotten toads and filthy animals ; 
the fountains were either dried up, 
or thickened by corrupted carcases 
that had fallen into their waters, in 
vain endeavours to quench their burn- 
ing thirst ; and it was there I met Philip, 
Montano, Torquo, and Hugo, and 
found those, my old tormentors, a 
thousand tim.es more abominably rotten 
than the rest of mankind. Rheum 
streamed from their eyes, which soon 
became sightless ; pains of every de- 
scription accompanied their unsound- 
ness. The cold sciatica cramped their 



46 alexena; on the 

limbs; leprosy, stitches, blains, rheu- 
matiani, tooth-ache, fever, ulcers, can- 
cer, and all damned pains, tortured 
their loathsome forms, while they 
laughed, with sickening derision, at 
each other's torments, praying that 
some more subtle and devouring plague 
might light on their heads, off which 
both akin and hair had fallen, while 
vermin crept forth at their ears, mouth, 
and at those orifices where eyes had 
been I turned from them in disgust, 
and forgot my late revengeful thoughts ; 
nay, I did pity them. Rage, at length, 
at each other's abuse, aided by tor- 
tures, roused their fury to a pitch 
exceeding madness, as they groped 
for each other's shapeless forms; and 
you would have felt surprised to see 
how hatred lent them them sight to 
destroy each other. In a few moments 
they grasped and buried their fingers in 
each other's eyeless sockets, and with 
reiterated shrieks, dashed their skele- 
ton forms on the ground, slipping on 
the filth that had fallen from them, and 



CASJTXE OF SANTA MAnCO. 47 

after united struggles^ sunk into eter- 
nal misery; while I, affrighted at what 
I had ah-eady seen, returned thither, 
to piay with dead mens' bones, until ' 
doomsday." 

While the maniac related this horrid 
and disgusting tale, his female friend 
did not interrupt him ; but when he 
had concluded, she exclaimed, in the 
bitterest accents of woe — 

" Alas ! unfortunate Velasco ! to what 
a pitiable state of derangement have 
you been driven, by that monster, 
Acasto ; and I, luckless wretch ! con- 
demned to pass the remainder of 
my days, the only witness of your 
w rongs, without having the power to 
ameliorate them ; and you, most un- 
fortunate Alexena ! the mistress of 
the mansion, in whose dungeons youl' 
frantic brother, and miserable aunt, are 
confined, without exciting your pity, 
or even ruffling one of those tranquil 
smiles, ever attendant on worthlesis 
prosperity, I forgive you ; and, oh ! 
may heaven grant you timely rcpen- 



18 alexena; on the 

tance, and that I, though amongst 
women the most unfortunate, may yet 
see and bless you, before I die." 

" <jrracious Providence support me !" 
exclaimed our heroine, as she rushed 
from the place of her concealment — 
" it is my aunt !" and the next moment 
sunk senseless at her feet. The rattlingof 
her chains, as she approached, attracted 
the attention of Mrs. Hastings, who 
instantly recognized her, and with in- 
expressible joy, raised her senseless 
form to her throbbing bosom. Velasco 
beheld this scene in stupid amazement ; 
but as he was blessed with lucid inter- 
vals, he, in a short time, recognised 
his sister, and the consequence w as, joy 
had the most salutary effects ; it restored 
his wandering reason ; and when he 
found she was still the same pure and 
spotless angel he had always believed 
her, his feelings became so much com- 
posed, that he conversed rationally, 
and on his knees, entreated her forgive- 
ness, for the innumerable evils, tor- 
tures, and hardships, to which he had 



Cattle of santa marco. 455 

exposed her. She embraced, and v,ith 
tears, bcsouoht him to believe she had 
never thought on his past follies, ^vl{h- 
ont praying for his restoration to virtue; 
and as to her forii'iveness, he had tluit 
Ions: since — Louisa havinj^ convinced 
her he was worthy of it. 

" Then ! then !" said he, '' you have 
seen Louisa. — Oh ! my sister, say she 
yet lives, and you complete my happi- 
ness/' 

*' My dear brother, she does ; and is 
beyond the reach of the vile Philip, 
safe under the protection of Lord Mor- 
timer and Carracci.'* 

" Carracci ! — in heaven's name, who 
is he ? and what is the meaning; of 
your words ?" 

'' Be composed, Velasco, and listen to 
the wondrous tale I have to tell, and 
then with me return thanks to Almighty- 
Providence, for saving you from crime^ 
and me from destruction." Alexeua 
then related, wi(h precision and accura- 
cy, every event Mhich had occurred,, 

VOL. III. C 



so ALEXEKA ; OR THE 

from the night lie left her in the 
Dominican convent to the present 
minute ; and when she had concluded^ 
the unfortunate Velasco was greatly 
affected by her little natrative, la- 
inenling the barbarity with which he 
had treated both her and Lord Morti- 
iTier, for whom he then felt the higliest 
veneration and respect. Mrs Hastings 
now observed, it was possible that 
Monlano might return, and succeed in 
tracing her, which would ensure their 
immediate destruction. This alarmed 
them considerably, and our heroine was 
about to hurry back to her cell, when 
the distant wall, with a hideous crash 
rent asunder, discovering to their 
astonishment, the martial form of 
Carracci, accompanied by his lordship, 
Louisa, and a number of the troop, 
amona: whom Alexena discerned Fer- 
nandez , who, to her incredible surprise, 
she found was Belzo's lieutenant, Man- 
frone, who with Rourke, Larco and 
Albert pressed forward, to congratulate 
her on the prospect of f?peedy liberal iow. 



G!AStLE OF SAxVTA UAKCO. &! 

while Carracci ordered Mrs. Hastinsrs 
and Velasco to be removed to his 
cjjveni, vvliere Theodore, Arabel, Don 
Carlos, and Virjjiiiia, with a riumber 
of otheii, impatiently awaited their 
arrival. They were very unwilling to 
party,vvith Alexena ; bnt the robber was 
absolute, and commanded his preda- 
tious gan-^ to hasten with all possible 
speed, as Montano and Don Philip 
were to wait on our heroine in her 
cell, in a very few minutes. " Be not 
alarmed/* said the chief, addressing 
her ; '' support your spirits, and before 
this time to-morrow night you shall be 
free and happy. If Acasto should 
threaten to inflict any new torment, in 
order to obtain your hand, consent to 
be his wife, and leave the rest to Pro- 
vidence, and your friends." She was 
then conducted back to her cell, but 
not without considerable difficulty, 
as its labyrinths had not been visited 
by him for many years before, and, 
when at length found, he scarce had 

c 2 



52 alexena; or the 

time toM'ithdraw, before the monk en- 
tered with a ijuard of soldiers, armed 
\\ith carbincSj and led liis prisoner iu 
silence from liei dungeon. After she 
had been obbged to traverse an im- 
mense extent of subterranean cavern, 
tlie monk paused l)efore a low^ grated 
door, through \Ahich a faint li^ht feebly 
glimmered, and called on Torquo to 
produce the key, which he seemed 
most unwilling- to do, ^^hile his palid 
looks too plainly told terror was the 
cause. On entering;, they advanced 
a few paces into this '' darkness 
visible," and then Alexena was asto- 
nished to find the light proceeded from 
behind a black curtain, which was 
drawn across the cell. Montano rushed 
forward, pulled it from its fastenings, 
and the moment it fell, our heroine, 
shrieking, endeavoured to hide be- 
hind the rude soldiery, to whom she 
clung, and whose faces were also 
l)lanched w i(h awe, as what they beheld 
"was sufficient to excite horror in the- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 5S 

most savage breast; no wonder then 
that it shouhl have had a most violent 
effect on hei" feelings. The ruffians gaze J 
at her in silent pity^ and waited, in trem- 
bling expectation, the elucidation of a 
spectacle whicli presented such a fright- 
ful group. At the extremity of tlse 
dungeon, a kind of throne was erected, 
on vvhich was fixed, the cokl and sense- 
less form of Cerasco ; his feet resting 
on a cofTni without a lid, in which was 
placed the remains of the nnforuuiate 
female whom Montauo iiad murdered, 
and in a shallow grave lay the bodies 
of her mutilated attendants, with sufS- 
cient room between them for a third 
person, '.vliile round ihcir rude tomb, in 
the frcHh-turned earth, a number of 
black wa>: Lapers blazed, emitting a blue 
flame, v.hieh reflected a sickly light on 
the faces of the lifeless victims of the 
moiik's barbarity, adding additional 
horrors : and at (he foot of the irrave 
next the soldiery, there was a small 
post, to which a chain was fastened, 
and to it INIontano dragged our wretched 



54 ALEXCXA ; OR TKE 

heroine, m despite of all her prayers, 
tears, and cries — tears that failed to 
excite pity in his flinty bosom. When 
he had secured her, he said, '' Behold 
those putrid carcases — between them 
you shall lie in less than a moment, as 
cold and senseless as either, if you do 
not ini^tantly swear to marry Acasto. — 
Aye! this nii^ht, the very minute you 
are released from those fetters, and on 
no other condition whatever shall you 
exist. See ! a corrosive preparation 
is already prepared to waste that form, 
of whose beauty you are so proud ; and 
if you do not si^n with your lips, a 
solemn oath on this blessed crucifix, it 
shall be mixed with the filthy clay that 
encompasses the bones of those bodies, 
in less time than I have taken to pro- 
nounce your doom.'' 

He now paused for her reply; but it 
came not ; her thoughts were eno^afs^ed 
in prayer, and not until the soldiers 
advanced and presented their carbines, 
did she seem sensible of her dani^er. 
Beina: determined to die rather than 



'1^ 



CASTLS OF SANTA MARCO. 55 

take the oath, though she liad been 
assured by Carracci he would rescue 
lier from those toes ihe next day. she 
quickly rose from her knees, and, 
with a voice of commandinir di^rnitv , 
ordered the soldiers to lower their arms ; 
then addressed Montano : — '' 1 have 
made a choice/* she said^ *' which may 
affright the pusilauimous ; but is it not 
better to rest with those mangled bodies, 
who, when living, were faithful to their 
unfortunate mistress, than wed with 
their murderer ? This choice is mine, 
though a few hours, or, at most, a day, 
would save me for ever from the brutal 
tyraimy of Acasto ; yet, as the con- 
trary seems to be the will of heaven, 
I humbly submit, and now, soldiers, 
you may release my soul, which, I 
trust, w ill fmd a place of refuge in an 
eternal kinodom ; bear witness that I 
die rather than submit to infamous 
degradation ; n\y forgiveness is with 
you all." 

The soldiers jjroaned with aufjuish • 
they pitied, yet had no alternative- 



5(5 ALEXENA; OR THE 

Mont ano ordered tliem lo present; but 
in that, dreadful moment of suspense, a 
voice seemed to issue from the corpse 
of Cerasco, commanding them to de- 
sist. One word was sufficient ; they 
fled in terror, and in their flight, over- 
threw the monk, who, while struggling 
to rise, was a second time crushed to 
the earth by the bloody figure of Hugo, 
which had fallen on him from the roof. 
On discerning the cause of this second 
disaster, he screamed wild and piercing- 
ly, and sunk, senseless, under the body 
of Ids late attendant. In an instant 
after, the same disgusting phantom 
which had terrified Don Philip in Alex- 
ena's chamber, rushed from behind the 
throne, and seized the monk bv his 
fleecy locks; then raised his stiletio 
to slab him to the heart, and would 
have done it, had not Carracci seized 
Ins arm. — '' Williams/* said he, " the 
awful moment has not yet arrived ; — 
disappear." Williams (for it was that 
seaman,) obeyed, and Belzo then lifted 
the monk from the ground, flung him 



CASTLE OF SAXTA MARCO. 57 

irtto the grave, and threw the body of 
Hugo OM the top of him ; then released 
our heroine, who he rapidly bore to the 
library, where he placed her on a sopha, 
aiid left with her a lamp which ha had 
brouofht from the dungeon. "You will,'' 
he said, ''be again threatened; but 
consent, rather than expose yourself 
to further trials^ which may prove fatal 
to your reason. By this means you will 
gain time, and lull Acasto's fears, while 
I shall complete those arrangements 
on which our every hope of happiness 
depends." Carracci now withdrew, 
and in a few minutes after^ Margaret 
entered, with every demonstration of 
the deepest sorrow pictured on her 
countenance; but on seeing our heroine 
she screamed, and was about to fly, 
when she was recalled by her, who, 
beseechingly, requested to know the 
nature of her fears. Margaret stood 
aghast; her eyes distended, and her 
hair on end ; while she faullered — " Oh ! 
holy virgin, protect me! — dearest ladv, 

€5 



58 ALEXEXA ;'0R TUB 

wltat can I do for your poor troiihlet! 
solrit ? — Oh! God foririve ihohe that 
have your death to ansuer for!'' 

" Say/' said Alexeua, impatiently 
interrupting her^ '' what foolery is this? 
or is it possible that you, too, have 
leap^ued against my peace?" 

The fearful old woman raised her 
Jamp, and approached a few paces, but 
spoke not; she could not believe the evi- 
dence of her senses, until the former rose 
from the sopha, and again demanded 
an explanation. Then, and then only, 
Margaret was convinced it was a reali- 
ty, and not a shadow she beheld, and 
instantly dropped on her knees, and, in 
an audible voice, thanked heaven for 
saving her '' poor, dear child," as she 
affectionately named our heroine. 

" Oh, Donna ! dear, dear Donna ! 
forgive me, and do not wonder at 
my mistaking you for a ghost, when 
Sebastian swore he saw you shotdead^ 
and tliat the devil flew av>ay with the 
wifcuk the same moment." 



CASTLE OF SAiVTA MARCO. 6^ 

'' Well, now that you are convinced 
that his statement is not the fact, will 
you have the goodness to assist me to 
my chamber, but first go, beg of Don 
Acasto, that 1 may not be again alarm- 
ed or disturbed the remainder of this 
night." Margaret was about to comply, 
when Don Philip entered ; lie had over- 
heard Aiexena's request and message, 
and in reply said, " the fault was cer- 
tainly her own, but as it was not yet too 
late to apply a remedy, he would vouch 
not only for her happiness, but safety, if 
she was not absolutely blind to her own 
interest." 

" If Don Acasto has any thins: to 
expect from me, it is not by insult and 
cruelty he will ever extort it ; therefore, 
I trust, I mav have time for reflection, 
without being remanded to a dungeon; 
for should 1 ever again be subjected to 
Montano's brutality, I solemnly vow, 
that no tortures shall force an avowal, 
much less my consent. I will say 
nothing further; but Don Philip is at 



C0 ALEXENA; OR THE 

liberty to draw whatever conclusion he 
may fancy troin this declaration." 

"Dearest an^el!" he rapturously 
replied, " I sincerely, g-ratefiilly, thank 
you, for tlie illimitable happiness you 
have conferred. I sha'iit enlarjre on 
this delightful topic, lest I should dis- 
tress you, but ere I retire, believe me, 
no further violence shall be offered your 
person or feelings ; on the contrary, 
every attention and " 

" I beg you may not misconceive 
me," she hastily observed ; " for " 

"Misconceive — no, no! — the thing 
is hnpo^^sible; but pardon me, business 
requires my immediate attendance; 
Margaret, see Lady Alexena wants for 
nothing:. Adieu ! — £:ood night." He 
now vanished through a distant door, 
kissing his hand, and disappeared so 
suddenly, that it was impossible our 
heroine could utter that which she 
would have given worlds to have said, 
unl became absolutely miserable, lest 
lie should have construed her late 
words into an avowal that she consent- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 61 

ed to be his wife : but her thouii'hts 
were interrupted by her old attendant, 
who observed, the night was far spent, 
and begg'ed leave to lii»ht her to her 
chamber. She apologized for her in- 
attention to this faithful creature, who 
had been silently gazing- on her lovely 
countenance, and mentally invoking 
the protection of heaven, for this, her 
darling child, who, in a few moments, 
slowly and thoughtfully pursued the 
way to her own apartment. 



i 



C}2 alexena; or thf 



CHAP. III. 



O, thou day o' th' world, 



Chain mine arm'd neck ; leap thou, attire and all, 
Through poof of harness to my heart, and there 
Hide oi) the pants triumphing.'' 

Ant. & Cleo. 

Jl'lONTANO, on regaining his men- 
tal powers, became Iransfixed wilh 
horror, on finding himself in Ihe grave 
vhich he had prepared for Alexena ; 
and, on risins; from nnder his lifeless 
servant, his terror was increased by 
reading a scroll, which was grasped by 
a lifeless hand, whereon was inscribed 
this short sentence — " Montano, we 
shall meet ao ain !" 

" Yes," he maddeninn^ said, " in tor- 
inents ! but since this is the decree of 
inevitable fate, I will do things which 
shall gain the applause of devils ; lin- 
gering hope, farewel ! and now, accursed 
memento, that blasts my sight before 
the allotted hoiir, thus 1 dispose of 
tkee." lie now tore the placard to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAltCO. 65 

pieces, and then rushed from the 
diinj^eon. By this lime, the fears of 
Torquo had dispersed ; he, therefore, 
retinned to seek the monk, whom he 
met at the door of that carnal-house. 
Montano started back on behohlin^: 
this hoary-headed villain, who, at first, 
he conceived was the person who had 
placed the torturing placard in Hugo's 
hand; but, on reflection, abandoned the 
idea, and demanded whether Don Pliilii) 
had yet retired to his chanriber. On being- 
answered in the neirative, he hurried 
forward, and entered the library a very 
few minutes after Alexena had left it. 
Acasto had b^en in search of him, and 
at this moment chanced to pass throuj^h 
the adjoining' corridor, when the light 
of Torquo's lamp induced him to re- 
turn, to ascertain whether our heroine 
liad retired, and was surprised on ob- 
servins: the monk, whose hands he 
instantly caught, and shook violently, 
thanking him, in the most fulsome 
terms, for the great service he had 



61 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

rendered him. IVIontano was puzzled 
to guess his meaning, as it never 
occurred to him that Alexena would 
consent, and when he heard she had, 
he hesitated to believe it, until Acasto 
referred him to Margaret for a confir- 
mation of the joyful news. Astonished 
beyond measure, he accompanied him 
to his apartment, where they retired 
for the purpose of digesting their fu- 
ture plans, and to fix an hour for the 
celebration of the marriage, which they 
determined should be solemnized next 
evening, at farthest ; and while they 
were busily employed making those 
arrangements, Alexena sat in her lone- 
ly chamber, recalling the past events 
of her life, and with grief beheld a 
map which displayed nothing but 
shoals and quick-sands ; not one week 
of the last two years having passed 
without bringing some grievous mis- 
fortune or disappointment. She ac- 
counted herself a tenis-ball of fortune, 
and, as yet, there was no absolute 



CASTLE Of SANTA MARCO, 65 

certainty she would escape further 
persecution. Her dainask cheek pen- 
sively rested on her hand, vvliile 



Patience and sorrow strove 



Who iliould express her goodliest. You have seen 
Sunshine and rain at once : her smiles and tears 
Were like a better day; Those happy smiles, 
That play'd on her ripe lip, seem'd not to know 
Whit guests were in her eyes ; which parted thence, 
A« pearls from diamonds dropp'd. — In brief, sorrow 
Would be a rarity most beloved, if all 
Could so become it," 

And in tliis most interesting situation 
she was startled by a noise, which issued 
from the dusky recess of her apartment ; 
but her alarm was dissipated by the 
well-known voice of Carracci, who, the 
next moment, stood before her ; his 
countenance was more than usually 
expressive ; — an expression which in- 
spired terror, and tliere was a hol- 
lowness in his voice, almost more than 
mortal. 

" Lady Alexena," said he, " all is 
completed ; your persecution ends, 
and before this hour to-morrow, mv 



»(> ALEXENA ; OR THE ' 

enemies perish for ever. This nia^ht t 
might ste^p them in each other's blood; 
but my great revenge would then be 
incomplete. The cause of my intru- 
sion here is, to ask a request, and ob- 
tain a promise; the first is, that should 
I prove successful, you will accept of 
Lord Mortimer's hand, and allow me to 
bestow on him the most })recious gift; the 
otiier, that voii will apparently coi^iply 
with all Acasto's orders, as (he aj^art- 
m.ent which T wished he might appoint, 
is ahcady chosen by himself, where 
Montano vainly hopes he will perform 
the ceremonv. Your weddina;- £;;arments 
have been provided by me ; here is 
a key ; yon will find them in yonder 
cabinet; and I beg you will use them 
as the gift of a man, who pants for the" 
moment in which he v^iil be able to 
prove himself worthy of your respect. 
Acasto must see you in all your love- 
liness — must imagine joys that shall 
never be realized ; and when he is 
about to raise the cup of happiness to 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 67 

his lip, I hope to dash it from him for 
ever. — Yes, tlie treacherous, remorse- 
less, venomous, lying, ungrateful vil- 
lain, shall feel what it is to brave a 
Spaniard's veng-eance. — Oh ! forgive, 
Lady Alexena, this effusion of a vio- 
lent temper ; but if your tender bosom 
knew the pangs that he has rent mine 
with, you should not wonder that I do 
hate him." She, at this moment, raised 
her fine, expressive eyes to Carracci's 
coimtcnance, which was awfully terri- 
ble; his eye flashed indignant fires. A 
revengeful Spaniard, in all the gloomy 
horrors of his nature, stood confessed, 
and thouiili she felt tlie conviction, that 
he had been monstrously aggrieved, 
she could not excuse the expression of 
such implacable nmlice, and almost 
sunk from her seat with fear. The 
dark nodding plumes of the helmet 
which shaded his impatient brow, his 
tall majestic figure, his deep and sono- 
rous voice, his pale and quivering lip, 
while denouncing- destruction on Don 
Philip and the monk^ gave an awful 



f8 ALEXENA : OB, THE 

something to his form and appearance, 
that impressed the timid Alexena with 
the idea tliat he was superhuman ; but 
as soon as his reliections turned into a 
different channd, as soon as they were 
soothed with the hopes that he would 
be able, in a few hours, to restore the 
adorable creature before him, to her 
lover^ to her brother and her friends, 
his countenance brightened like the sun 
peeping forth from beneath a summer 
cloud, and the terrible Carracci became 
the elegant, the respectful courtier. 
Our heroine marked, the change, and 
with it her confidence returned — her 
fears vanished ; she promised toobscrvo 
his directions with the most rie:id ex- 
actness, and to do as he would have 
her. The deep blush that now suffused 
her pale cheek, told Bcizo that Lord 
Mortimer had every reason to be happy, 
and she rose in his estimation more 
than ever, by this tacit acknowlegement 
of her affection. " Such artless inno- 
cence," said he, mentally, " is the'pe- 
€uliar attribute of angels; and surely 



fASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 69 

If ever human being was perfect, this 
is that beiiio;;" then resuminij: the 
conversation, observed — '' to-morro\T 
night you shall be happy — and I re- 
venged ; hereafter you^will hear some- 
thing of my history, and be able lo 
jud'^e th^ cause I have for hatred." — 
Again his countenance fell, while Alex- 
ena, without venturing to look at him, 
said, " I have always been taught to 
consider hatred as the worst, and most 
detestabU of the human passions; and, 
therefore, feel grieved it can, for a 
moment, find a place in the bosom of 
my friend." 

'' Your friend ! — oh ! is it possible 
that Carracci, the outlaw, the chieftain 
of a predaceous gang, is so highly 
honoured." 

*'I do not reco2:nise him as such,'* 
she faintly answered, while she involun- 
tarily shuddered at the ideas he had 
awakened. " I know he has many 
inestimable qualities, and among them, 
I can point out some splendid ones." 
" May I entreat to know which," said 



70 / AI-EX£JfA: Oft TIIS 

he, snpplicatingly ; at. the same time 
venturino^ to take her hand. 

*' Steady friendship, compassion for 
the wretched, with a heart and hand ever 
ready to relieve them." 

" Oh ! yon are a flattering panegyrist ; 
bnt 1 cannot allow a particle of com- 
passion to interfere for either Acasto 
or the inoidi ; it would he an insult, a 
mockery of justice to let either escape ; 
accursed villains! that could be so 
diabolically savage, as to load those 
wrists of your's with chains," 

Again our heroine caught his eye, 
he smiled, but the smile was ghastly ; he 
let her hand fall from his, she having 
repeatedly, though gently, endeavoured 
io withdraw it, then turned away, and 
walked back and forward with en- 
creasing agitation. At length he 
suddenly said, " I am not w^ont to be 
savagely unmerciful, but the doom of 
both Acrfsto and his confessor is un- 
avoidably sealed ; the united beauties 
of this world in tears, nay, on their 



CASTLE Oi? SAMTA MARCO. Tl 

Isiiees^ would not induce me to pardon ; 
but the rest of their ^vi!d associates 1 
will not punish with deaih ; no ! Lady 
Alexena has saved them all, except 
Torquo ; yes, the infamous, detestable 
Torquo, shall have reason to curse the 
hour of his birth, and perish!" 

" Blessed is the merciful," she timely 
observed. 

" Yes," said he ; '' and the peace 
maker, for his is the kingdom of 
heaven ; but those villains were neither 
merciful, nor peace makers; thej were 
roaring- wolves, hyennas, demons ; — ^ 
pardon," he continued with quickness, 
'" pardon the repetition of this most 
disagreeable subject, and forget, if 
possible, that you have ever heard it. 
I have already trespassed on your 
patience, and the hours allotted to 
repose, therefore, shall now wish you 
happy slumbers; but before I retire, let 
mebeg youvrill to-morrow confine your- 
self as much as possible to your cham- 
ber, aud should any strangers arrive to 
witness the iut^-nvkd ceremouY. receive 



?2 alexena; on the 

tliem with all tlie ease you can command, 
that every suspicion may be hushed 
in Don Philip's bosom, and at the same 
time, sedulously avoid any species of 
conversa(ion with Montano ; — farewel, 
and may guardian seraphs watch round 
your couch, and drive every evil thing 
from your pillow." He now, bowing, 
vanished through the recess, whose 
solid stone-work yawned to receive him ; 
and once more our heroine waslefttothe 
silence, tlie solitude of her apartment; 
on waking in the morning, the first 
subject that recurred to her recollection, 
was the interview with Carracci the pre- 
cedino' ni^ht, and she then remembered 
the key of the cabinet, where her dress 
was deposited ; on examination, it 
proved to be more splendid than ima- 
gination could devise ; but how to ac- 
count to Acasto, when he should see her 
arrayed in it, she knew not, therefore, 
determined, if he made any observa- 
tions, to inform him where she had 
found it, and then leave him to unravel 
the mystery ; but for this, there was no 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCQ. 73 

necessity, as Margaret brought her 
many beautiful habits, which Don 
Philip had ordered some weeks before ; 
and as he had not seen them, could not 
form any idea whether it was one of 
them or not. Alexena looked forward 
to approaching night, with such a 
i3iversity of sensations, and of fears, that 
it is impossible to give a just description 
of them ; anxiety was traced on every 
line of her countenance, and she started, 
nay, almost screamed, at the slightest 
noise, while Margaret, who had been 
informed of the intended marriage, 
tortured her with questions, to which 
prudence forbade her making any 
reply. Several persons of suspicious 
appearance had arrived during the day, 
among whom were a number of females, 
who, from the lightness of their behavi- 
our, disgusted our heroine, and made 
her shudder at the idea of being united 
to a man who Was even regardless of 
appearances. He had waited on her 
several times, with his earnest entrea- 

VOL. ill. D 



74 ALEXENA ; on THE 

ties, that she should consider every 
thing in the castle at her disposal, and 
order whatever she might judge requi- 
site to add to her happiness, or give 
lustre to her beauty on that most joyful 
occasion : and at those moments^ the 
dreadful denunciation of the robber 
recurred to her recollection, and she 
trembled at the idea, that the unconsci- 
ous vrretch was doomed never to behold 
the light of the succeeding day; then 
she reviewed the character of Carracci, 
and saw much to find fault with, parti- 
cularly, that inveterate hatred which 
he nourished ; she allowed he might 
hare sustained a number of injuries of 
the most trying description, but were 
they such as warranted that unforgive- 
ness; — no! nothing shou5d induce us to 
submit to that most vicious vice; for 
when encouraged, it rankles and 
corrodes the bosom which gives it 
birth, and but too often leads to the 
commission of unnatural crimes — often 
to murder. We should, therefore, be 
always cautious against its effects, and 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAnCO. 75 

in ourselves, carefuliy crush the first 
buds of this malignant pas^iion, lest 
thej might blow, and bring forth the 
fruits of everlasting shame and infamy. 
Such were the reflections of Alexena, 
but she felt confident Carracci was a 
much better character than liis terrible 
avocation, avowed habits, and reputed 
criminality, led the world to suppose he 
was. In him, report exhibited a strange 
contrast of vice and virtue. She had 
branded him with the opprobrious 
epithet of outlaw, robber, felon, mur- 
derer! — '' No, no, no ! — this last cannot 
be/' said Alexena to herself; '' the 
friend of the oppressed, the parent of 
the fatherless, the terror of evil doers, 
the protector of Mortimer, Louisa, and 
myself, cannot be so debased." She 
drove the idea from her mind with ab- 
horrence, and wondered how slie could 
for an instant entertain, harbour, or con- 
ceive it. " But I am not to blame," she 
continued, "it was not I who gave the 
horrid name^ nor do I believe him 

d2 



76 ALEXENA : OR THE 



guilty.'* Thus are we always apt to 
form favourable opinions of our friends, 
notwidistanding there may be the most 
glaring' defects staring us in the face. 
Ourheroine, in the first instance, wished 
Carracci good and virtuous, from her 
own pure and beneficent nature; and in 
the second, because her slight know- 
ledge of him, led her to believe he 
had been formed to move in the most 
brilliant and distiM2:uished scenes of 
life. '' It is impossible," slie said, "he 
can be a mean and unenlightened 
peasant; he certainly is not; his accent, 
noble deportment, piercing eye, and 
elegant address, announce the courtier 
rather than the cottager. Then who can 
he be? — I know not ; this night pro- 
mises to elucidate the mystery. Well, 
until then, I must have patience.'* 

Here she concluded her mental ob- 
servations and inquiry, then com- 
mended her spirit to the care and 
protection of her Almighty Parent, and 
.returned thanks for the late sweet and 
refreiihing sleep, of which the guilty 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 77 

vainly seek the consolation. Guardiafi 
annrels had hovered round her couch, 
whispering peace and joy to her bosom, 
while, in dreams, they foretold the com- 
forts and happiness to come ; they 
soothed her for all sorrows past, and 
promised to bestow all the felicity t!iat 
can be enjoyed by mortals in this life, 
and everlasting joys hereafter. Then, 
no wonder that she awoke refreshed ; 
assured and enconra^red to bear the 
approaching change with calmness and 
fortitude. On her knees, she petitioned 
for steadiness and strength to support 
this great and eventful trial, on which 
her every hope was at issue ; and hea- 
ven smiled, and granted her requests. 
She, therefore, descended to the break- 
fast parlour with a calm countenance, 
firm step, and a heart exulting in hav- 
inn; deserved the reward which the 
Almighty Di.spenser of good promised 
to bestow, as a compensation for the 
intrepidity with which she had com- 
bated in the cause of virtue. 



78 ALEXENA; on THE 

On entering the room, Don Pliiliji 
rose to receive, and announce her as his 
bride,, which was distressing beyond 
measure, as all eyes were fixed on her, 
and the \ovf wld^pers of — how lovely ! 
how extremely beautiful ! — reached her 
ears every instant ; but breakfast, at 
length, diverted their attention, and 
the moment it was over, she retired to 
her chamber, where Margaret being 
summoned, said her marriage would 
have been solemnized at noon, had it 
been possible to procure a notary in 
time to prepare a proper instrument, by 
which her lord could m.ake a settlement 
suitable to the immense fortune he was 
to receive, and to which she had been 
entitled since her brother*s death. ''I 
overheard father Montano read a letter, 
slating the particulars, and which was 
.sent to a lawyer last night after you 
left the library ; it set forth all about 
your uncle, Don Diego de Guzman, 
and somefhing concerning an abbess of 
Dominicans, vrith other matters that 
this poor old brain of mine cannot 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 79 

remember ; but unless IMustapha ar- 
rives with that paper before eiglit 
o'clock this evening, the ceremony will 
be postponed until to-morrow." 

Alexena now comprehended the ex- 
tent of Acasto's villany. It was evident, 
the moment she signed the deed meis- 
tioned by JMargaret, his intention was 
to consig^n Velasco to the tomb. " Yes! 
Carracci/^she said, ''yon expected this, 
ar.d lest some fa'ality miiiht arise, have 
most kindly removed my unfortunate 
brother beyond his reach." She dwelt 
on this subject uiuch longer than sh;; 
intended ; but v,as, at Iet]gth, awakened 
from her reverie by Margaret, who en- 
deavoured to give a description of the 
CTC'di portrait apartment, wliich was 
already fitted up as a cliapel, under the 
insprction of Montano, who had not 
retired to rest the preceding night. 
" It is mighty beautifnl," she observed, 
" yet you don't seem very liappy to 
hear about all those fine doings ; but 
don't grieve, for your goodness cannot 
fail to reform mv lord, who, if not 



so ALEXEXA: on THE 

badly advised, would be a good man ; 
at least, on your account, I hope so." 
Aiexena smiled at theaukward attempt 
poor Margaret made to excuse her 
master, and was about to reply, when 
the former was called on to attend the 
affairs of the houshold, and had scarce 
left the apartment, before Fernandez 
entered with a billet from Carracci, in 
which he requested she would steadily 
refuse to sign any written instrument 
whatever, should one be presented for 
lier signature, before she was led to 
the altar. He also stated, that two 
lovely girls would attend her, who were 
the diiug'hters of a noble of the first 
dislinction, and who he had contrived 
to impose on Acasto for persons of a 
different description, that had been 
sent for by him. " I have/' continued 
Belzo, " intercepted them, and have 
taken the liberty to substitute those 
who are my friends, and worthy of 
the confidence of Lady Aiexena. Mus- 
tapha, the lawyer, shall be served in 
the same manner; therefore, when you 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 81 

are once before the altar, sig-n,, without 
fear or doubt, the contract which will 
be presented ; but should you recog- 
nize the pretended notary, be silent 
as the grave. — Farewel until nine! 

B. C." 

Our heroine read this with a painful 
variety of sensations. The robber 
mii^ht yet be an agent of Acasto's, aa 
where could he procure the daughters 
of a Spanish grandee, who would vo- 
luntarily consent to risk their lives to 
oblige him ; but had he not repeatedly 
saved Louisa and herself? Yes; but 
that might be a snare laid to entrap her, 
and what to do, she could not deter- 
mine. Mortimer was in the power of 
the bandit, and had always been most 
kindly treated. This thought, in a 
great measure, dissipated her fears ; 
and when she recollected the conver- 
sation she had accidcn'ully overheard 
between Don Philip and Torqiio, re- 
lative to Clarissa, her doubts vaiiisljcJ, 

D 5 



^5 ; ALEXENA ; OR THE 

and Villli a smiie of grateful thankful- 
ness, she toid Feiriaudez, who, in 
future, we shall call MontVane, that 
she would be ])articulariy attentive to 
his cautions, and then inquired whether 
Acasto knew he was iu tlie castle. 

" Certainly not; but he will be sur- 
prised to see me this night, particularly 
when I wash this oliye dye from my 
complexion ; but it is now the hour 
you s'lould dress for that dinner which 
shall be the last Philip will ever partake 
of in il^is world, unless you are able 
to prevail on Carracci to pardon him." 

*' The wretched man/' she observed, 
" is ill prepared for eternity, and heaven 
forbid I should not interfere ; at all 
events, I trust I shall be able to have 
liis sentence mi(iga<ed to banisljment, 
sliould his fate be absolutely at the 
disposal of yonr chieftain." 

*' Not absolutely, as the inquisition 
liave taken cognizance of his crimes; 
liut more of this hereafter, as I should 
have returned Ions: since." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 8 



n 



Monfrane now respectfully withdrew, 
and our heroine sat down to her toilet, 
which she finished with much di'iicuity, 
not from the want of accustoined assist- 
ance, but from the excessive agitation 
of her mind. On descendin*^, she found 
tlie saloon crowded with stran^-ers, at 
which her surprise encreased, particu- 
larly when she heard many of tlmpa 
say they had just arrived from ?uadrid, 
others from Valencia and Toleflo, and 
found many among them were gay 
females, who, from the vivacity of 
their looks, did not seem much fatigued 
by travelling ; but Don Philip, she 
thought, miglit, nay, must have invited 
them some weeks before, to witness 
this detestable union; *' and they have 
now arrived," she mentally said, *' to 
witness his execution." 

A few moments after the desert, the 
ladies retired to the drawing-room, 
where Don Philip followed them, and 
then introduced lli« two lovely girls, 
mentioned by Carracci, to oar heroine, 
as the daughters of a most particular 



S4 aleilena; cr the 

friend, who were anxious to attend her 
to the hymeneal altar. Alexena gave 
each an expressive look, as she cur- 
tesied, which they understood, and 
shortly after, tliey stole from the room 
together, unnoticed, except by Acasto, 
who now chided lazy time, and almost 
every moment sent domestics to the 
draw-bridge or the ramparts, to ascer- 
tain was there any sign of Mustapha's 
approach. At length, the lawyer was 
announced, which created great bustle 
among the guests; the ladies hastened 
to their chambers, to array themselves 
in weddinggarmrnts, while our heroine 
was attired in tliat magnificent dress 
which had been presented to her by the 
robber., Iler maids were very lovely, 
very young, and very accomplished, 
and by their attention and kindness, in 
a great degree, soothed her agitation. 
It had been aareed that caiuion should 
give the signal when every thing was 
ready. The firing of a gun was to 
summon every individual to the great 
reception-room— of two, that the bride 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 85 

and groom stood before the altar — of 
three^ that the marriage contract was 
signed ; and a grand salute from every 
cannon on both tower and ramparts^ 
the moment the words were said. 

When the great clock struck eight, 
Alexena's terror encreased to a painful 
degree ; before another hour, how 
many dreadful events would occur ; 
Acasto, and it was possible, Mortimer, 
Carracci and herself, might be in eterni- 
ty ; if one, nay the m.ost trifling, of the 
bandit's plans should miscarry : what 
blood would be then shed, what horrors 
ensue ; Lucinda and Zorayda saw and 
felt her terrors ; but they were not 
forgetful of Belzo's caution, and repre- 
sented the impossibility of any failure 
on the part of her friends. While they 
yet conversed, the thunder of a gun, 
declared the dreadful moment was at 
hand, and our trembling heroine slowly 
proceeded towards the reception room, 
supported by her beauteous maidens. 
We shrink from the task of describing 



S6 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

the bride, the most fanciful imagination 
cannot form any thing- so enchantingly 
lovely; the varying colours of her 
cheek, now pale, now dyed with virgin 
blushes; her sylph like ibrm, arrayed 
in matchless beauty; her sufferings 
past; her present trying situation ; her 
extreme timidity. Oh ! our readers may 
conceive, but we cannot do adequate 
justice, to her exquisite charms ; then 
imagine, also, what must have been the 
feelings of Don Philip, when he led her 
towards the altar. The moment she 
appeared before it, the second guns 
were fired ; the procession having 
reached it in the foUov/inijorder: First, 
a number of elegant cavaliers and 
ladies ; next, the bride and groom, 
her attendant maids, his gentlemen; 
behind them IMustapha with the con- 
tract; a crowd of visitors and domes- 
tics, guards, &c. followed. Montaiio 
was already robed, waiting in tljis 
emporary chapel, which was a room of 
}\T,mcnse dimensions^ being one hun- 



CASTLB OF SANTA MARCO. 87 

dred and forty feet lonj^, eighty wide, 

and fifty feet high; galleries wound 

round it on the outside ; by day it was 

lit by glass domes placed in the roof, 

but at night, by twelve chandeliers 

suspended from the ceiling, by an equal 

number of massy gilt chains, and a 

vast profusion of variegated lamps^ 

formed into emblematic fiijures, which 

displayed considerable taste. The 

walls were decorated by full length 

portraits of the Santa Marco family, as 

large as life, pourtrayedin the different 

costumes of their dav : some as states- 

men, bishops, grandees, knights, others 

as admirals and generals, warriors who 

ha<l gained immortal honors in their 

country's service, and were crowned 

w'ith never-fading laurels ; the opposite 

side of the aparlment was occupied by 

the likenesses of the females, among 

whom many had been eminent for every 

virtue, beauty and accomplishment; 

and, at this moment, the eyes of each 

seemed endowed with life, while 

imagination gave an air of anxious 



&8 alexena; or the 

expression to their features^ as they 
seemed to gaze on the beautiful bride, 
uhose usurping lord had trampled on 
their ancient rights, and who had rude- 
ly thrust their son and representative 
from this, the venerable mansion of his 
ancestors. Alexena, in return, apparent- 
ly looked towards them for protection, 
and seemed to beseech them to save her 
from relentless tyranny, until the weak- 
ness of her spirits had actually endowed 
them with animation. 

The nuptial party had entered this 
apartment from the galleries on each 
side, as the great folding doors, which 
constituted the grand entrance, were 
immovable, though every exertion had 
been used by Acasto to force them 
open ; the space on their outside form- 
ed a kind of aisle like that of a 
cathedral, which made him more 
anxious to have them forced, that it 
might add to the beauty of this tempo- 
rary chapel. When he and our heroine 
stood before the altar, Mustapha came 
forward with the contract, which he ex- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 89 

plained without reading-, and then pre- 
sented a pen to Don' Philip^ who knelt 
on a velvet cushion, placed the solemn 
instrument on a small desk, which was 
fastened to the railing, and then signed 
with a triumohinor heart ; he rose, and 
with a smile of exulting anticipation^ 
placed the pen within the agitated 
hand of Alexena, whose taper fingers 
were so trecnulous, that she held it with 
difficulty. She dropped on one knee; 
Acasto gazed on the deed, while Mon- 
tano's sparkling eyes and fitful counte- 
nance, expressed undefinable feelings. 
Our heroine now ventured to look 
round — all were silent. " Oh ! my 
God!" she mentally said, ''support 
me ;'' she caught an expressive glance 
from Mustapha — her bosom throbbed 
violently — she felt the conviction all 
was well, and instantly signed the con- 
tract ; tliere were two other seals and 
marks for signatures, and Acasto re- 
quired their meaning. " They are," 
said the lawyer, '* for the names of the 
trustees," '' And who are the fittest 



90 ALEXENA; Oil THE 

persons," he demanded. — " Lord Mor- 
timer and 1!" said a voice, which 
seemed to outvie the thunder, and 
instantly the heavy doors burst open, 
and struck the solid walls vsith such 
violence as shook the castle to its base, 
displaying the form of Belzo Carracci, 
armed cap-a-pie; his eyes glittering in 
the fires of venireance, and his brow 
crowned with a thousand horrors! lie 
stood in the door-way, and behind, in 
the dark corridor, a train of his lierccst 
banditti, part of whom seemed lost in 
misty distance; but those next his 
person bore torches, whose red glare 
shone on his armour, adding terror to 
terror ; his voice was fate — his frown 
death; all eyes were rivetted to his 
figure — all hearts quailed with fear ; 
a scarf of crimson velvet, richly em- 
broidered, was the only ornament he 
wore ; in his right hand he grasped his 
sparkling falchion, in his left, a llaming 
torch, and before he advanced a single 
step, stamped his foot ; the signal 
whistle runG: throui^rh the distant cham- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARC». 91 

bers, and instantly all the portraits 
vanished, while each aperture was fdled 
by two savage rutfians; onepresentiuij 
a carbine at Acasto and his confessor, 
the other armed with a sabre, display- 
in<j atone view, the en tire troops of this 
predaceous chieftain. All motion, all 
hope, seemed extinct ; all were petrified 
with horror — with fear — with amaze- 
ment; until Carracci, in a voice ever 
to be re-nembered, said, " Alexena 
saves all — !iut two ; therefore, let no 
man move on pain of instant death. 
Mortimer appear and detend your 
wife I'' His lordship, who had been 
until then concealed behind some of 
the banditti in the lower apertures, now 
sprung- from his hiding- place, and as 
he bounded o[i the floor, presented a 
pistol at Acasto — another at the monk, 
exclaiming, " to stir is to perish!'' here 
our heroine, in despite of her utmost 
exertion, became faint ; but. Sir 
Edmond Hastings, in the person of 
Mustapha, flew to her assistance. Car- 
racci approached ; each eye was on him. 



92 ALEXENA; OR THE 

he passed in solemn silence, m^attended 
by his guard, and the next instant 
stood before Acasto ; who, despicable 
wretch! was pale asdeath. Th^^ hour of 
retribution had arrived ; escape was hn- 
possible ; but he tried to pluck courage 
from misfortune, and desperation was 
fast kindling a flame, which might have 
been fatal to some, had not Carracci, at 
that eventful moment, uncovered his 
brows, and in a hollow tone, deep as if 
it had issued from a tomb, demanded, 
'•' Philip, doit thou knov/ me?" Acasto 
ventured to raise his eyes, only to 
gaze in horror; instantly his face became 
distorted, his limbs convulsed, his 
bosom heaved, almost to bursting ; his 
breathing became short ; the cold, chill 
damps of death dropt from his brow ; 
every joint trembled; his eye-lids fell 
over their blood shot orbs; liis heart 
ceased to throb ; nature was exhausted, 
he sunk — groaned — and with a faint 
struggle, pronounced the name, " Don 
Miguel !" and expired. A deep silence 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 93 

followed, but the words of Acasto were 
not likely to allow its loni^ duration. 
A busy hum repeated the name — 
" Don Miguel/' an hundred times, ac- 
companied by the exclamation of — " Is 
it possible !" " Yes, iti the robber 
Carracci, behold Miguel Saint Marco, 
once more the liege lord of this castle, 
with a character unstained, unpolluted 
by crime. Those holy inquisitors, to 
whose power I deliver those arch 
villains, Montano and Torquo, have 
the kin»c*s writ for reinstatinj: me in 
my rights, and that instrument which 
Acasto has signed, is nothing more than 
a detail of the numberless crimes which 
he has couimitted, and for which he 
demands pardon from Lady Alexena 
and this English noble. Had he read, 
it is likely it would have produced 
the same melancholy effects, which ray 
appearance caused ; for while affixing 
his signature, he felt convinced he was 
wronjrinff a man who he had almost 
irreparably injured, and who, it was his 
avowed intention to murder, before the 



S4 ALEXENA; OR THE 

sun should rise io-monow; (hat person 
is Vclasco de Giszmari, who you here 
behold rescued from the filthy dungeon 
in which he has been buried those many 
months ; — but I am trespassing on the 
happiness of two of the miOst deserving 
of beings. Remove that monster, 
Montano, to a distance from the holy 
altar, which is defiled by his presence, 
and let the kind Zelo resume his place."' 
The good father advanced when the 
troop had removed the monk. — " Let 
him/' continued Don Miguel, *' not be 
taken to prison, until he first beholds 
the fruits of his industrious villany 
blasted, until he sees Donna Alexena 
the happy wife of this happy English- 
man. — No reluctance, lady ; you know 
I hate your promise." Our heroine 
presented her haiid to the adoring 
Mortimer, who received it as the kind- 
est, first, best gift of heaven, while 
silent tears announced the heart-felt 
joy of all present. The very robbers 
were afi'ected, and gazed with delight 
on this scene, while their countenances 



CASTLE or SANTA JIARCO. 95 

were almost softened to harmonj. — 
Zelo bestowed the nuptial blessing, 
assisted by the Rev. William Jones, 
Avhose joy was perfect, and in a few 
moments our heroine became La<1y 
Alexena Mortimer, tlie wife of the idol 
of her heart. Such happiness repaid, 
more than repaid, years of painful 
anxiety, and the past was forgotten in 
the bright prospects of the future. The 
guns liaving announced the celebration 
of this most wished-for ceremony, the 
gay crowd gathered in groups, to let 
the inquisitors lead off their prisoners, 
and the banditti to secure the soldiers 
of Don Philip, who, as yet, had no 
intimation of what was passing in the 
castle, as all the avenues of it were 
filled with Don Miguers troops, and 
those of the inquisition. The signals 
for firing the caiuion v^ ere conveyed by 
the former, to those who were ordered 
to attend for the pru-pose, and they 
were afterwards secured without a blow, 
so that, by proper precautions, blood- 
shfd was prevented. 



96 ALEXENA ; OH THE 

Before the soldiers retired, the writ 
for Don Miguel's restoration being 
read, he bade all welcome, and when 
his domestics had removed Acasto's 
body, he thus addressed his auditory : 
— " IMy ever dear friends, and you 
my faithful band, I rejoice that our 
late misery has thus terminated ; that 
good order is restored ; and believe me, 
my dependants shall have cause to 
bless the propitious day, which has 
restored Miguel to the hall of his 
fathers. The wretched man whose 
remains has been just borne from your 
sight, was the cause of all my suffer- 
ings ; he involved me and my dearest 
relations, in misery and disgrace ; 
among whom were my sister and her 
husband Don Selib — those I had the 
happiness to rescue from the jaws of 
death. In the latter. Lord Mortimer 
may recognise his guide, Monfrane; 
and Lady Alexena, her friend Fernan- 
dez ; in the person of the flippant and 
talkative Larco you behold their son 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 07 

Celio, who has happily escaped ; ]}nt 
CerascOj my unfortunate neiglibour, (A[ 
Moiitano's victiai, at the moment ho 
Was piu'suin^ the equally unfortunate 
Geraldine, who also perished by the 
monk's hand ; for it was she whom he 
shot on the ramparts, when the fatal 
ball was intended for Bolerno As 
Don Philip is now' before an Eternal 
Judge, I shall be silent, let his vices 
die, and be buried with him in an 
obscure grave ; but as to that subtle 
villain, that pander of crime, Montano, 
the justice which he has scoffed at shall 
overtake him ; she shall be appeased 
for the social ties on which he has 
trampled, and for the peaceful homes 
he has destroyed. By him, the kind 
and benevolent have been deceived ; 
the vicious goaded on to crime ; God 
has been blas{)hemed — his laws per- 
verted — chastity violated — the w ithering 
hand of murder levelled at numbers, 
and the altars stained with blood and 
pollution. The spot is accursed on 
VOL. iir. B 



9S alexena; oa THE 

wbicli he breathes ; his touch is conlij- 
gion ; his words dtigg-ers ; then is it 
r.ot just, that he shall be crushed, to 
prevent a repetition of furlhcr crime; 
to prevent the poison of liis precepts 
blighting the yet unsullied ; and to 
save human nature the p:'.in, the dis- 
gTace, of giving food and sliellcr to 
such a reptile; but enough — let us 
now retire to the banqueting cliam- 
ber, where, in a very few moments, I 
I hope to see the happiest group on 
earth. He was then follov^ed by these 
friends, who vicre, in a short time, 
arranged round the social board, at the 
head of which was Mrs. Hasting?, (who 
seemed the happy mother of all the 
females present,) with Don Vasquez on 
her right, and M. San'ianellc, Arabcl's 
father, on her left ; at the foot, Don 
Miguel, with our heroine on his right, 
her lover next her ; on his left, Louisa 
and Yelasco; on each side of the two 
Ibrmer, Don Selib and Clarissa, Vir- 
gina and Carlos, Arabel and Theodore, 
Eveline and Antonio, Lucinda and 



CASTLE OF SANTA fllAttCO. 99 

Zoraydii, the latter of whom was 
evidently a great favourite willi Don 
Mi2:viel ; Sir Edmontl and Bolcnio : 
LarcOj now Don Celio, Tn-hose eyrs 
often wandered towards those of Lucin- 
da, while her kindling blushes gave 
])irth to no very silent whispers ; llie 
fathers Zclo and Bernardo close to 
their ilhistrious enterlaincr; Mr. Jones, 
Galafron, the chief inquisitor, and 
above forty others, among whom were 
many lovely females from the adjacent 
towns, with Rourke, Albert, Williams, 
llenriquez, &c. attending. Tills world 
could not produce such a happy assem- 
blage, and while they enjoyed the good 
things above, the banditti were en- 
tertained below, where Margaret pre- 
sided as mistress of the ceremonies ; 
and once more the halls of Santa 
Priarco rung with joy and innocent 
merriment ; for the real terrors of the 
troop were merely vested in their name, 
It was nigh two o'clock in the morn- 
ing, ere the charming Virginia, now a 

e2 



100 alhxena; oa the 

mother, led our heroine from (he sup- 
per-room, who retired witliout exciting 
any particular observation, accompa- 
nied by her beauteous maids. Imme- 
diately after, Eveline withdrew, and as 
^he passed his lonlsliip, signi(i< d, iliat 
he should be sent for very t^jorlly; he 
evinced his gratitude by a gentle prrr- 
snre of her liand ; but his impatience 
rendered it impossible to await tlie 
\vished for signal; every minute was 
an age — a moment became insupporta- 
ble ; and he stole from the bamnut 
unperceived. When at tlic door of the 
nuptial chamber, lie paused — feared — 
yet wished to enter ; but did not linger 
long, until it was opened !}y Lucinda, 
Avho, with Zorayda, had bade Alcxena 
adieu; slie was at that time standing 
almost undressed, attended by Virginia 
and Eveline. His lordsiiip was now 
obliged to retire into an adjoining gal- 
lery; but, in a few moments, the latter 
passed, with the intention of sending 
for him, which he no sooner observed, 
than, rushing from liis hiding place. 



CASTLSOF SANTA UARCO. 101 

he kissed her hand, and those of her 
fair companions, then flew to the 
apartment where his bride lay expect- 
ing-, trembling', blushing. lie quickly 
ascended the bed of blisses, and clasped 
her to his throbbing bosom ;~ and here 
we shall draw the curtain. 

Don Miguel sat with his happy guests 
until early dawn, who then retired, 
astonished and delighted at (he joyful 
termination of the last few evenlful 
hours^ uhile he — dread chieftain ! re- 
paired to Galafron's chamber, to con- 
sult with him how they should disqiosf- 
of Torquo and the monk. 



102 alexena; or the 



CHAP. IV. 

" Away with , and to a death 

Of nameless horrors bear them !" 

EXT morning, at early dawn^ 
Galafton despatched a messenger to 
tlie inquisitorial tribunal of Madrid, 
w'lih information that every thing had 
succeeded to the utmost of his expec- 
tations — that Montano had been seized, 
and was to be tried on the evening of 
that day. of \Those conviction there 
could not be a doubt — and that he had 
iient for the superiors of two neigh- 
bouring monasterieSj to assist on the 
solemn occasion. 

It was noon before Lord and Lady 
Mortimer, with their friends, assembled 
at breakfast, where our now happy 
heroine received the congratulations of 
all present. She was pitiably distressed, 
and her burning blushes added to her 
confusion, until Don Mijr-uel 'lood- 
uaturedly changed the conversation, 
and «»'ave a new turn to the thougrhts of 



CASTLL OF SAXTA JIAUCO. 103 

his gucstg, by requiring;, in the nainc 
of the holy tribunal, the attendance 

-and testimony of ail those who knew 
Montane, or had sutiered by his cruel- 
ty. An immense subterranean hall had 
been appointed^ which was to bo fitted 
up as a temporary court for the purpose, 
the inquisitors havin^V declared it con- 
trary to all rule to try a criminal by 
day-light, against whom so many atro- 
cious chari^-es were e:shibited. This re- 
quisition cast a momentarj gloom over 
the lively group ; bu the attention 
of Don Miguel, and his unceasing en- 
deavours to amuse them, i-estorcd their 
usual gaiety, until the monk s judges 

, arrived, who having partaken of some 
refreshment, issued orders to conduct 
Montano forthwith to the court, where 
Lord iMortimer was shortly alter re- 
cjuired to give evidence against him. 
On his entrance, he was astonished to 
find that a few hours had been sufTi- 
cient for Galafron and his ofiicers to 
erect a throne of terrors, very little 
iufciiei- to that of ^Madrid ; bencuth 



It)! ALEXENA ; OR THE 

which, on a kiiu! of platform, lay the 
))0(]y of Acasto; his countenance dis- 
torted, arid bearing ail those mariis 
which distinguish persons Avho die in 
convulsions ; at the furtiier end, there 
were two pos!.«, to which the monk and 
Torqno were chained, while ordinaries, 
Inniiliais, mutes, and all other necessary 
officers, attended. 

Bv Don IMignel's request, Montano 
was allowed to be prerscnt at his trial, 
which was both fair and impartial, and 
during ils continuance, he displayed 
great })rcsence of mind, by asking a 
number of qtiestions, which were un- 
<'qnalled for subtiity, malice, and deep 
cunning: many of them having startled 
Galafron himself; but all his wiles 
were likely to be unavailing, as every 
moment new witnesses appeared, who 
bore tcslimony to his vicious course of 
Hie. The examination of Lord Mor- 
timer was of considerable length, as he 
was obliged to enumerate every cir- 
cumstance that had occurred, from the 
lu^ht of Montano's shipwreck on th« 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 10^ 

^coast of llollyvvooii castle, to the hour 
ill which the inquisitorial troops had 
entered Santa Marco. The second 
witness was Lady Alexena,she deposed 
to several important facts ; the death of 
Cerasco ; the prisoner's cruelty to her- 
self; his attempt against Louisa, and 
tnany other circumstances, with whicii 
our kind readers are already acquainted, 
©on Miguel was the third person, and 
Ills examination occupied two hours, as 
it was deemed necessary, he should 
give an accurate statement of every 
transaction, from the commencement of 
his acquaintance with Don Philip, down 
to the present moment. He, there- 
fore, stated, Acasto had been for many 
years previous to their introduction 
connected with a number of inftimous 
sliarpers, who shared the iniquitous 
spoils gleaned from the vile and 
detetsable vice of gaminj^, and on 
which they not only existed, but were, 
by such plunder, enabled to indulge in 
the most licentious courses. II u vvus 

e5 



}0G ALEXEXA; OR T LIZ 

only twciity-sevcii vcars old, when in- 
troduced to v.itiicas, vet had been a 
professed gambler for some years be- 
Ibre their friendly intercourse, which 
>viis only for a period of four months; 
but in iliat time he had effected 
the ruin of the latter, in the manner 
stated by Clarissa, wiih this difference, 
that on the night after Don Miguel 
left IMadiid, accompanied by Henriquez, 
his faithful German servant, he, by his 
inquiries, learned that every member of 
the holy brotherhood had received 
ii description of his person ; there- 
fore, to elude their vigilance for any 
lenj^lh of time, would be impossible ; 
and was also aware, that if he sur- 
rendered when public opinion ffov,ed 
]]ip!;h against him, it would be voluntary 
bubniissioii to the axe of the execution- 
er. Thus situated, he determined to 
circulate a report of his being assassi- 
nated, which was the most likely means 
to stifle all exertion that would other- 
wise be made for his ap[)rcherjsiqn ; 



CASTLE OF SAJJTA MARCO. 107 

ills afiectioiiate doriiestics approved of 
the piaij, undertook to give it publicity^ 
mid afterwards to return to tlie Pyrenees 
to join him; as he had purposed visit- 
ing- Santa Marco, where tliere was yet 
some valuable jewels ?^nd a small sum 
of money deposited i:i a ypot known 
only to himself. iiiU before Don 
Miguel had reached the castle, he was 
ca})tared by a horde of banditti, who 
had recently lost their chieftain ; ana 
before he had been their nrisoner manv 
weeksj was unanimously chosen. 'Vh'-.) 
desperation of his atfairs, and liis 
resentment against a government which 
had treated him with such rigour, in- 
duced him to embrace their offer; 
besides, the power he would possess, 
promised ample means of revenge, 
not only on Philip, but all his othe.: 
enemies. The retreat of tiie banditti, 
at that period, was precarious and 
unsafe; their new chiei'tain, therefore, 
led them to those caverns already 
described, as soon as he had exacted a 
.^oienin oath- of implicit obodieiicj. 



ICS alcxbva; or the 

Their late leader was named Belz© 
Carracci, he therefore adopted the 
ajDpcilation, and in a little time was 
looked up to by his ferocious troops as 
the most heroic of mortals ; he softened 
their manners by his example, and by a 
sort of sophistry, directed all their 
cxnloits aoraiiist those who, from the 
viciousness of their private life, or pub- 
lic character, merited punishment; 
those, and those only, were the persons 
v\ho suffered, ill either person or proper- 
ty, which, in a short time, gave him a 
distiiit^uishcd name amons: freebooters. 
In one of his excursions, in the wilds of 
the mountains, he found Don Selib in 
the cottag-e of a poor peasant, wounded 
and insensible, with a little girl weeping 
beside his heathy couch ; surprised and 
grie-ved beyond measure at this unlook- 
ed-for misfortune, he divided the troop 
into small parties, and sent them in 
dillerent directions, to seize, if possible, 
tlie perpetrators of the dreadful out- 
rage ; about day-light the following 
inoruinr-, the band returned^ and fouf 



-CATTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1Q3 

''of them brought iiiforiTiation, that they 
had overtaken a noble, with a numerous 
retinue of armed domestics, who con- 
veyed a lady and a child into the castle 
of Santa Marco. This was sufficient ; 
Don ^*liguel had not a doubt, but 
Philip was that person, and as soon as 
Don Selib recovered the use of his 
speech, he confirmed his fears. It was 
many weeks before the latter could bqi 
removed, and during that time, the 
peasant and his family had been unre- 
mitting in their attention, particularly 
their daughter Geraldine, to whom Don 
Miguel became so much attached, that 
he prevailed on her father to allow him 
•to send her to a neiiihbourins: convent, 
■the superior of which was his relation, 
and to whom he confided his real 
situation : havinij: first obtained a 
•solemn vow of secjvcy. Geraldine was 
extremely handsome, and in a few years, 
became an object of universal admira- 
tion ; but her beauty and simplicity 
e;ided in her destruction. The gay and 
-dissipated Cerasco heard of hercharm?^ 



<T10 ALEXEXA; OR THE 

and pressed his inoUiar to iiivita her to 
their mansion ; there promised hermar- 
riaiie, and she afterwards fell a sacrifice 
to his infamous strata^^ems. When Don 
3iiguel heard of the ruin of his favourite, 
he led his troop to her betrayer's 
residence, and there punished him 
severely ; after which he conveyed the 
fair mourner to a distant conyent^ 
where she remained several months; at 
length, havini^ expressed an earnest 
wish to t&ke the veil, he sent Bondello 
and Spantani to conduct her to his 
relative, as she wished to return to 
her molherlv protection. . Cerasco iiad 
always regretted, and would have 
married her, rather than snbmit to an 
eternal separation; llierefore, had the 
convent incessantly watched, and ijn- 
mediately obtained ini'ormalicn of her 
removal. Deliglit ~1 at the prospect of 
reiiaininir his treasure, he armed a few 
■domestics, and comsnenccd a rapid 
pursuit, but onlv arrived on (he spot 
v,here her attendants were slain, just 
^I'AiQ cnoui^h to learn she v/as in the 



CASTLE OF SANTA JIARCO. lit 

powei- of Acasto^ and tiien on her way 
to the casLlo, and there he ako wiliiugly 
submitted to be conveyed. Boiidclio 
and Soaatiinij were the fiercest robbers 
of the troop, and fought with surprising* 
bravery iu her defence^ cofnbatiag' 
eight times their nnriiber^ and felj, 
sword in hand^ v.ithout utteriag- a 
groan. Like wolves they contended, 
and like those animals, died in silence. 
Oil Selib's restoration to perfect 
health,, he was elected iirst lieutenant 
by the mutual consent of the banditti, 
Avho named him Monfi'ane, and then 
Don Miguel, for the tirst time, initiated 
the robbers in all the dreadful secrets 
of the caverns, at the same time de~ 
daring his real name, and proving it 
by his knov.iedge of all the private 
entrances and passages of th« castlq, 
and by many document^:, which re- 
moved every shadow of doubt, it was 
while accideutaiiy roaming through its 
privacies, that be overheard Acasto 
threaten to murder Clarissa's child, and 
by his timely appearance prevented 



312 alexena; on the 

Ihat horrid deed. Selib wa?, at fhlj 
tune, slowly recoverinj^' from the effect 
of his wounds, otherwise Don Miguel 
would have made him acquainted wifh 
her dangerous situation ; but he feared 
to inform him, lest his impatience 
should retard his recovery. 

At the time Torquo so inhumanly 
wounded Clarisssa, her brother was on 
his return from Italy, where he had 
been, in hopes of interesting two car- 
dinals, his particular friendsj who could 
effectually serve him, by tlieir influence 
with the pontiff, and not only have him 
recalled from such disgraceful exile, but 
punish his enemies for their infamous 
treachery. Most unfortunately, hoW'. 
«ver, those sons of the church were 
both absent on iinporlant missions, and 
Don Miguel was forced to return, dis- 
])irited as well as disappointed, and 
was on his way to the cavern, when his 
s-ister's piercing shrieks s'.immoned him 
to her assistance. Before he went to 
illome, he informed her he was C^ar- 
,X*icci the robber^ and .promised to be 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAtlCO. H 



o 



her rriend, but had not discovered his 
affinity, iind, his visor being always 
down, of his countenance siie could 
not for:n a conjecture ; therefore, her 
surprise and joy may be easily ima- 
gined, when she not o:dy found a 
brother, but a husband, iii the persons 
of Carracci and Monfrane. The happy 
tidings v\ere communicated by Don 
Mii^uel himself, immediatelv after her 
recovery, and, in a short time, it was 
judged expedient far IMonfrane to take 
the name of Fernandez, and enter into 
the service of Acasto, that he should 
•always be able to account for any 
strange occurrence that the frequent 
visits of the troops might render neces- 
sary; and also, that he might, if requi- 
jsite, supply them \vit!i ammunition, 
-and render the arms of Acasto's people 
-useless. But it was not Don Miguel's 
intention to resort to those measures, 
until such lime as he had effectually se- 
cured the pontiff's friendly interference^ 
and then he knew success must eventu- 
«My ensue. Thus sixteen years had 



114 ALEXENAJ CR TIIS 

clapsedj before our hei'oirie ^vas con- 
veyed to Santa Marco, and during that 
time, the name of Beizo Carracci was 
known in everv province of Spain ; ijnd 
he was equally well acquainted with 
almost every circuinatance of peculiar 
interest in them. At the period Lord 
I\Iortimcr and Alexcna Iiad arrived at , 
Eayonne, Selib and Hcnriqcez, under 
their fe!.«rued names, discovered Acasto 
tind the monk, with whose persons and 
characters they were but too well ac- 
quainted ; and, as soon as they learned 
the-intcntions of the former, they com- 
municated with Don Mii^ucl, who was 
then in a colta;::e on the Frciicli side cf 
the Pyrenees. By this tim^e, it was 
notorious thatMontano had robbed the 
Dominicans in the vicinity of Sigucnca ; 
also, that our heroine, and several 
others, had escaped therefrom. This 
inforiiiation gave Don Miguel consider- 
able satisfaction ; th'st, because so 
many lovely women were restored to 
society; and, in the second place, the 
Dominicans were justly punished fo.^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. J 15 

thek ciTK'Uy and credulity, Notwill:- 
ytpaiciiiig, he determined to punish 
Montano^ and, if possible, rescue our 
Iieroiiie ; thercforej corr.nianded Seiib 
to be in readiness to conduct Lord 
Mortiiner to the caslle, where he was' 
to be seized, and conveyed to the 
cavern ; which was accordingly done. 

Zelo was next examined ; he gave 
evidence of the scene in the chapel, 
where Montano wounded Lord Morti- 
mer, without havin^^ any warrant from 
the inquisition, and in which affray 
many had lost their lives. 

Bernardo followed ; he had known 
the monk a number of vears. and enu- 
merated many of his .atrocities. In the 
course of his evidence, he implicated 
the abbess, and notes of his deposition 
against h^r, were taken separately, by 
Galafron himself. Virginia was then 
sworn, and gave a circumstancial de- 
tail of her sufferings in the convent, 
and. identified Montano as the person 
•'.who had personated the prior on the 



116 ALEXENA; on TilE 

jiigljl of her trialj and wlio liaJ aftec^ 
wards passed the sentence of death. 
Here Lord Mortimer and his lady were 
ag-ain called, and, on being questioned, 
described Elleiia's execution ; of all 
which, nninutes were entered. They 
were no sooner dismissed, than Eveline 
and Arabel were separately examined, 
and proved the cruelty with which they 
had been persecuted in the convent; 
and their testimony effectually ruined 
the abbess. 

The next witness was Ilourke, who 
was excessively surprised on being led 
^inio the hall ; he gazed wildly round, 
and no sooner perceived Montano, than 
he said, '^ Arrah ! you're welcome home, 
jewel! — I suppose you are soon to he 
with your oul master, who is just where 
be ought to be." — Here he was inter- 
rupted by a familiar, who, in a whisper, 
ordered him to be silent, if he valued 
Jiis life. At this he seemed much 
amazed, but made no reply ; and in a 
moment after, when desired to repeat 
the oath, exclaimed — " Och ! 1 can't 



CASTLE OF SA:^TA MARCO. 117 

Speak not a word ; for if I do, this 
black Turk at my elbow will stop my 
wizc7i.'^ GalalVon now, in a voice that 
made him start, commanded him to 
repeat it, wliich lie had no sooner 
done, than he spit out, shrugged his 
shoulders, looked at the monk, and 
apparently wished for liis blackthorn. 
At length, his examination began with 
the usual question — " What is your 
name ?" 

" Tom Rourke; and from the north 
of Ireland, at your service." 

'• Do you know Mon'ano de Gus- 
pard. a Dominican monk ?" 

" Och ! hushla-ma-ehfee, is it game 
you're making ? — know the monk? — 
bim my soul that's no bad joke." 

Galafron did not understand this 
sort of answer, and the question was 
again put.- 

" Know him! arrah, do you thiuk I 
don't know my lefj hand fron> my riglit ? 
Yes! I know him to be the biggest 
blackguard that ever crossed hiniseU"/' 

The inquisitors now sent for Ljrd 



lis alexexa; on, the 

JMorlimcr, to act as interpreter, a* 
Tom's English, Irish, and Spanish, 
jumbled together, were totally nnintelli- 
gible. On his lordship's appearing-, the 
rxamination recommenced ; but, as this 
v.iiHcss knew very little, his answers 
are not \7orth relating; his evidence 
being only corroborative with respect 
to Montano's landinijr in Enijland : 
Gonzales' declaration ; the scene in the 
chapel; and escape from the Dominican 
convent. Albert was examined to the 
same facts. Then Donna Louisa; her 
evidence was the most conGiusive and 
convicting, if we except that of Boler- 
PiO, at whom the monk fired, and in 
whose presence he killed Geraidine. 
Williams was the last witness, and if 
Ronrke was unintelligible, lie was ten 
times worse. On beins: desired to 
explain the scene in the cell where 
Montano had chained Alexena to the 
post, and was about to sacrifice her, he 
thus described it: — ''Do you see ; I 
hap'd to be under hatches, when this 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. I IP' 

pirate broaclied his foul vveatlici' plai], 
for boardin«' that littie skifF: triistinfx 
fear wonld ohliije her to strike her 
colours; and that dead shark there, 
(pointing to Acasto,) v^ho is novf in ;i 
brimstone latitude, cheered him on; so 
when the Uibber fired a gun to brin<;' 
her too, and saw <hat she honied xxo a 
stout spirit, and determined to give 
battle while she had a timber standing-, 
he commanded his mamelukcs to ponr 
in a broadside ; hut I, seeing her about 
to sink, drificd in odd rigging on their 
starboard quarter^ and they taking me 
for a fire-ship, soon cleared the deck; 
aye, aye! ihey cut cable — crowded all 
. sail, and left that dog-fish sprawling 
\¥ith his lee jaw broken by a bomb shot. 
Damn my eyes! I \T0uld have closed 
Ids cabin lights, had not our commodore 
Don Mi2:aeL shouted avast ! at;d rr.n him 
aground between two scuttled liulks." 
Our heroine listened to tliis detail^ with 
tearful eyes, and could scarce explain 
the :^alla!]t tar's meanin.":, beins: so 
much gfTec'cd by the kindness and 



120 ALfeXEXA; OR TKE 

bravery \\liich he had so nobly display- 
ed in the moment of danuer : for had 
he been discovered, instant death must 
have followed. 

Williams could not behold her tears 
unmoved ; he knew the source from 
which thoy (lowed, and comprehended 
the feelings that summoned them. 
Therefore, having tossed his quid from 
onejavv to the other, with great rapidity, . 
he exclaimed, " Why this foul weather ; 
cheer up! the storm's blown by; we 
sail right before the wind, so, no more 
of these salt-water pearls," Alexena 
smiled through her tears, and Williams 
observed, " Aye, aye ! that's right ; 
sunshine and rain betokens a fair day. 
Come captain," he continued, address- 
in": Lord Mortimer, '' tow her on deck, 
as this here hold is rather raw, and 
she's only fit for summer gales; — no 
disparagement lady, God bless your 
heart." 

''My good friend, no oflence whal- 
ever," replied our heroine, *' receive 



CAStLE OP SANTA MARCO. l)il 

my most sincere and grateful thanks, 
and believe me, I will feel most happy, 
if you will remain with my lord, wlio 
will return to England next month, 
and where, I trugt, you will allow us to 
make the remainder of your life com- 
fortable," Williams was about to burst 
into a string- of ejaculations, when they 
were all ordered to be silent, and 
shortly after were permitted to with- 
draw. ' 

When Lord Mortimer had retired, 
Galafron read the depositions of the 
witnesses, and after a few moments 
consultation, passed sentence of death 
on the two wretched criminals ; in a 
most impressive manner, he enumerat- 
ed their several offences; dwelt on their 
horrible nature, extent, and atrocity; 
reverted to the dreadful punishments 
that awaited them hereafter, unless they 
sincerely repented, and concluded, by 
saying, *' Thatthe doors of mercy were 
shut on them for ever in this world ; 
then ordered them to be executed at 

VOL. III. F 



122 ALEXENA ; OH THE 

twelve o'clock the following' nin^lit 
Where tlieii were Montano's airj-built 
castles? they had vanished, leavirio- 
him a prey to all the torments of a 
guilty conscience. In the gloom of his 
dungeon, bitter recollection held a 
mirror before his half distracted fancy, 
in which he beheld those who had 
(iillen by his hand, and tlicse whoso 
ruin he had caused by nameless wiles 
and treachery ; remorse for a monjent 
visited his flinty couch ; but the cata- 
logue of his crimes was of such exces- 
sive length, that hope forsook him, ere 
he had scanned one half its contents; 
desperation followed, and he would 
have closed the scene by suicide, had 
not two familiars sat in his cell, to 
prevent any attempt of that nature. 
Zelo attended both him and Torquo 
alternately, but they were incorrigible ; 
the latter, indeed, appeared toavrait his 
approaching death with much less 
fortitude than the monk, and seemed 
to expect some dreadful torments ; he 
was apparently insensible to the kind 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 133 

exhortations of the good father, \t}io 
explained with great feeling-, the bound- 
less extent of God's mercy ; tried to 
impress his mind with an idea of future 
rewards and punishments ; besought 
him to repent, but he continued im- 
movable, until a few hours previous to 
his execution, when lie was induced to 
repeat several prayers ; yet, at the 
conclusion of each, observed, they 
would be of no avail, that he knew his 
doom ^Tas sealed, and that years of 
penitence could not save him ; his 
thoughts were tinctured with despair of 
the blackest hue, and he even wished 
for death to end his mental misery; 
however, before the fatal iiour arrived, 
his worthy confessor had succeeded in 
soothing his spirit to a degree of 
composure that could not have been 
expected. 

Time glides rapidly — the day passed 
—night returned — the clock tolled 
eleven — and the men of death entered ^ 
Montano's dimgeon to strike off his 



F 



9 



151 



ALEXENA ; OR THE 



irons, preparatory to the awful mo- 
iTient, On their arriTal, \\q appeared 
much agitated ; but before his limbs 
were freed from the fetters, he seemed 
to have collected strength to meet his 
fate with fortitude; but this assumed 
coura^je vanished on beinir led into the 
deep and drearj/ dung-eons of the castle ; 
his eyes roamed over their dark soli- 
tudes, in ghastly earnestness, particu- 
larly when hedistmguishcd the roaring 
of the subterranean torrent ; its horrors 
were, as yet, unknown, and he gazed 
wildly round, wishing to ascertain the 
cause of the ahnost deafening din that 
assailed his ears; at first, conceiving it 
was a noise occasioned by the dasliing 
of the sea against the rocks, and that 
he was to be led through some passage 
which communicated with the foaming 
surge; to be there aliot, and thrown into 
its an«Trv waves. But who can pretend 
to describe liis horror, on beholding 
the real cause from the hall that over- 
looked the terrific cataract? The little 
boat was already at the steps; a kind 



tASTLt: OF SANTA MARCO. 123 

of platform was fastened to the iron 
barrier, and the draw-bridge below 
\Yas distinguishable by the light of two 
torches^ which almost touched the wa- 
ters that impetuously rushed under it. 
There Moiitano comprehended the ex- 
tent of the horrible fate the inquisitors 
had prepared for him ; and Galafron 
stood on the rocky bank, until ho was 
bound, and placed in the crazy vessel 
appointed to convey him and the 
executioners to the platform. Num- 
bers of the banditti had assembled on 
the bridge; manj^ were gazing through 
the dripping roof; others hanging on 
the friglitful precipices, in momentary 
danger of being dashed to pieces. Tiie 
stream ruslied over the rocks v.ith 
unusual fury ; the torclies Ih^rcd in the 
gloomy distance, and the countenances 
of (he rude spectators of this dismal 
scene, were expressive of the awe which 
chilled each bosom. When the boat 
had arrived at the fatal spot, INlontano 
Avas placed on the platform, and from 
thence beheld the jaws of destruction 



126 ALEXEXA ; OR THE 

open to receive liim. It was a moment 
of horror ; for a wild cry starlled all 
present, and on the monk turning his 
eves to ascertain the cause, he saw 
Torqno lowered by a rope, with his 
hands and feet tied together, who, as 
he screamed and struggled, twisted his 
distorted form to gaze on the black 
gulph into which he was about to be 
})recipitatcd. The former now forgot 
ijis own situation on observing his 
fellow-sufibrer ; but for him he felt 
no compassion ; on the contrary, he 
grinned with satisfaction, on the exe- 
tnlioner drawing his sabre, for the 
purpose of cutting the frail cord by 
which lie was suspended ; but a deep 
groan, accompanied by a sudden flash 
of light, drew his attention to the 
bridge, and he there beheld the de- 
cayed figure of Hugo rise from the 
deep, with a scroll in his right hand, 
\\hich he held so close to one of the 
torches, that the writing could be ac- 
curately distinguished ; and Montano\s 
blood froze on reading those words — ■ 



GASrLE OF SANTA MAIICO. i'27 

'* Hu<xo waits to conduct his master to 
the mansions of darkness !" lie trem- 
bled ; the cold perspiration fell from 
his agitated brows into the dark waters 
of the gulph. Galafron gave thedread 
signal ; the rope was severed, and Tor- 
quo fell headlong into the rugged deep ; 
the plunge made the cavern ring, and 
his last moan ascended as Hugo's body 
sunk, while the impatient soul of r>Ion- 
tano fluttered in his bosom, willing to 
relinquish its polluted tenement, raiher 
than endure such harrowing sights. 
The inquisitors now uncovered their 
heads, and the executioners disrobed 
the monk, ar.d then returned in the 
boat to the hall. All eyes \Nerc fixed 
on him ; his fate was inevitable, and 
while he yet gazed on the surrounding- 
horrors, the remains of Acasto de- 
scended, and stood beside him. Moii- 
(ano's hands were at that time unbound ; 
he laid them on Philip's shoulders, and 
held him from him ; but the cord by 
which the latter was lowered beingcut, 
he fell into the monk's arms, and the 



12S ALEXENA ; OR THE 

same instant the platform turned over^ 
plunging both into the foaming abyss, 
where the former was clashed to pieces ; 
no trace of either ever appeared, and 
we hope their vices, like themselves, 
will be forgotten ; or, if remembered, 
only with abhorrence, accompanied by 
a sincere desire, that such monsters 
may never again degrade the human 
form. 



«ASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO. 129 



CHAP. V. 

'-' Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of si^hs ; 
Being puig'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes 
Being vexM, a sea nourish'J with lovers' tears : 
What is it else ? A madness most discreet, 
A choking gall, and a preserving swreet." 

Rom, & Jul. 

J. ME execution of Montano and iiis 
\'ile associate made a deep and lasting 
impression on all those who had wit- 
nessed it. and assisted in reconciling: 
them to the chan£:e which was about 
to take place. Don Miguel and liis 
friends were i<»;noraRt of wliat sentence 
had been passed on tlieir enemies^ until 
the, day after they were no more, and 
from that hour every individual in the 
castle carefidly avoided mentioning 
their names, so that in a week they 
were apparently forgotten. 

Before Galafron left Santa Marco, he 
ordered every individual to remain in 
it for one montli, on pain of incurring- 
the displeasure of the holy tribunal^ ae 



f5 



ISO alexena; or the 

he said it mi<^ht be necessary for 
many amon^ them to give personal 
testimony against the abbess of the 
Dominicans; but this mandate of the 
inquisitor gave little uneasiness, as the 
entire party were too happy to think 
of separating so soon, and some among 
them could not bear the idea, without 
suffering certain unpleasant sensations, 
inflicted by the arrows of the little 
blind god. Among those, were Louisa 
and Velasco, who were constantly seen 
on the beach, while Louisa and Don 
Celio amused themselves in rambling 
through the delightfully romantic paths 
opposite the castle. Zorayda played 
cnchantingly both on the guitar and 
harp, so that Don Miguel was seldom 
to be found absent from the music- 
room, and Alexena, with her PvJorlimer, 
generally passed their morning in the 
library, either drawing, or reading to 
each other. Happiness and content 
shone on the countenance of every 
individual in Santa Marco. Don Selib 



OASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 131 

looked forward, with much satisfaction, 
to an union between Lucinda and hii 
son, being ah'eady very much attached 
to that lovely girl, whose beauty was 
ihc least of her perfections ; she was a 
descendant of one of the first families 
in Spain, related to the prince, pos- 
sessed of an ample fortune, and though 
not so delicately beautiful as her sister 
Zorayda, had many brilliant attractions. 
Cello loved her with boundless aiTec- 
tion^ and very soon became a favourite 
suitor. Her father, Don Alonzo, ap- 
proved of her choice, and made them 
happy. 

Don Miguel had no reason to com- 
plain ; his manners were irresistible, 
and in a short time Zorayda's bosom 
heaved v^ith that most undefinable of 
sensations — love; and there was not 
many females in Spain, nay, we shall 
only except our heroine, who was so 
likely to inspire that delightful passion; 
gracefully tall in her person, with a 
%ure every way faultless ; fine hazie- 



iS2 ALEXENA; OR THE 

coloured eyes ; her liair jetty black ; 
her complexion fair; her voice soft 
and languishing, accompanied with a 
bewitching smile^ that played round a 
mouth of inexpressible beauty ; in fact, 
every movement gave an interest which 
found the way to his heart ; he was 
the most enamoured of men, the most 
respectful of lovers, tremblingly alive 
to anticipate her wishes, and to prevent 
the possibility of the most trivial of 
them remaining ungratified. Oh! he 
was 



All made of fantasy, 



All made of passion, and all made of wishes -j 
All adoration, duty, and observance ; 
All humbleness, all patience, and impatience; 
All purity, all trial, all observance." — 

And ere the expiration of a month, was 
the happiest individual in the castle. 

Every succeeding day brought new 
visitors, many of whom were Don 
Miguel's most distinguished friends, 
and amon": them our eccentric cha- 
racier^ Don Raphiel de Agrilio, deserves 



tJASILE OF SANTA MAECO. 13S 

notice ; he was a man of rare talents, 
accomplished, blessed with the best of 
hearts, yet, notwithstanding, was exces- 
sively crabbed and morose, particularly 
with those who affected any virtue 
which they really did not possess ; such 
persons were sure of receiving no mercy, 
and seldom a day passed without giving 
him an opportunity of annoying them. 
Alexena and Zorayda were his favour- 
ites, and he generally allowed them to 
lean on his arm for an hour every 
evening, which was considered by all 
his acquaintances, as a most extraordi- 
nary piece of condescension, "and 
proved beyond a possibility of doubt^ 
that those ladies were endowed with 
matchless excellence. During hiss ple- 
netic fits, he was exceedingly diverting; 
all his observations were well applied; 
but his sarcasms, though humorous, 
were rather severe. 

About three v.'ceks after Don MiguePs 
restoration, he sent cards of invitation 
for a grand masked ball, to which were 
invited every family of distinction in 



Iji AliEXENA ; OS THE 

St. Sebastian, Pampeluna, and Sara- 
gossa ; this entertainment promised 
much gratification, particularly to Don 
Ilaohiel, who was resolved to tease all 
those who deserved it, without distinc- 
tion, and from the diversity of cha- 
racters ; he promised himself ample 
satisfaction for the torrents of abuse 
with which he had been mercilessly 
loaded. In the castle, splendid pre- 
parations were made, and with every 
part of them, our cynic was sure to 
find a thousand taults. " The emble- 
matic figures were without meaning ; 
the artificial flowers, like any thing but 
nature; the masks villanously executed ; 
the dresses abominable ; the company 
invited, all fools ; and Don Miguel, a 
downright madman." He understood 
English, and spoke it fluently ; therefore, 
generally conversed with Mortimer in 
that language, and seldom smiled, ex- 
cept when listening to Alexcna's lisping 
attempts at the pronunciation of it. 
Bhe iufiiiitely amused hira ; her playful 



«ASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. Ibd- 

iiinocence won his heart ; and in the 
whole of his careful observance of her 
manners, he saw nothing- with whicli he 
could be displeased. "You are too 
forgiving," he would sometimes say, 
*' but, nevertheless, 1 must love you, 

that is, I mean — 1 mean pugh ! — 

ridiculous !" 

" Me don't like you," Alexeiia re- 
plied, " you be so much sulky.'' 

" No jabber now," observed Don 
Haphiel. " Speak Spanish." 

'' Me much like English." 

'' Aye, because it is your clumsy- 
husband's language.'' 

*' Ah ! ah ! you be ver' merry." 

'' Not I ! — confounded folly ! it makes 
nie sick." 

- Vil ye be sad?" 

" Yes, how can 1 be otherwise, when 
I am in company with such idiots, 
who scarce know how to laugh at each 
other?" 

'' Vake out of it then." 

** I will ; and as I would fain believe 






IS6 ALEXENA; OR THE 

you have some sense, I shall take you 
with me." 

' And me vil take Mortimer/' 
" Oh, yes ! but you would liave been 
better without such an incumbrance ; 
'however, as he is not the most incor- 
3'i^ible ass here^ you may bring him 
alons:." 

His lordship laughed, and having 
drawn an arm of his beautiful bride 
through his, accompanied Don Raphiel 
to the adjacent precipices, which com- 
manded one of the finest views of the 
country and the bay. While they 
wandered along the coast, our heroine 
was highly entertained with the obser- 
vations of her sulky companion, whom 
even the beauties of nature could scarce 
please ; but their attention was diverted 
from this subject b3Mhe sound of voices 
very nigh them, and on peepi4]g over 
the projection of a rock, they beheld 
Don Mii^uel at the feet of Zoravda. 
pouring out the eifusions of a love-sick 
heart, and she listening with approving 
jsmiles and blushes. Lord IMortimer 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1S7 

and his lady would have made a preci- 
pitate retreat, had not Don Raphiel held 
both; and while the lover continued 
speaking, Raphiel's physiognomy was 
most laughable^ and it was not without 
the utmost diiiicultj his lordship could 
prevent him iVom disturbing- the tele-a- 
ttte. 

" Merciful pow ers !'' he exclaimed, 
" did you ever hear such stuff as this 
silly J ack-o'-th'- Lantern is filling that 
languishing lady's brains wiih? Before 
heaven, 1 should not be surprised, if 
he imagined himself a second Apollo; 
aye, aiid Miss Zorayda, a Daphne ; 
only she seems much more inclmed to 
sit than run away. — Charming thought ! 
how delightful to tumble from those 
cliffs — be changed into a river, and 
mingle with the waves of Biscay !" 

" Vere ye ever in love?" demanded 
Alexena. 

" Vos I ever in bedlam ?" said he, 
mimicing. — " No ! not quite so mad 
as to sing sonnets to the moon, dash 
myself against rugged precipices^ tear 



13S Ai^EXE^A; Oa THE 

my liair out in humlfuls^ insult my 
friends, bake myself in the sum, and 
then blow my brains out." 

*' Lovers are seldom so frantic, be- 
lieve me/' observed his lordship^ laugh- 
in '^'' 

••' Aye, but they are (hough. How 
often have I seen such bamboozled 
automatons move along, like scare- 
crows, to some sunny bar:k, and liiere 
sink beneath a load of imaginary 
misery ; then, stretched at full length, 
enumerate their several woes, begiu- 
iiinu: with the last frown or scornful 
look of their mistresses, who, in all 
probability, at the moment, were wast- 
ing their beauty, if they had any, over 
a chess-board or gaming-table." 

" You be odious man, and our sex: 
vil hate you." 

" Yes, for stating facts; women hate 
to hear the truth ; but was not this the 
case, we should have no marriages, for 
a man must tell a thousand lies, and 
swear to them, before any of you will 
JtcJl him one in return, which is no more 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAr.CO. IS9 

than that you are content to have the 
poor devil for an husband." 

They were now at the draw- bridge^ 
where Virginia met them, witli word 
that Galafroii had returned, accompa- 
nied by Ansehiio, Isabel, and Madeline, 
with the abbess of the Dominicans and 
two nuns, prisoners. Alexena was 
greatly shocked at this intelligence, 
being aware the latter had been brought 
to be tried, and that escape was utterly- 
impossible, when such witnesses as 
Eveline, Arabel, Bernardo, and herself, 
should appear against her. 
- Don Raphiel soon learned the cha« 
racter of the abbess, but refrained from 
making any observations ; he was too 
noble-minded to " load the fallen ;" on 
the contrary, he ventured to join Don 
Miguel and the ladies in her behalf; 
but the stern Galafron ordered all 
to be silent, as he was resolved to 
be entirely guided by evidence. She 
was accordingly tried, found guilty, 
and executed, by being conveyed in 
a boat a considerable way into the bay. 



HO ALEXENA* OR THE 

where two buoys were fastened to her 
person, and she was then flung into 
the waves to perish by birds of prey, 
who literally eat her alive. Thus 
perished Ursula de Baretto, the most 
cruel domina that ever disgraced a 
religious institution ; her wealth was 
immense, and instead of saving, it 
hurried her to destruction. The crafty 
inquisitors divided the spoils which she 
had so infamously amassed — then de- 
stroyed her ; and so may all tyrants 
perish ! 

In a few days after the trial of the 
abbess, Galafron pardoned the n,uns, 
who, he said, merely acted under her 
influence, and rewarded the good 
Madeline, \^ho had saved Virginia, by 
appointing her superior of the Domi- 
nican convent, to the great joy of every 
individual within its walls. The kind 
nun had incurred the displeasure of 
her late cruel predecessor, by inter- 
fering for Ellena, and was punished 
by many months solitary confinement. 
Father Zelo was appointed to a high 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 141 

preferment in the churcli, but chose 
to remain as confessor to the liimily 
of his worthy benefactor ; and Don 
Miguel felt so extremely gratefnl for 
this proof o his unalterable attach- 
ment, that durin«^ the remainder of his 
life, he paid him every attention. 

Before the inquisitors left the castle, 
they offered an immense sum for it, in 
order to settle within its walls a number 
of monks of the Benedictine order, 
who would shelter the distressed travel- 
ler, or wandering pilgrim, from the 
remorseless banditti which had fora^-es 
infested those mountains, and as a fur- 
ther inducement, they pledged them- 
selves, it should for everbear his name;, 
but Don Misfuel knew the tribunal too 
well to place any reliance on their 
promises, therefore, declined their pro- 
posal in the gentlest terms, saying, ''It 
washis intention to reside in it constantly 
durinc: the summer months.'* The 
inquisitors, however, were indefatigable, 
and finding that he would not part with 
it to them, commissioned others to 



J42 ALEXEXA ; OR TU3 

purchase it for his most Christian ma- 
jesty, under pretence, thatthe king wish- 
ed to convert it into a fortress, for the 
purpose of defending those seas from 
pirates. But this offer he also declined, 
and Galafron returned without effect- 
ing this desirable point. Its gloomy 
dungeons and subterranean caverns 
would have been an excellent place to 
torluro or confine the Moors ; and this 
was the al)ominable use for which it 
was intended ; these were the pilgrims 
and travellers the inquisitors wished to 
shelter ; these were the wretches that 
were to be protected from the banditti ; 
however, the halls of Santa Marco were 
saved from such pollution, and would 
for ages have braved the storm, had it 
not been for the cruelty of those re- 
morseless vipers, who, in a short time 
destroyed this ancient seat of hospitali- 
ty, where joy and merriment had been 
constant guests, and where food and 
fire was administered to those whose 
wants required it. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. H3 

A few days previous to that appoint- 
ed for tlio masquerade, Don Miguel 
won the final consent of the beautiful 
Zoyrada, and had no sooner obtained 
it, than he waited on Don Raphiel, 
wliom he requested to accompany him 
to the altar. 

" Is it I? ara you really serious?' he 
exclaimed^ evidently surprised. 

'' Certainly ; I know few bachelors 
whom 1 esteem so much — none more.'' 

'' By my honour," observed Agrillo, 
'' if you prevail, I should not wonder 
if I follow your example, and become 
a Benedict myself" Clarissa's cousin, 
a fine animated girl, was at this moment 
standing opposite him, and he fixed his 
eyes with so much meaning on her face, 
that she almost sunk with confusion. 

''Eh! girl," he inquired, '' why so 
much rogue? — by my life, 1 believe this 
castle's enchanted, and that you are the 
sorceress; for since these walls received 
you, 1 am most strangely altered." 
Isabella now turned to withdraw, but 
Don Raphiel detained her; — " You 



Hi jllexena; or the 

must not go, Donna, until you say I 
am for/J^iven ; for world's I would not 
offend you." 

" By all that's wonderful," exclaimed 
Selib, ''I believe you are serious, if so, 
Isabella should be proud of having 
made a conquest of a man who has 
resisted the beauties of Spain these 
fifteen years." 

'' Thank you, Selib ; but you give me 
credit for too much." Isabella, with 
difficulty, escaped from this raillery, but 
the instant she disappeared, Raphiel 
declared, he most sincerely loved her, 
and earnestly begged Don Miguel's in- 
terference in his behalf. Nothing could 
exceed the surprise of all present, and 
no unfortunate lover was ever more 
unmercifully teased ; but he displayed 
infinite good humour, so much so, that 
his best friends scarce knew him, and in 
a very few days, actually obtained 
Isabella's consent. Velasco was equally 
successful. Celio had w^on the heart of 
Lucinda, with tlie mutual consent of 
both their parents, and after a most 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 145 

joyful consultation, it was mutually 
aoreed '' by and between the aforesaid 
parties/' that those four happy couple 
should be nnarricd on the same day. 
The auspicious morning at length 
arrived ; the blushing brides were led 
to the ahar, and it V70uld be difficult 
to decide which was the prettiest; yet 
if a decision could be made, Zorayda 
was certainly entitled to the preference. 
But our heroine stood peerless, and 
while present, all others seemed forgot- 
ten by the numerous and gay assem- 
blage Avhich now crowded the castle. 
This day passed happily, though tedi- 
ously, the lovers having wished for 
night, an hundred thousand tim.es. Oh ! 

" Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, 

Tow'rds Phoebus' mansion ; such a waggoner 
As Phaston would whip you to the west, 
And bring ia cloudy night immediately. 
Spread thy close curtain, love performing nigia! 
That run-away 's eyes may wink ;"— 

For— 

" Lovers can see to do their am'rous ritet 
By their own beauties.'' 

VOL. III. G ' 



ii6 ALEXENA; OR THE 

Night, at length, wearied by their % 
supplications, gathered the bright god 
of day beneath her dusky wings, and 
ere the twelfth hour, the lovers had 
reached the zenith of earlhl) blissv 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAUCO, 147 



CHAP. VI. 

'• His nature is too noble for the world : 

He would not flatter Xeptuue for his trident. 

Or Jove for his power to thunder. His heart's his 

mouth : 
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent.'' 

Cor, 

AjOVE and joy waited on the bridef5, 
as their respective husbands led them^ 
*' in beauty, blushing like an April 
morn," to the breakfast-parlour, where 
they happily met to congratulate each 
other on bavins: attained the heio^ht of 
human felicity. Don Raphiel, though 
a most attentive groom, had not al- 
toirether forsrotten his old habits ; vet 
managed his satirical humour with 
such adroitness, that it gave infinite 
entertainment ; and the second day 
after, avast number of strangers being 
expected, he resolved to indulge it. 

On the night of the masquerade, Don 
Raphiel promised to give our heroine 
a sketch of the different characters, as 

g2 



148 ALEXENA; OR THE 

they passed fi'om one siiiie of rooms 
to another^ and appointed a convenient 
spot for the purpose. The masks began 
to assemble at an early hour, and before 
eleven o'clock, the apartments were 
crowded. Alexena was dressed as a 
shepherdess, her attire simply beauti- 
ful ; Zorayda was habited as a gipsy; 
Lucinda,, as a sultana ; Louisa, as a nun; 
.Virginia^ as a flower girl ; Eveline, as 
a duenna; Arabel_, as a ballad -singer ; 
Don Mi:^uel assumed the character of 
an inquisitor ; Don Raphiel, that of a 
fortune-teller ; Lord IMortimer, as a 
knight-errant ; Carlos, as a monk of 
the order of St. Dominic ; Cclio, as 
a muleteer; Velasco, as a huntsman. 
The remainder of our friends wore 
plain dominos; but among the motley 
group were kings, queens, princesses, 
devils, bravos, cheesemongers, fruit- 
erers, sailors, tinkers, players, frisseurs, 
courtiers, demerips, harlequins, gipsys, 
Tiuns, and other characters innumera- 
ble, each attentively seckirtg the god- 
dess Pleasure. Among such a throng. 



tJASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 149 

Hapliiel could not fail finding- man/ 
deserving censure, and was not many 
minutes seated in a recess, which oui* 
heroine had converted into an artificial 
arbour, before he beg'an to entertain her 
with their faults and foibles. The first 
who passed was a friar, with an enor- 
mous paunch, and Raphiel exclaim- 
ed — '•' See that overgrown porpoise ; 
he is a rich alcade, having a fortune 
of twenty thousand crowns per annum, 
which has been amassed — heaven knows 
how ! There is not a more ignorant oi* 
uncharitable dog in Spain ; to be poor 
is, in his opinion, to be a rogue, and 
such he is sure to punish, guilty or 
not.=' 

'' Me don't like him," observed Alex- 
ena, in English. 

" ^Vell, look here, that slim figure, 
who, by her habit, we are to suppose 
is a devotee, is really one of the most 
atfected coquettes in Europe ; she has 
a considerable share of beauty ; but 
lier manners are so disofustini!:, that in 



ioO alexena; on the 

a few moments yon imagine you are 
in company with a monster." 

" Be vou not ver' severe ?'' demand- 
ed his attentive companion. 

''No, truly; but, hush! here comes 
a fiashy captain ; one of the most ar- 
rant cowards that ever wore a sword ; 
he has been in one or two skirmishes, 
in consequence of which, it appears to 
be his belief, none are more valiant; 
though it is pretty generally whispered 
he ran away, and that his connexion 
alone saved liim from well-merited dis- 
grace. 

" Do good so he to let him pass." 
*' Aye, with all my heart; we have 
had too much of him already." 

*' Who be this pretty smart figure?" 
'• Oh ! this is one of our learned 
ladies — the greatest plague in exist- 
ence. She drags her knowledge of 
history, geograpliy, politics^&c. head 
foremost into every conversation, no 
matter whether foreign to the subject 
in discussion or not. The other day% 



4;A!ITI.E of SANTA MAR€0. 151 

:for instance, an eminent physician ob- 
served, that a certain young female of 
my acquaintance was rapidly consum- 
ing by a decline, when Miss here, not 
aware of his profession, instantly con- 
tradicted him, by saying, " La Signior, 
yon mistake the poor thing's complaint ; 
I can prove to a demonstration, it is 
nothing more than a nertous fever, 
caught from a seve.re cold. She then 
entered into a learned description of 
diseases, and concluded, in my mind, 
very ridiculously ; all present thought 
so too ; but if any one had opposed 
her, she would not have ceased bab- 
bling yet." 

" Me have enough of her. — Pray 
now who is this that talks so incessant- 

*' Mercy on me ! — this is one of the 
greatest pests of society — a gossip; a 
small-talk vender, a dealer in charac- 
ters, a scandalous chronicle, a she- 
devil in petticoats. From the hour she 
rises, until fatigue closes her ferret eyes, 
her tongue U busy propagating mis- 



J52 ALEXEVA ; OR THE 

chief. What is said in this house she 
will grossly pervert into a different 
meaning', and as her Tarious inclina- 
tions prompt, repeat to the credulous, 
to the ill-natured, or envious, as facts, 
which they believe, or pretend to be- 
lieve, and tell to others, with innume- 
rable additions," 

" I vil h^tc the vorld two times more 
than imagine you, if you can't prove 
me some be good.'' 

'' Ah ! ha ! you speak English like 
a parrot; I should not like to have 
the trouble of making you pronounce 
it 7nuch good, (mimicing.) 

" Vel, me not mind. — Say who be dis 
frisseur?'* 

" That is a butterfly — a moth — a 
senseless powder-monkey, who thrusts 
himself into all companies — flutters 
about the females— talks scandal— hems 
handkerchiefs — composes washes for 
the fair — combs old Tabby's lap-dogs 
— kills characters by the gross — and is 
despised and laughed at for his pains." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 1^3 

" Ob, my! — lie be worst yet." 

" Aye, but here comes a cheese- 
monger ; how different his real occupa- 
tion! (I should say profession,) being; 
a quack, an apothecary, a vender of 
poison by wholesale and retail ; but 
withal, a useful member; he hides the 
frailty of numbers of your sex, where 
they are seldom discovered — I mean in. 
the o-rave. He has two or three sove- 
reign remedies for all diseases, which he 
applies indiscriminately. If they cure^, 
it is well ; if they kill, it saves farther 
trouble. He has sent many passengers 
to Charon these some years past, and 
as the most of them are females, it is 
but reasonable he should expect a 
pretty storm about his ears the moment 
he crosses Styx." 

*•' Let him begone, and say wlio this 
bravo be?" 

" He is a country squire, with scarce 
a rial's worth of brains — a mere boar- 
hunter, more brutal in his manners 
4ban tlie beasts which conrstitute hi^ 

G 5 



154 ALEXENA; OR THE 

game ; overbearing-, oppressive, ty- 
rannical to a degree, over lliose un- 
fortunates whom relentless fate has 
subjuo^ated to his gating yoke; and 
snealvingly mean and submissive to 
his superiors in wealth and power. — 
I wonder how he found admission 
here!" 

*' Well, he be hateful character ; — 
Avho is this nun?" 

" T feel pleasure in being able to 
gratify you. — She is the mother of a 
fine family, and one of the most ines- 
timable of women. Another time, and 
1 shall give you a detail of her num- 
berless virtues." 

'' I sliould much like introduce." 

" Very well ; I will endeavour to 
f^ratify you, but can't at present, as I 
wish to discover a figure, who, from the 
slowness of his gait, seems to be ad- 
vanced in years, and is habited as an 
itinerant showman. Yonder knight- 
errant, if I mistake not, is your hus- 
band^ and seems much disturbed by 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARCO. 155 

the representaiioti. — Come, let us see 
what it means." 

Don ilaphiel thea led our heroine 
where Lord Mortimer was slandin£»\ 
and as she advuiiced, his agitation 
was apparent. Ourcyuic now beg'ged 
to have a peep, and offered tiie feign- 
ed showman money. His voice was 
known, and Zelo (tor it was hej caught 
him by the arm, asid poifitiiig to the 
glass, in a suppressed voice, bid him 
look quickly. He did, and to his un- 
speakable terror, beheld a villain, in 
the robes of au inquisitor, in the act 
of tiring a train of gun-powder, which 
was represented as concealed in the 
vaults of the castle." 

'' Oh, merciful heaven ! my good 
Zelo, what is the meaning of this 
dreadful picture?" 

" We are all on the brink of destruc- 
tion ; tind Don Miguel, if possible, and 
retreat ia the western tower ; descend 
the stairs by the trap-door you will find 
open ; get on board the boat, and I 
will be with vou as soon as I warn our 



156 ALEXENA; OR THE 

other friends ; for to give a general 
alarm would be the inevitable ruin of 
us all." 

Raphiel turned to protect Alexena, 
and seek for his wife ; but the former 
was gone, and Mortimer had vanished. 
Distracted, he rushed into the adjoining 
rooms, where he met Isabella and 
Celio ; mentioned their horrid situa- 
tion, and sent the latter in search of 
Lucinda and the other ladies. Zelo, 
in the meantime had the ixood fortune 
to meet Don l^.Iiguel, who no sooner 
understood their impending danger, 
than he exclaimed — " 'Tis the bloody 
work of Galafron, who is here in a 
mask: seek our dear friends, and let 
them be conveyed to the place of ren- 
dezvous, while I endeavour to prevent 
Ihis dreadful calamity." He then has- 
tened away, and almost flew towards 
the subterraneans ; but was petrified 
with amazement, on finding Alexena 
quielly following the infernal inquisitor 
lo inevitable ruin. '' Lady Mortimer," 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 

he hoarsely murmured, " Why trc j in 
the footsteps of Satan?" Galafron turn- 
ed, and beheld Don Miguel, habited in 
the robes of the holy tribunal; he knew 
not what to think, but conceiving' he 
was discovered, extinguished his lamp, 
and retreated through one of the pri- 
vate passages. To attempt overtaking 
him would be little less than madness; 
therefore, the former prudently resolved 
to return to the rooms, seize the casket 
wherein his treasures was deposited, 
and fly to the brigantine, which lay 
close under the walls. 

Lord Mortimer, in his anxiety to sav& 
Zorayda, Louisa, Arabel, &c. forgot 
Alexena, who foolishly let go his arm, 
on being beckoned to by the inquisitor, 
and who, by his dress, she mistook for 
Don INIiguel. On his lordship turning 
to request she would not stir from his 
side, judge his consternation, on finding 
she was not even in the same apartment. 
Wretched, frantic beyond conception, 
he rudely pressed through the crowd^ 
and was about to call her, when he 



158 alexena; or the 

Avas again met by Zelo, who told him 
she was safe, and commanded him, as 
he valued her existence, to hasten to 
the tower. 

During these eventful momenta, 
Rourke and Williams had stolen into a 
corner, where ihey diverted each other 
with the most extraordinary observa- 
tions that likely were ever uttered, and, 
luckily, were reconnoitered by the good 
father as he passed ; their late merri- 
ment was woefully changed by his 
communication, and in less than five 
minutes they were in the tower, accom- 
panied by Henriquez and Albert, rhere 
the unfortunate Don Miguel harangued 
them in broken whispers, naming cacii, 
and alter commendinsr them to the 
protection of heaven, he descended a 
.cylindrical flight of stairs, cut in the 
rock, the lower steps of which were 
washed by the swelling surge, on which 
a boat lay tossing, and into it he 
lifted his faintins: Nvife. Mortimer and 
Alexena followed ; Velasco and Louisa 
jiext^ and after them, every individual 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 159 

about whose welflire we are immediate- 
ly interested, accompanied by a very 
few straii ■^ers. The boat was so heavily 
laden, that she scarcely cleared the 
water; however, a gentle breeze pro- 
mised to carry them in safety to the 
brigantine, which they hoped had 
escaped their cruel enemies ; but this 
last refuge was denied, unless they 
fought and conquered ; arms, they had 
none, and the lights on board, too truly 
proved she was manned ; every moment 
their vessel gained on her, and should 
they be discovered, one cannon shot 
would bury them in the deep ; they 
dare not use an oar; every one looked 
to Williams for relief, who sat like a 
stoic, apparently unconcerned, but was 
in reality their sheet anchor. 

" Can any one swim here?" he de- 
manded ; " if so, let him drop overboard 
with me, and we can enter by the cabin 
■windows, knock tiicse sharks o' the 
head, and save this precious freight; 
if not, let Don Mio:uel or Lord Morti- 
mer come to the helm, and Til go 
alone." 



160 ALEXENA; OR THE 

*' 1 can swim like a herren/'' whis- 
pered Rourke, and dive like a dolphin, 
so tumble in and we'll bother them." 
There was no time to lose, the inquisi- 
tors had withdrew, and the languid 
flame of their lanterns was distinguish- 
able, moving along the beach ; lights 
were also visible in a large galley, 
which was ready to get under weigh in 
a moment ; and if our terrified adven- 
turers did not succeed before they 
boarded her, all was lost. 

"What's keeping you, Williams ?*' 
said Rourke. 

" No jaw rope, but drift ahead ;" he 
replied, '* I'm in already." 

"God bless you, my friends," said 
Don Miguel, "i would be with you, if I 
could swim." Lion now became un- 
easy, and Lord Mortimer let him gently 
into the water ; then deciarf^d his de- 
termination of assisting his servant, 
and, notwitlistandinii' the urirent en- 
treaties of the ladies, particularly our 
lieroine, he jumped into the water, 
and swam after the dog to the brigan- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 161 

tiae. The niglit was exceeding dark, 
and had it not been for the lights on 
board, our distressed fugitives would 
have found it extremely difficult to 
discover her ; but Providence assisted 
them in every thing, for Williams 
gained the cabin window, and had 
entered before his lordship appeared ; 
he and Rourke tfien hauled him up, 
and as all within was silent, they 
groped about in search of arms, 
and luckily found two carbines and a 
cutlass. The boys were in bed in a 
lillle room adjoining, and them they 
easily secured ; then cautiously crept 
upon deck, where the men were walking, 
expecting tlie return of their compa- 
nions, who had gone to assist the inqui- 
sitors. Tiieir lanterns served to point 
them out, and before they could make 
the slightest resistance, were all seized, 
bound, and conveyed to the hold. Don 
Miguel, in the mean time, ran the boat 
along side, and the ladies were quickly 
assisted on deck, from which they 



162 ALEXENA; OR THE 

retired to the cabin, where Albert pre- 
pared a fire, and procured lamps. 

It was now necessary to get under 
weigh with all possible dispatch. Wil- 
liams took the command, and was as 
promptly obeyed as tlie first admiral of 
the British fleet; his orders were issued 
in low whispers, as the galley was 
too close to admit of their conversing 
freely ; and in ten minutes they stood out 
from the s'nore, having cut their cables ; 
poor Bill had very indifierent seatnen, 
but their good-will made amends for 
their want of knowledge, and his little 
■vessel had got a-head of the enemy's 
ship, above a cannon shot, before (hey 
observed the lights of the inquisitors 
glide rapidly along the beach The faint 
plasliing of oars was now heard, and 
instantly after the destructive train was 
fired, in less than half a minute the 
castle blew up with a drcr^dful noise, 
for a moment illuminatingthe surround- 
ing woods and sea coast ; large beams 
of burning timber, and numbers of 
.scorched and mutilated bodies, fell round 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAaCO. 163 

the vessels ; the groans of the many 
vv'ounded were wafted from the shore ; 
v.hile the piercing shrieks and wild 
cries of those who had escaped rent 
the air. Numbers had been alarmed, 
by a few mysterious hints vvhich fell 
from Zelo, and instantly withdrew; 
these and their attendants, witli several 
of the baud, who had been informed of 
their danger, had Inckily passed the 
draw-brid^j^e time enoui^h to avoid in- 
evitable destruction. 

The burning pile quickly discovered 
the retreat of our adventurers, which 
was no sooner observed by Galafron, 
than he commanded them to be pur- 
sued. Williams now crowded all the 
sail he could muster, but finding it 
woidd not do, the guns were loaded^ 
and the deck cleared for action ; as 
every njan on board had solemnly swore 
to conquer or perish. The ladies were 
busily employed heating balls, with 
vvhich Captain Williams hoped to fire 
^the rii^ging of (he galley, and in twenty 
.rainui.cs they were within pistol shoi. 



164 ALEXENA: OR THE 



The brigantine had tlie advantage 
of the wind, but the enemy hud more 
hands, and a larger vessel, besides 
their men were trained ; however, to 
fight they were resolved, and Bill seem- 
ed confident of victory. '' Come, lads/' 
he shonted, " clap the jigger tackle to 
your spirits, and off with the muzzle 
lasliing's — batter their hull — splinter the 
deck — come, scud away my hearties — 
already the enemy hardly know their 
fore-sheet from thi maintop bow-line.'* 

The yards were secured ; the bull- 
dogs ready : and being now muzzle to 
!nuzzle, the brigantine poured in a 
broadside in gallant style. This con- 
fused tlie inquisitors, who had not an 
idea of meeting with resistaiice-; but 
were most disagreeably undeceived ; 
Rourke fought desperately ; between 
every broadside, he bawled—'' Bow- 
wow ! — what spattering! — rake them 
starboard and larboard — more car- 
tridges — blow them up! That's my 
honies! (to the cannon,) speak out!" 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 165 

" Do you see," cried Bill, " they 
sheer off ah'eady. — Now for a red-hot 
ball in their powder-room." 

Albertj at this moment, received a 
severe wound in the hand, and^one of 
the inquisitorial seamen, who had been 
previously liberated to assist in the 
action, had his head carried away by 
a cannon shot. 

Lord Mortimer anxiously inquired 
who was wounded? 

" Your servant," replied Williams ; 
'' but he has only got his ticklers 
smasiied ; send him down to have them 
foddered by the ladies, as they must 
be our surgeons now," 

The galley, by this time, had set 
all her canvas; but kept firing as she 
retreated. 

" Ah ! ah !" cried the captain, *' me 
knowed she'd start about. Point well; 
take time, and bear a hand — that's it !" 

Mere Williams ordered a discliarsj-e 
of several red-hot sliot and shells, 
■which did considerable execution, and 



106 ALEXENA; CH THE 

in five minutes more the enemj's rigj^ing 
was in flames. The scene was horrible 
beyond description ; the ])rigantine 
ceased firing, and t)ore away, as the 
galley ^\as expected to blow up. In 
a quarter of an hour, this actually hap- 
pened, and the explosion was beyond 
conception dreadful; some few had 
thrown themselves into the sea, and 
were picked up in a short time after 
by our noble crew — two of whom were 
sailors, one a monk, and these only 
survived." 

Don Miguel, Velasco, Celio, and 
Williams, were wounded severely ; 
Lord Mortimer, Antonio, Rourke, and 
Albert, slightly; Henriquez and PedriU 
lo, dangerously ; one seaman killed, 
and one mortally wounded, who died 
next day. Vasquoz, Selib, &c. es- 
caped unhurt, though they were in the 
middle of the fire ; and the ladies, who 
had been almost lifeless Mith fear 
during the action, were now busily 
engaged dressing the wounded. No- 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 167 

thing could exceed the steadiness, 
courage, coohiess, and bravery, of 
every individual; and Williams swore 
they deserved fair weather, light 
breezes, and a smooth sea, until the 
High Admiral of all should waft them 
aloft ! 

On a consultation the foUowinir 
morning, it was deemed advisable to 
steer towards the coast of France, there 
procure a proper pilot, and then sail 
for old England, 

" ■■ That pale, that white-fac'd shore. 

Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides, 
And coops from other lands her islanders.** 

and there Don Miguel resolved 
to reside, as he could not but detest 
his native country. Injury had been 
heaped on injury : the king had savcd^ 
but to deliver him to the inquisition. 
This was what he believed ; but the 
fact was not so. However, the whole 
party conceived it unsafe to return 
to Spain, at Icaj^i. lor scn^e time; 
aud^ as both Sir Ednsond and Lord 



J68 alexena; or the 

Mortimer pressed Don JMiguel, Selib> 
Velasco, CeliOj &c. to accompany them 
to Hollywood castle ; they accepted the 
invitation. 

On the third day, the hrigantine 
anchored in a small creek on the 
French coast, in the vicinity of a sea- 
port town,, from which they procured 
a pilot and 'provisions Here M San- 
tanelle, Theodore, and Arabel, parted 
with Alexena a second time, but not 
without many tears and prayers for her 
prosperity. 

In a week the brigantine was once 
more at sea^ well manned, and with 
every thing that could render her pas- 
sengers comfortable. While they lay 
in the creek, the monk who had been 
picked up the night of the action, ex- 
plained Galafron's reasons for blowing 
up the castle, and every particular con- 
nected with that most horrible event. 
He had been present at the restora- 
tion of Don Miguel, and afterwards 
left Santa Marco with Galafron. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. l(y§ 

On their return to Madrid, the in- 
quisitor reported the success of his 
mission to the tribunal ; but was then 
almost petrified with horror, on hear- 
ing that he and Montano were brothers. 
This was a dreadful shocks as he had 
not only sat in judgment, and passed 
sentence, but afterwards witnessed his 
execution. Infuriated by a revenge the 
most diabolical, he resolved, at one 
blow, to destroy the innocent cause of 
his misfortune : and liavins: once con- 
ceived the terrible project, determin- 
ed to carry it, or perish in the attempt. 
Nothing could be more artful than the 
plans laid for its accomplishment ; he 
having, in an elaborate speech, de- 
scribed the cruel persecution of the 
Dominican abbess ; her avarice and 
immense wealth ; the disgrace which 
the publicity of her actions had brought 
on all religious institutions, and gave it 
as his opinion, she should be tried in 
Santa Marco, and if guilty, punished 
with death ; then dwelt on the amiable 

VOL. III. H 



170 ALETENA; OR THE 

manners of Don Miguel, the popularity 
of his character, and the noble qualities 
of his heart ; saying", *' He could scarce 
^ieve for the death of a brother who 
had caHsed so much misery." He then 
repeated the entire of our heroine's ad- 
ventures, not concealing the slightest 
circumstance, and exposed Montano's 
brutality in the most glaring colours ; this 
naturally led to observations on the 
construction of the subterranean ca- 
verns, their vast extent, and all their 
concomitant horrors; which he repre- 
sented as an acquisition that could not 
be too highly prized ; particularly, when 
its commanding situation, and vicinity 
to the sea, wero duly considered ; and 
affirmed, that it was his belief, Don 
Miguel would dispose of it for less than 
one-fourth of its value. 

The tribunal having at all times con- 
ceived Galafron a man of the deepest 
penetration, gladly embraced his advice, 
and a sum of money was accordingly 
ordered to be paid into his hands to com- 
pletethe "cliase, so with this treasure. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. ITl 

and the abbess his prisoner, he returned 
to Santa Marco. Every thing, in fact; 
succeeded beyond his most sanguine 
hopes ; the tribunal had been deluded 
by the idea, that he esteemed Don 
Miguel, and entertained an almost 
fatiierly affection for Alexena ; this was 
just what he wished, for he resolved 
to blow up the castle, and convert the 
mon^y to his own use. A forged deed 
of sale could easily be procured, as 
those who should be supposed to have 
executed it, were to be buried in the 
ruins ; not a soul was to escape, and the 
moment he head of the masquerade, 
his gloomy nature led him to fix on 
that nio-ht, as he would then have an 
opportunity of not only destroying Don 
Mi«'uel, our heroine and her husband, 
but their respective friends; besides, 
bemg conscious that so great a calamity 
must cause a degree of confusion, which 
would favour the escape of his vile 
associates, (who were men of the most 
infamous character,) and who could 

h2 



172 alexena; or, the 

easily retire to a remote part of France, 
if necessary; if not, boldly venture to 
iiursue their usual avocations. 

Thus determinedjGalafron arrived at 
Santa Marco, and after the abbess had 
been disposed of, this arch fiend made 
a proposal to Don Miguel, for the pur- 
chase of the castle, and would haye 
been rejoiced had the latter sold it, as 
he could then have a proper instrument 
prepared, and the moment it wassigned^ 
perpetrate the monstrous crime. A few 
of Don Miguel's friends were to have 
been witnesses, and those might be 
saved from the general massacre : 
however, when he found that the noble 
owner would not comply with any 
terms, he hastened to execute his dire- 
ful project. Having bade adieu, he 
hastened to St. Sebastian in disguise, 
and there procured a suflicient quantity 
of gunpowder for his purpose, and con- 
veyed it to the vaults, where it was dis- 
posed of in such a manner, as left not a 
doubt of its effects. A galley was hired to 
furnish certain means of safety for him- 



CASTLE OF SANTA JIARCO. 173 

«elf and his bravos, and the brigantine 
was seized, to prevent the possibility 
of any of Don Miguel's friends availing 
themselves of this means of escape. 

One of the wretched men who had 
been entrusted with this detestable 
plot, was, at an early period of his 
life, saved from an ignominious punish- 
ment, by the influence and interference 
of father Zelo ; and as that kind monk 
was among the proscribed, the grati- 
tude of the ruffian induced him to pro- 
tect this his former benefactor; but^ 
being sworn in the most solemn man- 
ner not to mention Galafron's plans to 
any human being, he, under the idea 
of keeping' his faith inviolate, contrived 
to delineate the most striking parts of 
the terrible design, and enclose them 
in a small box. This done, he has- 
tened to Zelo's apartment, who was 
then engaged in deep study, and there, 
by signs, explained the meaning of the 
pictures, and also gave him a mask, 
with a suitable disguise, desiring him 



174 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

to save any friend among the company 
whom he thought proper. The dis- 
tracted Zelo ahnost flew to the recep- 
tion rooms, where he made such good 
use of the few moments which Provi- 
dence had granted, that every individual 
of his friends escaped, except the in- 
former, who shared his master's fate, 
in the explosion of the galley. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCa. lib 



CHAP. VIL 

•* Their sinking hearts unusual horrors chill : 
And down their weary limbs thick dews distil ; 
No ray of light their dying hope redeems ! 
Pregnant with some new woe each moment teem*.'* 

Falconer. 

While the brlgantine was taking 
in provisions and water for her intended 
voyage, the wounds of Don Miguel 
and his friends rapidly amended^ and 
before they left the coast of France, were 
able to walk on deck, and partake of 
some trifling amusennents. On putting 
to sea again, it was determined they 
should land on the Spanish coast, and 
Don Vasquez, with Don Alonzo, were 
to hasten to Madrid, there sell theit 
estates and other property, then return, 
join them, and all sail for England 
together. The avarice, cruelty, and 
persecution of Philip, since the death 
of his queen, had become insupport- 
able ; and if Don Miguel returned 
iTithout Galafron, it was much to be 



176 ALEXENA ; OR THE 

feared^ ^^le king- would deliver hiiu to 
the inquisitors, who would demand 
their brother ; and he was well assured, 
no account that could be given of the 
late fatal catastrophe would be attend- 
ed to; on thecontrary, when the tribu- 
nal should find that boih he and his 
visitors had escaped, they would na- 
turally conclude, the castle had been 
destroyed by hiin after he had re- 
ceived its value. His late wandering" 
life and habits would stamp this sup- 
position indelibly vOn their minds, ad 
certain destruction was to be expected, 
not only by him, but by every other 
person who had witnessed the fatal 
event. These ideas on the subject, 
were suggested by Zelo, and met with 
the belief and approval of our travel- 
lers, who, immediately after, commis- 
sioned the two old gentlemen before 
mentioned, to return in disguise, dis- 
pose of their estates for whatever sum 
they would bring, and carry the money 
to Britain, where they might purchase 
others, without being tortured by the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 177 

idea of losing- thenij and their lives, 
with every whim of either the king- or 
the priestliood 

111 less than three W^eks, both Don 
Vasquez and Alonzo returned, after 
succeeding- beyond their expectations; 
having disposed of the respective 
estates for the full value, and joined 
Don Miguel with the money, just at 
the moment their absence began to give 
the most serious alarm. All was now 
well, and when they had taken the 
precautions usually necessary on long' 
voyages, they sailed for England — 

'* This royal throne of kings, this sceptr'd isle^ 
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars, 
This other Eden, demi- Paradise; 
This fortress, built by nature for herself. 
Against infection, and the hand of war;'' 

and where they hoped to spend the 
remainder of their days in tranquillity 
and connubial happiness. But fate had 
not yet ceased to persecute thcui ; they 
had to encounter many evils, and among 
which, a storm was not the least trvinsr^ 

H 5 



17S ALEXENA; OR THE 

However, they left the coast in high 
spirits, and with a fair wind. 

The cabin was scarce large enough 
fo accommodate the ladies; but they 
were satisfied to encounter every in- 
convenience rather than return to Spain, 
and the beloved society of their hus- 
bands yielded incalculable pleasures — 
joys far exceeding the pomp and cere- 
mony of a court levee, or the dazzling 
brilliancy of a ball-room. In that 
small vessel they were the happiest of 
women ; day succeeded day in inno- 
cent amusements ; the chess-board, 
cards^ and a few entertaining books, 
which Don Miguel had purchased in 
France, gave a pleasing variety ; the 
ladies sung enchantingly, and .were 
often accompanied by guitars ; while 
Lord Mortimer, who performed ex- 
tremely well on the fiutCj called forth 
celestial sounds, which, in a calm 
eveniiig, charmed the senses. 

They, at length, entered the British 
Channel, and at the declineof that day, 
tlie white rocks of Albion were faintly 
discernible in the distance. The 



CASTLE or SANTA MAR CO. ITS 

spirits of all were eleviited to an un- 
usual hcigiii, until the gathering clouds, 
and a few light squalls^ somewhat a- 
larined their pilot, who, being' an experi- 
enced seaman, ordered every necessary 
precaution to be taken, to prevent the 
threatening, misfortune. 

As it grew darker, the wind whistled 
through the shrouds, and the fears of 
the females were almost insupport- 
able, particularly when the storm be- 
came violent ; it was then the thun- 
dering voice of Williams rolled along 
the deck, animating the weary crew. 

" Reef top-sails," he cries — ''run the 
clue lines — square the yards — damn 
your lubberly eyes, no dreaming !*' 

Every individual was in motion ; but 
the squall having increased, the ship 
lay deep on her side, and alarmed Don 
Miguel, with all those on board, who 
were unacquainted with the terrors of 
an angry sea. 

Again, Williams, in a voice equal to 
a speaking trumpet, shouted, " Brail up 
the mizen — man the clue srarnets — b<^ 



ISO alexena; or the 

quick, quick !" — He was obeyed with 
promptitude ; yet in despite of their ex- 
ertionSj the mainsail was torn to pieces. 

" Come^ rnounsieripWot,'* he continu- 
ed, " hehn a weather." 

The prow^ veers, they brace tlie fore- 
sail, and the squall having passed to 
leeward, the fears of our friends began 
to subside; but their joy was of short 
duration, the tempest increased, and 
despair began to shew her gloomy face. 
Lord Mortimer pressed the pilot for 
his opinion, which he gave after 
some hesitation ; it v\as unfavourable ; 
— " There are no hopes of better 
wcatlier," he said, *' and the darkness 
is fast increasing." 

*' Lower topsails," vociferated Bill, 
" slack the bow-lines and halyards ; haul 
down the clue lines ; hold tight ; fuil 
the sails ; strike the top-gallant yards; 
send some travellers up the weather 
backstavs — right, right! — our rigging's 
clear, but the gale increases, and it 
ruins confoundedlv." 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. IS i 

A heavy shower now ahnost blintled 

tlie benumbed mariners, and the dark- 
ness became horrible; yet to have a 
moment's respite was impossible. Wil- 
liams rushed through the hissing- storm, 
from one end of the vessel to the other, 
applauding some and cursing others ; 
but this was not a time to reason with 
liim on the impropriety of swearing\ 

" Reef courses, my gallant hearts, 
there's no danger ; we don't value this 
puff o' wind a rope's end ; our High 
Admiral aloft will send light presently, 
and belike will keep a watchful eye to 
the helm, so cheer up !" 

Alexena ventured on deck several 
times, and exposed her delicate form to 
the rough kisses of the tempest. She^ 
Zoyrada, and Louisa, frequently encou- 
raged the men by their promises, and 
by the fortitude they displayed in this 
hour of peril; while Rourke, always as 
, fearless as he was useful, was ever to be 
found where the danger required his 
aid ; and having gained considerable 



J82 ALEXENA ; OE THE 

r 

knowledge of the different ropes^ sails, 
&c. was of infinite service. 

Albert, from the severity of liis late 
wound, was not able to do much, yet 
rendered all the assistance in bis pow- 
er ; but, the athletic figure of Don- 
Miguel excited the attention, and even 
attracted the admiration of the crew, 
who were zealous to imitate an ex- 
ample of such patient suffering ; he 
had also been wounded in the aetiorL 
with Galafron's galley, yet that did not 
prevent his doing treble the duty of 
any man on board ; for though he was 
drenched with rain., bruised severely, 
with his hands lacerated in many places, 
he did not utter the slightest murmur ; 
on the contrary, animated all present by 
his steady conduct. 

It was now twelve o'clock ; neither 
moon or stars were to be seen ; na- 
ture seemed convulsed ; a dangerous 
sea threatened to dash them on a 
leeward shore; the sails were reefed, 
but if they should again hoist them, 
the dreadful pressure of the wind might 



CASTLE OP SANTA MARGO. 183 

sink their trembling ship ; therefore, 
after deliberating, it was resolved, they 
should furl the courses, and reef the 
mizen. This was accordingly done, 
and gave some hopes, particularly, 
when Williams ordered the helm a-lee ; 
the prow then seemed to pursue the 
proper course, but the impetuous and 
angry surges, dashed in frightful rota- 
tion over the quivering deck, until it 
became necessary to throw the guns 
overboard, and this service was not 
effected without much toil and danger; 
however, it seemed to afford relief, and 
revived their drooping spirits, until they 
were overwhelmed with a greater cala- 
mity than any that had yet happened ; 
the crazy vessel having sprung a-leak, 
their labours at the pumps became 
excessive; their hearts sunk with hor- 
rors, and, at length, repeated fatigues 
made them weary of life. 

When the dawn burst througli the 
eastern sky, it found the crew forlorn, 
without hope, and almost without feel- 
ing; the ladies were miserable beyond 



184 AtiEXENA ; oil TSie 

conception, being benumbed with cold ; 
their <j:arments drenched with the salt 
brine ; their husbands fainting- with 
fatigue ; no help nigh; a rocky shore, 
beaten by roaring breakers^ and sea 
birds screaming with discordant notes, 
eager to seize and glut tliemselves 
with prey. They wearied Williams 
with useless questions, to which he was 
at length obliged to give this answer; 
" That ail n)ust inevitably perish, un- 
less heaven sent some messenger to 
quell the insolence of the blustering 
winds, and smooth the surface of the 
deep." 

The ship soon struck upon a shelv- 
ing bankj and the only hope then left, 
was to cutaway the masts and rigging, 
and bind them with planks, oars^ &c. 
to each other, by which a raft might be 
formed, that would carry the wretched 
crew to the wished-for land. To effect 
this with more ease, the stern was turn- 
ed to westward, that every mast might 
fall towards the shore, when cut down. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 185 

and which all hands were then busily 
employed in effecting. 

About six o'clock, there was a consul- 
tation held, and it was the unanimous 
opinion, that the vessel would go to 
pieces in less than an hour, and if 
something was not attempted for their 
immediate relief, the females, at leasts 
could not escape a watery grave. 
They therefore were summoned on 
deck, and with the assistance of their 
respective lords, crawled to it. Oh ! 
had our readers then beheld them, what 
a contrast they would have seen ; pale, 
tired, trembling, almost convulsed vv'ith 
fears, they ciung to the shattered 
cordage, and gazed with horror on the 
threatening surge, wliich lashed the 
sides of the sinking wreck with resistless 
impetuosity. The frowning shore was 
within a few fathoms length, but it 
rudely threatened to dash those . to 
atoms, who should dare to invade its 
rugged beach. Don ]^iguel sat on the 
splintered boards, with his Zorayda in 
his arms, gazing sternly on the troubled 



186 alexena; or the 

flood ; and Lord Mortimer, with our 
heroine reclining on his bosom, whose 
cold lips he pressed, as often as he could 
do so unobserved. The remainder of 
the ladies were scattered o'er the crazy 
vessel, weeping and beseeching heaven 
to spare their husbands, and vainly call- 
ing on the weary sailors to save them ; 
many of whom had already sunk, never 
to rise again, in fruitless attempts ta 
reach the taunting land. 

While all yet remained undetermin^ 
ed, a swell, almost mountain high, 
swept Alexena into the roaring deep ; 
and this misfortune was announced by a 
wild scream from the remaining suffer- 
ers, who knew not the moment when it 
should be their fate to follow. But 
Lord Mortimer saw the peril of his 
lovely wife, and dashed into the briny 
tide, followed by Rourke and Williams ; 
and the latter, though the last, first se- 
cured our sinking heroine, who, in 
despite of wind, waves, and the rocky 
beach, he bore in triumph to the shore. 

Don Miguel could not swim, and on 



OASTLE OF SANTA MAECO. 187 

seeing Alexena safe, he exclaimed, 
"Oh! now, of what value are all my en- 
dowments, when they cannot singly or 
united, save my wife." Then with ade- 
spairing look, which would have made 
fiends weep, cried, " My Zorayda, we 
shall perish, but let it be in each other's 
fond embrace." She sunk into his 
arms, and as he resigned himself to 
fate, besought heaven to soften the 
pangs of death, not for him, but for the 
dear partner of his heart. 'Oh ! exqui- 
site misery !" he cried, '*is it possible, 
that so many lonely and beloved women 
shall perish? is there no hope, no refuge 
left?" 

The wreck still held together, but 
every moment became more feeble, and 
each succeeding minute, some of the 
dying crew fell from, the masts into the 
groaning billows, and there slept in 
eternal silence. 

When Lord Mortimer and Rourke 
reached the shore, they were quue ex- 
hausted, and it was not without the 



188 alexena; or the 

greatest difficulty, they clambered up 
the cragg-y precipices ; but having at 
length gained the wished-for havev,, they 
hastened to relieve their companions 
in nnisery. His lordship first raided ihe 
form of his insensible wife, ano ciasped 
her to his bosom ; her hair wc , loose^ 
wet^ and dishevelled; her l^nhs* al- 
most stiff with cold, and ail apie; ranee 
of animation extinct ; but life had not 
fled, and a husband's love restored it. 

On regaining her" recolleciion, ima- 
gine her happiness, onbeholdliigZoray- 
da and Louisa leaning over her, who 
were almost equally benumbed with 
cold and fear. Willianis had rescued 
them from the remorseless deep, with 
the assistance of Lion, who had been 
his messenger four times to the wreck ; 
and by their united efforts, the raft, 
with every surviving individual on 
board, had been saved. 

'' What cheer, my lady?" said that 
brave fellow, addressing himself to 
Alexena, as he wiped away the big tear 
of joy that had forced its way to his 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAKCO. 180 

'* cabin lights/' as lie called them. — 
*' What cheer? — it was a rough gale^ 
do ye see; but as it is over, think of 
smooth seas ; the harbour of safety 
is found ; for, if I am not out in my 
reckoning, Hollywood castle is within 
half a leaijue," 

" Heaven be praised for its number- 
less mercies !" our heroine fervently 
replied, " and once more, Williams, 
receive my thanks, for a life so often 
saved ; I have not strength to utter 
what my heart dictates; but, believe 
me, I am grateful — very grateful." 

'' Bill could not hear this effusion of 
gratitude without a pleasing pain ; and, 
with a heart almost bursting with joy, 
he hastened to mingle with the drip- 
ping group, who were shivering on the 
strand. 

On his approacii, they surrounded 
him, and, in the warmest terms, return- 
ed thanks ; but Williams could not 
hear them Avith patience. " No more 
of your white-lined chamber talk," he 
cried, " or you will sink this crazy 



190 ALEXBNA ; OR THE 

brain of mine in the gulph of madness ; 
set your rigging- to rights^ and steer for 
the port of Hollywood, where we may 
refit and take in provisions, of which 
our bread-rooms are much in need." 

Rourke recognised the coast the 
moment he had heard the observa- 
tion of Williams, and as soon as he 
perceived his lord and lady were per- 
fectly safe, almost flew across the coun- 
try, and, notwithstanding his recent 
fatigue, returned in less than half an 
hour, accompanied by every domestic 
about the castle, with horses, litters, 
and refreshments ; and as soon as our 
shipwrecked travellers had partaken of 
the latter, the ladies were removed, 
with all possible haste, to the cheering' 
hearths of Hollywood, where they were 
attended with all the care and hospi- 
tality which their situation so much 
required. 

Mrs. Hastings, once more under that 
brother's roof, where she had for so 
many years presided as mistress, soon 
regained her wonted health, and by 



€A9TLE OP SANTA MARCO. 191 

her cordial and endearing kindnesses, 
restored the almost shattered frames of 
her female friends. 

Both Zorayda and Lucinda were ex- 
tremely delicate, and had not great 
care been taken, they could not have 
survived the late hardships; but our 
heroine, whose constitution was not 
altogether so weak, soon recovered^ 
and enlivened her doating Mortimer^, 
by her smiles, and her most affec- 
tionate uncle, Sir Edmond, who not 
only loved her with all the fondness of 
a parent, but at his decease, resolved 
to bequeath her the chief part of his 
property. 

Virginia, ever gay, soon forgot that 
iand in which she had suffered but 
too much unhappiness, and was re- 
joiced when Don Vasquez completed 
the purchase of an estate adjoining 
Caeile Dashville, the seat of her be- 
loved friend, Alexena, 

Clarissa, and her Selib, had apart- 
ments in Hollywood, until such time as 
they could procure a suitable residence. 



192 ALEXENA* OR THE 

and Don Miguel and his Zorayda 
resided with Lord Mortimer ; while 
Don Raphiel, ever eccentric, retired to 
a beautiful cottage, a quarter of a mile 
from his lordship's mansion, which he 
fitted up with infinite taste, and where 
he occasionally invited his friends to 
witness his happiness with Isabella, 
who always found him a kind and 
attentive husband. 

Velasco, now ii; England, forgot the 
prejudices which he had nourished, and 
wondered how he could have enter- 
tained them. His Louisa was the best 

of wives the most affectionate of 

mothers, and in her endearing society 
he spent the remainder of a long life^ 
in ease, comfort, and affluence. 

Antonio, the beloved brother of our 
heroine, resided on a neighbouring 
estate, where he was adored by his 
tenantry and dependants. He resem- 
bled his beautiful sister in all the good 
qualities which enrich the human heart, 
and none were more deservedly be- 
loved tlian he and his Eveline. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MAIICO. 193 

Henri Bolerno, shortly after his re- 
turn, married Miss Dashfort, a fine 
blooming girl, who we have slightly 
noticed in our first pages, and with her 
he enjoyed a splendid fortune, to which 
she added not only an excellent dispo- 
sition, but many brilliant accomplish- 
ments ; so that he was not the least 
fortunate. 

Bernardo passed the remainder o£ 
his days in Hollywood, where he was 
both esteemed and respected, and lived 
many years to enjoy the society of his 
grateful friends, who conceived they 
could never sufficiently reward a person 
to whom they were so deeply indebted. 

Zelo still continued with Don Miguel 
as his confessor, and was looked up to 
by all as a father ; the old blessed him, 
and the young sought the wisdom of 
his counsels; none ever enjoyed more 
respect, more filial love, than this good 
man, this kind priest; and none more 
richly deserved it. 

Mrs. Hastings was, about this period^ 

VOL, III. I 



194 ALEXENA; OR THE 

turned of forty ; but a mtich prettier 
woman than most females of her age; 
and Mr. Jones having, for many years, 
expressed the warmest attachment. Sir 
Edmond assented to their union, as he 
wished to see this dear sister happy. 
Few men were more respectably con- 
nected than Mr. Jones; his livings were 
very handsome, with a disposition and 
manners unexceptionable. He had 
also passed the heyday of youth, and 
was, therefore, both likely to enjoy, as 
well as value, the society of such a 
woman as Mrs. Hastings, to whom he 
was soon after united. During the 
summer months, the parsonage was 
their residence ; in winter, the castle, 
where they were always welcomed by 
their generous and hospitable brother, 

Albert, in a few months after his 
return, was married to Bets}" ; but still 
continued in his lord's service, being 
promoted to the respectable situation 
of land steward. 

Tom inust not be forgotten ; he dicj 



CAS^'LE OF SANTA MARCO. 195 

Slot long- remain a bachelor ; for hav- 
ing written to Biddy's father, that his 
finances were such as must even meet 
the approbation of a 'squire, the pru- 
<3ent old man accompanied his rosy- 
cheeked dau'T'hter to Euiiland, where 
she soon after became Mrs. Rourke, to 
the mutual joy of all those interested. 
, Old Margaret was appointed house- 
keeper at Dashville, where she had 
reason to bless the hour in which our 
heroine was imprisoned in the castle of 
Santa Marco. 

Henriquez led Annette, a pretty 
French girl, an attendant of Zorayda's, 
to Hymen's altar, where Zelo bestowed 
the nuptial blessing, and immediately 
after the ceremony, Don Miguel made 
this worthy couple a present of five 
hundred crowns, with which they in- 
tended to purchase a farm, if heaven 
blessed them with a family ; if not, they 
resolved to pass the remainder of their 
lives under the same roof with their 
munificent benefactors. 

1 9 



196 ^LEXENA} OR THi; 



CHAP. VIII. 

" « ■ . . Sliould we be taking leave 
As long a term as yei we have to live. 
The lothness to depart would grow : Adieu ! 

Ctm. 

J3EFORE we conclude lliese pages, 
it may be satisfactory to explain several 
particulars connecterl with our story; 
we shallj therefore, request our readers 
to return with us to the castle of Santa 
Marco. 

It must have appeared rather extra- 
jordinary Low the good Zelo, who we 
fii*st inti'otUiced in the ruinous chapel 
near Siguenca, should have found his 
way to the cave of Carracci the robber, 
and as he is very little known, it may 
not be uninteresting to give a short 
.sketch of his life." — 

He was the second son of an eminent 
statesman^ and received his education 
in the principal university of Sala- 
manca, v.hcrc ho remained until he haid 



CASTLE OP SAXTA MARCO. 197 

attained his twenty-firist year. Being 
handsome in his person, elegaiit in his 
a<]drcss, and the only son of a minister 
liigh in power, he was much esteemed 
by the chief nobility of the city, and 
became a vast favonrile with the ladies, 
ainon": whom he had already selected 
one who he hoped to make his wife. Her 
fktiier, Don Pablo Bisalco, moved in 
the first circles, was extremely rich, bnt 
unfortunately, more ambitious. This 
was a family misfortune ; for Joseph, 
his brother, who enjoyed high digni- 
ties in the church, was still more aspir- 
ing ; and his vast possessions were not 
only insufficient to satisfy him, but 
made him anxious to amass more, 
so that in a little time he looked for- 
ward to the mitre of Grenada, which 
was then on the head of the most im- 
placable, the most cruel, and most 
powerfid priest in Spain. But these 
mighty obstacles were either unhappily 
overlooked, or only served to stimulate 
the ambitious prelate, and his still more 



198 AiEXENA ; OR T»E 

ambilioiis brollier. The consequence 
was, tliey, vvilh several other iTiisji;uided 
tlergy, entered into a conjbination and 
conspiracy to overthrow the arclibishop, 
by addncing' proof of acts vvhich would 
criminate him ; or, if this failed, ia 
consign him to the stiletto of an as- 
sassin. 

During the period of these traitorou& 
conferences, v^hIc]i were held in the 
iiouse of Don Pablo, Angelina, the 
Younffcst and most beautiful of his 
daughters, discovered the plot, and re- 
monstrated with her father on what 
was likely to be the consequence. She 
represented the greatness of the dan- 
ger, and of the crime — besought him to 
give up such a wild chimera — proved 
the folly, and the destruction that must 
. inevitably ensue, should their design 
transpire; but her every argument was 
useless, the misguided Pablo resolved to 
persevere ; and after extorting a most 
solemn oalh of secrecy from this his 
virtuous, beauteous daughter;j.dismissed 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 199 

her. Many weeks passed away with- 
out any particulur occurrence having 
intervened to disturb the general tran- 
quillity J during which time^ prepara- 
tions were made for Zelo's nuptials 
with the beloved of his heart ; his father 
having liighly approved of the connec- 
tion he was about to form, while Don 
Pablo conceived this intended marriage 
to be the most fortunate of events, as it 
would secure tlie interest of the prime 
minister. Thus influenced, the latter 
increased the joys of the lovers, by ap- 
pointing an early day forthe consum- 
mation of their union ; having deter- 
mined, immediately after, to disclose 
the entire plan, then ahnost ripe for 
execution, to Don Francisco, Zelo's 
father, and to be guided by his advice ; 
but inexorable fate had decreed far 
otiierwise ; for the night of the day 
preceding that fixed on for this mar- 
riage, the lovers, and every individual 
in Don PhoIo's mansion, \^ore alarmed 
by the inquisitorial troops, who had 



goo ALEXENA; on THE 

surrounded it, and thus rendered their 
escape impossible. On admission be- 
in^ denied, the doors were broken 
open, and all within thenv made pri- 
soners. Conveyances were already 
prepared, and at the dismal hour of 
midnight, Don Pablo and his lady, 
Angelina, with her two sisters, Mar- 
cella and Selina, their uncle Joseph, 
and several domestics, were obliged 
to set out for the inquisitorial dun- 
geons of Grenada, where they arrived 
after a most fatiguing journey, not being 
suffered to rest for more than an hour 
at a time on the road. 

The cause of this misfortune was> 
want of proper discretion on the part of 
the conspirators, who foolishly confided 
their secret to the keeping of a servant, 
and the hope of an immense reward 
induced him to betray them ; but he 
was disappointed, and fell a victim to 
his own treachery ; for on seeing his 
master chainf^d to a rock, in a noisome 
crell, he repented, and on his knee* 



CASTLE OF SA\TA MARCO. 201 

bc^'ared pardon for the irretriveable ruiri 
he had brought upon his house. The 
stretched Pablo could scarce believe 
the evidence of his senses, as he had 
always treated this domestic with par- 
ticular kindness, having brought him 
up in the family from his early youth ; 
but finding reproaches useless, he en- 
treated this miserable dupe of villany 
to inform him, what was the exteot of 
the information he had given. The 
now repentant Juan instantly gave a 
true detail, and his unfortunate master 
had the satisfaction to find many of his 
most inestimable friends had escaped 
unsuspected. This oast a transient 
gleam of comfort round his dark dun- 
geon, yet even this was momentary, for 
the former had scarce concluded, before 
several familiars rushed into the cell, 
and dragged him before the tribunal, 
who instantly ordered him to be im- 
paled, for daring to disclose secrets 
^hich he was bound to withhold, CY«n 

i5 



202 alexena; or the 

from liis confessor, williout havin<r Hrst 
obtained their liberty to disclose then>. 

Thus perished Juan, the most worth- 
less of traitors; he h.ad stung- the liand 
which fed him, and was deservedly 
crushed. 

He had been sent to induce his mas- 
ter to make further discovenes, whose 
information was tobe received as a ran- 
som for his forfeited life, and that of liis 
family; but unfortunately for himself^ 
he disregarded the cautions which had 
been previously given, and betrayed his 
diabolical employers. 

In his iiiformations, he stated, that 
one of Don Pablo's daug-hters was 
acquainted with the names, rank, and 
residences of all the conspirators, but 
>vhich of the ladies he could not tell; 
yet supposed Angelina to be the per- 
son, as she was deservedly her father^s 
fa^vourite. 

Of this deposition, the archbishop re- 
solved to avail himself, and tried every 
means by which he was likely to extort 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 20 



f» 



confession from her, the torture except- 
ed ; but on finding all his eftbrts un- 
successful, he ordered her and her family 
to he executed. 

On the dreadful night of the perform- 
ance of this heart-rending; tragedy, the 
miserable Pablo, his wife and daugiiters, 
with Joseph and Zelo, were conveyed 
into a subterranean hall, where a kind 
of low stage or platform was erected, 
on which a wheel and several narrow 
tables were already placed. In front 
there was a number of iron chairs, 
fiistcned to the stone floor, and in four 
of these. Donna Besalco, and her three 
lovely daughters were chained ; theii* 
feet and hands were confined in such a 
manner, as rendered it impossible to 
make the slightest motion with either, 
while a kind of steel clasps confined 
the shoulders, so that their heads alone 
were at liberty, and Zelo was held by 
two familiars at a distance, to be a 
witness to the succeeding scene of 
horrors. 



201: alexena; or the 

Perez, tlie archbishop, now appeareJ, 
and in a speech of considerable length, 
exhorted Pablo to discover his accom- 
plices, promising- in the most solemn 
manner to spare him and his family ; 
but the father in reply, with a solemnitjr 
most awful, denounced his curse on 
that child of his, who would even in 
torments betray their friends. " You 
would not relieve yourselves, my chil- 
dren," he said, " for the moment your 
executioners have drained the last 
particle of information, they will re- 
morselessly sentence you to a death of 
agony ; be you therefore steady, and 
die deserving of a father's last bless- 
ing." This fatal command shook the 
soul of Zelo; he knew Angelina would 
suffer ten thousand tortures, rather than 
disobey this dying injunction, and he 
then determined to perish also, for 
Avithout her, the world was a dreary 
blank, not worth enjoying;. 

When Perez found his exhortation 






CASTLB OF SANTA MARCO. ^Oj 

vain, he ordered Pablo and Joseph to 
be broken on the wheel, in the presence 
of their distracted family, aiid which 
was instantly done. This dreadful im- 
plement of torture came dowu seve« 
ral times on the limbs, back, and 
ribs of the wretched sufferers, while 
their shrieks pierced the hearts of all 
present, except the females, who fortu- 
nately were insensible, though the in- 
quisitors used every restorative, in order 
to inflict exquisite misery, but happily 
without effect, and both Pablo and 
Joseph passed into eternity, ere they 
awakened to behold their mutilated 
bodies, which were stretched on tables, 
covered with white linen, but whose 
heads were exhibited on spears in front 
of the platform. A bell at this moment 
rung a dead and heavy peal, which Perez 
no sooner heard, than he hastened 
from the execution chamber; but before 
he retired, ordered the heads of Donna 
Besalco, and her two eldest daughters^ 



200 "^ alexena; or the 

to be struck off, after they should re- 
ceive four blows from the wheel.* 

The moment this demon retired^ the 
executioners, with the consent of the 
inquisitors present, resolved, their vic- 
tims should suffer decapitation first, 
and be broken on the wheel afterwards. 
This merciful determination was scarce 
assented to, ere it was carried into effect. 
The first who fell, was the donna her- 
self, whose head was struck oW at a 
blow ; the next Marcdla, who eagerly 
stretched her snowy neck to receive the 
fatal stroke, and then, with a sigh, ex- 
pired. Selina saw her sister die, and 
"with a resignation, unequalled except 
by saints, submitted to the executioner, 
who gazed for an instant on her lovely 
trembling form, then in a low murmur 
said, " Lady, you are to be happy, and 
a moment's pain over, you enjoy ever- 
lasting peace/* He then removed the 

* This story is founded on facts, and those persons 
"were actually executed as herein described. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 207 

gauze which covered her neck, and as 
it dropped from herheaviui^ bor>omj she 
blushed deeply ; it was the last token 
of expiring modesty ; with it the sabre 
fell, and herspirit ascended into heaven. 
No orders had been "iven for the ex- 
ecution of Angelina, and the inquisitors 
were consulting, whether they should or 
should not order her to be treated as 
her sisters, when the archbishop enter- 
ed, and put an end to theirdeliberations, 
by commanding his prisoner to be 
stretched on the rack. Zelo now gave 
a wild crv of horror, and strun-ii^led to 
be free ; having heretofore been a be- 
numbed spectator of the wanton slaugh- 
ter; but sentence had not then been 
passed on Angelina. The familiars 
were too strong, and held fast, yet his 
emotion did not fail to attract the notice 
of the prelate, who recognised him as 
her lover, and, therefore, resolved to 
try how far it was possible to work on 
her feelino's. Havina: first commanded 
her to be unbound, Perez solemnly 



208 ale:ieka; or the 

promised to bestow the entire of her 
father's large possessions, together with 
the hand of Zelo, if she made a full 
confession ; and disclose, without re- 
serve, the names of those concerned in 
the plot. This she called on heaven to 
witness she would never do, and then 
her tormentor ordered the torture. In a 
short time she was fastened on the rack, 
and the signal being given, her shoul- 
ders were drawn from their sockets at 
4he first jirk, but her piteous shrieks 
having become unsuffcrable, one of the 
executioners, being much more merci- 
ful than her judge, drew a long knife 
from his bosom, and, unperceived by 
any person present, cut the ropes of the 
machine. Immediately after, the arch- 
bishop put the question a second time 
and on finding she was still proof 
against his tlireats, ordered the torture 
to be repeated . Again the horrid im- 
plement was applied, but failed in its 
action, and the executioner announc- 
ed it was uselessj with a pleasure 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 209 

AThich he never before had felt. En- 
raged at this supposed accident, and 
irritated by her patient suffering, the 
inhuman prelate wound the broken 
rope round his arm, and ere he strained 
it, demanded his victim's answer. 

" Oh, heaven ! in thy mercy, take me 
to thy peace^ and forgive this man \" 
was the fervent prayer of Angelina^ as 
she laid down her head on the scaffold ; 
this, and this only, was her reply ; but 
it was more than sufficient to irritata 
her brutal judge, who now jinked the 
cord with such violence, as inflicted the 
most excruciating pains. *' Oh! infer- 
nal monster! accursed, inhuman dogl" 
exclaimed Sanguini,* — " this to thy re- 
morseless heart ; and let it be a pass 
to thy kindred fiends!'* he said, and 
plunged his poisoned stiletto into the 
bosom of Perez, and laid him dead at 
his feet. 

An exclamation of horror and sur- 
prise now rung through the cavern ^ 

* One of the executioners. 



i^lO aLexena; or the 

but the executioner^ brandishing his 
bloody weapon, commanded silence, 
and, threatening", swore to immolate the 
first who should dare to move; tlien, 
lowerinii' his voice, he addressed Anire- 
lina — " Lovely and unfortunate lady, 
the moments are precious ; therefore, 
let me be quick. You are doomed to 
unheard of misery; one way only re- 
mains to save you, whicl) is, by releas- 
ing your spirit, before those demons 
in human form can wreck its beauteous 
habitation. Oh ! before you die, pro- 
mise, that when you reach Paradise, 
you will hold forth your hands, and 
beseech that Redeemer who suffered for 
us all, to save my soul." 

" My friend, I will, if I shall attain 
such immeasurable joys." 

" 'Tis enough; then, thus we defy 
the malice of our earthly, vain, inhu- 
man judges," he said, and stabbed 
her to the heart ; then himself, and 
expired on her lifeless form. Her eye 
was fixed on Zelo's, as she received the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 211 

deadly blow, and it spoke unutterable 
love ; it recalled hiui from stupid in- 
aetion, to a sense of that misery which 
shortly after ended in madness. How 
long' he might have remained under 
the influence of that dreadful distem- 
per, he could not form an idea; but 
when reason resumed her throne, he 
was pardoned, and set at liberty. His 
peace of miud^ however, was irre- 
trievably ruined, and, in a state of 
pitiable despondency, he sought the 
mansion of his fathertj but — 

*' when sorrows come, they come not single spic$j 
But in battalions ;'' — 

For his parents had both died of a 
broken heart, leaving him a large for- 
tune, in case he should ever claim it; 
if not, it was to be distributed among 
the religious, to secure the repose of 
his soul. 

When Zelo found that a few months 
had been sufficient to overthrow his 
every hope of happiness in this world. 



212 ALEXENA; on THE 

he retired into an obscure monastery 

of Benedictine monks, where he re- 
solved to spend the remainder of his 

miserable existence ; but time and re- 
ligion softened his sorrows, and at an 
early period of his life, he was induced 
to become Don Miguel's tutor, which 
task he performed with infinite credit 
to himself, as well as to his pupih He 
was almost sixty before he took the 
cowl, which was many years after he 
had retired into the monastery. 

Immediately after the combat in the 
chapel, he hastened to acquaint Don 
Miguel, (who he had long known as 
Belzo Carracci,) with the particulars of 
that event, and to beg his interference; 
for the beauty of our heroine had inte- 
rested his every feeling, particularly, 
when he conceived she bore a striking 
likeness to his lost Angelina. Carracci 
promised his assistance, and used every 
exertion to liberate Lord Mortimer ; 
and had it not been for the threateninji: 

CI 

letters with which he terrified both the 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO, 213 

prior and abbess^ Alexeiia would have 
fallen a victim to the unprecedented 
cruelty of the latter. 

Father Zelo had been many months 
in Hollywood, before he was induced 
to relate this, the story of his life ; but 
the earnest request of Don Miguel 
prevailed, and one evening when he 
was surrounded by every individual 
who had accompanied him from Spain, 
(the servants and sailors excepted,) he 
gave this melancholy relation of his 
woes. 

The moment he had finished, Velasco 
fell on his knees, and besought his bless- 
ing, and called on Lady Mortimer to 
follow his example. — " Oh ! my sister," 
he cried, ''this is our uncle Don Diego, 
long since supposed to be numbered 
with the dead ; this is he who be- 
queathed to us his large possessions, 
and is the only brother of our regretted 
father." 

Zelo, now Don Diego, clasped each 
alternatively to his heart, while he said. 



214 ALEXEKA; OR THE 

/' My chiltlren, 1 did not conceive it pru- 
dent to disclose otir relationship sooner, 
as my story, added to your other griefs, 
would have been too much, and you 
are now only to think of it as a tale 
told for your amusement ; yet, alas! it 
is too true; however, I praise heaven, 
that I have the comfort of beholdins; 
my only surviving* relatives worthy of 
empires, and that my grey hairs shall 
sink into the grave in peace." 

Velasco now insisted on restoring his 
uncle's fortune, or the value, as it had 
been converted into monev ; but the 
kind old man, with a smile, said, ''My 
dear boy, what should I do with it? — 
No! no!— keep it, and may heaven add 
innumerable blessings. I shall live with 
you, ISIortimer, and Miguel, alterna- 
tively, and have no doubt, but I shall 
meet with as much attention, as if I had 
the wealth of kingdoms to bestow." 

It is impossible to express the 
felicity of all, on this unexpected re- 
coijnition, as neither Yelasco or our 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 215 

heroine had ever seen this beloved 
relative in the life-time of their parents, 
though tliey had often heard a few par- 
ticulars of his melancholy fate. 

When those happy friends had some- 
what recovered from the aijifatioii 
which this joyful event had excited, 
they spent the greater part of the night 
in the repetition of misfortunes past ; 
and in those long.winded stories it ap- 
peared, that Don Diego had procured 
the horrible robes in which the kind 
Williams had frightened Don Philip, 
the night he had entered Alexena's 
chamber, for the purpose of assassina.- 
liui; Louisa. 

The scull which dashed the bowl 
from our heroine's hand, in the dun- 
geons of Santa Marco, was thrown by 
Velasco, who was at that time de- 
ranged, and the voice which spoke 
from the cavern's roof, commanding 
her not to taste of the olio, was one 
of the ruffianly band of Aciisto, who 
Montano had placed there for the 
purpose of increasing her misery. 



21(5 alexena; ou tiiib 

The exclamation of, ' Heaven have 
mercy/ which Lord Mortimer had heard 
in the cemetery of the castle, when 
wandering through it with Don Miguel, 
and which seemed to issue from one of 
the coffins, was repeated by Mrs. Hast- 
inirs, who was at that time confined in a 
dungeon underneath it, and often ex- 
pressed her grief and misery in prayers, 
or sudden exclamations, such as that 
which his lordship had overheard. 

We should suppose it is unnecessary 
to say that the placards which were 
at different times fastened to the body 
of Hugo, were either procured by 
Don Selib or Williams; and that the 
groan overheard by the monk in one 
of the pillars in the chapel, was 
uttered by the former to terrify that 
villain. 

Henriquez was the guide whoaccom- 
j>anied the sham Monfrane, when Lord 
Mortimer was conducted through the 
Pyrenees, and who had beds and en- 
tertainment provided for his lordship. 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 2lf 

Don Miguel, previous to his mar- 
riage, had the unfortunate Cerascci 
and Geraldine interred in one grave, 
over whom h€ raised a plain but hand- 
some tomb, with an inscription, de- 
scriptive of their love and misfortunes; 

Many of the banditti perished in the 
explosion of the castle ; but the greater 
number had, antecedent to that misfor- 
tunCj retired to their respective homes', 
situated in different provinces, and there 
settled comfortably, which they were 
enabled to do, by the munificent pro^ 
vision made for them by their generous 
chieftain. 

The traveller can yet recognise pail 
of the old moss-covered towers and 
buttresses of Santa Marco, once famous 
for the loves of Alexena and her Mor- 
timer, but r.ow the retreat of the woH" 
and the ov.1, who ni'^htlv shriek over 
the ruins, in concert with the sliades of 
Montano, and his partners in iniquity, 
Hugo and Torquo. 

VOL.111. R. 



SlS ALEXENA; OR TUB 

Dashville, the beautiful residence- 
of Lord Mortimer and his Alexena, is 
now the abode of love and domestic 
happiness, where the good and virtuous 
daily meet to witness each other's feli- 
city ; where Zelo blesses the childreiv 
of our heroine, and guides them steadi- 
ly through that narrow path, to the 
attainment of those treasures, " which 
neither moth nor rust can corrupt, nor 
thieves break through and steal.'* 

Our pen is now worn, and we 
an?:iously hope, not altogether without 
attaining the desired object, which was 
to shew, that though the wicked may 
sometimes prevail, and afflict the just^ 
their power is weak as it is worthless, 
and eventually ends in disgrace and 
punishmeiit ; and that the virtuous, 
though oppressed by the villany of 
designing men, shall, by patience and 
couraire, overcome misfortune. 

Now, if the youthful hand that has 
•written this tale, has, in this first at- 
tempt, rendered one reader pleasure^ 



CASTLE OF SANTA MARCO. 219 

by dispelling the gloom of half an 
hour's solitude, or ameliorating the 
pains of sickness, he shall not only 
conceive he has succeeded, but feel 
bimself amply rewarded. 



FINIS. 
