M. 



WOMAN : 



OK, 



IDA OF A THENS. 



BY MISS OWENSON, 

AUTHOR OF THE " WILD IRI8H GIRL," THE " NOTICE 0» 
ST. DOMINICK," &C. 



" Nul doute qu'on ne s'elevat aux plus grands choscs si 1'on avott 
l'amour pour precepteur — et que la main de la bcauiii jetta dans 
notre ame les semences del'csprit etUe la veriu." 

Helve tius, Disc ours 2rf, p. 153. 

* Si le d«ir et merae l'espoir de voir un jour la liberie rendu aux 
Grecs ne sont que d'S chimeres, on doit pardonner cts doucea ittu— 
•ions a ceux dout I'enfance a ete consacres a l'etude de leur gloires, et 
a 1'admiration de leur vertus." 

De Choiseuil, Voyage Pittortsjue, p. 8. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 
VOL. HI. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REE3, AND ORML, 
PATERNOSTER-ROW. 



1809. 






' 









' 



Primed by J.D. Dewicit, 

46, BarbJC»n. 



-. 



WOMAN; 



OR, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 



THE SACRIFICE. 



In those few, and brilliant moments of 
existence, when that blissful feeling 
which nearly sums up every joy in one, 
visits the heart, and seizes on every fa- 
culty of the mind, how submit to the 
cold dictates of the prudence that con- 
demns, or to the influence of the reason, 
that cautions? 

Ida, tender and ardent, for the first 
time truly conscious of loving, and of 

VOL. III. B 

732094 



2 WOMAN; OR, 

being loved, gave herself up without 
reserve to that train of enchanting emo- 
tions, a conviction so sweet and power- 
ful Was calculated to inspire. She was 
unsensible to the coldness with which 
her father received her on his return. 
In the note which he presented her 
from her diako, she perceived a health 
and spirit, which lurked not in its faint 
and almost illegible lines. The tone of 
her awakened feelings was calculated to 
bestow a brilliant character on every 
object ; and she thought that all smiled 
without, because all within was love, 
and peace, and joy; She retired early to 
her apartment to give herself up to re- 
flections only less dear than the felicity 
that awakened them. She slept but 
little, and her broken dream was sweet 
as the vigil that preceded it. She arose 
with the dawn., and frequently visited 
the kiosk of her apartment, in the hope 



IDA OF ATHENS. 5 

of finding within its casement the flowers 
which were to inshrine the expected 
billet — the tender breathings of that heart 
which now throbbed so responsive to 
her own ; but during the whole of the 
day, neither the flowers, nor the note, 
crowned the sanguine hopes of Ida.; 
and a shade deeper than even that of 
disappointment, clouded the brilliant 
spirits and glowing feeling which hitherto 
animated her existence ; in love's hour 
the vicissitudes of an age are registered. 
The morning sun had risen in a brilliancy 
not its own, to the happy senses of Ida 
— its evening beam found her sad and 
pensive. She was seated in her gyma- 
sium, at her embroidery, surrounded 
by her domestic circle. Her father re- 
clined on an Ottoman, smoked his 
hoakoh ; and a silence, almost sullen, 
was only interrupted by a few laconic 
sentences, in which the merit of the 
* 2 



4 WOMAN; OR, 

Disdar-Aga was detailed, and the sin- 
gular opinions and imprudent conduct of 
the diako were arraigned. 

Ida was accustomed to this. The 
Disdar-Aga had fastened on the weak- 
nesses, of the archon's character ; while 
he availed himself of his interest and in- 
fluence with his compatriots, into whose 
secret factions he frequently penetrated, 
through the medium of the archon's 
intelligence and unguarded conduct — 
while the diako inevitably betrayed a 
superiority which his brother's interests 
prevented him from opposing, but which 
his characteristic pride and national va- 
nity rendered insupportable. His obser- 
vations on both now acquired a pecu- 
liar poignancy from the interview he 
had with the one on the preceding 
morning, and with the other on that of 
the present day. 
- The diako had settled all his worldly 



IDA OF ATHENS. • S 

affairs; and had bequeathed, to the ar- 
chon, in the presence of g cadi, the 
whole of his property in Athens, with 
the exception of ten purses to Osmyn, 
whom he had previously adopted by the 
name of " Child of his Soul" according 
to the Turkish law* ; and this instance 
of partiality to a person whom the pre- 
judices and the fears of the archon had 
taught him to hate, lessened his sensi- 
bility to the generosity of his brother- 
in-law, which he now looked on as a 
matter of course, dependent upon the 
the affinity of their kindred. He made 
no reply to the encomiums lavished by 
the diako on the character of Osmyn ; 
and the venerable friend of Ida per- 
ceived the inefficacy of urging a suit 
which time alone could crown with suc- 
cess, and was silent on that subject which 
engaged the last of his mortal thoughts. 
* See note (a) at the end of the volume. 



6 WOMAN; OR, 

But while his vacillating affections 
thus cooled in their ardour to a bene- 
factor who would soon cease to exist, 
they warmed towards him whose kind- 
ness was the result of his own interested 
and selfish views. The Disdar had ap- 
pointed him to the government of a 
little district in Livadia, and merely; 
added to - his nominal consequence, 
while he made him the instrument of 
his own insatiate rapacity. 

Ida guessed not at the immediate 
causes which now influenced the in- 
sinuations of her father relative to the 
friend whom she loved, and the tyrant 
whom she feared ; but she observed 
their poignancy, and the tear that stole 
at intervals from her eye, fell unobserved 
on her work, and was brushed away 
only to be succeeded by another. 

It was just after one of those acrimo- 
nious speeches which, when aimed at a 



IDA OF ATHENS. 7 

character we revere, carries to the heart 
that pang of indignant feeling which 
proudly checks the effort of vindication 
friendship dictates, that Ida, unwilling 
to listen, and unable to reply, arose to 
leave the gymnasium, when a slave ab- 
ruptly entered it, followed by Osmyn. 
A faint exclamation burst from Ida's 
trembling lips ; she sunk back upon her 
seat; emotions of anger, amazement, 
and contempt, distorted the features of 
the archon. The children recognized 
their friend, and addressed and wel- 
comed him by his name. Ida concealed 
her face in her veil, and the eyes of 
Osmyn were rivetted on her person. 
In a moment every other feeling 
seemed absorbed in that with which he 
contemplated her. 

The archon measured his figure with 
his eyes. 

b 4 



t WOMAN j OR, 

" Who are you P' he demanded, with 
a siern and haughty coldness. 

*.' An Athenian !" replied Osmyn, 
with that firm and motionless dignity 
which belongs alone to great minds. 

" And a slave !" retorted the archon, 
contemptuously. 

"' He only is a slave who is the friend 
of tyranny," replied Osmyn. " He only 
s a freedman whom the truth makes 
free." 

" Your business here?" demanded 
the archon, pale with stifled rage. 

" Alas !" returned Osmyn, his eyes, 
his countenance, his voice softening into 
sorrowful emotions, " Alas ! it is a sad 

one your friend !" he paused, 

and turned his looks on Ida. She had 
started from her seal ; — she had dropt 
her veil. Terror, suspense, a thousand, 
various feelings, were visible in bee 



tt>A OF ATHENS. 9 

countenance. Osmyn approached her : 
he fell at her feet — he took a hand 
whose touch, more precious than life, 
was chill as death itself, and drawing 
from his finger a ring of dark and 
plaited hair, and placing it on Ida's, he 
said, in a low and tremulous voice, 
" This little ring is an appropriate gift ! 
its circle is symbolic of eternity ! It 
was only relinquished, with life itself; 
and it was the wish of him who be- 
queathed it, that Ida should receive 
it from one whose tender smypathy 
should share her sorrow, even though it 
denied him to soothe and solace her re- 
grets/' Osmyn pressed the hand that 
lay almost lifeless in the clasp of his ; he 
struggled to suppress the feelings that 
agitated his soul. He arose : coldly 
saluted the archon as he parsed him, 
and said, with an air composed and dig % - 
niiied, " Archon, the dying command 
r, 5 



10 WOMAN; OR, 

of that friend who is no more, brought 
me to your house ; the duty was sacred; 
it is now obeyed." Then, not daring 
to indulge his eyes with one look at 
Ida, he rushed out of the apartment, 
and Ida fell senseless in the arms of her. 
Paramana. 

TO IDA. 

ff Sacred be the sorrow of a 
young, a tender, an unpractised heart, 
whose faculty of suffering is first 
called into being by that irreparable 
loss which human power can neither 
compensate or soothe, let not even 
the glowing hand of love draw aside 
the veil that shades the mourners 
head in the first era of passionate 
affliction — let not even friendship vio- 
late the mystic sadness that hangs 
upon the first days cf unutterable an- 



IDA OF ATHENS. II 

guish, when the heart still clings to 
the tie which is wrenched from it for 
ever, and doubts the possibility of an 
eternal separation. But when time, and 
nature, so favorable and so healing to the 
wounded soul and lacerated feeling of the 
human sufferer, have assuaged the an- 
guish and soothed the pang of new- 
born woe into the tender melancholy 
of resigned affliction, then, Oh ! Ida, 
may not love, trembling to intrude, 
yet languishing to sympathize — may not 
respectful, timid love, approach the 
mourning object of its fond idolatry, 
chase from the lovely cheek the lingering 
tear, and echo back the bosom's tender 
sigh, and soothe the sadness it is so 
sweet to share. 

" All Athens speaks of Ida's tender 
and profound regret for him who 
taught all Athens to revere him. 

" But Ida's sorrows, like her joys, can 
b6 



n WOMAN i OR, 

ne'er be even guessed at by a world 
where none resembles, and none can un- 
derstand her. 

" Yet, oh Ida ! is there not one whose 
soul has caught its spark from your's — 
whose heart is worthy to adore you, yet 
is he only banished from your pre- 
sence ? Day after day I hover near 
your dwelling. I behold with envy the 
indifferent persons admitted to your fa- 
ther's house ; and are they all indifferent ? 
To-day 1 saw the Disdar-i\ga enter 

Ida, you dare not violate that 

sacred promise ! I know his manners 
rise superior to his country's sullen cha- 
racter — I know him handsome, power- 
ful,, rich, and enamoured ! yet, still I 
have your promise. Why was voue 
cheek: so flushed when I beheld you at 
the casement of hjs harem ? Why ! 
Madman !-— Have not I pressed you to 
my heart ! — Have not you bid me live-— 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1.3 

and — live for you ! Last night I faintly 
swept my lyre's, chords beneath your 
easement ; you drew aside the lattice, 
and some one then approaching, obliged 
me to retire. To-night I shall again 
thus lure you to your window. You 
will then receive these lines, and I will 
wait beneath for one, one single line, 
which Love perhaps may dictate, anifc 
Sorrow not deny. Osmyn." 



TO OSMYN. 

" I was not then deceived. My heart 
responded to those tones which ypur's 
alone could breathe. To-day they told 
me you were proscribed — -pursued.— 
They said your life was forfeited. — 
They said, too, that Jumeli pleaded — 
pleaded for you to her father, and pro- 
voked, the Disdar's rage. Happy Ju^- 



14 WOMAM; OR, 

meli ! Oh, Osmyn ! your note was my 
salvation ; for this night I purposed to 
break my vow, to fly to the Acropolis, 
and save your life. The effort now, I 
trust, is needless, and Ida was deceived." 



TO IDA. 

"It is true Ida — I am proscribed ! 
pursued ! I was observed loitering near 
the citadel the day you visited the Dis- 
dar's daughter ; and tyranny and power 
can seldom want pretence for persecu- 
tion. Hitherto an impenetrable dis- 
guise has enabled me to escape their 
vigilance ; and I encounter risks in still 
remaining in Livadia ; but he whom 
love and patriotism animates, is his own 
destiny. Stamati, generous and impru- 
dent, has offered me asylum, but if I 
fall, I fall alone ! All day I wander 

4 



IDA OF ATHENS. U 

amidst these now melancholy shades 
that witnessed my growing passion — my 
only days of pure felicity. Soon as the 
sun declines, I hover near the spot thy 
presence hallows : then join the little 
band of patriots, whom the sympathy 
of virtue, the sacred love of freedom, 
unite and consecrate ; and then, veiled 
by the shades of night, I sleep amidst 
the mighty ruins of my country's former 
greatness — and when thy seraph image 
visits not my dream, the shades of the 
athenian heroes seem to hover round 
me, and shed ' their glory o'er my 
sleeping vision. 

" Oh, Ida ! thou who inspiredst my 
youthful heart at once with love, and 
glory's deathless passion, shall I e'er 
win, as I would fain deserve thee — shall 
the ardent feelings of that soul with 
which thine own pure spirit has com- 
muned, be given their scope — assert 



IS WOMAN f Oft, 

their claims to higher fortune — and find 
these claims allowed by that high power 
which men call fate. Ida, I am be- 
loved by thee ! You cannot now deny 
it ! You know not who I am, and 
yet you love me — but you know what I 
am, and therefore do you love me. — 
'Twas not thy words confessed it ! 'twas 
not thine eyes betrayed it ! — but in that 
sacred moment, when the vestal's love 
sought sanction in the woman's fears, 
and when you pressed so close these 

hearts Oh, Ida! I cannot longer 

live without beholding you I" 



TO OSMYN. 

M Osmyn, I know not who you are, 
and scarce desire to know. Be your 
birth what it may, or poor or princely, 
it cannot make you nobler in my eyes, 



IDA OF ATHENS. If 

nor e'er degrade you in my mind's 
esteem. The sacred love of virtue 
warms your soul; genius and patriotism 
deify your character; and all your 
feelings adapt your whole existence to 
love and tenderness. These are endow- 
ments of heaven's own gift ; and after 
these, how poor and low the. honours man 
confers. It is also true 1 love you, most 
tenderly, most passionately ! {)ut if to tell 
thee so is weakness, it is the sole weak- 
ness that love itself shall teach me to 
commit. 

" Oh, Osmyn ! why endeavour to con- 
ceal from you what perhaps you already 
suspect— what you must eventually 
know ? If reasori, if nature sanction 
our loves, a duty, now paramount to 
every other, forbids it. I am not yet a 
wife ; then thy law were mine ; but I am 
still a daughter, and sentiment, no less 
than duty, deters me from openly op- 



18 WOMAN: OR, 

posing the wish and will of him, hitherto 
so dear, so tender, and indulgent. I am, 
indeed, a thing inconsequent; yet in 
the great chain of social compact I form 
a little link — the country which respects 
me ! the father who depends on me ! 
the brothers who look up to me ! 

" Oh, Osmyn ! I can risk my life for 
your salvation, and glory in the sacrifice! 
but I cannot live degraded in your eyes 
and in my own. The true point of 
virtue is to immolate the selfish for the 
social good ; and that point I am worthy 
to attain, since I am beloved by you." 



TO IDA. 

• Is then the sweet tide of pleasure 
always to have its reflux of bitterness* 
Is the ecstasy of a moment to be pur- 
chased by the sufferings of an age ?— i 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1.9 

Has the happiness I had never hoped, 
and was unworthy to enjoy, become 
: the source of my misery? and having 
tasted of heaven, am I become unfit for 
Tsarth ? Oh, Ida ! what does this por- 
tend ? Do you already repent that 
goodness by which 1 received from your 
hands a new sense of being:? Do vou 
"wish to tear from my heart the memory 
of a moment ? Alas ! the effort is in 
Tain. Oh, no ; it would be the last 
violence of nature to extinguish the 
memory of a bliss, which, by a sweet 
and eternal habit of recurrence, gains 
with every added hour a more absolute 
possession of our soul. 

" Ida, you bade me love — and live for 
you ! From that moment life, and even 
love itself, assumed a new aspect to my 
senses and my soul. The duties, the 
occurrences, the pursuits that orice im- 
pelled and actuated my being, all are 



2o WOMAN; OK r 

now overwhelmed in a sentiment, whose 
impetuosity resembles the whirlwind 
which tears away in its career of wild 
- destruction , every object, every particle 
within its sphere. My whole frame is* 
but a wandering phantom, into which 
another spirit is transferred, than that 
with which heaven had endowed it : 
and my restless heart still pursues you 
like the shadow which is. but the re- 
flection of a superior image, to which 
it still points with invariable fidelity. 
By a strange paradox of feeling, the su- 
premacy of my bliss has become the 
source of my unutterable misery. In 
proportion as I feel the duties of my 
situation, I feel my total incapability to 
effect their accomplishment ; and my 
sense of right still sharpens, as my in- 
efficiency to adhere to it increases.-^- 
The claims which bound me to society 
'are slackened , the fire that warmed my 



IDA OF ATHENS. 21 

bosom for my country's weal is chilled. 
1 no longer live for the world, or for 
Athens. I no longer cherish that pas- 
sionate love of giory, and of fame, 
which animated and guided my earlier 
feelings — I live for Ida ! alone for 
Ida ! and love is the only passion of 
which my soul is susceptible. Ida, I 
must see you ! I must hear you ! It is 
your absence that renders you terrific — 
your presence is less fatal ; it at least 
trahquilizes the imagination. The holy 
calm of yonr sweet and vestal counte- 
nance soothes the fever which your 
charms, when ideally dwelt on, excite. 
You alone can counteract the effects of 
which you alone are the cause. Yes, 
Ida, if I am mad, tis yo 1 alone that 
have awakened my frenzy : it is you 
alone that can restore me to reason. 
There is at the foot of the hill of the 
Acropolis, and at no great distance from 



22 WOMAN; OR, 

your residence, a cave, which now some- 
times serves as a christian oratory, and 
is dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary. 
It is also anciently sacred to the loves of 
Apollo and Creusa. If 1 am not to be- 
hold you in your father's house — if you 
will not, if you cannot come to the re- 
treat of our late friend, to-night I shall 
expect you in the oratory of our Lady 
of the Cavern, this spot so remote and 
so sacred, so consecrated by religion, 
and by love, so devoted to the memory of 
a celestial chastity, and an immortal pas- 
sion. Oh, Ida ! on earth there is no 
other spot so worthy of receiving you : 
so worthy of re-uniting two beings, 
whose sentiment of tenderness is pure 
and ardent as those characters by whose 
memory that spot has become hallowed." 






IDA OF ATHENS. 23 



TO OSMYN. 



" It is for a common woman to inspire 
a common passion. Ida of Athens would 
hope to find in the lover, her heart has 
chosen, the man whom her reason must 
approve, and the hero on whom her 
imagination could dwell with triumph 
and with pride. 

"Oh,Osmyn ! had your soul been sus- 
ceptible of no other sentiment than that 
of love, would you have been preferred 
to the first and most amiable of the 
athenian youth ? No ; I chose you for 
yourself alone ! 1 chose you because I 
believed you capable of a great passion, 
and of those heroic actions which a greafc 
passion alone inspires ! It is not for 
a tame and moderate character to feel 
that pure, that ardent and sacred senti- 
ment, which in its true and highest 



24 WOMAN; OR, 

nature Is connected with all the greater 
faculties and sublimer emotions of our 
being, and therefore did my soul elect 
you as its dear and high associate, as 
one best capable of loving, and therefore 
most worthy to be loved. But if you 
would have me love you. fondly, let me 
esteem you highly. If you would 
render me sensible of your tenderness, 
continue to exalt yourself in my imagi- 
nation. Give me some excuse for the 
excess of my affection. If they will 
say ' she loved imprudently/ — let them 
also add ? but she loved greatly.' 

" Hitherto I stand acquitted. It was 
a hero — the champion of Liberty and of 
Greece— the friend of Athens, and hu- 
manity, for whom I exposed myself in 
the nekkeme of a Turkish tyrant. But 
it is not for a lover, a frantic lover only, 
in whom an imprudent passion has sub- 
dued every purer, every nobler feeling, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 25 

that I would- violate the delicacy of a 
national and natural reserve, and steal 
clandestinely, from the dear and safe 
asylum of a father's dwelling, to* the 
gloomy cavern of Apollo. 

" Oh, Osmyn ! let me be loved 
worthily, or let me be resigned for ever ! 

"Ida." 

TO IDA. 

" Oh, Ida ! your heart, insensible as 
pure, resembles those polar snows from 
whence the northern lights effuse their 
radiance ; it illumines, but it does not 
warm, and its sentiments chill in pro- 
portion as they brighten. She who 
reasons, rarely loves ; she who argues, 
seldom feels ; and she who dares not 
confide, will never inspire confidence. 
Ida, do you already forget those blissful 
days, when all nature conspired to 

VOL III. c 



26 WOMAN; OR, 

assist my passion, because my passion 
rendered all nature subservient to its 
feelings ! 

"When the ardor of a meridian sun 
drove me with Ida to those shades, 
whose luxurious melancholy breathed 
love's own character ; when the pure 
beam of a midnight moon lured us to 
those haunts ; where the delicious ema- 
nations of balsamic flowers communi- 
cated a sweet inebriety, and effused their 
odour even to the imagination; yet then, 
even then, in those shades where love 
alone presided, did not the celestial calm 
of Ida's soul communicate its character 
of pure tranquillity to Osmyn's ardent 
feelings, and made him blush to feel or 
offer human homage to one who, sainted 
in his heart and fancy, seemed only 
worthy to receive devotions almost holy. 

"Oh, Ida ! you stand alone, and I can 
find no parallel for your perfections. — 



IDA OF ATHENS* 27 

I am young — I love— and am a Greek— 
but if love has made me frantic, can 
love render me unworthy. It were im- 
piety towards heaven, and profanation 
towards you, to think it. 

" Prove me, try me, convince me I am 
beloved ; become at once my inspiration 
and my reward, and then behold 
what the soul of man can effect, under 
the perfect developement of a profound 
sensibility — of that sensibility which 
you have so often said ' is the source of 
all human excellence, and of • whose 
affections virtue itself is but composed.' 

*' The cause of Athens demands my 
warm exertions ; but my feelings, agi- 
tated and diverted from its interest^ 
want that reposing confidence in your 
love that can alone restore them to their 
native tone. Come then, sweet Ida ! 
come and pour thy spirit in my soul ! — 
if not for love's dearer sake, at least for 
c 2 



28 WOMAN; OR,. 

that of Athens, come : at once formed 
to be the daughter of a Cato, or the 
mistress of an Alcibiades — lovely in thy 
patriotism, as powerful in thy tender- 
ness. I swear by all my soul holds 
sacred, that from the persuasion of thy 
lips only will I be lured back to that 
cause from which thou alone couldst sever 
me. Oh, Ida ! remember the amulet 
— remember the song of Canzi an i— re- 
member, ' that if it is for man to perform 
•great actions ; 'tis for woman to inspire 
them. 

" To-morrow night, then, Ida, in the 
- Oratory of the Lady of the Grotto, it 
is no common cause demands thy pre- 
sence — it is not love alone — it is thy 
country that solicits it." 



IDA OF ATHENS. 29 

TO OSMYN. 

" I come to restore you to your coun- 
try ! to revive that love of glory you 
were created to feel ! to re-animate that 
fading spark of virtue which the i 1 1— * 
directed violence of an unhappy passion 
has for a moment chilled ! 

" I have much to tell thee — I have 
much to hear. It is love, now worthy 
of the name — it is patriotism with 
which no vice was e'er associated, that 
leads me to you. You invoke me in 
my country's name, and I obey the sa- 
cred invocation. Oh, Osmyn ! not more 
the friend of my heart than the hero of 
my soul ; to-night, when the Gastriani 
have called out the twelfth hour from 
the walls of the Acropolis, thou shallst 
behold me at its base ; but attempt not 
to leavel the grotto — approach not my 
g3 



30 WOMAN; OR, 

father's house. I already tremble for 
,thy temerity, and feel thy danger 
through my country and myself." 



The house of the archon Rosemeli 
lay near the Lanthern of Demosthenes, 
and at no great distance from the Oratory 
of our Lady of the Grotto ; but the night 
was gloomy, and the heart of Ida was ap- 
palled for the first time as she stole from 
the safety of her paternal home. Every 
movement awakened a new fear ; the 
trembling of the leaves made her 
shudder: and she paused, overcome, as 
the deep hallow of the Castriani struck 
on her ear. At that moment she be- 
held an indistinct form gliding towards 
her — her heart trembled between its 
instinctive hope and natural fears : nor 
was its palpitation tranquillized when 
she felt her sinking form supported 



IDA OF ATHENS. 31 

by Osmyn's arms. His emotion was 
scarcely less than her's. He could only 
pronounce her name, and almost bore 
her in his arms towards the grotto. For 
a moment they paused. Sounds of a 
religious strain met their ears. They 
approached the entrance *of the grotto, 
and beheld it filled with a pious crowd, 
engaged in celebrating the midnight 
mass on the eve of the festival of some 
tutelar saint of the Greek church. The 
lumination of the wax tapers — the cha- 
racteristic drapery of the bearded pa- 
triarchs and papas — the rolling clouds of 
incense — the ceremonies of a religion so 
fanciful in its forms, and the singular 
place in which they were celebrated, 
which in other times had witnessed the 
rites of a still more picturesque devo- 
tion, all combined to render the spec- 
tacle solemn, interesting, and romantic. 
Ida, whose head drooped on the shoulder 
c 4 



S% WOMAN; OK, 

of Csmyn, raised her eyes to his. Their. 
looks mingled with a faint smile, and 
both felt the tender ecstasy of a mutual 
feeling, even in a matter of taste, of sen- 
timent, and fancy. But scarce a mo- 
ment was allowed for the contemplation 
of a scene so singular, under circum- 
stancesof so peculiar and eventful a na- 
ture. Osmyn feared not for himself, 
but for Ida. The winds that roughly 
disordered her tresses — the night dews 
that fell upon her lightly-covered head — 
the apprehension of her being seen, all 
awakened the tremblings of his doating 
heart. He led her away in silence to- 
wards the porch of a little mosque, 
which lay at the brow of the Acropolis, 
in the midst of a Turkish cemetry, and 
was shaded by cypress trees. He as- 
sisted her in her ascent ; and murmurs 
of tender encouragement, or affectionate 
apprehensions, answered by gentle as- 



IDA OF ATHENS. S3 

surances of courage and strength, alone 
broke on the stillness of a scene so 
solemn, and an hour so awful, till 
Osmyn abruptly pausing, seemed to 
listen to the sound of voices, whose 
louder tones Ida soon caught. Osmyn 
hurried her on towards the shelter of a 
tomb, at whose head the gaudy turban 
of some deceased Turk was placed ; 
then drawing a small sword, he hurried 
down the ascent. 

Ida heard the sound of voices grow 
louder: she thought she heard the 
clashing of arms. The frenzy of love 
and horror braced every nerve ; her 
weakness was no more : she flew like 
lightning towards the spot from whence 
the noise appeared to issue. She beheld 
Osmyn engaged with two men. Fear- 
less of danger, she shrieked and rushed 
between them. " Mercy! she ex- 
claimed. " Ida !" returned a voice, 
c 5 



S4 WOMAN; OR, 

and almost lifeless, yet not insensible, 
she fell in the arms of her father. But 
her sight, her feelings, failed not with 
her strength : she beheld Osmyn still 
engaged with his unknown adversary. 
She fell at her father's feet ; her voice 
trembled with agony and passion. — 
" Save him,''' she exclaimed, " or be- 
hold me expire at your feet !"' But the 
prayer was needless. Osmyn was vic- 
torious. The ci meter of his adversary 
was shivered in the air. He fled. — 
Osmyn still pursued him. A shTiek of 
love and triumph broke from the lips of 
Ida! 

" He conquers!" she exclaimed; 
" he is still victorious !" and fell sense- 
less to the earth. 

The passiQn of the disdar-aga for 
the archon's daughter was so cherished 
by circumstances, so combined with the 
strongest prejudices of his nature, so 



IDA OF ATHENS. 35 

linked with the most powerful ties of 
his interest, that it had begun to assume 
a character of durability in his heart, 
which obstacles served but to confirm. 
Aware of the increasing factions of the 
athenians, he was anxious to unite to his 
cause one of the most powerful and 
opulent of the athenian families. Ena- 
moured of the beauty and genius of Ida, 
a resistanceso seldom encountered, served 
but to enflame his love ; and detesting", 
while he feared, the superiority of his 
former slave, he still suspected a rival, 
over whose destruction he no longer 
lingered. The days of Ida devoted to 
afflict on for the loss of her best friend, 
left him no hope of obtaining an im- 
mediate interview ; and still concealing 
his views from the archon, he still con- 
tinued to exasperate his pride against 
the temerity of Osmyn, whom he af- 
fected to have discovered engaged in a 
c 6 



36 WOMAN; OR, 

secret intercourse with Ida ; and whom r 
under the pretence of political caution, 
and a supposed discovery of secret ma- 
chinations against the Turkish empire in 
Greece, he had proscribed. But Osmyn, 
unknown but by his patriotism, undis- 
tinguished but by those brilliant quali- 
ties lavished on him by a partial nature, 
was surrounded by secret friends, while 
the aga invested with the sword of 
power, and the reins of empire, was en- 
vironed by secret enemies. It was thus 
that Osmyn escaped the vigilance of a 
tyrant in ail the plenitude of command ; 
it was thus the disdar vainly pursued a 
slave, whose genius and whose virtue 
created their own destiny, and still with- 
stood the power of the oppressor, while 
armed and animated in the cause of the 
oppressed. 

But the unquiet and vehement love of 
Osmyn opposed its unguarded violence 



IDA OF ATHENS. 37 

to the general prudence of a conduct, 
which, in other instances, had been re- 
gulated by a circumspection seemingly 
incompatible with the passionate tone 
of his enthusiastic character; a circum- 
spection which the reiterated counsels 
of his deceased friend had called into 
being, and which the impetuous but 
volatile character of the athenians, with 
whom he was coalesced, hourly con- 
firmed. On the evening in which he 
had induced Ida to meet him in the 
grotto of Apollo; his solicitude, his im- 
patience betrayed him into imprudences 
of which his love (invalued in its owa 
feelings) took no account. 

He had appeared less disguised than 
usual near the Acropolis, engaged in ex- 
amining that rich, but consecrated spot, 
which he contemplated as the temple of 
his supreme felicity ; and at whose en- 
trance he had scattered those flowers, 



3« WOMAN; OR, 

whose breath he well remembered Ida 
loved to inhale. At night, he had again 
adjourned there, and had been remarked 
by the soldiers who guarded the walls of 
the citadel ; and the disdar was soon in- 
formed of the suspicious appearance of 
the wanderer, who, within an hour of 
midnight, was seen to loiter beneath the 
ramparts of the fortress. 

The fears and hopes of the aga 
equally assured him, the unknown could 
be no other than the daring, the unvan- 
quishable Osmyn ! And he issued forth 
with his capadilgar kiazessa, in pursuit 
of the imprudent, whose life he now 
conceived to be in his hands : while by 
strange comminglement of cowardice 
and intrepidity, he determined on assas- 
sinating hirr, whom he feared publicly 
to destroy. It was near the grotto of 
our lady that he encountered the archon, 
who, trembling with emotion, informed 



IDA OF ATHENS. 3$ 

him, that thus far he had traced the 
footsteps of his daughter, whom he had 
by chance discovered to have secretly 
left his house, and whom he had pur- 
sued, a-nd lost amidst the increasing 
darkness of the night. 

The aga listened to the detail with 
stifled rage ; he perceived the Greek 
was armed, he dismissed the captain of 
the guard, and accompanied by the 
archon, continued his pursuit of the 
object of a double vengeance. 

It was Osmyn, who seeking danger 
had thrown himself into its very arms — 
it was Osmyn who parried the vengeful 
efforts of Ida's father without returning 
them — it was Osmyn who vanquished and 
pursued the aga till he felt pursuit was 
almost dishonour : and till love, and love's 
profoundest apprehensions, hurried him 
back to the spot, where he had left Ida 
with her father ; but all was dark and si- 
*4 



40 WOMAN; OR, 

lent, and Ida and her father had disap- 
peared. 

The archon Rosemeli had with diffi- 
culty borne the almost lifeless form of 
Ida home; they entered her gymnasium 
by the garden ; it was faintly lit up by 
a single lamp. Ida sunk on a sopha, 
and the archon paced the chamber with 
that air of restless perturbation, which 
spoke a mind agitated by conflicting 
passions, Whose overwhelming vehe- 
mence denied them utterance. The 
superior character of Ida, from her 
earliest youth, had inspired him with a 
respect for her genius, and a confidence 
in her virtue, her recent imprudence 
could not wholly vanquish. Her strength 
had so often supported his weakness, 
and her counsel had so often directed 
his conduct, that the sentiment existing 
between parent and child, seemed with 
them almost reversed ; and the archon. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 41 

even in the moment when her obvious 
imprudence clashed equally with his 
prejudices, his interests, and his pride, 
believed her innocent in fact, though 
erroneous in feeling, and blameable in 
conduct. 

He knew not how to arraign her 
whom he had hitherto revered — he 
knew not how to accuse, where he had 
hitherto only feared accusations, so 
powerful is the influence of a strong 
mind over a weak one. 

He paused for a moment, and look- 
ing fully on her, he at last said : 

" Archondessa ! in what light have 
you appeared this night, in the eyes of 
your father and his friend ?" 

" As one," said Ida, tremulously, 
and supported only by conscious virtue, 
— " as one who loved innocently, but 
unfortunately — as one who, attached to 
virtue, was forced, by the prejudices of 



42 WOMAN; OR, 

others, to shroud her conduct in the 
mystery which should belong alone to 
vice." 

" Then j you openly confess your 
passion for this young and daring 
stranger?" he demanded, -trembling 
with uncontrolled rage. 

Ida fell at her father's feet, and con- 
cealed her blushes and her tears in the 
folds of her father's robe. 

" For a slave ! — a traitor ! — an 
alien \' y he continued. 

" For him I 1 ' said Ida, indignantly, 
" who in all Athens dares^ alone to be 
free ! — For a hero ! and a patriot \" 

" For him," continued the archon, 
passionately, " whose destiny, urged on 
by frontless bold temerity, marks him 
the victim of a speedy vengeance ! ,; 

" The destiny of genius and of virtue 
depend not on man!" said Ida, with 
enthusiasm: "It is blended with that 



IDA OF ATHENS. 43 

of the universe, and can only perish in 
the common ruin." 

The weak but subtil mind of the 
Greek was struck by the fismness of 
her reply, and the grandeur of the air 
that accompanied it. 

He paused for a few moments — his 
countenance changed its character —and 
he calmly asked, " Ida, knowest. thou 
from whom thou art descended? — know- 
est thou that the noble, virtuous archon, 
Aristodemus* was the founder of thy 
family in Athens?" 

" 'Tis said so,"' replied Ida, meekly. 

" That Athens boasts not of nobler 
blood, than that which flows in thy 
veins." 

" I do believe it," she added, sighing*. 

* He flourished in the first year of the 107th 
Olympiad : the orations of Demosthenes were 
made in his archonship. 



44 WOMAN; OR, 

" And thou, Ida ! thou who art so 
deep-versed in thy country's ancient 
laws, and modern habits, knowest thou 
not one by which athenian women are 
forbidden to wed another than an athe- 
nian citizen? — and that the alien who 
dares to wed the free athenian woman, 
was liable to slavery, and forfeiture of 
property*?" 

" Such was the ancient law, I know," 
faintly answered Ida. 

" And such the modern observance!" 
added the archon. " When does a true 
athenian, whom birth has rendered no- 
ble, violate the well-known precept 
* when thou marriest, let it be thy 
equal?' And is it the archondessa Ro- 
semeli, to whom all Athens looketh for 

* For an account of the ancient laws of Athens, 
see jElian, lib. 3, and Potter's Antiquities, page 15S, 
vol. 1, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 45 

example, who would oppose her indivi- 
dual wishes, to a prejudice so favorable 
to her country's happiness, her coun- 
try's good ? Would Ida be the first to 
violate an ancient law which modern 
Greece respects, and still obeys ; a law 
which still preserves the native greeks 
distinct and free from all impure al- 
liance with turk, with infidel, with 
slaves, or strangers?'' 

" No, not even a prejudice would 
Ida violate, which could promote her 
wretched country's good!" replied the 
young athenian, with enthusiasm. 

"Then, Ida, thou must resign this 
alien, whom none e'er knew but as the 
purchased slave of Achmet-aga — but 
as the object of my kinsman's ill-judged 
bounty — but as the suspected secret 
leader of a dangerous and devoted 
faction !" 

Ida intercepted her father by tears 



* 



Vk 



46" WOMAN ; OR, 

and passionate exclamations. She fell 
at his feet, and pressed his hands. 
" Oh ! spare me !" she cried, " spare 
me ! for still I love him !'' 

Her father gazed on her for many 
minutes, then turned aside his head 
and wept. Ida was overcome by a 
father's tears — she kissed his feet — she 
invoked him to have mercy on her. He 
raised her in his arms— he folded her to 
his heart — " You have conquered, he 
exclaimed, " but you have broken a 
parent's heart ! — Go ! seek out this un- 
known, wandering stranger ! desert for 
him, all that has rendered thee supe- 
rior and unequalled in the world's 
eyes! — the father whose life is bound in 
thine ! — the brothers over whom you 
have acquired all the endearing rights of 
maternity! —that country, that native 
and unhappy country, which ** 

"Never!" interrupted Ida, with an 



IDA OF ATHENS. 47 

exclamation of horror. " Father, you 
know not of what 1 am capable! — For 
the safety of him I love I would sacri- 
fice a thousand lives ! — For the family — 
for the country, on whom I doat, to 
whom I am bound, I would sacrifice 
my happiness ! — would !^-Oh, God ! — 
I will !— I do !" She rushed to a little 
cabinet as she spoke, and, in a tremu- 
lous agitation, that betrayed the disorder 
of her feelings, wrote the following 
lines : 



" TO OSMYN. 

"Farewell! — the virtue that at- 
tracted us towards each other, separates 
us for ever ! — To become yours, I must 
first become unworthy of you ! — You 
are resigned — you are beloved — but if 
to tell vou so be a weakness, 'tis the last 



' 48 WOMAN; OR, 

that* "even love itself shall lead me to 
commit.— Again, farewell ! — I restore 
you to the- country for whose service 
you were created — I return to the duties 
from which an unfortunate passion had 
nearly and for ever severed me. 

" Ida." 

Ida, with a trembling hand, and an 
averted head, presented the paper to 
her father — he glanced his eyes over it, 
and clasped her to his breast. Ida hung, 
faint and almost lifeless, on his shoulder; 
she felt his tears on her cheek, and they 
revived her; conscious virtue, and filial 
tenderness, were the paramount feelings 
of the moment: at last the archon said, 
" And this paper, which is the mandate 
of your father's happiness — how is it to 
be delivered ?" 

" Am I not worthy of your confi- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 4$ 

dence?" demanded Ida, with an an- 
guished smile. 

" Most worthy, dearest daughter !" he 
answered. 

" Then," she added, with a profound 
sigh, " though I shall never again hold 
intercourse with him for whom it is 
intended, he shall receive it before the 
morning's dawn — but the virtue that 
teaches me to resign him, teaches me 
also to guard his life and safety, like a 
sacred trust, committed by heaven to 
my care." 

"It is enough !" said the archon, 
with a perfect confidence in the inno- 
cent nature of her who had sacrificed 
her happiness to the promotion of his 
peace — " It is enough 1" and calling 
down a blessing on her heart, he again 
tmbraced her, and bid her farewell, 
entreating her to seek that repose her 
exhausted nature called for, 

VOL, III. d 



50 WOMAN ; OR, 

The night was now far advanced ; 
but Ida guided by the instinct of that 
heart, which was still enamoured even 
as it was wretched, sought the kiosk, 
beneath whose casement she believed it 
possible Osmyn even at that moment 
might wander, careless of the danger 
which his solicitude for her would tempt 
him at once to brave and despise. 

The waning moon had just risen from 
behind a mass of clouds, and its faint 
beam fell on the form of a man, who, in 
an attitude at once anxious and de- 
spending, leaned opposite the kiosk; 
the well-known form of Osmyn was not 
to be mistaken. For a moment Ida 
gave herself up to the contemplation of 
an object so dear, so dangerous. 

That perfect, that unrivaled form, 

which she bad never beheld without 

emotions of love and admiration— that 

beautiful countenance, in which the fire 

3 



IDA OF ATHENS. if 

of an ardent soul, the sensibility of a 
passionate heart, was so sweetly mingled ; 
and those sighs borne to her ear by the 
death-like stillness of the hour, all 
roused to madness the enthusiastic feel- 
ings of love, and of despair. For a mo- 
ment every lesser sentiment yielded to 
their force ; >she was on the point of 
rushing from the kiosk, of precipitating 
herself into those arms, where even 
death would be so much more welcome, 
than a life which love no longer blessed. 
The passionate affections of the youth — 
the profound feelings of the woman— 
the awakened tenderness of the mis- 
tress, loving, and conscious of being 
beloved, all overwhelmed the soul of 
Ida ; already she was on the verge of 
yielding to an influence she no longer 
wished to resist. 

Trembling with a two-fold emotion, 
she approached the door, which opened 
D 2 



iZ WOMAN; OR, 

on the path where Osmyn stood ; she 
hesitated for a moment — her bosom 
throbbed — she panted for breath — the 
influence of love thrilled through a 
frame which love itself had formed— -the' 
power of an immaculate virtue lingered 
in that heart, which virtue had made 
her throne. Ida, agitated almost to dis- 
solution, draws back the bolt of one 
door, while she hears footsteps approach- 
ing the other, which led to her own 
apartment : a moment only is given her 
to decide, and love itself renders virtue 
victorious ! She fears for Osmyn even 
more than for herself ! She flings down 
. her letter from the casement — the strug- 
gle is over— she totters back, and is re- 
ceived in the arms of her paramana. 

The absence of Ida had only been 
discovered by her father, who had ob- 
served, during the evening, that agita- 
tion of soul, which the consciousness 
of a first imprudence had awakened, 



IDA OF ATHENS. *8 

and which her natural and simple cha- 
racter was ill calculated to conceal. 
He had therefore visited her sleeping 
apartment, before he had retired to his 
rown ; and suspecting the object of her 
absence, had pursued, without betray- 
r mg her to the family. The paramana 
awakened by a chance from a profound 
sleep, had heard the footsteps of the 
agitated Ida, as she passed through her 
apartment to the kiosk ; and tremb- 
ling lest indisposition should have 
seized her, she flew to her assistance. 
The appearance of Ida sanctioned her 
fears — the paleness of death covered her 
face — its 'coldness was in her touch. She 
wns faint and motionless, and Kyra. 
scarce able to support her, bore her td 
her couch. The sweet waters which 
Kyra threw on her face, revived her ; 
and she had the presence of mind to 
plead a sudden illness, and to affect a 

82*0*0; • D 3 



54 WOMAN; OR, 

recovery and calmness, which soothed 
the fears of her nurse, who at last com- 
plied with her repeated requests, and 
left her to take that repose* which re- 
sembled the heavy insensibility that 
hangs on the harrassed feelings of a suf- 
fering and exhausted heart. 

To the violent tension of feelings, 
wrought up to their last excess ©f sen- 
sibility, a total relaxation of every fa- 
culty succeeded in the mind of Ida ; 
but the first beam of the dawn, in chas- 
ing from her pillow the torpid and im- 
refreshing repose which hung on it, re- 
vived her sense of those acute, anxieties, 
which had lulled her into a short oblivion 
of suffering, by the excess of suffering it- 
self. It is a sad and melancholy moment, 
when the chill gloom of a grey and 
comfortless dawn mingles its sombre 
influence with the awakening. remem- 
brance of an affliction, which a transient 
forgetfulness had banished from the 



, IDA OF ATHENS. 55 

memory and the heart. Ida shuddered 
to reeollect she had solemnly renounced 
the only hope of happiness that she was. 
then capable of conceiving; and the 
triumph of virtue, proud and glorious as 
it was, had not yet in its result compen- 
sated the sacrifice which love had made. 

But the secret workings of the heart, 
always difficult to ascertain, even when 
least veiled from observation by the in- 
fluence of the passions, are inscrutable 
to the woman who loves with tender- 
ness, but not with prudence } and 
who, enamoured of virtue, centres her 
whole felicity in him whom virtue 
teaches her to forego. Ida felt (yet 
knew not) that a tender hope was 
gradually subduing the influence of a 
too prompt despair ; and that the tears 
that flowed from her eyes, -were not all 
tears of sadness. 

For proud in the capability of resign-, 
D 4 



$«• 



TOMXV; on', 



ing him, on whom she doated, she was 
solaced in the conviction that she was 
still unresigned by him, to whom she 
was still dear. 

Voluntarily to wrench the heart from 
the felicity to which it clings, is a vio- 
lence done to nature, which nature al- 
ways resists, till time and inevitable des- 
tiny reconciles us to that, which we at 
first submit to without believing the 
possibility of the effort we have made. 

Certain of Osmyn having received 
her letter ! trembling, yet anxious to re- 
ceive his reply, she arose, and again 
visited the kiosk ; beneath the little 
frieze of the casement, the usual place 
of deposit, she found a paper which en- 
closed a leafless rose, a decayed sprig of 
melissa, and the following lines illegibly 
written with a pencil : ' 



IDA OF ATHENS. 57 



TO THE ARCHQNDESSA ROSEMELI. 

" That it was not lov-e. which led thee 
to the cave of Apollo, thou hast thy- 
self asserted ; and I must now believe: 
that the much thou hadst to tell me,, 
is couched in the lines I have this night 
received, thou wouldst infer ! and I > 
must now suppose, or Ida never loved, , 
or loves no longer ! — or ! ■ 

Lady, thou didst once think me worthy 
of thy love ! and be the fate of that love 
what it may, Osmyn shall prove himself 
more worthy still to claim, and to obtain 
it. If it is virtue that deprives me of your 
heart, virtue shall yet restore it; but if 'tis 
woman's fickle fancy — if 'tis a rival's in- 
fluence—if — Ida — I may go mad — but . 
I can ne'er be vile. Thou mayest dis- 
tract, but fate itself can ne'er subdue 
d 6 



48 WOMAN; OR, 

me ! Proscribed ! pursued ! unfriended 
and unknown, I am worthier thee, and 
freer, greater, happier still than Achmet- 
Aga in all his plenitude of pomp and 
power; happier, — Oh, Ida! — Farewell! 
Take back the flowers thy infant love 
bestowed ; they .are still symbolic of 
woman's fragile passion. But thou 
can'st not reclaim, nor restore the gem 
that recompensed the boyish effort, thy 
words converted to a patriot deed ; nor 
can'st thou e'er obliviate, or 1 forget,- 
that sentiment, that song, which waked 
the flame of glory, and my soul blended 
the love of woman and of fame ; and led 
me still to emulate those deeds which 
valiant men -perform, and creatures like 
thyself inspire, and recompense. Lady, 
farewell ! once thou didst bid me live 
alone for thee ; and I indeed too fatally 
obeyed thee. But that command with- 
drawn, and with it, that sweet fcope that 



IDA OF ATHENS. 59 

made it so omnipotent, I live alone for 
virtue, freedom, and for Greece. 

" Osmyn/' 

1 
Ida covered this letter with her kisses, 
and bathed it with her tears. She saw 
in it all the traits that composed the cha- 
racter of Osmyn, tender, passionate, 
proud, dignified, and suspicious ; not 
that suspicion which proceeds from a 
want of confidence in others, or one- 
self: but that restless jealousy of spirit 
which accompanies an ardent and ty- 
rannic passion, which, though causeless, 
made the misery of his life, and would 
have hazarded the peace and happiness 
of her, who would have formed her 
destiny in his. 

She languished to assure him of her 
unalterable love ; to prove to him how 
unworthy and how unfounded were his 
D 6 



So * WOMAN; OR, 

suspicions of the aga, and to convince, 
him that the moment in which she had 
resigned him for ever, was that in which 
he was most dear to her affections, most 
necessary to her happiness ; but the sa- 
crifice was made, and she had no appeal 
from misery and from affliction. 

The next day the archon, commend- 
ing his sons and family to his daughter's 
care, with all the careless security that 
belonged to his flexible and national cha- 
racter, embarked on the Egean Sea, to 
prosecute some commercial speculation, 
and Ida was left to the now gloomy soli- 
tude of her gymnasium. 



THE C0NSPIRAT0JIS. 

If an immortal heroism is always 
found rearing its laurelled head amidst 
the struggles of republican virtues in 



IDA OF ATHENi. Oi 

that stage of society, where wisdom 
constitutes the legislature — valour the 
commander — and the bright star of 
genius holds its ascendant in the galaxy 
of political consideration ; if there ex- 
ist in free governments certain springs 
to extraordinary exertion, which, when 
touched on by the pressure of circum- 
stances, act with boundless influence — 
if the milder virtues, the gentler merits, 
rise and expand in that state, where 
the just equipoise of power excites no 
rivalry, and the poverty of the nation 
preserves the virtue and felicity of the 
people ; it is under the goad and 
shackles of an oppressive tyranny, that 
human nature, borne down to its utmost 
power of sustention, by a bold and 
hazardous effort, rises to assert its rights. 
It is in the school of national adversity 
that patriotism and magnanimity receive 
their inspiration ; and the inborn vigour 



62 ' WOMAN ; OR, 

of the high superior mind betrays its 
power of resistance, and fertility of re* 
source. 

It was in the reigns of Caesar and of 
Hippias, that Rome beheld her cham- 
pion in Brutus, and Athens in Harmo- 
dius. It was at the moment that the 
Turks tightened the chain of oppression 
round the necks of the Greeks, that its 
tension became the pre-disposmg cause 
of its fragility. 

The islands of the Archipelago had 
long been ripe for insurrection ; but the 
interesting, the affecting manifesto pre- 
sented to the empress of Russia, evinced 
that in Athens there still existed men 
capable of recalling the memory of their 
glorious ancestors*. 

But among the many little factions 
trhich private interest, intriguing cabal, 
and religious, bigotry gave birth to, in 
* See note ( b )v 



IDA OF ATHENS. , 63 

the state, of Attica, there was one 
(and it was the least) which consisted 
chiefly of men in that era of life, when 
even the errors of humanity are but the 
false extremes of its unregulated vir- 
tues — when the feelings, fresh and sus- 
ceptible, still bear the brilliant gloss of 
unworn nature — when the vigour of 
manhood has steadied the impulsions of 
youth, and the experience of age has 
not yet chilled the ardour of hope. 

It consisted of men who, sufficiently 
educated to know the former glory of 
their wondrous country, sufficiently inde- 
pendent to afford leisure to meditate on 
its existing state, soon learnt to behold 
its pristine freedom and felicity through 
the medium of a national pride, and a 
high-coloured imagination, and to feel 
its actual slavery and living misery, > 
through the sympathy of mutual suffer- 
ing, and national sensibility. 



U WOMAN ; OR, 

With the classic dreams of ancient 
heroism floating in their vivid fancies— 
with the splendid monuments of their 
ancestors glory mouldering before their 
eyes — with the wounds of a ruthless op- 
pression rankling in their sensible hearts ; 
this little band of patriots stood alone ! 
they loved (heir country ! they deplored 
her injuries ! and they resolved to free " J 
her from the Turkish yoke, or perish 
amidst her ruins. 

It was from them that Osmyn had 
received the letter and the Arabian cour- 
ser; it was with them he had become co- 
alesced during the life-time of his friend, 
through the medium of Stamati ; and 
it was to them he presented the bequest 
of his generous benefactor, at a moment 
when the want of means to provide them- 
selves with arms alone prevented them 
from effecting those views, on which their 
virtues, rather than their prudence specu- 
lated. 



IDA OF ATHENS. £5 

By this act, Osmyn had left himself 
almost destitute ; but little remained of 
a sum found in the casket of the 
caloyer monk ; but that little was suf- 
ficient for one whose wants were as 
moderate as his spirit was insatiable. 

By this act, he had also fixed himself 
so deeply in the confidence of the young 
conspirators, that uniting their sense of 
his disinterested liberality to their con- 
sciousness of his superiority in the use 
of arms, his valour, iiis genius, and 
eminent personal . endowments, they 
learnt to consider him as the guiding 
soul of their party, and elected him their 
chief, while uncertain whether he was 
not in worldly rank their inferior ! 

It is thus that genius and nature 
assert their great and powerful rights in 
moments of danger and exigency. The 
creative faculties of the superior mind are 
then alone resorted to — the command- 



fe? WOMAN; OR, 

ing energy of the physical strength is 
then depended on, and the high indis- 
putable nobility of soul forms the 'sole 
distinction, to which deference is paid— 
to which the homage of respect is 
offered. :JJt >. 

But Osmyn, while he daily grew with 
increasing influence on the hearts and 
admiration of his compatriots, suffered a 
passion to insinuate its power in his bo- 
som, which could alone successfully 
oppose itself to the cause in which he 
had so warmly embarked. 

As long as his love for Ida was but 
the pure affection of a spiritual inter- 
course, it mingled with his other views 
without destroying the energy with 
which they were pursued. But from the 
moment the full consciousness of being 
beloved, of forming the felicity, the very 
existence of a creature whose beauty, 
whose genius., whose virtue, and whose 



IDA OF ATHENS. 67 

sensibility, placed her in his glowing 
fancy, as one beyond the power of hu- 
man rivalry ! .From the moment he 
had folded her to his heart — from the 
moment he had felt that gentle, ardent 
pressure, which spoke a soul love had 
wholly penetrated, he became lost to 
every thought but that which Ida in- 
spired ; and the most powerful, the 
most uncontroulable feeling of nature 
in that era of its existence, where it is 
most omnipotent, seized on every faculty 
of his beingy and for a period weaned 
him from a sentiment, which, however 
great and good, is still but a sentiment 
of duty and reflection, warmed by en- 
thusiasm, animated by associated affec- 
tions, and consecrated by approving vir- 
tue ! But the letter of Ida so unex- 
pectedly/received at a moment when 
love (inflamed by disappointment) led 
him to the casement, where more than 



6S WOMAN; OR, 

once she had charmed his senses, and 
influenced his life, inflicted a wound in 
his tin prepared heart,' deeper than that 
his supposed rival had a short time be- 
fore meditated against it 

Counting on the nature of Ida's pas- 
sion by his own, without calculating on 
the feelings that impelled, and the cir- 
cumstances that governed her — without 
reflecting on the difference produced on 
the passions of the sexes, by the influ- 
ence of education ; and that the habitual 
restraint of woman becomes a faculty 
of his existence, which, when united 
to the influence of reason, to the power 
of a real or supposed virtue, enables 
her to sacrifice her life's dearest feelings, 
even though her life itself become the 
purchase of the effort ; he judged her 
conduct by his own, and believed her 
faithless, because his love, his character, 
and situation, all contributed to render 
him true. 



■ ". 

IDA OF ATHENS. 69 

■ . ■■ ■ 

'cii.lfa is thus that woman, who can 
scarcely even love with impunity, is 
judged by man, whose passions are 
licensed, and whose feelings are un- 
restrained. 

Sometimes he . believed her intimi- 
dated by the dangers which must inevi- 
tably attend their connexion, however 
pure and innocent it might continue — 
sometimes he believed^ the personal 
beauty, the rank, and passion of the 
aga, had influenced her conduct and 
her heart — sometimes he fancied her in- 
different, or capricious, that she looked 
down upon his hidden birth, and infe- 
rior rank; and this supposition, the 
most torturing of all, the indignant 
pride of his haughty character enabled 
him best to support- -and sometimes 
he resigned himself wholly to a confi- 
dence in her virtue, and her genius, 
which revived his love and admiration, 



ro WOMAN; OR, 

and taught liim to consider her conduct, 
as the result of that superior soul, 
Whose high perfections he for the first 
time so bitterly deplored. While all 
these various and contradictory feelings 
agitated his soul, as in the first tumult 
of resentment and despair he wrote that 
letter, which was the type of a still 
doating, but a still proud and suspicious 
heart, whose feelings he would sacrifice 
at the expence of his life, rather than 
have indulged them at the expence- of 
that dignity of mind, dearer than life 
itself. '* 

With an energy which drew its spirit 
and animation from the bitter overflow- 
ings of a disappointed passion, as yet in 
the first era of its unbridled emotion, he 
returned to that standard, from which 
that fatal and still secretly cherished, 
but openly abjured passion, had seduced 
him ; and, after an unusual absence of 



IDA OF ATHENS. 71 

some nights, he appeared again, in the 
midst of the little band, who had ob- 
served his absence with a regret, which, 
without disturbing their confidence in 
bis attachment to their cause, taught 
them to feel the want' of that compre- 
hensive and ardent mind, on which 
their hopes, and even their unanimity 
depended ; since his superior genius 
formed a centre, to which their various 
views were drawn, and by which the 
incongruities of their vacillating opi- 
nions were always reconciled. The 
place of rendezvous which *the young 
conspirators had chosen, was a rude, 
grotto, excavavated in the base of the 
hill Museum, whose site had been 
anciently dedicated to warlike pur- 
poses*, and where, in a still remoter 

* The hill of Museus was a fort near the ci- 
tadel. Antigonous stationed a garrison there, and 
his son Demetrius surrounded it with a wall* 



■ % 



72 WOMAN; OR, 

day, the pupil of Orpheus, the inspired 
Museus, breathed his immortal strains 
to a delighted multitude. Every thing 
around them conspired to cherish that 
love of glory, that national pride, so 
nutritive to the spirit of patriotism ; and 
they deemed the place worthy the sa- 
cred purposes to which it was now de- 
voted. 

To the grotto of the museum, Osmyn 
adjourned on the night of that day, 
whose dawn had brought to his heart a 
pang so unexpected, so insupportable ; 
and whose anguish, by the Jrritation it 
communicated to his other feelings, 
gave a more poignant energy to the in- 
terest with which he again united him- 
self to a cause, to which his principles 
were invariably true, though his enthu- 
siasm suffered a temporary abatement. 

The appearance of Osmyn in the cave 
of the conspirators was hailed with de- 
light. Il seemed as if the soul was 



IDA OF ATHENS. 75 

restored to the body, after a transient 

. suspension M its faculties. While his 
spirit was fired, his ambition was roused 
as he beheld himself surrounded by 
those young and vigorous persons, who 

. had so daringly embarked in the cause 
of their .country's freedom, and who 
looked up to him for counsel and sup- 
port ; while their bold and picturesque 
forms — the gloom and extent of the ca- 
vern — the arms which were strewed 

r Bound it— the pale flame of the lamp, 
which was suspended from the centre 
of its rude and vaulted roof; partially 
dispersed the mists of a close and pent- 
up air, and drew forth the faint scin- 
tillations of surrounding spars ;' all touch- 

^jed his imagination, and gave a new and 
daring tone to his awakened mind, 
which silenced, without vanquishing, 
the tender feelings of a suffering and 
enamoured heart. # 

I V0L * IJ1, • E 



fi WOMAN; OR, 

His absence, which had excited a 
general emotion, was eagerly inquired 
into ; and his proscription, and the ne- 
cessity of caution and concealment, af- 
forded him a sufficient plea, which he 
blushed as he made, though it was re- 
ceived as a sufficient excuse. He was 
then informed that the pile of arms and 
ammunition which he beheld, had been 
landed in the depths of the preceding 
night, at the deserted port of the Pha- 
lerum; and that the little flotilla, which 
they had fitted out, was completely 
manned, and sanctioned by the French 
colours, which they had hoisted. 

A debate, the entrance of Osmyn had 
interrupted, relative to the plans of at- 
tack, and the time expedient for their 
execution, was now continued with 
spirit a id energy. 

It was now, too, Osmyn observed, 
that the band of patriots was nearly 



IDA OF ATHENS. 7S 

'doubled since he had last appear- 
ed among them; that some Greek 
Turks, disaffected to the government, 
-and many whose lives and characters 
were but little consonant to the senti- 
ments they now professed, had crept 
among those whose principles and sen- 
timents rendered them worthy of the 
cause in which they had been the first 
to risk their lives and properties. 

Osmyn had observed the shyness 
which some of these strangers had be- 
trayed, when he was presented to them ; 
and the invidious smiles With which 
others had heard him addressed by 
the name of Leader, Compatriot, and 
Chief. 

The blood boiled in his swelling 
veins — his proud and haughty soul, 
ready to betray its own superiority, was 
restrained in its emotions by that ne- 
cessary caution, the cause, and not his 
e2 



9$ woman; or, 

own safety inspired ; and he listened 
with suspicious attention to the various 
opinions delivered under the influence 
of different interests, and different 
views, as the spirit of patriotism — the 
seal of bigotry — the corruption of in- 
trigue — the desire of plunder, or the 
restlessness of unfixed principles, in- 
spired ; while he frequently beheld 
them all equally under the influence of 
that national spirit, whose gusts of 
passion, and vehemence of character, are 
so inimical to that firm stability, that 
cool, deliberative caution, which, though 
not wholly consonant to his own impe- 
tuous feelings, he looked on as greatly 
essential to the success of that enter- 
prize in which they had embarked. 

Meantime, arguments, drawn from 
various feelings, and from various views, 
now ran hioh, and an inflammatory) but 
inconclusive, speech, uttered by the 



IDA OF ATHENS. 77 

young and vehement Stamati (who felt,- 
but never reasoned), was answered by a 
Greek Turk, advanced in years, whose 
countenance exhibited traits of dissimu- 
lation, art, and cunning. 

lie talked of the limitation of their 
number— the poverty of their resources 
— the necessary support of a foreign 
ally, and the power and vigilance of the 
ruling government. He seemed anxious 
to recruit the Russian atones, rather 
than to promote the cause of Liberty 
and Athens. Osmyn observed the in- 
fluence his persuasive words and ve- 
nerable air produced on the feelings of 
his too-susceptible auditors, and he arose 
to obviate the effects of his dangerous 
and insiduous arguments. He arose 
with that look of high command, and 
lofty superiority, which nature, ,and the 
dignity of his mind, shed over his per- 
fect form ; and his eloquence; forcible 
e 3 



r« WOMAN; OR, 

and energetic, yet softened by the at- 
tractive graces of youth, played with the 
passions of his hearers, while it seized 
on their senses and their minds. He 
sought to rouse the slumbering spirit of 
the atbenians from the dream of timid 
caution, into which the artifice and 
corruption of the previous speaker had 
plunged them ; and be fired their souls, 
by representing the ancient glory of 
their country, through the brilliant 
prism of that national vanity which was 
always to be awakened. 

The glorious ardor, thus re-illumined, 
was diffused around with a contagious 
sympathy ; the light of patriotism seem- 
ed reflected from heart to heart, and 
the pure and social flame, thus spread 
around, became too bright and ardent 
to be easily extinguished. 

' He thus catagorically answered the 
arguments of his opponent : 



IDA OF ATHENS. 7* 

•" We are not, it is true," he said, 
" all powerful- in number I — but it was 
a thousand Greeks alone defended their 
stations, liberty, and rights, against 
three millions of barbarians at Thermo- 
pylae ! 

" It is also true, that our resources, 
externally considered, are but mode- 
rate ; but the resources of brave men 
are in their hearts, and there they will 
be found exhaustless ! 

" You would convince us the Greeks 
can only fight with swords of foreign 
temper ! — but say, what foreign ally 
backed the Grecian forces at Marathon, 
or Mantinea? — And what is the tyrannic 
power of an unjust and cruel govern- 
ment against that band of patriots, 
whom freedom and humanity lead on, 
and love of country fires? 

" No ; blend but the private interests, in 
one great view of public -good, still be the 

E 4 



80 WOMAN; OR, 

paramount wish, the nation's happiness : 
let but unanimity direct and bind you ; 
and tyranny, injustice, and fanatic zeal, 
shall then lie prostrate at the feet of 
public happiness, and victorious patri- 
otism r' 

He ceased; but enthusiasm and vir- 
tue still spoke eloquently in the lumi- 
nation of his expressive countenance, 
and the graceful dignity of his com* 
manding attitude. A burst of applause 
hung upon his words-v- it was loud and 
animated, but not general; and the son 
of a greek patriarch, lately inrolled 
among the patriots, who, in the absence 
of Osmyn, had distinguished himself by 
a fanatic zeal and a turbulent eloquence, 
now arose to speak. 

Envy of Osmyn 's superior talents, 
and still more, of his obvious and su- 
preme influence, instigated him to enter 
on a subject of discussion, on which he 



IDA OF ATHENS. 81 

believed Osmyn incapable of toucbing, 
and which he hoped., would bring the 
religious prejudices of the assembly on 
his side, and turn the scale of feeling 
and opinion in his favor. 

He spoke of the disregard which had 
been hitherto shewn to all hope of „ as- 
sistance from heaven, for their cause — 
that no trust had been placed in that 
ruling power which governed the des- 
tiny of man, and that temporal views, 
and temporal hopes, seemed alone the 
objects of their exertions — that they 
sought not to glorify the Deity by their 
deeds, or to extend the true and only 
Church of Christ by their exertions. — 
He spoke of the extermination of the 
infidels, not upon a political, but a re- 
ligious principle, as a work worthy of 
the greek Christians ; and of bringing 
back, by fire and sword, the heretical 
sects of the Roskniki, and the Staro- 
£ 5 



82 WOMAM; OR, 

vagi* to the orthodox faith ; and* he con- 
cluded with a longeulogiumon the purity, 
infalibility^and supremacy of the greek 
Church, under whose banners the greeks 
ought alone to fight, and hope to conquer. 

Puerile, cruel, and intolerant as were 
his arguments, he did not want for ad- 
herents, and did not speak without some 
shareof approbation and applause. 

Osmyn witnessed with impatience 
and contempt the result of the zealot's 
arguments. 

He again addressed himself to the as- 
sembly with an impetuosity dictated by 
his feelings. 

* The Greek, like every other, church, is di- 
vided into countless sects, who all oppose, despise, 
and hate each other with a violence that knows no 
bounds. The Roskniki and Starovagi are the 
most prevailing. The greek martyr, Formio, was 
burnt for professing the former sect, and for 
openly declaiming against the worship of images* 
He had been formerly a caloyer or monk. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 83 

" They alone," said he, " place 
a confidence in heaven, who, con- 
quering the prejudices which the cre- 
dulity and imposition of man give 
birth to, see by the light of that 
reason which heaven has illuminated in 
their souls, arid act from the impulse of 
that sensibility which heaven has im- 
planted in their hearts. It is their dic- 
tates that convince us, that if the Deity 
can be glorified by man's inferior efforts, 
it is by promoting the happiness of man 
— by diffusing. round the power of bene- 
volence and truth — and by- developing 
those affections which are the sweet 
bonds of social love, and social hap- 
piness. 

" Whatarethecountless distinctions in 
opinions merely speculative r and uncon- 
nected with the moral or physical good 
of the human species, which dare asr 
sume the name of religion, and obsti» 
e6 



84 WOMAN: OR, 

nately assert the obvious impossibility, 
that each is in itself infallible ? What 
are they in his eyes, who knows no re- 
ligion but that which is of the heart, 
which in theory is so comprehensible, 
in practice so divine ? 

" Athenians ; descendants of rhe con- 
querors of Asia ! of those who polished^ 
while they awed the world ! you whom 
a transient flame of patriotism fired ! is 
the pure spark so soon extinct? Are 
you subdued by words, who aimed at 
deeds? Are you, who sought to free 
your country, and set a bright example 
to mankind, to stoop to wear the chains 
of bigotry ? Once we knew no dis- 
tinctions but that which vice and virtue, 
or slavery, or freedom,, made; but now 
the infidel and faithful Roskniki and 
Starovagi divide, and arm us in their re- 
spective causes ; and they, whom liberty 
and virtue animated, who fought for 
4 



IDA OF ATHENS. 85 

Greece, humanity, and freedom, are now 
become the intollerant champions of 
some pious dogma, they cannot feel, and 
do not understand. Go, go ; chuse out 
another leader! It was to men and 
patriots I bound my fate, not to secta- 
rians and croisaders.'' 

A violent tumult now arose : the in- 
timate friends of Osmyn and the parti- 
sans of Greece gathered round him, 
♦ exclaiming, " You are our only leader, 
and freedom still our cause \" ' , 

Others vehemently cried, «* No alien 
leader ! — no slave ! — no foundling for 
our chief!" While a few, tossing up 
their caps, exclaimed, " Long live the 
defender of the Holy Greek Church : 
we elect him in 'the name of the sacred 
Panaghea; down with the infidels and 
heretics--the true believers for ever !" 

Itwasinthis moment of universal con- 
sternation and uproar, that the greeks, 



SS WOMAN; OR, 

who were always placed at an outpost to 
prevent a surprize, rushed into the cave, 
and with terror that rendered them 
almost unintelligible, proclaimed the ap- 
proach of an armed force, which was 
already descending the .hill of the Acro- 
polis, led on by the disdar-aga himself. 
The tone of the general perturbation 
was now wholly changed ; and a mo- 
ment of indescribable emotion, surprize, 
and horror, ensued. The blood mantled 
to the cheek of the brave ; it chilled 
round the trembling heart of the feeble. 
They who had mistaken impulse for 
principle, now felt the self-deception ;, 
and they whom other sentiments than 
those of virtue had influenced, trembled, 
and were dismayed: all f were moved — 
but Osmyn least of all. He had in- 
stinctively seized on arms. His heart 
throbbed with an emotion it would have 
been more want of sensibility than of 
3 



IDA OF ATHENS. 87 

spirit not to have felt ; but; he stood 
alone, firm, dignified, and collected. 
He felt like a patriot — he felt like a 
man —and he looked like a hero! 

Every eye was turned on him, for the 
noble tranquillity of his air was in- 
spiring. An hundred voices supplicated 
him for advice and counsel. 

<M I can fight, 5 ' he replied coldly ; 
" but I am a slave, an alien, and am un- 
worthy to director lead." 

" You are a true patriot V cried the 
general voice. " We call upon you in the 
name of Athens, to direct and lead us." 
" Do you," he exultingly return- 
ed, " for myself alone do you elect 
me ? Then know it is the grandson of 
that Limbona*, who justified your 
rights, and punished your lawless tyrants, 
whom you have now elected. It is 

* See note ( c). 



88 WOMAN; OR, 

Theodorus, the son of him who some 
years back was banished for having 
joined the cause of liberty and Greece P 
Osmyn then drawing up the sleeve of 
his robe, shewed the picture of his 
father fastened round his arm. This 
intelligence seemed to operate like elec- 
tricity on the hearts of those who sur- 
rounded him. 

The name of Limbona was victory it- 
self. The person, and still more, the 
dauntless soul of Osmyn, were irrefra- 
gable testimonies of his noble birth. 

" Citizens, to arms!" he cried ; " a 
glorious death, or victory and freedom !" 

In a moment every man was armed. 
The voice, the countenance of Osmyn, 
was inspiration. 1 They waited not the 
approach of the janissary troops ; they 
rushed forward to meet and to oppose 
them. \ 

The.turkish soldiers, accustomed to 



IDA OF ATHENS. 89 

factious commotions of the greeks in 
distant provinces, supposed that they 
had been called on to disperse a few in- 
consequent insurgents, and found them- 
selves charged, with a violence that bore 
all before it, by upwards of three hundred 
of the flower of the athenian youth, 
whose enthusiasm, amounting to frenzy, 
rendered their arms in the first onset 
invincible. 

The turks, always brave to fury in a 
charge, as pusillanimous in a retreat, 
were beaten back to the citadel with a 
considerable loss, and retired in disorder 
and consternation before their conquer- 
ors. Meantime, the whole force of the 
garrison, joined by the turks of every 
description, poUred into the town from , 
the citadel ; and the greeks, animated 
by their success, rushed madly forward 
to oppose a force treble their own. 

Amidst the shades of a gloomy night. 



9P WOMAN; OR, 

partially illuminated by the lamps which 
the terror-struck athenians had brought 
to their casements ; the singular, the 
tremendous spectacle of an open in- 
surrection now presented itself in the 
narrow winding streets, amidst the grand 
and awful ruins of Athens. 

Moment of unequalled horror ! when 
personal danger is aggravated by the 
dread anxiety for all we love, and all 
we value — when the imagination is 
overcome by images of terror — when 
the heart is subdued by apprehensions 
of tenderness — when citizen is opposed 
to citizen, friend to friend — when the 
bonds of social love are torn asunder—- 
when the child bleeds beneath the pa- 
rent's eye — when the mistress witnesses 
the destruction of the lover— and when 
the folly or injustice of man subverts 
the whole order of a just and benevo- 
lent nature, and feels and gives the 



IDA OF ATHENS. $1 

sharpest pang which man can suffer or 
iiiflict. 

A general engagement had now taken 
place in the open square of the bazar. 
The turks, certain of success from 
the superiority of their 'numbers, un- 
swayed by the wild impulsions of 
that warm enthusiasm which stilt 
animated the patriots beyond the line 
of prudence, and plunged them into 
unavailing danger, fought with a cool 
and resolute firmness, and displayed 
in their- offensive, as in their de- 
fensive operations, a merciless but 
disciplined exertion, which the ardor of 
men who felt their efforts consecrated 
by their cause was unequal to cope 
with ; and the greeks, animated by 
national sensibility--impelled by na- 
tional enthusiasm— though feeling more 
deeply— acting more vigorously— be- 
traying more forcibly the nerve of soul, 



02 WOMAN; OR, 

the prowess of body, which the con- 
sciousness of combating for all that 
men hold ) dear, inspired— were still 
unable to resist a force which power 
armed, and interest continually accu- 
mulated. 

All the vicissitude of civil dissention 
betrayed their terrific effects with every 
added moment. The impetuous charge x 
— the disciplined retreat, hope, de- 
spair — the full shout of temporary suc- 
cess—the sad murmur of a transient de- 
feat—the shriek of anguish, and the 
moan of life's last pang, all mingled 
their dreadful sounds with the roar of 
fire-arms, and the deep roll of the 
turkish drums. 

At last, it was fatally evident that the 
spirit of patriotism formed no shield 
round the breast of the patriot. The 
cool resistance, the mechanical opera- 
tions of superior forces, were victorious 



IDA OF ATHENS. 93 

over the impetuous ardor, the unregu- 
lated enthusiasm,, of superior souls; 
and many a brave head bowed beneath 
the cleaving cimeter of tyranny ; and 
many a brave heart dyed with its vital 
stream the bosom of that country in 
whose cause it bled. 

Victory glittered on the turkish 
crescent ! and the secret hopes of a 
timid nation died with the glorious 
few who had heaved their last sigh in 
her defence. The carnage was dread- 
ful, for it was wanton and merciless; 
the licensed, the inflated soldiery, un- 
restrained in their brutal fury, perpe- 
trated deeds, which their loyalty sanc- 
tioned, but from which justice and hu- 
manity recoiled ; the night was devoted 
to every species of destruction human 
wickedness, under the influence of po- 
litical prejudice, and religious bigotry, 
could inspire. 



S4 WOMAN j OR, 

The houses of the opulent, whose 
owners were native greeks, and not of 
the established faith, were plundered. 
Many of the citizens were put to an 
immediate death, though innocent of any 
crime save that of slumbering over their 
country's wrongs ,* and the buts of the 
miserable, and the poor, were consumed 
from a rage wanton and insatiable in its 
ferocity. 

Yet even amidst these terrific scenes 
of human desolation, a few of the patriot 
band still survived, and wildly sought 
the death which chance had yet denied 
them. 

Their furious efforts were characterised 
by a desperation that gave them super- 
natural force ; with one arm disabled by 
a deep wound, the son of Limbona had 
wrenched a cimeter from the grasp of a 
turk, whom, with Herculean strength, 
he had hurled to the earth. 



IDA OF ATHENS. $ 

Leading his little band, he rushed upon 
a party of al banian spahis, who formed 
the body' guard of the disdar-aga. 

Osmyn, with daring and imprudent 
valour, singled out the aga. And, in a 
moment, found himself surrounded by a 
party of janissaries, who disarmed and 
seized him ; it was in vain he endea- 
voured to fall upon one of the swords 
that were pointed at his breast. It was 
the repeated command of the aga that 
he should be strictly guarded, and his 
life preserved. The furious rage of Osmyn 
was unavailing — the agony of his wounds 
was insupportable ; his loss of blood 
was great ; his strength failed him, and 
he was carried lifeless in the arms of the 
jenissaries to the Acropolis. 

Meantime, a few of the greek patriots 
had escaped. A few had been taken 
alive, and were led to noxious dungeons ; 
but the" majority had perished the. envy 
of *heir wretched survivors ! 



,p6 WOMAN; OR, 

At last the appetite for carnage be- 
came sated. To the rapid tumult of 
successive passions, to the furious acts 
of an inflamed and armed multitude, to 
the uproar of the combat, and the 
dreadful sounds of general destruction ; 
an awful, sullen, calm, succeeds : the 
silence of terror, and of death, reigns on 
every side. The faint and grey dawn, a« 
it rises in the east, sheds its gloomy light 
on a scene of melancholy and terrific 
desolation : the dwellings of the unas- 
sailed and opulent, closely barred up; 
those of the less fortunate, whom their 
party or religion proscribed, were de- 
spoiled and shattered, and those of the 
unprotected and poor,' were smoking, 
and in ashes. 

On every side, horrid vestiges of the 
night's destruction were visible. The 
turkish soldiers alone were seen in the 
streets, save the few wretches who came 
to seek the disfigured forms of those 



IDA OF ATHENS. 97 

still dear to them in death ; and who 
scared from their sad, and pious office, 
by the footstep of the patrole, flew to 
the adjoining ruins, to conceal at once 
their tears, and their intentions. 

Amidst the wretches whom affection 
still opposed to danger, there was one 
alone whom armed barbarity could 
neither daunt, nor vanquish. Young and 
beautiful ! gentle and timid > a pavement 
dved with blood, and sometimes strewed 
with mangled bodies, was still unequal 
to daunt her mind, or chase her from 
the object of her research. She flies 
from street to street — she uncovers the 
distorted countenance — she examines 
the mangled features ; despair and 
madness point her wild and wandering 
glance. A janissary patrole seizes her by 
the arm, she is insensible to his threats, 
a laugh of frenzy braves his useless rage. 
The mussulman, (with the prejudices of 

vol. in. F 



98 WOMAN; OR, 

his religion) respects her apparent in- 
sanity, and she continues ^er melan- 
choly pilgrimage unopposed. She seeks 
the friend of her soul, she seeks him in 
death, and finds him not ! For a moment 
the conviction strikes her that he lives! 
She knows, she feels, he has not fled ; 
and the more terrific, the less noble, 
death that now awaits him, flashes on 
her appalled heart, with a new sense of 
horror ! Unimpeded by the soul-harrow- 
ing objects that lie exposed to her 
view, she flies with the rapidity of light- 
ning to the Acropolis, but the gates 
which lead to the citadel are closed ; the 
spahis that guard it, are doubled in their 
usual number; and the armed castriani 
that crowd the battlements, appear like 
an army. 

The sufferer applies for admittance to 
one of the sentinels ; he turns scoffingly 
fromi her — she supplicates another, he 



IDA OF ATHENS. 99 

trifles brutally with her feelings ; and a 
fourth, struck by her youth and beauty, 
seizes her by the arm ; she bursts from 
his grasp ! he points his zatagan at her 
bosom, and she sinks lifeless at his feet. 

At that moment the vigilant, the con- . 
quering Achmet-aga approaches, accom- 
panied by his Capadilger Keayassa, to 
visit the guards. Amazed, he recognizes 
the person of the prostrate unfortunate. 
It was the saint that had charmed his 
eyes in the mekkeme ; it was Ida, the 
daughter of the archon Rosemeli ; he 
raised her in his arms, and she was con- 
veyed by his orders, to an apartment in 
the citadeh 

Tff t|c TJT Tf? 3(c "Sjc sje t|c Tfc "5(f Tf? 

* Al> ■£• Jtd %|i <d' Uj *£* a* %!>, \b 

vje ^r Tfp Tfp Tff if? vfz ifr Tf; w 

The triumph of the disdar-aga was 
now complete ; he had effaced the stain 
of being vanquished by Osmyn when 
they were singly opposed to each other 3 



100 WOMAN; OR, 

by having in his turn become the van- 
quisher, though by means so much less 
noble, that even he was not insensible 
to their disparity. He had now in his 
hands the life of the rival whom he 
hated, and the person of the woman he 
loved. 

The worst passions of his nature 
blended their influence in his soul ; and 
his profound policy and daring ambition 
alone opposed themselves to their im- 
mediate gratification. 

In endeavouring to crush the little 
band of patriots in Athens, the disdar- 
aga had nothing less in view than pro- 
moting the interests of that government 
to which no mind could attach kself 
from principle or affection, and to which 
he had long been false from secret mo- 
tives of interest or ambition. He had 
even slumbered over the conspiracy, 
that he might have a fuller power to cut 



IDA OF ATHENS. 201 

off by a single blow those who were the 
most likely to oppose his intentions. A 
government which is erroneous in its 
fundamental principles, whose basis is 
false to the laws of nature and huma- 
nity, and whose law is the despotic will 
of the ruling power, or the dogma of a 
bigoted superstition, bears within it- 
self the seeds of its own destruction ; 
and by its natural re-action, becomes 
the inevitable victim of its own tyranny. 
The governors of the provinces in 
Turkey maintain their power by tributes 
to the porte, levied on the wretches 
whom they rule; and when the go r 
vernor, by avarice and rapacity, esta- 
blishes his independence, and seduces 
the troops to his interest, he frequently 
rebels, and testifies his disposition to 
mutiny, by withdrawing his remittances 
to the porte. 

Such had long been the ability, and 
f 3 



m WOMAN; OR, 

such the views of the disdar-aga. His 
talents, his military skill, and popularity 
among the janissaries. His riches, and 
the civil government having, almost 
wholly devolved into his hands by the 
imbecility of his brother, rendered him 
peculiarly adapted for an enterprize in 
which so many others, with qualities 
greatly inferior to his, had succeeded. 
He had won over all the turks of Li- 
vadia to his side. The troops, though 
not numerous, were devoted to him; and 
many of * the opulent greeks who 
hated the government, without cherish- 
ing that love of country which could 
openly inspirit them to oppose tyranny 
for the love of freedom alone, sought a 
change, and sought it under the 
standard of him, whose power they con- 
ceived to be their safety and protection. 
-It was undec. the sanction of circum- 
stances such as these, that the disdar aga 



IDA OF ATHENS. i<& 

had made no remittances to the porte 
for the government, which he and his 
brother held between them for the last 
year ; and his recent triumph over those 
whom he termed the rebels, gave him a 
new influence over his partizans, and 
accelerated the accomplishment of his 
long-cherished desires, to become the 
independent governor of all Livadia. 
The extension of his own individual 
authority, like that of many other mi- 
nisters in states, better organized, was 
paramount to every other consideration. 
It was not the rebels he wished to sup- 
press — it was- not the government he 
wished to serve — it was his own per- 
sonal advantage he was anxious to se- 
cure : they were the passions of avarice 
and ambition he wished to gratify. 
But though he knew he should find 
among the degenerate greeks many who 
would readily sacrifice their country to 
i 4 



! 
3©4 WOMAN; OR, 

their interests or their fears — many 
whom a toy would bribe, or a sound 
seduce — whom the rentage of a petty 
government, or a title of nominal im- 
portance, would influence ; yet he wished 
to blend, to confirm, his influence over 
their minds, by blending his interests 
with that of one of the aichontic fami- 
lies, who still preserved among them a 
shadow of respectability, and the sem- 
blance of their ancient consequence. 

N Upon this principle he had early con- 
nected himself with the vain, the weak 
Rosemeli. And his union with his 
daughter, whose talents and whose 
charms had rendered her so popular 
in Athens, was an object which 
his desires and his ambition equally, 
coveted. 

He was well aware that the religious 
and national prejudices of the archon 
were all against him ; but he believed 



IDA OF ATHENS. 105 

if the fre6 will of Ida made her his, 
those prejudices were to be reconciled. 

She was now in his power; but he 
dared not abuse it to the extent his pas- 
sions and her charms would had him. 
He wished to conciliate the greeks; and 
he knew that a violation of a certain 
sense of honour drove them to frenzy, 
and that even the sultan himself could 
not oppose this ancient principle with 
impunity. 

But he was determined that, before 
the sun set, Ida Rosemeli should be 
his wife ; and he believed he had then 
in his power the means to render the 
act as apparently voluntary on her side, 
as it had long been desired on his. He 
would then, in the moment that his re- 
cent victory had intimidated the greeks, 
present himself to their eyes as the hus- 
band of the noblest of their women, 
whom he would pledge himself to make 
? ,5 



106 WOMAN ; OR, 

his sole wife — as the opposer of their 
tyrants — the friend of their interests — the 
commander whom the troops had elected 
i — and the begler-bey of the province of 
Livadia. 

Such was the result of an hour's- 
secret meditation which he had indulged 
in, after having conveyed the lifeless 
form of Ida to the Acropolis. 

THE NUPTIALS. 

From the oblivion of a transient in- 
sensibility, Ida at last recovered to a 
perfect sense of her misery. She re- 
membered to have been deprived of 
reason near the gate of the Propyleum ; 
and she but too keenly recollected the 
cause that had brought her there. But 
she understood not the circumstances in 
which she was at present involved : she 
was lying on an ottoman, her head was 



IDA OF ATHENS. f 0/ 

supported by an old moorish woman,/ 
and a slave, engaged in chafing her 
temples, knelt beside her. They spoke 
to each other in a language she did not 
understand; but when she addressed the 
woman in Greek, and demanded where 
she was, the slave replied, " In the 
citadel, in the residence of the disdar- 
aga." 

Ida shuddered ! but every other 
feeling was overwhelmed in that of love, 
and grief, and anxiety for their object. 
And after the cogitation of a few 
moments, she requested they would 
lead her to the aga. 

The slave replied, * We have no- 
orders for that, but the disdar shall 
know your wish." And he opened 
the door of an anti-room, and deli- 
vered the message to another person. 
The quick glance of Ida perceived that 
the room was filled with soldiers, an<f 
f 6 



108 WOMAN; OR, 

she was at once struck with the con- 
viction that she was a prisoner ! but 
the woman, whose tender heart trembles 
for the fate of those she loves, is in- 
sensible to every self-consideration. 
Ida felt not the captivity she suspected ; 
she only felt, that the man she loved 
was no more, or was in the power of a 
cruel and implacable enemy. 

She put some questions to the slave, 
relative to the fate of the leader of the 
patriots ; but his answer was still, " We 
have no orders/' She perceived that 
slavery and fear had reduced him to a 
mechanism of feeling, it was impossible 
to work on ; and the disgusting and 
hideous countenance of the old moor, 
prevented her making any attempt to 
awaken her compassion. Though weak 
and exhausted, she arose, and continued 
to pace the apartment in all the anguish 
of suspenseful suffering — her eye burn- 
ing and tearless, was wild and wander- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 109 

ingin its gaze — her cheek sometimes be- 
traying the paleness of death, was some- 
times of the deepest crimson; when she 
sought to speak, her voice was broken 
and sobbing, and her limbs cold and 
trembling, were scarcely able to support 
her. She approached the casement — the 
mists of the dawn were dispersed — the 
sun rose resplendently over the heights 
of Hymettus — the waves of the Engia 
shone brightly to his beams — the ruins 
of the Acropolis were warmly tinged 
with his rich and golden hues, and the 
arms of the turkish soldiers glittered 
brilliantly to his beams. This lovely and 
splendid aspect of nature, rendered the 
moral disorder more dreadful to the 
he r t of. Ida; it conveyed that melan- 
choly feeling which we experience 
when the gay beauty of a smiling dawn 
first flings its beam on the remains of 
that object, whom death has ravished 



110 WOMAN; OR, 

from us, amidst the gloomy shades of 
night. 

This spectacle, which under other 
circumstances would have cheered and 
refreshed her awakening soul, plunged 
her in that despondency, which resem- 
bles the melancholy madness of those 
whom " grief has crazed." 

But she wept ; and those tears so sad 
relieved the agony of her throbbing 
temples. 

At last the Capadilger Keayessa ap- 
peared to lead her to the disdar-aga. 
She trembled with a two-fold emotion — 
she attempted to follow him, but tottered 
back — he took her arm and led her on, 
and they passed through a room, filled 
with soldiers, to the apartments of the 
aga. They reached it, and the captain 
of the guard retires. 

The aga is alone, seated on a selictea 
of golden stuff; he is refreshing himself 



IDA OF ATHENS. Ill 

after the recent exertions he has made, 
with opium and coffee. 

He received Ida with haughty cold- 
ness; and the strength, which the con- 
sciousness of the cause she was about to 
plead had inspired now deserted her. 
She was pale and trembling ; and the 
peculiar tone of his voice served but to 
intimidate her. 

Yet there was a sensibility in her 
disorder, which restored some of that 
loveliness her suffering had chased; and 
the disdar beheld her with secret emo- 
tion. 

" Speak !" he said. "Came you hither 
toseek our protection from the danger the 
infidels have drawn upon themselves ?" 

Ida drew nearer, and faintly repeated, 
* To seek your protection ! but not 
for myself." 

" To implore mercy for your kinsman 
haply? " added the turk. 



112 WOMAN; OR, 

" To implore mercy ;" inarticulately 
murmured Ida, drawing timidly nearer, 
" but not for my kinsman." Then with 
an emotion she could no longer suppress, 
she fell at his feet, she took hold of the 
drapery of his robe, and demanded in 
wild agitation, " Lives the leader of 
the patriots ? And lives he in your 
power ?" 

" The leader of the rebel infidels, 
now lives; 5 ' he returned with rage 
sparkling in his eyes ; while she, whose 
charms inflamed his passions, pleaded at 
his feet for his rival, u but in a few 
hours he will be beyond my power." 

" Oh, God !" ejaculated Ida, and fell 
prostrate before him. 

The Turk resumed his pipe. 

Ida raised her eyes to his ; she took 
his hand. 

" It is so willed," he coldly replies ta ! 



IDA OF ATHENS. 11J 

her eloquent looks; " it is marked in 
the book of fate." 

" Oh ! mercy, mercy !" cries the 
wretched Ida, in an agony of tears. 

" Pray not for those whose death is 
eternal!" replies the disdar, in the lan- 
guage of his koran. 

" Achmet !" she cries, in ardent sup- 
plication, and presses his hand to her 
damp and chilly brow. It trembles 
in her grasp ; yet he coldly added, 
" I turn away my face from the un- 
godly, from the enemies of God, and 
his piophet." 

" Friend of my father 1" she continues 
in broken accents. ** You who once 
did not hate his daughter, shut not your 
heart against her supplication." 

" If you plead for the rebel Osmyn, " 
he sternly added, " you plead in vain;'* 
and he withdrew his hand. 



114 WOMAN; OR, 

Where was now the eloquence with 
which Ida had supplicated at the mek- 
keme, in the cause of humanity and 
Greece; the interest was now too home ; 
the hope, the fear, was too closely inter- 
woven with her existence. She arose, 
she felt her inability; she felt it to 
madness ; and despair marked its terrific 
expression on her countenance, as she 
turned slowly away. 

"Stay!" exclaimed fehe aga. She 
clasped her hands, and turned round, 
with a smile which agony and hope dis- 
puted. 

He arose, he took her hand, and led 
her towards a casement, without suffer- 
ing her to approach it. 

" Behold \" said^he, and directed 
her glance to a little court, which the 
casement of the room hung over. 

It was surrounded by a high wall ; on 



IDA OF ATHENS. 115 

one side an iron grate led to a dungeon 
prison ; in the centre stood the instru- 
ments of torture"; and near it, those of 
death were arranging by the officers of 
the bow-string. Ida held by the aga for 
support, she trembled to dissolution, and 
was speechless. 

The next moment the grate of the 
dungeon opened, Osmyn was led 
forth in chains ; his cheek was pale and 
livid, but the fire of his sparkling eye 
evinced 'twas not with fear ; it was with 
the loss of that blood, which deeply 
stained his garments : the officers led 
him to the torture. Ida saw no more ! 
she uttered a frantic shriek — she would 
have fallen to the earth ; but the aga 
caught her in his arms, and held her 
there. She was not insensible, but she 
was powerless. 

M Save him, 'tis you alone can 
save him," she wildly, but inarticulately 
murmured. 



116 WOMAN; OR 

" I cannot," said the.tu rk, i n a low voice. 

Ida fell at his feet, and raised her hands 
and eyes with a look of wild enquiries. 
, " In a few minutes," added the 
turk, " they lead from the torture, to 
death." 

"Speak*" cried Ida "speak!" 
with a frantic impatience. 

" Be mine •" returned the disdar. 

" I am I" cried Ida madly, " but save 
him ! this moment save him!" 

The disdar made a signal from the 
casement. Osmyn was led back to the 
dungeon. 

" Your voice arrests his fate !" cried 
Achmet, while the eyes of Ida, bursting 
from their sockets, pursued the receding 
form of Osmyn, whose face was hidden in 
his robe, as if some object had blasted 
their gaze, he dared not again encounter. 

"You are mine!" continued the turk, 
triumphantly. 

" I am your's ! and he lives !*' re- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 11? 

peated Ida, with a loud convulsive 
laugh, and sunk upon the selictea. 

The turk now opened an adjoining 
room, and supporting Ida in his arms 
led her to a low desk, at which sat a 
cadi, with some papers and the koran 
before him. Ida mechanically did all 
they desired her ; and signed the civil 
contract of marriage, according to the 
laws of Turkey*. 

She was not senseless ; but the vio- 
lent emotions she had sustained, the 
wild extreme of feeling she had suffer- 
ed, plunged her into a temporary stu- 
por — one image only swam before her 
eyes— Osmyn suffering the torture, or 
dying' by the bow-string ! one senti- 
ment only filled her soul, she had saved 
his life — she had seen him on the point 
of destruction — on the verge of eternity ! 
and she had saved him I 
* See note ( d ) 



113 WOMAN; OR, * 

It had been the intention of the crafty 
turk to seize on the minds of the athe- 
nians by surprize, to present himself at 
once to them as a conqueror, as the 
husband of their popular archondessa, 
and as the independent governor of their 
province ; but his fears suggested to him 
the necessary support of his troops ! 
and, as they were scattered through the 
province, it was impossible to assem- 
ble them till the next day ! he therefore 
swore the cadi to secrecy until he 
should please to absolve him by that 
oath a mussulman holds so sacred! by 
the sanjak-cherif, or sacred standard of 
Mahomet ; and by the black stone of 
Mecca ! 

He then again gave up Ida to the 
care of the moorish woman and the 
mutes to whom he had already con- 
signed her ; and attended her himself to 
the door of that harem, which had now 
become her prison for Life. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 11$ 

The bridal-day of the wretched Ida 
was the last of the ramazan, or turkish 
lent : that season of self-denial so de- 
voutly celebrated by all true mussul- 
men ! that season, which evinces the. 
omnipotence of a prejudice over those 
minds to whom truth and nature are 
strangers ; when the dogma of a puerile 
superstition holds in subjection the in- 
fluence of climate, of habit, and of in- 
clination ; when nature herself stands 
checked ! when the passions, the wants 
incidental to the state of man, are 
shackled and restrained, and when all 
imposes a universal abstinence, which 
ill observe from every natural pleasure, 
or rational enjoyment. Such is the in- 
fluence of a bigoted faith on a people, 
who, with the exception of their term of 
annual fast, are, of all nations, the most 
devoted to the mere pleasures of sense ! 

Achmet was a zealot in his religion ! 
2 



120 WOMAN; OR, 

and while he had determined on the 
secret assassination of Osinyn, he re- 
fused himself the pleasure of again be- 
holding Ida, until the arrival of the mid- 
night hour which, by finishing the term 
of the ramazan, gave him up to the 
free indulgence of passions that acknow- 
ledged no rein, but that which supersti- 
tion imposed. " It is thus that the con- 
science of man, formed upon a specula- 
tive faith, or peculiar mode of thinking, 
reconciles itself to tvery crime but that 
which clashes with its dominant pre- 
judice. It is thus that a religious belief, 
or a moral feeling, which is not con- 
nected with the interests and good of 
society, becomes but the sanction of 
error, and holds out but a partial 
barrier to vice. The love and know- 
ledge of truth, the observance of nature 
and the developement of the affections, 
alone obtain for us that clear and pre- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1*1 

cise idea of virtue, which becomes 
rather a feeling of our existence, than a 
duty of our observance. " 

During the rest of the day, the sight 
of Ida was not blasted by the presence 
of her tyrant; and the protraction of an 
evil so dreaded, became a positive good. 

The stupor, occasioned by the sudden 
mass of horror, which had burst over -her 
devoted head, was now beginning to 
dispel, and to leave her free to the con- 
viction of an insupportable misery; She 
had suffered herself to be led away by 
the moorish woman and the mutes, she 
kuew not where ! Roused from the 
torpor of an insensibility, occasioned by 
the extreme tension of her nerves and 
feelings, she now gazed around her, and 
beheld herself in an apartment furnished 
according to the best taste of turkisli 
luxury. They were those occupied by 
the Egyptian wife of Achmet, whom 

VOL. III. Q 



122 WOMAN; OR, 

lie had the day before divorced. But 
their downy sofas, their Persian carpets, 
their cushions, and their flowers, only 
served as a contrast in the imagination of 
Ida to the chains and dungeon of 
Osmyn ; only served as testimonies of 
the horrid fate she had drawn on herself 
for his sake; a fate contemplated with 
that dreadful feeling which mingles the 
wild distraction of insanity with the 
acute pang of conscious sensibility ; 
whenever the terrific idea struck on her 
soul, she became frantic. Her passion 
for the man from whom she was for ever 
separated, rendered her horror, her dis- 
gust to him in whose power she was 
thrown, a feeling, agonizing beyond the 
strength of her mind or nature to sus- 
tain. She threw herself on the earth ! 
heart-breaking lamentations broke from 
her lips — strong convulsions shook her 
frame ! 'till nature, exhausted, restored 



IDA OF ATHENS. 123 

her to that sullen torpor which, after a 
short time, allowed her the melancholy 
indulgence of considering her wretched 
state, in all its sad relations. She 
thought of the purity and happiness of 
her past life — of her absent and uncon- 
scious father — of her innocent and help- 
less brothers — of the prospects that now 
opened on her days ; and last, and most 
of all, on Osmyn and on love I 

If, in the extreme acuteness of her 
desperation, she had regretted for a 
moment having purchased the salvation 
of him, whom she adored, by a sacri- 
fice so dreadful ! — a sacrifice ! which, 
to a tender, delicate, and feeling woman, 
is not to be paralleled in all the various 
sufferings of human woe, she was, in a 
moment of less selfish feeling, mors re- 
conciled to that immolation, which 
saved the life of the bravest, the most 
virtuous man, and still preserved to her 
-€ 9 



12* WOMAN; OR, 

wretched country, one, who, in days 
more prosperous to its cause, might 
again distinguish himself as its friend 
and champion. When, by one of those 
^udden variations of thought incidental 
to a state so wretched .and suspenseful, 
it struck her mind, that in sacrificing 
herself, she had probably only accele- 
rated the fate of Osmyn, by betraying 
those passionate feelings for his safety, 
so little calculated to assuage a rival's 
wrath ; when she recollected the art- 
' ful conduct by which the aga had at- 
tacked her heart, through the medium 
of objects, purposely perhaps arranged 
to influence her conduct, and the 
promptitude with which . she had re- 
signed herself to the vehemence of these 
feelings that were thus wrought up to 
madness; when she reflected that they 
were both at that moment in his power, 
and that the vows and promises made 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1?5 

to those who were considered as in- 
fidels, would be all absolved by the re- 
ligion and laws of the country of him 
who had pledged himself; then despair 
succeeded to the tumultuous vicissi- 
tudes of affliction, and no faint beam 
of hope or comfort, no shadow of re- 
demption, offered itself to the soul of 
the sufferer; no tear moistened her 
burning eyes ; no sigh relieved her bo- 
som's deadly weight ; while sometimes 
a convulsive laugh burst from her lips, 
and again resigned her to the uncom- 
plaining sullenness of confirmed de- 
spondency. Thus passed a day, whose 
every hour came fraught with some 
new sense of suffering and anguish 
to one formed for each joy and every 
bliss which woman could experience or 
bestow. 

It was in vain that the old moor en- 
deavoured to prevail on her to take 
g3 



}>26 WOMAN ; OR, 

some refreshment ; that by signs and 
gesticulations she pointed out to her 
the necessity of taking the bath, which 
formed part of her suite of rooms ; or 
alluded to the usual ceremonies of the 
bridal toilettes. Ida was insensible to 
her attentions; and moved by her gen- 
tleness, her sufferings, and her youth, 
or wearied by her obstinacy and af- 
fliction, the moor at last gave up the 
point; and while Ida paced the room in 
.an agony of perturbation, or, overcome 
by suffering, lay stretched upon the 
earth, the moor coolly followed her 
with her eyes, or amused herself in 
stringing various beads, with which she 
decked her tawny neck and arms, al- 
ways glancing a look at the door as 
Ida approached it, though aware that 
it was guarded by the mutes on the 
other side. 

At last the evening closed ! — the 



IDA OF ATHENS. 127 

shades of night gathered over the face 
of the heavens !— a lamp dispersed the 
darkness of the captive's sumptuous 
prison ; and the clashing of arms, as the 
sentinels relieved their watch on the 
walls of the Acropolis, the roll of the^ 
turkish drums, or the deep howl of the 
castriani, alone broke upon the silence 
of a season, which every moment ren- 
dered more dreadful to the heart and 
imagination of Ida. 

It was midnight ! — the law of abstf- 
nence was repealed ! — the famished 
mussulmen gave themselves up to an 
intemperance, dangerous as it was bru- 
talizing. The termination of the severe 
and gloomy ramazan, brought joy to 
every turkish heart ; but to np heart 
such triumph as to Achmet-aga's. He 
had suspended the fate of Osmyn till 
his own usurpation was confirmed — till 
he had forced him by torture to betray- 
_c4- 



" , ''■■■•''■' 

128 WOMAN; OR, 

what yet remained to be known of the 
' crushed conspiracy — and tili he had in- 
flicted the greater torture, of convincing 
him he was confirmed in a power 
greater than that he had opposed ; and 
that he inevitably possessed the woman 
to whom he had dared to aspire ! 

It was half an hour after midnight ! 
— the turks of the Acropolis were ab- 
sorbed in the revelries of their festivals 
— the timid greeks were commemo- 
rating, with their tears and secret la- 
mentations, the horrors of the preceding 
night. 

Ida, wholly exhausted by agony of 
mind — by feelings of insupportable 
suspense — by a long fast and want of 
rest, bowed to the influence of that 
imperious nature, who subdues even 
the power of that sensibility which 
seems immortal as the Soul that 4e- 
Y el ops it I 



IDA OF ATHENS. 129 

She slept ! — but it was a broken 
and fatiguing slumber, which dreams of 
terror darkened, or distracted. Roused 
by the slightest noise, a footstep waked 
her. She raised her dim and swollen 
eyes, and the lamp's uncertain light fell 
on the form of the disdar-aga ! She ut- 
tered a faint exclamation, for she was 
feeble and exhausted, and sprung from 
the sofa on which she lay, to a distant 
corner of the room. She looked wildly 
round her, and missed the presence of 
the moor, whom she now sought as a 
protection. 

The aga approached her — she fell on 
her knees, and trembled with a violence 
that deprived her of the power of arti- 
culation. She raised her clasped hands, 
and her tearful eyes were at once ex- 
pressive of supplication and despair. 
Her looks were so characterized by ti- 
midity, by innocence, and by terror, 
G5 



tm WOMAN; OR, 

that her unresisting weakness became 
for a moment her protection and de- 
fence. 

Her life seemed quivering on her 
lips, as if ail power was denied her, but 
the power of dying T — She no longer 
pleaded for a hated rival ! — she no 
longer betrayed the energy of strong and 
passionate feelings in her supplication ! 
—she no longer resembled a woman, 
flushed by powerful emotions, of an 
energetic and ardent character, capable 
of the most extraordinary exertions for 
him whom she loved, or against him 
whom she feared ! — Oh, no ! the blue 
and doubtful light, as it fell on her de* 
licate figure, as it tinged with its beam 
her colourless cheek, gave to her person 
and her countenance the air of a de- 
parted spirit, whom grief had freed 
from its morta-1 coil ! 

The turk was intimidated !-- — he 



IDA OF ATHENS. 131 

trembled, from a selfish motive, lest she 
should expire in those arms from which, 
with a shuddering that shook her frame 
to dissolution, she impulsively recoiled 
— he, released her, and she fell at his 
feet, and bathed them with her tears. 
He was perplexed — he wished her to 
betray some violence of conduct, to 
make some daring resistance, even to 
speak- — he endeavoured to shake off his 
unaccountable weakness — he addressed 
to her some words of tenderness and 
encouragement — he raised her from the 
earth, and supported her in his arms — 
he placed her on an ottoman. At that 
moment a tumultuous noise was heard 
in the anti-room of the apartment they 
occupied : the door was burst open, and 
soldiers, slaves, and women unveiled, 
appeared before the astonished eyes of 
the aga, Among the confusion of voices 
g6 



132 WOMAN- Ofe, 

that resounded on every side, these- 
v words were alone distinctly heard : 

" Osmyn, the leader of the rebels, 
has escaped from his prison ! — The 
Capadilgrr-Keayassa has fled with him! 
and the lady Jumeli has eloped 1" 

The fears which the tyrant ever links 
to the courage of the man — the amaze- 
ment which becomes so powerful from 
being excited in a moment of an opposite 
feeling, seized on the soul of the asto- 
nished aga. The prompt exaggerations 
of his horror-struck mind, represented 
his hopes as blasted in their bloom ; and 
an insurrection, headed by the unvan- 
quished Osmyn— a conspiracy against 
his life, rushed to his scared imagina- 
tion. Self-preservation, vengeance, pa- 
rental anxiety, for a moment superseded 
every other feeling. He paused not to 
enquire into the minute circumstances 
3 



IDA OF ATHENS. 133 

of an event that flushed like blasted 
lightning on his soul. He thought only 
of pursuing the fugitives, and he rushed 
out of the apartment of the harem, fol- 
lowed by the crowd of timid slaves, 
each endeavouring to exculpate him- 
self from the imputationof a treachery, 
of which all would have been guilty, 
had a temptation, adequate to the risk, 
been offered as the purchase of their 
fidelity ; for those whom „fear alone 
secures know no other bond of fealty 
than that which danger seals. 

Idafound herself alone: nodeterminate 
feeling,-no precise emotion, occupied her 
being. She had fallen on her knees; in- 
stinctive murmurs of thanksgiving breath- 
ed on her quivering lips; a confused idea 
of suffering, too great for mortal susten- 
sion, of a joy too pure for human endur- 
ance, fluctuated in her thought; at last, 
her heart, her senses, gave the full testi- 
mony of their evidence to a moment in- 



134 WOMAN; OR, 

credible in its events. She uttered a 
wild and piercing scream of joy. She 
flew like lightning through the apart- 
ments of the harem. She ran to a 
kiosk, and sprung from its open lattice: 
it was low — she reached the earth un- 
hurt. She continued her flight, veiled 
by the darkness — she avoided the en- 
trance to the Acropolis — she endea- 
voured to descend one of its steep and 
perilous declivities. Had she seen her 
danger, it might have become fatal. 
Her limbs were torn and wounded by 
the sharp-pointed rocks and the thorny 
briars ; but she was insensible to pain.. 
She at last reached a turkish cemetry; 
it was the same to which Osmyn had 
led her on the eve of our lady of the 
grotto ; and, amidst the wild confusion 
of her feelings, she recollected the 
event. Trembling to proceed lest she 
should be discovered, she threw herself 
among the long grass that waved over 



IDA OF ATHENS. 135 

a tomb, and directed her anxious eyes 
towards the citadel. Flambeaux- ap- 
peared and disappeared among the ram- 
parts. She perceived a troop of horse 
passing under the arch of the Propyleum, 
She looked towards the harem of the 
disdar's residence, and perceived lights 
gleaming in the room she had left. She 
doubted not but she was missed and 
sought for, and she became doubtful of 
her present security. She reflected for 
a moment on the steps she should 
pursue. She hesitated to return home, 
when her absence must have caused 
amazement and consternation, which, 
should she be sought- for there, would 
sufficiently betray the ignorance of her 
family as to the place of her conceal- 
ment, .She therefore determined to direct 
her timid steps to theshadesof that learer 
home where her happiest hours had pass- 
ed, and which, though now belonging to 
her father, was unoccupied and deserted. 



136 WOMAN; OK, 

Her perfect knowledge of its winding 
shore and cavernous rocks, sanctioned 
her determination. She continued her 
route, therefore, with a spirit of mind 
that opposed itself to a physical weak- 
ness, which increased with every step. 
She reached with difficulty the bottom 
of the rocks of the Acropolis, and at 
that moment the troop passed near her, 
taking their way towards mount An- 
chesmus. She trembled — she shuddered 
— not for herself alone, but for him whom 
the troop pursued. She took shelter in 
the cave of Apollo till the horsemen were 
no longer discernible: she then continued 
to retrace the path she had so often taken 
in days, of unalloyed felicity — she 
involuntary paused amidst the mighty 
ruins of the temple of Jupiter. Its 
solemn grandeur soothed, though it 
could not tranquillize the perturbed 
feelings of her soul. The struggles, the 



IDA OF ATHENS. , 1ST 

vices, and the sufferings of man, faded 
before a contemplation of an object 

which had witnessed the rise and fail 

- 

of the generations of near three thousand 
years. It brought forcibly to her mind 
the littleness of man, whose existence 
is a moment* whose sphere of action 
is a speck. 

But she glanced her eyes towards the 
perystile of the temple, where she had 
beheld thegraceful form of Osmyn, whose 
early superiority had been prophetic of 
those natural powers he had since so 
unfortunately betrayed, and the feelings , 
of the impassioned heart subdued the 
meditation of the reflecting mind. The 
night was now faradvanced, or rather the 
morning was already betraying its grey 
and reserved tints in the horizon. Heavy 
mists arose in columns from the sides 
and summits of the mountains of Hy- 
mettus and Parties, and fell in showery 



138 WOMAN; OR, 

dews on the earth. The light drapery 
of Ida was penetrated by the drops 
which chilled her frame ; her limbs 
wearied, and wounded feet, were scarcely 
able to support her. At last, and with 
great difficulty, she reached the lawn of 
that dear and delightful dwelling which 
she had not beheld since the death of 
her life's best friend, and where every 
thing around her seem consecrated to 
his memory. 

She perceived at a little distance th,e 
spot where she received his last embrace. 
She leaned against a tree for support, 
while she indulged in the melancholy 
contemplation. To the influence of 
feelings so awakened, was added the 
recent irritability and present exaustion 
of her nerves — bodily fatigue beyond 
the power of her delicate frame to sup- 
port — and that debilitating weakness 
which long want of sustenance or repose 



IDA OF ATHENS. m 

brings with it. Faint and sick, she en- 
deavoured to move on, but her head grew 
giddy — her eyes were dim. She strug- 
gled to collect her lingering strength — she 
advanced a few paces, but her chilled and 
trembling limbs failed her — she believed 
herself dying — she thought only of 
those she loved, of the grief her loss 
would occasion to her little family, and 
of the doubtful fate of him who had 
been, though innocently, the cause of 
her death. She endeavoured to reach 
the portico, but the effort was beyond 
her strength — her senses failed her, and 
she fell lifeless to the earth. 



THE FLIGHT. 

It was amidst the glowing beauty of 
a summer's morning, when the case- 
ments of a sick chamber had been 



*40 WOMAN; OR, 

thrown back to admit the freshness of a* 
balsamic air, that Ida awoke asfroma long- 
dream, after a delirious fever, which had 
proved nearly mortal in its effects, and 
which for many days had left her family 
hopeless of a life so precious to its in- 
terests and its affections. 

Perception returned more rapidly than 
health ; but her senses, confssed and 
doubtful, scarcely credited the evidence 
of their own observations. She gazed 
around her, and found herself in that 
apartment she had always occupied in 
her uncle's villa. She looked timidly 
on either side of her couch, and trem- 
bled least the ^vision should dissolve 
which presented to her delighted eves 
the forms of her father, her brothers,, 
and her paramana. The sun that shone 
so brilliantly — the air that breathed so 
freshly -the peace and calm that reigned 
around her — memory threw across Her 



' *. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 141 

imind the last incidents it had treasured* 
The tumult of civil dissention — the 
gloom which shrouded nature — those 
forms so feared, and those feelings so 
•dreadful, all opposed themselves to the 
dear, the tranquil, the social scene, that 
now surrounded her. A few tears escaped 
from her eyes; and she faintly ex- 
claimed, in that timid tone of voice that 
seems apprehensive of being only an- 
swered by the echo of its own faint 
accents, " My father :'! " 

"Ida! my child." Those words so 
sweet, that voice so dear, convinced 
her that her fears w T ere unfounded, and 
her most precious hopes realized. 

Ida had nothing to relate that the 
archon was not acquainted with, save 
the secret ceremony which had passed 
in the presence of the cadi ; but he had 
much to communicate, which Ida lan- 
guished, yet feared to hear. 



142 WOMAN) OR, 

The disdar-aga was no more ! The 
withdrawing of his usual tributes had 
awakened the suspicions of the kislar- 
aga, who had superseded his uncle. 
His intrigues were betrayed to the porte, 
and his destruction was determined on. 

When circumstances do not permit a 
sultan to subdue a rebelling subject by 
force, it is not unusual to send a secret 
executioner, with orders, that should he 
fail in the object of his mission, to 
appear publicly, and to heap honours 
on the rebellious chief, that appearances 
might be saved. The emissary of the 
porte did not fail : he found in the 
discarded wife of the aga an agent 
worthy of executing the commission he 
had undertaken. The Egyptian had 
poisoned the opium which the aga had 
swallowed on the night of the feast of 
the Ramazan ; and he had expired a 
few miles distance from Athens, while 
4 



IDA OF ATHENS. 143 

in pursuit of the fugitives. The truth 
of the event soon transpired. 

The athenians rejoiced over the de- 
struction of their tyrant ; and those of 
his partisans, who had not suffered with 
him, still trembled for their properties 
and their lives. 

The fugitives had eluded all pursuit; 
and a slave, whom fear no longer bound 
to silence, had made a discovery, cor- 
roborated by circumstances, and cur- 
rently received in Athens, that a secret 
attachment had existed for some time 
between Osmyn, who was now known 
to be the son of the exiled archon 
Limbona, and the daughter of the 
disdar-aga ; and that Jumeli had effected 
his liberation, and eloped with him to 
Russia. 

Such was the information which at 
different times was communicated to 
Ida by the archon — by her paramana — 



Mft* . ^OMANi OR, 

*by her cousin Zaphira — and by the bab- 
bling gossips of Athens, whom curiosity 
brought to the couch of the invalid, and 
who delighted to detail a history so preg- 
nant with romance as the loves of the 
rebel slave, and the daughter of the dis- 
dar-aga, to which their ardent imagina- 
tionsadded a thousand fictitious events, 
which at last, by being incessantly re- 
peated, were credited as true, even by 
ithose to whom they owed their invention. 

The love of Ida for Osmyn was known 
'Only to her father — had been suspected 
■only by the d-isdar. 

The civil act which had nominally 
made her for a few hours the wife of 
the disdar-aga, was known only to the 
■old cadi, who, .as one of the chief parti- 
sans of the late aga, had been put to 
death by the reigning vaivode of 
-Athens; her secret therefore was safe, 
and the cause of her agony unsuspected. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 145 

The strong, the unconquerable emo- 
tion, which details so extraordinary 
awakened in the sensible soul and deli- 
cate frame of Ida, were considered by 
those who surrounded her, as fatal re- 
lapses of her disorder ; and Ida, silent, 
suffering, and uncomplaining, continued 
to languish into a confirmed atrophy, 
which baffled all medical skill, and was 
neither guessed at in its cause, nor un- 
derstood in its effect. 

It is a dreadful feeling '! that disease 
of heart ! when the body enters into 
the sufferings of the mind ! and the 
soul sickens, even more than the frame 
it animates — when a deadly weight 
preys upon the springs of being — when a 
sudden recurrence to the bliss, which 
memory has treasured, causes a momen- 
tary start of life and animation; and. 
when the hysteric impulse of a vision- 
ary and faded joy is succeeded by that 

VOL. ill. H 



1 4,6 WOMAN; OR, 

depression of every faculty, and every 
sense, which plunges the whole exist- 
ence into a state of inanimation, accom- 
panied by the lingering traces of sensi- 
bility, sufficient to feel, and to lament, 
but not to redeem or to restore the loss 
of those capabilities for happiness, 
which distinguished and enriched the 
more felicitous days of life. 

The youth, the native strength of 
constitution, and native climate of the 
unhappy sufferer, finally prevailed over 
the struggles which long existed between 
the sensibility of her soul, and the deli- 
cacy of her frame. 

The physical evil was removed by 
time, by nature, and by art— the moral 
had taken a firmer hold; and though no 
murmur of complaint betrayed its ex- 
istence, it lay like a settled agony at the 
bottom of the heart — it resembled the 
evil spirit, with which the fiction of §u- 



IDA OF ATHENS. .. itf 

perstitious fancy torments the ideal ob- 
ject of its own creation — it hung heavily 
on the awakening gaiety of natural 
cheeriness— it mingled with the inno- 
cent pleasure of social intercourse — it 
shadowed the opening prospects of life 
w 7 ith an eternal cloud ; and when the 
heart, with its natural impulsion to fe- 
licity, rushed forward to seize some mo- 
mentary gleam of passing happiness, it 
dragged it back to that state of dark de- 
spondency, which the* destruction of all 
its hopes, and all its joys, had confirmed 
into a habit, that almost resembled a 
natural and irresistible feeling. Ida had 
loved with all the passion of a greek — 
with all the tenderness of a woman ; 
that tenderness, which woman only 
knows ; which is not a solitary and in- 
dividual feeling, but an affection of the 
soul, which incorporates itself with the 
whole moral and natural existence; 
u 2 



, r tmm.h 10 mi 

blends with every thought, mingles with 
every act, becomes, the object of life, 

•and the type of eternity ; associating 
the human feeling,- with the heaventy 
hope, and extending an earthly union*of 
souls to an immortal community of 
spirits ; without parallel in its excesfc, 
and without end in its duration. Sm?h 
had been the love of Ida, such had been 
that pure, ardent, and tender passion, 
which, alive only to the happiness and 

^safety of its object, had sacrificed for 
him, feelings, a thousand times more 
precious than life itself! To have died 
for him would have been an #ct.. pf 
amiable, but of no uncommon heroism ; 
but to live without him, under circum- 
stances of danger, horror and disgust—to 

f>^ave him even from temporary suffering — 
to redeem him from immediate torture, 
even though uncertain of preserving his 
life — to have loved him for himself alone, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 149 

independent of birth, or circumstances 
— to have loved him amidst danger and 
peril— to have risked for him the repu- 
tation she prized, and the loss of that 
parental affection, she so much valued ; 
and yet to have been abandoned, and 
'abandoned for another, before the af- 
fection he professed had worn out itself; 
for another ! who must have so recently 
attached herself to him; to whom he 
must have been so recently attracted, by 
the mere force of personal beauty. 

This was a suffering that in its first 
excess adrnitted of no hope, nosolaee — 
that humbled to the very dust that 
spirit so proud and lofty in its own 
nativedignity — that wounded on the life- 
nerve of all its feeling, that heart so 
'delicate, so tender, and so warm. And 
Ida, capable of every exertion for those 
she loved, unsubdued by the adversity 
winch she combated for another, sunk 
tk 3 



J 50 WOMAN ;0R> 

unresisting beneath a blow which aimed 
only at her own existence. 

When the heart of woman reposes in 
the sweet and certain confidence of re- 
turned affection, and avowed esteem, 
every evil of life sits lightly on her full 
and contented bosom ; Dut that no- 
bility of" mind, that firmness of soul, 
that elasticity of spirit, which carries 
her through the lesser vicissitudes of 
care or of affliction, desert her, when 
she believes herself abandoned, either 
from her own imprudence, or the insta- 
bility of another by him she loved — by 
him who loved her — then the heroine is 
no more, the woman only remains. 

The loss of that heart which had so, 
long held the most intimate communion 
with her own — of that sympathy? which 
enters into every feeling, every emotion 
of our souls — of those little points of 
coiacideace in taste, in sentiment, hi 



IDA OF ATHENS. Hki 

judgment, and even in error— those deli- 
cate and impalpable ties, which bind 
and blend two beings into one common - 
and delightful existence, losses always 
irreparable, are in their first period of 
privation, insupportable, impossible to 
relinquish in idea, and terrific to dwell 
on in recollection. • 

To this destiny of cheerless suffering, 
Ida had no force to oppose ! her feelings 
preyed in anguish on themselves ; and 
reason, while it endeavoured to argue 
away passion, dwelt in fondness on the 
object ; for hope and doubt, that wished 
to be deceived, still suggested that Os- 
myn might have been wronged, and in 
that idea, might still be loyal. But the 
first six months that hung so heavily on 
his flight, and brought no intelligence of 
his destiny, left Ida no hope*; it con- 
vinced her that he, whom she had loved, 
was unworthy of her love, and in that 
ii 4 



conviction, pric^w« 8 % 7 tf otefl? u i 
tantamount t6' v t^' differ ''VifttVs^iJf 
man, and nature, so favolirab^to'&e 
weakness of ardent feel Iri^s/ WecteA 
what reason and hope -were unable to 
accomplish. &ft&*muow>'-ip& 

The pride of the athehiari 3 Va$ ,J &e 
true and generic pride of a teride^arui 
intelligent woman, of one who united 
strong feelings to superior genius, and 
whose first self-estimation, whose con- 
sciousness of the honour her love con- 
ferred upon the worthiest object, pre- 
vented her from becoming debased either 
in the eyes of others, or her own, by the 
indulgence of a degrading weakness 
which found no sanction either from her 
feelings, or her mind, since she now be- 
lieved the one to have been trifled with, 
the other to have been imposed on. 

It was to this pride that her soul, ex- 
hausted by fertile expectation, at last 



IDA OF ATHENS. J 53 

turned for resource and aid— it was tp 
that nature she applied, which,, in calling 
us to happiness by various means, op,- 
poses not her beneficent intentions, by 
throwing us dependent upon one soli- 
tary circumstance for enjoyment, which, 
s inject to the casualties of .human, jLife, 
would terminate hope with its own ex- 
istence. 

Ida, therefore,in that sad suspense,, 
which vibrates between the extremes of 
pleasure, and of pain, extremes so con-, 
sonant. to her feeling, animated, and sen-' 
suous character, gradually regained a 
tranquillity, which, if distant iVoui,ha[> Tl 
pincss was unallied to suffering. 



./ II 



i Jj)evoted equally from duty, as from, 
uffectjp^i, to her little family, she sougfyft 
to distribute among its members, t]ia>t[ 
redundancy of affection, with whicj^ 
her heart overflowed. But there is in 
the heart of woman a source of more 
H 5 



154 WOMAN | OR, 

profound arid'saered sensibility, than the 
mere ties of consanguinity and -habit 
can awaken or engross; and the heart of 
Ida was not that of a common woman. 

The archon had sold his house m 
Athens, and retired to the villa be- 
queathed him by his brother in-law ; 
and those scenes, where every thing re- 
called to Ida the days, of her past fe- 
licity, rather soothed, than aggravated 
her feelings. 

Two years succeeded to that period 
which had been so fatally fruitful in 
events to Athens and to Ida I Her natu- 
rally fine constitution— the delicious 
climate of her native country — the inno- 
cence and regularity of her life, all con- 
tributed to the perfect restoration of her 
health, to the peace of her mind, and to 
the perfection of her genius and her 
loveliness; while, in relinquishing all 
hope for her country, she lost nothing 



IDA OF ATHENS. 155 

of the interest she had ever felt in its 
<4U6e. Her reflections upon its past, 
reeent, and present state, drew her 
mind from a topic of contemplation, 
perhaps still dearer to her feelings, and 
more dangerous to her peace. 

She beheld how much the good and 
happiness of mankind depend upon the 
nature of the government under which 
it is placed ; and that those moral; dis- 
orders in a nation, which, under the 
various and opprobrious names olfac- 
tions, conspiracies, rebellions, and in- 
surrections, distract, afflict, and impo- 
verish a state, are but the inevitable 
result of some evil policy in the para- 
mount power, which endeavours to pu- 
nish and suppress, by violent and cper- 
cive measures, those fatal effects, whose 
causes might be so effectually and. easily 
removed by that beneficent wisdom of 
conduct which should make the good 

»6 



156 mMM-M^ 

of tleJ^^tWe^ect of the govern- 
ment, and sacrifice 1 Ji the intrigues, the 
caBalSnlpWvaie^rtterests of the few, 
to the peace, the happiness, and ^a UI 
tional security of the mnny.' !ii tfeJn'^ooiii 
',. A total relaxation of the soul, ^^. 
the body, is the general consequence of 
if violent %%W mtir&rikte tensioi*W*h©i 
filings ancf't&e nerves ■•; and the reguft 
or a harrassed and exquisite sensibility;: 

isTan apathetic indifference that lethar*? 

... 
gizes the heart, and stills, without anni- 
hilating, its powerful capabilities -for 1 
strong and profound emotion. 

Such was the state of Ida's existence* 

13LI If > 

when the english traveller first became 
known to her ; that state of existence! 
when the soul, anxious to lay hold of 
any object that can restore its wonted 
powers, becomes the less scrupulous in 
its selection, and clings to the remotest 
shadow of a sympathy, which promises 



IDA OF ATHENS. 157 

an object to excite, and to participate in 
its dormant sensibilities, . 

-v^ere were so few with whom the 
mind of Ida could associate itself— her 
thoughts, her ideas, her opinions, her 
ffeelijQgs, | were so far removed from the 
common level of reflection and senti- 
ment) that she would have lived an alien 
ejve^ii^ffsogi^ties more polished and 
more intelligent, than that in which she 
was condemned to dwell. But between 
the accomplished, the dangerous stranger 
and herself, she observed certain coin- 
cidences of feeling, rather than of 
opinion ; of sentiment, rather than of 
idea, more necessary to the state of her 
heart than any sympathy merely intel- 
lectual could be. His manners so polish- 
ed, so insinuating, so novel in their 
effect, captivated her fancy : and if the 
want of a full developement of his cha- 
racter and talents, deprived him of that 
2 



158 WOMAN; OK, 

power over her mind, which the heroie 
Osmyn had obtained — that passionate 
cast of his character, which so nearly 
resembled the exquisite sensibility of 
her own — the elegant fondness of hi* 
manner, so capable of awakening a reci- 
procal tenderness ; and the refined cul- 
tivation of taste and understanding, 
which so eminently distinguished him y 
soon became a necessity rather than a 
relief, and afforded her a resource against 
the poignancy of her feelings, the tedium 
of her life, and the ignorance, fatuity, 
and prejudice of those who surrounded 
her. ' Yet so deeply had the disap- 
pointment of a first love sunk in-te 
her heart, that the reserve,, the timi- 
dity, the delicacy of her too sensitive 
character increased, rather than dimi- 
nished, with the experience she had ob- 
tained. She trembled again to hazard 
her peace by surrendering her very ex- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1*9 

istenee into the possession of another. 
She felt she was not calculated for the 
indulgence of a moderate sentiment ; 
and she blushed to acknowledge, even 
to herself, the full capability of tender- 
ness, which lay secretly stored within 
her; heart. It was thus that the english- 
man found her involved in all the bash- 
ful .diffidence of a simple and inexperi- 
enced recluse — trembling for herself— 
fearing for others — systematically sup- 
pressing her feelings — impulsively be- 
traying her emotions — modest, yet ar- 
dent- -timid, yet animated — blushing 
that she felt, and feeling that she blush- 
ed—still cherishing a latent sentiment 
for one, whom she believed unworthy — 
still repelling a growing approbation for 
another, whom she trembled to confide 
in; not daring to love, yet incapable of 
indifference. The conduct of the eng- 
lishman, the freedom of his principles, 



which no arbitrary idea of more 
could sanction, and which the^self^.e^t 
teem and delicate pride of the woma^ 
recoiled from, steadied the vibration of 

- TfiOyD on 1 . 

her feelings. _ ^ fa • 

Abandoned by him she had adored—- 
insulted by him to whom she had given 
her esteem, Osmyn and the stranger, strik- 
ingly different in their pursuits and .ha* 
bits, their characters and manners, held 
almost an equal place in her estimation, 
though not in her heart. It perhaps de- 
pended upon the after events of their 
lives (and above all. upon the feelings, 
by which they suffered their conducts. 



to be governed and regulated), w 
became the arbitrators of. her destiny., 
and confin ed their own happiness or 
misery, b) the loss or possession of her, 
who, from the singularity of her charac- 
ter, taken with all its accessary circum- , 



1 he departure of the englishman re- 
signed Ida to that tranquil tone of life 
fro^ 1 wiii oil 1 Tits' presence had for an in- 
^elval withdrawn her; but those feelings, 
so calculated for strong and varying 
emotions, resumed not the calm and 
passive made into which time, necessity, 

and the unvaried routine of her recent 
, , , , . i dauonJ 

existence had plunged them. 

ir 1ttiejjP 'were again seen impelled to 

their original and native bias -they had 

been again called to love, to pleasure, 

att& n to suffering ; and they had again 

bee l n rendered sensible of their own 

extent and power, and of the inefficiency 

of every other faculty or circumstance, 

to bestow true happiness ; but such as a 

free and perfect intimacy with a mind 

that thinks, and a heart that feels with 



met WOMAN ; OR, 

our own, bestows ; all else is the drapery 
and contingencies of life : that alone is 
the spirit and the soul, the principle of 
felicity, and object of existence. Had 
not a former and a fatal experience ren- 
dered her timid and suspicious— had not 
the terror of sufferings, such as had 
already crushed her to- the earth, placed 
a guard upon the sensibility, and taught 
her to suppress feelings, to restrain hopes 
already so deceived and blasted, the con- 
duct and departure of the stranger would 
have plunged her into a miseiy more 
profound than that which had already 
attacked the very principles of her being; 
for her capabilities for happiness and 
affliction had matured with her years; 
and an hourly, improvement of intellect 
ami developement of sensibility, render- 
ed a sympathy of mind, and of affection, 
more necessary to her very life, and gave 
at once more weakness and more force 



IDA OF ATHENS.' 1«* 

to her character, in proportion as ten- 
derness and energy grew, and added to 
each other's influence. 

But Ma, suspicious of herself and him, 
secured by the brevity of their inter- 
course, and warned by the freedom of 
t^ose manners, which increased her 
modesty and timidity, while they charm- 
ed iier imagination, did not surrender 
the tenderness of her heart with the 
ardent admiration it was impossible to 
restrain. The englishman never could 
have excited that character of passion 
m her bosom which Osmyn had awaken- 
ed. In her feelings towards the latter, 
there was more of sublimity — of imagi- 
nation ; her tenderness was not alone de- 
voted to the man, her homage was offered 
to the hero. She was herself glorified in a 
passion for an object who stood alone 
unequalled and unrivalled. The feel* 
ings the englishman inspired, and might 



164 WOMAN; OR, 

have confirmed by time and perse* 
verance, were not of this cast ; -Hilt* f the*y 
■were not without their influence, their 
interest, and their charm. Ida might 
have been supremely blest as the 'elect- 
ed object of either, but in different de- 
grees. For ever separated from both, in 
her own belief, betrayed by one, mis- 
construed by the other, she thought 
she had the power to subdue the in- 
terest that each had excited. With feel- 
ings harrassed and exhausted — with a 
heart wearied and disappointed— with a 
pride wounded in its dignity — and- a de- 
licacy of sentiment that shrunk from a 
recurrence of the mortifications she had 
endured, she sought to forget she had 
any thing to forgive ; and no ioriger 
wooed back indifference as a cOfripl&a- 
tive relief, but courted its return as' a 
positive good. Yet she felt the loss of 
that intercourse of mind, that reciprocity 



IDA OF ATHENS. 165 

1 -• "is emu yd heimtinoo svjsrf 
of feeling (even where a perfect coinci- 
dence of opinion did not exist), she had 
lately enjoyed, and felt it with a pang 
whose acuteness nothing could subdue, 
but the occurrence of extraordinary and 
unexpected circumstances, more over- 
whelming in their influence than eysp 
the feelings of regret she still cherished. 
A few weeks only had followed the de- 
parture of the englishman, when every 
selfish sentiment was lost in anxiety and 
apprehensions for those, to whose safety 
and happiness the private and individual 
feelings of Ida were always offered a 
voluntary and willing immolation. 

It was in the decline of an autumnal 
evening, that season so dear to the mild 
affections of the heart, to the tranquil 
enjoyment of social intercourse, that the 
family of the archon Rosemeli, assem- 
bled in the gymnasium of his daughter, 
were alarmed by a universal uproar, 



*»• WOMAN; OR, 

which seemed to ascend from the lawn 
that surrounded the villa ! Not a mo- 
ment was left for a timid or suspenseful 
conjecture ; a party of turkish soldiers 
rushed into the apartment, and, obedient 
to the orders of a subaltern officer, seized 
on the archon. # r v 

It was in vain that Ida 1 , terrified, yet 
endeavouring to veil her fears from those 
dear objects for whom they existed, 
threw before her trembling parent the 
consecrated shield of a daughters arms. 
Her questions were unanswered— her 
supplications were unheeded— her father 
was torn from her embrace ! and, amidst 
the noise and uproar of a turkish rabrMi 3i?r? 
•the archon was carried to the rifrkkemS ' 
of the vaivode, who had succeeded in 
his office to the brother of AchmeV n,i 
aga. 169 d 9fjb 

Ida, on foot, and unveiled, followed^ 
her father. She too well knew that t# 



IDA OF ATHENS. 167 

he accused in Athens was to be con- 
demned; that in Turkey there existed 
not established Jaws— -no acknowledged 
code by which an individual might in- 
struct himself and defend his rights ; and 
that, under a government where inte- 
grity was destruction, and injustice lu- 
crative, the victim of power had neither 
redress nor appeal from the voice of the 
magistrate. 

She guessed,, but did not positively^ 
know the extent of her father's impru- 
dence, into which he bad been led by^} \ 
the spirit of party and disappointment, 
rather than by his love of country, or 
hatred of tyranny ; but, while she ac- 
knowledged his errors-, she felt not the 
less for his sufferings ; and she followed 
him with the air of a maniac, but with 
the heart of a daughter. 

At last the prisoner is brought to the 
cour^t of the vaivode ; it is crowded,, 
4 



168 WOMAN; OR, 

1 .1 f .1 1 



and the appearance of the archon and 
'his daughter excites a tumult: — the 
cries of the clerks, and the staff Of the 
cadi, restore order. 

The chief magistrate is seated on a 
cushion, on the ground : he is smoking 
his pipe, and twisting his beard, with 
an air of perfect sang-froid. 

A clerk reads aloud the deed of accu- 
sation, and the archon is accused of 
corresponding with the enemies of the 
porte, of assisting to fit out a vessel for 
the flotilla of Lambro Canziani, and of 
other treasonable deeds against the 
state; which, partly true, and partly 
false, were merely alleged against him, 
to furnish the shadow of a pretence for 
seizing on his property, and despoiling 
his residence of those valuables which 
he had displayed with an imprudent 
extravagance, that thus drew down its 
own retribution. It was in vain that he 



IDA OF ATHENS. 169 

attempted a defence ; it was in vain 
that Ida, speechless and overpowered 
by a new and unexpected sense of 
suffering, appeared in tears and in dis- 
traction, at the feet of the magistrate ; 
the archon was ordered to the dungeon 
of the square tower, in the arsenal of 
Lycurgus ; and his death was only de- 
layed till the torture should force from 
him the secret of his supposed hidden 
treasures. 

To the tower he was followed by his 
unfortunate daughter ; she believed that 
the keenest sense of all other sorrows 
was summed up in this. The interest 
which the misfortunes of a father ex- 
cite, is so distinct from every other ; 
the instincts of nature — the affections of 
habit — the sentiment of gratitude, all 
blend their influence in that dreadful 
pang, which rends the heart for the 
sufferings of him to whom we owe ex- 

vol. 1 IX, h 



170 vvosir:, OR, 

istence, with whom bey fate and feel- 
ings are so intimately associated. 

The prisoner, his daughter, and the 
guards, had now reached the arsenal o|, 
Lycurgus. It is a square and lofty, 
toweT, formed of coarse masonry, and 
ils sole entrance is a low iron grate, 
arched with ponderous stones %^ ^ 
sentinel is placed before it; his lofty 
stature — his half-shaded and lowering 
countenance — the loss of an eye, and 
a complexion almost as black as the mus- 
tachoes which cover the lower part of 
his face, in depriving Ida of a last hope, 
nearly deprives her of life and reason. 
She is terror-struck by the ferocity of his 
. appearance ; but when her father enters 
the subterraneous passage of the tower, 

• 
* This tower, according to Cbandler, and other 
travellers, is always used as a place of confinement 
for state delinquents. 
2 



IDA OF ATHENS. ' 171 

she rushes impulsively after him — the 
sentinel rudely pushes her back — the 
turkish officers applaud his vigilance 
'end fidelity — still she is not repulsed. 
She hears the moan that bursts from her 
father's heart— she throws herself at the 
feet of the sentinel, and only intreats to 
be allowed to share her father's prison — 
he puts her back with his carabine, and 
exclaims, '" That he must have room to 
walk ; and that if he did his duty, he 
would fire at the first person he should 
find lurking about the tower." 

Ida raises her eyes to heaven, and 
walks slowly away ; she fears to irritate 
by importunity, at a moment when she 
has importunity only to offer. She re- 
members the venality of the turks, and 
she bends her feeble steps towards 
home that she may collect all the 
irioney and jewels they possess, as ata 

I 4> 



1T2 WOMAN; OR, 

peering to the vigilant and ferocious 
$entinel. 

But scarcely had she proceeded as $£v 
3S the theatre of Bacchus, when a man, 
stealing from beneath its ruins, beckons 
her towards him. Ida was in that state 
of suffering when nothing worse is to be 
expected, and when the heart clings to 
every incident as to the foundation or a 
hope ; yet she turned tremblingly to- 
wards the person who addressed her. 

" Lady," said he, " do you forget 
the object of your former charity ? — I 
am the poor greek whom a few years 
back you relieved as I returned from 
prison with my mother and brothers? 
after having been liberated by that gal- 
fib* youth !"_ 

"Ah!" interrupted Ida, "I know 
you now 1" — And a thousand recol- 
lections rushed to her heart, and a tor- 
rent of tears flowed from, her eyes. 



ct 



IDA OF ATHENS. If; 



" There is not a moment to be lost }*' 

continued the Gre%k, looking timidly 

around him ; " tryst yourself to me, ,fJ I 
mr&fUel * r , 

will convey you to my hut, where 1 

have already conducted your brothers, 

,and ^your paramana : it lies near the 

quarter of the city called Placa ; thete 

''3 W 31 9810 « Of] . J 

you will at least find safety for the 

Of VoilUOT-ipa y. iU ooil/f J.».. M 

present I , 

B«lO flOlJ WL nil-*,' 

" But why not return to my fathers 
-OJ '^i^n J J 

house?" cried Ida, while new terrors 
seized on her imagination. 

" Alas, archondessa ! " he replied, 
" it is by this a pile of ruins. — It is de- 
spoiled of every thing by order of th% 
chief magistrate. — The turkish soldiers 
are now pillaging it r 

Ida replied not— she stood mute and 
motionless. The greek', with an air of 
respect and compassion, drew her arm 
through his, and led her on. The dark- 
ness of night was falling on every sicte. 
I 3 



They passed through the city unob- 
served, and the greek informed her 
that his brothers were gone to sea, that 
his mother was dead, that he himself 
followed the profession of an agojatc, 
or carrier, and that hi« hut, his mules, 
and himself, were devoted to her ser- 

vice - Hoid L 

By the very order of things, it is a 
rare circumstance when a good or evil 
deed does brjng with it, in its result, a 
concomitant reward or punishment ; a 
principle of right can scarcely produce 
an effect that does not accord to its own 
excellence. 

Ida wept some gracious tears, to find 
in "the object of her former bounty a 
friend in her existing sufferings. She 
w r as indeed now almost wholly friend- 
less ; for a government, radically bad in 
tjie very basis of its structure, diffuses 
its noxious influence upon the most pri* 



IDA OF ATHENS. ifs 

vate feelings and intimate associations of 
life ; and almost all the ties which time 
and tenderness had twined round the 
heart of Ida were now broken through 
the evil policy under which her unhappy 
country laboured. 

Her nearest kinsman, the old Dro*' 
gueman, had died of a broken heart 
during the exile of his son. Stamati, 
whom the interest of Ida had recalled to 
his native country, had again volunta- 
rily abandoned it for the service of 
Russia, and his mother had accompa- 
nied him. Many of her relations had been 
killed in the insurrection, and the im^- 
minent danger of her father left her now 
without a single friend to whom she 
could venture to apply, save him whom 
gratitude (that sentiment so consonant 
to nature) bound to her service. 

The wearied, the exhausted, the 
heart-broken Ida, at last reached the 
1 \ 



-/Tin. 

176 WOMAN; OR, 



m sbl w ifBvs'iq oj \ryr » fit 

hut of the honest and grateful Ste- 



phaniki. 

He led her into a little room, which 
was faintly illuminated by the embers of 
a dying fire, over which the paramana 
was uttering her feeble complaints, and 
stifled sobs. At sight of Ida she shrieked 
and rushed into her arms. Ida wept on 
her maternal bosom, faintly exclaiming, 
" My brothers ! — my beloved, my un- 
fortunate children ! 

Kyra led her to a corner of the hut, 
where, interlaced in each other's arms, 
they lay asleep on some dried leaves." 

" Poor souls ! " exclaimed Kyra, " they 
are almost dead with fear and horror, 
and have wept themselves asleep !' 

Ida stooped, and kissed their brows, 
and her tears mingled with those which 
had not yet dried upon their glowing 
cheeks. 

It was in vain that Stephaniki and 



' IDA OF ATHENS. 177 

■ •. i 

Kyra endeavoured to prevail on Ida to 
take such refreshment, and such repose 
as the hut of the benevolent carrier af- 
forded ; she endeavoured to conceal 
from them the dreadful agony of her 
mind, and she at last succeeded in pre- 
vailing on them to leave her for a few 
hours to an undisturbed reflection, that 
she might ruminate on the conduct it 
would be best for her to pursue, re- 
lative to the liberation of her unhappv 
father. 

Kyra at last lay down beside the 
children, Stephaniki shared the repose 
of his mules, and Ida, to recruit her 
strength, threw herself upon a few 

dried leaves that strewed the floor of 
• uLtP^s *3vtg«ii»ni I) is 

It was in this lowly state that the 

lovely, the pleasurable, and tender 

greek, who had hitherto only breathed 

a perfumed air, and sought repose from 

15. 



178 WOMAN; OR, p 

couches of the cygnet's down, lost aJV, 
sight of her own sufferings and helpless, 
situation, in contemplating the miseries 
and afflictions of those she loved. >m 

She endeavoured to re-animate the 
latent energies of her being, to collect 
her scattered senses, and to take relief 
from the resources of her fruitful and 
exhaustless mind. She knew that tha 
fluctuating property of her father, like 
that of the rest of his unhappy country- 
men, was almost entirely personal, 
which commercial exertion had accu- 
mulated, which luxury dissipated, and 
opportunity renewed ; this property was 
now confiscated, and their sole depend- 
ance was the fortune deposited by her 
late uncle in the hands of an english 
merchant. f msSd »U 

But that was of no service in the pre- 
sent instance ; and Ida knew that br#^ 
bery alone could save her father's life. 



IDA'0F'ATHE!&, l^ 1 

She had on her bosom a diamond cress,. 
mispended by a chain of gold : the cross 
and the chain had belonged to her 
mother ; she always wore them beneath 
her tunick ; and as she knew the guards 
were changed every hour, she hoped 
that this rich and valuable trinket would 
obtain an influence over the sentinel of 
the present watch, which nothing could 
effect, in her belief, over him whose fe- 
rocity had nearly deprived her of life 
and hope together. To share the prison 
and the fate of her father, was a com- 
parative good to one who knew there 
was no evil so insupportable as that 
which no feeling of sympathy shares or 
alleviates. 

It was mrdnight: a faint moon shed' 
its beam through the casement of Ste- 
phaniki's hut. Ida arose, and wrap- 
ping round her the cloak of Kyra, with 
M 



180 -IdMN; OR, 

a noiseless step she stole from the 
humble asylum which benevolence and 
gratitude had afforded, her. 

When the soul is elevated to acertiemi 
degree of feeling — when the heart is 
agitated by hopes and by fears for an 
object of its tenderness and love — a 
force almost supernatural seems com- 
municated to the frame — fatigue is 
unfelt — exertion is not counted on 
— and the body appears to become 
immaterial as the spirit by which it is 
animated. ■'" - !i ^'?u>. 

Terror for a father's life subdued in 
Ida every other sense of feeling. She 
had already walked many miles; but the 
activity and emotion of her mind de- 
vested her of all personal consideration ; 
and naturally timid, delicate, and nervous, 
she now, without a fear or a feeling for 
herself, proceeded s on her long and 
lonely way to the prison of her father. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 181 

All in Alliens was dark, silent, and 
s desolate; its narrow lanes were only lit 
up at distant intervals by the faint 
glimmer of a lamp placed before the 
statue of the sacred Panaghea ; and no 
sound broke on the stillness of the hour, 
but the distant foot-fall of the turkish 
f>atrole, or the hollow cry of the cas- 
triani from the battlements of the 
Acropolis. 

She at last approached a cluster of 
ruins which lay near the arsenal of Ly- 
curgus. Their awful grandeur was in- 
timidating, yet she entered them as the 
shortest path to the tower. At the 
same moment a mysterious figure, wrapt 
in an impenetrable disguise, glided from 
beneath a broken arch, and passed 
closely by her. Ida advanced a few 
steps with an involuntary motion — then 
paused to recover strength and breath. 
Everything around her was calculated 



1S2 WOMAN,- OR, i-.Gf 1 

to touch the imagination, and mislead 

the faocy. 

She stood near a range of brokea.:: 
columns, whose shadows were darkly ; 
traced on the earth by the pale light of 
a declining moon, and ere its transient 
beam was obscured by a mass of clouds, 
she thought she perceived the shadow 
of a human form darkening the 
snowy surface of a marble pedi- 
ment that lay near her. She start- 
ed, and turned round; the person 
who had passed the arch stood behind 
her ; she bounded forward ; she cast 
back a fearful glance, and the figure was 
involved in the darkness of , the ruins; 
but the moon breaking suddenly through 
the clouds, again discovered the figure 
slowly tracing the footsteps of Ida. 
Her fears and suspicions were nowr- 
wound up to agony. J9g 

"The last moment of. my existence 



IDA OF ATHENS. 185 

is perhaps arrived," she mentally said, 
" and I shall die without having saved 
my wretched father from a dreadful tor- 
ture, and an ignominious death." 

Terror, at once real and fanciful, de* 
prived her of all power to proceed ; 
she paused and clung to a pillar; the 
figure gently retreated, and beckoned 
her to follow. 

Amazement mingled with the terror 
of Ida; she withdrew her timid eyes," 1 
and attempted to hurry on, when she 
felt herself arrested by the arm. A 
faint exclamation broke from her lips. 
The mysterious stranger endeavoured to 
lead her back towards the darkest part 
of the ruins. She struggled with a lin- 
gering effort of strength in his grasp.— 
He released her, pronouncing the word, 
" Ybur father," and moved away. This 
sentence, the motion of retreat that 
accompanied it, threw her off her 
guard. 



184 WOMAN; OR; 

" Lead on" she said ; I follow you !'* 
and he proceeded to a gloomy recess 
which had been part of the cell of an 
ancient temple : it was strewn with the 
fragments of broken columns, now par- 
tially overgrown with dank grasses and 
flu viatic weeds* Ida trembled almost 
to dissolution ; yet, with the sound of 
her father's name still vibrating on her 
ear — with the hope of his deliverance 
swelling in her heart, she still followed 
her mysterious guide; the spirit of the 
anxious daughter sustaining the timidity 
of the fearful woman. At last the gloom 
and silence of the place overcame her — 
she paused, and faintly said, " I will go 
iip further/' The stranger took her 
hand, and placed his finger on his lip. 
Thus doubly engaged, the wind, as it 
rushed through the ruins, blew aside 
his robe, and Ida, beneath the garb qf 
a. dervise, beheld the shewy dress and 
shining zatagan of a turkish janissary/. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1S5 

tl ; . uoy ^qIIoJ I l . «p hfift I g 

Sue raised her astonished, her iear- 
88939;. vmooiB. • i ' , 

ful dance, and met the terrific eve that 

^ &iw-, pi ■ 

scowled on her a few hours before from 

Sfff [IJIW BW93J8 8&W 

under the turban of theturkish sentinel. 

WOil ,S' r •■■■ 

She believed her death inevitable, and 
she fell to the earth. The stranger 

J20iIllJ3 D' . 

jraised her in his arms — he placed her on 

to nisj') -of 

the fragment .of a pillar; and his hand, 
as it clasped hers, trembled with an 

'J9VIi9f> ?lff to Sao] ~7fi9 

emotion that Ida believed to proceed 

llrjg. 9rie t J; r 

from a transient struggle between guilt 

am To Jftiqg 9nl ij fi» ? t 

and conscience. A minute had nearly 

elapsed in a state that seemed to vibrate 
between life and death. Ida was speech- 
less, and her companion seemed not in- 
clined to break a silence so awful and 

l 

impressive. It was interrupted by the 
sound of many voices — a guard of sol- 
diers entered the ruin's. Feelings of in- 

stinct now over-ruled every other in the 

to • 

bosom of Ida ; and that she might suffer 

an immediate and an easy death, was the 



186 WOMAN; OR, 

only thought or hope that occupied he* 
fainting heart ; but the guard had passed 
close by the entrance of the cell, with- 
out seeming even to observe its singular 
inhabitants. The last echo of their foot- 
steps died a,way — the hand of Ida still 
trembled in that of her companion — his 
glance was rivetted on her face — all was 
inexplicable mystery. 1 He arose, and 
led her back in silence to the entrance 
of the ruins, and putting a paper into 
her hand, said, in a low and deep voicej 
' ' Return from whence you came," and 
instantly plunged into the deepest ob- 
scurity of the ruins. 

Ida stood for a considerable time 
motionless ; she could not collect her 
senses. — she doubted their evidence; 
and yet raised her heart and eyes to 
heaven, in the fervor of a gratitude that 
involved every other feeling : her hopes, 1 
though vague, were cheering; and her 



IDA OF ATHENS. v 187 

fears were lost in amazement and in 
joy. She rather flew than touched the 
earth ; and twice, as she cast back an 
eager look, she beheld the figure, the 
mysterious dervise, following her at a 
distance. She no longer looked on him 
as a persecuting spirit, but as a guardian 
angel. 

She at last reached the hut of Ste- 
phaniki. She had been nearly two hours 
absent— its inhabitants still slept. She 
trimmed a lamp that burnt on the 
hearth, and took the sybil leaf from her 
bosom ; a ring fell as she opened, it. i^ft 
was a ring her father always wore- 
and the few lines the paper contained, 
were written with a pencil in his hand. 
They were as follows : 

1fj " My child ! in a moment of dread- 
ful extremity, heaven has vouchsafed 
us its protection. On receipt of this, 



1*8 WOMAN; OR, 

fly with your brothers to the eastern 
coast of Livadia, near the jtstimtbt$£ 
Euripus — a cave in the side of theprov 
montory of Cynosura will affot{t$@Bo£|i 
asylum rfllwe meet, which may h&ffil& 
few hours after your arrival there.<g ggw 

" JoASIK ROSEMELI." 

*&v(A aljtf? a ttd giifriicpiq rallsa 

jrjt.Jda, transported beyond all power of 

expressing her joy, flew to awaken Ste- 
phaniki, Kyra, and her brothers. Ig^ja 
moment the intelligence is communi- 
cated to her delighted and astonished 
auditors ; and light throbbed those hearts 
which, thus awakened to the suddeajpy, 
retained no sense of recent sufferings but 
such as served to exalt the existing 
happiness. ?[s3*; 

All was now animated bustle and 
eager tumult in the hut of Step.haru^i, 
which prudence could not regulate, and 
hope, revived, almost roused to frenzy; 



IDA OF ATHENS. 189 

forio many of the relatives of those who 
had assisted the Russians had been put 
to death in Greece, that the lives of 
Rosemeli's children hung upon a thread 
almost as fragile as that by which his own 
was suspended. 

Stephaniki immediately busied him- 
self in preparing his mules ; while Kyra, 
with the cautious foresight of a prudent 
housewife, filled his borachio, or water- 

tg, with provisions for their little 
rney. Rice-cakes, dried olives, and a 
flask of vin-de-loi, were all that the stores 
of Stephaniki afforded ; and these Kyra 
carefully collected ; while Ida, alone, 
still trembled between her hopes and 
fears, with all the tender, though con- 
cealed perturbation which touches the 
heart of woman, where the feeling and 
the fate of its dearest affections are 
concerned. 

The athenian boys, early taught to 



W WOMAN; <fcc. 

curb and manage the most unruly steed, 
were fully adequate to master the mules 
of Stephaniki. 

The eldest was his sister's cavalier; 
the youngest an arch boy, and not 
averse to the charge, took Kyra behind 
him. Stephaniki, laden with the bo- 
rachio, took the lead as guide : and the 
misty grey of a faint dawn, favoured 
the departure of the fugitives. 

They soon cleared the suburbs of 
Athens, and found themselves in the 
plain by which it is surrounded. Still 
were their eyes incessantly turned back; 
but the tears which dimmed their glance, 
sprung not alone from timid apprlehei^ 
sions; for though friendless; unfotW 
nate, and proscribed — they were still 
Atnemans . ?z5 j0fl n iiS \ a ^ y^A» c iioiieo 

iuwolg .^IfjoKj « — «u£btyj) 
>\t ;ntt moil* ,m9<! 



.. 



Bslum pi) /ft VATPG 

TO THE THIRD VOLUME. 

JO IT h ('.'■■ 

Ixurfoi! ===== 

■ • ■ 

(a) j). 5. The subjects of the Ottoman empire, 

to avoid their estates falling into the hands of the 
grand signers/ call the heir of their adoption, 
the child of their soul, and a writing is drawn up 
by the cadi, which secures him the bequest. 

(b) p. 62. The following eloquent and pathe? 
tic paragraph is copied from the manifesto, which 
was written in modern Greek, and in Italian : 
41 We ho^>e to deliver, from the hands of the 
cruel Mahomedans, our empire, which they have 
usurped ; our patriarchate, and our holy religion, : 
which they have profaned ; to rescue the descend* 
ants of Athens, and of Lacedemon, from the ty- 
rannic yoke of ignorant barbarians, under which a 
nation, whose genius is not extinguished, still 
groans — a people, glowing with the love of li- 
berty, whom the iron chains of barbarism have 
not degraded — who have constantly before their 



192 NOTES. 

eyes the images of their ancient heroes, and by 
whose example their warriors are animated. Our 
magnificent ruins speak forcibly to our minds, and 
proclaim our pristine grandeur — our innumerable 
ports— our beautiful country — the sky serenely 
smiling on us through the year — the ardour of 
our youth, and even of those advanced in age, all 
attest that nature is not less bounteous to us than 
to our progenitors." 

(c) p. 87. " Limbona porta les plaintes des 
grecs et les preuves des. violences qu'on les avoit 
faite un kislar-aga a qui les revenus d'Athenes 
apportient. 

" II optenu tout a qu'il vouler, fit mettre quel- 

ques-unes des aga's en galere, les priverent de 

toutes leur charges et les fit banir d'Athenes. 

Limbona y revint triomphant." . 

Spon. 

(d) p. 117. Marriage is purely a civil act, ac- 
cording to the laws of Turkey ; and it is not even 
necessary that the bride should be present at tb« 
ceremony. 

END OF VOL. III. 



Punted by J. a. Dewick, 
46. Barbican. 
