HOWARD CASTLE

A ROMANCE.

Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.
HOWARD CASTLE

OR A

ROMANCE

FROM THE MOUNTAINS.

IN FIVE VOLUMES.

By A NORTH BRITON.

What is vain life? an idle flight of days,
A still-delusive round of sicky joys,
A scene of little cares and trifling passions,
If not ennobled by some ddeds of virtue.  THOMSON.

VOL. I.

London:

Printed at the Minerva Press for

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-STREET.

1817.
TO

THE PUBLIC.

In the following pages you will
neither find a history of an op-
pressed princess, an extravagant
duchess, a prince, or an unprin-
cipled lord. It is a simple narra-
tive, written for amusement, dur-
ing a summer spent in the High-
lands of Scotland, in which the
Authoress was removed to a dis-
tance from her friends, and beyond
the reach of books. The offspring
of the solitary moments was thrown
aside when she returned to the
busy haunts of men, and, in all
probability, would have been con-
signed to oblivion, had a friend
not cast perhaps a partial eye
over the work, and declared it
worth of a better fate. Human
nature is prone to vanity; the
flattery of approbation took hold
of her; and she ventures to launch
a book into the world; if it can
amuse the idle for a few hours,
as much as it did her in writing
vii

it, her end will be answered, and,
she trusts, no harm will ensue
from the perusal.
HOWARD CASTLE

CHAPTER I.

In the country of - the name of Bou-
verie is well known; it did not derive its
fame merely from the antiquity of its anecs-
tors, but from the active part many of the
family took in their sovereign's cause, whose
distinguishing marks of favour will immor-
talize them for ages.

The only support of this illustrious house
found himself, at the age of nineteen, pos-
sessed of a splendid fortune, by the death
of his father, who was killed at the very
moment victory was sounding on his side.
The laurels he so gloriously obtained did
not die with him, as an elegant monument
was soon after erected in Westminster Ab-

VOL. I.
2       HOWARD CASTLE.                      1
'bey, at the expence of government, justly
setting forth the merits of the hero.

   His son, Edward Bouverie, was early in-
spired with martial ideas, and wishes to 
follow his father's warlike footsteps. His 
mother, who was an officer's daughter, died
when he was but eight years old; after
that period, he was brought up in the camp, 
and received most of his education under
the inspection of his father, whose hours of
relaxation were happily employed in in-
stracting his son. He lived to see him ob-
tain the rank of captain in the regiment he
commanded, beloved by the offices and
privates, and an honour to his country.
When the war was concluded, he returned
to England, with the rank of lieutenant-
ecloel; anxious to visit the seat of his an-
cestors, and a large estate which was an-
nexed to it, he retired to the country as 
soon as he possibly could.

   Roachwood Castle, having been uninha-
bited for many years, was become entirely
a ruin; i was surrounded by an extensive
park, which was beautifully diversified and
broken, but which required the taste of the 
owner to improve. The estate had been
managed in the most advantageous man-
ner by the agent, for pecuniary emolument.
The embellishing the grounds, which were
naturally beautiful, he reserved for the pro-
prietor; if he should prove a man of taste,
and fond of fine scenery, he was convinced
the extensive domain of Roachwood would
be an invaluable source of amusement.  He
was not mistaken.  Colonel Bouverie ap-
proved of all he had done, and anticipated
pleasure as he planned numberless improve-
ments.  The wood, which literally encum-
bered the ground, as he had given repeated
injunctions not to remove a tree during
his absence, was a land of wealth; but he
found his presence upon the spot was ab-
solutely necessary, before the axe was laid
to the root of the noble spreading trees,
which be lamemed the cruel necessity of
levelling with the ground.  A river, which
serpentined through the park, was almost
hid by the surrounding woods; he cleared
its banks, leaving a few of the finest oaks to 
break the scenery from his house, which
rose like magic on an elevated situation,
leaving the sombre old castle in the back-4                                                   HOWARD CASTLE.

ground, which proudly reared its towering walls, and seemed to look in sullen grandeur on modern architecture. Its noble remains showed what a magnificent building it had been in former days; but time, that powerful oppressor, had converted the once-splendid apartments into the habitation of any birds which chose to shelter themselves from the inclemency of the weather. The towers and battlements, which seemed to have been of immense strength, and to have bid defiance to the assaults of men, were not mouldering to decay; the creeping ivy had taken possession of its walls; whilst the neighbouring peasants had long declared, and firmly believed, that it was haunted by spirits, and that the ghost of old general Bouverie might be seen there every night.

The colonel directed his steps towards it; he found the path had been long unfrequented, and so much grown up with weeds, as to render it almost inaccessible. There was a carriage-road to the family burying-ground, which was in a chapel attached to the castle; but those gates were only opened when a death happened. There was                       
                  HOWARD CASTLE.                5

part of the building sufficiently entire to
admit a person's going through it, and still
some heavy iron-nailed doors remained to
grate upon their hinges; it was with the
utmost difficulty the colonel could proceed;
but one of the towers, his attendant inform-
ed him, being entire, and from which
there was a most beautiful view of the ad-
jacent country, tempted him to surmount
every obstacle; he at last succeeded, and
attained the wished-for spot, which fully
repaid him for the scramble he had had
The prospect surpassed every thing he had
ever seen.  The moat, which had surround-
ed the castle, was almost entirely filled up,
from having been totally neglected; sedges 
and weeds in most parts hid the remains
of water.  Where less rubbish had fallen
into it, the water-lily spread its luxuriant
leaves on the surface, and surprised the 
colonel with the beauty of its flower;
everything arrested his attention.  He
was by nature fond of her productions; for
the first time he had bent his thoughts
towards admiring the vegetable creation.
A camp was not the place for botanical
studies; he was totally ignorant on thesubject; but the simple flower of the water-lily, he thought exceeded in beauty any plant he had ever seen before.  In the delightful shades of Roachwood, the colonel spent the summer, perfectly secluded and perfectly happy, watching with delight the various improvements, which displayed, in glowing colours, that his taste was good for the embellishing his domain, and that his house not only displayed elegance, but every comfort.  When his plans were completed, he introduced to his delightful retreat a wife, in every way calculated to render it a perfect paradise.  

Lady Clementina Montague, sister to the earl of Radnor, was the most admired female who graced the fashionable circles; her beauty and accomplishments gained her general admiration, and her amiable temper and disposition many friends.  The colonel was much envied when he carried off the prize from the gay world; he, perfectly sensible of his good fortune, shewed, by his unwearied attentions, the gratitude he felt; he hung with rapture on the praises she bestowed on each favorite walk, or admired prospect; all became doubtly de-lightful to him, as they met with un-
bounded approbation from his companion.

Happily did they spend their days in
this calm seclusion; but alas! short were 
their duration. Lady Clementina's con-
stitution was weak; she drooped; her
strength failed, and the beautiful tints of
rosy health faded in her cheeks; but the
sanguine hopes of her friends revived
by the birth of a daughter. this event seem-
ed to dispel very fear, as she appeared to 
regain her looks and spirits; she bloomed
for the summer, but autumn's chilling blasts
caught hold of her tender frame; the hec-
tic colour settled in her delicate face, and
all her alarming complaints returned with 
double violence; "the lustre languished
in her eye, dawning a dimmer day on hu-
man sight, and on her cheek, the residence
of spring, pale omen sat, and scattered
fears around."

The colonel watched with anguish the 
progress of the fatal disease, which was with 
hasty steps destroying his gay prospects;
rapid was her decay, "yet hope, that 
sweet delirium of the soul," would at times
dawn a faint ray of sunshine across hisgloomy thought. He still flattered him-
self her youth, and change of climt,
might restore his blasted happiness, as he
saw her spirits raised by fever, and heard
her cheerfully laying plans for future days,
which she was doomed never to see. The
catastrophe proved that all was an illusion.
She expired in the arms of her wretched
husband, and left him a prey to the deep-
est sorrow. The little Clementina was his
only tie to the world; for her sake he wish-
ed to live, and to subdue the grief which
consumed him. She knew not the cause
of her father's dejected countenance, or
the reason of the tears which would often
flow as he gazed upon her, and trace in
her features a resemblance to her mo-
ther's.

Lady Radnor, who had been at Roach-
wood at the time of lady Clementina's
death, returned to Colnbrook immediately
after the funeral, taking with her her
young niece, who she proposed should be
under her care and protection, and be edu-
cated with her caughter, lady Elenora,
who was very little older than her cousin.

Lord Radnor remained with the colo-HOWARD CASTLE. 9

nel until the first effusions of his grief were
abated; as soon as his composure was in
some degree restored, he solicited his ac-
companying him to Colnbrook. Anxiety
to see his child aided the arguments used
by lord Radnor; he yielded to his entrea-
ties, and, with an aching heart, quitted his
now melancholy habitation, which had been
so lately the seat of every domestic joy.
He paid frequent visits at Colnbrook, and
each time felt the struggle more severe at
parting with Clementina, whose innocent
prattle alone could drive painful recollec-
tion from his mind. The blank he felt in
the absence of his little darling made his
home appear doubly irksome; her com-
pany, he thought, might beguile the tedi-
ous hours, which now hung heavy on his
hands. At last he resolved to propose her
returning to Roachwood with him; but
lady Radnor painted, in such strong co-
lours, the cruelty of his plan, to separate her
from her companion Elenora, that he gave
up his self-gratification willingly, if it was
beneficial to his child. Most of his time
was spent at Colnbrook; he watched, with10 HOWARD CASTLE.

anxiety, lady Radnor's temper, which gave him secret uneasiness. To her own family she was imperious, harsh to lady Elenora, and her other children; her manner was more mild to Clementina, but still it was not what her father perfectly approved of.

A war breaking out at this period roused all the colonel's martial spirit; he longed again to wield arms in his country's defence, and again to triumph over its foes; but the idea of quitting England, uncertain when (or if even) he might return, and leaving his best treasure with a person who might not render her happy, was a thing impossible. As long as he was near, and could watch over her with the keen eye of parental love, he felt no dread of her situation being comfortable; but to leave her so exposed, when it was out of his power to protect her, was what he could not do. He had often heard lady Clementina mention, in the highest terms, a relation of hers, who was the abbess of the convent in France where she had been educated. To her he was resolved to trust the important charge of his daughter. Lady Radnor, he was afraid, would be of-   HOWARD CASTLE

fended, but he would run all risks, rather
than of Clementina's happiness. She was
eight years old, an early period to separate
her from her nearest relations; but his pre-
sence being immediately required abroad,
left him no a moment to hesitate : as he re-
solved to accompany her himself to France,
he could not delay acquainting lady Rad-
nor with his intention. The storm he ex-
pected exceded any think he had formed
an idea of. She upbraided him, in the most
bitter language, with ingratitude to her,
and injustice to the child, who would be 
the victim of his capricious temper. He
left the house, unable to bear the violence 
of her resentment, secretly exulting in hav-
ing snatched his daughter from the misery
of being exposed to such a temper.

 Having apprised the abbess of his inten-
tion, he quitted England with his little
charge, and fixed her in a situation to his
wish. The abbess, rejoicing in having a
child of her favourite lady Clementina's
under her care, promised all the colonel
could desire. He left his darling with
painful emotions, but perfectly at east on 
account of her happiness.12 howard castle.
Having received the command of a regi-ment,the colonel left his country,in hopes
of returning a conqueror. For ten years he signalized himslef by many brave deeds,
till an unfortunate ball wounded his knee so severely,that he was obliged
to quit the army, and return to england,loaded with honour; but being stopt in his
career,at aperiod when he expected to see his coun-try triumph over its foes, was a most cruel disappoinment. The pain he suffered from his shattered limb, added to
his mor-fication,was more than his natural good temper could bear; his spirits, which had been raised to the highest pinnacle by suc-cess,were now sunk into mortified de-jection. He retired to Roachwood, cha-grined and soured resolving
in the mo-mentary fit of despair which had seized him,to spend the remainder of
his days in solitude. The pleasure of strolling about his former favorite walks
was now denied him; he could only move with great diffi-culty from his bedroom to
the library,where he lay upon a couch, his leg sup-ported by cushions. The general
felt his situation very lonely, it being near the   HOWARD CASTLE.

end of October, and the evenings long.
His eyes were weak; he could not amuse
himself as he used to do, by reading by can-
dle-light; he wished, above all things, for
the company of his daughter, but he dread-
ed her feeling the dullness of the situation.
Away from every friend suitable to her
age, her only companion an old man, whose
spirits were worn out with pain, and who
was unfit in every way to amuse a girl
of eighteen, her tender years did not suit
with being a nurse, or being buried alive
in the country. He however argued with
himself upon the subject, that it was im-
proper she shoudl remain in the convent;
there, except in the companions suited to
her age, she led as dull a life as she could do
at Roachwood. He, after mature delibe-
ration, wrote to the abbess, thanking her
for the maternal case she had taken of his 
daughter, and expressing his wish for her
to return, lamenting that he could not
guard her on her journey, and personally
to express the gratitude he felt for the un-
remitted attention she had paid to her.
He next addressed the object of his fond-
east love, in the most flattering terms, tell-14                                HOWARD CASTLE

ing her how he longed to fold her to his heart; an ended by entreating she would quit France as soon as she possibly could. He sent an old and faithful servant, who had been the companion of his various campaigns, to escort her to England; he did not fear any accident happening to her that was in the power of James to avert. 



                                   CHAPTER II.

The letter from the general worked a tumult in the breast of Clementina; the joy she felt at hearing from him, and the pleasure the prospect of again seeing him gave her, were predominant feelings, till the idea of separating from the only friends she had ever known damped the sensation of joy which had filled her bosom.  The abbess had been to her as an indulgent, fond mother; how should she support bidding her farewell?  Her young companions flocked around her, and expressed the unfeigned sorrow they felt at the unexpected andHoward Castle                            15

unwelcome intelligence, which had quickly spread itself though the convent, of her orders to prepare to quit it; their grief affected Clementina; she wept with them, and sincerely lamented the separation which caused such sorrow.  The abbess, who suffered the keenest regret, and felt as if she was on the point of parting with a favourite daughter, suppressed her own feelings, in order to raise the drooping spirits of her young friend; she expressed the gratitude she felt at the general's having so long permitted her to remain under her care- "had your father," said she, "not wished for your company, when he was living in retirement, would your pride not have been wounded?  You ought to rejoice in being blest with such a parent, and happy in having received such a letter."

Clementina assured her she was, and that the prospect of having it in her power to render her father's life more comfortable, gave her secret satisfaction; the only sorrow she felt was in parting from her and her companions.

"This separation," replied the abbess, "I have always had in view; you have16                                   HOWARD CASTLE

been longer under my care than I had reason to expect, and I have experienced much pleasure in the flattering marks of your affection and attention which I have invariably received since you have been the inhabitant of those hallowed walls. your must be a faithful correspondent, and tell me all the occurrences of your life, if they are ever so trivial.  I shall be deeply interested in your welfare.  Your letters will soften the pain of absence; and, in return, I will give you what perhaps you will think very dull, a little motherly advice; you can expect nothing amusing from this mansion.  Wipe off those pearly drops, my love, and let not your gentle bosom be ruffled at leaving a dismal nunnery and an old woman for the gayer scenes of life. Your companion. Lady Augusta Sydney, does not feel so melancholy with the idea of quitting me in a few days.  I have been secretly planning, ever since the arrival of your father's letter, your accompanying her to England; being under the care of her governess, and being with your friend, will be the most agreeable and proper manner you can travel; and es-HOWARD CASTLE                            17

corted by your father's veteran, I trust you will reach his paternal arms in safety."

Clementina, who was pleased with the proposal, quickly imparted it to lady Augusta, who was highly delighted; her spirits were elated from the same cause which depressed Clementina's.  The prospect of leaving the convent was a source of joy to her; she was possessed of high spirits and a lively imagination, not at all calculated to enjoy the dull routine of a monastic life.  She was the only daughter of the duke of Beauclair, and destined, from her high birth, to move in the first circles. From her infancy her education had been the great study of the duchess, who wished her to shine as a brilliant star.  Nature had given her an agreeable countenance, but no beauty; the defect must be made up by high attainments.  A few years in France, guarded by the strict eye of an English governess, was deemed necessary for the acquirement of fluency in the French and Italian languages; all the accomplishments which could be taught, she was mistress of.  Tired of the same thing over again, as she had nothing new to learn, her young heart18                                   HOWARD CASTLE

panted after variety and gaiety; active and lively, she longed to appear on a stage where she knew her rank would one day make her cut a conspicuous figure. 

The order of her return had been received with transport, and with the expectation of her brother's arrival, who was to escort her to dear England, was eagerly looked for; the idea of Clementina's returning with them to her native country added to her pleasure; she was completely happy, and wondered the same feelings did not animate the countenance of her friend, and make her move with more alacrity in preparing to quit confinement. 

The day before their departure, the marquis of Clemaire arrived at Rouen; lady Augusta was rejoiced to see him after a separation of four years, in which time he had made the tour of Europe.  His appearance was much in his favour, as he was extremely handsome; but no person could be long in his company without perceiving that he was not unconscious of his own attractions, which  many Parisian belles had found irresistible.  He had led a dissipated life in Paris, and had met with suchHoward Castle                           19

success amongst the ladies, that he flattered himself he could make a conquest of 
every female he chose. 

His first salutation to his sister, after her joy was a little subsided, was so declaring he was shocked at finding her so robust; it was rustic beyond conception, to have the appearance of good health; a tender delicacy was the thing he now admired; languishing blue eyes with a delicate form, which seemed unable to bear a winter's campaign, was the style now in high ton. 

Lady Augusta felt surprised with this address, as her appearance seemed to be the principal object with her brother; but as his affection for her she did not doubt, she answered him with perfect good humour, that he should be introduced to a travelling companion next day, who would surprise him with her beauty, as she exactly answered the description he had given of what was requisite to gain universal admiration- "Take care," added she, laughing, "of your heart, otherwise it will yield to Miss Bouverie's charms before we get half way to Calais."

The marquis thanked her for her cau-20                                   HOWARD CASTLE

tion, at the same time saying he did not suppose it was at all likely he should be so captivated, as his heart was almost proof against a common attack, and he did not suppose it could be a very serious one made upon it by such a novice; however, he returned to his hotel with a new source of entertainment for the evening, which he dreaded would have hung heavy on his hands, having no companion to pass the hours by enlivening conversation.  Forming schemes of amusement for the ensuing journey employed his thoughts, as a little flirtation, pour passer le tems, was what the marquis highly approved, and practised when he had an opportunity. 

Lady Augusta had opened an agreeable prospect to his view, and set his busy fancy to work about the fair companion whom she had prophesied would attract his attention and admiration; his hopes were not sanguine as to her beauty, which her sister had extolled so much; but having no variety would make him satisfied with a more ordinary conquest than if he had been in the gay crowds which he of late had frequented.  In this manner wereHOWARD CASTLE                       21

the marquis's thoughts employed anticipating amusement with Clementina, who was mourning over the separation awaiting her; never once had she thought of the brother of lady Augusta, until she entered her apartment in the morning, in order to hasten her, as she expected the carriage every moment, when the pale face, languid air, and swollen eyes of her friend, convinced her she had passed a sleepless night. 

"It was not kind in you, Clementina," said lady Augusta, "so effectually to disfigure yourself in so cruel a manner; when I told the marquis what a beauty he was to travel with, I gave him unnecessary advice to put a double guard upon his heart, which was otherwise inevitably gone; you have rendered my precaution perfectly absurd, as you have contrived to make yourself frightful.  Was it from a charitable motive, out of pity to my brother?"

"I am surprised," replied Clementina, "that you are in such spirits, when we are so soon to part with our numerous companions, and particularly from our friend the abbess."

"Oh!" replied lady Augusta,"you are22                      HOWARD CASTLE.

mourning over what has quite the contrary effect upon me.  I respect the good old woman, but I rejoice to get out of the convent; England and dear liberty have innumerable charms for me; and pardon me if I think you stupid, if the prospect does not give you pleasure."

A stop was put to their conversation by their entering the parlour, where they found the abbess seated ready to receive them; her countenance expressed the sorrow which she felt; but all her grief was centered in parting with Clementina.  She received her under her care from the arms of her father, almost in infancy; she admired her beauty, and the strong resemblance her little features bore to her favourite lady Clementina; she was proud and pleased with the trust, and faithfully did her duty, as she had promised to the general.

Never was there a more engaging pupil: the extreme beauty of her face and person which was cast in nature's fairest mould was the least part of her charms with her aged instructress; her pliant temper, gentle and mild as her lovely countenance, and her affectionate heart, which beamed in herHOWARD CASTLE                             23

intelligent eyes, rivetted her love upon her; she received her instructions with avidity, as her understanding was clear and comprehensive, and her memory retentive.  The abbess believed there never was a more perfect femal, or one possessed of so many perfections, mental and personal.  Each year she had been with her she had received fresh proofs of her amiable temper- of the strength of her intellectual powers- the elegance of her manners, which were peculiarly attracting; but, above all, the most pleasing part to her, the strong attachment she had shewn to her, and the distress which was painted in her expressive countenance at the idea of leaving her; silently she stood, listening probably to the last advice she should ever receive from her revered friend. 

Lady Augusta, who had placed herself in a window during the expressions of regret which were passing between the abbess and Clementina, exclaimed, in an accent of joy- "There is my brother! We must not detain him."  So saying, she turned round to her friends, who had assembled to bid them adieu.  She heartily shook24      HOWARD CASTLE. 

hands with each, assuring them of her re-
gard; and, thanking the abbess for her care
and attention, flew out of the room, with 
light steps and a cheerful countenance, to
meet the marquis.

   Clementine, with a slow and melancholy
pace, followed, having taken a silent, sor-
rowful leave of those she was most attach-
ed to, leaving them all mourning her de-
parture; they were soon seated in the mar-
quis's carriage, another following with lady
Augusta's governess, and her mind; the
retinue was completed by Clementina's
faithful guard and the marquis's valet. 
They set off at a furious rate, leaving the
convent soon behind, and to lady Augusta
every dull thought. Clementina sunk in 
a corner of the carriage, overpowered by
her feelings; it was the most severe trial
she had ever experiences, but what lady
August could not understand; at last she 
exclaimed-" You will not give me an 
opportunity to introduce my brother to
you."

   Clementina took her handkerchief from
her eyes, and made an inclination of her
head, but articulation was denied her; she              HOWARD CASTLE.               25

heard the marquis say something very civil,
but she felt no wish to attend either to
his good wishes for her composure, or lady
Augusta's derision at her affliction. She
addressed much wholesome advice to her
disconsolate friend, who heard her use
many strong arguments upon the impro-
priety of indulging such grief, when she
had an affectionate parent ready to fold her
to his heart-- "I, my dear Clementina, was
taught to look up to you as a pattern of
propriety; but upon this occasion my ex-
ample ought to be followed. I look for-
ward to my arrival in England, not with
pleasure, but rapture; I feel, as I dare say
a bird does, when it first escapes from con-
finement, freed from its horrid cage and
cruel captivity, rejoicing again to roam at
large in the open air with dear liberty. I
respect the abbess; but it certainly is my
duty to love my parents better."

  "Certainly," whispered Clementina.

  This little assent encouraged lady Au-
gusta to go on-- "The nuns are extremely
innocent and very good."

  "As far as you can judge," said the 
marquis, smiling.

"I do verily believe they are," said lady
Augusta; "but they are not companions
suited at all to my disposition.  Your little
life, before you were put under the guid-
ance of the abbess, was not the happiest in
the world; exposed to the ill-nature of your
aunt, what a reverse did you experience,
when you entered into the cloistered walls
you were a pretty plaything for the whole
community, and every sister strove to in-
gratiate herself into the little heretic's fa-
vour, and the head petted and spoiled you
tor ten years."

The first smile the marquis had seen
upon the face of Clementina was at those
words.—"You will make your brother
believe he has a very froward child to tra-
vel with; if I have been a pet, he will cer-
tainly regret having such a burthen upon
his hands, as there is nothing half so disa-
greeable."

"Clear up then," said lady Augusta,
"and let us again see you with your usual
animation; the cloud is dispersed at the
convent, and all are again serene and mov-
ing like clockwork. Oh, how I dislike the
regularity with which every action is con-
duted! You know in one day what will
happen during your life, if you were to re-
main in it. That horrid monotony I call
mere existence -- nothing to agitate or in-
terest you. My arrival roused you in some
degree from your torpid state; but I have 
a great deal yet to do." 

"My life," replied Clementina, who was
roused by this attack, "is not likely to be
more gay at Roachwood than it was in the
convent. My father, I am afraid, is not in 
a state of health for me either to leave him, 
or mingle with society. His letter re-
questing my return is, that he may have a 
companion in his solitude."

"Can you suppose," cried lady Au-
gusta, "that your father will be so selfish 
as to bury you alive at Roachwood, how-
ever he may be charmed with your com-
pany? No; we will carry you off by force
to Carnsworth, if entreaty will not do. 
Brother, will you not lend me your aid?"

This question roused the marquis from 
a reverie which he had sunk into. The
beauty of Clementina had not struck him
as his sister had predicted, but he thought28                HOWARD CASTLE.

her an elegant, interesting figure; of
her face he could hardly be a judge; but
the cold indifference in her manner pre-
cluded all his gay plans of amusement, and
he was not at the trouble to join in the
conversation which his sister had kept up.
He assured Clementina that his exertions
should not be wanting, and that surely the
general could not keep from the world
what would be its leading star.

  Clementina looked at him with sur-
prise, not perfectly comprehending the
meaning of his speech.

  The marquis continued--"The prospect
of having more of Miss Bouverie's compa-
ny is such a temptation, that a plan has
struck me of seeing you safe home, and to
give lady Augusta an opportunity of trying
her rhetoric upon the general. I know he
is an old acquaintance of the duke's, who
highly esteems him; we may perhaps
tempt him to pay Carnsworth Castle a vi-
sit. I recollect my father regretting they
had not met for many years. What plea-
sure he would feel at again meeting with 
an old friend! and what pleasure I should
derive from having been the means of again

introducing them to each other! Self, Miss Bouverie, I own, is not a little interested in this plan.  I shall certainly prolong our pleasure in the present instance, and probably secure a considerable share of it in future by, I hope, both enjoying your company at Roachwood and at Carnsworth." 
   Lady Augusta, with pleasure sparkling in her eyes, applauded her brother's scheme, and Clementina expressed the satisfaction she really felt.  Before they reached Calais, her wonted cheerfulness was restored; she felt at perfect ease with the marquis, whose fine speeches amused her; they were the first she had ever heard, and made as little impression as possible; she was the very worst flirt he had ever met with, as at no moment did she seem elated with his attention, or gratified with his admiration.  Her manner was exactly the same when she conversed with the marquis, or with his sister.  This singularity attracted his notice; she was the first female who had treated him with such perfect indifference, and he never wished more to please.  They met with no occurrence worth narrating; the winds favoured them in their passage, 30  HOWARD CASTLE.

and they arrived at the stage where it had
been proposed Clementina should proceed
to Roachwood, and her friends to Carns-
worth.

Lady Augusta wrote a few lines to her
mother, explaining the reason why they
accompanied Miss Bouveric to Roach-
wood, where they meant to remain one
night. The governess and attendants pro-
ceeded on their journey, and Clementina
and her friends rapidly moved towards her
paternal home.

As they approached nearer to her fa-
ther, her spirits evidently became agitated;
she was on the point of meeting with al-
most a total stranger; their correspon-
dence had even been irregular ; should she
come up in any degree to the high expec-
tations he had formed of her, as, from his
letter to the abbess, she easily perceived his
hopes in regard to herself were very san-
guine ; is she should be disappointed, how
mortified and grieved she should be ! She
resolved, again and again, that no exertion
should be wanting on her part to render
him happy, and to amuse his solitary hours.

The marquis regretted each moment                HOWARD CASTLE.           31

that passed, as it was bringing their de-
lightful journey nearer to a close; her
countenance had regained its beauty,
which at first had been so obscured by
grief, that he could not allow she surpass-
ed many of his favourites. The simple 
elegance she possessed was a novelty to
him, and he thought her particularly en-
gaging and interesting; and before they
reached Roachwood, he contemplated, he
believed, the loveliest woman in existence.
He saw the agitation she was in, and se-
cretly wondered from whence it arose.

                CHAPTER III.

At last they reached the park gates, and the
feelings of Clementina became more and
more agitated; it was the beginning of 
bleak November; every thing wore a 
gloomy aspect. The trees were stript of
their covering--the fields of their verdure;
the river looked muddy and rapid. The52                     HOWARD CASTLE


old castle struck her as she passed it with a melancholy sensation; she sighed as she looked round; the many sombre months she probably might be obliged to spend in this retreat occured to her; her friend was to be only one night at Reachwood; what a blank she should feel without her society! A tear startedl she was ashamed of the weakness she betrayed, but she hoped her companions had not observed the emotion, which was momentary. She was become too interesting an object to the marquis not to watch each varying expression of her intelligent countenance; he observed the pearly drops, and heard the half suppressed sigh with wonder. "What can creat this agitation?" thought he, "and my breast is almost in as great a tumult, although I do not give vent to my feelings in the same manner. One cause must actuate us both, as both must feel the approaching seperation, perhaps with equal regret."

The carriage stopt; the marquis handed his fair companions out of it, and ventured to press the hand of Clementina to his                 HOWARD CASTLE                 33

lips with forvour. She was in too great
confusion to resent the liberty, as she was
hardly conscious of what was passing.
   The general was seated in the library, 
which was not to the front of the house; 
he was deeply interested in the perusal
of a new publication, and did not hear the
noise of their arrival, until he was roused
from his studies by the entrance of the 
most lovely female he had ever beheld. 
He had not time to contemplate the divine
object; how his heart bounded with joy
when he heard her exclaim - "my father!" 
and found himself locked in her arms. The 
tears, which she had long struggled to sup-
press, now flowed unrestrained. The ge-
neral yielded to the emotion which her
appearance had excited; he saw in Cle-
mentina the image of her mother; days of 
unspeakable happiness rose to his recollec-
tion; they had been few in number to the
sorrowful ones which he had spent; the
presence of his child awakeened various emo-
tions; he had locked forward to her return
with all the ardour of a fond parent; yet
a fear would steal across him that so
                      C334 HOWARD CASTLE.

litary life he led might not suit her age
If he saw her pining in secret after gaiety
and amusement, he should feel more mi-
serable than ever. He pressed her to his
heart whilst he gazed on her mild beautiful
face, which at once convinced him all his
fears were erroneous; her gentle, affectionate
manners, and the benign expression of her
countenance, were sufficient to convince
him the flattering accounts he had received
from the abbess of her amiable disposition
were not exaggerated. They spent some
time together before Clementina recollect-
ed lady Augusta and the marquis were in
the drawing-room. The general begged
she would go immediately to them, and 
apologize for their absence, and that he
would join them as soon as he was suffi-
ciently composed.

Clementina found the marquis out of
all patience; he took her hand, saying--
"Our time of being together is now so
very limited, that I was miserly of your
company, and had nearly broken in upon
your tête-à-tête, which you protracted to an
unconscionable length." She again begged
pardon for their apparent rudeness; butHOWARD CASTLE.   35

their mutual agitation at meeting had
rendered them incapable of appearing be-
fore them.

"I see," said lady Augusta, "that you
have been in tears; what an odd way of
expressing pleasure!"

"It is a common way, I believe," re-
plied Clementina. "The meeting with
my father, I may almost say, was a first
introduction; seeing me created painful
feelings to him."

"Painful!" repeated the marquis;
"could contemplating nature's fairest pro-
duction create pain?"

Clementina continued, without attend-
ing to his flattering speech-"My ap-
pearance reminded him so strongly of my
another, that he was agitated beyond mea-
sure, which, of course, affected me."

As she finished the sentence, the ge-
neral entered, and gave lady Augusta and
the marquis a most flattering reception,
thanking them, in the strongest terms, for
conveying his daughter to England, and
for accompanying her to Roachwood; and
for accompanying her to Roachwood; and
giving him an opportunity of personally
to thank them, was a particular gratifica-
tion to him: he was charmed with both. 
Lady Augusta's cheerful animation pleas-
ed him -- the marquis's conversation amused
him -- his polite manners charmed him. In 
short, he was delighted with every thing,
and every body; his spirits were raised be-
yond their common pitch; he had not felt
so happy since the death of lady Clemen-
tina. The general introduced his daugh-
ter into a room, which had been particu-
larly occupied by her mother. It was 
surrounded with neat bookcases, filled
with the most admired authors, in Ita-
lian, French, and English; there was an 
organ and pianoforte, which the general 
had taken care should be put in order pre-
vious to her arrival, and got from London 
modern music. There was a large bow
window in the room, which commanded
a view of the castle, the park, and the ri-
ver, which fell in a beautiful cascade, un-
der a bridge half buried amongst trees. 
The scene looked bleak from the season 
of the year; but in summer, when nature
is clad in her gay attire, it was pictu-
resque and beautiful. She was delighted
with her apartment; and when it had theHOWARD CASTLE. 37

addition of her drawing materials in it, she
should find a constant fund of amusement.
The general expressed the pleasure he felt
at seeing her so pleased.

The marquis, who was an enthusiast in
music, entreated she would try the intru-
ments. He placed a seat before the organ,
the keys of which Clementina run over, and
sung a little Italian air. The melody of
her voice, and the exquisite taste with
which she managed it, surprised the mar-
quis; he expected to hear a common song,
sung in a common manner; how was he
astonished when he heard the sweetest
notes! they were full and harmonious, of
great compass, yet soft as possible. He
hung over her chair, enraptured both with
the song and with the singer; he almost
determined in his own mind that she
should be the machioness of Clemaire.

Dinner being announced put a period
to the music; however, the marquis would
not quit the room without her promising
to return to it in the evening.

Clementina acquitted herself in her new
department with an easy elegance pecu-
liar to herself. Her manner to the marquis38         HOWARD CASTLE.

was the same- perfectly polite, but per-
fectly indifferent; at no moment could be
surprise her into betraying the slightest 
symptom of partiality. He talked of their 
departure, and of the painful sensation of 
saying adieu; he had a convincing proof 
that Clementina could feel, strongly feel, 
the parting with friends; surely he should 
see the same sensibility shewn in the morn-
ing, as, without paying himself a very 
high compliment, she probably would have 
stronger sensations in being separated from 
him, than from an old woman: although he 
not extort one flattering expression, 
he felt no alarm, as he was perfectly con-
vinced the marquis of Clemaire could not 
sigh in vain. It was wonderful why he 
should sigh at all; but he certainly never 
had seen so lovely a woman, or had he ever 
conversed with one so pleasing. Her in-
difference towards him had roused his 
attention; it was what had not been ac-
customed to from the fair sex, who gene-
rally repaid him so bountifully in his own 
coin, that it created disgust, and he dropt 
the pursuit; but with Miss Bouverie, eve-ry 
attempt at firtation had been checked;              HOWARD CASTLE.               39

if he expressed his admiration of her charms,
she appeared no way flattered or elated;
the same polite indifference at all moments
wounded his pride, which seldom failed in
supporting him; still it did not, inthe
smallest degree, damp his hopes, which
were as sanguine as possible; time would
shew what her real feelings were towards
him.

     When lady Augusta and Clementina
retired to the drawing-room, their conver-
sation immediately led to the subject up-
permost in lady Augusta's thoughts --a 
visit from her friend at CArnsworth Castle.

     "I cannot help taking a retrospection of
our past lives, my dear Clementina, or ra-
ther of the years we have spent together---
not a momen separated; our pursuits, our
amusements the same.  Should your fa-
ther prove obstinate, and bury you alive in
this calm retreat, our intimacy must weaken,
our pursuits will be so different.  In the 
course of a few years we shall not have the
relish of each other's society which we
have at present; you will imbibe such a
taste for shady groves and purling streams,
that you will become romantic; if your40   HOWARD CASTLE.

letters are filled with comments on the sea-
sons, describing tender buds bursting into
a vivid green, and lambkins skipping 
near your window, I shall never write
to you, as you could not relish matter-of-
fact epistles; and I have no relish for the
descriptive, unless you will give me men
and manners to descant upon."

"Why have you turned me all at once
into such an insipid correspondent?" said
Clementina, smiling.

"Because, " replied lady Augusta, "you
appear to be so determined to remain quiet-
ly at Roachwood, that you must do some-
thing for your amusement - either make
a collection of plants - have a poultry-yard
- turn village doctress, or some such rural
business. You must have employment for
your mind; books may amuse, but you 
would tire to death to be always reading;
drawing and music will become vapid, if 
you have nobody to shew your works to,
or extol the sweet melody of your voice.
The grand spring to our exertions is ap-
plause; cut off all prospect of admiration, 
and you will effectually cut off what ex-
cited your perseverance and labour."                                 HOWARD CASTLE                           41


"I cannot agree with you," replied Clementina; "I should draw and play for my own amusement, were not a soul to hear me, or see my works. I could vary my employments so much as never to feel a moment hang heavy on my hands, were I deprived of society: but shall I not have a companion-one whom duty, as well as inclination, will lead me to amuse, if it is in my power?"

"You are so resolved to be happy," said lady Augusta,"that you quite provoke me; I do believe you will carry this amiable pliability so far as to say you prefer the peaceful shaded of Roachwood to all the gaiety of Fortman-square."

"Quietness," replied Clementina," I know can convey happiness. I never was in a bustle; therefore I am ignorant hpw I should feel. Having your company, wither in town or country, would give me the greatest pleasure: but why should I set my heart on bieng disappointed? This retirement would irksome to you and I cannot, will not, leave my father, or put him to the painful necessity of so soon refusing a request; therefore I entreat of                  Howard Castle       42

you not to mention the subject of my leaving him to pay you a visit. Were I to spend January at Carnsworth Castle, I should feel February dull at Roachwood; in the state of ingonrace I am in, the winter will glide imperceptibly away; my life will be a continuation of the convent-tranquil, and, I shall think, happy."

"I shall not be surprised," cried lady August, "if I hear in teh gloomy month of December, you have thrown yourself from the battlements of that frightful old castle, or into the moat which the general tells me surrounds it; the very idea of sitting comtemplating that ancient pile would make me miserable in a week. but you will find how well i shall manage matters. As I am convinced I am a favourite with your father, I will try my influece, as snatch you, my dear Clementina, from such a horrid fate."

Clementina smiled, but in her own mind determined no persuasion of lady Augusta should induce her(even if her father should consent) to quit Roachwood.

They continued to converse, briefly on the same topic, till the marquis joined           COMMENT SONT CHATEAU

eux, qui dit gaiement, mensonge entrés dans la salle: «J'ai été pressé par le général de boire plus de vin, mais j'ai résisté à son invitation, que je pourrais profiter de plus de la société de sa belle fille, qui est beaucoup plus accueillant, mais pas moins intoxieating ". Il s'assit près d'elle, et a couru dans la même souche florissante.

"Si vous avez bu peu de vin, mon seigneur, il a eu un effet étrange," dit-elle, gravement regarder.
"Il serait étrange en effet," répondit-il, avec rapidité, "ai-je pu si longtemps en compagnie de la plus belle des femmes, sans sa perfection s'enfoncent profondément dans mon cœur".
J'ai peur », a déclaré dame Augusta, en riant," l'admiration n'est pas reciporcal, comme je l'ai utilisé tout mon rheoric en vain, même à lui faire dire que nous payer une visite au château de Carnesworth rendrait heureuse; vos pouvoirs fascinants , frère, n'a pas sombré. "

L'approche du général empêché une réponse, à la grande satisfaction de sa fille, qui n'avait pas envie d'aller sur le44                       HOWARD CASTLE.
same grounds again as she had done with lady Augusta.

  As soon as tea was over, the marquis reminded Clementina of her promise of again charming them with the sound of her voice.  Some hours were dedicated to harmony.  Lady Augusta played with all the case and  execution of a master.  The marquis was no contemptible singer; he joined in duets with Clementina, and was more and more delighted with her taste and with her voice.

  In the course of the evening, lady Augusta introduced her intended topi, by lamenting how soon they should be separated--"I have in vain," said she, particularly addressing the general, "tried to
extract a promise from my friend that she will visit me at Carnsworth; she declares, without you will accompany her, she will not move a step from Roachwood.  What could be half so salutary for your health as a little variety?  A visit to my father would give him the greatest pleasure, and would diffuse general happiness.  Clementina, why will you not express what I know you feel?""Without more solicitation," said the
general, "than what lady Augusta has
used, I will consent to the plan; I will
quit my retreat, and visit my old acquaintance
the duke of Beauclaire, and express
what I feel-- gratitude for the protection
you have afforded my daughter. To my
new acquaintances I certainly owe every 
attention," at the same time bowing to
lady Augusta and the marquis; "if by
spending a couple of nights at Carnsworth
can more strongly express the obligation
I feel for your accompanying her to Roachwood,
and the pleasure I have experienced
in the short visit you have paid me, I will
willingly break through all rules, and 
accompany my Clementina."

The marquis was unbounded in his
expressions of pleasure and thanks.

Lady Augusta looked significantly at
her friend, secretly delighted with her
scheme succeeding beyond her most
sanguine expectations.

Clementina could hardly believe what
she heard, and was still more surprised
when she found they were to spend part
of the winter in Bath, as her father added--"My medical attendant has long proposed
my drinking the Bourage water; but such
a journey, in my infirm  state, has deter-
mined me against that plan. The other
day he offered to compromise the matter
with me, and asked me if I would go to
Bath, as he thought the waters might be
of service in removing a disagreeable com-
plaint I have in my stomach, from, I be-
lieve, want of exercise, and for a little
amusement, such as hearing the news of
the day, and having it in my power to
play a game at whist when I please: add
to those good reasons the wish of getting
rid of a very troublesome old fellow, who
frequently teazes him. I answered it de-
pended upon my daughter; if you liked
the excursion (I own I had no hopes but
what you would), I would follow his ad-
vice. Any time after Christmas," conti-
nued the general, "which is convenient
for your family to receive us, we will join
the party at Carnsworth Castle."

Lady Augusta and the marquis again
expressed, in strong terms, the general
pleasure he imparted by this plan, and
Clementina sat mute with surprise at soshort a time producing such a change in
her prospects; she felt pleased that she had
not for a moment repined at the idea of 
retirement, when her friend had so often,
and in such glowing colours, painted the
pleasures of a gay life; she had felt no
dread of the dull sameness of a winter in
the country. In her own mind she was 
convinced she should have been happy in 
rational pursuits, and in the society of her
father. The prospect which now opened
to her view was certainly very agreeable, 
as she could judge for herself whether the
delightful bustle of a gay winter, so feel-
ingly described by lady Augusta (who an-
ticipated, from the little she had seen, be-
fore she went abroad, of what, one day, she 
hoped, to enjoy in the fullest extent), or 
the calm quiet life she had led the con-
vent was most congenial to her disposi-
tion. Carnsworth Castle, she understood, 
was a continued scene of gay company, 
and variety of amusements, which, in 
some degree, would prepare her for the 
new life she should enter into, when she 
became an inhabitant of a great town. 

Lady Augusta whispered -- "No popvisits at Carnsworth; the duke, I am sure,
will be so delighted with seeing your
father, and your father to delighted with
meeting with mine, that your stay will be
two weeks instead of two nights. I am
so pleased that we accompanied you, as a
volume written upon the subject could
not have succeeded half so well as getting
the whole affair settled as we have done."

The satisfaction which the general's
determination appeared to give every one
afforded him infinite pleasure; and the
idea of renewing an acquaintance with a
person whom he highly esteemed, and 
with whom he was once intimate, would
be very agreeable. He admired both the
marquis and lady Augusta, and was happy
that his daughter had formed so proper a
friendship, and which he should wish to
see strengthened--- no way more certain
than the plan he had determined upon.

Each retired to their several apartments,
perfectly satisfied with the result of
the day; all pain was banished, which the
approaching separation had created; and
not one of the party was happier than the
marquis. He now formed deeper schemesthan merely personal admiration; he almost resolved to introduce the beautiful Clementina to the world as the marchioness of Clemaire. Her being an inmate at Carnsworth Castle, and the duke and duchess having an opportunity of judging of both her personal and intellectual charms, was what he most wished for. He knew they were anxious that he should marry, as he was the only prop of their family. If he died without issue, the title would become extinct. Miss Bouverie was highly connected by her mother, and very respectably by her father, to whose large property she undoubtedly would be heiress. Her appearance was certainly uncommon; with the most lovely countenance, and the finest figure in the world, she possessed the most attractice manners, perfectly free from the least tincture of conceit. Her gentle, elegant, unassuming behaviour, he firmly believed, would ensure his mother's approbation of his choice, and her fortune would make his father anxious for the connexion. Thus the marquis settled in his own mind that Clementina's first introduction to the50           HOWARD CASTLE.

gaiety of London should be as his wife.
In all probability the duchess would have
two daughters to present to the world;
how envied he should be when the young
marchioness appeared at court, amidst the
gaze of admiration which her unrivlled
beauty would excite !

     The busy fancy of the marquis almost
precluded sleep; he was intoxicated with
the happiness he had in view, as never for
a single moment did he entertain a doubt
of her consent.  He rose early, in expec-
tation of meeting with the object of his
thoughts, as he knew she was more alert
in the morning than his sister, and he
hoped to enjoy half an hour of her com-
pany alone; but he was disappointed; she
did not appear till the usual hour, and ac-
companied lady Augusta into the break-
fast-room.  Her cheerful countenance be-
spoke a mind perfectly at ease; no agitat-
ing thoughts nor plans of greatness had
broken in upon her repose.  The marquis
had never for a single moment occupied
her thoughts, nor had she dreamt of a du-
cal coronet upon her ouch; she felt per-
fectly happy and delighted with the pro-spect of so soon meeting with her friend;
but the marquis had no great share in the
pleasure which animated her countenance,
as her acquaintance with him was of a very
recent date. She did not think his man-
ners particularly attractive, in spite of the
studied attention he constantly paid her;
with the fine speeches and the high enco-
miums, which he lost no opportunity of
passing on her personal attentions, she
was not in the least degree elated; to
one who had been so little inured to the
hackneyed terms of admiration which the
beaux of the present day think themselves
entitled to bestow, it might have been
supposed the marquis's attention would
have been flattering, and that she would
have felt intoxicated with the adulation of
the first young man she had ever been in
company with, whose appearance was
handsome, and his address generally
thought elegant and pleasing; self-appro-
bation was apparent, but he was young,
and had met with flattering success
amongst the females in the higher circle
of life, that he believed he could not sue52 HOWARD CASTLE.

in vain; he was too conscious of his ex-
alted ran, and of his high attainments, to
allow him for a moment to suppose that
Clementina could be cruel; the coldness
of her manner might be natural to her.

The little party were in excellent spi-
rits; the general was lively and agreeable;
Clementina was surprised with his ani-
mated conversation; the amusing anec-
dotes which he gave them entertained
them exceedingly. With such a compa-
nion, thought she, how could the hours 
appear heavy? The time he had spent
alone, he had read a great deal, and he had
the happy art of imparting his knowledge;
he had likewise met with many interest-
ing adventures, which did not lose any
thing in being narrated; as he had a flow
of language, and a considerable share of
humour, he amused his guests, and de-
lighted his daughter.

At last the carriage was announced,
which was to convey lady Augusta and the
marquis from Roachwood. The general
expressed the regret by which he really felt;
and taking the latter by the hand, hoped he 
would not stand on ceremony, as at alltimes it would confer the greatest pleasure 
on him if he would visit him. 

The marquis assured him (and he spoke
the truth), that nothing could make him 
happier than paying his respects to Miss
Bouverie and himself; and that, ere long, 
he should prove his professions were sin-
cere, as he knew the blank he should
feel would make him very soon wish to 
accept of his kind invitation. "You have,"
added he, "a magnet at Roachwood,
which will retain my heart, and may as-
sure you of my speedy return."

The general smiled at the speech; he
treated it as unmeaning gallantry, which, 
he believed, all young men practised, and
which, he hoped, had made no impression 
on his daughter.

Clementina had retired to a window
with lady Augusta, which prevented her
hearing what passed between her father and
the marquis. She should have attributed 
his speech to the same cause as the general
had done, as she had no wish really to be-
lieve him sincere in the admiration he pro-
fessed. She bid her friend a kind adieu--she suffered the marquis to press her hand 
to his lips without the slightest emotion,
and returned with her father into the house,
with her feelings perfectly tranquil. 

Chapter IV

The general introduced Clementina to the
housekeeper as her future mistress. Mrs. 
Moore had served her mother in that ca-
pacity, and was highly respected in the 
family; she was rejoiced at the arrival of 
her young lady, in whose countenance she
traced the features of her much-loved and
lamented lady Clementina, and soon found
she inherited her engaging manners and
mild disposition. Mrs. Moore was the 
widow of a curate who lived near Coln-
brook Abbey; he died some little time
before lady Clementina was married, and 
left his wife and infant daughter in indi-
gent circumstances: unused to any kind of
business, or means of gaining a subsistence        HOWARD CASTLE.     35

for herself and child, she gladly accepted
the office of being housekeeper at Roach-
wood.
  Lady Clementina put her little girl to 
school, meaning to educate her for her own
maid, but she lived not to put her plans
into execution.  Clementina immediately
resolved to fulfil her mother's intentions of
Mary's becoming a domestic in Roach-
wood; she found, from Mrs. Moore, that
she was serving a lady in London, who
was too gay to render her maid's life a com-
fortable one.  She had received frequent
letters from her, complaining that her
strength was unequal to the fatigue she
endured.  Clementina's proposal of Mary's
becoming her attendant was received with
joy, and she was soon after settled perfectly
to her mind.
   The first inquiry Clementina made was
after her aunt, lady Radnor; the great wish
of her heart was, that all animosity might
cease, and that the early friendship which
had subsisted between lady Elenor and
herself might be renewed.  She feared,
from the manner of her father, that she
should be disappointed, as he gravely said56 Howard Castle.

-"I have seen nothing of the family
since my return; before I arrived at Roach-
wood, they had left the country."

Clementina asked if they were still from
home.

"They are abroad," answered her father;
"they were dreadfully alarmed by accounts
from Geneva, informing them lord Monta-
gue was at the point of death; the im-
mediately left England, and flew to their
darling son, who was considerably better
when they arrived, but so extremely weak
and languid, that he could not travel. Lady
Elenora being with them, and their son 
William settled at Cambridge, rendered
their remaining at Switzerland very agree-
able: they have been absent nearly two
years, but are now expected, I believe, in
a few weeks. Lord Montague is to return
with them, after an absence of several years:
this," added the general, "is my apothe-
cary's information."

Clementina listened with profound atten-
tion to this little history; no subject was so
interesting to her as those relations whom
she had passed her early days with; her
aunt's temper, she knew, was severe, butHOWARD CASTLE. 57

still she retained the strongest affection for
her, and gratitude for the kindness she
had shown her when under her care. Lord
Radnor had always treated her with the
most unremitted indulgence. Lady Ele-
nora and she had been greatly attached to
each other, and never had even their little
amusements or pursuits ended in quarrel-
ling; their tempers and dispositions were
similar--both mild and gentle.

Lord Montague was considerably older
than his sister, and was a particular fa-
vourite of his little cousin; the commence-
ment of his holidays was an event which
gave the greatest joy to lady Elenora and
Clementina, who were never so happy as
when permitted to ramble in the pleasure-
ground with their beloved Frederick, or
to watch the more active sports of his
lordship and his brother William, who
was likewise their senior. Clementina per-
fectly recollected the strong wish she al-
ways had to be in their society, and the
good humour which lord Montague would
often plead with the governess to permit
them to be with him, when she made no38 HOWARD CASTLE.

doubt they were very troublesome compa-
nions.

A thought struck her, and instantly she
communicated it to the general, that she
should wish, above all things, to visit
Colnbrook Abbey, in the absence of the
family; she was convinced she had a per-
fect recollection of the place, and she should
have the greatest pleasure in retracing her
early days.

"And will you not, my dear girl," said
her father, "feel more pain than pleasure
when you reflect how unkindly your near-
est relations have behaved, and that it is
only by stealth you can enter a house
which ought, from the consanguinity of
the inhabitants, to be a second home to
you?"

"No," replied she, with quickness; "I
flatter myself that so many years have
elapsed since I was taken from my aunt's
protection, that cool reflection must have
convinced her she was wrong, and that a
parent was entitled to dispose of his child
and he thought proper; her sorrow at part
ing with her little charge was a convincing
proof that she was attached to me; if sheHOWARD CASTLE. 59

should offer her friendship when she re-
turns, I trust you will accept it, and that
every disagreeable idea may be banished
from your recollection."

Tears filled the eyes of Clementina; as
she earnestly looked at her father; he drew
her towards him, and pressing her to his 
heart, said--"Her protection may be es-
sential to you, my child; if I was taken
from you, who would be so proper a per-
son to introduce you to the world as your
aunt? The independent fortune which
you will have will make you less liable to
experience her caprice; but do not urge
me to solicit a renewal of our acquaint-
ance."

The tears, which she had tried to re-
press, now flowed at this speech of her
father's--"I had no idea," at least she ex-
claimed, "of any motive but purely af-
fection towards my relations, which made
me wish again to meet with them. Hav-
ing lady Elenora's friendship would cer-
tainly give me heartfelt pleasure; but my
auht, who undoubtedly was the aggressor,
ought to be the first to make advances; I
will even give up my plan of visiting the60 HOWARD CASTLE.
deserted mansion, for fear it should come to their knowledge, and might be construed into a desire of being upon friendly terms."
"You shall go," replied the general, pleased with her so readily acquiescing in his wishes; "I shall order the carriage to be ready to-morrow, at an early hour, that you may have time to look about yhou. I cannot accompany you; but the distance is inconsiderable, and you will join me at dinner."
Pleased at the prospect, Clementina thanked her father for the indulgence.
Next morning she set-off as soon breakfast was over; anticipating pleasure, her hopes would extend beyond her present excursion. Her busy fancy restored peace between the two families, and, in imagination, she again enjoyed the friendship of her cousin. When she arrived at Colnbrook, and the gates were thrown open for her to enter, she recollected perfectly the grief she was in when she had last passed through them. She had witnessed part of the scene between her father and her aunt, which had been carried on with much as               HOWARD CASTLE                61

perity on both sides; she did not under-
stand the meaning of the high voice and
apparent anger of lady Randor; but she
found she was to be removed from her
companion, which caused her great dis-
tress; little did she then imagine that her
departure was to lay the foundation for a
quarrel between the families. When she
entered the hall, she was surprised how each
object rose to her remembrance, and seem-
ed familiar to her. She sent a servant to
desire that the house might be shewn to
her; she should have enjoyed wandering
through the different rooms unattended, but 
it would so odd an appearance to the
housekeeper, she durst not indulge herself;
she watched her approach, in hopes of see-
ing an old acquaintance; but a decent-look-
ing woman appeared, who was a stranger
to her.She found she had not been long
in the family; she apologized for the dis-
order of the house; but the servants were 
busy preparing for the return of lord and
lady Radnor, who were expected the week
following.

     "Do not lady Elenora and lord onta-
gue accompany them ?"
  62                 HOWARD CASTLE.

  "Yes, ma'am," was her reply, "we
suppose so, but Mr.Brown did not men-
tion them. He ordered that all the apart-
ments might be well aired; so who comes
with them we do not know."

  Clementina told her that she knew the 
house so well, she did not require her at-
tendance, as perhaps she was busy: but
the housekeeper assured her she was not--
the housemaids were employed; she should
have much pleasure in shewing her the
different apartments; in lady Radnor's
dressing-room there were portraits of the
family, done by sir Joshua Reynolds, a
very short time before lord Montague went
abroad; "indeed," added her attendant,
"lady Elenora's was only finished a short
time before she left home, and strong like-
nesses they all are."

  Lord and lady Radnor's Clementina
passed with a slight examination; lady
Elenora's arrested her attention, as she
could hardly trace the least resemblance to
her young friend. The picture she gazed
on represented a tall, elegant figure, with
a pensive Madona countenance, perfectly
unlike the little rosy Hebe her recollection        HOWARD CASTLE.     63

had dwelt upon. She could not help ex-
pressing her surprise, and received for an-
swer there could not be a more striking
likeness. "My lord," continued the house-
keeper, "would not have her ladyship's
picture taken till she had done growing,
and was quite formed. I could almost
fancy it was really my lady who is looking
at me, it has so much her air and manner."

  Clementina smiled as she moved to-
wards another portrait, which was a full
length of lord Montague, and which repre-
sented the most interesting figure she had
ever seen. His face appeared as handsome
as his person; it expressed every thing
that war agreeable. A feel of envy for a
moment filled her bosom; how happy la-
dy Elenora must be in having such a bro-
ther—such a friend and companion!

  "I always think, ma'am, that is the
sweetest picture that ever was seen."

  "It is a very pleasing one," said Cle-
mentina; "is it as strong a resemblance as
his sister's?"

  "I believe it is reckoned so," was her
answer, "but I never saw his lordship; 64   Howard Castle

he has been gone four years; I have been here only three.  The servants say he is quite as fine-looking as the painting makes him.  Mr. William is a very nice young gentleman, but nothing to compare to his lordship."
   Clementina continued silent, her eyes intently fixed upon the object before her.
   The housekeeper continued - "His lordship's servant wrote a sad account of him to the butler - that love for a foreign lady brought on the fever, f which he had so near died."
   "I was sorry to hear he had been so ill."
   Encouraged by those few words, she replied - "He was quite out of his reason for some time, and raved of her - I forget her name, it is a very curious one; but it is of no consequence.  She came to Geneva when he was ill, and attended him night and day; she however left him suddenly, the very day lord and lady Radnor arrived.  My lord's groom wrote all this in confidence to one of the servants, who told me, but begged I would not mention it to any one; nor should I have told it to you, howard castle
ma'am ,but you appear to admire his picture so much, I thoughtit a pity you should
not know as much of the original as I did."

Clementina thanked the housekeeper for information,which ,she supposed, owed much
of its idea probably took its rise from his having an attentive female attendant.
The intelligence did not make the impres-sion upon the young lady her communi-cative companion expected; she made no comment upon it,but quited the apart-ment
She observed a little spaniel follow-ed her wherever she went,and seemed to solicit her notice; she storked the ani=mal's head, and asked if he was a favourite? Her answer was, she believed he had be-longed to lord montague, but she did not think there was any partcular store set by him; lady Elcnora generally took care of him, and was fond of him; but as lady Radnor had a dislake to dags, she would not let Floric travel with them."He is a sad proud little fellow, as he does not like being with servants; and I fear lady Elenora will think we have starved him in her absence, as he looks very thin and ill;HOWARD CASTLE.

but perhaps she may never think about
him when his master comes home."

Clementina's pity was moved, and again 
she patted his head. He looked wistfully 
in her face, wagged his tail, and trotted
close by her side. She inquired if the old 
gardener was still employed, as she had a 
perfect recollection of him, and she was
sure of having a place in his remembrance?

The housekeeper answered in the affir-
mative, and offered to send for him.

Clementina positively desired she would
not, as she wished to walk about the 
grounds without any attendant, and she
should go to the garden before she return-
ed home; she wished to converse with the
 old man, without his being informed who 
she was, and she likewise wished to have
solitry ramble. She led the way ihto
the library, where she knew there was a 
door into the pleasure-ground. She was 
delighted when she found herself once
more at liberty to indulge her own
thoughts; every turn of the walk brought
some little anecdote to her recollection. 
In such a bush lord Montague had first
shewn her a bird's nest, with younger birdsHOWARD CASTLE  67
in it-a sight which had pleased her ex-
ceedingly. He took one of them, assuring
her the parent bird would not discover the
theft, and gave it to Clementina. The
sensations which filled her breast were
fresh in her memory ; and the sorrow she
experienced when her little charge died,
probably from want of proper care, or,
from what was most likely, too much at-
tention, still created a painful emotion.
She reached the greenhouse; a transpa-
rent pond. which was close to it, had been
the scene of many of their infantine
amusements. There she had first seen
lord Montague slide upon the ice-had
likewise witnessed his having a severe fall.
Clementina could have lingered on the
spot, but she found it only wanted half an
hour of the time she had ordered the ser-
vants to have the carriage ready. She en-
tered the greenhouse, where the gardener
was arranging the plants, and putting all
in order previous to his young lady's re-
turn.

"Is lady Elenora fond of flowers?" ask-
ed Clementina. 68                              HOWARD CASTLE.
  "She is," was his reply; still he was busying himself in pruning a geraninum, which one of his men had brought into the house, and which seemed to occupy all his attention.
  "Is that a favourite you are taking such pains with?" again asked Clementima, who wished exceddingly to attract his notice.
  "No particularly, but lady Elenora is fond of it."
  Still his eyes were bent on his work.
  Clementima's patience was nearly exhausted--"Do look in my face, Mr. S.Smith laid down his pruning-knife, and did as she desired him, but a shake of his head convinced her he could not trace a feature of little Miss Clemmy, which he always used to call her.
  She smiled--"It is nearly ten years since I used to attend you in this very greenhouse, and hold the matting for you as you used to tie up the plants."
  Mr.Smith required no other introduction, the joy he expressed pleased Cle-
mentina, who was gratified to hear even 
a domestic of Colnbrook Abbey shew such 
happiness at again seeing her there.

The good man accused himself of great
stupidity in not looking more attentively
at her -- "I saw a female enter the green-
house, but supposing you were one of Mrs. 
Bell's friends, who sometimes plague me, 
asking me questions about what they do 
not understand, I was rather sulky in my
answers; little did I imagine it was Miss
Clemmy who stood by me; often and
often have I asked about you, but they
always told me you were sent out of this
country for your education. I am hap-
py to see you come back, and hope you 
will come and stay here as soon as our fa-
mily returns."

Clementina thanked him for his wish-
ing to see her again; but she could not 
leave her father, who had returned from
the wars wounded and in bad health.

"So I head," was his answer. "My lord
got accounts of his son's illness before he
returned to Roachwood, where I have 
heard him wish he might see him again to 
my lady, as they walked in the garden;but they set off in terrible affliction, not expecting that they should find lord Montague alive. Thank God! he is returning with them in perfect good health, so we shall all be happy again."

Clementina was delighted with the information she had so accidentally picked up, that her father had been thought of by his friend: she bid Mr. Smith good morning; but he attended no more to the geranium he had been so occupied with; he would go with her to the carriage, which she found waiting; she got into it, again bidding Mr. Smith good-bye, when, to her surprise, the spaniel leapt in after her. The servants attempted to take him out, but he crept for protection close to Clementina. His trembling solicitations she could not withstand, and inquired if she might venture to take him with her? They all agreed that he probably would never be missed; as lord Montague had been absent four years, he, in all likelihood, had forgot him. Clementina desired, if they should hear any of the family express a wish for his return, to send a servant immediately to Roachwood, where the greatest careHOWARD CASTLE 71

should be taken of him, and he should be
restored when sent for. She desired it
might not be mentioned to the family
where he was. They promised to obey her
orders, and she drove off, very much
pleased with the morning she had passed.
Her companion seemed equally gratified,
as he repeatedly thanked her by marks 
of kindness for the compassion she had
shown him. She attempted to take a col-
lar, with lord Montague's name engraved
on it, from his neck, but she found it
was impossible to rid him of his ornament,
which was silver, fastened by a padlock.
In spite of the pleasure she had received
by her visit to Colnbrook, she almost wish-
ed she had not indulged her curiosity, as
she was afraid her father would not approve
of her new attendant.

When she arrived at Roachwood, Frolie
was all bustle and animation--leaping upon
her, and entered the library, where the ge-
neral was sitting, before her. He was sur-
prised at seeing his daughter follow the
dog, as he expected a stranger; he inquired
how she had returned so attended? Cle-mentina gave him the little history, and of 
the orders she had left with the servants.

The general approved of what she had
done, and admired the dog for the taste
he had shown; he did not examine him
very particularly, and the collar escaped
his observation.

Frolic now became Clementina's con-
stant companion, and the change in his
appearance proved that his new situation 
was perfectly to his mind.

A week after the departure of her friend,
a most polite and kind letter arrived from
the duke to the general, expressing the
pleasure the duchess and he felt at the idea
of seeing them at the Carnsworth Castle, and 
that he should fix the twenty-seventh of 
December, when he should hope to shake
his old acquaintance by the hand; he de-
sired he would not determine on any plan
in regard to his journey to Bath, as they 
should not be satisfied with the visit he had
mentioned to lady Augusta. On the first 
of January his son and daughter were to 
give a ball, which he should expect him to 
be at, as it was to be on his birthday. There
would be company suitable to every eye.                                    HOWARD CASTLE.                     73


Lady Augusta's letter was written in the highest spirits possible, describing the gay prospect with all the animation of her character.  The plan had been laid by the marquis and her on their way home; they knew that Carnsworth Castle was a festive scene the first day of the year, which was the commemoration of their father's birth; instead of having the whole country to dine, they only petitioned to have them in the evening, and to have a band of music; they had succeeded to a wish, and were as busy as possible. The marquis had the duke of Bridgenorth, (who was staying with them, and who knew every beau in the fashionable circle) to assist him in collecting his forces; she acted under the direction of her grace and Maria Osborne, who was like-wise with them. Lady Augusta concluded her letter by saying-"Now, my dear Clementina, before you quit Carnsworth Castle, I shal hear you confess that the dismal convent no longer retains a place in your remembrance, and that the world and its amusements are far more delightful thatn the gloomy walls and melancholy inhabitants of a cloister."74 HOWARD CASTLE

Clementina smiled as she finished the letter - "The prospect is gay," thought she, " and to lady Augusta enchanting; I shall be a better judge when I return to Roachwood, if there is such happiness in dissipation."

The general had read his epistle once over, had laid it down, taken off his spectacles, and was carefully wiping them - took the letter again, and read it over - " It certainly is so; my eyes do not deceive me. This letter is from his grace of Beauclaire, inviting me to a ball. Well," continued he. " wonders will never cease. My old friend to sit down and write to a man past the grand climacterie, and I may say, without varying much from the truth, with but one leg, and hope I will not object to such a meeting, as there would be many suitable to every age - partners, I suppose, he means!"

Clementina could not help laughing at the idea, but feared he would not accept of the invitation - at least to remain so long an inhabitant of Carnsworth Castle.

"This meeting," said the general, "is very suitable to a person of your age; you    Howard Castle    75

shall therefore go on the day mentioned.  I will wait till all the bustle is over before I join you - I will stay the time I proposed doing at first - a couple of nights, and proceed to Bath."
   Matters being thus settled, Clementina retired to her own apartment, to give directions on the important subject of dress - a subject which never before had any share in her thoughts. 
   Mary was delighted to hear her young lady had such a prospect of gaiety, and readily undertook to equip her in a proper manner for the festive scene.  The elegance and beauty of the fair wearer made it a most pleasing employment.  Her maid firmly believed she would eclipse all the graces who would be assembled at the ball, without any particular spendour of dress but she resolved nothing should be wanting to set off her charms to the best advantage; no trouble should be spared, and she was not limited in expense.
    The prospect of pleasure had been greatly damped in Clementina's idea by her father's resolution of not being present; how
                       E2 76                  HOWARD CASTLE

should she feel, thrown into such a differ-
ent life from what she had ever been in
before, without the protection of the gene-
ral! Lady Augusta, of course, would be
much occupied with her numerous guests,
and could not bestow much time upon her,
and the marquis would drop the polite at-
tention he had paid to her, when he was
surrounded by his acquaintances, and flut-
tering amongst women of splendid rank.
He had no other to bestow his fine speches
upon when he was at Roachwood, other-
wise she concluded he would not have
thought her an object worthy of his pur-
suit. His high rank, and the good opi-
nion he entertained of himself, would in-
duce him to prefer a more splendid part-
ner; she had never danced but under the
eye of a master--should she not feel awk-
ward in such an assemblage of fashion as
there would be at the ball? Thus did she
torment herself with humility, till she ear-
nestly wished she might be permitted to
remain at home. She feared there was no
chance for the Colnbrook family being
there; and perhaps, thought she, if they
were, they might not notice her, which        HOWARD CASTLE.     77

would distress her more than any thing
could do to be in the same room with her
nearest relations, to whom she felt so
strongly attached, and to be neglected,
she was convinced, would overcome her,
and she should expose her weakness. She
hinted her fears to the general, and ex-
pressed the strong wish she had that he
would accompany her, as his presence
would give her confidence and composure.

  He smiled at those words, and assured
her neither would be wanting, as they very
seldom tithed, particularly the former. "Ti-
midity is so much out of date amongst our
modern fair ones, that were you to betray
you were possessed of it, you would be
an object of universal attention and admi-r
ation. Novelty is very attractive, and
what is so novel as modesty? In all pro-
bability," continued the general, "your
relations will not be of the party, as at this
season of the year their journey may be re-
tarded by many circumstances. If they
are, you have no part to act; if they are
civil, you of course will return it; if they
take no notice of you, you must not betray
either sorrow or resentment. I have writ-78     HOWARD CASTLE.

ten my apology, and promised that you
should spend a week with your friend; I
cannot now retract, nor does my inclina-
tion prompt me to do it; you will soon be
generally acquainted, and, I can answer
for it, will enjoy happiness in your visit."

            CHAPTER V.

CLEMENTINA'S feelings were not in a
comfortable state. in spite of her father's
arguments, when she heard of the arrival
of the Radnor family at Colnbrook. A
week had elapsed after she had recieved
lady Augusta's letter, when Mr. Walker,
her father's medical attendant, called. He
was a good-natured man, and a wish to
amuse his patients induced him to collect
all the intelligence he possibly could, and
he seldom was long before he imparted his
budget of news; he hardly had time to go
through the general inquiries after his pa-
tient's health, when he informed them he
had been at Colnbrook, to visit the family            Howard Castle  79

upon their return. He was pleased when he found the general and Miss Bouverie had not heard of the great event; he therefore proceeded to give them all the information in his power.  Lord and lady Radnor seemed better for their tour, and lady Elenora wonderfully improved both in appearance and manner;  lord Montague, he thought, appeared languid; but he had prescribed some strengthening medicines, which he was convinced, would be beneficial to him; he had not perfectly recovered the severe illness which had so nearly carried him off.  "Lady Radnor," continued Mr. Walker, "described the situation he was in- nearly gone, I assure you - nature quite exhausted; but he now looks well - very handsome indeed, but not in his wonted good spirits; bracing tonics are neccessary."
   "Will tonics restore the spirits?" asked the general, significantly.
     "The spirits of a young man," replied Mr. Walker, "ought to be good; if they are affected, it is owing to the nervous system being deranged, or a defect in the interior, such as want of digestion, bile or many various complaints I could name,her solicitations would be unavailing. She
was one day wandering, at no great distance ch 
from the house, where she was screened
from the keen frosty air by a thick holly 
hedge; Frolic's barking disturbed her from
a train of ideas which filled her mind. 
She turned round, and, to her surprise, she
saw the marquis of Clemaire walking
quickly after her; she advanced towards
him, pleasure animating her face, which
never looked more lovely. The brilliant
coloar the air had given her, and the smile
which welcomed the marquis to Roach-
wood, as she held out her hand towards 
him, charmed him; he had not seen any
thing half so beautiful since he had parted
from her and he had seen great variety, as he
hadnot been a day disengaged since his re-
turn home. He pressed the extended hand 
with rapture to his lips, as he expressed the
joy which he really felt at again seeing her --
"I have mourned my unavoidable absence, 
but, day after day, some party was formed, 
which precluded my leaving Carnsworth. 
This morning I literally stole away for
two days; this I spend with you, if you82              HOWARD CASTLE.

will permit me; to-morrow is to be dedi-
cated to Colnbrook."
   Clementina replied, she was sure her
father had no engagement, and would be
happy in having his lordship's company.
She secretly hoped he would prevail on the
general to alter his plan in regard to his
visit to Carnsworth.
   He delivered a packet from his sister,
which, he believed, contained a full ac-
count of their proceedings-" My going
to Colnbrook," added his lordship, "has
a double motive: the first, to pay my re-
spects to the family, and to engage them
to Christmas at Carnsworth Castle."
   "Then," replied Clementina, "they are
to pay a long visit if they are to remain to
the ball".
   "We expect they will," replied the
marquis; "lord Montague and his charm-
ing sister, we must have; lord and lady
Radnor will be the guests of the duke and
duchess; they must use their influence;
we only shall interface with the younger
branches, and exert our authority over
them." A sigh from Clementina reached
the marquis's ear. " I know," said he,
howard castle

"from my sister, that an unfortunate mis-understanding subsists between general
Bouverie and the Colinbrook family; we hope, by your accidentally meeting with
each other, it may be done away. I do not other ,it may be done away. I do not
mean to mention it to your father, nor shall I tell lady Radnor the prospect she
has of meeting with her relations;any one who looks in your angelic countenance, Miss Bouverie ,could not harbour resentment."

"I have no idea," replied clementina, "that my aunt can feel resentment to-wards
my father for disposing of me as he chose; time must have done away all ani-
mosify on her side, and I hope we shall be acquainted before we meet at carnsworth." She approved of the marquis's intention of secrecy, as if there was
civility offered from lady Radnor, and they were upon a good footing, meeting with
the family would give the general pleasure; if the shyness continued,the prospect of seeing her would be disagreeable.

"You probably know," added she, "that my father has determined to remain here
during your gaiety, so that he probably will not interface with the Colnbrook family." 
"We cannot consent to that plan, " re-84          HOWARD CASTLE.

plied the marquis; "before I leave him, I
must have it changed, and that we shall
have the pleasure of seeing him with you.
The duke was quite mortified with his
letter, and would have written an answer
on the subject, had I not offered a personal
expostulation, to appease the anger of the
family at my stealing off this morning,
when there was a large party expected at
dinner. I must carry back good news-
that my embassy has succeeded, and that
you and the general will dine at Carns-
worth Castle on the twenty-seventh of this
month, where," exclaimed he, gaily press-
ing the hand which he had drawn under
his arm, "all are prepared to admire Miss
Bouverie."

"I am obliged to you," she gravely an-
swered, "for the favourable impression
you have given of me," at the same time
withdrawing her hand.

No check had any effect in damping the
hopes of the marquis; his only reason for
not declaring the admiration he felt in se-
rious terms was, that he wished the duke
and duchess to see, previous to his an-
nouncing his attachment to them, the
lovely object who had gained his heart; her
                 HOWARD CASTLE.           85

beauty, he was more and more convinced,
was unrivalled; and her manner, upon be-
ing compared to others, was the most
pleasing he had ever met with. He allow-
ed himself to dwell on her charms, with a
certainty of one day possessing them; he
resolved upon her being introduced to his
family; and, before she left Carnsworth, to
make his sentiments known. She could
not be ignorant that he loved her, and that
his love was returned; he never for a mo-
ment doubted the joy she expressed at see-
ing him betrayed the sweet emotion which
filled her bosom; the deep tinge of vermil-
lion which overspread her expressive coun-
tenance, as she extended her hand to him,
and, with pleasure which she could not
hide, welcomed him to Roachwood, prov-
ed in plain terms, that her affections were
his; probably he was the subject of her
meditations, as when he first observed her,
she appeared in a deep study.

  The general was rejoiced to see him;
his reception from the father and the 
daughter convinced him he was a favour-
ite with both, and that both would rejoice
in the connexion. He again was enrap-86     HOWARD CASTLE.

tured with Clementina's dulcet notes; the
sweet tones of her voice thrilled to his
heart, which was wholly the beautiful
singer's, and he longed to hear the confes-
sion from her of being loved in return.
But he kept steady to his plan, and quit-
ted teh siren next morning, without dis-
closing his feelings, further than shewing
evident admiration. He had succeeded as
well with the father as he expected to do
with Clementina. The general, after a
good deal of hesitation, promised to join
the gay party on the day which the duke
had fixed upon, which gave universal sa-
tisfaction.

The only wish now remaining with Cle-
mentina was, that her aunt should visit
them; a reconciliation with those relations,
she was perfectly convinced, was necessary
before she could enjoy perfect happiness;
she was the innocent cause of dissension,
and she must be the means of restoring peace.
She was resolved to write to lady Radnor,
but would wait for a few days, in hopes
there might be a voluntary offer of a visit.
Clementina's disposition was as amiable as
her person was beautiful; her heart waswarm and affectionate, open to strong impressions and strong attachments, and filled with a high sense of gratitude - a kind action was never forgot, and a friendship once formed, was not easily shaken; she retained such an idea of the kindness she had received at Colnbrook, as the warmth of lady Radnor's temper could not efface; she longed to fold lady Elenora to her heart, with all the ardour of early affection; she retained the same feelings towards her and the whole family, as if her separation had only recently taken place; her mind had been accustomed to dwell upon her early days with peculiar delight; and since her return to England, they were not weakened, as the idea of being so near those she loved, and not to meet with them, but with averted looks and shy manners, occupied her thoughts, and disturbed her happiest moments. She was employed in her own mind composing a conciliatory letter to her aunt, when the marquis disturbed her. As soon as he was gone, she committed to paper what she hoped would restore peace.
 The general observed how much her         HOWARD CASTLE.

mind appeared occupied, and suspected
that lord Clemaire's engaging address and 
polished manners had made an impression
on her; if it was reciprocal, nothing could 
bemore gratifying to him, as he seemed ami-
able, and would be a most splendid connex-
ion for her; but he durst not let his mind
dwell upon so advantageous a match for 
his child, as probably the marquis was, like
all other young men, found of flirting with 
a pretty woman, without any serious ad-
miration; he trusted her heart would not 
suffer; if she escaped free from uneasiness,
all would be right, but he feared the evi-
dent absence of manner, which he had
watched more particularly since the mar-
quis's last visit, was occasioned by his 
attentions, and the flattering speeches 
which he missed no opportunity to whis-
per to her. Nothing was lost upon the'
general; he observed, with all the solici-
tude of a fond parent, the marked admira-
tion which Clementina could not be blind 
to, and which, he feared, had sunk too
deep in her young heart for her happiness.
The general roused her from her reverie,
by saying--"Why is my Clementina be-                   HOWARD CASTLE.                89

come so grave and thoughtful?  I am 
afraid the shades of Roachwood are too 
dull for you, and that you feel the blank
of society proper for your age."

  "Ah!" replied Clementina, with ani-
mation, "my dear father is a bad physi-
oghomist; your child never was so hap-
py in her life.  I want no companion but
what I have--no comfort but what I pos-
sess, excepting the friendship of lady Ele-
nora Montague; to be upon a good footing
with those relations, would certainly be
very gratifying to me, but it will not in-
rerrupt my happiness, even should they
spurn my regard.  While Heaven spares
you to me, I trust I shall be grateful, and
enjoy the blessing without murmuring at
my aunt's temper, for depriving me of my
early companion."

  The lively animation with which these
words were spoken convinced the general
they were sincere; but still the marquis of
Clemaire might have created the cloud
which had obscured her wonted cheerful-
ness; he though it almost impossible so
handsome and so agreeable a man should
pay such court, and he unregarded by so90                  HOWARD CASTLE.

young and inexperienced a girl. If her
peace of mind should be injured, he should
be wretched; but he durst not hint his 
suspicion, for fear of putting ideas into her
head, which he feared, greatly feared, were
already there.

  They were seated after dinner, the ge-
neral reading a newspaper, and Clementina
engaged with a book, from which her
thoughts often wandered, when the en-
trance of a footman with a letter, which he
said a servant from Colnbrook waited an
answer for, arrested all her attention. The
general took it; he looked at his daugh-
ter, and saw the agitation and pleasure
which were spread over her countenance.

  "It is," said she, "as I hoped--a letter
from my aunt, and we shall again be
friends."

  "It is not, indeed," said the general, as
he run his eyes over the paper.

  Disappointment for a moment took po-
session of Clementina, but her father
quickly dispersed it, by adding--"It is
from lord Radnor, as kind and affection-
ate as every; and hoping that to-morrow
morning I shall receive a visit from him-
               HOWARD CASTLE                   91
self and lady Radnor, as if no disagreement had ever interrupted our friendship. Be it so," said the general, as he laid down his letter, and rung the bell for his writing materials; "since they have made the first advance towards a reconciliation, I will not be the one to check it. I suppose lady Radnor has given my lord leave to write, and probably has dictated what he was to say."
     The pleasure Clementina now felt repaid her for all the anxiety and uneasiness she had experienced. Thus, in a moment, was every disagreeable idea banished. Her visit at Carnsworth would now be delightful; she should spend some time in the same house with the whole family, and renew the friendship begun in their early days. She secretly wondered if the marquis of Clemaire had in any way interfered, or had told them her anxiety to meet with them; if he had been the means of restoring peace, she should feel grateful to him in a high degree. Lord Radnor had not mentioned any one's visiting them but lady Radnor and himself; but she hoped that lady Elenora would accompany them-92 HOWARD CASTLE.

"why not the whole family?" thought she;
"it would be odd if lord Montague was the
only one to remain at home; every mem-
ber of the house of Radnor may be as anx-
ious to renew the acquaintance as I have
been, and he ought to take the first op-
portunity of waiting upon his uncle." She
flattered herself she should have the hap-
piness of meeting with both uncle, aunt,
and cousins, in the morning; she was pre-
pared to receive them two hours before
they appeared; no employment could ar-
rest her attention; if she sat down to her
instrument, the least noise attracted her
attention, and made her heart flutter. At
last she quietly seated herself in the win-
dow, which commanded a view of the ap-
proach, and watched for their appearance.

At last the long-looked-for carriage came
in sight, and Clementina's feelings were in
a tumult. She saw lord Radnor hand his
lady and daughter out of the coach, and
the footman put up the steps; she had no
time for animadversion. Her father, who
had gone to meet his guests, entered the
room, handling lady Radnor, to whom Cle-
mentina flew with all the ardour of affec-           HOWARD CASTLE               9

tion. The reception she met with was
congenial to her own feelings; her aunt
pressed her to her heart, and expressed, in
the most gratifying language, the pleasure
she experienced in the meeting.  She
found lady Elenora what her most san-
guine expectation had painted; they both
were rejoiced at thus renewing their
early friendship, which they earnestly
hped might never again meet with a
check.  Lord Radnor was not the least
pleased of the party, as he had long  wish-
ed again to enjoy the society of his brother
and friend.

     Lord Montague sent a message of apo-
logy why he did not join the happy group
---that no one participated more feelingly
in the reunion of the families than he did.
Lord Clemaire of the families than he did.
Lord Clemaire being at Colnbrook pre-
vented his accompanying them.

     "He goes with lord Clemaire to-moor-
row," said lady Elenora, "to Carnsworth
Castle, and will have no opportunity to
visit you.  Your first meeting will be
there; he longs to see his little favourite
cousin again, and I believe will be as much
surprised as I have been.  I could hardly
  94   HOWARD CASTLE.
think it possible that the poppet Clementina
could be so changed!"
   "And I," replied Clementina, "had
exactly the same idea. Did you hear of
my visit to Colnbrook?"
    A "no" from lady Elenora made her
proceed.
    "I was tempted to steal a sight of a
house where I had spent my infancy; in
the absence of the family (I was afraid I
should not have an opportunity when you
returned) I went to Colnbrook, and had
the greatest pleasure in retracing the little
events which had made an impression on
my mind, and there I saw the pictures of
the family ; I was therefore prepared to
see you, as you are very different from
what my recollection had painted you."
   After they had spent an hour at Roach-
wood, lord and lady Radnor, and lady Ele-
nora bid them adieu, highly gratified with
the reception they had met with; their en-
comiums upon the beauty of Clementina
were unbounded. Lord Radnor raved of
his lovely niece, who was the handsomest
woman he had ever seen. The marquis
was delighted with the admination which

they bestowed, and plainly proved, by what he said, that her charms had made a deep impression on him. 

"I have reason to rejoice," said lord Montague, laughing, "that I have not seen this siren, and my wisest plan would be to avoid such dangerous society. Should I be so unfortunate as to admire her as much as those of my family who have seen her, I should sigh in vain, and envy you, my lord, the happy privilege of breathing into her ear the soft accents of love."

The marquis bowed, and the self-complacent smile which accompanied it plainly said all is peace within; no doubts or fears racked his bosom; the lovely Clementina, he believed, would soon be his.

Chapter VI.

The twenty-seventh of December arrived, the day on which they were to set off for Carnsworth Castle. All was bustle at 96               HOWARD CASTLE.

Roachwood; the servants were so little accoustomed to their master's moving from home, that a journey was a great event in the family. A coach, which had been purchased on the general;s marriage, and which had been little used, was to be their conveyance; it was not perfectly modern, but much more convenient, as the stool and cushions which James placed for his master's reception occupied nearly half of the carriage. Mary stood with the most anxious countenance as she handed various boxes in, containing her lady's smart ornaments, praying they might not be crushed. Clementina's only care and anxiety was, that Frolic might be prevented from following them, which Mrs.Moore promised should be her care. James at last announced that the carriage was waiting. The general and Clementina were seated, and Mary opposite to them, surrounded by boxes, which she would not trust out of her sight.

"Is all this preparation," said the general, "for Carnsworth? you surely mean to outstrip the belles in finery."

"I hope not," said Clementina; "youcertainly might have put my dress into less compass, as this display is very alarming; should any of the family see the interior of the carriage, or what is brought out of it, they will suppose that we mean to remain a month with them."

"A week," replied the general, "will be the extent of our visit. I will give you one day after the ball for you to recover the fatigue before we commence our journey. I almost think it is unnecessary our  going to Bath, as your return has improved my health more than all the doctors in the world could do; but the excursion will amuse you; and if we should tire of the gaiety, we can return to Roachwood. What say you to the plan? will you be willing to take only a peep of the world?"

By his manner, and the significant smile which accompanied these words, she saw her father suspected she would be unwilling to give up the scheme; she quickly answered-"Did you not require the Bath waters, I should prefer remaining in the country-I have not the smallest degree of curiosity-I dare say public amusements98 HOWARD CASTLE.

may be very delightful to those who have
tasted of their pleasures--I have not, nor
have I the least inclination--I know I am
happy in retirement, with the society of
those friends I love. I should not wish to
quit the quiet, serene life I lead at Roach-
wood, to search for, probably, what I should
never find in dissipation."

The general smiled--"Could I only
hear your sentiments, and not see you,
I should conclude you were not formed to
please the public eye; admiration is gene-
rally the summit of happiness in a young
breast; nature did not give you such en-
dowments for me to keep you all to my-
self; you must judge in some degree of a
world, in which probably you will have to 
fill a conspicuous situation; I should be
blamed if I did."

"Who could blame you," asked Cle-
mentia, "for indulging your child? You
flatter me by saying nature has been kind
to me; why has she given me the powers
of amusement for me to waste them in
pursuits which cannot in any way im-
prove my mind? When lady Augusta has
often described to me the pleasures of a     HOWARD CASTLE.

London life, with all the animation possi-
ble, I have never felt intoxicated by the
description; and never could she instil a
wish into me that I might participate in
such a scene. Our minds," continued Cle-
mentina, "are formed as different as our
persons are; I should be generally reckon-
ed quietly stupid to prefer a country life,
with the society of relations (as I hope to 
be intimate with the Colnbrook family),
to all the bustle lady Augusta will enjoy 
in Portman-square."

 "Perhaps," said her father, "you will
not have the same idea after you have ]
been a month in Bath."

 "They pray let us return home from
Carnsworth Castle," interrupted she, "and
let me retain my happy feelings."

 The general smiled--"This is an old
subject of dispute between a father and a
daughter of your age, reverse it, and it
would be natural. But although it is very
odd, it is very companion is no punishment."

 They continued busily conversing, when 
a hollowing from the servants behind made100                 HOWARD CASTLE.

Mary stretch her head out of the window,
to see what was the matter, when, to her
mistress's sorrow, she heard her exclaim--
"It is poor little Frolic gallopoing after us;
he is quite out of breath, and Thomas is
trying to drive him back with his whip."

  "What shall I do?" said Clementina, turn-
ing to her father, "we must be nearly five
miles from home; poor fellow! he will be 
lost."

  "Take the dog to Carnsworth, by all
means," said the general, "and return him
to lord Montague."

  "What excuse can I make for having
him in my possession?"

  "The truth, to be sure."

  Her only alternative was to make Mary
confine him in her apartment, until she
was sufficiently acquainted with lord Mon-
tague to tell him of the theft she had com-
mitted, and solicit permission to keep him.

  Frolic had eluded the whip, and was
now barking by the side of the coach, where
he soon had a place at Clementina's feet.

  They arrived at Carnsworth Castle, with-
out meeting with either accident or adven-
ture.
                                HOWARD CASTLE.                           101

The bleak season of the year did not show off the beauty of the park to advantage; but the house was splendid in the extreme. In the entrance-hall lady Augusta met them with extended arms, and gave her friend the most cordial reception possible; she introduced the general into the library, where she knew her father was, and left them to enjoy each other's company; as they had not met for many years, she knew a téte-à-téte would be most agreeable. She drew Clementina's arm under hers, saying-"My mother has retired to dress, but she desired me, if you arrived when she was at her toilet, that I should bring you to her dressing-room-it will be more agreeanle. You should be acquainted with the family before you appear in the drawing room. My brother is not yet returned from hunting; he was laughed out of a proposal he made at breakfast, which was to give up the sports of the field, that he might be ready to receive you."

"He was extremely polite," said Clementina. 

She had time for no more. A tap at102      Howard Castle
the room-door, and a permission to enter, put a stop to their conversation.
   The duchess dismissed her attendant.  and rose at their approach, extending at the same time her hand to the blushing Clementina, saying - "I am extremely happy in seeing Miss Bouverie at Carnsworth Castle.  I hope your father has accompanied you, and that he is in good health."
   "He is perfectly well," was her answer; "he is with the duke; meeting with his grace gives him particular pleasure."
   "It is reciprocal," said the duchess, "as I have heard him express a strong wish to meet again with his old friend."
   The steady gaze of the duchess rather disconcerted Clementina; she seemed to survey her with the eye of criticism.  Had she been conscious of her charms, she need not have shrunk from the survey; no fault could her grace discover; she certainly was beautiful, and her manners elegent - no awkward restraint, or vulgar ease; she wished lady Augusta was her counterpart. 
   The duchess had been a fine woman, without any regular beauty her counte-            HOWARD CASTLE.              103

nance had an expression of hauteur, which
conveyed the idea that she had a high
sense of her birth and dignity.  Her car-
riage was creet and stately, and not even to
her own family were her manners ever fa-
miliar; a stiff politeness kept all at a due dis-
tance; and Clementina felt rather relieved
when lady Augusta proposed retiring; the
duchess assented, at the same time asking
if Miss Bouverie would not go to the
luncheon-room, and take some refresh-
ment ?

     Clemenina politely declined the offer,
and withdre.

     The important task of the toilet sepa-
rated lady August and her friend, who
shewed her to her apartment, where she
found Mary in anxious expectation for
her coming; when she was nearly ready,
lady Augusta entered her room ___ "I
com," said she, "to attend you to the
drawing-room; all the beaux are returned,
and my brother is most impatient to see
you."

     "Without your protection, I could not
have made my entréd, which,even with
you, I feel is very formidable."
104                HOWARD CASTLE.

     "Formidable !" repeated lady Augusta,
laughing, "what an idea!  Why should
you be alarmed? Was it the drawing-
room at St. James's, I should excuse a lit-
tle trepidation; but here, where there is
only a party of select friends, there can be
no cause for alarm. Were you a little, 
awkward-lookingthing, frightened at your
own shadow, and walked with a mincingl
timid step, I could suppose the first intro-
duction into a brilliant party might be ra-
ther alarming; but you, with your fine tall
figure and graceful motions, can never feel
afraid of being looked at."

     Clementina smiled at lady Augusta's
idea of height giving her courage ___"Who
does this select party consist of?

     "Four of them are your own relations,
whom I am happy to find, have been to
wait upon you, and who, I assure you, are
your warm admirers."

     "Not all," replied Clementian. "Lord
Montague was not at Roachwood."

     "To be sure" cried lady Augusta, "the
admiration of the other branches did not
signify; he certainly will be of the same
mind, if he sees you at all; but he is so ab 
 Howard Castle. 105

sent, and so odd, he may no observe you
are of the party. You know the family 
plans in regard to this original." A nega-
tive made her proceed. "Maria Osburn
is to be lady Montague; her immense for-
tune is to clear off incumbrances, and she
is to be countess in return. This is fix-
ed between the mammas, and I believe
they are good children, and will do what
they are bid. She is his lordship's senior,
but that is of no consequence; marriage is 
now a very good kind of traffic-the heart
quite out of the question. At times I fan-
cy he is satisfied with the plan; at others,
he seems to forget she is in existence:
but come along, and you shall judge for
yourself of this relation." So saying, she
led the way to the drawing-room, the door
of which Clementina saw lady Augusta
throw open, and announce Miss Bouverie.

There was no time for hesitation; she
had hardly entered the room, when the
marquis flew towards her, and taking her
hand, expressed by looks and words the
pleasure which he really felt. He led her to
a seat near the duchess, who again politely

F3accosted her.  She looked round the room,
but saw not a person in it who she had
ever seen before; she felt pleased that the
marquis continued by her; she even list-
ened with more patience to his gay speeches
than she thought she could ever have done,
as she should have felt uncomfortable with
no other companion than the duchess,
whose dignified manners threw a restraint
over her.  An elderly lady was seated on
the couch with her grace, to whom she
sometimes addressed her conversation.  The
marquis informed her she was Mrs. Osburn.
Clementina observed that the company ap-
peared perfectly at their ease—no form or
ceremony, which she should have expected
from the still formality of the duchess.  
There was, reclining upon an ottoman near
her, a pretty-looking young lady, who
seemed gay and lively, and whose bright
sallies amused, or appeared to amuse, a
gentleman who was seated by her; she al-
most could fancy she was the object they
were discussing, as they frequently cast
their eyes upon her. Can it be, thought
she, lord Montague and Miss Osburn? but 
she could trace no resemblance to the pic-
                  HOWARD CASTLE            107

ture, nor of what she recollected of him. There was a sarcastic smile upon the features of the lady, which did not prepossess her in her favour, and she was more and more convinced, that comments upon her were what was creating the smile which played upon her companion's countenance. She discarded the idea as ridiculous, that it was her relation who could be so amused. The drawing-room door being opened, arrested her attention, as she hoped to see lady Elenora enter; but the moment she saw the person, she recognised her brother. The perfect remembrance she had of his features was so imprinted on her memory, that she required not the resemblance of the picture to recall him to her recollection. He was always remarkably handsome; and although he retained much of his former apperance, age had improved him. His figure was manly and elegant, and his countenance had all the pleasing expression which the picture had given him, with the regular fine features which he had when a boy.

The marquis whispered-" Is it necessary to introduce lord Montague to you?""I have not seen him," replied
Clementina, "since my childhood, and I dare
say he can have no remembrance of me;
therefore an introduction is necessary."

He saw an unusual degree of agitation
in her countenance, as his lordship
approached nearer to her; he was paying his
compliments to the duchess. She heard
the marquis say-- "It is perhaps not a
prudent wish Montague, for me to introduce
Miss Bouverie to your acquaintance."

"More probably imprudent on my side."
replied he, "to rejoice in such an
introduction. Do you honour me by a place
in your memory, Miss Bouverie? Time has
Made a great change on us both dine we 
last saw each other. Your appearance is 
so perfectly altered, that I cannot trace
a feature of my companion, which,
before I saw you, I believed could not be
the case

"I knew you, my lord, the moment
 you entered the room; but you are less
changed than either lady Elenora or myself."

"I was bordering on manhood, or fancied 
myself so, when you left Roachwood;
therefore my looks could not undergo sogreat an alteration as yours and my sister's,
who were so much younger. I cannot ex-
press the pleasure I feel in renewing an ac-
quaintance begun so early in life. I think
the mind is wonderfully soon able to form
strong attachments, and that the impression
is not so easily worn out as in maturer age."

"It ought not to be the case, my lord;
where sense should in some degree guide
the heart, it should be a more lasting, as it
would be a more prudent predilection;
childish fancies would be very inconveni-
ent to be adhered to in riper years."

She might have spoken on without be-
ing interrupted, as lord Montague appear-
ed lost in thought.

The marquis had been called to the other
end of the room by his sister who was all
life and animation.

Clementina saw with pleasure that her
friend was as happy as possible; she again
wondered what had become of lady Ele-
nora, and ventured to express is to lord
Montague.

"Have you not seen my sister since you
came? I know she was on horseback this110                               HOWARD CASTLE

morning, which may have made her later at her toilet."

     As he said these words, a bustle at the room-door attracted their attention; it was opened, and Frolic made his appearance, followed by a lady. The dog quickly recognised the person he was in search of; he run up to Clementina, and expressed the joy he felt at escaping once more from confinement, and again finding his mistress. He jumped upon her, and insisted upon being noticed. She had no time to speak, as Miss Osburn called to lord Montague, that she had made a most extraordinary discovery.

His lordship did not attend to what she said, being wholly engrossed with the appearance of Frolic, whom he knew to be his long-lost favourite. He saw, in the countenance of Clementina, he had been discovered contrary to her inclination, as he was convinced, from the embarrassment she was in, his being introduced into that room had distressed her, and that he now was a favourite of hers-"If I am not greatly mistaken, this little gentleman is an old ac-   HOWARD CASTLE.

quaintance of mine, although he disclaims
all knowledge of me."

 "It must appear strange, my lord, that
I should have committed a theft, but I
plead guilty, and crave your pardon. I
paid a morning visit at Colnbrook before
you returned, and Frolic told me, in such 
plain language, he was unhappy during
your absence, that I suffered him to accom-
pany me home. He has no claim upon
my pity now; his master is returned."

 "He would be an object of commisera-
tion, were you to deprive him of the happy
situation he is in. Who would not envy
him if he is a favourite of Miss Bouverie?
Will you suffer me to derive pleasure from
your having in your possession what once
belonged to me, and will you permit Fro-
lic to retain the place in your regard, both
for his own sake and his master's? I not
only an the oldest acquaintance you have,
but I am your nearest relation; therefore I
feel entitled to make this request."

 "I thank you for the gift," replied she,
with quickness, "and I shall treasure Fro-
lic, both on his own account, and for the
sake of the giver."112           Howard Castle

   The marquis at these words joined them, which prevented lord Montague expressing his thanks.  He soon after left her. 
   The marquis, whose curiosity had been greatly raised by the extraordinary discovery Miss Osburn had made, was soon master of the subject, and related to her how the little prisoner was released.  The lady was in search of lady Elenora; mistaking Miss Bouverie's apartment for hers, she found a little trembling captive shut up, and, in her great good-nature, released him.  "The truth was," said the marquis, "the name on the collar surprised her, as she discovered who the room belonged to.  I suppose she was resolved to see what a commotion his being introduced would make, and she should get a satisfactory explanation from lord Montague why a dog of his was so secreted.  Any thin which has the appearance of investigation suits Miss Osburn, she has a busy spirit, ever restless, unless employed."
   "I trust," exclaimed Clementina, "she will consider me too insignificant a being to draw forth her powers upon, and that she will not be uneasy at what was a mere                      HOWARD CASTEL.             113
accident.  Lord Montague, I hope, will explain every circumstance to her."
  " why should he." asked the marquis, "gratify such curiosity? why did she intrude into your apartment? and why did she give the dog his liberty?  He was tied by a riband to the table, which plainly proved he was not intended to stray further.  Miss Osburn ought to apologize to you for what she has done,"
  "That is perfectly unnecessary," said Clementina; "she has done no harm by her interference, and I am satisfied; my maid obeyed my orders in securinghim,"
  Lady Radnor and lady Elenora approached herl she advanced to meet them, white affection beaming in her countenance, and was delighted with the kindness of her aunt.  She seated herself by the duchess, and lady Elenora with Clementina and the marquis.
  "has my brother been introduced to you? or has he pressured upon his former friendship," asked lady Elenora, " and accosted you without further ceremony?"
  "Our acquaintance," replied Clementiona," is of so ancient a date, I was worn
114               HOWARD CASTLE.

out of his remembrance; had not the mar-
quis named me to him, he could not have
discovered who had been his early compa-
nion."

  "I think," replied the marquis, "he 
could not have remained long in doubt;
you had been very particularly described to
him; he knew you were to be here, and
you were the only stranger in the room."

  Dinner being announced, put them all
in motion; not till then did lady Elenora
perceive Clementina's  attendant.

  "Frolic!" exclaimed she, "how, in the
name of wonder, have you got here?"

  "In my father's carriage," replied Cle-
mentina. "I brought him to return him
to your brother; but he permits me to keep
my little favourite."

  "Permit you!" cried lady Elenora; "I
should suppose he will be delighted if
any thing which belonged to him could
give you pleasure; but I think Frolic is
very ungrateful, as he takes no notice of
me, who was his only friend after my bro-
ther left us--I cherished him for the sake
of his master."

  "You will not say so, I trust," said theHoward Castle. 115

marquis, at the same time pressing the'
hand of Clementina.

"I hope they will both prove faithful
friends to me," was her reply. "I shall
certainly value the dog more highly, from
having been the gift of Lord Montague."

"Does his near relationship sanction the
kindness of this speech?" whispered the
marquis, as he seated himself at the table
between the lovely cousins; "beware of
creating jealousy."

"I understand you," replied she.
"Miss Osburn has no occasion to fear my
infringing on her rights; your sister told
me of the engagement between them."

The marquis did not attempt an expla-
nation, as he flattered himself she under-
stood him as he meant she should.

The duke, lord Radnor, and the gene-
ral, they found waiting for the remainer
of the company in the dining-room. They
had enjoyed an hour's conversation by
themselves, as the party consisted chiefly
of younger men, who were more amused
amongst the gay assemblage of beauty in
the drawing-room, than with politics and
farming, which had been discussed in116          Howard Castle.

the library; they deemed it no incivity 
enjoying themselves, which they did in a 
high degree.

   The general's spirits were raised beyond 
their common bounds; he was happy in 
the society of his old friends; and the
praises of his daughter, which both the
duke and lord Radnor were lavish in be-
stowing, delighted him.  He assured them,
the beauty of her outside was nothing to
compare to the beauty of her mind , the
sweetness of her temper, and the goodness 
of her heart; all combined to make him the
happiest parent in the world.

  " You cannot expect," said the duke,
" to keep such a paragon long with you.
My son raves of her charms; and should
he attempt to steal her from you, you must
not be surprised, nor at our rejoicing in 
such a theft."

  " And I," said the general, " could not
feel either angry or sorry, although I should
be deprived of my companion.  I should
rejoice more in the prospect of her happi-
ness, than even the splendor of the cou-
nexion."

  " Clemaire," replied the duke, " hasmany good qualities, and is formed to
please the fair sex.  I never heard him ad-
mire any female so much as he does Miss
Bouverie ; and if he fixes there, he will
give both his mother and myself pleasure."

This assurance pleased his friend ex-
ceedingly; it now became his favourite
wish to see his Clementina the marchio-
ness of Clemaire.

Lord Montague was seated at dinner,
between lady Augusta and Miss Osburn,
who did not appear to Clementina to be
formed to please her cousin.  From what
she could observe, there was a supercilious
air and evident self-conceit in her manner,
that she could not suppose he would ad-
mire ; his gentle address and mild coun-
tenance seemed ill adapted to her loud, in-
harmonious voice, and bold looks; her face
was handsome, as her features were regular;
but the keen expression and sarcastic sneer
prejudiced Clementina against her; her
beauty was evidently much indebted to
art, as she displayed the finest bloom in
the world, and a skin like alabaster.  Her
figure had as little nature in it as her com-
118   Howard Castle

plexion; but take her as she made herself, she was a showy, pretty woman.
    Miss Pelham (the lady who Clementina had supposed was Miss Osburn) was her counterpart, only without her large fortune; they were inseparable friends; if the latter disapproved of any person, Miss Pelham was a bitter enemy; if Miss Osburn admired, her companion adored the happy being, and took care never to form an opinion till she knew how her patroness was inclined; never was there a more pliant or subservient disposition, or one who bowed more humbly at the shrine of wealth; strip Miss Osburn of her money, and you stript her at the same time of her friend.
   Mrs. Osburn had a small jointure, and was rather too much in the same capacity as Miss Pelham, and watched with solicitude her daughter's smiles, or, more commonly, her frowns.  A brother of her husband's had left all the wealth he had acquired in India to his neice, without adding to her mother's income - the only proviso, the name of Osburn should be attached to his fortune.
This little history the marquis gave her,
who was evidently no admirer of either
Miss Osburn or Miss Pelham; he ap-
peared inclined to apologize for their
spending so much of their time at Carns-
worth Castle, by adding--"My mother is
an old friend of Ms. Osburn's, who is a
good-tempered woman, and, I believe,
spends her happiest days here, as in this
house she is more her own mistress than
in her own."

The marquis had got on a never-failing
subject, but was stopt by the ladies quit-
ting the dining-room.

Clementina had heard enough (if she had
not been prejudiced from her own observa-
tion) to avoid the society of Miss Osburn
and Miss Pelham.

Music was proposed for the evening's
amusement, and no contemptible concert
was performed. Clementina's powers were
generally admired, and no one seemed to
feel them more than lord Montague. Her
voice, accompanied by the harp, was beau-
tiful harmony, and the simple grace of the
singer attracted every eye.

The marquis was envied, and pronoun-120                       HOWARD CASTLE.

ced a favourite of fortune's, as it was universally understood the lovely Miss Bo-
uverie was his destined bride.


     "I surely may be permitted," said lord Montague as he seated himself by Clementina, " to secure this vacant chair; it is so seldom there is an opportunity to approach you, that I have gladly seized the moment; the marquis is engaged to tell you how much I have been pleased with your voice; I know how dangerous it is to listen to you; but I could not avoid hearing the notes, nor could I help contemplating the singer; we were all entitled to gaze, when you were exerting your voice to please every one; I was not infringing on the happy prerogative of the marquis to admire my cousin, when she acted in a public capacity; and I hape to be again charmed, without injuring my friend."


     Clementina felt unwilling to understand lord Montague's hints; she disliked the marked preference the marquis shewed her; but being a stranger in his father's house was the cause which she attributed his extreme attention to; she left pleased that lord Montague had placed himself be her;


 
as she had been mortified by his evidently avoiding her, she had wished exceedingly to talk of former days, and anticipated pleasure in conversing with him; but he had carefully avoided giving her an opportunity; she now wished to keep him by her, and succeeded, as he forgot the marquis's rights-prudence, every thing was banished from his recollection, but pleasing conversation of Clementina.

Chapter VII.

Next morning Clementina rose at her usual hour, and had been long ready, when a bell rung, which she supposed was the summons to breakfast, it being considerably past the time at which she had been accustomed to appear. She went to the room where they had supped but found no preparation going forward; she was surprised; but seeing a book laid in one of the windows, she took it up, and found it122          HOWARD CASTLE.

was the first volume of the Sorrows of 
Werter, in French. Being in her favorite
language, she began to read it; the ele-
gance and beauty of many of the senti-
ments pleased her, and she resolved to
peruse it.
   A servant's entrance roused her from 
her studies ; he answered to her inquiries
that it wanted half-an-hour of the usual
time the family appeared at, but seldom
any person came down stairs till near ele-
ven, and that breakfast was never over
before one- " If you will give me leave,
ma'am, I will shew you to the library, as
we may disturb you here."
  She accepted the offer,and followed the
footman into a charming room,which,like
the other,was quite unoccupied; there she seated herself, and continued the little in-
teresting story.
  She had not remained ten minutes, when
lord Montague entered-" Miss Bouverie
here thus early !" exclaimed he, as he ad-
vanced," shall I disturb your meditations,
if I venture to proceed?"
   " If my studies had been very serious,
my lord, I should not have remained in aHOWARD CASTLE. 123

public room. where, of course, I should
be subject to interruptions."

"May I ask what it is which interests
you?'

"A book, my lord, which I believe is 
your property; I think your name is in
the first leaf of it."

"Ah!" cried he, "have you got that
little melancholy tale? it is conveyed in 
pretty language, and most touch the feel-
ings; you perhaps know the story is re-
probated as dangerous, and I believe it is
so when it falls into improper hands; but
where there is sense to distinguish the
failings of the impetuous Werter, it may 
be of use as a beacon to men of violent
passions, his love for the betrothed wife of 
Albert overcame his reason, and he be-
came the victim of his uncontrolled affec-
tions; his arguments upon suicide I con-
demn, as no man, in his cool reason, can
defend principles which are contrary to
every law human and divine; but it is im-
possible not to pity Werter, although all 
must condemn him."

"Have you the second volume, my
lord?"

               G 2124 HOWARD CASTLE.

"I have," at the same time pulling it
from his pocket; "you may not have time
to read it while you are an inhabitant of
Carnsworth; allow it to be your travelling
companion, and honour me by placing it
in your library--it will be a memento of
me."

"A melancholy one, by your account,"
said Clementina; "I should not wish
Werter to remind me of you."

A deep sigh escaped him, and he looked
earnestly in her face; at last he exclaimed,
with evident agitation--"You are not
aware of what you have said; there is a si-
milarity in Werter's situation and mine;
but I trust nothing shall tempt me to act
as he did; when I find I can no longer
conduct myself with propriety, I will fly,
like a coward, and hide my weakness in
solitude."

Clementina remained silent; she was
surprised with his manner, and with his
words, and knew not what to answer.

After a pause of some minutes, lord
Montague took her hand--"How happy
the prospect of spending half-an-hour in
your company would have made me, couldHOWARD CASTLE. 125


my good genius have whispered to me,

when I enjoyed so much the few minutes

we passed in the music-room last night,

that I should have again an opportunity

of conversing with you this morning! but

this foolish book has driven every pleasant

idea from my mind.”


   "Or rather my foolish remark,” said

Clementina. “ You had given me sufficient

hints, in regard to Werter‘s character, to

prevent my wishing him to remind me of

you. I should be sorry if’ my cousin did

not fill the highest place in my estimation,

which I suspect he would not do if he was

a Werter.”


   "Is not the highest place filled,” replied

he with archness, “ before you knew whe-

ther I was worthy of so exalted a situa-

tion? many will aspire to it who are doom-

ed to disappointment.”


    "You are very high,” replied Clemen-

tina. “ on the list of friendship, and I hope

nothing will happen to remove you from

the situation you have held for many

years; you would disappoint me most

cruelly if you forced me to renounce you,

as I look back with the greatest pleasure126                   HOWARD CASTLE.

on the days which are gone, and anticipate
the future with equal delight, as I am 
convinced nothing will again interrupt the
peace which is so happily re-established."
   " I trust not," sighted lord Montague;
he pressed the hand which he still held of 
hers to his lips; "let this bind our former
affection, for I loved you. Clementina."
   "As a sister," added she.
   "Thank you for checking me," an-
swered he, smiling; " the feelings of a 
boy towards a child of seven years old are
certainly very different from what would
now agitate me. The little Clementina I 
admired-I wad delighted to play with
you-to protect you-to amuse you; but
what would be my sensations was I now
to be upon that footing!"
   "You are," said Clementina; " at this
moment you are in play; and I am amus-
ed, and I am sure you would protect me,
save me, were I in danger."
   "With my life," cried he.
   "Then I have no need for fear, what-
ever dangers beset me; with such a cham-
pion I shall be courageous." HOWARD CASTLE        127

"ALAS!" said he, " I am not worthy of
such an offic."

"You are," cried she, " either very humble this morning, or very odd; you are unfit to be my guard, and I rather think you wished to be off from being my friend. What heinous crime hangs heavy
on your mind, which renders you incapable
of holding those high offices I am
willing to appoint you to?"

" Who would be willing," said he, "to
be a secondary object with Miss Bouverie?"

" Proud mortal!" exclaimed she, " you 
will be either all or none."

" None," whispered he; his feelings
 seemed almost to overcome him.

Clementina was again puzzled, and determing
he should be at liberty to indulge
his strange humour, opened her
book, and began to read. Lord Mantague 
walked about the room, apparently
lost in thought.

In this way lady Augusta found them -
A tété-à-tété!" exclaimed she, " but
not mal-é-à -propos my breaking in upon
you; the lady reading, and the gentleman 
walking for a wager. Well," conti- 128      Howard Castle

nued she, "my account will not create jealousy; my brother is miserable at having lost you, but I will relieve him, if he is uneasy at your being here with Lord Montague; both appear so solemn - you, Clementina, wrapt up in meditation, and your lordship pacing about, as far from her as you can get, looking as if you had not spoken a word for a month."
   "A second Lavater," said lord Montague; "you have defined our situation exactly.  I was so dull and stupid, Miss Bouverie could make nothing of me; she therefore had recourse to a book, and I to my own reflections for amusement, which are not often productive of much pleasure."
   "I am determined not to be infected with melancholy," cried lady Augusta; "come, Clementina, and relieve my brother's anxiety; I found him in the breakfast-room alone; I inquired for you, as I had tapped at your room-door in passing, and your maid told me you had been below near an hour; you must have something on your conscience which will not let you rest."
   "I shall take care for the future to con-HOWARD CASTLE. 129
from to the hours of the house," said Clementina, as she rose from her seat.
"And not spend such another horrid dull one," added lady Augusta, looking archly at lord Montague. She took her by the arm, and they joined the marquis, who seemed to have been unwillingly detained by a party of gentlemen, who were laying plans for the morning's amusement. The moment he saw Clementina cuter the room, he quitted them, and interrogated her (at the same time been, and how she had bsen employed?
She smiled as she answered-"Must I account to your lordship for every moment I have not the honour of spending in your company? Are you deputed my guardian, and as such acquied an ascendancy over my actions? If that is the case, I will inform you the exact hour I left my apartmontat, where I have been since, and what has been my employment."
"Mine," cried the marquis, evidently a little disconcerted by her manner of answering him, "is a self-appointed office;
G 3130 HOWARD CASTLE.

My wish in being Miss Bouverie's so-
ciety is for my own gratifcation, not as an
Argus to guard her."

"I can account both for her time and
her temper," said lady Augusta, laughing;

"I found her in the library with her cousin;
she sat reading the Sorrows of Werter,
with the evident marks of sorrow in her
face, and his lordship pacing about the
room, completely wrapt up in a gloomy
cogitation; so what can you expect from
such a conference?"

The marquis gently took the book from
Clementina, and put it into his pocket--"I
must prevent you, my dear Miss Bouverie,
from reading the poor, silly, melancholy
stuff which those pages contain; they are
evidently the effusions of a madman's brain,
who wishes to make every body as mad
as himself. I once read a few lines at the
end of the book, which, when I do read
novels, I generally begin with. I threw
Werter aside, resolved never more to open
it."

Clementina was expostulating with him,
and entreating he would restore the vo-
lume, when lady Radnor and Miss Os-HOWARD CASTLE. 131

burn entered, and soon after they were
seated at the breakfast-table. Lord Mon-
tague appeared perfectly absent, and out
of spirits; and, as soon as he possibly could,
quitted the room. The marquis was not in
his usual gaiety; Miss Bouverie was grave,
and infected him.

Amongst the variety who filled the
table at Carnsworth Castle, Clementina
particularly observed a young man who
appeared to have a never-failing source
of what is called fun, and whose lively
action and monkey tricks seemed to amuse
every one; his plain face ordi-
nary figure surprised her, as he had so
little the looks of a gentleman, that he
should be admitted at the duke of Bean-
claire's. She at last asked the marquis his
name; but she was astonished when he
said--"The honourable Mr. Stopford,
lord Almonton's eldest son; the young
lady seated near my sister is Miss Stop-
ford."

"Honourable!" repeated Clementina;
"surely he was not formed by nature for
such a situation."

"He is plain," replied the marquis, "and132                HOWARD CASTLE.

he studies to make himself worse, as he
chooses to be a conspicuous character; he
is almost a Proteus, as he can assume
any form; at present it is his whim to be
a Merry-Andrew, and to look and appear
as quizzical as possible."

  "Was he of the party yesterday?" ask-
ed Clementina.

  "He was," said the marquis; "but he
was in the character of a rational being,
and his dress had no peculiarity in it; he
bore a conspicuous part in the music-room
last night, as  he is quite an amateur, plays
on almost every musical instrument, and
sings delightfully; but he did not choose to
charm us with his voice, which he pre-
tended was hoarse; he is a composer of mu-
sic, and I have understood not a contempt-
ible one; and he can imitate almost any
body, or any style, from a bravura to a 
ridiculous ballad, and from the finest
singer to the vilest; it is a pity," continu-
ed the marquis, "that such powers are
thrown away, as he would be one of the
first comic actors in this country; his face,
which he can throw into any comical
form, would amuse if he did not speak aword; but his reciting is delightful, and
I could almost lay any bet, that if he 
really would exert himself, he could make
you laugh and cry alternately; his humour
is capricious, as unless it strikes himself, 
no persuasion will induce him to enter-
tain a party."

"And he certainly is right," said Cle-
mentina; "those talents would become
tiresome were they often displayed. I 
suppose mimicry is one of his accomplish-
ments?"

"And the best caricaturist in the world,"
added the marquis. 

"What a disagreeable character!" was her 
answer; "no one is safe in his society."

"Miss Bouverie is perfectly so," cried 
the marquis; "you may defy his pencil
and his powers of ridicule; could he paint
any thing half so perfect, he would be the
greatest artist in the world; your person, 
your manners, and your talents, are all
above his reach; he will not attempt what
he is sure to fail in."

"I am sure," said Clementina, "your 
lordship caricatures fine speeches; you 
shew your powers, as you are never at a 134             HOWARD CASTLE.

loss to introduce a compliment; you
might write for the lottery-office, you
have so much ingenuity for bringing in
your subject."

     The marquis was afraid of discussing the
point; he replied ___" I am satisfied you
have given me the merit of ingenuity; in
expressing what engrosses every faculty
but I must remind you of a promise you
made last night of practising the delightful
song which you said you failed in; I be-
lieve you was the only person in the room
who had such an idea.  Will you
accompany me to the music-room, or may
I order lady Augusta's harp to be brought
here ?"

     "Not for the world !" exclaimed she;
"you would make me a subject for Mr.
Stopford's pencil."

     "I dare not reply," said the marquis;
"but I will impart the scheme to a person
who, I know, will be delighted to hear
your voice."  So saying, he flew to lady
Elenora, who was charmed with the pro-
posal, and they quitted the room, where
there was much gaiety and amusement
going on.Mr. Stopford continued to be most faceticiously agreeable; but as the marquis had not given the most agreeable character of him, Clementina felt no wish to listen to the lively wit which created the mirth.  The duchess had retired with lady Radnor and Mrs. Osburn, and a party of gentlemen had accompanied the duke to view some beautiful stock of his own breeding; the younger part alone remained to amuse themselves as they chose; a keen frost prevented the sports of the field; therefore the beaux had no other employment than to attend the ladies.  Clementina had not finished the symphony when most of the party entered the room.
   "It is as we suspected," cried lady Augusta; "this is the second time I have caught you secreted this morning, Miss Bouverie.  Why would you not give us fair play, and permit us to accompany you?"
   Clementina paused - "This," said she, smiling, "was merely a rehearsal, not at all intended for public exhibition."
   "Then," said the marquis, "favour us136 HOWARD CASTLE.
with the enchanting Italian air you sung at Roachwood."
She reluctantly complied, as she knew attempting any excuse would bring such a flow of compliments from the marquis as would completely ovrwhelm her. She seated herself at the pianoforte, and played the symphony. She heard a voice exchlaim-"That is the most beautiful composition, and the most difficult to do justice to in the world." She was convinced it was Mr. Stopford who made the remark. Her voice faltered at first, and she was evidently flnttered, but gained courage and composure as she entered into the feelings of the words, and of the delightful harmony; at one of the most interesting passages she heard the room-door opened, and a person gently advanced towards her; she saw it was lord Montague; an unaccountable tremour seized her-her voice faltered-she stopt.
"Heavens!" exclaimed the same voice who had before extolled the song, and who appeared to he very near her, "this is an electrical stroke! my feelings were worked up to the highest pitch of admiration."HOWARD CASTLE. 137

 "How could you," said the marquis,
"be so cruel as to pause at the most beau-
tiful passage?"

"I ought, and do claim your pardon,
my lord, for breaking off  in so abrupt
a manner; but if my hearers are not already
tired, I will attempt to finish it."

 "And I," said lord Montague, "who
have been the unfortunate cause, will pro-
mise not again to disturb you, if you will
favour us with another, or the same song."

 "May I entreat for the same," said Mr.
Stopford, who now advanced to the piano-
forte; "the song has awakened such sen-
sations in my my breast as I cannot describe."

 "Take my advice," said Lord Monta-
gue, as he reclined against the window
close to the instrument, "not to wish for
what will inevitably create you misery."

 Mr. Stopford smiled--"You are pru-
dent, my lord-- I am not; I therefore will 
listen and admire."

 Before Clementina finished, an unusual
bustle was occasioned by Miss Osburn's en-
trance, who clapping the door after her,
walked up to her friend, Miss Pelham, de-
claring they looked as grave as if theyHOWARD CASTLE.
were listening to a sermon instead of a
song. Clementina heard hr, but hr
words made no impression; she finished, 
and innumerable compliments were paid
to her. The marquis was profuse in her
praise; Mr.Stopford was in ecstasy; but
lord Montague said not a word; he conti-
nued in the same position, and appeared
grave and absent.

Many were the solicitations for Clemen-
tina to keep her seat at the pianoforte, and 
no one was more urgent than Mr. Stop-
ford, who leaned upon the back of her chair.
She at last ventured to say to him-" Am
I not entitled to ask a return from you?"

"Most assuredly uou are," was his an-
swer; "but I am at this moment exerting 
my voice in favour of the whole company."

"It would be very much in their fa-
vour," she replied, "if you will do what
lord Clemaire says you excel in; I shall re-
pent being so easily persuaded as I have
been, to make a public exhibition, if you will
not make the least excertion to amuse me."

"Will you permit me to have an auxilliary.HOWARD CASTLE. 139

as my voice would sound discord itself
after such sweet strains as we have been
charmed with from Miss Bouverie?"

He did not wait for an answer, but
walked towards a young lady, who, cle-
mentina found, was likewise a sister of his;
he placed her at the instrument; they
sung a duet in the most scientific manner,
and with such taste and feeling as to please
the whole party. Mr. Stopford's voice
was uncommonly agreeable, full, deep,
and mellow, and proved the marquis had
not exaggerated his musical abilities.

The morning slipped imperceptibly
away ; Clemeutina retired to her own
ladies separated, her mind wholly occu-
pied with the odd manner of lord Monta-
gue, who had not attempted to say a single
word to her, after their morning's cou-
ference, which had ended in so abrupt a
manner ; his expressions dwelt he had
said-"There was a similarity in Werter's
situation and his," would almost lead her
to suppose that he really had an engage-
ment abroad, or could he have promisedhis hand to Miss Osburn, and discovered
too late she had not his heart, or could he
believe her engaged to marry the marquis
of Clemaire?  Every idea which quickly 
succeeded each other in her mind led to
herself, as the more she revolved upon his
strange manner to her, the more convin-
ced she was that a secret misery preyed
upon him, and that in some way she was
connected with it; her heart would whis-
per—"Can he love me? can the affection
of childhood be so imprinted on his me-
mory that so transient an acquaintance
can have renewed in any degree a fa-
vourable impression, which might have
been sown in infancy, and now only
budding into maturity?"  She loved her
cousin with the pure affection of a sister;
and as her young heart had never re-
ceived any other impression, she believed
he held an unrivalled place; her thoughts
were wholly occupied by him, as there was
always a particularity of manner in his
lordship, which arrested her attention; he
was either markedly assiduous, or quite the
reverse; sometimes wrapped up in gloomy
mystery, or amusing her with the most 
Howard Castle. 141

insinuating conversation, dwelling with
peculiar delight upon their early days,
which he found was an interesting subject
to her.

Lord Montague's disposition was ardent 
and sanguine, formed for strong attach-
ments, and ill calculated to bear disappoint-
ment. He had loved his little cousin Cle-
mentina with all the fondness of his years;
but with manhood he forgot his favourite
in other pursuits: when he returned from
abroad, and found a friendship likely to be
renewed, he strove to recollect all the
little anecdotes of former days; and with
the remembrance, the affection which he
had felt in so strong a degree for his com-
panion recurred to his mind. Prepared to
meet with a person who had in some de-
gree occupied his thoughts, and had anti-
cipated much pleasure from the idea of
again seeing, he rejoiced in the introduc-
tion at Carnsworth; but how was he sur-
prised to see his little favourite changed
into the most beautiful woman he ever con-
versed with! Alarmd at his own situa-
tion, at times prudence guided him, and  142                          HOWARD CASTLE.

threw a reserve over his manner, which he could not always preserve; he believed the marquis to be a favoured lover, and often he resolved no self-gratification should tempt him to indulge himself in her society.  He meditated an abrupt departure, and flying from charms which he could never possess; but the magnet rivetted him to the spot, in spite of all his reason and all his prudence.
  Lady Augnsta had again promised Clementina to attend her to the drawing-room; it being the public day, many strangers were expected.  A tap at her room-door roused her from the reverie which she had fallen into.
  As the marquis's attention was unavoidable occupied by the numerous guests, lord Montague, with evideat pleasure, took the care of Clementina upon himself.  He was animated and agreeable; she was the same; his good spirits seemed to enliven her; her countenance was illumined by the most pleasing expression, and she looked and felt as happy as possible.
  At dinner lord Montague was placed by her.  She was surprised at the change, but                               HOWARD CASTLE                    143

concluded the great addition to the party 
bad occasioned it, as the marquis was seuted 
at the bottom of a second table, and lady Au-
gusta at the top. The day which Clemen-
tina had excepted would be the most disa-
greeable proved the reverse; it was the 
most delightful; she was in a great mea-
sure free from the marquis's fine speeches. 
Lord Montague's conversion was rational, 
and perfectly suited to her taste; no high-
flown compliments, or extravagant expres-
sions of admiration, assailed her ears.

    A little time before the ladies retired to 
the drawing-room, a printed paper was de-
livered to the duchess, who slightly looked 
at it, and desired the servant to take it to 
the marquis.

    The moment he cast his eyes over it, he exclaimed-"A juggler solicits your grace's patronage. As you are a lover of the fine
 arts. I hope you will permit him to display 
his magical powers this evening in the sa-
loon. Upon my word, Mr.Drofpots 
holds out great things: he has performed 
before all the German princes, with un-
bounded applause; he will of course ex-344 HOWARD CASTLE.

cite our wonder and admiration. May I
give him the wished-for leave?"

A general exclamation of "the juggler, by
all means!" and a nod of approbation from
the duchess, made the marquis order the
attendant to acquaint Mr. Drofpots that
his request was granted, and at the same
time desiring the saloon to be prepared ac-
cording to his order-"Stopford," said he
at the same time throwing him the list of
feats which were to be performed, "you
may gain some knowledge in the art; I
know you have a smattering in the slight-
of-hand way, and may be greatly improv-
ed by this exhibition."

Mr. Stopford examined the paper-"I
know the fellow well, and all his tricks;
he is certainly clever, and may amuse you.
I shall take the opportunity of writing
some letter, which I ought to have done
the first day I-came here."

The duchess soon after rose from the ta-
ble, Clementina believed an hour earlier
than to her only had appeared shorter.
Lord Montague participated in her feel-                                        HOWARD CASTLE                 145

ings, and regretted when he saw her quit her seat.

Lady Elenora Montague and Clementina had no part to act; they therefore enjoyed an uninterrupted téte-à-téte. There was too large a party for general conversation, and lady Augusta was so fullt employed, that she had not a moment to spare; so the two friends retired to a sofa, and were mutually pleased with receprocal assurances of affection, and laying plans for meeting very frequently.

Miss Osburn, who was walking about the room with a party of ladies, attracted clementina's attention-"when," said she, "are you to call that lady by the tender appellation of sister?"

"Never," said lady Elenora, with quickness. "Miss Osburn is not calculated to make my brother happy; could he have instilled your manners and your ideas into her, he might have wished to have been nearer allied to her, but not as nature has made her."

"Nature has little to do with Miss Osburn," replied Clementina, "and I rejoice

VOL 1.   HOWARD CASTLE.

to hear I shall never have to claim relation-
ship with her; her looks as so bold and
disagreeable, that I have not attempted any
knowledge of her agreeable qualities, as we
have hardly exchanged a sentence since we 
met."

"You cannot be at a loss," rejoined lady
Elenora, "to explain her cold manners and 
haughty looks; until you came she had her
share of attention; Montague was civil,
and she was pleased; since your arrival, her
bosom has been filled with jealously; she
has seen you bear off the beaux, and Ma-
ria is not well versed in philosophy. My
brother prefers conversing with you, if he
has an opportunity. When the marquis
engrosses all your attention, he seems not
at the trouble to exert himself to be agree-
able to any one but yourself, and generally
sits, perhaps meditating upon your charms,
or, at least, wrapt up in his own reflections."

 "you surprise me," replied Clementina,
"as lady Augusta seemed to make no doubt
of the connexion. I understood her all 
was fixed."

 "It would not be any easy matter," an-
swered lady Elenora, "to fix for lord Mon-Howard Castle. 147
tague, and I am certain he has had no
share in the plan, nor does he know such a
thing was ever in agitation. A scheme
might have been mentioned, that if it could
succeed, it might be very convenient, as her
large fortune is a matter of consideration;
and her mother, who is a silly old woman,
might tell her what the duchess had said
on the subject. It was she who planned
their meeting here, and who believes Mon-
tague will fall in love, as they wish him to
do; he would be very much surprised if he
suspected how he was disposed of, and I
believe would prove very refractory, were
he obliged to obey their inclinations at the
expence of his own."

"No wonder," said Clementina; "to
control the affections would be strange in-
deed."

"Yet, it is daily practised," answered
lady Elenora, "but not with such a dis-
position as my brother has; his feelings are
too powerful to be restrained by prudence;
he will never make what the world calls a
proper connexion; his will be the choice
of his heart."

112
148       HOWARD CASTLE.

They continued together until the gen-
tlemen joined them.

Lord Montague, the moment he entered
the room, saw the happy situation thre
was on the sofa unoccupied. The marquis
being still engaged, he ventured to solicit
the enviable corner by Clementina, and
succeeded to his wish-" This day," said
he, " will be marked in my mmory as an
uncommonly agreeable one, although I be-
lieve it the most dangerous I ever spent;
every sense is entranced, and every idea
is bewildered; I feel in a kind of delirium, 
or intoxication, which is delightful, and
from which I would not be awoke for the world."

" What has overpowered you in so strange a manner?" asked Clementina.

" You," replied he, looking stadily in
 her face. " I was in a sullen mood after
 our conversation before breakfast- I felt
miserable; your singing harmonized my
feelings, and soothed the agitation of spi-
rits I endured- I became tranquil. Your 
manner to me before dinner charmed me, 
and your conversation has restored me to 
myself. Only continue to be as you have Been to-day, and I shall again be gay and cheerful; you have recalled my happiest moments to my recollection; and had you only the art to sink the intermediate space in oblivion, you would see me the most delighted of the human race.”

Clementina looked at him; she believed he had drank too much wine, which had created the rhapsody she had listened to with profound attention, but little of which she could understand. 

“Oh, Clementina !” continued his lordship,  “could you make me drink of Lethe’s stream, how grateful should I be!”

“How much have I been deveived !” was her reply, “as I believed retrospection was pleasing to you!  Why do you always revert to the days I spent at Colnbrook when you converse with me, if the remembrance of them is painful?”

“They were the happiest of my life,” said he with energy.  “The only painful sensation which recalling them can create in my breast is, that they are gone forever.”

“They certainly are past,” was her answer; “but I hope there are many to come,
150                                                        HOWARD CASTLE.


which will bring with them their pleasures, both to your lordship and myself.''

''And may every hour of your life, Clementina, be as happy as I earnestly wish them to be!'' cried lord Montague; ''and may you escape from the most terrible of all evils, self-reflection!''

Clementina felt uneasy and uncomfortable. Lady Elenora has quitted her seat soon after her brother had joined them; the agitation of his manner again surprised her, and again gave full employment to her thoughts. At last she said—''You puzzle me exceedingly; at one moment so happy, the next so miserable, without any apparent cause for either.''

He smiled at her idea of his wayward manner—''You believe me capricious, but you are mistaken; my disposition is as free from it as possible. My situation is very peculiar, and would create pity in your breast; but I must not impart my feelings to you; I will not act a treacherous part, in trying to involve the most amiable being alive in my misfortunes.''

He gave a deep sigh as he said these words.              HOWARD CASTLE.            151
"Ah, my lord, why will you mot treat
me as an old friend--as a near relation
and tell me what causes you such disquie-
tude? Believe me, could I in any way re-
live the load which oppresses your spirits,
it would give me the most heartfelt satis-
faction."
 "Clementina," replied lord Montague,
"this conversation cannot tend towards re-
storing peace to me; your offer of soothing
my sorrows adds to them in the most poig-
nant manner; for pity's sake do not bestow
such compassion! I know it is wrong in
me to indulge myself in conversing with
you, and that I am   encouraging feelings
which may tend to my own destruction,
and to your peace of mind."
 The marquis at that moment approach-
ed them-" I have felt like a fish out of
water," said he, "this whole day. My
time has been occupied by people who care
not for me, or I for them."
 "What is so common?" replied she,
smiling.
 "Can you say the same thing?" said the
marquis, placing himself by her. "You
have not appeared as if you had been oc-152 HOWARD CASTLE.

cupied in the same uninteresting manner."

"I have not," was her answer; "I hope
I have been with those who care a great
deal for me, as I do for them." She looked
at lord Montague, but he was leaning his
head upon his hand, and appeared not to
be attending to any thing which was
passing. "I have not mingled with the
crowd," continued she; "I had no part to
act, but to please myself."

"Why will you take such pains to con-
vince me," cried he, "of your enjoying
such happiness? When I was forced to 
be absent from you, the only comfort I had
was, my eyes being at liberty, I watched
your complacent countenance, and envied
lord Montague the tête-à-tête he had
with you, and which still seems to occupy
his thoughts."

The marquis was again forced to leave 
the society he most wished to have. Lady
Augusta required his presence, as the sa-
loon was announced to be in readiness for
the reception of the party; most of the
company had left the room before lord
Montague seemed aware that it was ne-
cessary he should move.
Clementina would not disturb him, but
resolved to remain where she was, till his
recollection should return.

His absence was of short durration, as 
lady Elenora tapt his shoulder with her
fan as she past—"Come Clementina," said
she; "Montague is drowsy; take hold of
my arm, and leave him to enjoy a little re-
pose."

"Not so stupid," exclaimed be, at the
same time springing from his seat, "as
tamely to see Miss Bouverie run away
with."  He gently took her hand. "This,"
said he, "is my property for the evening;
I will not be deprived of happiness which
I may not again enjoy.  You accused me
of pride; you will surely now allow that I
am humble, as I am happy to fill the mar-
quis's envied situation when he is engaged,
and to resign you, with seeming compo-
sure, when he is at liberty to claim his
prerogative."

Clementina wished, above all things, to
change the conversation, which embarrass-
ed her exceedingly; she knew not what
answer to make to the insinuations which
he had thrown out since he had entered the drawing-room; she did not wish to understand his constant hints in regard to the marquis, who, she concluded, he thought was her favourite.  Time she determined should convince him of his error; she could not check the polite attention he shewed to her, whilst she was a visitor in his father's house, and which she believed would cease upon her quitting Carnsworth Castle.  She found every one had the same idea-that she was to be the marchioness of clemaire.  Lady Elenora lost no opportunity of congratulating her, and even lady Augusta had twice named her by the epithet of sister.  the duchess relaxed from her haughty carriage towards her, and treated her with the most marked respect and attention; and the duke was kind and affectionate, expressing his approbation of her.  She was sensible of all that was passing; she likewise saw with the greatest pleasure that her father seemed perfectly well, and perfectly happy; she ad no dread of any unpleasant consequence arising from their visit, which she found much more agreeable than she expected.  Thetwo days she had been an inmate in Carnsworth Castle appeared an age; she could hardly convince herself the week they were to stay was not nearly expired. The lives of the gay, she thought, must appear double the length of those who spend their days in seclusion, as in the short space she had been in gaiety, there had been more to occupy her thoughts than during the whole ten years she had spent in the convent. Lord Montague filled her with wonder; the eccentricity of his manner arrested all her attention-"How surprised," said she, as they were following the party to the saloon, " will the juggler, be when he sees such a numerous assemblage!" 

"And probably," said lord Montague, "will be much delighted at the prospect of the wealth which he will acquire, as in general they are very poor." 

"They must spend the most tiresome lives in the world," said Clementina, "day after day, and hour after hour, performing the same dull round." 

"Do we not do the same?" was his answer. "We rise in the morning to follow the same course which we did the day be-156                HOWARD CASTLE.
fore, only our occupations are styled amusements, which often prove bitter sorrows.  We know we have every thing money can procure; but can it produce happiness?"
  "It certainly is very conductive to it," replied she, "as what can be done without it?"
  "The man we are now going to see perform his monkey tricks," cricd lord Montague, with quickness, "may be wretchedly poor, and very happy; his desultory mode of living may be perfectly congenial to his inclination--one day starving makes the next, when he is possessed of wealth, appear doubly delightful; tomorrow he may live like a prince, and perhaps spend his money with the woman he loves; she shares his poverty and his riches.  In such a case can he be wretched?"
  "I should think he might," said Clementina; "seeing a person he is fondly attached to (supposing, as you do, that he has a beloved wife) deprived perhaps of food, of every confort, can he be happy?"
  "Yes," exclaimed he, "with the woman I loved," at the same time pressing the hand which was within his arm to his  heart, "and who would willingly share in
my sorrows as well as my joys, I could
not be wretched, as I should firmly believe
the same feelings would reconcile her will-
ingly to suffer what I did."

"I could not suppose either of you hap-
py, if you were deprived of the necessaries
of life; she would feel, or ought to feel,
miserable in being a burthen upon her hus-
band."

"The truth is," cried his lordship, "that
Miss Bouverie can talk coolly on the sub-
ject. Had I a beloved object to work for,
how sweet would the food taste earned by
the hard labour of my hands! and how de-
lighted I should be, if, by any deprivation
of my own, I could procure her an addi-
tional comfort!"

"Theory," said she, "is easier than
practice. Could I see you, my lord, placed
in a cottege, depending solely for your sup-
port upon your own labour, I fear both
you and your beloved would be miserably
thin."

"I have not been accustomed," replied
he, with warmth, "to gain my bread; but
I am convinced I could, and that I could158      Howard Castle.

be happy, if I saw my companion so; she
would sweeten all my toils."

"Perhaps be dissatisfied, and embitter 
them," replied Clementina.

They entered the saloon, which put a
stop to their conversation; it was very bril-
liantly lighted, and displayed a most sci-
entific figure, who was placed at the upper
end of it, with a large table before him, co-
vered with green cloth. The magician
was enveloped in a long black robe; his
dark countenance was not enlivened by a 
pair of black spectacles, and in his hand he
waved a white wand, the insignia of his
magic art; he profoundly bowed to the
company: the duchess graciously bent 
her head in return, and the party were 
seated.

Mr. Drofpots addressed them in broken
English -- "Ladies and gentlemen, I do
feel myself very deeply obliged by being
permitted to amuse and surprise such an
august assembly for von half-hour. I have
had de honor of performing before many
crowned heads, both in my own country
and oders, and I have never yet failed in
giving satisfaction. I hope my deceptiveart will entertain you.  If I am so happy to succeed, it will give me ver much relish here," laying his hand on his heart; and again making a profound bow, proceeded to display the usual tricks of slight of-hand, with cards, dice, &e.

     Clementina had never seen any performance of the kind before, and was highly amused.  She was quickly selected by Mr. Drofports; as he saw he particularly attracted her attention, he in the most humble and earnest manner solicited her to come nearer to the table, where she might more easily see the neatness and celerity with which he could change a card, or transform a piece of money into a goldfinch, and the bird into rabbit.

     The marquis almost insisted upon her accompanying him; she felt she was making a conspicuous figure, but his entreaties overcame her scruples; and as she wished to see more than she could do at a distance, she consented.  Her extreme beauty attracted general observation; her elegant figure and graceful lattitudes (as she was soon engaged in lending her aid in doing the various tricks) gained more attention than

     160
                HOWARD CASTLE
all the magic of the poor juggler. Who appeared animated by her presence. The astonishment he excited in her seemed to give him peculiar pleasure; the extraordinary quickness of his motions, which her eye could not follow, and the curious metamorphoses which he produced, entertained her exceedingly; she soon forgot she was exposed to the eyes of the company, or that the magician and she stood alone.
     When the performance was over, Mr. Drofpots made a still lower obeisance to the company than he had done before; and placing a small box upon the table, said it possessed no uncommon art, as it was ready to receive whatever the company would choose to put into it, again bowing nearly to the ground. The box had hardly ever before been so well filled, in spite of his having performed before crowned heads; each went up and bestowed a mark of approbation upon poor Mr. Drofpots, who continued to bow till all had quitted the room.
     Music was proposed by the marquis, to fill up the remainder of the evening, and the company adjourned to the music-room.HOWARD CASTLE. 161

Clementina looked for lord Montague,
but looked in vain; he was nowhere to be
seen. She had observed him quit the sa-
loon a short time before the rest of the
party, and he did not again appear till sup-
per was announced. The had her busy at-
tendant, who teazed her to sing his favour-
ite song. He placed the harp, and was so 
active and bustling, that he arrested the
eyes of the strangers to Clementina, who,
with vermillioned cheeks, was entreating
to be excused; but the marquis was not
easily denied; he persevered till he suc-
ceeded, and she was again the object of at-
tention and universal admiration.

When she had finished, she anxiously
looked for Mr. Stopford. At last she said
to the marquis--"Is your friend still oc-
cupied with his pen? or perhaps he may
not know that we wish exceedingly for his
company."

"Must I inform him," said the marquis,
"that you wish him to join us? Had I
not better likewise send a messenger in
quest of lord Montague?"

"I wished the company," replied Cle-
mentina gravely, "to hear the delightful162                  HOWARD CASTLE.


duet we had this morning.  They have 
been so polite as to appear pleased with my
insignificant song—I should wish them to
hear real good harmony."

     "You are so humble," said the marquis,
"and so determined in your opinion of
your own powers, that it is impossible to 
instil a proper sense of your rare endow-
ments into you; but they are formed to
sink so deep on the hearts of your hearers,
that I believe both lord Montague and Mr.
Stopford are prudent, and have flown in
their own defence.  It would be cruel in
you to recall them."

     At that moment the latter entered the
room, and immediately advanced to Cle-
mentina, who welcomed his return, at the
same time assuring him he had missed a
great deal of amusement in the saloon.

     Lady Augusta was seated at the piano-
forte.

     Mr. Stopford, pleased with the cheerful
manner Clementina had greeted him, wish-
ed exceedingly to pursue and acquaintance
which he believed would be productive of 
much pleasure, as, from the little he had
seen of Miss Bouverie, he thought her con-        versation as fascinating as her appearance was prepossessing-"And were you really amused with Mr. Drofpots?" said he, as he seated himself on a sofa by her; 'could his humble powers entertain you?"

   "They did indeed," was her reply. "At first the horrid appearance of the man rather alarmed me, as there was something particularly disagreeable in his countenance. When he begged I would go near him, I shrunk from the idea; but the very great wish I had to watch him do some of his tricks, which I could not do where I was seated, got the better of my reluctance. I soon forgot all fear which his strange countenance gave me, and was wonderflly entertained with his powers. I should not choose to have him as a very near neighbour-I should expect he would strip me of all I had that was valuable."

   Mr. Stopford laughed exceedingly-"You would be afraid to have him seated by you, as I am. Take care that I have not the same art."

    "No," replied she; "I do not suspect you; few people are gifted like the poor164     HOWARD CASTLE.

juggler. He certainly is an extraordinary
man, both in abilities and appearance."

"I am sorry," said Mr. Stopford, "that
I did not see this strange animal; I have
seen a person of the same name, but he was
not such a very quizzieal creature as you
describe this to bo."

Mr. Stopford and his sister again sung
the duet, at the earnest request of Cle-
mentina. He said, as he rose from his 
seat - " I can hardly believe that I am 
quietly doing what I am bid; but there is
something so powerful in your commands, 
I cannot resist them,  Last night I was 
charmed with your singing : but I formed
a resolution nothing should tampt me to 
let my voice be heard in your presence; it
is the first instance of my firmness giving
way; I now can have no confidence in
myself."

Supper was at last announced, and lord
Montague appeared. His eyes looked
heavy, and his countenance melancholy;
he sat nearly opposite to Clementina, but
neither spoke or eat. Mr.Stopford kept
the place by her he had been so much
charmed with, and proved a most agree-             HOWARD CASTLE.                  165
able companion. He was highly amused with her account of Mr.Drofpots and his tricks, and often led her to describe the different feats he performed. At last she exclaimed-"I do believe he is a great cheat!"
     "Why?" said Mr. Stopford.
     "I have this moment discovered that he has got a very valuable gold coin of mine, which was given me by a particular friend."
     She examined her purse, her ridicule, but nowhere could she find her treasure.
     "How! have you only discovered your loss now?" said Mr. Stopford.
     "I was so amused with his performances," was her reply, "that I did not recollect having given him my coin for one of his slight-of-hand tricks, nor that he did not return it."
     "What punishment must we inflict?" said Mr. Stopford. "As I will venture to promised you, that you shall have your favourite restored to-morrow, he must be near Carnsworth; and I will, if he is in the country, discover the rascal, and give him whatever you deem his due. Only pr166 HOWARD CASTLE.

nounce his sentence, and I will see it exe-
cuted."

 "If you can recover my property," said 
she, "I have no wish to encounter his 
magic art; he may discover the mistake
he has committed, and perhaps voluntarily
return what does not belong to him."

 "Had it not been of great intrinsic va-
lue," said Mr. Stopford, "I should have 
supposed he had secreted the coin for the 
sake of the fair owner."
 
 "What an idea," exclaimed Clemen-
tina, "to entertain of a poor starved jug-
gler! The sight and weight of the gold
tempted him."

CHAPTER VIII.

WHEN the party assembled at breakfast,
all seemed gay and cheerfull lord Monta-
gue's gloom gave way to the animation'
which encircled him. The gentelmen 
were to have a party on the ice, which waspronounced sufficiently strong for skating,
Clementina had never seen the amuse-
ment. It was determined that the ladies
should walk to a fine piece of water, which
was within half a mile of the house. Lord
Montague was to the their escort, with the
elder branches, who were to be conveyed
in two carraiges; as the general was not 
able for the walk, the duke and duchess
would accompany him. Lady Radnor
was afraid of getting cold, and ordered her
coach, in which she took Mrs. Osburn, and
offered a place to any of the pedestrians
who were afraid of the sharp, keen wind,
which was piercingly cold; but all seemed to enjoy the prospect of the walk. Many
of the gentlemen were on the ice 
when the ladies reached the margin of the lake.

  Clementina was charmed with the scene, 
and with the elegant attitudes of the ska-
ters, who appeared to fly in the most de-
lightful manner-- "Oh," exclaimed she,
to lod Montague, on whose arm she was 
leaning, "how pleasant that motion must
be! Is it an amusement entirely appro-
priated to the male sex? are females not
permitted to join in it?"168     HOWARD CASTLE.

  " Not in this country," was his answer
" there is no law against it, but it is not a
common thing to see a lady on skates.
You most probably would fall, and tum-
ble on the ice is rather severe.  Abroad
they are accustomed to it from their in-
fancy; there you often see women skating
to market, with baskets on their heads, and
fine ladies skating for their amusements."

   " I wish I had been educated in a fro-
zen clime," said Clementina.

  " Will you venture on the ice with my 
arm as your support?" said lord Montague.
  
  A party was soon formed, and he had 
half-a-dozen ladies under his protecting
care.

   The marquis, as soon as he perceived 
them, flew towards them.  He appeared
to great advantage, as it displayed his fine
figure, and anxiety animated his counte-
nance.  Clementina he saw had hold of 
lord Montague's arm, and was proceeding,
when lord Clemaire entreated she would 
desist in her intention - a fall might be
attended with serious consequences, as it
was impossible to guard her from danger.
He had ordered some chairs to be prepared              HOWARD CASTLE.            169

for the ladies, which he expected being
brought every moment, and again entreat-
ed, in the most earnest manner, that they
would not venture.

  Clementina immediately stopt-- "You
have conquered," said she, smiling. "I 
will be contented to watch you, and envy
the delightful feeling of flying so smoothly
and so swiftly as you appear to do."

  Lord Montague's servant was waiting
with his skates; he was soon equipped,
and proved to the ladies he excelled in the
amusement; the beautiful attitudes he
threw himself into were not lost on Cle-
mentina. He lingered near the edge
where the party stood, and displayed all the
feats he possibly could.

  "Did ever a pretty woman," said lady
Augusta, laughing, "try more to attract
admiration than lord Montague is doing at
this moment?"

  Maria, turning to Miss Osburn-- "I
hope you are looking at this lordship--
what a graceful bend! and how beautiful-
ly he again raises himself to an erect pos-
ture?"

  VOL. I.                I170 HORWARD CASTLE.

"There is a lady," cried Miss Osburn,
"Who repays all the trouble be is at, by
gazing as f he was the only mortal on the 
ice. With such evident adulation his 
lordship cannot stray far from the spot."

Clementina heard the insinuation, but 
continued exactly in the same position;
she was so occupied both with her 
thoughts and her eyes, that she did not per-
ceive a most excellent figure which was 
crossing the ice towards the spot where 
she stood. An exclamation from lady Au-
gusta roused her; she looked up, and saw
a female advancing with the greatest velo-
city; her figure, which was dressed in the
commonest garments; a red cloak was
thrown over her shoulders, but did not 
hide the largest person ever was seen; a
broad, merry face, which was partly shaded 
by a cap and bonnet, shewed no fear ex-
isted in her breast; a basket was nicely
balanced on her head, and in her mouth
was a pipe, which she whiffed at the gen-
tlemen as she passed along; she plainly
proved, by her motions, that skating was
not always attended with elegance. Shestrode away, seemingly bent on accomplishing the place of her destination; she came close up to the edge, and giving the ladies a puff from her pipe, wheeled about, and making a circuit round lord Montague, recrossed the ice.

The servants, with chairs, soon after made their appearance; but none of the ladies would trust themselves on the slippery surface, except lady Augusta and Clementina. The marquis, who was always attentive when the latter was concerned, immediately came to the margin, and would take the charge of her chair upon himself.

The duke of Bridgenorth, who evidently preferred lady Augusta's company to any other, was her escort; they set off with much caution, but the ladies urging them to a quicker motion, they were soon on the middle of the lake. Lord Montague continued to hover near them; the chairs were so placed that he made the figure of eight round them, sometimes conversing as he passed.

The Dutchwoman, which, from therotundity of her shape, they concluded she
meant to represent, was soon close to them,
and excited no small amusement; she ap-
peared highly diverted with the ladies
coming on the ice in chairs, pointing to
her skates, and beckoning them to come
to her.

"Who is it," said Clementina to the
marquis, "who affords such amuse-
ment?"

"I am perfectly ignorant," was his an-
swer; "she does not put your sex into
the most flattering shape, or rather she
acts as a foil to shew off the contrast be-
tween her clumsy limbs and awkward gait
to the other females present."

"She is of great advantage to you gen-
tlemen," said Clementina, "as I was not
near so sensible of the elegance of your
skating until she appeared."

To the surprise of the whole party, Mr.
Drofpots came suddenly from behind a
wooded island, in his magician's dress, and
waving his wand, with an authoritative air,
and with a celerity peculiar to himself, ap-
proached Clementina; he seized upon her
chair, and turning it round with incredi-ble swiftness, moved it from the circle; he then presented her with a little packet, saying --"The theft I committed last night has proved of too great value for me to keep; had it been of any other metal than gold, you would never have again seen it; or could I have used my art, and converted it into a thing of the smallest intrinsic worth, I should have prized it as the most inestimable treasure in my possession; but that power I do not possess, nor, alas! do I possess any over you."
He wheeled her round to her former situation, and darting from the crowd, who had now assembled round her, was out of sight in a moment.
Clementina was astonished; the varying colour in her face proved that she had been alarmed. The marquis, who was thunderstruck with the boldness of the action, and with the quickness with which it was performed, apologized to Clementina for his being so much off his guard as to permit any one to have used such liberty, when he had voluntarily taken the office of the guardian upon himself; he, not suspectingthat she was the object of pursuit, had
yielded to the menaces of Mr. Drofpots'
wand, and had permitted him to seize in
so rude a manner on Miss Bouverie's chair.

All were inquisitive what the conjurer
had said, as they heard he had articulated
some words.  Clementina was too confus-
ed to recollect them; but she was convin-
ced in her own mind he was not what he
pretended to be.  She looked in vain all
around her, but saw nothing of her mys-
terious acquaintance; the little packet she
held in her hand

Lady Augusta proposed to return to
the party on terra firm; the gentlemen
would not permit it; they were determin-
ed they should be conducted quite round
the lake; as neither of the ladies objected
to the swiftness of the motion, they should
accomplish it in a very short time.

Lord Montague, who had seen the stran-
ger deliver a paper to Clementina, as his
eye had not been for a moment off him,
said, in a low voice—"The note you re-
ceived will probably explain the purport
of the magician's visit, which has created
such wonder."         Howard Castle.       175

  Clementina immediately presented him
with it--"It is a coin of mine, which he
forgot to give me last night."

  "There is more than a coin here," said
he, as he took the little parcel from her
hand.
  
  "Open it," said she, with quickness.

  He broke the seal; the piece of gold
was carefully wrapped up, and with it
there was a sealed note directed for Miss
Bouverie; he presented it to her.

  "It cannot be in better hands," was her
answer; "pray read the contents aloud;
I have no secret correspondence with the
strange being."
  Lord Montague did as he was ordered,
and read a most elegant little poem, ac-
knowledging the theft he had committed,
describing his own sensations when he had 
her property in his possession, and the
necessity for relinquishing it, and subduing
the admiration he felt for her. The lan-
guage was particularly pretty; there was
an elegance and simplicity which proved
it was the composition of no common poet.
Lord Montague's voice varied as he readtuation.

"How flattery is interwoven in the formation of man!" exclaimed Clementia; "even the half-starved juggler has stretched his invention to pay highflown compliments; it is hard he got no pecuniary reward for the labour of his pen."

"I am very glad," cried Mr. Stopford, "that the poor devil has proved honest, and has returned Miss Bouverie's property with such a good grace; there can no resentment lurk in your bosom when he has restored your treasure, and with it so much admiration."

The ladies again petitioned to be moved twards the ground, as they saw the party were preparing to return to the castle; the gentlemen declared , if it was their determination to go so soon, they should quit the ice with them, and escort them home.  

Mr. Stopford, who had not before attracted their observation, now caused much amusement by playing all kinds of pranks, dancing and singing, leaping and skipping about as if he was on a room-floor, instead                Howard Castle   177

of the slippery footing which he had; his motions were not near so graceful as either the marquis's or lord Montague's, but his life and vivacity were highly entertaining.
   Clementina's attention was a good deal occupied by her unknown visitor, whose words were not engraven on her memory, as she was so alarmed, she hardly attended to what he said; but his manner and the verses convinced her he was no common person.  She felt puzzled, and appeared absent, and wished exceedingly to be at liberty to examine the writing; perhaps she might know the hand.
   Lord Montague had again wrapped the coin in the paper, and had given them together to her; she did not choose to show any anxiety on the subject; and as they were totally in the gentlemen's power when they would release them, she strove to be gay, as she was before, but it was evidently forced cheerfulness; she was relieved when she was again at liberty to use her feet, and to be under her own guidance; when the novelty of the motion was over, she found there was little amuse-

            I3ment in being dependent upon the will of others.

   The marquis never left her: as soon as she reached the house, she retired to her own apartment, happy in having the excuse of putting off the warm dress which she had been wrapped in for her walk. The moment she reacher her room she pulled the verses from her pocket, and studied each line and each word, but no clue could she gain towards developing the writer. She examined the coin, as she began to suspect some change might be worked on it, but it appeared identically the same; she found further investigation was unnecessary, as it was impossible she could discover who was the composer of the verses, which certainly were in a very complimentary strain, but were extremely pretty, and could not be the production of a plebeian's pen. She again folded them up and deposited them in her writing box; luncheon bell roused her from the train of reflections tormented herself with fruitless wonder about the anonymous writer. 

   Lord Montague's strange behaviour was             HOWARD CASTLE                179

a never-failing source of employment for
her thoughts; without any self-conceit, she
believed her self to be the object he was
attached to; the peculiarity of his manner
to her could not be mistake, and the de-
spair of his looks and language could only
be the result of supposing her destined to
be the marquis's wife.  What could she
do, as she firmly believed the attention
she received from him was merely the
whim of the moment, and that as soon as
her back was turned he would forget she
was in existence ? She had a different idea
of lord Montague's attachment to her, as she convinced herself it had existed since
their childhood, both in his affections and
her own; her feelings towards him were
very different from what the marquis or 
Mr.Stopford created; the former tired her
with compliments -- the latter amused her
for the moment; but if they were absent,
she felt no regret, nor any particular plea-
sure when they were present. She found 
most of the party assembled round a very
large table, where all the rarities of the
season were displayed to tempt the app-
tite.  The adventures of the morning were    HOWARD CASTLE 

the subject of conversation, and the ma-
gic verses were universally called for.

"We have to lament our cowardice,"
said lady Elenora, "which prevented our
venturing with lady Augusta and Miss
Bouverie; we might have had peoms pre-
sented to us, had we been of the party."

"No," said the marquis; "the ariel
being (for he seemed hardly to be encum-
bered with mortal flesh and blood, his mo-
tions were to rapid)appeared to see no
one but the object he had in view; Miss
Bouverie alone had the magic art to en-
trance his senses; the instant he deposited
his sentiments in her hands, he vanished
from our sight."

"He probably sunk through the ice," said 
Mr. Stopford, "and could cool his heated 
imagination in the deep. Was he very 
heroic, Miss Bouverie? or did he quietly
restore your property without making any 
protestations? Little did you suppose,
when you good-humouredly assisted him
in his performances last night, that you 
were inflicting wounds which perhaps have 
for ever destroyed his peace."

"It certainly is a very fit subject for ri-          HOWARD CASTLE.                                  181
dicule," replied Clementina, gravely, "and as such suits you.  I have no alarm for the happiness of the poor man."
  "You are serious," said he, "which is very flattering to the conjurer; I shall take some means of informing him,"
  Clementina smiled, not at his remark, but at the idea of her becoming the subject of Mr.Stopford's satirical powers, which she had so firmly resolved should not be excited by her.
  the party soon after separated to dress; but lady Elenora's curiosity was too much raised quietly to retire to her apartment without seeing the verses which had created so much speculation; she was astonished with their beauty, and agreed with C;ementina, that if the conjurer was the writer, his situation was not what he represented.
  When Mary was alone with her mistress, she asked her if there had not been a very curious fat woman upon the ice; her answer in the affirmative, and an inquiry of why she asked, brought the following reply.
  "I belive I ought not to tell; but we182             Howard Castle

had a great deal of amusement in dressing the lady for her public appearance; we were all employed, as every thing was to be enlarged to fit Mr. Stopford's groom, who had half-a-dozen of pillows stuffed around him, besides his own large carcase to cover; one of the under-cooks is a prodigious large woman, but her clothes would not fit him, and we had so short a time to prepare the dress, that we had to be very busy.  I suppose he is a very good skater, as he was several years abroad with his master, where they used to half live upon the ice.  I understand his master is often playing tricks, as he is, by all accounts, a very merry gentleman."
   "Do you know any thing of the conjurer who was here last night?" asked Clementina, with a face of the most earnest inquiry; a thought struck her Mr. Stopford might have been the person.
   "I cannot say," replied Mary, positively, "as every thing was kept a profound secret in the house, but I have my suspicious.  As I was going below to supper, I saw the strangest figure cross from the passage into the gallery; I was terriblyfrightened, and gave a scream, as I really did believe I saw a ghost, and I flew back into this room, where I remained till the duchess's maid came in search of me; for the truth was, I durst not go along the gallery by myself.  I described what I had seen to her, but she laughed at me, and said it was all fancy."

"And pray what was it?" said Clementina.

"It was a very tall black figure, with a dark grim face, and the largest black eyes that ever were seen; it was neither somebody disguised, or it was a very frightful spectre.  I determined not to tell you, ma'am for fear you would be alarmed."

Clementia had heard enough to be perfectly satisfied Mr. Stopford was the person who had puzzled her so exceedingly; she resolved not to betray his secret, but to continue in seeming ignorance.  His extraordinary powers filled her with wonder, as she believed no one in the room suspected the deception.  She recollected he was absent all the evening, under pretence of writing letters, and in the morning he certainly was not to be seen till184
                 HOWARD CASTLE.

after the magician had disappeared; her mind was now perfectly at rest; before the discovery, she had felt perplexed and impatient when the unknown was the subject of conversation.
     In the evening lady Augusta proposed to have dancing, which seemed to give general pleasure. When the ladies retired to the drawing-room, after dinner, she began to arrange the plan; a new cotillion had been brought from Paris by lady Elenora, which was determined should be danced at the bull; practice was necessary, as it was an intricate figure.
     "Can we muster sufficient force for two sets?" said lady Augusta, as she seated herself on a sofa, with lady Elenora on one side, and Clementina on the other. "I will begin with ourselves and our brothers, five; the duke of Bridgenorth, who is a famous dancer, although he looks rather ancient--"
     "I am sure," said Clementina, "Mr. Stopford must be one."
     "Why do you fix particularly upon him?" asked lady Augusta; "how delighted he would be if he knew how highly hehad been flattered! he shall then be your partner."

"By no means," said Clementina; "my only reason for mentioning him was, that he is so quick and clever, he would understand the figure at once."

"Has he the art of your beau?" replied lady Augusta, laughing; do you think he possesses the powers of conjuration? If Mr. Drofpots chooses to make his appearance in our evening's amusement, as he did in our morning's, I'm sure he will have a place, as we shall all make way for him. Well then," proceeded lady Augusta, at the earnest desire of Miss Bouverie, "Mr. Stopford is to be her partner; the marquis yours, lady Elenora, and the duke must be mine."

"Will you not allow the gentlemen to choose for themselves?" said lady Elenora; "who is to be my brother's portion?"

"He must select a fair lady," replied lady Augusta, "from the numerous party who will be spectators; who so proper for lord Montague to have for a partner as Maria Osburn? he ought to make his peace with her, as since this brilliant star has ap-186 HOWARD CASTLE.
peared, he has neglected his old flame; he ought not to give up a substane for a shadow."
"Clementina," said lady Elenora, "do you permit such expressions?"
"Why should I resent them?" was her answer. "I neither look upon myself as being a luminary or a sylph' I therefore do not think the appellations suit me."
"My meaning." said lady Augusta, "is that you are a meteor-an ignis fatuus, who dazzles to mislead the unwary."
"They are the truth," said lady Augusta, "and nothing but the truth; time will prove that I am correct. Could you suppose," turning to lady Elenora, "this cousin of yours was the most demure little puss in the convent? so quiet, so good, and so compassionate, her gentle nature slunk from domestic retirement, that I could not raise one tumultuous idea in her tranquil bosom by the most animated descriptions I could compose of gaiety. She now in-flicts wounds of the blackest dic-even the
poor conjurer could not escape; your bro-
ther-my brother, are dying, and half the
men in the house are languishing in silent
sorrow, yet she feels no more contrition
than the hardest-hearted criminal."

"And do you feel none," cried Cle-
mentina, "for thus cruelly traducing a
fair character? can you prove one of your
accusations?"

"Shall I ask Miss Osburn what she
thinks of you?"

"No," replied Clementina, "I will have 
an impartial judge."

"I am sure," cried lady Augusta, "you
cannot find one amongst the male sex."

"And I will not be brought to a tribu-
nal of my own," was her answer.

"You are right," said lady Elenora;
"envy is a leading feature, and, by lady
Augusta's account, you would find it dif-
ficult to procure a jury here."

Soon after the gentlemen entered the
room. Mr. Stopford immediately ap-
proached Clementina-"I have been so
unfortunate as not to be within the
reach of your voice since morning, when188                            HOWARD CASTLE

you broke off the conversation so abruptly."

"Because", she replied, "it was neither edifying nor amusing."

"It was both to me," he quickly answered, "as I was very deeply interested in  your sentiments."

"Could you suppose," interrupted she, with animation, "that I had any sentiments to develop upon such a strange subject?"

"Poor conjurer!" sighed Mr. Stopford, "to be treated with such utter contempt as not even be worthy of one thought! you perhaps have disturbed his tranquility, and even will not bestow pity in return."

"Of what service would it be to him if I did?" cried she; "but most certainly I should not thing of pitying a very presumptuous man; those verses he presented to me are, most probably, generally distributed after his performing his art in deception to one of the party.  I can answer for their not being his own composition-probably copied out of a book of poems, for the purpose of gaining a pecuniary reward from the flattered fair."       HOWARD CASTLE. 189
"You are very severe," said Mr. Stops ford; "and could the poor poet have known how you would have treated him and his effusions, he would have done well to have kept your property in his possession: it could only have been deemed a breach of trust; and even had it been a capital of-fence, would it not be better to hang a man at once, than for him to die a miser, able lingering death?"
"You seem to be upon a very impressive subject," said lord Montague, as he joined them..." death and judgment."
"We are, indeed," cried Mr. Stopford; this is the most hard-hearted, cruel woman in the world."
"Those are serious accusations;' said his lordship, " and what did not use to be Miss Bouverie's character. Am I so fortunate as to find you disengaged? Dancing is to be the order of the night; you have often been my little partner at Colnbrook, and I have such an agreeable recollection of former days, that I have thus early solicited the honour of your hand for this evening."
An assent from Clementina made Mr. Stopford exclaim-"How foolishly have 
190 Howard Castle

I been wasting the precious moments! but it is always the case; I never have any senses about me."
   "There you certainly are mistaken," said Clementina; "you had better not trifle more of your time, otherwise you may be too late."
   "I am obliged to you for the advice, which I believe is one word for me and two for yourself." He walked off as he said these words.
   "What an original!" said Clementina.
   "He is," was lord Montague's answer; "he has an uncommonly good capacity, if he would manage it properly; but he is so unsteady, there can be no dependence upon him; his life has been a continuation of caprice, exactly what you would expect from his manner; one moment volatile, the next solemnly grave.  He joined a set of strolling players for several months, and gained great applause;  I believe he is a very capital comic actor, and has had great offers from the London managers.  His father, who is a genius of the same kind, and is not much entitled to find fault, threatened to disinherit him if he did not correct his   HOWARD CASTLE

mode of living, obliged him to quit the
wandering life, which he enjoyed exceed-
ingly, and again become gentleman, and
take the name of Stopford, which he had 
dropped. I have been told he is as fa-
mous a Methodist preacher as he is a player."

 "And is as good a juggler," said Cle-
mentina, "as either. I have discovered,
through the means of my maid, that the 
wonderful magician, who surprised us so
last night, and alarmed me upon the ice,
was Mr. Stopford."

"What did he call himself?" said lord 
Montague?

"Drofpots."

"Drofpots!" repeated he; "reverse it."

"Stopford!" replied she; "how stupid
that it did not occur to me! how amazing-
ly clever he was in every thing he did!"

"Probably," answered his lordship, "he
has acted publicly in that capacity; his
sisters are very amiable, and very quite,
and are the means of his being received
into all parties; his eccentricities have
caused them much sorrow, as they are, in
spite of every thing, fondly attached to
192        HOWARD CASTLE.
him. Lord Almonton is not very disstantly related to 
the duchess, and the son's strange whims are in this house styled vivacity."
  " The marquis," replied Clementina, " mentioned Mr. Stopford with the highest encomiums; his abilitics were brilliant, and his attainments great."
  " They are so. " was his answer: " were they applied to good purpose; he would cut a great figure in society ; but unfortunately hitherto he has rather been a disgrace than an ornament to the high circle hea was born to move in. "
   The sound of music in the gallery seemed to put the party in motion. Lady Augusta and the marquis had been busily employed allotting each their part; it was at last determined there was to be only one cotillion; so many declined cutting a conspicuous figure, that the number was obliged to be confined to eight.
   The marquis came to Clementina and sait-" My sister tells me that you appointed each his partner beford we left the dinning-room, and slected Stopford for yourself; I am to have the honour of lady.    HOWARD CASTLE.   193

Elenora's hand, and you, my lord," turn-
ing to lord Montague, " must choose a
fair lady from the circle."

   " My choice is made," cried Montague,
with animation; "and as you are engaged,
there can be no impropriety in my having
secured Miss Bouverie's hand."

  " Certainly not," was the marquis's an-
swer.  " After cotillions are over, we
are to have country-dances; the two first
of which I shall hope to be your partner."

  Clementina bowed, and lord Montague
added--"Then, for the two following, will
you promise to be mine?"

  She readily answered--" With the ut-
most pleasure."

  She saw Mr. Stopford handing Miss
Pelham to her place; the marquis and lady
Elenora took the lead; the party soon un-
derstood the figure, and they finished
without making the smallest blunder.

  Clementina's graceful dancing was uni-
versally admired; she was pleased and
animated; her light and elegant form
glided through the intricate figure with
uncommon vivacity. Lord Montague ap-

   VOL. I.
HOWARD CASTLE. 193
Elenora's land, and you, my lord," turning to lord Montague," must choose a fair lady from the circle."
"My choice is made," cried Montague, with animation; "and as you are engaged, there can be no impropriety in my having secured Miss Bouvcries's hand."peared inspired by her example, as he looked cheerful and happy; he excelled as much in dancing as his partner did, and enjoyed the privilege of sitting by her til the country-dances were formed, as the marquis did not claim her hand till the set had stood up. 

"Are you going to be an idle spectator?" asked Clementina; "you seem to enjoy the amusement-why will you not join in it?"

It is not the act of moving my limbs in time to a lively Scotch tune, which conveys pleasure to me," said lord Montague; "unless I have a partner who animates me, and who interests me, I would rather sit quietly on this spot; you are engaged; therefore I have no wish to move."

"You are as odd as Mr. Stopford is," rejoined she, looking at the same time at him, with a smile upon her countenance; "as you are so nearly related to me, I shall perhaps be like this family in regards to him-give it a more gentle epithet than whim or caprice."

"I am afraid you think me a very strange being," was his answer; "but you                                                      HOWARD CASTLE.            195

cannot suppose me more strange than I am. I have the unhappy faculty of repenting of every action of my life; the only period which affords me any kind of pleasure in the retrospection is when you were an inhabitant at Colnbrook. I had then committed no folly; our little amusements gave me uncontaminated delight; the prospect of my holidays, when I should return home, cheered all my tasks; I then was innocent and happy.''

''Innocent!'' repeated Clementina; ''and has my cousin been guilty of a crime which makes him use such strange expressions?''

''I have,'' replied he, ''in coming to this house, and in remaining here, when I found what dangers encircled me; I am constantly, every moment, breaking one of the commandments—envying the lot of a friend, which, you must allow, is not a comfortable sensation.''

''You are incomprehensible,'' said she.

''And must remain so,'' was his reply.

A lively tune at that moment struck up, and Clementina saw the marquis com-

                                                                K 2
HOWARD CASTLE.

ing with a quick pace towards her; she
rose from her seat, at the same time say-
ing-" Take my advice; Mis Osburn is,
I see, disengaged; go, and be agreeable."
He shook his head-" Not till you are
at liberty."

For some time he watched the dancers;
at last Clementina saw him suddenly quit
the room, and, to her surprise, did not
return to it to claim her promise; she sat
in expectation of seeing him enter, but she
looked in vain; her astonishment increas-
ed as she saw the set was forming in which 
he was to have been her partner. She felt
puzzled, and expressed wonder to the marquis 
what had become of him.

His answer was_" I wish I could pro-
fit by his absence, but I am engaged to
lady Elenora." He saw she was absent 
and uneasy_"Perhaps," said he, "Miss
Osburn is offended at his attention being
bestowed on even a near relation, and he
may find it prudent to avoid giving her 
more offence."

" My only fear," said Clementina, " is 
that he is ill."

"Shall I go," said the marquis, " and
HOWARD CASTLE. 197
express the tender fears which torment 
you, and bring to pour forth the gra-
titude he must feel at your anxiety?"


 She gave an assent, and he quickly dis-
appeared.

 The moment he quitted the room, the
impropriety of sending after Monta-
ue struck her with full force; she, quick
as lightning, followed the marquis, in
hopes of meeting with him before he could
find the object of his search. A noise in
the entrance-hall attracted her attention;
she followed the sound, but the room was 
dark; the lights from the passage shewed
her figure, but she could not see any one;
she had advanced a little way, at the same 
time saying--"Lord Clemaire, is it you?
I wish to speak to you," when, to her
horrow, she found herself locked in a man's
arms, who, raising her from the ground, 
turned towards the darker part of the
room.

 Terrified beyond measure, she screamed,
and making a violent effort, she released
herself from his grasp; she flew, with the
swiftness feat lent lier, into an apartment
which was opposite to the hall, the door ofHOWARD CASTLE.

which she immediately shut and bolted;
thinking herself secure in her new situation,
where she was convinced her rough assail-
ant could not follow her, she stood for a 
second to recover her respiration, which
was nearly gone, at the same time saying,
in hardly an audible voice-"Thank Hea-
ven, I am safe!"

She had scarcely pronounced those words, 
when she heard an exclamation of surprise,
and by a faint light, which the fire yield-
ed, saw a man approaching her-a sound 
and an appearance she so little expected, 
shocked her already-agitated nerves to such
a degree, that she sunk lifeless upon the
floor.

Lord Montague, in whose dressing-room
she was, was roused from a train of melan-
choly reflections by the entrance of a per-
son; but that it should be the very one
who was occupying his thoughts, he fan-
cied was impossible. He heard a voice, and
 he saw a female; but he could not believe
his senses that it was Miss Bouverie.
How was he surprised and alarmed when
he was convinced it was her, and that she
was lying in a state of insensibility! heHOWARD CASTLE. 199
instantly raised her from the ground, and bore her to a couch, where he deposited his inanimate burthen ; he stood for a moment to reflect upon the extraordinary situation he was in, and in what manner he ought to conduct himself; a lady fainting in his dressing-room would have a very strange appearance to any one he should. call to for assistance; he had no hartshorn or volatiles to restore her to life.
The fire afforded a sufficient light to shew her pallid countenance, on which he stood and gazed in all the horror of irresolution ; he at last, after much deliberation, resolved, if she was not quickly restored to her senses, to call his sister from the ball-room ; she was the only person he could intrust with the very alarming condition her friend was in ; he was, however, happily relieved from his difficulties by perceiving she moved ; he bad knelt down by her, that his arm might more conveniently support her head, which he feared was in an uneasy position.
He was gazing on her countenance, and earnestly watching for returning animation,
200               HOWARD CASTLE.

and holding one of her cold hands in his,
when she opened her eyes; she quickly
raised herself from her reclining posture,
and withdrawing her hand, exclaimed--
"Lord Montague here! what is the rea-
son of my being in this strange, unac-
countable situation?"

  "Ah, Clementina!" cried lord Monta-
gue, with energy, "how thankful I am to
hear your voice, which ever has conveyed
pleasure to me, but never so much as at this
moment. You have been insensible to the
misery I endured, as you have been ill,
very ill; but what was the occasion of it,
or what brought you into this apartment,
I am wholly at a loss to account for."

  "What must I do?" cried she, in the
greatest agitation; "I must quit this room
immediately, and if I am discovered, what
will become of me."

  She had hardly finished the sentence,
when the door was attempted to be open-
ed, but luckily Clementina had secured it
upon her entrance.

  "Are you there, Montague?" said lord
Clemaire, still pushing at the door. At 
               HOWARD CASTLE               201

the sound of his voice the weak spirits of
the alarmed Clementina were again nearly
put to flight.

     "I will be with you immediately," re-
plied lord Montague.

     "What the devil are you about all this
evening ? " cried the marquis; "Miss Bou-
verie is uneasy at your absence, and has
sent me in search of you."

     "That idea, could I give credit to it,
would bring me, were I ever so deeply en-
gaged."

     So saying, he unbolted the door, and
joined the marquis, who, with a look of
much archness, rallied him upon so quick-
ly shutting it __"If you will not let me
peep into your apartment, I shall suspect
you have a pretty girl in it, who you  have
been flirting with, instead of Miss Bou-
verie."

     "How can you be so tantalizing?" was
his answer; "I know too well the envi-
able footing you are on with that lady, to
aspire even to flirtation; prudence ought
to keep me at a distance."

     This gratifying speech had the desired
                    K3202           HOWARD CASTLE.

effect; he no longer thought of his threat,
and they entered the ball-room together,
and soon after separated.

     Miss Osburn was placed near the door,
and by her an empty chair, which lord
Montague took possession of, wishing to
engross her attention so as to prevent her
leaving the room before Miss Bouverie
came into it; he knew the dislike she en-
tertained towards his lovely cousin, which
she took no pains to conceal, unconscious
that he was the cause, and that nothing
torments the bosom of the fair sex more
severely than wounded pride; he strove in 
vain to assign a reason why she should, at
all moments, betray the strongest marks of
ill-nature at the gentlest of the human
race, who seemed as if she would shrink
at satire, and blush at praise, and who
would not willingly offend the most insig-
nificant mortal.

     Those perfections were the very means
of disturbing the peace of Miss Osburn;
she saw, in Clementina, such a combina-
tion of beauty, elegance, and sweetness,
that envy had, from the first of their meet-
ing filled her bosom; and the evident ad                 HOWARD CASTLE.         203

migration which she received from the gen-
tlemen, especially from lord Montague
(who, she had believed, was destined to be
her attendant, and who, she had fancied, had
shewn her a preference till this siren had
appeared), gave a rooted antipathy to-
wards her. She was surprised at lord
Montague's seating himself by her; but as
Miss Bouverie was not in the room, she con-
cluded that was the cause of the momen-
tary attention.

  Miss Osburn was quick-sighted, parti-
cularly where she had a dislike to a person,
and was never at a loss for a reason for
every action. She wished, above all things,
to bring the admired Clementina upon a 
level with herself, and watched, with the
keen eye of jealousy, for an opportunity
to lower the paragon in the eyes of those
who appeared almost to worship her.

  The wished-for moment was at hand.
Clementina entered the room, very differ-
ent from what she was when she quitted
it; her face was pale; she betrayed, by her
manner, the utmost languor, and the agi-
tation which she had been in was visible
in her countenance; her hair was greatlydisordered, her feathers broken, and her
dress considerably torn; that her appear-
ance could be disconcerted had not occur-
red to her; she wished to have retired to 
her own apartment to have recovered, in 
some degree, her composure; but the fear
of meeting with more disasters intimidat-
ed her, and made her resolve to join her
friends as soon as possible.

"Mercy on me!" exclaimed Miss Os-
burn, as soon as she saw Clementina, 
"what can have happened to Miss Bou-
verie? never sure was there so strange a 
change upon any mortal in so short a time;
she must have been engaged in a very 
violent manner, he dress is in such dis-
order. I recollect hearing a scream when
we were dancing; Miss Bouverie had quit-
ed the room a moment before; I know
you and the marquis were absent; the lat-
ter was to have been lady Elenora's part-
ner, but ran away at the very time his
presence was necessary; so I suppose
either the one or the other, or perhaps both, 
can account for her woe-begone figure."

"Believe me," cried lord Montague, with
quickness, "I cannot satisfy your curiosity,        HOWARD CASTLE.     205

as I am wholly ignorant of what can be
the cause of Miss Bouverie's altered ap-
pearance; she certainly has been greatly
alarmed."

He rose from his seat, saying these words,
as he felt fully more anxious than even
Miss Osburn could do, to develop the
mystery; he fancied a degree of confusion
when Clementina made her entrée; and as
he was the most likely being to have been
engaged in any kind of mischief, his sus-
picions fell strongly upon him; but how
she had been in his power, or why he
should exert that power to alarm her, as-
stonished him, as it could have been no
common boyish trick to frighten her, as
her dress testified she had been roughly
handled, and the state of violent agitation
she was in, when she flew into his apart-
ment, plainly evinced her terror.

Clementina, unconscious of any altera-
tion in her appearance, walked to the
upper end of the room, where lady Au-
gusta and lady Elenora were seated.  The
company, being tired with dancing, had
formed themselves into little parties, so206 HOWARD CASTLE.

that every eye was directed to the conspi-
cuous figure she made; as she advanced to
her friends, each was ready to exclaim--
"What is the matter? what has alarmed 
you? what has disordered your dress in so
shocking a manner?"

Almost overpowered by this torrent of
questions, to not one of which she could
answer, Clementina sunk silently upon a
seat by lady Elenora, who, taking her
hand, alarmed with her pale countenance
and evident agitation, entreated she would
explain what had happened to her--"Will
you go to the drawing-room, where you
can have more air, and where there are
fewer people?"

"I will," said Clementina, in hardly an
audible voice.

The idea of her attracting the attention
of all she saw around her, filled her with
the greatest distress; she was nearly redu-
ced to the inanimate state she had been
in. Supported by an arm of each of her
friends, she was proceeding towards the
door, when the marquis and lord Monta-
gue, both with the most animated concern
in their countenances, approached her, theformer expressing the deepest dismay at seeing her so pale and disordered, at the same time pressing the hand which hung within his sister's arm.

"Do not teaze Miss Bouverie," said lady Augusta, with impatience; "do you not see she is ill?"

"I do indeed," said the marquis, "and it gives me the greatest uneasiness."

"Do not detain her," replied she; "your feeling for her will not restore her to health."

Clementina smiled, and said, as she turned to lord Montague, who had not spoken a word, but had looked more than words could express- "I have many apologies to make to you, but I am quite unable at present;" so saying, she proceeded with her friends. As soon as she found herself alone with them, she exclaimed- "What will become of me, as I am convinced Miss Pelham has seen me come out of lord Montague's room! she was in the passage as I opened the door."

"Come out of lord Montague's room!" repeated both the ladies; what is it you mean? Consider, we are perfectly igno-208          Howard Castle

rant of the whole affair, and wish, above all things, to have an explanation of what has a very strange sound."
   "I have been in a strange situation," was her answer, "and so has your brother," turning to lady Elenora; she then explained the double alarm she had received; she added - "What apology can I make to lord Montague? how can I explain to the company the reason of my altered appearance and disordered dress? and how can I escape the censure of Miss Pelham?"
   Her friends could not help laughing, in spite of her distress, at their ridiculous situation she had been in, assuring her, at the same time, her alarm might be entirely over, as the whole affair could be very easily explained to the different parties concerned.
   "Who," said lady Augusta, "could the person be, who, in so rude a way, attempted to detain you? his grasp," continued she, "and your determination upon having liberty, are both evident, from the mutilated state of your gown, part of which he must have kept as a memento of his folly."
   The dress was then examined, when it             HOWARD CASTLE.    209

was ascertained a considerable piece of it
was gone.

  "Could we dicover," continued lady
Augusta, "who is possessed of the frag-
ment, we would inflict a punishment suit-
able to the offense: I am sure the delin-
quent ought at least to be sent to Coven-
try for a week."

  Lord Montague was resolved to investi-
gate the business, and at once to accuse
Mr. Stopford with the crime; as the con-
sequences had been so serious, it was not
too harsh a term.  A party of gentlemen
stood by the fire when lord Montague
joined them: Miss Bouverie's appearance
was the subject they were discussing, and
wonder seemed to fill every one.

  "Apply to Stopford," said his lordship;
"he alone can solve the riddle."

  "By all accounts," replied Mr.Stopford,
"lord Montague is the person to apply to,
as the lady was seen emerging from his
apartment."

  "She certainly did come out of it," was
his answer, "but you drove her in; she
flew into my dressing-room for protection,
as never was a timid hare more terrified
HOWARD CASTLE.

when nearly in the mouths of her pur-
suers than Miss Bouverie was; at one mo-
ment I believed you had occasioned her 
death, as she was in a state of insensibility."

"I certainly did encircle her form with
my arms," said Mr. Stopford; " who could
resist such an assemblage of beauty? and
I do believe, had she not screamed in the
most discordant manner, I should have 
pressed her ruby lips with mine; I at-
tempted to hold her, but the effort was in
vain; this trophy remained," pulling, at
the same time, from his pocket a large
shred of muslin, "which I shall treasure, as
having once adorned the loveliest woman 
in existence."

The marquis gravely answered- " He 
was extremely sorry that Miss Bouverie,
or any female, should meet with such an
insult in Canrnsworth Castle; pray where
or when did this strange affair happen?"

"Please your honour," replied Mr. Stop-
ford, putting on at the same time the most
laughable face of simplicity and confusion,
" I met with the pretty maid in the dark; I 
should not have known who she was, if she
had not, in the swetest voice, called upon 
         HOWARD CASTLE.

lord Clemaire. What  was so natural, please
your worship, as for me, if possible, to
discover what she wanted with your lord-
ship? I spoke not a word, but pressed her
to my heart, just what I supposed you 
would have done, and what I supposed 
would please her. As I personated you,
my lord, I wished to conduct myself with 
great propriety, and make the most of the 
lady and the precious time." 

 Lord Clemaire's countenance underwent
several changes during this ludicrous ac-
count; that he was the person she was in
search of pleased him; but the rude beha-
viour of Mr. Stopford shocked him; at the
same time, he knew it would be of no avail
to resent his conduct, as he was set aside
as an incorrigible being, whom neither anger
or advice would control; he was heartily
vexed that Miss Bouverie should have been
so alarmed, as she certainly had been.

Lord Montague then accounted for her
entrance into his apartment, and of the
dreadful state his voice had thrown her
into.

Mr. Stopford again called their atten-
tion by saying--"You, Montague, must 
212            HOWARD CASTLE

account for her head-dress being so disor-
dered, her hair dishevelled, and her fea-
thers broken; I cam clear, from all that
mischief, her gown alone suffered from
my embrace; it must be deemed an inno-
cent one," added he, "if a gossamer dress
being torn is all the evil which can arise
from it."

     "I think great evil arose in Miss Bou-
verie being so alarmed, and this house
being so disgraced," said the marquis.

     "I cannot account in any way," said
lord Montague, "for Miss Bouverie's dis-
asters; you certainly are amenable for the
whole; the broken feathers, tattered gar-
ments, and pale countenance of the lady,
will not be too great an  accumulation for
you to bear.  I believe the whole stigma
must rest on your shoulders."

     The marquis, satisfied that he could
gain no further information, went in quest
of Clementina, who he found seated in the
drawing-room, with a friend on each side
of her. The duchess and the general had
quitted the card-table, to inquire into the
strange alarm she had had.  The former
was evidently shocked that any visitor in
HOWARD CASTLE. 213

Carnsworth Castle should have behaved in
so plebeian a manner, as she was sorry to 
find Mr. Stopford had done; the latter
was distressed to see his daughter's pale
countenance and forlorn appearance.

Clementina smiled as she assured them
she was perfectly recovered, and asked
permission of the duchess to allow her to
inflict a punishment upon the aggressor.

"I shall feel myself greatly indebted to
you, Miss Bouverie," was her grace's re-
ply, "if you will take upon yourself what
I must have done perhaps in a more serious 
manner, as he ought to be banished from
such society as he is now in, unless he can
conduct himself more like a gentleman."

Peace seemed to be again restored; the
duchess and the general returned to the
card-table, and the little party still remain-
ed in quietness; Clementina was almost
perfectly recovered, but enjoyed the so-
ciety of her friends so much, that she al-
most lamented the necessity of again join-
ing the gay party in the gallery.

The marquis was delighted to find her
spirits restored, although the roses had not
altogether returned into her cheeks; he ex-214              Howard Castle

pressed such pleasure in her recovery, and seemed so interested in her feelings, that Clementina felt grateful, and more willing than common to receive his overflowing civilities; she addressed him with the sweetest smile of gratitude, which was not lost upon the happy marquis, but which he attributed to a more tender cause, and never did the object of his attention appear more bewitching.  The languor of recent illness was evident on her fine features; her eyes, which in general were sparkling with animation, betrayed, by their heavy expression, that she had not perfectly recovered her alarm.  He gazed upon her, and was more than ever intoxicated with her charms.
   They had not been long separated from the party, when lord Montague entered the room, followed by Mr. Stopford.
   "I come," said the former, "to introduce a delinquent, who, I know, has words at will, and the full power of making his own defense and apologies. I must say a few words for myself- that I rejoice to see you appear so much recovered from your indisposition."HOWARD CASTLE. 215

The gravity and formality of his manner
surprised her, but she had no time to make
any comment on it, as Mr. Stopford was
most eloquent, and petitioned, in the hum-
blest language, to be forgiven.

Lord Montague, as soon as his stiff
speech was made, quitted the room.

Clementina readily assented to what she
was so strongly urged to do, at the same
time saying--"I must inflict a punish-
ment upon you."

He bowed--"Nothing that Miss Bou-
verie can inflict ought to have that term;
if she will condescend to order me to do
any thing that is within the compass of
my power, I shall prove how her orders
please me; whatever the decision may be, 
if it is her wish, I shall obey, not with ala-
crity, but with heartfelt pleasure."

"Then." said she, "tomorrow evening
there is to be reciting, sprouting, imitations;
in short, the company are to be empower-
ed to call forth Mr. Stopford's talents."

"Not the company in general," cried
he, with quickness. "I bow to Miss Bou-
verie's power; whatever she desires, I will
comply; but no one else is to have any216  Howard Castle

command over me.  But pray inform me how you ever thought of allotting me such a task?  You must inspire me with the ability; I already have the inclination to take you as my arbitress, in spite of the cruel mandate you have issued - that I am to be a public spectacle."
   "Retaliation is sweet," said Clementina; "you have made me an object of speculation to-night; your turn is to-morrow."
   "Miss Bouverie must always be an object of attention wherever she goes," cried the marquis, who could not let so good an opportunity escape of paying her a compliment; "every eye must be attracted by her beauty, and every sense entranced by her charms." 
   "If I was to insist on your lordship's making a public exhibition," said she, smiling, . "I would set up a statue for you to make fine speeches to; you would astonish the world with your powers."
   "If Miss Bouverie would be the image for my worshipping, there would be no end to my eloquence."
    "Nor would there be any thing novel in the entertainment," said Mr. Stopford;"I Fear you would have a drowsy audience."
    "I hope you will take care," said lady Augusta, who had sat silent during the discussion, "that there is no propensity towards it; to-morrow evening you must keep the whole party from betraying symptoms of lassitude - not one yawn permitted.  I beg it may be particularly stated in the articles of agreement, and I desire, Miss Bouverie, that I may be appointed your delegate, and empowered to inflict a fresh punishment."
   "I protest against it," exclaimed Mr. Stopford: "I will have no judge but this lady," turning to Clementina; "nor will I submit to any jury; she alone must decide my fate."
   Terms were again agreed upon.  Clementina was to acquit or condemn him, according to his performance. CHAPTER IX

Most of my fair readers will suppose that
Clementina was as happy as possible, fol-
lowed by the eye of admiration wherever
she moved, and attracting all the attention
from the surrounding beaux; yet she was
neither intoxicated nor elated; she cared
not for general adulation, nor could she
listen with pleasure to the overstrained
speeches which were poured into her ears;
she did not suppose they were really the
effusions of the heart, but were more cal-
culated to shew off their own powers than
any serious attachment to her. She was
so accustomed to hear what she believed
was flattery, that she became perfectly in-
different to compliments, and to those who
paid them. Her mind was as rational as
her person was beautiful; she neither was 
likely to be carried off by the tide of  fa-
shion, nor to be filled with self-conceit
from the approbation of the gay world. Her              Howard Castle     219

hcart was formed for strong attachments, but it was under the control of her judgement; her discrimination of characters was quick, but her decision not hasty; her reason never forsook her; nor had she strong prejudices against any one, until she knew there was a just cause.  Miss Osburn's behaviour to her had been markedly uncivil; she was surprised, as she had given her no cause; she avoided her society, as she believed it could not be productive of pleasure to either side, but she felt no rancour or ill nature towards her; her temper was gentle and forgiving, formed for friendship and affection.  Lady Elenora Montague she loved as her sister; her mild manners and placid bosom were congenial to her own; the same sentiments and inclinations united them to each other.  Lord Montague she thought by far the most pleasing of any of the male sex she had ever seen; at the same time, she believed him extremely capricious, and very odd in his behaviour to her - at one moment gay, and apparently happy; the next, gloomy and miserable.  Had Lady Au
                  L2gusta not told her how very strange he
was before she made one of the party,
she should have believed, from his manner
to her, that she in some way caused him
uneasiness; her own heart would whisper
that he loved her; yet that idea was often
banished, and as often as would return; the 
gentle mildness of her manner was pe-
culiarly pleasing; there was something in
his conversation so flattering, without any
fine speeches, that she felt gratified when
he addressed her, and sorry when he quit-
ted her. The last few words he had spo-
ken to her had given her serious uneasi-
ness.

When the parted at Carnsworth, it pre-
bably would be for ever. Surprised at the
strength of the expression, she betrayed
such feeling, that he added- "I must fly
from danger, and go abroad for some years."

She had no time to gove him an answer.
They separated for the night, but it im-
pressed her mind with melancholy, and dis-
turbed her repose. She would give the
world to know what discomposed him so
evidently, as he seemed to take no pains to
conceal his agitation and inquiettude.When she appeared at breakfast, her coun-
tenance betrayed that she was not in her
wonted good spirits.

The general, alarmed at seeing her look
pale and languid, interrogated her on the
state of her health; he was convinced she
was ill, and would hardly listen to her as-
surances to the contrary.

The marquis, who always seemed inclin-
ed to display his happy prernative, took
her hand, declaring his misery at the bare
idea of her being unwell.

Mr. Stopford again apologized for his
folly, in having, he was afraid, been the
cause of what seemed to give universal
alarm.

The duchess could not let so good an
opportunity slip of expressing her dislike
to any thing so rude and vulgar as his be-
haviour had been.

Lady Elenora and lady Augusta kindly
hoped their friend would soon recover her
good looks, which, the latter said, were so
narrowly watched, that if the pink in her
cheeks was one shade paler than usual, it
threw the whole party into a panic.

This remark created a smile, and the in-vestigation into the state of her health had restored the bloom in the face of Clementina, who observed lord Montague had not said one single word; no hope or fear had escaped his lips; he looked grave, and silently finished his breakfast.  Soon after he joined a party of gentlemen, who were going out a woodcock shooting, and was not again seen till dinner brought all together.  

The saloon was again brilliantly lighted for Mr. Stopford's display of his powers; and after tea the company were to judge if his merit was equal to what they expected.  

Clementina continued with the same feelings as she had quitted her apartment with in the morning; she was sorry she was not in her usual spirits; but the more she wished to be cherful, the more she was depressed.  She was obliged to assign a cause to her father for her being grave and silent, as he felt anxiety on her account.  She answered to his earnest inquireies, that a slight headache rendered her stupid.  He exclaimed--"I cannot forgive the folly of that silly boy, who is al-    HOWARD CASTLE.

ways trying to display his life and spirit;
he has completely done away yours. This
whole day you have looked as melancholy
as lord Montague does, and you have been 
equally silent."

He pressed her hand with all the ardour
of affection; she assuring him she had very 
little to complain of, any that she should 
be quite well in a very short time, and as
gay as ever.

Lord Montague, as the general remark-
ed, hardly spoke a sentence, either at
dinner, or while the ladies remained in
the room. His gave manner and de-
jected countenance again occupied Cle-
mentina's thoughtsl; still lady Elenora
made no remark; she believed her brother
admired his cousin, and envied the mar-
quis his happy prospect of being united to
her, which no one entertained the least
doubt of. A little feeling of envy would
at times steal over the gentle bosom of la-
dy Elenora, as she saw the attention the 
marquis ever directed to Clementina; she
believed she felt interested on her brother's 
account, who, she was convinced, was suf-
fering the greated misery in being a prey224               HOWARD CASTLE.

to hopeless love; but she had to conquer a
little of the same sensation in her own
breast. That the marquis could plead in
vain, she deemed impossible.

  Mr. Stopford consulted Clementina on
what was to be the amusement of the
night.--"If it can be called amusement,"
said he, "it is a hard task for one single
man to stand up and entertain twenty peo-
ple."

  "Have you not already one it?" said 
Clementina. "Oh, Mr. Drofpots, if you
can recite as well as you can personate a
magician, and fill us all with wonder, you
need not apprehend a failure this evening."

  "I must accuse you of what I have long
suspected to be the case," he replied--"that
you are well versed in the magic art; I be-
lieve you are not human, but a sprite, who
has assumed the fairest form, for the de-
struction of our sex; who can elude your
power, if you alone (and I believe there
were thirty people present) could divine
that the German Mr. Drofpots should be
George Stopford, of English extraction and
English education? Could you suppose 
that any one, who has not made slight-of-hand his business, could deceive so large a
party, who were all watching him?"

I did think you," replied Clementina,
"extremely clever; and I expect to be
highly gratified this evening."

"How came it,"he cried, "to enter
your head, that I could do what you insist
upon-- reciting, spouting, and imitations?"

"My magic art," she replied. "How
could you ask such a question, when you
have just accused me of being a witch?"

"Then," said he, "decide what I am to
do; of course you know my knowledge,
and will suit yout orders accordingly."

"I wish you to recite Collins's Ode on
the Passions, and some passages from
Milton's Paradise Lost."

"Two of my greatest favouristes!"
exclaimed Mr. Stopford.

"As for the other part of the entertainment,
I know nothing of the English stage,
so that I cannot fix upon those you are to
imitate; choose your own plays, and your
own actors; the company must judge if
your performance is correct."

"No," cried he, with quickness, "I am226      HOWARD CASTLE.
not to be thrown on their mercy; what-
ever you decree I submit, but I fear you
will have little feeling; Collin's Ode is
long, and requires much exertion; and 
you give no limits to Milton; then I am
to go through the dramatis personae of the 
London stage. Do not be cruel in your
decision; remember, I failed in my at-
tempt; had I succeeded, you might have 
condemned me to the severest punishment
possible; I should have had my reward;
but as I had nothing but much compunc-
tion ever since, surely my crime does not
merit such a severe sentence."

He led her, saying these words, to the
saloon, where most of the company were
again seated, ready for Mr. Stopford's ap-
pearance -- "heavens!" said he, as they 
entered the room, "how formidable the 
circle looks! but if you will shut your eyes,
I could go on with more courage."

"I should think the ears being closed
would be of more consequence than the
eyes," said she; "you pleased my 
before; now my senses are to be gratined."

The marquis, she observed, had not en-
tered the saloon, and the seat Mr. StopfordHOWARD CASTLE. 227
handed her to was close to lord Montague,
who stood conversing with the duchess.
There was an empty chair by the one
Clementina took, which, if his lordship
turned round, whilst it continued vacant,
he could hardly help securing it; if he did
not, if would prove to her he had determined
upon avoiding all intercourse with
her. She heard the marquis's voice in the
passage.

When all was ready for Mr. Stopford to
begin, lord Montague was going to seat
himself, when he observed Clementina-"I
did not know," said he, "I was so very near
Miss Bouverie; and I fear I feel rejoiced in
the discovery, and that she seems more at
liberty than usual. I must indulge myself,"
at the same time placing himself by her,
"although I know I am beset with danger.
I have been vain of my own prudence
and forbearance, and I foolishly believed
I had a command over myself; but
I find, alas! that I have been deceived. I
cannot withstand the temptation of being
happy when I can, though at the certain
risk of future misery."

"I shall call upon you, my lord," saidshe, "to assist Mr. Stopford in the arduous
task he is to perform this evening."

"Why?" asked he.

"Because you seem in a theatrical mood.
The speech you have just now made, I
think, is borrowed."

"I wish to Heaven," exclaimed he,
"both my words and my feelings were bor-
rowed; I would willingly resume those I
entered Carnsworth Castle with, and I
would fly with them, as with the greatest
treasure I could be possessed of; but they
are gone for ever!"

He accompanied the last words with so
melancholy an expression, they affected
the nerves of Clementina. A tear started
into her eyes; she had felt dejected all the
day; lord Montague's manner did not help
to raise her spirits; she longed to be expli-
cit, as she hoped a few words from her could
at once relieve his feelings; but the at-
tempt proved fruitless--she could not in-
troduce the subject. The hints he gave
in regard to her engagement with the
marquis were so ambiguous, that she could
not possibly give any serious explanation
to them; he might have some other causeof sorrow, unknown to her; how self-conceited she should appear, if she was voluntarily to declare she was at perfect liberty, with the evident expectation of his making a profession of his affection, and he should still continue in his strange desponding mood, without unburthening his mind to her, she should both appear and feel very foolish.

The marquis walked about the room, conversing with each in their turn, till Mr. Stopford attracted everyone's attention, as every one (although their expectations were raised uncommonly high, from his known powers in reciting) were astonished. Clementina had happened to fix upon a poem which she admired, but she knew not the abilities it required to do it justice; nor did she know the beauties Collins's Ode on the Passions possessed, until she heard it from Mr. Stopford. The varied and pleasing tones of his voice, and the pathos and expression he gave to the feelings of the poet, sensibly affected those of the company. Clementina was enraptured, and wondered that lord Montague should sit perfectly composed. When it230                    HOWARD CASTLE.
was finished, she turned round to him, and expressed what she felt, astonished at his apparent indifference.
  "I am indifferent to Collins's description of the passions,"  was his answer "Durst I describe my own to you, perhaps you might deem them fully more interesting, and not less moving; they are real; what you have allowed to work upon your sensibility are fiction.  I i was to give stopford my little narrative, he would make it a most plaintive story; and with his every insinuating manner of narrating it, I am certain he would move your pity your commiseration.  Yes, Clementina, I know you would drop many tears over my wayward fate; and would to Heaven they could blot out my errors!  I am at times tempted to disclose my sorrows to you, and open my heart to you, but whole could bear to harass such a bosom, fillied with every virtue, miled, gentle, and compassionate?'
   "Could you suppose," replied she agritated beyond meassure by the world, which had just escaped from him, " that Mr.Stopford could touch myfeelingsmore than your lordship could?  his reciting an indiffer-              Howard Castle             231

ent author's works might astonish and please me exceedingly, and was the subject pathetic, probably might excite a tear; but, believe me, your description, in the most simple, unadorned language, if it was of any kind of distress which belonged to you, would grieve me beyond what I can express.  Your manner, I own, has an odd effect upon me; I am pleased when you converse with me, yet you always leave me impressed with a painful sensation, as if I had been perusing the most interesting book, which had strangely taken hold of my senses, without my comprehending its meaning."
   Lord Montague sighed - "You must continue in ignorance," exclaimed he, with emotion; "could you develop all my feelings, and my situation, you would no longer think me worth of deciphering."
   "Surely," said she, sweetly smiling, as she turned towards him, "the greater knowledge I gained of your character, the more deeply I should feel interested in your welfare, as I cannot believe my cousin's conduct could not bear the strictest investigation.  I again have ample roomto be puzzled with you, as you are com-
pletely incomprehensible."

Mr. Stopford, who had taken some re-
freshment, and who had received the thanks
and approbation of the company, was again
ready to charm them.  His imitations were
pronounced by the knowing ones as ini-
mitable.  Clementina could not judge of
his merit, having never heard any of the
actors; but the various speeches which he
gave them, with such different voices and
action, surprised her, as she could hardly
believe they were delivered by one person.  
Upon his exclaiming with much feeling
—"When love's well timed, 'tis not a fault
to love; the strong, the brave, the virtu-
ous, and the wise, sink in the soft captivity
together," a very deep sigh from lord Mon-
tague made Clementina look round, and
for a moment she lost what Mr. Stopford
said.  Her attention, quickly returned,
when she heard him pronounce, with much
animation—"A lover does not live by vul-
gar time; believe me, in my Clementina's
absence, life hangs upon me, and becomes
a burthen; and yet, when I behold the
charming maid I'm ten times more un-        HOWARD CASTLE.     233

done, while hope, and fear, and grief, and
rage, and love, rise up at once, and with
variety of pain distract me."

"A glowing description," whispered
lord Montague, "but not an exaggerated
one. If poor Stopford really feels what he
has so well expressed, and for the person
whose name he has introduced, he is an
object of pity."

Clementina had felt so confused by list-
ening, with the profound attention she had
done, to so glowing a description of love,
and hearing herself named as the object of
it, that she aid not even attend to lord
Montague's words, till the following sen-
tence again made her listen.

"Tell her thy brother languishes to death,
and fades away, and withers in his bloom;
tell her, that he forgets his sleep, and loaths
his food—that youth, and health, and war,
are joyless to him; describe his anxious
days, and restless nights, and all the tor-
ments that thou seest him suffer?"

"Can you listen," said lord Montague,
"unmoved to such a piteous history?"

"I can," said she, smiling, "listen with
perfect tranquillity to Mr. Stopford's de-234      HOWARD CASTLE

scription, although he certainly, as an ac-
tor, must move the feelings."

  "Ah!" replied he, "we all know Stop-
ford could not interest you."

  "Nor has he," replied she, smiling, "the
least inclination, further than to be admir-
ed as a very extraordinary genius; as such,
he must be generally esteemed."

  Lord Clemaire approached her as she
finished the sentence--"Miss Bouverie
must approve of the talents which have 
been displayed for her amusement this
evening. Stopford has exerted all his
powers for your approbation, which, I hope,
he has obtained. He has, in a most feel-
ing manner, described the sensations of
many of the company--'When love's well
timed, 'tis not a fault to love."

  Lord Montague at these words rose from
his seat, and quitted the room.

  The marquis sunk into the vacant chair,
saying with gaiety--"Believe me, 'in my
Clementina's absence, life hangs upon me,
and becomes a burthen."

  "You are an apt scholar, my lord."

  She regretted the change of her compa-
nion.        HOWARD CASTLE.     235

  "Quotations," he replied, "I seldom
use, otherwise, in the language of Shake-
speare, I could describe my feelings on
many occasions in much more glowing
words than nature has gifted me with; but
I speak from the heart, and never for a mo-
ment study the speech which I address
you with; all that you hear me utter are
the effusions of a sincere one, which is de-
voted to you."

  Clementina's embarrassment was now
beyond what she bad ever felt; not only
the words, but his manner, his looks, left her
no room to doubt what his intentions were;
she dreaded a further explanation, as she
was convinced it would involve her in
much trouble, as from her father's manner,
she believed, seeing her united to the mar-
quis was his most favourite wish; what
pain she must inflict on him, as she was
certain her happiness must be sacrificed if
she was to marry him! His speech com-
pletely confused her, and the abrupt de-
parture of lord Montague distressed her.
He had heard the gay address, which ap-
peared to be well received by her; she had
no opportunity of shelving her disapproba-
236              HOWARD CASTLE.

tion, as he quitted her before she had time
to answer lord Clemaire, who now had the
field to himself, and most of the conversa-
tion, as Clementina's answers when she was
obliged to speak, were so short and con-
strained, that his lordship had little inter-
ruption.

     Mr. Stopford recited from Milton, in
the same happy manner which had ganed
him so much admiration; the great exer-
tion he made was rewarded by the most
general applause and approbation, and he
received the thanks of the company; but
the commendation he most wished to ex-
cite was the longest of being imparted.

     Clementina never put herself first on the
list of any occasion; and as she supposed
her praise could be of very little conse-
quence, where there were so many better
judges of his merit, she continued quietly
seated, pondering in her mind upon the
marquis's words, and lord Montague's man-
ner.  The first, she believed and feared,
were easily developed; the latter was more
and more wrapt up in mystery.

     Lord Clemaire had quitted his seat to
congratulate Mr.Stopford upon his success.               Howard Castle   237
ful performance.  She saw him bending his steps towards her; and from his eyes being fixed upon her, she concluded he was resolved she should praise him.
    "Why is Miss Bouverie so mute?" exclaimed he; "will she not condescend to flatter, conscious that her slightest commendation would create more pleasure than all the world's most laboured, far-fetched expressions of approbation - say only that you have been amused, and I shall be highly gratified."
   "Conscious insignificance," replied she, "has kept me silent; so many better judges of your merit were expatiating on your wonderful powers, there was no room for my humble opinion."
   "On that opinion," cried he, with quickness, "depends my satisfaction; to please you alone, I have exerted my voice, and made myself a public spectacle."
    "And you have highly pleased me," said she, with energy; "my expectations were raised, but they fell short of the pleasure I have experienced."
   "You have said enough," replied he; "the praise was extorted; I am willing to238                 HOWARD CASTLE.

believe what gives me heartfelt pleasure.

     "But why," asked she, "did you intro-
duce my name?"

     "Because I knew every heart would vi-
brate to the sound, and which would ani-
mate me beyond expression. Is not a ma-
nager delighted when he can announce in
his bills the name of a favourite actress, as
he is certain by the means to have a full
house? I introduced a magic sound, which
I knew would arrest every ear, and which
would call their wandering attention to the
feeble powers which I was exerting for
their amusement."

     Clementina smiled as she said--"I have
had ample proof of your abilities this even-
ing, but not of your discrimination. There
certainly required no incentive to attend
to your wonderful talents, as there could
not be a person present whose thoughts
could stray from the interesting authors
you so ably and feelingly quoted. My
name could be of no farther use than to
arrest my surprise."

     "You are mistaken," he replied. "I
pourtrayed sensations in the beautiful lan-
guage of Shakespeare, which all must feel             HOWARD CASTLE.        239

but perhaps dare not avow to Miss Bouve-
ric."
     " You created my astonishment," she
replied; " will you now satisfy my curio-
sity? Your reciting is the effect of an ex-
traordinary memory, but I wish to be in-
formed how you became such an adept in 
the magic art; your feats of deception as-
tonished me as much as this evening's ex-
hibition has pleased me."
     Mr. Stopford exclaimed- "There is no 
withstanding so fair, so sweet an interroga-
torist! Were I possessed of a secret of 
consequence, I should tremble, were you to 
question me. The first precaution I should
use would be closing my eyes, if you sur-
veyed me with that fascinating, penetrat-
ing, pernasive expression. Adieu to all 
prudence; my ears would certainly be
more easily managed, as while you were
talking, my reason might be working; 
but were I gazing, my tongue might ine-
vitably take its own course, without any
guidance. Now, for prudence," at the 
same time binding a handkerchief over his 
eyes," "I have my optics in due subjection;
and as my sense will not be under therr240                 HOWARD CASTLE.

undue influence, I will answer you questions."
  Mr. Stopford's eyes and forehead, which he had covered, were by far the best parts of his face; the rest of his features were uncommonly plain, and were no bad representation of an ordinary species of the camine race, known by the name of the pug-dog.
  Clementina was not in a mood for laughter, yet the comical face of her companion completely prevented her putting the questions her seemed so ready to answer, as he sat apparently wraptup in the  most  profound attention.
  After a short pause, he said--"I shall be obliged both to put the interrogations and give the answers.  You ask how I became an adept in the slight of hand business.  Dame Nature was in the most comical mood when she formed your humble servant, but as I have completely quarrelled with the whimsical goodness, and set the demure gipsy Prudence at defiance, I will give my optics full liberty to gaze on her fairest production.;  He untied the handkerchief, and continued--"she filled me          HOWARD CASTLE      241
with all sort of vagaries and faneies; she gave me a universal smattering of what is of no use in the station she foolishly placed me in. The day before my exhibition as a conjurer, I passed through a village in this neighbourhood, where I saw, stuck upon a blacksmith's shop, a list of performances which were to be displayed in the evening; as they suited my capacity, having studied the art of deception, a thought struck inc, that I would personate the judgler. I imparted my scheme to the poor starved fellow, who was delighted with the expectation of reaping the benefit of the frolic, as the expected he should be well paid for the loan (as I borrowed his dress and his apparatus). There is an art in all attendant, and deposited cards, balls, and coins, as I directed. Every thing succeeded beyond my most saguine expectations; and I believe the poor devil was surprised by the sum of money he found in the box. You were the only person present who suspected the trick, and I should have feared detection less from a stranger than from 

 VOL.I      M    HOWARD CASTLE.

sisters, or my intimate friends, I have
made my confession to you-- I hope you
will be equally candid."

 "Your reappearance upon the ice," re-
plied Clementina, "the verses you gave 
me, and your manner, set my wits at work
to discover who you were. My maid as-
sisted me; she saw you cross the gallery,
equipped for your exhibition; she was alarm-
ed beyond measure, and described you to
me as a most frightful spectre, with the
largest black eyes that ever were seen."

 Mr. Stopford laughed heartily at the
idea of his spectales creating such alarm--

 "No wonder your attendant was terrified;
I started at my own uncouth appearance, as
I surveyed myself in my conjurer's habit;
yet in spite of my disguise you discovered 
me. Have you betrayed me to the com-
pany?"

 "I have not," was her reply, "to any
one but lord Montague."

"Then," cried he, "you have done no
mischief, as my secret is sure to rest safe in
his keeping. His lordship is in this in-
stance conveniently absent; were the par-
ty to know I had deceived them, theyHoward Castle.          243

would be suspicious, and I should not be
able so easily to impose upon them in some
little plans I have laid."
     
   "I will put lord Montague upon his
guard," said she.

   "By no means," was Mr. Stopford's re-
ply; "he probably has no recollection ei-
ther of my exhibition or of your informa-
tion; even your presence, Miss Bouverie,
and your smiles, are lost upon him.  I
know you are nearly related; if I bore the
same degree of consanguinity to you as he
does, and if you honoured me by the same
flattering distinction, I should be the most
conceited fool in existence.  You should
not bestow one kind look upon an ungrate-
ful beeing, nor should you try in vain to
cheer a gloomy mind; mine would be ani-
mated, and sensibly alive to every perfec-
tion my cousin possessed.  I would act the
part of a mirror; you might always see the
representation of your own feelings in my
face.  Were you sad, I should be wretched;
were you merry, I should be light as air - 
I would be the faithful counterpart, and
you would guide the whole."




"How tiresome," exclaimed Clementina,
"to be so watched, and so mimicked!  Was
I melancholy, I should wish to have a
cheerful companion to raise ny) spirits; not
one who would increase my malady by
woful looks—so you will not do for me."

"Nor will lord Montague," said Mr.
Stopford; "his features are cast in such a
sombre mould, that I firmly believe it is
not in his power to look cheerful.  I have
watched his countenance when he has ap-
proached you; if animation and pleasure
were sparkling in your eyes, a heavy gloom
generally overspreads his; if you appear
lively, be becomes profoundly grave, and
often seeks refuge in flight.  I am told he
is prudent; but he is so melancholy a spe-
cimen of it, I am thankful I never was its
votary, and shall guard against it, if its in-
fluence is so baneful. I certainly envy lord
Montague his self-command, as I cannot
fly from what gives me exquisite pleasure,
although I am convinced it is attended by
danger; but, as I have said before, nature
gave me not one spark of prudence; in the
jumble she forgot it altogether—Howard castle
What is Hope?! 'tis a siren,
who enamours to destroy;
cunning wiles lier form environ,
Mischief revels in her eye."

"Yet," said Clementina, " in spite of 
your poetic description , what should we do
 without the siren? she often does enamour;
but when reason attends, surely
it is not to destroy."

"What is Reason? 'tis a taper,
Passion's gusts too oft puts out:
"Tis a thin and wandering vapour,
Blown by storms of thought about."

" Can you so aptly delineate every word
I make use of?" replied she: "if you can, 
I will go through Johnson's dictionary,
 and tempt you to amuse me with such 
lines as you have just now given me. I
have much pleasure in hearing you recite
the most trifling thing; you give it an air
of consequence."

" What is Pleasure? "tis a bubble, 
Fill'd with empty froth and wind, 
Leading on to care and trouble
Leaving many a song behind."

"Ah, what a pity," crid Clementina,"that your fortune does not depend on
your powers! Wealth on you is ill be-
stowed."

"What is Fortune? she's a gipsy,
Who delights in odd mistakes;
Oft I think the jade is tipsy,
Such a blandering she makes."

At that moment lord Montague entered
the room; he looked more alive than com-
mon, which encouraged Mr. Stopford to
continue his quotation.

"What is Love? an idle meteor.
Playing round the cheated heart,
Dancing o'er each conscious feature,
Spreading wide th' amusing smart."

"Amusing!" repeated lord Montague;
"how can you combine the word with
smart, which denotes pain? and pain," con-
tinued he, "is seldom amusing."

"I think," said Mr. Stopford, "love is
amusing; but we often smart for it. You,
my lord, are so much more versed on the
subject than I am, that I will not enter
into the list for discussion."

So saying, he rose from his scat, and
walked off.                  HOWARD CASTLE.             247

     "Is love an idle meteor? said Lord
Montague, as he took the empty chair by
Clementina.  "I cannot myself believe it
to be so fluctuating a thing as the volatile
poet, recited by the giddy Stopford, would
make it."

     "It is not a subject," replied she, "that
I can define, as it was not one of our bran-
ches of study in the convent."

     Lord Montague smiled as he said ---
"Had there been lectures upom it, perhaps 
the nuns could have descanted very scien-
tifically, and ascertained if the smart was
amusing."

     "They probably," replied Clementina,
"if they had ever felt the tender passion,
could not have a favourable opinion of
the sensation, as they of course must
have experienced disappointment and sor
row : they appeared cheerful, and perfect-
ly resigned to their monotonous and ran-
quil lives."

     "Many of them," replied Lord Monta-
gue, "might hide, under the semblance of
religion, heart torn by disappointed hopes.
Had you heard the various nuns describe
the anxious moments they had passed in
248       HOWARD CASTLE

the world, the mortifications and miseries they had experienced, you would have shrunk with horro at the temptations and deprivations they had encountered in the vain vortex you were about to enter. But how willingly would most of them have changed situations with you, and again entered a seene they had declaimed against! Nuns are generally too anxious to express their great happiness in religious retirement, for me to believe they really experience it in so high a degree as they wish to make every one think they do."

 " I was perfeetly happy in the quiet seclusion of the convents," replied Clementina; " and I firmly believe they would make a miserable change if they quitted it."

  " Have you been disappointed," said lord Montague, " in your short career? 
You surely have not met with ought to occasion a moment's sorrow! If ever human being was exempt from it, I should suppose you were that being. Young, beautiful, caressed by surrounding friends, and adored by a deserving and favoured lover, you must be happy , if ever happiness was the lot of moral."Clementina was struck with the sen-
tence; he certainly meant the marquis,
who was a deserving and favoured lover;
it sounded as if he was recommending him
to her notice, not at all as if he wished to
ingratiate himself into her affections. She
hesitated in giving an answer, which lord
Montague perceived. He added, in a
grave tone of voice-"I believe the mar-
quis of Clemaire accompanied you from
France?"

"I returned to England," replied Cle-
mentina, "under the care of lady Augusta's
governess."

"The marquis was of the party, and he
had the happy privilege of pouring the soft
accents of love into your ears."

"You are mistaken," she replied, with
a smiling countenance; "lord Clemaire has
made no professions to me, nor do I believe
he ever will."

She stopped. This was an opening for
lord Montague, which he never had before. 
She listened, in eager expectation that he
would seize the favourable moment, as a
prior engagement to her cousing would re-
lieve her from the dread of the marquis's250            HOWARD CASTLE.

declaring himself her lover.  She was re-
solved to be so far explicit with him as to
prevent an open avowal of his sentiments
to her father.  She listened in vain; lord
Montague gave a deep sigh, and continued
perfectly silent.

     "I have watched," said Mr. Stopford,
as he approached them, "whether my join-
ing the party would be an intrusion or an
addition; as I have seen no visible signs of
conversation,I have ventured where my in-
clination pointed; as I can be no check to loquacity, I presume I may make the num-
ber three."

     "And probably be the life of the trio,"
said Clementina, who was willing to say
something the first opportunity, as she was
afraid her countenance and manner would
betray the recent mortfication she had met
with.  She could in no way account for
lord Montague's behaviour, which, she flat-
tered herself, was owing to her supposed
engagement with the marquis.  She had,
with the openness and frankness natural
to her character, cleared away the idea of
her being engaged, which, she concluded,
from the abstracted manner and ambigu-                HOWARD CASTLE.         251

ous hints of her cousin, was the only cause
for his dejection and silence. The marquis
certainly would be a more splendid alli-
ance; but her father could not have ob-
jected to her being united to lord Monta-
gue. Thus were her busy thoughts em-
ployed, in spite of the effort she made to
be cheerful.

  Mr. Stopford observed her spirits were
unusually agitated.

  The evening passed away without her
having further conversation with lord Mon-
tague, who spoke to no one, but sat wrapt
up in gloomy silence.

  When Clementina retired to her apart-
ment, she dismissed her maid, that she might
indulge without a witness in the sorrow
which oppressed her.

  The next day was to be the ball, at
which all the neighbourhood were to be
assembled.

  The day after but one, her father pro-
posed to leave Carnsworth Castle, when
she should probably bid adieu for ever to
lord Montague. He had hinted his inten-
tion of going abroad, where he should re-
main for several years. She had vainly at-
252          HOWARD CASTLE

tributed this plan to his attachment to her,
and the belief that she wasengaged to marry 
the marquis. "How mistaken," thought
she, "is that idea! He now knows I am
free-that I have unequivocally declared
myself so, which seems so have put a stop
to all inclination of avowing his senti-
ments. Why continue so melancholy and
so abstracted? there must be a cause, un-
known to his friends, which time alone can
develop." Hope would come to her aid,
and still anticipate pleasure. Next day
lord Montague might be more explicit-he
might revolve the conversation in his own
mind before he opened it to her.




            CHAPTER X.
            ________


The first of January was ushered in by the
firing of cannon, which were mounted on 
a battery in the park, and the ringing of
the parish bells, which were distinctly
heard from the castle; every demonstra-
tion of joy was evinced by the numerous                                HOWARD CASTLE                      253

tenantry, who assembled at an early hour, and who were to dine in a barn on the skirts of the park, where old English fare, roast beef, plum-pudding, and home-brewed ale, were to be the entertainment of the day. The domestics of the duke joined heartily in praying for long life to their beloved master; who enjoyed the cheers in the barn, at each toast, for the welfare of the family; every one second elated with the day, which was particularly fine for the season of the year.

Clementina wished to be gay, but she saw lord Montague so much the reverse,that her spirits sunk; he appeared to avoid all conversation with her; she heard him,soon after breakfast, order his horses, and sawe him depart, attended by his servant. No one seemed to perceive that he was absent, except herself; she secretly wondered where he was gone, and iof he would return; she could not confide her uneasyu sensationsto anyone, but must wait in anxious suspense until the dinner-hour, when she should be convinced of what she feared was true.

Mr.Stopford was the life of the com-245          Howard Castle
pany, and in spite of the weight which oppressed the bosom of Clementina, she could not help being amused with his flights of fancy; few possessed so much original humour, and what is denominated fun; he had no restraint or fear for exhibiting before all the world; no person could have the least control over his eccentric genius; whatever fancy was predominant at the moment had free scope, and whatever whimsical idea prevailed, it was imparted the instant it was formed; from his exertions the morning was a continued scene of mirth.  The arrival of strangers to dinner separated the party; the company from a distance were to spend the day, and to sleep in the castle; those within the compass of a drive were to return to their respective dwellings after the ball.
    When Clementina retired to her room, the first inquiry she made was, if Lord Montague was returned?  A negative to the question almost sunk her spirits; the evident agitation she was in was plainly perceived by Mary, who added - "I heard Mr. le Bran say it would be late before his master come back."     HOWARD CASTLE.     255
   
   "I thought," replied Clementina, "his
servant was with him."

   "His groom is, ma'am; but Mr. le
Brun is his valet."

   Respiration became more easy to Cle-
mentina; she hoped she should again see
him join the party, and in better spirits
than when he quitted them.  Her dress
for the ball was too splendid to appear in
at dinner; she ordered Mary to be in rea-
diness at nine o'clock, when she should
return to put on her gay attire.  Dressing
herself in her usual simple style, she was
soon ready, and wishing to have a little
conversation with lady Elenora, she went
to her apartment; finding her friend on
the point of leaving it, they determined to
go below, where they probably should en-
joy a tête-à-tête.

   The state drawing-room, which was
splendidly lighted, was unoccupied; they
walked about for some time before Cle-
mentina could mention the subject upper-
most in her thoughts; at last she ventured
to say--"Is your brother returned?"

   "I suppose so," answered lady Elenora,
carelessly; "why do you ask?"
256                           HOWARD CASTLE


"Nothing very particular," said Clementina; "I saw him set off in the morning, and feared he did not mean to come back."

"How came you to think so?" quickly replied lady Elenora;"he never mentioned an intention of going to any member of the family;his presence is absolutely necesary at the ball, otherwise we cannot dance our favourite cotillion."

Clementina smiled-"How differently,"thought she,"does lady Elenora feel? no anxiety expressed of why he went, or where he could be gone to;"she took it so coolly,that Clementina hoped there was no cause for alarm; she did not know the short but interesting conversation which had passed between them, and which dwelt on her mind. 

At last lady Elenora said-"My brother is very evidently out of health; he has certainly never recovered the illness he had at Geneva; We hoped his native air would restore his wonted sheerfulness; but instead of amendment, he has been considerably worse since he came to Carnsworth               HOWARD CASTLE.           275

Castle; he is absolutely intolerably stupid;
do not you think he is?"

  There was an archness in lady Elenora's
question which confused Clementina--"If 
he is in bad health," was her answer, "how
can he by gay?"

  "He is sick at heart, I believe," rejoin-
ed lady Elenora; "his little favourite cou-
sin has created sensations in his bosom,
which I believe are not easily conquered;
the first question he put to me was con-
cerning you, and I easily perceived he
dwelt with peculiar delight on the days of
our childhood, when you used to share in
all our sorrows and our pleasures; when
lord Clemaire came to Colnbrook, he raved
of your charms, and we plainly saw they
had sunk deep on his heart. I fancied my
brother envied him the delightful journey
he had with you, which he described with
all the warmth of an admirer. Montague
listened with seeming composure, but I
am convinced it was a painful subject.
When he came here, I watched the pro-
gress of a flame which I am convinced is
consuming him; he loves you, Clementi-
na, I am certain; there lies his misery."258               HOWARD CASTLE.

  "You are mistaken," was all she had
time to say, as the marquis entered as she
began the sentence.--"In what is lady
Elenora mistaken?" said he. "I cannot
conceive that she is often in the wrong."

  "In this instance," cried she, "I know
I am perfectly right."

  "Allow me to be the judge, Miss Bou-
verie. I declare I will be impartial in my
decision; say what was the topic you were
discussing when I entered?"

  "Will it give you very particular satis-
faction, my lord, to hear that lord Monta-
gue was the subject? he quitted Carns-
worth Castle this morning, I believe not
to return; his sister is convinced he will
come back."

  "I knew I could solve all your difficul-
ties," cried he; "lord Montague is at this
moment in his dressing-room, adorning his
person; he does not always follow the
footsteps of other people; this morning he
chose a solitary ride; to all the bons mots
and wit of Stopford, your brother is not
apt to laugh when others are amused; at
first I was almost ashamed of smiling, he
        HOWARD CASTLE.    259

looked so grave, but custom has reconciled
me to be merry, as usual, in his presence."

  As the marquis made the remark, a
stranger entered the room, who he intro-
duced to Clementina as lard Stanhope;
lady Elenora, she found, was an old ac-
quaintance of his, as they greeted each
other in a familiar manner, and appeared
mutually glad to meet: more company en-
tering obliged the party to separate; the
marquis was forced to quit the only so-
ciety he cared for; his time was fully occu-
pied, and lady Elenora and Clementina,
attened by lord Stanhope, seated them-
selves on a couch.

  Their conversation consisted chiefly of
remarks on the various beauties of Swit-
zerland, in which Clementina being per-
fectly ignorant, could not join; her thoughs
were soon as busily engaged as her friends
were, and on a far more interesting sub-
ject to her - the near approaching sepa-
ration from lord Montaque; and his strange
capricious behaviour - his returning to
Carnsworth Castle, were what she had not
expected; his manner the evening beforehad been so odd, that she had firmly be-
lieved, when she saw him set off, she 
should never have again seen him; his
coming back surprised and pleased her, yet 
what had she to expect from again meeting 
with him? His last words to her had been 
to try to impress her with an idea of the 
marquis's attachment to her, and of his 
many and various perfections; at the same
time he lost no opportunity to convince
her he admired her, although he seemed
unwilling to explain himself further. A
short period would clear up the mystery,
as if he was not more explicit before they
parted, she should banish him, if possible,
from her thoughts; but she was more and
more resolved the marquis of Clemaire
should not supplant him; she still hoped,
in spite of lord Montague's opinion to the
contrary, that it was nothing more than
unmeaning gallantry, and that when they 
were separated, she should be forgot by the
marquis. 

Company continued to pour in -there
was an immense party before lord Mon-
tague entered; he was elegantly dressed,
and looked uncommonly handsome. Cle-                   Howard Castle    261

mentina flattered herself his contenance was mere animated and cheerful; she saw him advarcing towards the part of the room where she was seated, but his progress was very slow, as he met with many impediments.
   At last he reached the wished-for spot, and after shaking hands with lord Stanhope, placed himself perfectly to his satisfaction - "This," said he, as he addressed Clementina, "is to be one of my happy days - it is to be dedicated to you.  I will give my inclination free scope, and indulge myself in what perhaps may never be again in my power."
   "Are we to part," said she, "with the melancholy idea that it is for ever?  You would make it not at all a happy one to me, could I suppose it was to be the last I was to spend with you.  Why have I rejoiced so much in the reconciliation with your family, if any member of it is to be excluded?  I hoped I had gained a brother in my nearest relation, and my oldest friend." 
    "A brother!" repeated he, with em-262 HOWARD CASTLE.

phasis; "what a pity I cannot feel for you
as such!"

A momentary gloom overspread him,
and he continued silent for a short time;
she roused him by saying--"You must
have had a long ride this morning, my
lord, and you have missed may lively
sallies and innumerable bons mots from
Mr. Stopford, by your running away."

"It is a proper term," replied he; "I
did literally run away, but my evil genius
impelled me to come back."

"And pray what has happened to dis-
compose you?" said she, smiling. "Since
your return, you addressed me in a happy
strain; why so soon change to a gloomy
one without any reason?"

"In my Clementina's absence, life hangs
upon me, and becomes a burthen; and yet
when I behold the charming maid, I'm ten
times more undone. In these words are
comprised the cause of my return this day,
and of the speech you require an explana-
tion of. I believed, this morning, that by
my quitting Carnsworth Castle, and the very
dangerous society which is contained in it               HOWARD CASTLE.           263
I should be relieved from at least breaking 
one of the commandments ; after riding 
about ten miles, my courage was restored; 
I condemned the cowardly act, and re-
turned to brave the danger, and to indulge
in your society as long as I might be per-
mitted. In conversing with you, I find all 
my theory is of little use ; the rules I laid 
down in my ramble are fled; the moment 
I am in your company, I sink in my own 
estimation; sometimes I lose all recollec-
tion of the past, and enjoy a momentary 
gleam of happiness, when reflection darts 
across me, mid I am undone." 
  This speech, like many others, Clemen-
tina could not comprehend; she had said 
enough to do away all idea of her having 
any engagement with the marquis, which 
had not given the relief to lord Montague 
she had expected; he was enveloped in 
mystery, which she almost gave up hopes 
of developing. Dinner being announced 
put a period to her wandering thoughts, 
which would stray beyond the boundary 
of probability; she formed innumerable 
ideas upon the subject, which were almost 
264                     HOWARD CASTLE.

     as quickly discarded as impossible; her cousin was surely a man of honour; 

how could she for a moment suffer a doubt of his character to steal across her 

mind?  Had he formed an engagement abroad, he could not pay her the flattering 

attention he had done from the first moment of their meeting; yet what had he 

said? nothing upon which she could rest the slightest hope. 


     There was a general bustle, which seemed to rouse lord montague; which seemed

to rouse lord montague; he took clementina's had - "Pardon," said he, with a 

momentary smile upon his feature, "the strangeness of my manner - all must soon 

be explained, and, alas! my doom irrevoeably fixed."


     "And why," asked she, "will you decide upon a melancholy finale? Trust that 

termination will be a happy one; enjoy the present moment, and look forward with 

hope to the future. 


    "Do you instil hope, that siren, into me! the definition Mr. Stopford gave 

gave of it, and which is a true one in the present instance, it enamours to 

destory;  hope from you will destory me."

           Howard Castle    265

   "Let us drop a subject," said Clementina, gravely, "which I cannot comprehend."
    "You must comprehend it," cried he; "you know there is no hope for me, otherwise I should be the happiest being in existence."
   He placed himself by her at the table, and was more animated than usual, conversing chiefly on the days that had passed together at Colnbrook; the most trifling incident of their former lives seemed to be fresh in his recollection, and he dwelt with peculiar delight on the little events which had in any way interested her.
   Clementina's spirits became more composed, as lord Montague became more rational; and when she retired to dress for the ball, she felt perfectly tranquil.  Anxiety and uncertainly had almost precluded gaiety, as her natural cheerful dispostion had received so many checks since her arrival at Carnsworth Castle, that she was almost converted into a grave character: her dress was splendid, and became her

Vol. Ibeyond any thing she had ever worn; her
attendant, who was deeply interested in 
her lady's appearance, contemplated her 
with exultation, as she firmly believed she
would eclipse all the belles.

Mary was not wrong in the conjecture;
the unconscious beauty attracted general
admiration, and created uneasy sensations
in both sexes; the certainty of her 
engagement with the marquis precluded all
hope. The gentlemen gazed on her charms
with envy of Clemaire's happy lot; the
simplicity of her manners, and the 
fascination of every word she uttered, made them
listen and almost forget the beauty of the
speaker.

The gaiety of the scene, which was more
splendid than any thing she had ever
beheld, threw a cheerfulness over her; she felt
animated as lady Augusta and lady Elenora,
and the entered the brilliant ball-room ---
the immense apartment decorated with 
every thing fancy could collect, or money
purchase. Innumerable coloured lamps were
disposed of in the most tasteful manner;
beautiful transparencies, emblematical of
the day, with sumptuous draperies ofHOWARD CASTLE. 267

crimson satin, with gold fringe and tassels,
ornamented the walls; rich chandeliers
were suspended from the ceiling, which
gave a blaze of light; and the perfume oc-
casioned by hothouse and greenhouse
plants, which were disposed of on gold
stands, down each side of the room, gave
it both fragrance and beauty.

Clementina exclaimed, as the marquis
approached her--"Is this enchantment,
my lord? magic must have been employ-
ed, to have combined every thing with
such effect to gratify senses."

"I feel it is enchantment," cried the
marquis, with energy; "you are the en-
chantress which gives life to the whole;
until Miss Bouverie appeared, there was
nothing either to charm the eye or interest
the heart."

He had taken her hand and lady Elenora's
as he made this gay speech, and led them
to the top of the room, where the duchess
and a large party were seated. The mar-
quis lamented he was, according to the
rules of etiquette, obliged to begin the
ball with the lady of highest rank, andthat he was under the necessity of the relinquishing the hand of Clementina till late in the evening; he lived in the hope that she lamented the cruel necessity as much as he did, although he saw her join the set with Mr. Stopford, who took no pains to conceal that he was one who bowed low at the shrine of beauty.

Clementina was not tormented with his attentions, but highly amused with his conversation; he had an ample field for discussion, as his satirical powers were called forth only by those who appeared decked to arrest attention; those who chose to be eccentric were fair game, and he lost no opportunity of displaying, in ridiculous colours, their affected failings; some were blind in the extreme, and could see nothing without the aid of spectacles or glasses; others dragged their legs after them, in dancing, as if they had been paralysed; some beaux were too languid and nervous to dance, whilst others shewed their good humour in joining in an amusement which nature had not intended them to shine in. Lord Stanhope made one in that class; he danced with lady Elenora,HOWARD CASTLE
who, after much exertion, reached the bot-
tom of the set, satisfied her partner had
much good nature, but was possessed of 
neither ear nor activity.

: Lord Stanhope," said Mr. Stopford, 
"does more duty than any man in the
world, as he is the most indolent of human
beings; we set out in life together, but I
own our pursuits were very different, al-
though we had the same end in view-to
be educated and to appear as gentlemen,
which certainly is a most stupid profes-
sion."

" And which,: said Clementina, laugh-
ing, " I suppose you have not strictly ad-
hered to."

"My genius soared higher," replied he;
"lord Stanhope plodded on-laboured at
 the dead languages, which he never could
comprehend-studied authors, which were
as unintelligibl as the classics-went to
the university, where he lived most vir-
tuously and correctly, and left it as great 
a blockhead as when he entered-made the
grand tour; where he slept away his time,
without one vice being laid to his charge,
or bringing home one new idea; he now ison the high road to preferment, as he is in 
pursuit of a rich wife, who will pay his 
father's debts, and manage him. Nature 
has been kind to him in many ways, as he 
has the best temper in the world, what is denominated a good heart, and much of 
the milk of human kindness in his dispo-
sition. Indolence and want of energy are 
the greatest vices he is possessed of; he is a 
good son, a good brother, and a good loyal 
subject, and will make the best husband in 
the world."

   "Do you recommend him?" said Cle-
mentina.

"Not to you," was his answer; "such
rare endowments as you possess, are not
combined in such a fascinating form as to
be wasted on a mind like lord Stanhope's."

"Is he not a good son, brother, and 
subject, good-natured, free from all vice?
what could be wished for more?"

"More than centres in lord Stanhope," 
replied Mr. Stopford; "there must be all 
his worth, combined with brilliant talents,
and a heart capable of feeling your won-
derful perfections. If report speaks truth,
you have met with a congenial soul to
                                HOWARD CASTLE                         271

your own; in it there is, I suppose, a hidden treasure which you have discovered."

"You are mistaken," said she; "I have not analysed the contents, nor do I intend it."

"Indeed," said he, with much gravity; 
"I have been told you were on the very brink of--"

"Ruin must come next," said she.

"No," continued he; "it certainly often does attend matrimony, but not the person who marries you. Heavens! what an enviable destiny to be your guide-your companion-your husband!"

Lord Montague had, unperceived by either, approached the; he heard the last words which Mr.Stopford had uttered, not in a whisper; his feelings were interested in the sentence.

Before lord Montague had time to speak, he added-"I predict, and you know my powers of divination, you have not yet seen your lord and master."

Clementina raised her eyes from her fan, on which she had neen intently gazing during this little harangue of Mr.Stopford's, when she saw lord Montague look-272       HOWARD CASTLE.

ing steadily at her; she turned to Mr.
Stopford, and said - " As you have not 
your wand with you, I shall not have faith 
in your prediction."

   " I should not have ventured sporting
an opinion," was his reply, " had you not 
done away what is generally believed."

   Lord Montague approached, and hoped
she was disengaged for the set which was
forming; an assent, with a smile playing
upon her countenance, cheered him as he
took a seat by her.  Mr. Stopford, who
seldom made a third person, went in pur-
suit of another partner; but there was not
one in the room who could in any way 
compensate for the society of the bewitch-
ing Miss Bouverie.

  " Mr. Stopford,' said lord Montague,
" very easily relinquishes his place by you;
I am the unlucky person who generally
drives him form the enviable situation."

  " He is quite a citizen of the world." 
answered Clementina; " he can make him-
self happy with any society. I dare say it
is the same thing to him who he converses
with, as his own fancies amuse him; he seems
a happy, thoughtless mortal, fitted to passthrough life, feeling as few of the rubs incident to man as possible."

"He has excellent spirits," replied lord Montague; "but he is not exempt from sorrows. Who are?"

"Some much more so than others," was her answer; "many imaginary sorrows are as severe as real ones; and how many people there are who give way to fancy, which is apt to magnify trifling evils into great ones!"

"May you," cried he, with warmth, "escape from both real and self-created ills!"

"It is not the lot of mortal," said she; "why should I even hope for what none of my fellow-creatures enjoy? I will be thankful for the good, and submit to correction, which I must meet with, and which is essentially necessary to us."

"Did you learn philosophy in the convent?" asked lord Montague, with a smile.

"In theory," was her reply; "there was no opportunity for practice."

"I should have supposed," said he, "that there was ample room for practice.as submitting to such a life of dull
monotony must have required much 
philosophy."

"None in the world!" exclaimed she,
with animation. "I was happy as the day
was long, and never felt a moment hang
heavy on my hands. The world, I believe,
has many charms, of which I was ignorant;
but are there not as many thorns strewed
in the way as there are pleasures? The
llittel specimen I have had of it has 
convinced me there are."

Lord Montague felt conscious that he
had occasioned some painful sensations to
her; he believed that he had a considerable
portion of her regard--- he hoped of
her affection, but only as consanguinity 
and early friendship entitled him to
expect. That he had a deeper interest in
her heart, he did not suspect; in spite of all
she had said to the contrary, he firmly
expected she would accept of the marquis's 
hand; the perfect security he seemed to
feel in regard to her affections convinced
lord Montague he should, at no great distance,
be nearly connected with her. He
loved Clementina with fervour; the flame              HOWARD CASTLE.             275

which had been kindled in childhood, had
lain dormant during their separation; each
was unconscious of the impression formed
in early days. Lord Montague now disco-
vered to his sorrow, that his whole heart
was in her possession; all the resolutions
which he formed when absent from her
vanished upon conversing with her. He
felt keenly the misery of his situation,
which was surrounded with danger; he
knew he ought to quit her society, or avoid,
at least, feeding a flame which must con-
sume him. He was sensible of the impro-
priety of his conduct, but, as many of his
sex do, continued to err, in spite of reason,
and indulged in pleasure, although he knew
it was criminal; he was not only involving
himself in certain wretchedness, by giving
way to an unfortunate passion, but might
he not injure the peace of an angel? In
every way his distracted thoughts turned,
they presented a picture of despair, and he
almost wished to see her united to the mar-
quis.

  The set stood up for which he had
solicited her hand; but his mind was in276                              HOWARD CASTLE

such a tumult, that Clementina had to remind him of their engagement.  He started up, and begging her pardon for his seeming inattention, hurried her along. 

She saw the agitation he was in, and wished, from the bottom of her heart, that she could discover the cause; his own reflections certainly did not tend to his happiness, as she invariably observed, that after he had been wrapt up in silence, he seemed more depressed.  He was perfectly absent in dancing, and appeared relieved when the exertion was over. 

As they were returning to their seats, the marquis reminded Clementina of her engagement to him for the following dances. -"I have done a great deal of duty," said he, gaily taking her hand; "I hope now to enjoy pleasure."

He hurried away as he said these words, and lord Montague sighed out-"Happy marquis! there is no impediment to your felicity."

"I should suppose," replied Clementina, carelessly, "that he has disappointments, as well as other people, though perhaps not ofHOWARD CASTLE. 277

a disposition to feel them so strongly. His
spirits are good, and he is at perfect peace
with himself."

"He probably has no cause for self-re-
flection," replied lord Montague; "and of
all the tortures which ever was invented,
it is the most harassing. Evils inflicted
which we cannot avert, must be supported
with resignation; but where ruin is brought
on by imprudence, there is misery not to
be endured."

"You must certainly have committed a
crime of a heinous nature," was her an-
swer. "as never did mortal express so much
sorrow or contrition as your appear to feel.
What have you done which seems to lie
so heavily at your heart? Confess your
misdemeanour to me, and I will give you
absolution, if it is possible."

"It is impossible!" cried he.

Lady Augusta Sidney at that moment
came up, and asked when the cotillion was
to be exhibited? "You two have been so
seriously engaged, that I durst not inter-
rupt your tête-à-tête by the question; but as
you both looked half asleep, I began to think
a third person might be a relief. You cer-278
                 HOWARD CASTLE
tainly have had a very serious topic of conversation."
     Clementina rose from her seat-"I have been long stationary here".
     "And with a very stupid companion," added lord Montague, smiling.
     "You always appear conscious of your error," said lady Augusta; "Why don't you improve, and become more lively and amusing? At the same time, did you not please Clementina, she would not spend so much of her time in your society, as you are generally stuck up together, looking as melancholy as possible. She has lost half her life and spirit since she became acquainted with you."
     "These are terrible charges," was his answer, "and I plead guilty, only do not punish me by depriving me of her conversation; however dismal I may appear, I should be ten times worse, was she not to honour me by a share of notice."
     "I think you have more than your share," said she, "and I believe it is the general opinion. But what is so capricious as the heart of man?"
     "I have shewn no caprice," was his an-    HOWARD CASTLE. 279
swer; " surely near relationship may sanction friendship."

 " All Platonic, I dare say, " cried lady Augsta; "your conversation, which has the appearance of much interest, which has the appearance of much interest, consists entirely of family concerns- how you quarelled, and how you are friends again- and how comfortable it is that near relations should he upon an amicable footing. Are these the only subjects you touch upon, Elementina?- all humdram, matter- of- cource confab?"
  " It is a diffrent question and answer. If I agree with you, that our topies are such as you have so happily described, I am afraid you will not credidt me, as certainly lord Montague is possessed of powers beyond bringing in family feuds to accelerate conversation."
  Lord Montague bowed, and lady Augusta said- I find I have touched on a tender chord with you. I had no intention of calling either of your powers of amusement in question; I firmly believe you are very agreeable to each other."

 The marquis joining them, put a stop to her reillery. He proposed, that after the two following country-dances, in which he
was to be Clementina's partner, which were
to be the last sets formed before the supper-
rooms were to be thrown open, was the
time to dance their favourite cotillion.

The company were to return to the ball-
room, when lord Clemaire entreated Cle-
mentina to be again his partner.  She had
had many solicitations, but she had plead-
ed fatigue, and a wish to sit quietly for the
remainder of the evening.

The marquis was not to be so easily re-
pulsed—"I have been unavoidably sepa-
rated from you; I felt rejoiced in again
having liberty to follow my own inclina-
tion and surely you will not be so cruel
as to mortify me, at the moment when I
flattered myself I had reached the summit
of happiness. I have seen and envied the
time you have dedicated to lord Montague;
many wished to approach you, but you ap-
peared so intent upon the subject you were
discussing, that no one durst interrupt it.
I cannot, will not be so deterred. After
the cotillion Is over, this hand must be mine;
I will not relinquish it, even to a relation."

Clementina gave an involuntary sigh, as                  HOWARD CASTLE.         281

she believed he had no reason to fear a
competition for it from Lord Montague;
she felt unable to contend the point, and
unwilling to enter into any discussion with
lord Clemaire, had she been in the best spi-
rits possible.  She was a passive partner,
and did the figure, and kept the time, more
as an automaton than any thing else. He
was gay as usual, and never admired her
beauty so much as in the dress she wore;
he had been charmed by hearing her
praises sounded wherever he turned, and
had been more than once congratulated
upon the paragon he was on the point of
possessing.

     In the cotillion, Clementina exerted
herself, and appeared in better spirits.
Lord Montague was more animated than
usual, and danced with all the grace for
which he was generally admired.  The pe-
culiar elegance of the figure, the beauty of
the music, and, above all, her having a
partner in every way calculated to please
her, raised her spirits; her light form mov-
ed with the celerity of an aerial being
through the mazes of the intricate dance.

     The marquis had not time to watch theHOWARD CASTLE

change: he observed the langour of her
manner while she danced with him and
teazed her with his fears that illness oc-
casioned it. He would have been stung 
to the quick, had he had leisure to contem-
plate the change, but he was too busily
employed to allow him to see what must
have given him pain, particularly could he
have guessed that her partner had, in a
geat measure, occasioned it.

At supper, lord Montague had the hap-
py privilege of sitting by her. He could
not refrain from indulging in what he knew
must soon be at the end. A separation, 
probably for ever, was fast approaching;
his feelings were in a tumult; he eagerly
sought what he believed would destroy
him, but he had lost all control over his ac-
tions; every idea of propriety, of prudence,
was sunk in the dreadful one of being se-
parated from Clementina; he wished to 
engage her for the remaining dances which
were proposed. She told him what had
 passed with the marquis, and that she had
declined dancing any more.

" I shall not long interfere with lord
Clemaire's envied prerogative. To-mor-row, Clementina, we probably part for
ever; a little indulgence, therefore, cannot
be ill bestowed.  I feel miserable to be
from you; and when I am with you, I can-
lot converse—I cannot enjoy your society; 
the dreadful feeling alone remains, that I
am wretched beyond all relief."

"And can I be happy," said she, "when
I see you so much otherwise?  Your ex-
pressions of despair distress me beyond
treasure.  Tell me why your spirits are so
dreadfully depressed; there must be a 
cause."

"There is," said he, with quickness, 
"but what I must not reveal at present to
you.  You must know my cruel situation,
Clementina, and you cannot withhold your
pity; but I have not courage to tell you
all I suffer."

The marquis at that moment came up
to her, and taking her passive hand, was
leading her towards the dancers.

Lord Montague, in a faint whisper,
said—Good-night!" and immediately left
the room.

The marquis did not hear the words he
uttered; but his manner struck him forci-bly. He looked steadily at Clementina,
saying--"Montague certainly interests
you exceedingly, as you seem as much agi-
tated as he does; your spirits are depressed
by conversing so much with him. I feel
more than half jealous of the power he ap-
pears to have over your feelings, and I will
not consent to your dedicating so much
time to him."

Clementina could not answer; she fear-
ed rousing the marquis, as she dreaded his
making any profession of regard for her to
her father; she longed to say that he had
no title to control her actions, no never
should; but prudence restrained her. She
exerted herself to appear cheerful, but the
marquis saw plainly it was an effort; he be-
gan seriously to feel his fancied rights in-
fringed on, and resolved to seize the first
opportunity to speak to her on the subject
nearest his heart. He believed himself se-
cure of the prize and had not intended
making a formal profession of his regard
during their visit at Carnsworth Castle, but
to follow them to Bath, with his creden-
tials from his father; he knew the subject
had been canvassed between the elder bran-                   HOWARD CASTLE.               285


ehes, and all seemed happy in the alliance. 
He had not openly avowed his intention 
to Clementina, but his manner had prov-
ed to her on every occasion his attachment.
He never felt a moment's uneasiness on 
account of her intimacy with her cousin till
that evening; she had dedicated her whole 
time to him, although numerous beaux
had strove to share in her attention. He
had received no mark that his company was
disagreeable to her; but had she not plainly
shown she had felt no blank? Lord Monta-
gue had filled up every chasm with themost 
assiduous care, and she appeared perfectly
willing to dedicate ever moment to him.
She had even shown a particular reluctance 
to dancing, and her manner to the marquis
was evidently languid and restrained. For
the first time, the dread of having a rival
in her affections preyed upon him, and 
Clementina saw that he was evidently dis-
composed; she suspected the cause, and en-
deavoured to remove it, by assuming a 
cheerfulness foreign to her feelings. But 
forced gaiety is easily discovered. She had 
neither a face nor temper calculated for
hypocrisy, and the marquis saw through286            HOWARD CASTLE.

the farce, and became grave and thought-
ful.  After the two dances were finished, he
teazed her no more with his attentions; he
busied himself with the numerous assem-
blage of strangers, and left Clementina at
perfect liberty to resume her conversation
with lord Montague; but he had quitted
the room as soon as she had joined the 
dancers, and appeared no more.

     She would have preferred retiring to her
own apartment, but prudence kept her in
the noise and bustle, which were become
irksome to her.  She evidently saw that
lord Clemaire was angry; as she was not
conscious of having done any thing to of-
fend him, she felt no inquietude at his
averted looks, as certainly he was in no
way entitled to be a check on her actions,
and she hoped would never have the power
of choosing who she should converse with.
Lord Stanhope had often attempted con-
versation; but as he had not much volubi-
lity, he had been generally cut out by Mr.
Stopford, who scrupled not approaching
her, if he saw her so uninterestingly en-
gaged.  His lordship was the very compa-
nion suitable to her present situation; her.mind was in a tumult, as every disagree-
able consequence which could result from 
the marquis's attachment to her, which she 
now seriously dreaded was the case, flash-
ed across her mind. What could she plead
to her father, who she feared would be 
strenuous in his solicitations for her to ac-
cept of so splendid an offer, and perhaps 
he might carry it farther than mere argu-
ment; he might insist on her aggrandize-
ment; what plea had she to offer? no en-
gagement. 

Thus were her thoughts wandering into
a labyrinth of sorrow, when lord Stanhope
placed himself by her, and began by mak-
ing a few commonplace remarks on the 
heat of the room, which was rendered
doubly oppressive from the strong perfume
of the plants. Clementina acquiesced--
orange flowers were too fragrant, except 
in a greenhouse, where one was not oblig-
ed to remain longer than was agreeable; 
she again agreed it was certainly extremely
overpowering. 

Lord Stanhope rose from his seat, which 
roused her attention -- "I will open a win-
dow, to admit a little fresh air.""I do not think it is necessary," was her
answer, "and the company probably would
object to a cold external air being admit-
ted; this room bears no mark of winter,
either in the atmosphere or appearance:
you forget the chilling blast which would
enter."

"My motive," said he, "was on your
account; I thought you were unwell."

"Did you?" returned she. "I am cer-
tainly not a good rake; the late hours of
this house, and the fatigue of this evening,
have almost worn me out."

"A little custom will soon reconcile you
to the fashionable mode of spending your
time--in bed all day, and up all night:
half the pleasure of gay parties is making
them as inconvenient to both intellectual
and bodily health as possible; they literally
turn day into night, for no reason in the
world, but that is the thing. If you will
introduce earlier hours into the tonish cir-
cles, you will do a material benefit to so-
ciety."

Clementina felt surprised how she should
ever lead the gay world, unless he meant
her to change her situation to a splendidone--- "Perhaps," thought she, "he has
got an idea that lord Clemaire intends to
hounour me by raising me to his dignity."
She made no comment on his proposal, as
she felt unequal to support the conversation;
her spirits were sunk too much for her to
parry an attack even from lord Stanhope.

Mr. Stopford, who seemed to be always
on the watch for an opportunity to address
her, advanced towards her; she never before
felt regret at his approach; she was
convinced he would immediately discover
that all was not right with her --- her
present companion was not famed for 
penetration, yet he had quickly perceived that she
was discomposed in either body or mind;
her thoughts were in such agitation, she
could almost fancy lord Stanhope's idea was
correct, that she was ill.

"Do I see Miss Bouverie," exclaimed
Mr. Stopford, towards the close of the
evening, "Bereft of both her beaux? Is she
forced to appoint a new lord in waiting? 
From neglect of office, I cannot suppose
her old ones are discarded, nor can I suppose
it is caprice in the arbitress? What can be
the cause of their absence?"290 HOWARD CASTLE.
"I believe," said lord Stanhope, with the utmost gravity of countenance, "that I can, in some degree, account for their engagements: the marquis is at this moment dancing with lady Caroline Seymour; lord Montagne, I suppose, is fatigued with the exertion which is always the attendant of a ball, and is gone to bed."
Clementina could not forbear smiling, as she firmly believed it was what lord Stanhope approved highly of; she did not, however, give credit to the reason assigned for lord Montague's retiring to his apartment.
Mr. Stopford did not let the subject rest without investigation-"Did he tell your lordship he was tired?"
"No," replied he ; "but I was passing when I saw him enter his room ; he did not speak, but his hurried manner convinced me he was completely worn out, and enjoyed the prospect of resting his wearied limbs."
"And his wearied senses," added Mr. Stopford ; "he had exhausted all his powers of agreeableness with Miss Bouverie; I observed your tête-à-tête appeared so parti-
                                      HOWARD CASTLE                          291

cularly gay and lively, that it could not last long."

"His countenance did not betray much animation," replied lord Stanhope; "he rushed past me in the strangest manner, as if he was afraid of being stopt for a single moment, which convinced me he was anxious to have repose."

This account of lord Montague's agitation did not tend towards Clementina's composure; she knew not what to dread, but she was convinced there was a horrid mystery attending him, which could soon be developed-she could not converse. 

The quick-sighted Stopford easily perceived the tumult her mind was in; he half suspected the influence lord Montague had gained in her affections, and he plainly saw the marquis was no favourite of hers; that his intention of making her an offer of himself was very plain, and he feared the gentle bosom of Clementina was doomed not to escape without some painful struggles; he never before was so interested, nor ever had he wished to gain the good opinion of anyone so much: to292     Howard Castle

be a lover was presumptuous; but might
he not aspire to the title of friend? To be
worthy of such a place, he thought he 
could give up all his volatile pursuits, and
assume the grave character of a Mentor.

   Mr. Stopford had abilities for anything,
had the necessary attendant, steadiness, ac-
companied his sense; he was enthusiastic
in whatever was the whim of the moment,
but he generally tired of the pursuit before
he could bring any thing to perfection.
Nature had gifted him with such a reten-
tive memory, and various other strong en-
dowments, that he could not altogether
shake off her benefits; he never before had
met with such an inducement to be steady;
could he be secure in enjoying the society
of Miss Bouverie, he would strive to give
up his vagaries, and become a rational 
member of society; but the prospect of an
empty title was what he could never offer
to her, and he believed a small portion of
his father's property would devolve to him.
As he was, he cared not for riches--he had
been as happy wandering about with an
itinerant company of players as he had
ever been in the highest circles, and neverhad he wished for any other than the desultory life he had led, until he conversed with Clementina : her beauty pleased his eye, and her open ingenuous manner, and lively agreeable conversation, charmed him, but he was not of a nature to be long depressed, or to sink under hopeless love--he saw the admired object was beyond his reach, and resolved neither to render himself ridiculous or unhappy because she was so; he wished he could venture on the list of her friends, as nothing could contribute more to his pleasure than being of the least use to her: he saw she was agitated, and he was convinced lord Montague was the cause--his absence of manner, and at times the gloom which hung over him, plainly proved that all was not right.
He had watched the countenance of Miss Bouverie, when conversing with various people, but no one had the power of pleasing so much as lord Montague had; her face was too expensive of what she felt for any one to be deceived; he firmly believed that the marquis would not succeed, as he was thoroughly convinced she294           HOWARD CASTLE.
never would marry, unless her heart accompanied her hand.
  For the first time Mr. Stopford appeared thoughtful.  Clementina observed that he looked earnestly at her, and she was convinced an expression of pity overspread his countenance; she attempted to rally her spirits, as being an object to move compassion she did not relish;  but Mr.Stopford saw it was an effort, and that her smile was nearly attended by a tear.
  The marquis again accosted her, but with a gravity of manner very unusual to him, and asked her to dance the next sets which were forming, and which were to be the last.  Clementina again declined the honour of being his partner."Your are ill, I am convinced," said he, taking one of her hands into his,-- All the tender-ness he really felt for her came foreibly into his manner; he seemed to forget, in  his anxiety at seeing her so pale and languid, that he had disapproved of her manner to him; he flew to his sister, and requested she would urge Miss Bouvere to retire             Howard Castle    295
   Relieved by the proposal, Clementina gladly obeyed, and was rejoined when she found herself in her own apartment. 

            End of Vol. I












Printed by J. Darling, Leadenball-Street, London.NEW PUBLICATIONS
PRINTED FOR
A.K. NEWMAN & CO.
AT THE
MINERVA PRESS,
LEADENHALL-STREET, LONDON

Agrippina, new edition, 8vo. 3 vols ................ 0 15 0
Old English Baron, by Clara Reeve, 9th edition, plates  0 6 0
Ora and Juliet, or the Influence of First Principles, by
the Author of Eva of Cambria, &c. 4 vols ......... 1 0 0
The Caledonian Bandit, or the Heir of Duncaethel, a
Romance of the Thirteenth Century, by Mrs. Smith,
2 vols .................................... 0 10 0
The cousins, or a Woman's Promise and a Lover's
Vow, by Mrs. Ross, 3 vols ......................... 0 15 0
Julia de Vienne, 4 vols ......................... 1 1 0
Einathan, or the Ages of Man, an Historical Romance,
by a Philosopher, 3 vols ......................... 0 15 0
Sir Ralph de Bigod, a Romance, by E. Moore, 4 vols .. 1 0 0
An Old Family Legend, by J. N. Brewer, 4 vols ...... 1 0 0
A Winter's Tale, new edition, by the same Author,
4 vols. .......................................... 1 0 0
Mortimer Hall, or the Labourer's Hire, by Mrs. Bridget
Bluemantle, Author of the Three Old Maids, 4 vols .. 1 1 0
The Rockingham Family, by Mrs. Pilkington ........ 0 4 0
Farmer of Inglewood Forest, by Mrs. Helme, 2d edition,
4 vols ........................................... 1 0 0
