THE 

ANGLO-IRISH 

OF 

THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 
VOL. III. 



LONDON: 
PHINTED BY S. AND K. BEKT1EY, 
Dorset Stifet, Fleet Street. 



THE 



ANGLO-IRISH 



OF 



THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 



A NOVEL. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. III. 



LONDON: 
HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1828. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER I. 

" And do you think I wonder, after this, 
that mere Irish people hate half-Irish people ?" 
said Mr. Gunning, pursuing a conversation with 
Gerald, on the way home ; " or that they, or 
at least the poor devils of peasants amongst 
them, should get together on the hill sides, or in 
the bogs, to which Sir John Lumley and his set 
kick them, or horsewhip them, and there plan 
some atrocious piece of vengeance ?" 

" Oh," said Gerald, " but we must not con- 
clude that the horsewhipping system is any 
longer in operation ; indeed, Sir John said it is 
not." 

" Ay, but its spirit is, as well as the recol- 
lection of itself. Every word we heard this 
VOL. III. B 



2060837 



2 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

evening, about the population of the country, was 
full of that spirit ; and I must and will con- 
clude, that so is every act of these nondescript 
colonists towards the objects of their impolitic 
dislike and impudent contempt — ay, impudent : 
and, confound their impudence, say I ; no 
matter about their folly ; that has cost them 
dear, and (may God forgive me for hoping that 
it may) cost them dearer. Favour me by sup- 
posing England — (its real population, like that 
of Ireland, undiminished) — colonized by a hand- 
ful of men like these ; how long would the fools 
be allowed to play their antics within the limits 
of our chalky cliffs ?" 

" But again, Mr. Gunning, we are not to sup- 
pose all the English-Irish in Ireland like to- 
day's specimen." 

" True ; though I see no reason why they 
should not be ; at least, if * the Caustle' gives 
the cue here, as St. James's does in town. I '11 
wait, however ; but, in the mean time, hinder 
me, if you can, from abusing that * to-day's 
specimen." I never knew till now why it was 
that, whenever such of your half-Irish as I have 
seen, came to visit us in England, they appear- 
ed to be over-polite, over-conciliating, self- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 3 

doubting, inferior kind of men. But now I 
know it. They are tyrants at home under us, 
and they must be inferiors from home, in our 
presence : they can't help it." 

" Say, more charitably, Sir, that, as they imi- 
tate England, they must naturally be second to 
Englishmen. Reynolds long ago made an axiom 
of my proposition, when he said, l He who fol- 
lows must ever remain behind.' " 

" Burke, if you please, not Reynolds ; I 
know the opinion is against me ; as also is old 
Northcote, Sir Joshua's domesticated apprentice: 
no matter for all that ; I '11 have my own opi- 
nion ; but this is not to the point ; only I 
believe I am vexed enough to quarrel with 
doubtful claims of every kind ; what a name 
you Ve all got ! English-Irish, or Anglo-Irish ; 
why you make yourselves out nothing at all ; 
one ' does not know where to have you :' I 
wonder you never thought of having heard said, 
' between two stools,' and so forth." 

" You know, Mr. Gunning, I " 

*' Well, no matter, good-night ;" they had 

gained the steps before Morrysson's ; " I sleep 

here; so, touch my cane, — good-night ; but, do 

you know, I long to find out what the real Irish 

B 2 



4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

people are like ; have you started any of them 
yet ?" 

" One or two," answered Gerald. 

" And what did you think of them ?" 

" I fear to shock your new predilection by 
telling." 

" Well, don't then ; for now that I recollect, 
I shouldn't care much for your opinion ; that is — 
don't be angry — that is, I 'd rather wait and 
form my own. And so I will. Ay, by green 
Ireland's patron saint, will I, — very shortly too. 
Yes ; and in the thick of them, down in the 
South. I 've taken my place in the stage, and 
start to-morrow morning. Good-night the third 
time, and get home as fast as you can. 1 ' 

" But you surely will allow me to go in to 
this hotel with you, for I, too, sleep here ?" 

" Do you ? So we must have stumbled on 
each other, at all events ; come along then ;" as 
a waiter opened an inner door. 

" And you have absolutely voyaged from 
England, Mr. Gunning, to penetrate, in a stage- 
coach, down into the wilds of Ireland, just to 
try what the genuine sons of Milesius are likely 
to be like ?" asked Gerald, as they rested, toge- 
ther, in a public room. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 5 

" Who told you that ? Not I, I 'm sure. I 've 
business here. Don't you know that my elder 
brother married an Irishwoman, or rather an 
English-Irish one ?" 

" Yes ; a daughter of Lord Dargle." 

" Very well ; she has lately died, good lady ; 
and of all things in the world, knowing that I 
was a poor dog enough, — (and, I suspect, at 
Dick's instance, though the fellow will never 
own it) — left me the portion -of her property 
which was settled on herself : and as it is in the 
shape of Irish acres, joining the estate Dick also 
got by his excellent wife, why I am rather bound, 
I take it, to come and have a look ; — to say no- 
thing of a necessity for condolence, and all that, 
now that poor Dick is so much alone : he has no 
children, you know ; else, I fancy, this bit of 
luck had never fallen to me." 

At length the friends parted, and Gerald was 
free to collect his thoughts in his own chamber. 
The occurrences at Mr. Gore's, connected with 
the terrors of the night, the conversation, the 
characters, and even his discourse on the way 
home with Mr. Gunning, began materially to 
confuse, if not to change some of his former 
theories regarding his paternal country. But 



b THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

upon that subject Gerald would now scarce in- 
terest himself. Maria Gore, her familiarity at 
one time, her slights at another; his puzzle 
about her, and her proposed puzzle about him ; 
her strange questions, in allusion to the Knight- 
lies; every body's questions in allusion to them; 
and, after hers, Flood's in particular; and the 
stare of surprise, really unaffected, as Gerald 
now believed, with which that gentleman had 
honoured him, previous to his last exit to seek 
Miss Maria in the back drawing-room ; all this 
occupied Gerald's heart and imagination, to the 
exclusion of every other question. 

After a good deal of consideration, if the 
work of his mind, upon this night, may be so 
termed, he rested in something like the follow- 
ing conclusions. His indifference to the Knight- 
lies had become known to Maria Gore, and, at 
the instigation of Miss Rhoda, and perhaps, 
slightly, of his demure sister, that young lady 
determined to vex him on the point. Being so 
intimate with Flood, she had enlisted him in 
the absurd plot ; and it was precisely within 
the range of his old schoolfellow's talent to 
relish the jest, and prove a zealous agent in 
promoting it. But Gerald was not disposed to 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 7 

spend his time in Dublin as the scape-goat even 
of the beautiful Maria, or of his oldest friend. 
He would take care how he ever again gave 
Miss Maria an opportunity to amuse herself, or 
her " dear Augusta 1 ' either, at his expense. As 
to Captain Flood, early the next morning he 
could be asked to explain the whole part he had 
taken in the farce ; his stare, his humoursome 
message into the back drawing-room, which had 
made the young beauty laugh so gleeishly ; and 
her final answer to Gerald's question, as to 
whether or not he had ever seen her before 
they met in Dublin. And here it will be per- 
ceived that Gerald's lurking curiosity, and his 
fascination, if not love, for Maria Gore, had 
some share in directing the suggestions of his 
sulkiness : and, in fact, after laying his whole 
train of operations for the next day, — embarkation 
for England forming the final one, — he caught 
himself breathing a very warm and emphatic 
sigh in the service of the lovely and charming 
Maria — if, indeed, she ivas his French vision ; 
for, strange to say, he almost unconsciously 
made that proviso. 

Before daybreak he was awakened by the slow 
stumping of feet, and the firm tap of a stick 



8 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

along the corridor, that ran by his chamber ; pre- 
sently the feet and the stick stopped at his door ; 
then he was startled by three abrupt knocks, 
as if given with the stick, and Gunning's voice 
sounded abroad — " Are you awake ?" 

" Yes, thank you? 

"Well, good-bye, then, I'm off: the stage 
starts in a few moments, from the office in the 
next street ; good-bye :"" and Gerald, grumbling 
much, was left to try for another sleep, if he 
could get it. 

But he could not. His brain filled again 
with all its vivid thoughts of the previous night, 
and he lay awake till it was time to get up, and 
then, allowing an hour for breakfast, to set out 
to seek Captain Flood. 

He had scarce arisen, when an attendant ask- 
ed admittance to deliver the following note: — 

" MY GOOD FELLOW, 

" The absorbing pleasure of encountering 
you upon Carlisle-bridge, the charms of your 
discourse since, and the serious pressure of pub- 
lic, indeed national events, contemporaneous 
with our meeting, very nearly altogether put 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 9 

it out of my head, I may venture to say, to hint 
or indicate to you, that for the last five days 
your warmest admirer has rested under a sug- 
gestion, or warning, from people who assert pre- 
dominance over him, to march, with his troop, 
to-morrow morning, at six o'clock, unto the re- 
mote and somewhat southern town of , and 

there to take up his quarters, until farther or- 
ders. Now, amiable Blount, as, after my re- 
turn from the interesting mansion of Mr. Gore, 
the hour seems too late to make you happy by 
a personal intimation of my sudden departure 
from Dublin, endeavour slightly to comprehend 
how matters stand, and waft me an imaginative 
adieu. Positively, I am rather led to expect 
that, in a very few days, Captain Rock and 
your poor friend are to become known to each 
other ; therefore, wish me well, and abound 
with affectionate ejaculations for the fame and 
fortunes of, 

M Your exceeding worshipper, 

" Charles Flood." 

" P. S. Permit a light hint to the effect that 
your sudden retreat, this evening, out of the 
b5 



10 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

front drawing-room amazed, grieved, caused to 
be astounded, him who would have died to 
keep you that moment at his side. 

" C. F." 

This absurd note fretted Gerald much ; the 
explanation with its writer, upon which he had 
so surely reckoned, was no longer within his 
reach. Would he follow Flood to the town of 

? He felt strongly tempted to do so. 

But no ; he grew so tired of Ireland and of 
Irish people, that he would content himself with 
writing a letter to his old schoolfellow, merely 
requesting the information he seemed to have a 
right to demand ; then hasten to London ; com- 
municate Augusta's position to her elder brother ; 
determine upon a reply to her strange epistle 
from Lower-Court, (to be jointly written by Lord 
Clangore and himself,) and in the mean time 
Flood's answer would duly arrive by post. 

Accordingly, Gerald sat down, and after some 
caution and effort got through two pages of a 
letter to Captain Flood, the first penmanship 
he had performed since his arm was broken. 
The waiter took charge of it for the post ; 
and, under his directions, Gerald then went 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 11 

out to engage, at the proper office, a berth in 
a packet for England. His late peevishness 
was not soothed by learning that the Holyhead 
packet had sailed many hours before : after 
farther inquiries, he heard that he might pro- 
bably be in time for the Liverpool packet at 
Dunleary. He hastened back to his hotel ; 
settled his not unreasonable bill ; took a hack- 
ney-coach ; bribed the wilfully-cool driver to 
trot his lean horses as fast as they could or 
would be exhorted to go ; and arrived at the 
point required quite in time to have the dili- 
gent vessel pointed out to him, a white speck 
on the verge of the horizon. " Time and tide, 
you know, Sir,' 1 smiled the boatman, intimating 
the old adage ; — " I know, thank you," said 
Gerald, and was driven back to Dublin. 

Now he had another evening to consume in 
the metropolis of Ireland, alone and unassist- 
ed ; for his bile rose against a thought of 
Stephen's-green, or of any one in it, not even 
excepting the most beautiful of " the three most 
beautiful creatures in Dublin. 1 ' At the first 
view of this prospect, Gerald resolved to go to 
sleep, the moment he should get reinstalled in 
his bed-chamber at Morrysson's. 



12 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gaining the streets of the town, placards of 
the theatrical bill of fare for the evening caught 
his eye, and he changed his mind ; so far, at least, 
as regarded the place for going to sleep ; for 
Gerald had little doubt of being able to enjoy 
a comfortable nap in the back of a box in the 
Dublin Theatre Royal, just as easily as in his 
back bedroom at his hotel. 

Eager to avail himself of the proposed means 
for spending his evening, Gerald resolved to be 
in the theatre at an early hour. Mr. Morrys- 
son's cook, however, and his bottle of claret, 
sufficiently interested him until after the time 
at which, according to announcement, the doors 
were to be opened ; and even then, only for 
consistency's sake, he would not have left his 
warm fire-side and cheering glass, to encounter 
the chances of a half-filled, cold theatre. 

He soon found himself, however, before the 
then imperfected front and piazzas of the new 
theatre, in HawkinVstreet, late the fine pile 
of the Dublin Society, which that economical 
body sold for almost nothing to a London ma- 
nager, while they purchased, for forty thousand 
pounds, from the rich Duke of Leinster, his 
Grace's patrimonial and only town mansion — 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 13 

a building not so well suited to the manifold 
purposes of their institution : and thus, it might 
be said, public patriotism squandered public 
funds, in the one instance, without gaining any 
thing by the profusion ; and private patriotism 
divested itself of a place of address, in the 
second instance, without gaining much more 
than forty thousand pounds by the traffic. 

" Theathricle Obsaarver !" " Theathricle Ob- 
saarver !"" greeted Gerald's ears as he descended 
from his hackney-coach ; and looking around, 
he saw crowds of men, women, girls, and boys, 
flourishing on high the printed penny sheet, 
which, it is worthy of remark, suggested to a 
IiOndon plagiarist the similarly-named, and 
even similarly-mottoed digest of actors and of 
stage concerns, since and at present sold very 
extensively in Bow-street, JBrydges-street, Co- 
vent-garden, and along the Strand, every even- 
ing, from six to seven o'clock ; the only instance, 
perhaps, of English imitation of Dublin lite- 
rature. 

Gaining the bottom of a spacious sweep of 
steps which led up to the first- tier of boxes, 
Gerald's anticipations of a half-empty house 
began to fail him. The stairs were crowded 



14 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

with well-dressed men and women, standing still, 
until those who had preceded them should pass 
the ordeal of the pay-door. He concluded that 
some unusual interest drew a full audience upon 
this particular evening; and looking over his 
late purchase, " The Theathricle Obsaarver," 
found himself borne out in this judgment. In 
fact, the attractions of the evening were numer- 
ous, as he gathered from different paragraphs 
of the dramatic gazette. First of all, (for evi- 
dently it claimed to be so considered,) officers 
of the — th, Flood's regiment, after having 
ensured to themselves exclusion from private 
parties in Dublin by a want, or by the affecta- 
tion of a want of sufficient gallantry, commonly 
called good-manners, had come to the theatre, 
upon previous evenings, to stand on the stairs 
and in the lobbies, for the purpose of torment- 
ing all the Dublin beauties who passed in ; and 
many were the spirited reproofs they had met 
from the high-blooded friends and protectors 
of those beauties, until it became believed, as 
a kind of climax to their own well-known decla- 
rations of, " the — th never dance ;" — " the 
— th never drink lemonade," — &c, that " the 
— th never fight," either ; — and upon the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 15 

present evening, they were expected to be again 
encountered, playing the same stupid pranks, 
and subjecting themselves to the comment of 
being well qualified to insult a lady, but not 
so well disposed to afford explanation or satis- 
faction for the manful feat, or even to feel the 
rejoinder it provoked, in the way that gentle- 
men and soldiers generally feel it. 

Next, upon the list of attractions, were the 
following facts. A London female singer 
(since vanished from theatrical life) had lately 
made her debut before a Dublin audience, and 
quickly became a great and universal favourite. 
It happened that a poetical member of the 
University produced a very tragical tragedy 
(no one was left to give it out for repetition) 
upon the Dublin boards, and when he came to 
take his benefit night, he asked this lady to 
sing some cheering song, after the fall of the 
curtain, to try and do away with the baneful 
effects of his general massacre, but she would 
not. Thereupon, hundreds of his fellow-colle- 
gians proclaimed war against the Prima Donna, 
and repaired to the theatre, each night of her 
performance, armed with bludgeons, bed-posts, 
and, as they boasted, thigh-bones, procured from 



16 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the College dissecting-room, proposing not only 
to raise such a clatter by means of their lungs, 
and the formidable weapons mentioned, as 
would prevent a note of her songs being heard 
beyond the orchestra, but determined to knock 
down whoever might feel inclined to take the 
lady's part, or to restore quiet and good order 
in the house. And they had been quite suc- 
cessful in both ways, upon the first night of 
the row, and this was to be the second night of 
their classic campaign against the promising 
female apprentice of a speculating music-master. 
The last attraction for the crowds of gentle and 
simple that continued to pour into the theatre, 
was the individual who, a few weeks before, had 
monopolized all the interest of the public ; name- 
ly, the singing-lady, herself; the perpetrator of 
the outrage (which her master would not let 
her avoid) against the dignity and literature of 
T. C. D. 

After making himself acquainted with these 
facts, Gerald moved slowly up-stairs on the 
outskirts of the crowd. He had proceeded 
but a little way, when a group of three officers 
of the — th appeared lounging against the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 17 

balustrades, and peering with half-closed, or 
widely-staring eyes, into the faces of every 
lady they chose to select for such a silly mode 
of annoyance ; while their legs and feet were so 
disposed as to place their spurs in wait for a 
stray flounce, or, perhaps, for an incautious 
ankle. A fashionable and delicate young 
female, who absolutely stumbled over one of 
their protruded limbs, burst into tears as she 
passed them. Gerald's half-Irish blood boiled, 
and he was springing up to say something very 
hostile, when one of the lady's male protectors, 
a young and handsome man, saved him the 
trouble, by stepping back, after he had left his 
party on the lobby. 

" It was you, Sir, who incommoded the lady 
that has just gone up," began the champion, 
taking out his card-case, and holding it in his 
hand, as he confronted the immediate offender 
of the group. 

The person he addressed only looked with 
an affectation of stolid surprise into the answer- 
ing faces of his friends, and then down the 
staircase. 

" You do not deny it ?" resumed the chival- 



18 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

rous catechist, u and I am at liberty to demand 
your apology to that lady, or to term your 
conduct gross and ungentlemanlike ?" 

Still no answer : the dandies began to speak 
with each other upon some indifferent topic, 
while the challenger held out his card. 

" That is my name ; I require yours," he 
continued. The bold dragoon at last raised 
his glass to his eye, and curiously scrutinized 
the card, at some distance. Then he half held 
out the broad top of his cap to receive it : 
the gentleman placed it thereon. He inclined 
the cap sideways: it fell off; and again he 
seemed attentively considering it as it lay on 
the dusty stairs. 

" Puppy !" cried the champion, " 'tis as 
honourable a name as any of your set ; and if 
by this you mean to treat it with disrespect, 
and to refuse your name in return, take from 
me, at least, a name you have earned, — coward ! 
— and let me farther inform you, that if I had 
a whip, I would flog you out of the theatre. 1 ' 

After his piece of indignant oratory, the 
young gentleman went to join his party. Ge- 
rald, following him, passed the gallant exqui- 
sites ; and while neither the reprehended person 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 19 

nor his friends seemed conscious that any thing 
unusual had occurred, this was Gerald's question 
to himself : — " Dare these fools play such a part 
in the lobbies of Coven t-garden or of old Drury ? 
I do not mean, could they do so with impunity, 
or with this stupid affectation of indifference to 
the anger of men every way their equals ; but 
would they have the heart to play it amongst 
Englishmen ? They would not. And why, then, 
amongst Irishmen ? — Because their national con- 
tempt for the country influences their personal 
estimation of its people. Because, high-blooded 
English aristocrats, as they are, all their here- 
ditary egotism fills them with the tranquil pride 
of a superior race of beings. For there can be 
no cowardice in it, after all ; there is not— except 
the cowardice of cruelty ; the idiots did good 
work in the Peninsula, and are ready to uphold 
their character the next opportunity. — Ay, Ire- 
land ! 'tis just an instance of the estimation 
in which you are holden by your neighbours, — 
your half-Irish, as well as your whole Irish, 
population, — and nothing more; if, indeed," 
continued Gerald, unconsciously expressing in 
its first defined shape a notion he had lately been 
vaguely conceiving— "if, indeed, it does not serve 



20 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to supply an additional reason why all your child- 
ren, of every class and degree, should firmly unite 
in forming a national character, which would pro- 
tect you from such insults; instead of perpe- 
tuating, as they do, the sorry squabbles that de- 
prive you of the one, and ensure you the other." 
A loud uproar in the theatre interrupted 
Gerald's philosophy, as he looked round for 
a box-keeper to show him to a seat. He 
entered a box in the second-tier, of which 
all the places except one or two had pre- 
viously been filled by young men, armed 
with massive sticks, and mostly attired 
in heavy outside coats, buttoned up to their 
chins. They stood on the seats, before him 
and beside him, pounding the floor with their 
cudgels, and groaning, hissing, whooping, and 
roaring, " Off! off," while the young and in- 
teresting object of their dislike went through 
an exaggerated mad-scene on the stage, dressed 
in white, and her long hair let down, in equal 
portions, over each polished shoulder, accor- 
ding to the prescriptive mode of costume for 
female stage-madness, since the early days of 
Belvidera, at least. And, heaven knows she had 
reason to be mad in earnest at the persecu- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 21 

tion she was suffering ; for not a shriek of 
her modulated frenzy reached Gerald's ear ; 
although her widely- strained mouth and roll- 
ing eyes, and the expression of her attitudes — 
(little inferior, he thought, to the graceful 
energy of O'Neil) — plainly told her dramatic 
situation. The boxes opposite to him, at each 
side of him, and indeed the whole of the two- 
shilling-gallery, seemed occupied by young 
gentlemen similarly attired, armed, and en- 
gaged, with those amongst whom Gerald found 
himself; so that it was a grand, stunning, 
fiendish kind of uproar, kept up without an 
instant's abatement or variation. 

The performance appeared to be an English 
translation of a regular Italian opera. A knight, 
the hero of the piece, personated, Gerald be- 
lieved, by Mr. Horn, came out to relieve the 
mad heroine of her soliloquy, and began to 
sing to her. She replied, in all the natural 
effect of dialogue regulated by quavers and 
semiquavers ; still the noise went on vigo- 
rously ; not a sound could be caught from 
either. The knight lost his temper. With a 
sudden stamp, he wheeled round to the audi- 
ence, taking the lady by the hand ; and then 



22 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

he pulled off his fine helmet, and his lips 
moved rapidly, as if making a speech. Treble 
thunders roared through the house. He stamped 
again and led the lady off. 

The scene changed, new performers appeared, 
and at length, as if to rest themselves, and hus- 
band their powers for the re-entrance of the 
poor heroine of the evening, the champions of 
Trinity College literature grew a little quiet. 
In the pause, Gerald critically took a survey of 
the house. It reminded him of Covent-Garden,on 
a diminished scale ; with the addition of wreaths 
of shamrock running round the proscenium, and 
round the motto " Ceadmille phalteagh" that 
is, (translating from the pure Irish,) "a hundred 
thousand welcomes 11 — the motto tastefully put 
up by a cockney manager in something of the spi- 
rit of Will Boniface's welcomes to his guests, — 
" or," continued Gerald, pursuing this thought, 
" if not so stupidly conceived, it must have been 
conceived in humbug towards an Irish audience, 
who, according to this clever manager, or his 
cabinet, are eager to give three cheers for his 
hospitality, after purchasing it at the door. Yes, 
so it is ; every hoaxer of Ireland, and of Irish 
feeling, from the meanest to the highest, whe- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 23 

ther he speculate on pounds, shillings, and 
pence, or upon servile hands and hearts, thinks 
he has nought to do but to stick a shamrock in 
his hat, or give them a dinner or a dance, or 
promise to drink their healths in a hot tumbler of 
whiskey punch, and they will roar for him, he is 
sure, or fight for him, — yea, with one another, 
if need be, — and ask no better sport. And is not 
this, Ireland, another instance of the estimate of 
your claims in ' the sister island ?' And does it 
not contain another appeal to you, so to conso- 
lidate and sober down your aggregate character, 
as to present a moral front which such sneers as 
these durst not venture to sport with?" 

Gerald was again interrupted in his theories. 
While scarce a female of any rank appeared in 
the second-tier of boxes, the dress-circle bloomed 
and sparkled with Dublin beauty and fashion, 
attended by peaceable friends of the other sex. 
From the back of his noisy box, he saw into the 
back of one of those more orderly ones, and, 
over the heads of four rows of people, softened, 
and almost visionary, in the shade and the dis- 
tance, saw, too, a face which riveted his glance, 
and abstracted his attention from every other 
object and occurrence. The lady had turned 



24 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

her head, as if chidingly, towards that part of 
the house which again began to distract her 
study of the stage. Gerald quickly glanced to 
the features of her seeming companions on the 
same row, but none of them resembled those of 
the Gore family; " although there sits," he said, 
" ' the flower of her garden,' as Flood satirically 
called Maria, looking much more unlike herself, 
and much more like her fancied double, than 
ever before I thought she did." 

Two places were empty on her row, and she 
and her unknown friends sat a little parted from 
each other : the box-door opened, and three 
of the — th, perhaps the same individuals Ge- 
rald had observed on the stairs, entered, and 
straddling over the seat between her and them 
stood up before the whole party. An elderly 
gentleman, next to Gerald's " flower of her gar- 
den," arose at the same time, and seemed warm- 
ly expostulating with the intruders, who took 
no notice of his energy, except by turning round, 
and simultaneously mounting their eye-glasses, 
to pour in a volley of investigation almost close 
at the lady's nose. A cry of " shame ! shame !" 
escaped from the pit. Gerald loudly joined it. 
His belligerent box-companions, still at leisure 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 25 

to engage in any desultory row, during the ab- 
sence of the Prima Donna from the stage, more 
loudly seconded him. 

*' Turn them out!" continued "the many- 
headed monster of the pit." 

" Turn them out!" responded Gerald's allies; 
and, in the fervour of his indignation, " Turn 
them out !" cried Gerald himself. 

The lady got up, along with her party, and 
was the first to move towards the door, when it 
appeared that, from accident or design, a spur 
had grappled her by the flounce, and Gerald 
understood her gesticulation to be the accompa- 
niment of a request to its martial proprietor, to 
stoop and free her from the unwilling alliance thus 
formed between them. But even to this appeal 
the dandy and his companions remained ada- 
mant ; and while the disapprobation of the whole 
house gained an angry climax, Gerald burst out 
of his box, followed by the cheering crowd who 
had occupied it with him. 

In his haste, and his ignorance of the lobbies 
and staircases, he soon found himself alone, 
running along an empty and dark passage. It 
took some time to find his way back again to 
the lobbies, and still more to discover the box 

VOL. III. C 



26 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

he was so anxious to gain. A rumble of dis- 
cordant voices assisted him, however, on his 
way. He followed the sound, and now heard it 
illustrated by more than one hard knock and 
vehement thump. In a few seconds, his al- 
lies rushed past him, huddling the — th heroes 
towards the entrance to the theatre. He al- 
lowed them to pour on, and arrived at the box. 
Neither the lady who had caused the commo- 
tion, nor any of her friends, were to be seen 
in it. 

He hastened down to the hall ; many groups 
of ladies and gentlemen stood outside the en- 
trance-door, as if waiting for their carriages ; 
the ladies muffled in shawls or silk cloaks. A 
distant tumult at the extreme end of the piazza, 
seemed to indicate that " the Collegians'" were 
accomplishing their purpose of ejecting the — th 
men into the very street. And yet a single 
officer of that gallant regiment stood quietly at 
the backs of one of the groups that had attract- 
ed Gerald's notice, outside the door: and the 
person he seemed most anxious to be near to, 
was a lady muffled and hooded in a brown silk 
mantle. Gerald also stepped closer, and looked 
on observantly. This lady, of all her party, ap- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 27 

peared young; notwithstanding that her cloak 
disguised her figure, the air and character of 
youth played about her ; and she certainly 
leaned on the arm of the elderly gentleman who 
had remonstrated with the exquisites in the 
box. Gerald became still more attentive. 

In a short time he could perceive that the 
officer said something in a low tone at the lady's 
ear, to which her only reply seemed to be a 
closer muffling of her cloak. 

" If you are not known to that lady, you can 
have no right to address her, Sir," whispered 
Gerald, in his turn, at the ear of the supposed 
offender. The officer slightly started perhaps ; 
but, without a reply, quite turned his back 
upon his monitor. Gerald stood still, to note 
what effect his warning would produce. After 
an instant's pause, the military gallant cautiously 
moved his head, as if to observe the features 
and person of his self-constituted warder. Ge- 
rald looked away, not wishing to appear con- 
scious of the scrutiny. The next moment he 
resumed his watchfulness, and saw the officer 
gently tap the lady on the shoulder. At this 
he lost all self-command ; sprang to her side, 
and crying, " Desist, Sir P* raised his arm to 
c 2 



28 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

push the dragoon back. With the hand unoc- 
cupied by her elderly protector, she seized Ge- 
rald's wrist, whispering — " Arretez vous dans le 
nom (Tune des amies de lajeune et belle Justine.' 1 '' 

At the same instant, the officer of the — th 
turned, with a slight affected laugh, into the 
theatre, and, as he passed the lamp over the 
door, Gerald was almost sure he recognized 
Flood's features. Indignant, for many reasons, 
with his old class-mate, Gerald would have 
sprung after him, but that a carriage drove up 
close to " the friend of the young and beautiful 
Justine ; 11 and as she and her party prepared to 
get into it, he was prompted, by a still more 
lively interest, to venture a few words with the 
lady before her departure. " I hope that 
gentleman's rudeness has not much shocked 
you, 1 ' he said, still at her side, but deprived by 
the hood of her cloak from observing her fea- 
tures, which he was anxious to see. 

She answered in French, betraying, as her 
first French sentence had done, every tone o. 
the familiar of P£re la Chaise. 

" Fear nothing on my account — indeed, you 
had little to fear." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 23 

" Perhaps nothing, Madam : perhaps my in- 
terference alone has offended you." 

" Impossible; it was well meant." 

" But not as much calculated to please as the 
freedom it challenged," sulked Gerald. 

" Quite as much.' 1 

" Allow me to suppose, then, that the gentle- 
man has not the honour of being an object of 
great interest to l the friend of the young and 
beautiful Justine ?' " 

° He is nothing to me."" 

" Charming Maria I 11 continued Gerald, grow- 
ing ardent, in rather a desperate kind of way, 
as she prepared to mount the carriage - step, 
assisted by her elderly friend ; " answer me one 
other question, — give me time for one other." 

•' Though your mode of address is very 
strange, I will gratify you :" she spoke a word 
to her companion, and both stood still. 

" Why did you hesitate last night to reply 
to my message by Flood? — and what did you 
mean by vexing me about some puzzle or other, 
which he and you seemed to agree you had got 
me into P* 

After a considerate pause, she said — " Upon 



30 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the whole of that subject I refuse to say any 
thing for the present." 

" But must you be as silent to-morrow ?" 

" I must." 

" Well, promise me only this, — promise to 
speak French to me to-morrow, if we should 
meet." 

" Again I am bound to answer — No ; — and 
now good-night." 

" Good-night, Lady of Riddles," said Gerald, 
taking her hand to assist her into the carriage ; 
and though his words were bitter, he uncon- 
sciously hazarded a very gentle pressure. 

u Good-night, Thane of Cawdor" she re- 
joined. 

The carriage drove off, while Gerald stood 
gazing after it in no slight emotion. Two dis- 
tinct feelings agitated him. His fancy or his 
vanity had suggested that, as Flood would say, 
the very most remote indication of a return was 
vouchsafed to his pressure ; and now he chilled 
at the thought that her quotation might mean a 
recurrence to her former prognostic in another 
country. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 31 



CHAPTER II. 

ABANDONING the idea of waiting at the door 
to meet Flood coming out of the theatre, which 
he had at first proposed to do, Gerald hastened 
to his hotel, and called for the English papers 
of that day, as also for the file of the last week, 
and with trembling hands looked over the an- 
nouncements of recent deaths. Nothing ap- 
peared to confirm his suspicions, or to bear 
out the sibyl-like salutation just conferred upon 
him, in the light, at least, in which he inter- 
preted it. And now he asked himself how he 
could for a moment have permitted the allusion 
to disturb him. When it had before been more 
broadly made, his brother's own letter exposed 
its absurdity ; and although sufficient time had 
since elapsed to allow of a possible return of 
Lord Clangore's distemper, without Gerald's 
being advised of the misfortune, still he could 



32 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

not contemplate any such result as that in- 
sinuated in the application to him of the wierd 
woman's first augury to Macbeth. Or, if his 
brother had indeed experienced a dangerous 
relapse, although the persons who surrounded 
him in London should not, in that case, know 
whither to direct a letter to Gerald, surely they 
would have sent one to Augusta; and she, 
aware of his continued sojourn in Dublin, would 
as surely have communicated the event to him ; 
and since she had not done so, she could have 
received no such intimation ; consequently there 
was no cause to render necessary such a one to 
her ; and, again, no reason for Gerald's fretting 
himself about the silly, if not heartless and cruel 
words which had at first startled him so much. 

He dismissed the matter from his mind, and 
amid a bustle of exceedingly vague and per- 
plexing notions of the lady who had given 
him so great a shock, fell asleep at a late 
hour. 

It was past noon when he awoke next day ; 
and, as had been the case the previous morning, 
an attendant knocked to give him a note ; Ge- 
rald asked from whom it came ? The man did 
not know. A country-looking woman, young, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 33 

and apparently a servant, had just left it below, 
without any explanation. Gerald stared at the 
superscription ; it was written in stiff characters, 
and slanted towards the corners of the note. 
He opened the singular document, and recog- 
nized the hand, or, at all events, the kind of 
hand, in which the mysterious letter addressed 
to him in the Rockite cabin on the coast had 
been written. 

" You did very wrong in not following my 
advice when I wrote to you before. Your 
stealthy escape from the cabin, and your en- 
counter with the wounded lad, placed you in 
great peril, and might have been attended with 
the worst consequences. Had you remained 
quiet, according to my directions, until three 
o'clock that day, the friend I promised you 
would have appeared, and ensured you some 
unexpected happiness ; besides, your arm need 
not have been broken, nor your mind since 
tantalized with uncertainty and doubt, on va- 
rious points. 

•* I now write to offer you new advice, whicn 
I hope you will more closely attend to, for your 
own sake. By the day after to-morrow some- 
c 5 



84> THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

thing may become known to you which must 
compel you to visit your sister at Lower- 
Court. If, however, you shall not be so com- 
pelled, do not hesitate, longer than that day, 
to repair to her, notwithstanding. Your hap- 
piness as well as hers demands the measure : 
and, for your farther inducement, learn, that by 
obeying these commands, all your present mys- 
teries are to be cleared up ; every one you want 
to see, to know, and to comprehend, placed 
fully under your observation ; and some indi- 
viduals whom you do not want either to see 
or to know, introduced to your unbounded 
love and confidence. 

" Meantime, hearken to my farther injunc- 
tions upon other matters. While you remain in 
Dublin, do not repeat to any living creature 
the questions you asked, last night, under the 
piazzas at the theatre : do not directly, or in- 
directly, allude to the subject they concerned. 
Much depends on that : when you re-appear 
to-morrow (for you cannot to-day) in Stephen's- 
green, speak, act, and even look, as if no such 
topic had ever interested your mind. In fact, 
you will be allowed no opportunity to behave 
otherwise ; and if you show a disposition to do 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 35 

so, prepare yourself to brave frowns and indig- 
nation which you cannot withstand. 

" I would counsel you on yet another point. 
You are angry with a very old friend, for many 
reasons; but particularly because you think 
he invented a story about leaving Dublin, yes- 
ter morning, while you saw him late last 
night. But on this account, at least, restore 
him to your good opinion. When he wrote to 
inform you of his intended route to the town 

of , he really was under orders to repair 

thither ; within an hour of the time at which 
he should have been in his saddle, contrary 
orders reached him not to move till this morn- 
ing; but now, indeed, he is on his march; I 
am authority for the fact. 

" Farewell. As you love your sister or your- 
self, implicitly obey the commands of this letter : 
commands, I say ; for she who saved you from 
the waves, who housed you, clothed you, gave 
you to eat and to drink, and smoothed your 
pillow, may surely use the word. 11 

Well ! if Gerald had ever before been in- 
terested by a letter, this one interested him. 
Who was its writer ? Certainly the individual 



S6 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to whom, it could not be denied, he stood so 
much indebted for food, shelter, raiment, and 
good wine : and, as certainly, that individual 
must be Maria Gore: because with her he had 
conversed under the piazzas, and now no one 
else could allude to the fact. He remembered 
that the young lady had spent some time with 
the Knightlies; and during the latter part of 
that visit she had encountered him, no doubt, at 
the head of her Amazons, upon the shingles. 
His former notion, that his protectress was a 
female of humble rank in life, now gave way, 
not only under these argumentative associations, 
but also on account of the style and diction 
of the letter he held in his hand, which, not- 
withstanding the successful attempt to vulgarise 
the writing, bespoke a higher order of mind. 
He had caught a glimpse of her face on the 
shingles, then, although during his relapse into 
faintness, she afterwards contrived, obviously 
through motives of delicacy, to stay out of his 
view. And this explained the incongruity of 
his getting such a costly supper under the roof 
of the miserable cabin : — she had provided it. 
It also determined the question of his having 
first met her in France; for when he recognized 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 37 

her features on the moonlight strand, he did not 
then know her as Maria Gore, but as the lady 
of Pere la Chaise. But at the last conclusion 
offered by all his reasoning, Gerald's vanity 
sent most pleasing tingles through his frame. 
If any thing was evident in the whole case, it 
was this — Maria Gore loved him. 

No matter about her little evasions, and her 
little puzzles, (and Gerald now forgave her 
them all, nay even the cruel allusions to Lord 
Clangore,) from first to last her acts showed an 
affectionate interest in him and his concerns. 
And for many of those acts he owed her much. 
She had very probably saved his life. And 
must he not feel unboundedly grateful? Must 
he not warmly return her very flattering pre- 
ference? Nay, he did return it. He loved 
her dearly and deeply ; and he would prove 
that he did. He would snatch her, (poor, poor 
Maria !) he would snatch her, at once, from the 
domestic misery that surrounded her. He 
would request permission of Mr. Gore to ad- 
dress her ; yes, that very day ; Heaven alone 
could tell how long she might have a paternal 
roof to cover her head. Allowing for what- 
ever little harmless mysteries she chose to keep 



38 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

him in, he agreed, literally, to observe, indeed, 
her written commands of that morning; still, 
without breaking any of them, he might surely 
unbosom himself to her father. Oh, that 
dear, pressure of her hand at the carriage- 
door last night ! But hold ; — " of her hand ?" 
queried Gerald. And he got angry with him- 
self for the evident absurdity of doubting for a 
moment that it was Maria Gore he had seen at 
a distance in the theatre, and afterwards spoken 
with under the piazza. 

" I wish, however, I could ascertain two 
simple points connected with that last night 1 s 
adventure," added Gerald. — 

Mr. Frederic Augustus Gore was announced. 

" Now I can be satisfied at once," he re- 
sumed. 

The smiling and gracious young gentleman 
entered. He had been specially sent by his 
father and mother, to hope for the pleasure 
and honour of Gerald's presence to-morrow 
morning, at 's church, during the perform- 
ance of the marriage ceremony between Sir 
John Lumley and Miss Gore, and afterwards 
at breakfast in Stephen's-green. 

*' Miss Flint, you are a witch," cogitated 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 39 

Gerald, after he had expressed his ready assent 
to their polite invitation, and offered his best 
congratulations ; " and," he continued, " if you 
prove as correct in other good auguries, poor 
Gore will be soon relieved of some unpleasant 
inmates, at present in his house, and poor 
Maria taken out of immediate jeopardy." 

Mr. Frederic Augustus assured his "dear 
Mr. Blount," that his father would have per- 
sonally waited upon him, but that the bustle 
of the whole house, preparing for the sudden 
event, (it was, indeed, sudden and unexpected, 
but Sir John would have his way,) did not 
allow of the absence of any member of the 
family, save his useless self, Mr. Frederic 
Augustus. 

Gerald knew all about that. He also called 
to mind the warning contained in the note he 
had just read, to the effect that it would be 
impossible for him to re-appear in StephenV 
green that day, which seemed now fully ex- 
plained, by the fact of Mr. Gore's family, Maria 
particularly, being too busily engaged to receive 
the visit of an acquaintance. And as this could 
have been anticipated only by a member of that 
family, Gerald here arrived at another proof of 



40 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the identity of his correspondent ; and in the 
course of conversation with his visitor, he pro- 
posed the intended questions which were to 
afford him downright certainty. 

" He had been to the theatre last night," he 
said, " and thought he saw Miss Maria Gore in 
the house ?" 

" Yes, 11 her brother answered, " Maria had 
gone in the vain hope of hearing the new 
singer. 1 * 

" With friends, or with her own family ?" 
again asked Gerald. 

" With friends ; none of her own family ac- 
companied her. 11 

" And, I believe, I afterwards saw her step 
into a carriage at the door, 11 pursued Gerald, 
exceedingly pleased : " Excuse me, but I am 
curious enough to ask if you happen to recol- 
lect whether or not your sister went out in a 
cloak last night, and what was its colour ?" 

" Let me see,"" paused Mr. Frederic Au- 
gustus, smiling rather expressively — " yes ; I led 
her to her friend's carriage, when they called to 
take her up, and I am quite sure she had on a 
cloak, a silk one, light brownish. 11 

Gerald, his eyes sparkling, begged to thank 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 41 

his young friend very much ; he was exceed- 
ingly obliged to him. 

" And how well your sister speaks French," 
he resumed, extending his questions to a point 
he had not at first thought of approaching. 

" 'Tis said so, by good judges, 1 ' assented Mr. 
Frederic Augustus. 

" And I venture to pique myself upon being 
one," said Gerald ; " she must have got her 
accent in Paris, surely ?" 

" Why, yes; Maria was in Paris for some 
time, certainly ; though with a set that her fa- 
mily did not wish she should accompany thi- 
ther, or, indeed, anywhere — the Knightlies." 

" Oh, confound the Knightlies ! no matter 
about them — but was this very long ago ?" 

" Not at all : just before, and indeed, at the 
time of Bonaparte's return from Elba." 

Gerald shook his young friend's hand— nei- 
ther he nor that young friend clearly knowing 
why — and then he professed himself immensely 
glad of his visit, on its own account, and hoped 
they might know each other better, and like 
each other better ; and as this was so busy a 
day in Stephen's-green, and the ladies neces- 
sarily closeted and plotting together, and Mr. 



42 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Frederick Augustus, as he had himself de- 
clared, quite useless in their councils, perhaps 
he would do Gerald the very great pleasure of 
taking dinner with him. 

" Certainly; 1 ' Mr. Frederick Augustus felt 
much gratified at the prospect of cultivating 
his dear Mr. Blount's acquaintance, and he 
would only just step back to tell his friends at 
home of his good fortune, and afterwards get 
through some few calls, and then he would 
be Gerald's own for the evening. 

They parted upon this happy understanding. 

To do fit honour to the palate of his very 
agreeable brother-in-law elect, Gerald sum- 
moned the waiter with his yard-long dinner- 
bill, and after solemn and acute discussion with 
that accomplished counsellor, ordered an ele- 
gant and ample board. At the appointed hour 
the young gentlemen sat down to dinner. Mr. 
Frederic Augustus praised the dishes in a 
knowing connoisseur style, and the wines com- 
manded his still more decided eulogy, and, 
somewhat to Gerald's surprise, (at first,) his 
more substantial patronage, too. But Gerald's 
new feelings, and his hospitable responsibilities, 
together with the gradual influence of the good 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 48 

liquor itself, soon made him forget his friend's 
liberal bumpers in his own. Upon that memo- 
rable evening, he drank half a bottle of sherry, 
half a bottle of champagne, and two glasses of 
port, during dinner, and his fair share of five 
bottles of claret afterwards — ten times more 
wine than he had ever imbibed at a sitting in 
his life before ; and it followed, in course, that, 
about twelve o'clock, he had opened his inmost 
heart and soul to his dearest friend ; obtained 
his generous wishes for success with his beloved 
sister ; filled a bumper to her health ; then to 
each other's immutable friendship; then, greatly 
to Gerald's sympathetic joy, Mr. Frederic Au- 
gustus proposed another bumper to Augusta 
Blount ; then disclosed an attachment for that 
enchanting creature which had long lain in his 
bosom, unbreathed to a human being in the 
world ; upon which Gerald pledged him his 
hand, that if the heavenly Maria only consented 
to smile upon him, he should in return have his, 
Gerald's, best word with Augusta ; and lastly, 
they embraced, and the waiter entering, found 
them shedding tears. 

Before this, however, Gerald had opened his 
purse, as well as his heart, to his dear Frede- 



44 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

rick, just to enable him to get rid of a cursed 
dun, whom he did not wish his father should 
know any thing about : and when the young 
gentleman delicately accused himself of trespass- 
ing in such a kind of way, his host, with a hic- 
cup or two, spread out on the table the remain- 
ing portion of the bundle of notes Flood had 
lent him, and extending his arms, and sitting 
back in his chair, cried — " Have all / have, my 
dear Gore ! How can you — (hie) — make one 
word of this trash — these — (hie) — these paltry 
rags between us ?" 

To his regret, however, though not to his 
disadvantage, his dear Gore really would not be 
Gerald's debtor for more than about fifty pounds, 
along with what he had already borrowed ; and, 
sighing loudly over the hesitations and degene- 
racy of the too-cautious friendships of the day, 
Gerald put up his diminished roll of " paltry 
rags.'"' 

How the night ended he could not tell. Short- 
ly after the scene of tears, Mr. Frederic Au- 
gustus, his sister, the decanters, the candles, 
and every other person and thing, faded from 
Gerald's mind and vision, and he awoke at an 
early hour of the morning to groan and shudder, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 45 

in reality, over his errors and debauch of the 
night, and to detest Mr. Frederick Augustus, 
who, he now well remembered, had not been 
half as intoxicated as himself, and yet who had 
declared a deathless attachment for Lady Au- 
gusta Blount, and borrowed about a hundred 
pounds of her brother. Burning blushes cover- 
ed Gerald's cheeks, when he remembered that he 
had not only permitted such a person to pro- 
claim his speculating love for his sister, but had 
actually engaged to urge the young gentleman's 
suit with Augusta. 

As to his own passion for Miss Maria Gore, 
irresistibly, though very unreasonably, that also 
seemed to wane in proportion to his change of 
sentiments towards her clever brother. And 
at first, such was the case without any seem- 
ing provocation ; soon after, however, Gerald 
thought he discovered a marked blemish in her 
character, and one that called upon him to cor- 
rect his extravagant admiration for the young 
lady — " Which was not admiration, after all,'" he 
continued, " but a kind of fidgety interest, pro- 
duced by a doubt — a — I don't know what." 
Here, however, was Gerald's demur. Maria 
Gore's father and mother were surrounded by 



46 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

dreadful embarrassments ; every article of fur- 
niture in their house was watched by bailiffs, 
under execution ; the unfortunate Gore, himself, 
was watched by another bailiff, after having 
been arrested ; nothing could present a more 
afflicting picture of domestic misery ; nothing 
could be more calculated to appeal to the feel- 
ings of a child, particularly of a daughter ; in 
the midst of such circumstances, and aware of 
them, as of course, she was, — how, then, could 
Maria Gore exhibit, not merely smiles and 
cheerfulness, but the almost levity of which 
Gerald now accused her ? — how could she find 
heart, (if heart formed any portion of her,) 
to set Captain Flood upon drawing caricatures ; 
to league with him in laughing at the massacre- 
panic of the night before the last ; to titter with 
him, in the back drawing-room, over the notion 
of whatever silly "puzzles" she contemplated to- 
wards himself, Gerald ? Did not all this pro- 
claim a want of feeling, of amiability, of con- 
duct, which must totally unfit her for fireside 
happiness ? 

But what was Gerald to do? — By his pro- 
fessions to Mr. Frederic Augustus, at least, he 
stood committed. Nay, if his memory proved 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 47 

not very treacherous, he feared he had even 
gone so far as to engage his dear Fred, to 
open the affair to his father. And if the will- 
ing Mercury only recollected things as well as 
Gerald did, (of the converse of which there 
seemed no reasonable apprehension,) it would 
scarce be doubted that, before this time, he had 
faithfully discharged his trust. 

Gerald was interrupted by a statement from 
his attendant to the following effect. " Mr. and 
Mrs. Blake, having engaged themselves to ride 

to 's church in Sir John Lumley's carriage, 

had sent theirs, with their best compliments, to 
wait on the Honourable Gerald Blount ;" and it 
was at the door. He hastened down-stairs. 

The message seemed to import that he should 
find the carriage empty : when he got into it, 
however, this was not the case. Miss Flint sat 
in the corner next the door, holding herself 
back, as if to escape his notice until he should 
enter ; and then, gleeishly sinking her head 
between her shoulders, and holding up her fin- 
ger to her nose, she giggled out — " Think of 
this ! — we two going to church together ! and 
nobody the wiser, only Sam, on the box !" 

Gerald, wishing her in his heart any where 



48 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

else, expressed much gratitude to Mr. and Mrs. 
Blake for having provided him with so agree- 
able a travelling companion. 

" My gracious! you 're out ; 'tisn't that at all ; 
how slow you are at a joke ! No; but 'twill make 
you die laughing ! I was tramping along in my 
clogs — see \" — she held them dangling in her hand 
— " for every body knows /'m not worth a car- 
riage, and for that good reason don't sport one, 
not like other people that do, and are no more 
worth it than myself — think of that ! — but on I 
was tramping, and not liking the walk, (for the 
streets are quite puddle,) when the Blakes' car- 
riage passed me, empty; and after bidding Sam 
good-morrow, and asking him to stop a bit, he 
tells me they had sent it for you ; and then, 
says I to myself, wait now, till I have a joke 
out of Mr. Blount, and a laugh at 'em all, in 
spite of 'em ; for you must know, they all told 
me I couldn't have a seat to church this morn- 
ing in any of their carriages or things. Between 
ourselves, they're beginning to cut me, for a 
reason they have, — just for fear, I'd cut them" 
(winking) ; " and besides, they suspect I know 
a little too much, maybe; but no matter ; all's 
one for that : who '11 care most about it, I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 49 

wonder ? And so, * Sam, good boy,' says I, 
* this is lucky for me ; you see what a puddle 
the flags are ; and Mr. Blount is my very parti- 
cular friend, and will be very glad to find me 
in the carriage, instead of finding it empty ; so 
let me in ;' and so he did, and I bid him for his 
life to say nothing to you till you made me out 
yourself — hi, hi ! — and here I am, after making 
you stare like any thing ; and going off to see 
dear Selina married, in Mrs. Blake's fine car- 
riage, that she would as soon see down the Liflfy 
as me in it. I told my mind about Blake re- 
fusing to wag a finger for poor dear Gore, and 
she heard of it, and hates me like pison ; let 
her ; here are you and I, snug, whether she does 
or no — hi, hi! — think of that I" 

During the short pause that ensued, Gerald, 
too chivalrously deeming himself called on to 
say something, very disingenuously declared 
that Miss Flint only spoke the fact when she 
assured Sam how happy he would be to meet 
her. 

" You needn't tell me — I know it very well. 
I liked you the first time we met, in London, 
and I saw you liked me ; and I have shown how 
much I think of you since, depend on it ; you 

vol. III. D 



50 THE ANGLO IRISH. 

know more of my mind on a great many things 
than a great many people that I have been 
brought up with ; and why shouldn't you ? 
Nothing could be handsomer than your dona- 
tion to our society, — that is so sure you '11 be such 
a friend to it in every way ; to say nothing of 
your birth and your talents, and your being a 
good and a clever creature, entirely ; — and so, 
I made little ado in opening my mind to you 
the other night, just to give you a hint, for your 
good, that would show you what kind of people 
you got in with here in Dublin ; — and didn't 
I ? And was I much out in what I said about 
that snappish, hoity-toity lady, Selina ; and her 
old Adonis, Sir John, eh ?" 

" Certainly not ; your penetration quite sur- 
prised me" replied Gerald. 

" Well ; wait, now ; I have another little 
whisper to give you, that I got, last night, from 
a little bird of mine. The last time I opened my 
mind to you, I told you, you know, that poor 
Gore would not give Selina to Lumley, unless 
Sir John settled as much on her as would take 
him out of all his troubles ; and sure enough 
the fond old creature has done what they asked 
of him, and, so far, so good ; but would you 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 51 

believe it ? It 's now another point if Selina will 
do as much as her father hopes, though neither 
her father nor mother suspects any thing, nor 
no one else but you and me, and my little bird 
that I told you of: only this much I just say ; 
that, whether there has been any underhand 
agreement between her and her future lord and 
master — who is no fool, after all, except on her 
account ;— or whether it has come into her head, 
of her own accord, that his estate can't afford 
such a pull on it, and leave them as well off as 
the pride of her heart wants to be, for the here- 
after ; however this may turn out, in the long- 
run, I can tell you what (as I said) her own fa- 
ther couldn't tell you ; and this is it ;— ever 
since the marriage settlements were drawn up, 
Selina has employed an attorney of her own, 
under the rose ; and he has been down to visit 
two of Sir John's estates, and afterwards was 
closeted with her, incog. ; and, last night, my 
sister's husband told my sister, and my sister 
herself told me, that he met this attornev at 
dinner yesterday, and sat beside him ; and, as 
they are great friends, if the cat wasn't quite 
let out of the bag, one of her paws was; — 
and I M make no wonder at your hearing some- 
D 9, 



52 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

thing in an hour or two that will look very odd 
to you ; only, I am sure of one thing ; — every 
body will do their best to get poor Gore out of 
the clutches of the bailiff that is now taking 
care of him, before the rest of the creditors send 
in detainers ; indeed, so far, the business has 
been well managed ; and then, if he is made a 
free man, and gets as much as takes him and 
his poor dear wife, and their idle son, to France, 
out of harm's way, and receives yearly remit- 
tances afterwards — to no great amount to be 
sure, as France is a cheap place*; — and the house, 
and the furniture, ay, and the carriage too, left 
to pay off the present executions ; why, if this 
is done for him, what need he complain, after 
all ? Tell me that ! People must take care of 
themselves, you know ; and he ever and always 
was an improvident man to his poor family, and 
are they to suffer for him ?" 

f You have made no arrangement for Mr. 
Gore's youngest daughter, Miss Flint." 

"Ah, my poor Maria ! what is she to do? 
No, indeed ; I never thought of her going to 
France with them ; I don't think they 'd take 
her ; they don't like her ; neither father, nor 
mother, nor brother, nor sister likes her ; they 
never did ; she has something in her quite dif- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 53 

ferent from them all. And then she took up 
opinions of her own, lately, on the Castle poli- 
tics, and the people of the country — the Pa- 
pists, and such poor creatures, you know — and 
used to speak them out plump, no matter who 
happened to be by; and got in with the Knight- 
lies — a bad set, though they have your poor 
sister among them — don't be angry with me; — 
and worst of all, was better liked, for the last 
year or so, by the men, than Selina; a grand 
offence; though how could she help it, I'd be glad 
to know ? They kept her back long enough, in 
all reason, till she was one-and-twenty ; though 
I don't say that putting forward your little 
frumpish misses of from sixteen to nineteen is 
doing a wise thing, and therefore won't blame 
her mother and sisters for that ; not a bit ; but, 
as I was saying, one way or another poor Ma- 
ria was the black sheep of the family, and no 
one envied her life among them ; indeed 'twas 
well known that they never made her one in 
any of their secrets ; never opened their mind to 
her ; and I shouldn't at all wonder if, at this 
moment, she is quite ignorant of the bailiffs 
being in the house — and — " 

" Indeed !" interrupted Gerald ; " I 'm very 
glad of that." 



54; THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" You are ! why so ?" 

" I 'm very much surprised, I mean ; 'tis so 
very strange." 

" Is that all ? my goodness gracious, if you 
didn't make me wonder ! but no, indeed ; de- 
pend upon it, they keep all these things from 
poor Maria, fearing she might blab before peo- 
ple she sometimes goes out with in Dublin, 
against their will ; maybe that 's the reason." 

" People her family do not know ?" inquir- 
ed Gerald, with an object in his question. 

" Yes, the Knightlies and their friends." 

" Pray, Miss Flint, can you say if she has 
lately been out with any of that set ?" 

" Yes — let me see — yes, to be sure ; the 
Knightlies themselves were in town until the 
evening before the last, and she went to the 
theatre with some of them." 

" Then," thought Gerald, " the elderly gen- 
tleman upon whose arm I saw her leaning must 
have been my great fright ; it is strange I 
should not have recognized him ; meeting him 
but once, and so long ago, however, may have 
quite put him out of my head ; though I don't 
see how that could distinctly happen, either." 

" But if Miss Maria Gore does not accom- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 55 

pany her father and mother to France, what is 
she to do, Miss Flint ?" 

" God knows, poor thing ! maybe her sis- 
ters, much as they dislike her, will have her 
from one to another, till she gets settled ; they 
can't leave her unprotected, for their own sakes ; 
and then she has other friends amongst us all, 
and we won't see her badly off, if it comes to 
that pass. I always liked Maria better than 
Selinaor the other, though they didn't think so; 
because they being her elders, and out before 
her, one was obliged to be civil to them, just 
to keep the family on one's hands ; but I did, 
indeed ; ay, in spite of her dry jokes on myself, 
sometimes ; poor dear girl, she had no harm in 
'em — but, gracious me !" half screamed Miss 
Flint, as the carriage stopped, " here we are at 
the church-door, and every one gone in before 
us, and we '11 be too late for dear Selina, as sure 
as a pin — think of that P" 

Gerald, ashamed of his situation, held Miss 
Flint's clogs at the carriage-door, as, tucking up 
her garments, she bustled down. And he en- 
tered the church with a perilous return of all 
his interest towards Maria Gore, joined to the 
deepest sympathy for her sad and peculiar po- 



56 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sition. If Miss Flint's divining powers were 
still to be relied on, she stood acquitted of his 
late accusations of want of filial, indeed of com- 
mon feeling, and, at the same time, exposed to 
a future of wretched humiliation and suffering. 
" What ! Maria Gore thrown upon the benevo- 
lence of her estranged sisters, and of Miss Flint ! 
— but, tush," he continued ; " as yet this is all 
according to Miss Flint : let us see." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 57 



CHAPTER III. 

A scenic description of Miss Gore's mar- 
riage with Sir John Lumley is not to be ex- 
pected. Abler pens than mine have often dwelt 
upon the interesting incidents which character- 
ise such a tender and awful ceremony. A few 
things connected with it shall, however, be no- 
ticed. 

Mr. Gore stood by, leaning on the arm of 
(as he accounted for him) " a distant relation 
who had been all his life at sea, till he came 
very suddenly to visit him and his family ; a 
most excellent creature, and well esteemed in 
his profession, although its mannerism followed 
him into society, and made him a little awkward, 
and very silent, lest he should commit himself." 

Gerald glanced at poor Gore with pity, al- 
though with some contempt. Pride, triumph, 
and hope, lighted up his eye, as he witnessed the 
d 5 



58 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



ceremonial which made his favourite daughter 
Lady Lumley, and promised him summary ex- 
trication from his tangled mesh of difficulties 
and miseries. Towards the conclusion of the 
marriage, a tear — (welling, Heaven only knew 
from what source of mixed emotion) — dimmed 
the eye's brilliancy ; the fever-flush deserted his 
cheeks; and his lips, at last not curved into 
smiles, grew dry and quivered. When his 
daughter finally became a wife, and when he 
stepped forward to salute her — (after first look- 
ing for consent into the bailiff's face) — his fore- 
head fell on her neck, and his sobs were heard 
through the church. 

Mrs. Gore stood near him, meantime, smiling 
as usual, although tears streamed silently down 
her cheeks also, from the moment the ceremony 
began. 

Maria Gore was one of Selina's bridesmaids- 
Gerald observed her attentively. She seemed 
very grave, and looked pale, as if struggling with 
suppressed emotion. Her eyes rested on her 
sister, who took no notice of her ; perhaps they 
had had a quarrel before they came to church- 
When it was her turn to salute the new-made 
bride, she grew still paler, drew in her under 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 59 

lip between her teeth, and then threw her arms 
round her sister ; and as she turned away, Ge- 
rald saw that profuse tears had at last burst out. 

Mrs. Blake looked straight into an empty pew, 
from first to last, occasionally shrugging up her 
shoulders at the cold of the church ; and, when 
led by her husband to Selina, held out her own 
cheek for a kiss. 

The bride herself seemed to have been mar- 
ried in a fit of indignation, just kept under, and 
no more. She returned all the salutations (ex- 
cept one) of her friends, like an offended queen ; 
but her cognizance of that one, (Miss Flint's,) 
showed more of her ordinary nature. Bathed 
in showers of sympathy, and of every thing else 
that was to be expected, Miss Flint, still holding 
her clogs dangling by their latchets from her fin- 
ger, sprang at her " love, Selina," and dragging 
down her head with one hand, and holding her 
tight round the waist with the other, inflicted, 
like Petruchio, 

" Such a clamorous smack, 

" That at the parting, all the church did echo j" 

while, in the rage of her embrace, her wet 
clogs left certain very obvious marks of close 



60 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

acquaintance upon Lady Lumley's lace-dress, 
and even upon the satin under it. She was 
literally pushed away by the bride's strong 
though beautiful arm. 

" The happy pair," accompanied by all their 
friends, returned to breakfast at Stephen's-green, 
Gerald's mind filled with Maria Gore, and with 
her recent and deeply-interesting change of 
character. 

Mr. Gore's colour, and his smiles, and his 
good spirits, quite rallied at the breakfast-table, 
which was splendidly " furnished forth." He 
said good things, he told good stories, he laugh- 
ed loud ; but Gerald saw that whenever he put 
a cup of tea or coffee to his lips, his hand 
shook fearfully. It was something more than 
happiness too, or something different from it, 
which fed his flashing glances. 

And those glances often visited Gerald with 
a peculiar meaning, which the object of them 
failed not, in tribulation of heart, to interpret 
in a certain way. They also wandered, from 
time to time, to Maria Gore, who sat far away 
from Gerald, still looking profoundly serious. 
Gerald made but an indifferent breakfast. 

While some of the party yet sipped from their 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 61 

cups, Miss Flint among the number, Mrs. 
Gore arose, and after looking at Maria, left the 
room. Her youngest daughter followed. By 
mere chance Mr. Gore then remembered that he 
had a word to say to Gerald, and both stood up 
and repaired to one of the remote windows. 

" My dearest boy," said Mr. Gore, trembling 
all over, as he took Gerald's hands, " allow me 
to ask you if, when you made your most flat- 
tering proposals through my son, last night, 
you were aware of my poor Maria's portionless 

lot r 

" Quite," answered Gerald, trembling also. 

" But you could not have guessed the pre- 
sent dreadful situation in which her father is 
placed ?" 

f* With deep regret, I had previously learned 
it to its full extent. * 

" Ay I" cried Mr. Gore, starting, as his eye 
glanced to Miss Flint ; " and who was so con- 
siderate as to disclose it to you I* 

" Excuse me ; I am not at liberty to answer: 
but I knew it." 

" You knew of the — the executions ? v 

" I did." 

" And," continued Mr. Gore, while his voice 



62 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

faltered, and at last failed him, — " of — the— of 
this man ?" nodding his head backward. 

" Yes ; of that fellow." 

" Give me your arm, then." 

They walked out of the breakfast parlour toge- 
ther, and ascended to the drawing-room. Maria 
Gore stood alone near the fire-place, one arm 
folded under her bosom, the other motionless at 
her side. She had been looking down as they en- 
tered, and did not now raise her head, but only 
curtsied. 

" Are you quite prepared for us, Maria, my 
love ?" asked her father. 

" I am, Sir," she answered, in a low but firm 
voice. 

** Here, then, comes Mr. Blount, himself, to 
try if he cannot prevail on you to be more ex- 
plicit than you were with me in our conversation 
of this morning." 

<c Stop, father,' 1 she said, speaking louder, 
and looking up; Mr. Gore was retiring; — "you 
know, Sir, I told you that my explanation would 
be given to Mr. Blount, in answer to his very 
flattering intimation, while you stood by, or 
not at all." 

" Well, my love, well." Mr. Gore stepped 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 63 

back, and as he passed close to her, " perverse, 
unaccountable girl," he added, between his 
teeth. 

" I have already declared to you, Sir, that I 
entertain no unfavourable opinion of Mr. Blount, 
but the contrary ; that, in fact, I respect and 
esteem his character and talents." 

" To be sure, my treasure ; all this has been 
gone over and over." 

u I have also declared in answer to your 
questions, that it is not because I am pre-en- 
gaged in any other ' love-affair,' as you called 
it, Sir, I must decidedly reject the honour of 
Mr. Blount's advances." 

" Pho, pho ! of course, my dear child — of 
course ; and since you have said so much, 
surely you cannot expect us to be greatly 
alarmed on the score of whatever other reason 
you may conjure up; but there is a reason, 
Maria, and a solid one, why, for your father 
and mother's sake, you should waive all girlish 
refinings and hesitations, and meet us, in this 
matter, just as promptly — I may say, abruptly, 
as we come to meet you ; ay, and our excel- 
lent young friend knows that reason, though 
you do not, Maria." 



64 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" You mistake, dear father ; I do know it, al- 
though not from any confidence placed in me 
by my family ; although my informant is al- 
most a stranger ; and although she whispered 
the question that led to my discovery of your 
unhappy situation, only within the last hour, 
at 's church." 

" She !" cried Mr. Gore — " 'tis a woman 
then ?— Miss Flint !" 

" Miss Flint, Sir." 

" I will have her sent out of the house, this 
moment — the base gossip P resumed Mr. 
Gore, again moving to the door ; " but no, no ;" 
checking himself, " that would be but an im- 
potent show of authority, under the circum- 
stances. Maria, you do know, then, how abso- 
lutely necessary it becomes — (I must speak 
very, very plainly, my child — ay, even before 
Mr. Blount) — how absolutely necessary it be- 
comes that — in fact — you should avail yourself 
of this most honourable opportunity to be pro- 
tected against the future — and perhaps, — per- 
haps — " his voice trembled — " perhaps to help 
your unfortunate father out of his tremendous 
difficulties, by sharing with him some — some — " 
" Dearest father, say no more — " she wept 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 65 

profusely — " tremendous must your difficulties 
be, indeed, to call for this no less tremendous 
humiliation — and, after all, this unnecessary 
humiliation. 

" Maria !" exhorted Mr. Gore, in rising 
passion, M what folly — what fiend puts this 
obstinacy into your head ? You esteem and 
respect Mr. Blount ; you are engaged in no 
other affair of the heart ; and yet — " 

" I can never become his wife." 

" Provoking girl ! why so ? give your im- 
portant reason in one word ; — come ! you have 
promised to do so." 

" I have ; and I will do so, father ; I can 
never become Mr. Blount's wife, because"— 
she knelt at his feet — " because I am already 
the wife of another/' 

With quickly-uttered ejaculations, both gen- 
tlemen started back. But Mr. Gore's voice 
rose highest. 

"Impossible!" he exclaimed; "quite im- 
possible ! 'tis only an invention to make me mad !" 

" I have never uttered a falsehood to you, in 
my whole life, Sir — 'tis the very truth ; I am a 
married woman, kneeling for your forgiveness 
and your blessing." 



66 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" For my curse ! if indeed I must believe 
you. Disobedient, unnatural girl ; married to 
whom ? when ? how ? how long ago ?" 

" I was married, the night before the last, 
after my return from the theatre, but before 
my return to your house." 

" Merciful Heaven ! I will not credit it ! 
How, I ask you, could it have happened with- 
out my consent ? Stand up and answer me !" 

She arose, and said, " I am of age, and my 
husband procured a license. 1 ' 

"Your husband! God Almighty! — and to 
whom do you give that name ? what fellow is 
this, who, aware of his own unworthiness, base- 
ness perhaps, dared not ask you of your father P 11 

" He does not merit one word of your de- 
scription, Sir ; and it was not because he feared 
you would reject his suit, that he prevailed up- 
on me to become his wife in secret." 

" Creature ! let me hear no more of your 
fulsome, your indelicate praises of him ; but 
give me his name, at once !" 

" There, Sir, you will excuse me ; I am un- 
der a solemn promise not yet to divulge his 
name." 

" And you refuse me f° 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 67 

" I must, or break almost an oath to my 
husband, Sir.''* 

" Not caring how you madden your father ! 
Lost, degraded — " 

"No, my dear father — not degraded, Sir," she 
interrupted ; " there you mistake, indeed." 

" Then why would he have you hide his 
name ?" 

" I fear I can never tell you, Sir, the reason 
for that ; 'twas a prudent, if not a generous one ; 
and yet, Sir, generous my husband can be, has 
been, and may yet be ; nay, but that your afflict- 
ing want of confidence kept me ignorant of the 
full extent of your present dreadful trials, I am 
convinced he would not have wished me to 
enter into a private marriage, — nor asked your 
permission for an open one, without n 

" Pshaw ! he is a fry of those Knightlies." 

" He is not, Sir : and now that I at last know 
of your difficulties, I am just as sure — that 
although I cannot name him without his per- 
mission, it is only necessary for me to ask that 
permission in order to obtain it ; and so, if you 

allow me, my dear father P 

" Dear father! — dear d n! — Look 

there !" he pointed to the half-open door, at 



68 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

which was seen a man's figure. " Do you know 
who darkens the threshold of that door? — Do you 
really know that, this moment, I am watched in 
my own house— no, not my own house — I have no 
house — but dogged from room to room by a com- 
mon ruffian, a catchpole, a bailiff? — Look round 
you ! Do you really know that every thing your 
eye falls upon, that piano, that table, that chair, 
that miniature of your mother — Oh heaven of 
heavens .' — and instead of being in a situation to 
take me out of this hell of troubles, at all events 
to console me, you stand there, you, armed 
with your own disobedience to give my heart 
the very last blow ! Come !"— He seized her 
wrist, having wrought himself into a frenzy of 
passion ; " you shall not stand there to kill me 
outright! — Nay, while this house remains even 
nominally mine, you shall not disgrace it with 
your presence ! — off to your bravo, your hus- 
band ; he is your protector now ! but first come 
take leave of the mother and the sisters you 
have shamed !— come, I say !" 

" Father, dearest father !" she sank again on 
the carpet, " do not treat me so ; I do not quite 
deserve it ; I have been wrong, but not so very 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 69 

wrong ; and on such a day as this is, and from 
such a house as this is, do not, do not expel me! 
oh, my dear father, my heart is not, never was 
dead to a daughter's feeling for you, and for 
your misfortunes ! and if my husband — " 

" Damn him ! mean, obscure fellow, who- 
ever he is, damn him ! — Come ! I insist ! Do 
not make me force you !"• Force her, however, he 
almost did across the room, until at last she 
walked with him. " Give way, fellow !" he cried 
to the bailiff at the door, and, through it, and 
down-stairs he still led her ; Gerald following, 
in horror, grief, and consternation. 

" A hackney-coach, Sir P continued Mr. 
Gore, addressing a servant as he stepped to the 
parlour, — " Come, Madam !" he flung open the 
door, and appeared before the bridal party, 
pale and seemingly almost insane with passion, 
while he still held Maria tight by the wrist; 
" here, my good friends, — here, I have brought 
you another new-married lady — a dutiful, pure- 
minded, youngest daughter, who, because she is 
of age, as she says, thought no more than a 
license necessary to get joined in holy wedlock 
to some low, intriguing wretch that she fears 



70 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

even to name to her family. Ay, indeed, 'tis 
so," with tones of bitter mockery, as Mrs. Gore 
and her two elder daughters expressed their 
amazement in abrupt ejaculations. " The 
night before the last, — and after the play, — 
and God knows under what roof, by way of 
her Hymeneal temple," — this delicate, this 
high-minded young lady changed her maiden 
name and became a most right honourable wife ! 
Look at her ! does she not wear her new dig- 
nities well ? does not her brow look matronly 
already ; and her glance, her air, and bearing, 
seem quite ennobled ? See ! see what an impor- 
tant personage we have had among us, una- 
wares, ever since after the play, the night before 
the last ! Where are her happy mother, and her 
admiring sisters, to salute her — ay, to bow down 
to her ? Where are all the honours she should 
get, in return for all the honours she gives ? 
Ignoble creature!" he continued, again bursting 
out in fury, and dropping her hand, " this 
moment leave our presence ! — hide yourself in 
your chamber till your hackney-chariot draws 
up at the door, and then — " 

" Mother, mother !" she cried, running across 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 71 

the room, and falling helplessly at Mrs. Gore's 
knees, who sat weeping on a sofa. 

" Do not touch her !" screamed Mr. Gore, 
addressing his wife, as she stooped down to 
embrace her daughter. " I command you, 
Madam, to give her no parting kiss, — no part- 
ing hand ! get up and go to your chamber !" 
stamping at Maria ; " get up, or I will drag 
you up !" 

He walked towards her. She rose to her 
knees ; clasped those of her [mother fervent- 
ly ; kissed her feet ; ran to her sisters and 
brother, and separately embraced them ; and 
all this without a word ; and so rapidly that 
her father could not interrupt her. Then she 
looked round for him, and in another instant 
was clinging to his knees also, as she cried, 
" Still, still, your blessing, Sir, before I go !" 

" Blessing! 1 ' he shook her off; " my curse, 
you mean, and — " 

Before he could pronounce another word, Mrs. 
Gore sprang up screaming, fell on his neck, 
and put her hand on his mouth. At the same 
time, she turned her lips that Maria might kiss 
them ; the signal was quickly understood and 



72 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

answered ; then her mother motioned Maria to 
leave the room, and was obeyed. 

" I will shoot her at my feet if she again 
appears before me ! I will, by the heavens !" 
exclaimed Mr. Gore, in a paroxysm of rage. 
— " And now, Selina, 11 he continued, turning to 
Lady Lumley, and endeavouring to assume a 
calm tone, " you are my last and only hope." 

" I understand you, Sir," said Selina, " and 
we shall arrange every thing in another room. — 
Come, my love," to Mrs. Blake ; and both 
ladies arose. 

" Why needs she accompany us ?" demanded 
Mr. Gore, in an expression of face that vaguely 
foreboded something. 

" It may be as well that my sister witnesses 
our interview, Sir ; I should like the approval 
of so near a member of my family. 11 

He stood still, and looked expressively at her. 

" Selina, I do not like this beginning : it 
promises no good ending. Why should you 
wish her countenance in what you are about to 
do, unless you intend to do as she has done 
before you? But come, I will not anticipate." 

"Better not, Sir." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 73 

The father and the two sisters left the 
apartment. We follow them into a back 
parlour. 

" Who is this ?" asked Mr. Gore, as he 
entered the room, pointing to a gentleman fas- 
tidiously dressed in black, who stood up from 
a table and bowed profoundly. 

" My private solicitor, Sir," answered Selina. 

" Oh, — oho ! I beg the gentleman's pardon, 1 ' 
bowing even lower than his new acquaintance 
had done, " and yours, Lady Lumley," repeat- 
ing his obeisance; " I should have remembered 
that new dignities require new attendants, ay, 
and new respect. 'Tis all quite right; just as 
it should be : yes, the draft, off-hand, which 
you were to oblige me with, as a simple gift 
from daughter to father, must now necessarily 
assume the shape of some important legal docu- 
ment, technically drawn up by your private 
solicitor, and demanding a formal acknowledge- 
ment from Gervis Gore, Esquire. To be 
sure it must — if, indeed, you doom me to no 
more than that ; let us see :" he effectually 
curbed himself, and walked steadily to the 
table from which the attorney had arisen : — " of 

VOL. III. E 



74 THE ANGLO- IRISH. 

course, now, this gentleman and I settle the 
matter between ourselves ?" 

" If you please, Sir ; I have acted under his 
advice, and abide by his arrangements." 

" Yes, Sir," said the solicitor ; " and by the 
advice of the best counsel, after making all the 
necessary inquiries, beforehand, as to the ex- 
tent to which Sir John Lum ley's property, 
real and personal — " 

" I think I comprehend, Sir," interrupted 
Mr. Gore ; " pray, do not distress yourself by 
superfluous explanations ; let us to business at 
once. Take your chair, Sir, and you will 
oblige me. So 1 ' — Mr. Gore sat to the table 
along with the solicitor — "here are our docu- 
ments, I see ; very good : how do we begin ?" 

" Gubbins!" called out the attorne}', speak- 
ing towards the hall : Mr. Gore's legal attend- 
ant of the last few days entered. 

" We begin this way, if you have no objec- 
tion, Sir. Gubbins, you are aware that Mr. 
Pierce, the solicitor in this writ, and your 
employer, empowers me to settle the debt, and 
discharge you ?" 

The bailiff assented. 

" Then you may go home; here is your war- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 75 

rant to do so, under my name, and here I hold 
the amount of the debt, costs and all, which I 
will hand by and by to Mr. Pierce ; you have 
received your own money, day after day ?" 

" All, except that day's money,'" the man 
said. 

" There, then, and leave the house. 1 ' 

" Good-morning, Mr. Gore," said the bailiff, 
as he shuffled off. 

"A very good-morning to you, Mr. Gubbins," 
answered Mr. Gore, " and many, many thanks 
for your obliging attentions. — Well, Sir," 
turning to the solicitor, " what is this ?" as a 
folded paper was placed at his hand. 

" A draft on the National Bank for two 
hundred pounds, Mr. Gore." 

" For two hundred pounds," repeated Mr. 
Gore, deliberately — " good." 

" To which Mrs. Blake, out of her own pri- 
vate purse, joins one hundred more, at my in- 
stance," said Lady Lumley, putting down a 
note to the amount she mentioned. 

" Thank you, my love," resumed Mr. Gore, 

bowing his head, and smiling, over-graciously, 

to Mrs. Blake ; " 'tis your first kind help, and 

I value it accordingly. Well ; these three hun- 

e2 



76 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

dred pounds will scarce pay the executions now 
in the house, I fear, Sir ?" 

" It does not seem advisable, upon mature 
consideration, to meddle with them, Sir," replied 
the attorney. 

" That is, they must take their own course, 
Sir r 

" Yes, Sir." 

" That is, again, my house and furniture, my 
carriage and horses, are no longer mine, Sir ? M 

" If you glance over this deed, Sir," tempo- 
rized the attorney, " you will find it a set-off 
against the momentary and inevitable disadvan- 
tages of your present situation." 

" A set-off! what a happy word ! — a set-off, 
indeed, for me, when it no longer pleases the gra- 
cious authorities who decide my fate that I shall 
stay in my own house, in my native country, 
perhaps, — a set-off! ha, ha! — well, on with busi- 
ness, however; your deed, Sir! many thanks. 
So, so !" he muttered over the first part of it ; 
then read aloud ; " ' And the said Selina, Lady 
Lumley, hereby covenants and engages for her- 
self, her administrators, executors, or assigns, 
to pay to the said Gervis Gore, Esq. for and dur- 
ing his natural life, the aforesaid yearly sum of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 77 

three hundred pounds sterling, if it shall please 
him, the said Gervis Gore, Esq. to live out of 
the j urisdiction of the laws of these realms of 
Great Britain and Ireland, and so keep his 
person — dutifully honoured and revered by her, 
the said Selina, Lady Lumley, — free of all arrests 
and incarcerations on account of his numerous 
debts yet unliquidated, and' — and so forth, 1 ' re- 
sumed Mr. Gore, laying down the deed ; " all 
very good." 

"It was to be expected, indeed, that these 
arrangements would please you, Sir," said the 
lawyer. 

" To be sure, Sir; they do, indeed, exceed- 
ingly please me ; I am even grateful, to an un- 
bounded degree, to my affectionate and careful 
daughter, Selina, Lady Lumley ; indeed I am. 
And so, the sooner I leave Dublin, with my 
wife and son, the better, I suppose ?" 

" You will yourself perceive the absolute 
necessity of such a step, Mr. Gore. We have 
all done our very best to keep your late arrest 
from the ears of " 

" Oh, I know, Sir ; of my other • numerous 1 
creditors, lest detainers might drop in ; I know, 
and again thank you all from my heart.' 1 



78 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" But now, Mr. Gore—" 

" You cannot answer for what may happen 
in the course of the day, and therefore I must 
make my set off instanter; — and I will, Sir; 
which promise, I dare say, ends our business, 
Sir," rising : " and now, Sir, good-day to you." 

" Good-day, Mr. Gore ; and I hope you are 
satisfied with my part in the transaction." 

" My dear Sir, delighted ! your conduct re- 
flects the highest honour on your professional 
character, and I foretel that you have only to 
go on just in the same steady, respectable, clever 
way and — stop, Lady Lumley !" he cried, mo- 
tioning her back with his arm, as, followed by 
Mrs. Blake, she walked towards the door ; the 
sisters, in evident alarm, stood still ; — " in the 
same steady, clever way, Sir, and mine will not 
be the only father's heart you must assist in 
breaking ; mine not the only family that, for 
your six-and-eightpence, you must succeed in 
confirming in warfare against each other — " 

" What, Mr. Gore !" interrupted the attorney. 

" Begone, rascal !" thundered Mr. Gore, as 
he dashed the door in his face. Then he 
suddenly turned round, and thrusting his hand 
into his bosom, confronted his daughters. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 79 

For more than a minute he stood before them 
in silence, his face livid, his eyes rolling, his 
teeth set, his frame shaking, and gradually in- 
creasing in its tremor, until he staggered, and 
almost reeled. 

" Monsters !" at last said this domestic Lear, 
" I cannot call ye women, much less daughters! 
For the last four or five miserable years, ye have 
seen me willingly buffet a sea of difficulties and 
humiliations, merely to keep up the show of a 
station in society from which ye might step to 
the rank and affluence ye now hold, — and the 
very ruin I dared for your sakes, ye at las- 
leave me to deal with as I may. But to you, 
Selina Lumley, to you I would particularly speak. 
Your cold-hearted sister made me no promise ; 
you did. You did, and you deliberately break 
it. Listen to me then. May all the promises 
which have ever been made, and which ever 
may be made, to you, be broken to you, as you 
break that. May every tongue lie to you, every 
heart be hollow to you. May all the promises 
of the pride of your own hard and haughty 
heart prove false to you. You hope for a fu- 
ture of earthly triumph in the world ; may it 
turn into poverty as literal as mine ; into shame 



80 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and suffering more abject, and more friendless. 
Oh, that I pray for you, indeed, and in that 
curse, inhuman daughter, I curse you ! From 
smiling eyes, from honied flatterers, from seeming 
friends, but above all, — if, indeed, your age- 
stricken, debauch-worn partner is doomed to be 
a father, — above all, from children, from the 
children of your bosom, may you meet a re- 
quital for this falseness to me !— God of nature 
and of justice, hear my prayer !" 

She turned her back and rang the bell, call- 
ing out at the same time, " Sir John Lumley P* 

" Ay, Sir John Lumley !" echoed her father, 
opening the door, and holding it in his hand — 
" And here he comes, — and your mother too. 
She wishes you to lead her out, Sir John ; her 
carriage waits, no doubt ; do take her hand — 
and while her father flies like a felon to hide his 
head in a strange country — at her command — 
expatriated, outlawed by her — let her pass her 
bridal-day, and her sweet honeymoon, as sweet- 
ly and as tranquilly, or as riotously, as her heart 
can wish. Pillowed on your bosom, Sir John, 
and lulled by the recollection of her father and 
her mother struggling in poverty, and of her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 81 

father's curse mounting up for her to God — let 
her be very happy." 

" What !" cried Mrs. Gore ; " must we leave 
our house 7" 

" We must ; this instant, too — you, our son, 
and I — so they order it, my love. Put on your 
warmest things ; 'tis a sharp day." 

" Mother, farewell,''' said Lady Lumley, as 
she passed her, leaning on Sir John : Mrs. Blake 
had already gone out with her husband and 
entered her carriage. Mrs. Gore averted her 
head, and rushed by her daughter up-stairs, mak- 
ing no answer to her adieus. The bride con- 
tinued her way through the hall. Her father, 
now sitting stunned in a chair, heard her car- 
riage drive off. 

Mr. Frederick Augustus Gore entered the 
room where he was, and, unobserved by him, 
looked over the deed which lay on the table, and 
put it into his pocket, together with the draft 
for two hundred pounds, and the bank-note for 
one hundred, which were beside it. 

" Have all our bridal party gone away, Fre- 
derick ?" asked Mr. Gore, after a pause. 

" All, except young Blount, and he seems to 
e 5 



82 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

have something to say to you, Sir : he saw Ma- 
ria before her departure " 

" And Maria, too, has left us ?" interrupted 
Mr. Gore — " she took me at my word ?" 

" He saw her, father, and, I believe, received 
a message for you." 

" And you are sure that every other guest 
has quitted the house ?" 

" Except me," said Miss Flint, appearing — 
" and you know I never was the person to for- 
sake a friend in distress." 

" Begone, idle gossip !" — Mr. Gore stamped 
passionately. 

•* Oh, if you tvill snap at one in such a way," 
answered Miss Flint, rapidly hurrying to the 
hall- door, which was open — " think of this !" 
she continued, and they heard her pattering off' 
on her clogs. 

A hackney-coach drew up to the door. Mr. 
Gore rose hastily. 

** Come, Frederic," he said, " where is your 
mother ?" 

Mrs. Gore re appeared, dressed for a jour- 
ney. He offered her his arm, and, followed by 
their son, led her into the hall. The servants 
grouped with the keepers, who had come in 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 83 

upon the execution, but who, till this moment, 
were contented to stay out of sight, in a remote 
and obscure part of the house, appeared stand- 
ing on the stairs. Mr. Gore bent his head, and 
increased his speed. 

Mr. Blount, father," said his son, behind him. 

" Where is he ? I forgot." 

Gerald presented himself at the door of the 
breakfast-parlour, and in a disturbed and sym- 
pathising voice, prayed to say one word with 
Mr. Gore. 

" Lead your mother to the carriage — the 
hackney-coach, I mean, Frederic," said Mr. 
Gore, and, while his commands were obeyed, 
he stepped into the room with Gerald. 

" I will not say a word about your situation, 
Mr. Gore ; 'tis too dreadful to speak of ; but 
your daughter, Maria, has charged me with a 
message to you." 

" Well, Mr. Blount." 

" Her first duty, she says, will be to acquaint 
her husband with your afflictions ; and she con- 
fidently promises that you shall receive, in con- 
sequence, a letter from himself, of which the 
signature will not displease you, nor the pur- 
port seem ungenerous. Meantime, she parts from 



84 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

you in love and sorrow, only, and humbly begs 
that you will accept of this, — " presenting him 
with a pocket-book — " her husband's first gift to 
her, until both shall have an opportunity, by 
learning your address, of more properly show- 
ing their dutiful feelings." 

" Why, here are three hundred pounds," said 
Mr. Gore ; " do you know where she has gone, 
Mr. Blount ?" 

" No, Sir ; your daughter did not inform me." 

" But she went all alone ?" 

" Not alone, Sir," answered Gerald, looking 
peculiarly disturbed ; " a lady came to take her 
from your door." 

" A lady ? that 's strange. Well, God bless 
poor Maria. I was too hasty with her. She 
was the best of them, after all. Mr. Blount, I 
thank you for this kindness, and for much more 
that went before it. And as soon as I can sit 
down to write to you, though Heaven knows 
when that will be, or where, you shall receive 
my address, in care for her. Now, farewell. 
We must not stop talking here in this house, — 
this desolate house. Come. But stop ; I will 
be just to you, as well as thankful. These 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 85 

three hundred pounds nearly cover an old 
debt—" 

" Mr. Gore, Mr. Gore,' 1 said Gerald, with 
much energy, " do not so afflict me ; do not sup- 
pose me capable of — put them up, Sir, put 
them up ; things will all come right again, some 
day ; and then, you know — pray, Sir, put them 
upT 

Mr. Gore, who had not wept that morning 
at all his domestic trials, now burst into tears, 
as he grasped Gerald's hands. 

" Come, Sir, Mrs. Gore waits," continued 
Gerald, offering his arm. His unfortunate 
friend allowed him to walk him out into the 
hall. Upon the steps, leading down to the 
street, Mr. Gore looked back, and made signs 
of adieu to one or two servants. His eye then 
caught the brass-plate which bore his name upon 
the hall-door. He sprang back into the hall, 
went behind the door, unscrewed the plate, 
snatched it off, thrust it into his pocket, and 
after again shaking hands with Gerald, stepped 
into the hackney-coach, and was driven with 
his wife and son out of Dublin. 



86 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER IV. 

After Mr. Gore and his two daughters had 
returned from the breakfast-parlour, Gerald sat 
among the remainder of the bridal party, still 
much stunned with the effects of the recent 
scene. When his presence of mind began to 
rally, it only made his situation more uncom- 
fortable, by representing him to himself as the 
direct cause of all the vehemence he had wit- 
nessed, and now as the object to be stared at, 
and perhaps frowned at and hated, amid the 
family whose festive day he was unfortunate 
enough to overcloud in such a manner. The 
reflection that the people thus at his mercy in 
their joys and sorrows, were almost strangers to 
him, added peculiar impatience to Gerald's 
mood ; and following up the retrospect hereby 
presented, he could do little less than de- 
nounce his ill-staried arrival in Ireland, the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 87 

accursed stage-coach and babbling driver, to 
which and to whom he jointly attributed the 
breaking of his arm, that had first detained him 
in the country; the trifler Flood, the needy, 
wretched, Irish Mr. Gore, and the coqueting, 
hoaxing, and also very Irish beauty, by whose 
combined endeavours he had been seduced into 
a continued sojourn in Dublin, even after he 
could have escaped from it. As to Mr. Augus- 
tus Frederic, and the wine-bibbing night he 
caused Gerald to spend, and the hundred pounds 
it incidentally cost him, and the degrading errors 
it plunged him into — above all, the monstrous 
one of charging his watchful fellow- reveller with 
the love-message which brought down upon his 
head the thunder-clap of this morning — bah ! — 
he had not words nor patience to embody his 
utter aversion and disgust of the whole finish- 
ed masterpiece of Hibernian character, manner, 
and adventure. 

Oppressed by the double anxiety of escaping 
from the presence of the mad family, and from 
Ireland altogether, Gerald now only sat debat- 
ing whether he would go through the martyr- 
dom of taking leave of Mrs. Gore, and the 
friends who surrounded her, and depute his 



88 THE ANGLO-IBISH. 

parting respects to the bride of the morning, 
and to her father, or get up at once, and, un- 
noticed if he could, run out of the house. 
Strong as was his sense of politeness, it barely 
enabled him to decline the latter course ; and 
well as he prepared himself for the odious scene, 
he proved barely able to go through with it. 

When Mr. Frederic Augustus, smiling pa- 
thetically, held out an eager hand, in answer to 
his grave bow, he could scarce keep his brow 
or his tongue quiet, and finally, he almost rushed 
through the door at Miss Flint's sudden ap- 
proach, and her M Oh, Mr. Blount, you 

poor fellow V 

" 'Tis done, however, 1 ' said Gerald, gaining 
the hall. 

A female servant tripped down-stairs, making 
a sign, gained his side, looking about her cau- 
tiously, and put into his hand a slip of paper, 
on which were pencilled these words : 

U For goodness' sake, and for charity's sake, 
come up to the drawing-room to me, and take 
charge of my parting message to my father : it 
is absolutely necessary that he should receive it, 
and you are the only person under this roof to 
whom it can well be confided. Maria ." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 89 

Pity, mingled with remorse for his recent un- 
qualified censure of a being so very peculiarly 
situated, and perhaps flattered vanity at the 
confidence placed in him, assailed Gerald's heart, 
and he unhesitatingly obeyed the summons of 
the note. 

Its writer stood cloaked and bonneted in 
the middle of the room. She had been weep- 
ing, but, it would seem, tried to dry up her 
tears and compose herself at his approach. The 
pocket-book, afterwards presented by Gerald to 
Mr. Gore, was in her hand. With apologies 
for the trouble she put him to, the afflicted 
young lady then delivered her message. Gerald 
received it seriously and respectfully, and en- 
gaged to convey it to her father. 

" And now, Mr. Blount, 1 ' she continued, 
" accept my sincere apologies for much greater 
inconvenience which I have helped to cause you. 
In good-humoured lightness of heart, uncon- 
scious of the hidden misery around me, and, be 
assured, not meaning or wishing to obtrude my- 
self on your interest, I certainly became a party 
to a little plot against you. But we must not 
say farewell to each other till I at least remove 
a delusion which I directly, though not by direct 



90 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

words or actions, assisted in promoting. Indeed, 
I should think you scarce require, at present, to 
be undeceived in the silly matter I allude to. I 
see a peculiar meaning in the studious regards 
with which you honour me. After your second 
vision, at the theatre, the night before the last, 
of the real object of your interest, your waver- 
ing notions of identity become more fixed, and 
it is hardly necessary for me, though highly 
complimented by being generally called some- 
what like that charming lady, to inform you, 
that you and I never met till my father present- 
ed you at the carriage-door in Sackville-street ; 
never met in Paris, or on the French coast, or 
on the Irish coast." 

She correctly divined Gerald's thoughts. 
Hardly, indeed, did he now require her as- 
surance. If the face he had seen in the theatre 
was unlike Maria Gore's, Maria Gore's at pre- 
sent was unlike it ; and Gerald admitted that 
he was quite undeceived, adding how much 
he wondered at himself for allowing his mind 
to entertain the mistake. 

J* Do not be too severe on your own mental 
capacities," she resumed ; f* you at first admitted 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 91 

it with difficulty, and at no time really enter- 
tained it. And your doubt sometimes occurs : 
I have myself experienced something of the 
kind. Last year I met once or twice, in Eng- 
land, a gentleman, who was regularly intro- 
duced to me, and whom I often heard speak. 
Returning to Ireland, I became acquainted 
with another gentleman, just sufficiently like 
the former to make me observe the similitude 
at the first look. We grew to be intimate 
acquaintances, and day after day his points of 
resemblance to my English friend seemed 
stronger; the differences between their fea- 
tures, person, voice, and manner, melted away ; 
I often caught myself confounding the one with 
the other ; and it was but lately that their ac- 
cidental contact, side by side, here in Ireland, 
enabled me to correct the error of my memory. 
Observe, this happened with the certainty to my 
hand, if I had used it, of two distinct indi- 
viduals. But, as in your case, had I only 
casually seen the first gentleman, and lost 
sight of him without knowing his name, and 
then became acquainted with the second, and ex- 
periencec 1 from him a judicious attempt to 



92 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

make me think he was that first, beyond 
doubt I must have yielded, at least as far as 
you did, to the delusion." 

" But why was I marked out for such cruel 
tantalizing P" asked Gerald, gently and good- 
humouredly. 

" Blame me for the first part of it, Mr. 
Blount, and me alone, though others must 
share your censure for the continuance of the 
jest. I knew of your first interview with my 
original and masterpiece, almost as soon as it 
had occurred. This made me look curiously 
at you the moment my poor father brought 
you to the carriage. When, in return, you 
fixed your regards on me, and particularly 
when you spoke about Pere la Chaise, I re- 
collected of whom it was supposed I was such 
a bad copy ; and, merely for the sake of having 
a laugh upon paper with your dear, dear 
sister, Lady Augusta, took it into my giddy 
head to humour your doubt ; so far as, with- 
out false words or indelicacy, I might do so. 
In reply to my letter of that evening, Augusta 
highly enjoyed your dilemma, and urged me 
to keep you in it. Previously, I had engaged 
another in the plot." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 93 

" The arch-traitor, Flood ?" asked Gerald. 

" Yes ; your old and sincere friend, Captain 
Flood ," answered the young lady, slightly 
colouring. 

° I am bound to think," continued Gerald, 
" that Augusta really gave you instructions, by 
letter, to call on me to explain why I declined 
the visit of Mr. Knightly, and that eldest son 
he has got ?" 

" Certainly. 1 ' 

" And why I never answered a letter from 
them which I never saw ?" 

" That, too. Augusta, angry with your 
supposed offences, and with your neglect of 
her letter, would not ask these questions of 
you, herself; preferring to have me propose 
them, if I should meet you here, where she 
presumed you must be visible ; I had her 
wishes to that effect before I saw you." 

" And you seemed angry with me, your- 
self, because I would make no apology to your 
friend P 

" Yes, on her account, and because sharing 
her conviction that you were aware of facts 
which would have made your conduct, at the 
time, exceedingly unamiable." 



94 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" My conduct, how ?" 

" Towards the Knightlies, to be sure ; but 
before your sudden escape that night from this 
drawing-room, I discovered that we had both 
wronged you ; that you were not possessed of 
the facts necessary to shape your conduct ; and, 
at the same time, I also saw new facilities for 
surrounding you with increased mystery, still 
assisted by your sister and others. 1 ' 

" And you advised her accordingly ?" 

" Early next morning." 

" Well, and now I throw myself upon you 
for a solution of this fresh puzzle." 

" Indeed, Mr. Blount, my heart and my spi- 
rits are far from prompting me, in my present 
situation, to continue any piece of fooling with 
you ; yet I fear that I am not at liberty to ex- 
tricate you from your difficulties. Dear Au- 
gusta has bound me by a solemn promise to 
keep you ignorant of what we all mean, — until 
you repair to Lower-Court." 

" Oh, I thank Augusta very much. But 
Flood can and must resolve me; I'll set off to 
him." 

" I venture to promise you a journey for no- 
thing ; unless, indeed, you take your old class- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 95 

mate, as I am sure you will not take him ; par- 
ticularly when you recollect that he but faith- 
fully keeps a lady's secret." 

" Which I am sure he can do," said Gerald, 
venturing a slightly expressive look at Flood's 
advocate, and again his companion seemed 
a little disconcerted, while he continued half 
bitterly, half in jest ; " No matter then : I 
remember, that another person was indignant 
at my want of admiration for those wor- 
shipful, all-pervading Knightlies ; ay, and 
pointed out my lack of heart because I would 
not fall down to them : of course, she — for I 
speak of a lady — meant, like you and Augusta, 
that I knew the ' certain facts,' which now it 
seems I did not know, and do not know, and 
cannot know, unless I repair to Lower-Court : 
but I must and will, without any such alterna- 
tive ; 'tis but seeking out the lady in question, 
who abhors secrets as much as others love them; 
yes, Miss Flint ! to you I go." 

" And would it not be as well if, indulging 
your charming sister in her little harmless plot 
against you, Mr. Blount, you just accepted her 
affectionate invitation to the country ?"" asked 
the young lady, in a continued gravity, which 



96 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gerald, by his gradual assumption of badinage 
that he did not feel, had hitherto vainly en- 
deavoured to divert. 

" Well, and if I am fairly answered one other 
simple question, I may begin to prepare my 
mind for much of female despotism." 

" I believe I anticipate you, but can afford no 
hopes ; your question, however ?" 

" Who is my Genius, at last ?" 

" No: I foresaw it; that question, of all 
others, I am not permitted to meet ; but I can 
add, that your sister will personally resolve it 
also." 

" Just say if she is French, or English, or 
Irish r 

" Pray, Mr. Blount, do not press me upon a 
subject which, every thing else apart, ill accords 
with my predicament this moment. " 

" Only this, then — and answer me if you can 
— I did see her on the shingles ?" 

" You did." 

" And to her I owe my accommodation of 
that night ?" 

" To her. 1 ' 

" And she penned the note I found in the 
cabin ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 97 

" No : but farther on this point I must be 
silent." 

" But it was she, not you, I saw the night 
before the last ?" 

" I was in the theatre that night, but me you 
did not see. Farewell, Mr. Blount ; the carriage 
that bears me from this house — and from my 
family — draws up near the door;" — Gerald had, 
indeed, noticed that a grave-looking carriage 
just then stood still in the train of Sir John 
Lumley's and Mr. Blake's. 

" I have certainly seemed forgetful of your 
individual feelings, by my questions, and, per- 
haps, particularly so by my manner of putting 
them ; yet, believe me," said Gerald, changing 
his tone and manner, " not so really forgetful on 
the subject as I wished to seem; and now do 
not deem it merely impertinent, in a very sin- 
cere, if not very old friend, if he hopes, with 
all his heart that your immediate protectors 
are in all respects what you would wish them 
to be." 

" Oh, indeed, indeed they are : — see .'—quick- 
ly answering my hasty message, sent just before 
you came up-stairs — one of them appears this 
moment on the carriage- step ; — thanks, dear, 
VOL. III. K 



98 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

dear girl V* continued Maria, kissing her hand, 
while she again wept, to the friend she spoke of; 
— " No, my love ! do not venture in !" — her 
visitor was tripping up to the hall-door — •* but 
the spirited creature will come to me — she has 
not caught my signals." 

" Farewell, then !" said Gerald : Maria pre- 
sented her hand — " happiness to you ; and per- 
mit a last word upon my own affairs : I do not 
now require Augusta's help to guess the name 
of your double ; every thing at last convinces 
me that I have been haunted by her manager- 
in-chief, Miss Knightly." 

" Well, well, that is to be decided ;" a light 
foot came up-stairs, — " stop a moment, yet: — 
ah, dear girl !" as a young lady bounded into 
the room ; and the friends warmly embraced. 
The new-comer was not beautiful, but her 
figure was good, her stature imposing, and 
her quick blue eyes, and high, country colour, 
rendered her striking. She wore a riding-ha- 
bit and a man's hat, and held a whip in her 
hand. 

" Come," she said, after their embrace, 
" come with me out of this churlish house; I 
was just mounting little Cathleen, to have one 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 99 

good canter round the Phoenix, before leaving 
Dublin for the delightful hills and fields, but your 
note made me send her back to her manger, 
and order the carriage to take me to you : — so, 
come, I say, and now no cantering, and no 
Phoenix, but out of this dull town instantly. 1 ' 

Gerald had not a high opinion of the 
" spirited creature," upon whose protection 
Maria had thrown herself; she half seemed an 
Irish fox-huntress. 

" Do you catch the likeness ?" asked Maria, 
in a low voice, suddenly approaching him. 

" Where ? what do you mean ? — to you ? in 
this lady? Yes; you are tall, and have blue 
eyes in common ; but that 's all." 

" I must present you, though your introduc- 
tory and your parting-bow are destined to be 
made together : first, farewell, again ! — come, 
my dear," she took her friend's arm and was 
passing out, when both stopped on the threshold 
— "but I am guilty of an omission ; this gentle- 
man and you ought to be acquainted — so, Mr. 
Blount, Miss Knightly." 

Miss Knightly bowed low, smiling very tor- 
mentingly; the next instant she and her com- 
panion turned down-stairs, and before Gerald 
F 2 



100 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

** was himself again," they had entered the 
carriage, and were driven quickly from the 
house. 

" What ! she ! she, my Ariel ! she, my very 
dream of grace and beauty ! — No ; I erred in- 
deed ; and thank Heaven I did ; thank Heaven 
-'tis no Knightly. Ay ; as her friend evidently 
meant, my conjecture was soon to be decided, 
indeed. But lo ! the prime minister, and prime 
befooler of my rational sister, Lady Augusta 
Blount ; and my early competitor in donkey 
equestrianism. Yes ; the bold, forward child, 
Miss Rhoda, matured into this sun-burnt, wea- 
ther-rouged, rustic Amazon, — or, if it must be 
so, this ' spirited creature.'' 

" What is to be done with Augusta ? And 
who can my guardian-angel be, after all ? — I '11 
go down amongst the people in the parlour, 
again, horrid as is the enterprize, just to see if 
Miss Flint knows ; and to be sure she does — " 
here Gerald erred — " or at all events, she can 
explain the other foolish riddle about the ' cer- 
tain facts.' " Accordingly he was on his way to 
the parlour, when Mr. Gore's voice, loudly 
echoing his daughter Selina's call for Sir John 
Lumley, arrested his steps ; and the rapid oc- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 101 

currences which followed, completely put Miss 
Flint out of his head. 

We have seen him deliver Maria's message 
to her father. After Mr. Gore's departure 
from the house, Gerald, much depressed by 
the last sad scene he had witnessed, walked for 
some time about the streets, in a vague and 
melancholy mood. 'Tis unnecessary to say if 
his own concerns partially engaged him. The 
reader will solve the question when he is in- 
formed that Gerald bent his steps, about four 
o'clock, to the houses of some common ac- 
quaintances of his and of Miss Flint, hoping to 
learn that lady's address. But those acquaint- 
ances, though amongst her most intimate ones, 
after successively pausing, and saying, " Let us 
see," as if it was quite a new question to them, 
declared that they really did not know where, in 
Dublin, Miss Flint lived ; it was very strange, 
seeing her so often, and, indeed, for so many 
years ; but they really did not. And, in fact, 
Gerald's inquiries proved fruitless. 

The next situation he appears in, is purchas- 
ing a map of the county in which Lower-Court 
is to be found. We then follow him to the 
office of the night-coach that is to start at 



102 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

eight o'clock in the evening, and pass, at about 
five, next morning, within a few miles of his 
sister's residence. And here Gerald engaged 
his seat, and then repaired to his hotel to study 
his map. Now he ascertained from the scale, 
that the by-road, leading off the high-road to 
Lower-Court, measured only three miles; so 
that, after leaving the coach at its angle, he 
could walk on, and surprise Augusta with an 
early visit. Besides, a village marked very 
respectably on the map, was to be met half- 
way ; and if the morning proved bad, or the 
by-road difficult, though, again, the map made 
a different promise, perhaps he could there get 
a post-chaise, and pursue and conclude his 
short journey in a comfortable manner. He 
gained some perhaps as necessary inform- 
ation. From Lower- Court, the by-road, now 
turning, and running parallel to the coach- 
road, continued, for about two miles, to the 
house occupied by Lord Clangore's English 
agent, and then passed one in which, as Gerald 
concluded, dwelt his Scotch steward, Mr. Bignel. 
Gerald had made a bad breakfast ; now he 
made as bad a dinner ; that sensation known to 
all, though perhaps few can define it, the sensation 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 103 

of going away (if the indication shall be un- 
derstood), spoiled his appetite. It was great re- 
lief to him when the time arrived for proceed- 
ing to the coach-office. 

He found himself the only inside passenger, 
at starting. At a house in the outskirts of 
Dublin, the coach stopped, however, to supply 
him with a fellow-traveller. A burly, elderly, 
but respectable-looking man, came out of the 
hall-door, great-coated, and handkerchiefed al- 
most up to the eyes. He was attended by ser- 
vants male and female, who carried various small 
packages, besides a trunk and a bag, and fol- 
lowed by another gentleman, and by a lady, 
and by masters and misses of different ages. 
It appeared that Gerald's future acquaintance 
had been dining, and waiting for the coach, at 
this house, and that now, his host and hostess, 
and their equally hospitable progeny, flocked 
to their threshold, to wish him good bye and a 
safe journey. Many were the adieus, indeed, 
given and received ; many were the " best 
loves," and the " best regards," with which the 
traveller was freighted by old and young, to 
his own family, who, reckoning the names 
mentioned, would seem to outnumber even 



04 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

their town friends. Then he got into the 
coach, and received at the door, and stowed 
away on both the seats, and under the seats, 
and in the pockets, his dozen little packages, 
which might be made up of sundry nic-nacs 
ordered by his wife, or sued for by his children, 
and, through forgetfulness or hurry, not pur- 
chased till his seat had been taken, and his 
trunk and bag crammed almost to bursting 
without them. The coach had proceeded a 
good way from his friend's house before the 
careful gentleman finished arranging them all 
to his satisfaction ; and at last saying to Gerald, 
" Your servant, Sir," he lolled back in his 
corner, and settled his head for going asleep. 

Gerald wished that he could study the fea- 
tures of his coach-companion, who seemed to 
promise a display, should the opportunity turn 
up, of original Irish character. But his hand- 
kerchiefs, and his broad-brimmed, pressed-down 
hat, had quite hid the gentleman's face while 
the blaze at his friend's hall-door might have 
revealed it ; and now the scantily-lighted out- 
let through which they continued to pass, left 
them in almost total darkness. Gerald then 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 105 

wished the gentleman would speak, instead of 
setting in for a sleep, which, from the tranquil 
and matter-of-course preparations for it, might 
very probably last till morning. And perhaps 
it would have done so, had not the coach sudden- 
ly and violently jolted over an inequality in the 
suburb street, and caused the elder to waver 
towards the other corner, as he said — " No use, 
I see, on this pavement ; I must wait till we are 
rolling over the road, in earnest." 

" How like St. Giles's," remarked Gerald, 
looking out through the window, and willing 
to provoke his fellow-traveller into farther dis- 
course : H that is, so far as the scattered dull 
lamps will let me see." 

'* You'd admit a full likeness, in broad day- 
light, Sir," assented his companion. 

" With sorrow, if I was an Irishman," re- 
sumed Gerald. 

" As so you ought," said the gentleman. 

11 It is an Irishman I hear admit so much ?" 

" To the heart, Sir." 

" And you really do not patronize the 
economy of that London-Irish settlement, 
Sir?" 

f 5 



106 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

*' I would be one of a conspiracy to set fire 
to it," answered his new acquaintance. 

" With the hope of improving it, Sir?" 
smiled Gerald. 

" No, Sir ; Irish though I am, you have not 
caught a bull by the horns so soon." 

" In what view, then ?" 

" Tn a good many. First, to rid myself of 
a living subject for every-day taunt from Eng- 
lishmen, who perhaps are too hasty in consi- 
dering it as such, after all ; next, to force my 
cockney fied fellow-countrymen and fellow-coun- 
trywomen to seek out some less abominable 
hot-bed of vice and demoralization ; next, — but 
I hope these two reasons are enough, Sir." 

" But is it not a living and most eminent 
subject for the remarks you allude to ?" urged 
Gerald. 

" Before I answer you, Sir, I put in my 
national claim to ask you a few questions of 
my own. You can tell me, I suppose, why the 
streets of St. Giles's are permitted to remain 
in a litter ? why those, whose duty it is to see 
all the other streets of London visited by the 
scavengers' cart, leave those to their fate ? I 
hope you can also inform me how many Eng- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 107 

lish — how many London teachers of the worst 
and lowest London vice, have establishments 
among the Milesians of St. Giles's, instructing 
them, as, at their successive, and indeed first 
arrivals from Ireland, they did instruct them — 
to graft much of their present conduct 
upon the primitive habits imported from their 
native villages or wilds ? Next, Sir, no doubt 
you are prepared to say to what degree the 
avoiding antipathies of the more respectable 
of the lower order of Londoners may, or may 
not, have produced the necessity that keeps 
those poor people clanning together, deprived 
of immediate example for improvement ? and 
next, you will surely tell me why the law of 
England directly encourages them in the very 
worst kind of immorality ?" 

" What law of England .->" 

" That, according to which a marriage be- 
tween Catholic and Catholic, in England, if 
celebrated by a Catholic clergyman, is pro- 
claimed null and void, Sir." 

" And there is such a one, Sir?" 

" Why, yes : here, in Ireland, a Catholic 
priest is recognized by the statute as a legal 
agent in marrying two of his own flock ; he is 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

only guilty of felony when he marries two of 
different persuasions ; but in England his mi- 
nistry is not at all permitted. A well-schooled 
London-Irish hod-carrier, who has 'gone to the 
priest/ as they call it, with some unsuspecting 
fresh-faced girl of his country, just come over, 
can turn her adrift at his pleasure. I have seen 
many instances of the kind; the Roman Catholic 
clergymen of the rankling metropolis can supply 
you with more ; and the police offices, and the 
records of infamy and misery, with more still. 
But, after all this explanation, you have yet to 
answer my Irish questions, Sir. 1 ' 

" Suppose I am not able," said Gerald. 

" See there, then," remarked the gentleman, 
again about to make himself comfortable in the 
corner. But another jolt — it was the third or 
fourth — seemed to exhort him to continue. 

" After all, I am not ashamed of my slovenly 
compatriots of St. Giles's, in one respect. 
They are many thousands ; friends of theirs 
about Chelsea, and other outskirts of London, 
are thousands more ; and yet few of them ap- 
pear, from time to time, before your sitting 
magistrates, charged with their proportionate 
share of the different crimes which are com- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 109 

mitted in your Babylon — Lord Liverpool has 
remarked as much — and with the blackest of its 
crimes they, thank God ! never stand charged, 
either there, or here: — why? because they are 
absolutely ignorant of its nature, here; and have 
no name in their language for it ; and Peel ad- 
mitted that." 

M But it would be a blunder, indeed, if they 
have no name for the rows and the uproars, in 
London, which disgrace them and their country, 
and shock the English people.'" 

*' Again, I beg to put by your new point, till 
I give way to a little more Irish egotism about 
ray countrymen in your capital. Apart from 
St. Giles's, and its very humble community, I 
am still less ashamed of specimens of a higher 
class, whom we constantly send over to you. 
For example : — some of the editors, and sub- 
editors, of your daily press, a majority of its re- 
porters, and a good many of the contributors to 
your periodicals, are Irishmen, mostly real Pats 
— I mean Papists, as you call them. And not now 
considering the perfection to which they hare 
brought their reporting profession, and the great 
respectability they have thereby conferred upon 
it, nor the talent they show in the other depart- 



110 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

merits mentioned — not now debating these points, 
because we do not want them, I would invite you 
to recollect, for a moment, the sterling moral 
and social habits and principles, which alone 
could have enabled this numerous class of 
Irishmen to make themselves useful amid the 
jostling competition of London, and to this day 
keep> their private character untouched by public 
odium, or even by public inquiry of any kind." 

" All very fair, 1 ' Gerald said ; but he pressed 
his query about the fighting in St. Giles's. 

"Ay, just as they go on here, at fairs, and 
every where else ; I admit all that — won't de- 
fend a bit of it ; and yet, Sir, to your surprise, 
don't care one little harmless blow of a shillelagh 
about it. 'Tis very wrong, to be sure, but as 
incidental to the neglected state of society in 
which they first acquired it, as prancing is to a 
half-broke colt. In an improved position of 
Ireland, it will wear down ; ay, in her very 
next generation, please God ; — and so long as 
it continues, I thank the stars of my country 
that there is nothing unmanly in it ; and that 
it is not pugilism either— no doubt you stare, 
Sir, if I could see your face, but I am quite 
in earnest — I hope that cold-blooded prize-fight- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. Ill 

ing may never become a national sport, as you 
define it, in Ireland ; may never take place 
of even our pate-breaking cudgel-play, which 
has the merit of a cause for contention, if it has 
no other." 

" Or an imaginary cause," observed Gerald. 

" Or an imaginary cause," assented the Irish- 
man ; " it does as well for my point ; our com- 
batants may set to work under a delusion, in 
some cases ; still they are really vexed with 
each other ; their blood is up ; they do not 
shake hands to admit mutual and perfect good 
will, and then pound one another into jelly, or 
kill one another for a wager; — ay, kill ; for the 
yearly deaths by pugilism in England, are a set 
off to those by the shillelagh in Ireland. v 

" I am delighted to find a gentleman so 
truly national," smiled Gerald ; u you will not 
admit a single point against your green Ire- 
land." 

" Not a single one, — to an Englishman deter- 
mined that I should, Sir," replied his com- 
panion good-huniouredly. 

" Come, I compel you to one : you have 
agreed with me that the likeness was strong 
between St. Giles's and the outlet of your 



112 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

metropolis, which we just now cleared — why 
does it exist ?" 

" That outlet," answered the gentleman, in a 
low, impressive voice, " once formed part of an 
extensive, comfortable, and neat district, occu- 
pied by people who derived their means for 
keeping it so, from their manufacture of articles, 
which a certain political measure put an end 
to the demand for."" 

" What political measure, Sir ?" 

" The atrocious act of Legislative Union, 
Sir. v 

The adoring girl, who is told that her idol 
is a demon, would scarce feel more shocked, 
and, indeed, indignant, than did Gerald at this 
bold censure upon a measure which he had al- 
ways regarded as the result of the greatest 
state-wisdom, and as pregnant with incalcu- 
lable blessings to Ireland. It had been his 
father's pride, as well as the stepping-stone to 
his success in life ; it was the highest feather 
in the cap of the distinguished minister, Ge- 
rald's guardian, friend, and official principal. 
His brother took it up and identified himself 
with its spirit, and its workings. None of Ge- 
rald's political friends had ever impugned it. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. US 

To be now abruptly, and perhaps rudely, told 
that it was an " atrocious act," offended, and 
vexed him sorely. After an expressive pause, 
during which he looked hard at the companion 
whose face he could not see — " Good-night, 
Sir," he said, and he fell back, in his corner. 

" A very good-night, Sir, and a pleasant 
nap," returned his polite companion ; " and you 
are quite right, for here go our wheels over 
the smooth road at last." 



114 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER V. 

But Gerald was nothing the better of the 
kind wishes expressed in his regard. He did 
not sleep. The passing outrage upon his poli- 
tical creed at first kept him restless. '* Yes," 
he argued, " I have before me, at last, a speci- 
men of a real Irish declaimer, Milesian, Papist, 
and with a great O to his name. Here is 
one of the overweening nationalists that, by 
decrying every thing English, and blindly wor- 
shipping every thing Irish, keep this country 
from the great assimilation with her superior, 
which can alone ensure her respectability and 
happiness."" And Gerald went on to re-arrange 
his former opinions on the subject, which recent 
events had put out of their places ; and, a 
little in spite to his fellow-traveller, he resolved 
anew to hold firmly by them all. Nay, he 
even wished to torment and overpower him with 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 115 

them, if, indeed, the old gentleman would 
awaken out of his second sleep, and give the 
opportunity by talking politics again. That 
sleep seemed, however, a hopeless one for 
Geralds view. Nothing could break it up; 
neither the horn of the guard, summoning 
ghastly-looking creatures, in successive villages, 
to be ready with fresh horses, or to receive 
their mail-bags from Dublin ; nor the change 
of noise that occurred, when the coach suddenly 
clattered off the smooth road upon the pave- 
ment of a street ; nor yet the change from going 
fast, and being shaken violently, to a stand-still 
at the window of a village post-office, although 
sudden rest and quietness, when one sleeps 
amid the motion and rumble of a carriage is 
as great an interruption to repose, as is a sud- 
den uproar when one sleeps in one's motionless 
and silence curtained bed. 

In fact, hours wore away, and Gerald heard 
nothing from his companion, except a snore, 
that often strove for predominance with the 
horses' hoofs and the coach-wheels. 

During this pause, Gerald's momentary vex- 
ation gradually wore away in recurrences to his 
more immediate and important affairs, and he 



116 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

soon cared little whether or not the declamatory 
Irishman woke up till the end of his journey. 
Just at this moment of indifference to the event, 
it occurred, however, exactly as more conside- 
rable events happen in life when we least expect 
them, and after we have tired ourselves waiting 
for them. Though Gerald could not distinctly 
see his movements in the thrice-dark night, the 
gentleman seemed to shiver a little, as if he had 
got chilled ; and then it farther appeared that 
he snatched off his hat, and replaced it by a 
white night-cap, dimly hinted to Gerald's eye 
amid the surrounding gloom. Having made 
these improvements in personal comforts, he 
shrugged himself into his corner again ; but 
suddenly bent forward with another slight 
shudder, and quite pulled up the hitherto half 
raised glass. 

Gerald thought this unceremonious, and 
indeed so expressed himself. " You will ex- 
cuse me, Sir, but I am hot, and half-suffocated ;" 
and he proceeded to let down the glass to its 
former position. 

" And I am cold, and half-frozen," said the 
assiduous sleeper : u so, what are we to do ?" 

Gerald was conciliated by the tone and words 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 117 

with which his briskness was met, and going 
halves with his own ill-humour and the occa- 
sion, replied, " If your cloak does not keep you 
warm enough, you can have mine, Sir." 

" But not put up the glass ? Well, young 
gentleman, I give way, though, were it daylight, 
you would call me your senior by nearly thrice 
the number of years you have yet lived." 

" And were it daylight, Sir, you would see 
that I am an invalid, lately escaped from very 
trying illness and sufferings, and not worth con- 
tending the point with." 

" Indeed ?" questioned the other, stooping 
over and trying to peer into his features, per- 
haps for an illustration of Gerald's avowal — " I 
am very sorry, Sir, that I should have raised 
the trifling question — in reality 'tis of no import 
tome — lam in sturdy health, thank God! — and 
have been so as long as I can remember, — and as 
indifferent as Marcus Brutus to the ' idle wind' 
— so, never mind me, but take care of yourself, 
by all means. Don't you think you ought to 
use your cloak yourself? The night air may 
hurt you more than the closeness of our atmos- 
phere, if the glass were down, could annoy 
you." 



118 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Peace was now made ; once more they chatted 
freely together; and the elderly gentleman be- 
came amusing, as if he thought " to sleep 
no more,'' and make an effort for his invalid 
and sleepless companion. His tone, to Gerald's 
surprise, changed even into more kindness than 
his admissions of ill health warranted : nay, into 
a l'espectf ulness, or, at least, a considerateness, 
for which he could not at all account. Mean- 
time his respect for his accidental associate also 
increased, keeping pace with the good feeling 
called up by the stranger's attentions and man- 
ner, and he endeavoured to make himself re- 
sponsively amiable. A score of different topics 
were exhausted, before they a second time disa- 
greed, and then (Heaven knows by what by- 
ways they arrived at it) their stumble was over 
the theory that Gerald had so much at heart. 
Thus they immediately approached it. 

" Yes," (Gerald speaks,) " I am, indeed, as 
sorry as you or any Irishman can be, that your 
great question has again failed r 11 alluding to a 
recent vote in the House of Lords : — " for I con- 
sider it the first step to be taken towards a re- 
sult which would ensure the future happiness 
and success of your country, 11 and he stated his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 119 

favourite plan of perfect assimilation between 
the two islands. 

The stranger remained silent some time, and 
then said, — " Well ; and it would be my first 
plan, too, to have us all made English-Irish.'" 

There was a subdued something about the 
expression of the words, totally different from 
the speaker's former mode of delivering himself, 
which struck one of the thousand hidden or for- 
gotten strings of associated thought, and made 
Gerald's mind start. He surely had heard that 
voice saying those words before, but where, or 
when, was a question ; and it engaged him until 
his companion continued, very tranquilly, and 
perhaps somewhat sneeringly, only that the sneer 
was good-naturedly, or else cleverly kept down — 

" That is, Sir, it would be my first plan for 
curing all our evils, — if I saw any chance of its 
success ; if it had not failed already; failed a hun- 
dred times, during the last seven hundred years, 
and upwards; failed with all possible appliances 
to speed it on, such as it cannot now muster ; 
failed with attempts at extermination by fire and 
sword, by chicanery and intrigue, by famine and 
pestilence ; failed with attempts at colonization, 
even by Scotch experimentalists; failed with 



120 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

attempts at proselytism by " drum ecclesiastic," 
by the kidnapping, demoralizing, odious system 
of charter-schools, by burning mass-houses, 
by priest-hunting, and by laws passed amid 
assenting cheers, that might have found an echo 
in Pandemonium ; failed altogether, and at each 
failure more decidedly than at each previous 
one. And, as such is the fact, I give up the 
old plan for a new plan." 

* What is it f* asked Gerald. 

" One by which every other country has got 
on, that ever has got on. One, by which alone 
mighty England has got on, and could have got 
on, though she is not in the habit of recom- 
mending it to our adoption. One, you may 
anticipate, very little like yours — the unsuccess- 
ful experiment of eight hundred years. In fact, 
Sir, since we plainly see that Ireland cannot be 
made English, suppose we just allow her to 
make herself what she is every day becoming in 
spite of us— Irish ?" 

" What she is every day becoming ?"" echoed 
Gerald. 

" Precisely, Sir : at this moment, she is more 
Irish than she was a fortnight after the visit of 
the heartless, hoaxing, eye-poking-out and limb- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 121 

chopping Norman ; to say nothing of any later 
period of her history. The sojourning strangers 
in her soil, those who openly call themselves so, 
are numerically less, opposed to her real people, 
than were, in proportion, the few needy adven- 
turers he left behind him, to the then aborigines 
of the country. And that people now amount 
to numbers fitted to form a great nation ; and 
they are at last united, firm ; talky, if you like ; 
but still firm ; reflective, and full of purpose ; 
united by a riveting of every link of the social 
chain ; united in religion, — or at least their fel- 
low-countrymen who join them in purpose, care 
nothing for the difference, — and above all, Sir, 
they are — United Irish." 

" For a struggle by arms ?" asked Gerald. 
" I do not say that ; but I will say — for be- 
coming a nation, free, and able to work out its 
own resources. This freedom includes, of course, 
escape from the remaining fetters of the statute- 
book, but by no means can be limited to that 
single advantage. And this freedom, I repeat, 
Ireland will arrive at, in spite of us all. In 
spite of herself; she cannot help it. When once a 
country has come to a certain step, she must go 
farther ; there is a moral necessity — a necessity 

VOL. III. G 



122 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sown in the elements of human nature, then 
manifesting itself — that she should. Every 
country that ever gained that certain step, has 
done so ; Ireland has gained it, and she must 
do so." 

" And now, your certain step, 11 said Gerald, 
almost stunned, if nothing else, at the boldness 
of this doctrine. 

" Consciousness of moral power, Sir," answer- 
ed his lecturer ; " consciousness of moral power, 
derived from education amongst the higher and 
middle classes, and by their communings with, 
and their example to, the lower classes ; by in- 
crease in wealth, and by fame in liberal profes- 
sions and pursuits, the result of that education ; 
by successful rivalry in wealth and talent with 
those who would keep her down ; and I must not 
omit, although I still call it up in a moral view, 
by comparing themselves and their country with 
their antagonists, and with other countries, — 
ay, and by comparing numbers with numbers.' 1 

" And if not by a warlike coup-de-main" 
continued Gerald, " Ireland is, I suppose, to 
be made pure Irish by a perfect union (one even 
more perfect than your present one, to ensure 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 123 

the result) of all her people, of every religious 
and political cast ?" 

" It does not seem so. But no matter whe- 
ther it does or not. Such a literal union is not 
at all necessary. The single party who abso- 
lutely cry out against the approaching crisis are 
as unimportant and as undistinguished in moral 
power — that is, in wisdom or talent, in place 
or in fame, as they are numerically ; and they 
will soon grow less so than they are, and, finally, 
become as unnoticed in Ireland, as the few 
hundred thousands of Roman Catholics are in 
England, or their political (though not religious) 
pendants, the Huguenots in France. Some of 
our anti-Irish threaten to leave us, in the very 
first stage of our progress towards nationality. 
If they keep their word, so much the better; 
if they do not, again, I say, no matter. Whe- 
ther they go or stay, their national existence 
will be destroyed ; I do not mean by any spe- 
cific means of annihilation directed to them, but 
as a matter of course, according to the nature 
of things ; necessarily, of itself." 

" Then, Sir, your object is to be won rather 
by disunion than by union ?" 
g 2 



124 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Not by it ; because no one who seeks our 
object wants to work with it, or, indeed, wishes 
for it, — only if the party insists on it, (and they 
will; in fact, it is inevitable,) then our object must 
be won, notwithstanding that partial disunion, 
without caring for it, without thinking of it. Yes, 
indeed, Sir, you are quite right. Ireland must, 
at last, become a nation in the teeth of that dis- 
union, as far as it goes ; and those who made it, 
and who obstinately and foolishly keep it up, 
must abide the consequences. They have made 
their bed ; let them lie down on it. They have 
spurned every opportunity of getting on along 
with the Irish people, when both might have 
gone on well together, to the end of the world ; 
and now the Irish people will get on without 
them ; ay, and worse than that ; shake them 
off, and leave them behind on the course. 1 ' 

" Excuse my ignorance, if I admit that I do 
not know what political opponents you thus 
doom to destruction. 1 ' 

" To political oblivion, rather." 
" Well, any term ; but who are they ?" 
" Descendants of colonists, English and 
Scotch, who, to this day, in addresses presented 
to the throne, call themselves colonists, and de- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 125 

cline the name of Irishmen — these, in the first 
instance ; next, descendants of colonists, who 
openly advocate or encourage anti-Irish mea- 
sures of any kind." 

" Your English-Irish, in fact," commented 
Gerald. 

" Even so, if you like the phrase ; for I cer- 
tainly do mean all persons who would strive to 
make Ireland English ; and, lastly, I mean all 
pretended English-Irish friends of the people, 
who, to carry a county, or a town, or, perhaps, 
with a commendable foresight towards cherish- 
ing their Irish estates, (though I pronounce 
them in no danger,) give a vote, now and then, 
upon the great wrangling question, (as you 
would throw a piece of bread to a hungry mas- 
tiff, or to a critic, merely to pass him by,) and 
afterwards zealously, though perhaps covertly, 
engage in one or all of the absurd schemes for 
provincializing Ireland: such as converting, 
transporting, or unhousing a million at a time of 
her population. Long ago, Sir, such half mea- 
sures, and such half Irishmen, might have suc- 
ceeded in recommending themselves to our ge- 
nerous credulity ; but even the burnt child now 
teaches us a lesson." 



126 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" My good Sir," said Gerald, "you certainly 
have arrived, by this account, at a most sudden 
importance : my only wonder is, that, till within 
the last forty or fifty years, you never thought 
of taking any great steps towards it." 

" Do not wonder, Sir; but, if you please, 
blame yourselves for the phenomenon, and ad- 
mit beforehand a remarkable want of political 
sagacity in making us what we are ; since, as is 
argued, you never contemplated, at the time, 
making us the much more that we are doomed 
to become in spite of you." 

" Pray explain, Sir." 

" Why, Sir, you had us bound hands and 
feet, gagged, interdicted from reading and writ- 
ing, thinking and praying. Had you left us 
so, you would now find us so : terror, ignorance, 
the immorality engendered by a want of free 
approach to the observances and comforts of 
religion, and, above all, the uninterrupted in- 
fluence of perfect slavery and conscious self- 
abasement, must have unfitted us for a struggle 
against you, or fitted us only for one that free 
'blood-letting' (as Bacon called it, when con- 
sulted upon our symptoms, some hundred years 
ago,) would have got down. And since, indeed, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 127 

it has all along been your object to keep us 
from growing into a nation — I merely argue the 
thing logically — such ought to have been your 
part. But, with that object in view, you incon- 
siderately and inconsistently broke half of our 
shackles, ungagged us, allowed us to read and to 
write, to pray and to think ; to make money ; 
to stand before the world in professions ; and 
you deemed, that by leaving the other half of 
the shackles still rattling about us ; by barring 
your Universities against us, no matter how we 
availed ourselves of your permission to become 
learned and wise; by blocking up the bench to 
our successful lawyers ; the army and navy to 
our brave soldiers and sailors, the senate to our 
aristocracy, or to our popular men ; by these 
reservations, Sir, you calculated that still we 
should remain powerless and but half free. Yet 
surely here was a great lack of that political 
foresight which spans the future workings of its 
measure by aids from a philosophical, a common- 
sense calculation of the essential tendencies of 
man, derived from his position. The whole 
slave may be kept stationary, the half freedman 
never. And by half freeing us, you taught us 
to cry out for perfect freedom; nay, should 



128 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

you disregard our voice, you taught us how to 
obtain that first blessing with our own moral 
energies. You ensured it to us. You opened 
our eyes to the past, the present, and the future. 
You put a light into our hands, not indeed to 
dispel the darkness in which we mutely and 
passively crouched, but certainly to make it 
* visible.' You led us out of the valley of 
bondage, if not into the plains of freedom, cer- 
tainly to a height from which, for the first time, 
we saw their teeming promise, each following day 
inhaled their fragrance, and imbibed the inevit- 
able ambition to rush down and mingle with 
their favoured possessors. That, joined to your 
theory that we never must so rush down, was a 
great mistake. As well might you say to the 
hill-stream ' descend not,' to kindled flame f as- 
cend not, ' to the fledged bird ' fly not,' to the 
budding tree ' bloom not, nor yet bear fruit.' 
Streams may be pent up in the low grounds for 
ever ; flame, if never kindled, will never aspire 
to heaven ; that bird, if you clip his wings, and 
keep them clipped, will never fly ; that tree, if 
it bud not, neither will it be fruitful ; but once 
in motion on the hill, once kindled, once fea- 
thered, once budding, the water will find its 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 129 

way down, the fire will find its way up, the 
bird will emerge into his freedom of air, and 
the tree will yield its matured fruit." 

" Perhaps; if not diverted aside, or quenched, 
or caught on the verge of the nest, or torn up 
by the roots,' 1 said Gerald. 

" I grant you ; but Ireland is no longer to 
be so dealt with. Fair promises or half mea- 
sures can no longer ' divert' her ; and the 
hand of physical force alone can impede her 
launch from the nest, or quench her, or tear 
her up ; and this, your only available hand, 
you must not use, for she will not afford you 
the opportunity ; and an unarmed people — one, 
at least, so near you, and before the world's 
eye, you will hardly endeavour to exterminate. 
You live too late for that." 

" I am not one of those who, under any 
circumstances, or at any time — " began Ge- 
rald — his lecturer anxiously interrupted him. 

m I do not believe — suppose you are; in that 
point of view I never saw your character, not- 
withstanding the brisk twist you just now gave to 
my string of metaphors. No, Sir; nor can I even 
believe that one-third of the people of England 
entertain such a hopeful scheme ; are capable 
g5 



130 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of entertaining it : and hence, apart from the 
hazard of the attempt — for there would be a 
hazard, after all ; and apart from the ques- 
tion of other neighbours approvingly looking 
on at your enterprize ; and apart from the 
execration with which the voice of the world 
would greet it — hence is my confidence that 
England plans no exterminating crusade against 
us. How, then, are we to be stunted in our 
growth into a free and flourishing nation ? 
Shackle us, and gag us, and so forth, again ? 
Still more improbable. Impossible. A rebel- 
lion amongst us, from one extremity of the 
land to the other, would not, could not, be 
punished by the re-enactment of one repealed 
penal statute. You did not, durst not, so take 
vengeance for the wild insurrection of ninety- 
eight ; and what was out of the question thirty 
years ago, is now more remotely out of the 
question. You durst not, for many of the 
very reasons which stand against the fire and 
sword policy ; and for more than those. And 
here, I ask again, how will you stop us? 
Bundling up your assimilation theory, and 
your conversation theory, and your depopula- 
ting theory, like so much lumber; throwing 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 131 

them, in the name of good sense, quite over- 
board ; and getting things before us as they 
really have been, and therefore are, and must 
be — how — I repeat my words, over and over, 
for there are no better — How WILL you 
stop us ?" 

" Oh, Sir,"" replied Gerald, " I make allow- 
ances for the zeal with which, as an Irishman 
and a Catholic, you state all this matter ; but to 
many of your assumptions, whence flow your 
conclusions, I must, in the first instance, object. 
The aggregate national influence of all the 
descendants of English and Scotch in Ireland, 
is not so unimportant as you would represent 
it: in property and intelligence they outweigh 
the native people ; and even in numbers they 
are formidable. You also suppose for your 
friends superior talent and fame ; pardon me, 
if I have always been led to consider that in 
such instances, as well, indeed, as in all others 
which confer respectability, the English-Irish 
portion of your whole population had the ad- 
vantage.' 1 

" You make more than one mistake, Sir, 
which I crave your permission distinctly to 
point out," resumed the gentleman. 



132 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" When I spoke of an anti-Irish party here, 
who were insignificant, and to be treated accord- 
ingly, I did not mean the majority of the de- 
scendants of English and Scotch, now living in 
Ireland; I could not mean so, for that majority, 
though not pure Irish in blood, are so in feeling 
and in national identity with the people. After 
you have been some time amongst us, Sir, 
(which I hope may be the case,) you will meet 
many Protestant-Irish gentlemen as zealous as 
I am to see Ireland free and national, although 
Catholic. You will find Protestant wealth, and 
property, and title, and education, animated by 
this zeal, and swelling the common cry for free- 
dom and a country. Of course, we deduct so 
much of Protestant influence and respectability 
from your English-Irish, or anti-Irish list, and 
add it to our mere-Irish one. Then as to 
the question of the comparative intellect of 
the Catholic people and their Protestant abet- 
tors on the one hand, and of the headstrong 
party alluded to on the other, look into our 
literature, Sir, attend a Catholic debate in Par- 
liament, attend our Four-Courts in Dublin, and 
I leave you to your own conclusions. Taking 
into account how lately Catholic talent has been 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 138 

permitted to force itself into fame, and how un- 
interruptedly this handful of their sworn foes 
have enjoyed all the faculties for arriving at men- 
tal perfection, I am, indeed, surprised to find dis- 
crepancy upon the side where it appears so evi- 
dent. But we should, however, consider, that 
fifty years of pushing on, freshened by novel 
excitement, and inspired by noble objects, is 
worth centuries of narrow-minded resistance, 
which implies standing still, and perhaps more 
than that — perhaps occasionally falling back ; 
and thus we might account for the wonder ; and 
hence, probably, tyrants, or national monopo- 
lists, are always less enlightened than the people 
whom they would crush, or exclude from privi- 
leges common to all." 

" Well, Sir," said Gerald, " admitting your 
last statements, I acknowledge myself appealed 
to for a re-consideration of some former opinions 
on this subject ; you will permit me to appre- 
hend, however, that your religious zeal may 
still unconsciously induce you to exaggerate the 
advantages of your present position. 1 ' 

" I have helped you to correct two mistakes, 
Sir, built upon my conversation with you ; I 
will help you to correct a third. Since the first 



134 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

dawn of the Reformation — I must conclude ra- 
pidly, for we approach the turn off the high- 
road, at which, you say, we are to part — since 
the first dawn of the Reformation, my family 
have been Church of England Protestants — I, 
my wife and children, (a goodly flock, I promise 
you,) firmly adhere to the same creed ; and I 
beg to add — still more abruptly — for here the 
coach stops, and you get down — that for two 
hundred years, my predecessors held, here- 
abouts, what I now hold, an independence, 
though not a princely one, of Irish acres, upon 
which, should your views and leisure permit, I 
can assure you an Irish welcome, whenever you 

do me the honour to inquire for that name " 

and the gentleman, stooping across, touched 
Gerald's fingers with what he felt to be a card, 
which, making due acknowledgements for it, 
my hero transferred, in the dark, into his 
pocket. 

" And certainly, Sir," he added ; " the very 
last avowal you have made supplies the most 
cogent hint I could receive, as to the propriety 
of looking closer at all your opinions and 
statements ; it is a powerful comment upon 
them." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 135 

" I am glad you think so ; glad that any 
thing is likely to induce a stranger, newly ar- 
rived from England, to study us here, just as 
he finds us," said the gentleman. 

The coach-door was pulled open, and the 
guard appeared with a lantern in his hand, to 
say that Gerald's luggage was put down on the 
road, waiting for him. 

" Good-bye, then, Sir," said Gerald ; " and if 
I tarry in your neighbourhood, I shall scarce 
forget your kind intimation." 

" Nor I, should you appear, the spirit in 
which it is given — good-bye, young gentleman ;" 
and he once more made himself up in his corner, 
like a man that still had to travel many miles 
farther. Just then the guard thrust his lan- 
tern into the coach, to enable Gerald to arrange 
his cloak on his arm, and the dull light, strik- 
ing obliquely upon the stranger's face, momen- 
tarily revealed certain strong-marked, smiling 
features, which Gerald vowed to himself he had 
before seen, though he only presumed where. But 
ere he could farther debate the point, the guard 
withdrawing his lantern, urged him to descend, 
and Gerald soon found himself standing alone 
with his portmanteau at the closed door of a 



136 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

cabin, which formed the angle of the by-road 
leading to Lower-Court ; his departed guardian 
of the night having advised him to deposit his 
luggage in the lowly abode, till he could send 
for it in the daylight. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 137 



CHAPTER VI. 

" This is a pretty situation for me," said 
Gerald, standing inactive at the cabin-door. 
The proceedings of the guard had been so ra- 
pid and arbitrary, that he had not had time nor 
presence of mind to suggest any thing for him- 
self, nor yet to make some necessary inquiries. 
" Of itself, a very capital situation ; but taken 
with the chance of my again becoming an in- 
mate of a Rockite cabin, and ' the great Cap- 
tain,' as every body says, so active in this 
neighbourhood, it grows still more interest- 
ing. Here I cannot remain, however, in the 
dense cold of the morning ; and forward I must 
not march till there is light to see my way :" 
so, putting his thoughts into acts, he knocked 
at the frail and chinky door. 

Without hearing any stir inside, a woman's 
voice reached him, in Irish ; it would seem 



138 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

that she spoke from her couch. Gerald, winc- 
ing at the abhorred language, which he had 
once thought Welsh, slowly explained, in hopes 
that his deliberate pronunciation might be un- 
derstood. He was a traveller, he said, and a 
stranger, quite unacquainted with the country, 
and he had to walk up the by-road after day- 
break, and till then, would thank her for per- 
mission to sit down, and stow his portmanteau 
in a corner. 

" By all manes, Sir, a-voorneen,"" was the 
second answer; and then, while it might be 
supposed that the woman of the house got 
up and dressed herself, an infant, which per- 
haps, had been sleeping with her, began to 
scream violently. The mother, in her most 
soothing tones, tried to quiet it, but without 
effect; and, amid its incessant expostulation, 
the creaking door opened, and Gerald entered 
the cabin. 

Here, the darkness did not prove absolutely 
impenetrable. A girl of about five years old 
knelt, resting on the palms of her hands, at the 
hearth, and by her puny yet well-trained puffs, 
had already spread the latent spark of a sod of 
turf, intentionally left over-night in the ashes, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 139 

to be ready for morning. Two younger chil- 
dren sat, half-dressed, by the embers, anxiously 
awaiting the promised flame ; and still the vo- 
ciferous infant, careless of all things but the 
absence of its mother, peremptorily called for 
exclusive attention from a corner. 

The woman officiously took Gerald's portman- 
teau, and placed it aside. Next, she rubbed a 
three-legged stool, and adjusting it at the 
hearth, invited him to sit. Her accent was 
kind, and, Gerald thought, peculiarly plaintive; 
it was also tolerably good, that is in its imita- 
tion of an English one ; and her language was 
proper and decent. Her next proceeding con- 
sisted in sending the little human bellows to 
try and " pacify " her infant brother or sister 
on the straw coucli in the corner, while the 
mother, kneeling at the embers, turned herself 
into a human bellows of greater power, and 
much more promising effect. 

In a short time, indeed, the well-practised 
animal-machine produced a good blaze amongst 
the turf. By the light thus afforded, Gerald 
perceived that he sat in the most wretched and 
worst-appointed Irish cabin that had yet come 
under his observation. The last rain must 



140 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

have found ready way through the thatched 
roof, for the clay floor was puddled, and the 
puddle rested in little holes and cavities. He 
turned his glance to the woman who still per- 
formed bellows at the hearth. Her side-face, 
glaring in the blaze, fixed his attention. It 
was handsome and young — not more than three- 
and-twenty. 

" Here is a good fire now," said Gerald ; 
" do not trouble yourself any more. 1 ' 

" Thankee, Sir," she said, standing up. 

" And are all these fine little things yours ?" 
pursued Gerald. 

" Yes, Sir, praise be to God." 

" You have been a very young wife, then." 

" Musha, very, Sir ; but all 's for the best." 

f* You have not lost their father, I hope ?" 

" No, Sir, not out and out, entirely, the 
Lord be praised, Sir." 

Gerald's next question included more than 
interest for the poor family. In fact, the cir- 
cumstance of finding this cabin without a male 
inmate, as he had found a former one, pressed 
upon his private feelings. 

" And where is he ?" asked Gerald. 

" Anan, Sir?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 141 

The question was more carelessly repeated. 
" The poor father o' them, Sir ?" Evidently 
she was taken off her guard. A third time 
Gerald made his inquiry. 

" Avoch, Sir, he 's only gone a little way, for 
the night, on a matter o' business, to try an' 
bring home their breakfast, maybe; I expect 
him after the daybreak." 

" No doubt you do," thought Gerald. 
" And sure that's nigh-hand," she continued, 
looking out at the door. 

" Then it announces my hour for leaving 
you ; at least, I cannot stay much longer : shall 
I be able to get breakfast at the village on the 
by-road ?" 

The young woman assured him accommoda- 
tion there fit for the King of England ; but 
she offered no refreshments herself, not even a 
potatoe. " She has it not to offer," concluded 
Gerald, and he was right. 

Again he proposed a question : " Is Captain 
Rock near us at present ?" 

She started and grew pale, stammering out — 
" Who, Sir ? Captain who, for God's sake ?" 

As in a former case, Gerald repeated his 
words. 



142 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Myself does not know who you mean, Sir, 
a-voorneen ; sure, it 's little poor cratures like us 
ever knows or hears of captains, or curnels, or 
generals, or great people of the kind." 

It was a badly-acted equivocation. Gerald 
saw that, for some reasons best known to her- 
self, she dreaded admitting to him all know- 
ledge of a personage, with whom, nevertheless, 
she was not unacquainted. He did not, how- 
ever, embarrass his hostess any farther on the 
subject, but in his own mind decided that the 
sooner the broad daylight would permit him 
to leave the cabin, the better for all parties 
concerned. 

All this time the infant had been screaming, 
and its mother now ran to the straw-bed, 
lifted it up, sat on a second stool, and laying 
it on her^lap, drew to her a wheel, and began 
to spin; her ingenuity divided between her 
handicraft work and her endeavours to soothe 
and please her cross child. Both occupations 
ended in nothing. Her ill-conditioned off- 
spring would not abate a key or a note of its in- 
dignant remonstrance, although, speaking flu- 
ently to its unconscious ears, she tried it with 
coaxing, kissing, threats, promises, and at last, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 143 

notwithstanding that she was a meek creature, 
with a whipping : and the bad flax, which she 
would fain spin into fine thread, as if in league 
with the last pledge of her wedded love, kept 
snapping every moment. 

And yet, by a renewed conversation with his 
fair and perplexed young hostess, Gerald fovind 
that neither the cross child, nor the frail flax, nor 
any thing else in the world, could really put her 
out of humour. She and her husband were very 
poor, she admitted, and for some time had been 
so ; " but all was for the best, under God." Now 
and then she sold winter apples, and a bit of 
soap, and a few " haiperths" of tape and thread, 
and three or four tobacco-pipes. Although the 
flax was bad, she could get twopence a-day for 
spinning it, from six to six ; she should be a 
rich woman if her husband could find work, or 
if she could possibly make as much as would 
lay in one good heap of turf, or if she had half 
an acre of ground, at the value ; but, even as it 
happened, " every thing was for the best." 

" Altogether," ruminated Gerald, " I have 
never before imagined a model of poverty, meek- 
ness, contentment, and industry, united in one 
person." 



144 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

** And yet, 1 ' addressing her, " you have been 
better off, I dare say ?" 

" Musha, yes, Sir," — she dropped her head, 
and her voice changed, — " only we didn't meet 
with the best of friends ; but I blame nobody ; 
for if I did, I ought to blame them that the 
likes o' me and Mickle has no right to blame, 
at the first setting out ; every thing happens ac- 
cording to God's will, and is for the best." 
" What work can your husband do I* 
" Field-work now, Sir ; that is, he '11 soon be 
able for it, when he 's quite over the misfortune 
that got him discharged from his last calling, 
and, by the same token, that sent us out of a 
snug cabin into this poor one ; our third remove 
in the world, Sir, and worse than the other 
two." 

" What misfortune do you mean ?" 
" His thigh, Sir ; he broke it in bits." 
" And from what calling did this accident 
get him discharged ?" 

" Faix, Sir, from one that was better than 
the field-work will ever turn out for us, though 
it kept the poor boy a great deal away from 
me. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 145 

" He was a driver of a public coach ?" inter- 
rupted Gerald. 

" Musha, and he was so, Sir,'' answered the 
woman, stopping her wheel, and looking with 
great interest at him. 

" And his name, Farrell ?" continued Ge- 
rald. 

"Blessed saints!" ejaculated the young 
woman, starting up — " and so, it 's you, Sir, 
whoever you are, come back to see us again, as 
you said you would to Mickle, that day, on 
the road ? It 's you that talked kind to him, and 
gave him good advice, and the twenty goold 
guineas, and he lying on his back in the strange 
cabin? — the guineas that sent the poor boy home 
to us, and helped us to nurse him, many a long 
day, and paid all our rent, and every thing else 
that we could never pay, only for them, until a 
week ago, when they run out to the last shil- 
ling ? It 's yourself, Sir, isn't it ?" 

" I am certainly the person," said Gerald, 
inclined to smile at the last question, u who had 
the pleasure of doing your husband a trifling 
service upon the day you allude to." 

" Trifling, Sir ? it saved all our lives ! — May 
the Father o' mercies, that put it into your 

VOL. III. H 



146 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

heart that day, reward you for it !" — she knelt 
down, her vehemence at last arresting the cries 
of the infant on her left-arm — " May the blessing 
of his young wife and the young mother of his 
four darlings, be in your road for ever ! — och, 
amen, amen, I pray the good God." 

Gerald was not now disposed to smile ; he 
rather felt his eyes infected with the tears that 
streamed copiously from hers. At the same 
time he made the involuntary reflection, that 
in all this there was unalloyed nature and 
feeling, such as he had never before witness- 
ed. " They are a fresher people than the 
French or the English, in every way," he con- 
tinued. 

" But there was your own arum, Sir, a-vour- 
neen ; your own arum ! how is it ?" asked 
Moya Farrell, standing up. Gerald assured her, 
quite well. She pressed her question, warning 
him to answer her in downright truth and since- 
rity. He renewed his assurances. 

"Oh, then, the Lord be praised! — ay, 
though it's sooner come round than Mickle's 
itself, the thigh I mane. — Was there ever any 
thing to equal it ! To have you standing before 
me, Sir ! and my poor boy not in the place ! 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 147 

But you '11 stop awhile, won't you, Sir, a-vour- 
neen, to let Mickle see your face ? och ! and he 'd 
rather look at it, this morning, than at the sun's, 
if it was summer ! and you '11 never think that 
it 's in hopes of gaining by it, I mane, Sir, — 
or—" 

" Indeed," interrupted Gerald, " I never 
will think any such thing of him or of you ; I 
cannot await his return, however ; 'tis now light 
enough for my walk to the village, and I must 
leave you, with thanks for your accommodation; 
but very probably you will hear of me again ; 
meantime, pray take care of my portmanteau. 
Now, good-bye ; — stay ; I must kiss that chub- 
by fellow that keeps looking at us so stedfastly." 

While making his adieus to the wondering 
boy, Gerald unostentatiously put into his hand 
an earnest of his breakfast at least ; the mother 
did not notice the proceeding. Then, stepping 
over her sad threshold, amid all her regrets and 
lamentations, and her promises that the port- 
manteau should be as safe " as a chalice on the 
altar," and her earnest prayers for " luck and 
grace in his road," Gerald resolutely proceeded 
on his pedestrian journey. 

In fact, he had no wish to meet Mr. Mickle 
H 2 



148 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Farrell a second time, particularly under the 
present circumstances. At their last parting, 
Gerald had been led to conclude that, notwith- 
standing his specious statements, the ex-coachee 
was an active, though concealed Rockite : and 
his wife^ embarrassment when questioned, a 
few moments before, as to his absence from 
home, and her evident alarm, and bungled 
equivocation at another question, convinced Ge- 
rald that, notwithstanding the good advice 
admitted by Michael to Moya, and his yet 
lame thigh, to boot, the discontented young 
man had spent the very last night in Rockite 
conclave, at least. Gerald therefore would 
avoid personal contact with his former fellow- 
sufferer, however strong and sincere Michael 
Farrell's gratitude might prove. He pitied from 
his heart the early sufferings of the young 
couple, and again, and more than ever, accused 
himself of having, in a great degree, caused 
them : the character, the person, (though in no 
unlawful way,) and the manner of Moya, fur- 
ther interested him ; and he certainly would see 
more into their condition, and gain authentic in- 
formation of their past life, after his arrival at 
Lower- Court : but for the present Gerald walk- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 149 

ed as fast as he could away from their humble 
residence. 

He was doomed, however, to meet Michael 
Farrel before his arrival at Lower-Court, as 
well as a good many other people, some of 
whom he could not have possibly expected to 
meet. 

The by-road did not turn out as well in the 
reality as it had promised on the map, being 
deeply indented with ruts, strewn with large 
stones, and ankle deep almost at every step. 
The Irish mile and a half, which were to deliver 
Gerald up to comforts of the village half-way 
on to his sister's residence, seemed, under all the 
circumstances, as long as four English miles ; 
and when tired, and angry with Hibernian road- 
bills, and land measurement, he at last gained his 
first proposed halting-place, nothing helped to 
recompense Gerald for his unusual drudgery. 
The village, supposed so respectable, was point- 
ed out to him by a peasant, partly lying in a 
hollow, at the foot of a steep hill, from which 
Gerald looked down upon it, partly stretching 
up an opposite eminence, the whole composed 
of thatched cabins. Separated from it, stood 
a single slated house, which our traveller 



150 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

supposed and hoped might be the head inn, but 
the man by his side told him that it was only a 
new school-house, " built (to use his language) 
by the Orangemen and the biblicles, to coax 
the little childer of the place from their fathers 
and mothers, and try to make black Protestans 
of them." 

Gerald slowly descended to the group of 
cabins. Of an old woman, who was drying flax- 
seed before her door, he asked where he could 
find an inn. 

"An inn, Sir?" she said, as if the term 
proved too high-sounding for her ; then check- 
ing herself, for the honour of her village, she 
directed Gerald to a near cabin, upon the wall 
of which was a sign-board, having BrienvBoru 
(a great favourite with publicans of the neigh- 
bourhood, as he had been of their province) 
painted thereon in all the impressiveness of 
Prussian-blue armour, regal, red lead mantle, 
sceptre in hand, crown on head, and long white 
beard flowing to his breast. 

But Gerald could get nothing under the aus- 
pices of the conqueror of theDanes. The landlady 
had no bread; and as her proposed guest would 
not consent to substitute potatoes for breakfast, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 151 

she unwillingly forwarded him to " the house 
with the two chimblies,' 1 at the opposite side of the 
village, where Mrs. Bridget Hogan could " make 
off a loaf for him, and every thing else." 

Smiling, half-bitterly, however, at Moya 
FarrelPs guarantee, that his accommodations in 
this village would prove " fit for the King of 
England," Gerald proceeded to Mrs. Bridget 
Hogan. Meantime, he did not quite dislike his 
novel situation. Unknown, unsuspected, and 
without fear of contact with dangerous charac- 
ters, he rather congratulated himself upon the 
coming opportunity of studying real Irish 
persons and things, for the first time in his life, 
closely and peaceably. He determined to be 
very observant ; nay, he would use a pocket 
note-book and a pencil upon the spot, when- 
ever circumstances might require particular 
attention. And this proved an unwise resolve 
for him. 

Arrived at Mrs. Bridget Hogan's, Gerald 
certainly found that she could supply him with 
bread ; ay, and with tea, also, and fresh eggs, 
and new butter, and " the best o' crame :" and 
so, placing a seat for him in the middle of the 
apartment, she set about keeping her pleasant 



152 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

promises. Gerald unbent from his usual man- 
ner, and tried to be very civil in what he hoped 
might be an Irish way ; and this, too, was the 
result of a plan, cleverly suggested by his pru- 
dence to meet his situation ; and, so far, it did 
him good, for his landlady seemed very amiable 
and obliging. 

Looking around him, he felt desirous of at 
once carrying into effect the resolution we have 
just seen him form ; and accordingly, his note- 
book was placed on his knee, and his pencil 
pared. He wished to get a close, graphic 
description of the apartment in which he was. 
At his first glance forward, however, something 
occurred to flutter him in his purpose. A grey- 
headed man now appeared sitting in the gloom 
of the capacious chimney-recess, who, although 
he smiled continually, and looked very good- 
humoured, yet eyed Gerald keenly ; and not 
only were his glances disagreeable to the ama- 
teur, but Gerald inwardly started, as he asked 
himself, " Am I under some nervous delu- 
sion ? or is there a duplicate face of every face 
in the world ? and have I met and forgotten 
some one face, that is now reproduced in my 
mind, and confounded with that of the watchful 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 153 

old fellow, yonder ? or, worse than all, have I, 
as a kind of animal instinct on my nerves would 
hint — have I really encountered those features 
before now, upon some occasion of danger, 
when they wore a very different expression ?" 
Gerald argued thus, however, without showing 
any discomposure. After a moment's pause, 
too, he proceeded in his note-taking, passing his 
eyes over those of the elderly peasant with a 
careless confidence; and it gradually seemed 
that Gerald was mistaken in conjuring up a 
bugbear out of his silent observer. 

A second time, however, he was interrupted, 
though more agreeably, in his task. Nance, 
the landlady's daughter, came in from the 
fields, where she had been working, and took a 
seat near the man on the "hob." The girl 
had a pair of sparkling black eyes and pretty 
weather-tanned features, and the brown hair 
that burst from under her ungraceful cap was 
curling and glossy. Gerald perceived that 
she looked at him with intense wonder. He 
returned her regards perhaps oftener than 
was necessary for the business he had in 
hand, and by the silent converse of eyes, so 
popular between men and women all over 
h 5 



154 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the world, they soon became friends. In fact, 
after about his sixth glance, Gerald's lip 
teemed with a smile, and Nance's eyes were 
ready to flash into the first outbreak of coquet- 
ish laughter. Indeed, for modesty's sake, she 
was obliged to turn away her head. 

" Yes," said Gerald, nodding playfully at 
her, as he again looked up, " you are right ; 
I am drawing your picture — many a less hand- 
some one has been taken — and I will thank 
you just to keep looking at me, steadily, and 
sit still, without laughing." A useless ad- 
vice, as he knew it would prove ; for the girl 
now broke into hearty laughter, at the same 
time blushing till she grew really handsome. 

By this little subterfuge Gerald considered 
himself enabled to go on with his still-life 
sketch, and accordingly wrote as follows : — 

" I am in a mud-floor cabin, but one of 
larger dimensions than is generally met with in 
this country. I see into two inner-rooms, 
furnished with rude bedsteads, covered with 
patch-work quilts. Another door, closed, at 
the end wall, near the fire-place, seems to lead 
into a third bed-chamber. There is a wheel- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 155 

barrow turned up against the wall behind the 
entrance-door ; two wicker-work hampers, used 
for carrying turf from the bogs (as Nance in- 
forms me), hang near it ; and at hand is the 
pig's trough, her mess ready mixed in it — 
(while I write, the pig comes in, quite conse- 
quentially, and munches her food with grunting 
satisfaction ;) farther on, I see a heap of bog- 
wood (Nance again) inclosed by a ridge of 
turf; the remains of an old buskin dangles on 
the wall near the chimney, as a receptacle for 
odds and ends ; and over it is thrown a linen 
cloth, ragged at the edges, used for hands, 
pots, glasses, tea-cups, or any thing that may 
require such nicety. The chimney extends the 
breadth of the gable wall, only excepting the 
space occupied by the third door, before men- 
tioned : and from the iron crook suspended in 
its cavity, hangs the huge black kettle that 
simmers over the turf blaze to make my tea. 
And here come in my figures, — Nance, and that 
smiling old fellow,— confound him ! she look- 
ing like a hope of something I am to get, 
(I don't say from her,) and he like a remem- 
brancer of something painful that has happened 
to me. 



156 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Hitherto I have been facing the open door 
of the cabin. Now I turn round on my wooden- 
seated chair. Upon a kind of wicker dish, 
also used as a strainer, and called skeeck, 
(Nance still, of course,) appears the overplus 
of potatoes allowed for madam pig's breakfast, 
put by with housewifely care for her dinner. 
Pots, of graduated sizes, black as turf-smoke 
can make them, succeed; some hanging, some 
piled against the wall : next, a broken bellows ; 
and next a wooden implement, shaped like an 
artillery-man's spunging-rod, used for pound- 
ing potatoes and herbs into a human mess 
called — what, Nance ? — ' Caulcannon, Sir j 1 and 
the pounder itself ? — ' Musha, Sir, don't be 
joking us; thoorgeen, Sir;' (and with exquisite 
coquetry, Nature's well-taught child drops her 
chin on her breast, giggling, and shooting off 
at me an up-glance of destructive efficacy : I 
still pretend that my questions, and my studi- 
ous looks around, are only breaks in my occu- 
pation of taking her picture.) Midway down 
the side wall, are two sets of shelves, having 
drawers beneath, one set larger than the other ; 
and they display four cups and saucers, of 
different sizes and patterns; delft bowls and 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 157 

basins ; a few plates of the same material, still 
ill-matched ; three little stone bottles, once 
filled with " Warren's jet blacking," and still 
wearing his label ; a metal egg-cup, a — (here 
Nance stole round, at first without my notice, 
and gave a shy look over my shoulder to see 
what I was really about ; but, no matter how, I 
paid her for her peeping ; and now she retires 
again to her hob, laughing merrily at the joke. 
Query ? does not my assumption of Irish good- 
humour sit prodigiously easy upon me ? and, 
query again, how do I like it ?) — To conclude 
my sketch ; under the drawers of the larger 
set of shelves is a deal-table with cross legs, 
holding brown crockery-ware, and wooden 
dishes ; and under it, again, is a great com- 
mander-in-chief of all the pots of the establish- 
ment. From all which it is evident that I sit 
in an Irish cabin of no ordinary degree, and 
that Mrs. Bridget Hogan, so denominated, very 
respectfully, by her humble competitor of the 
Brian Boru, is a person of some consequence. 

" While she bustles about me, preparing my 
breakfast, I must note her proceedings; and 
also sketch herself, as well as her house — and 
that first of all. 



158 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" She wears a faded-green stuff gown, that 
has no forepart; a blue woollen-cloth petti- 
coat ; a blue apron, dotted with white spots, 
tied so determinedly round her plump form, 
just at the hips, that similar shapes confront 
each other ; her black stockings are darned 
with white worsted, and her feet thrust into 
very old slippers ; her linen cap, secured tight- 
ly under her round chin, surrounds a clever- 
looking, fresh-coloured, and jolly face, whence 
that of my friend Nance inherits its black eyes, 
and its roguish character. And Mrs. Bridget 
Hogan, according to her grizzled locks, may 
be near fifty ; but there is no wrinkle to denote 
such an age. 

" Now she throws the tea-leaves, or what- 
ever leaves they may be, out of the block-tin 
teapot, opposite the door : by their tenacity to 
the interior of the vessel, I judge they have 
been a considerable time in it ; and it seems 
difficult to eject them. And now she fetches 
muddy water from (as she says) the well, and 
proceeds to wash a cup and saucer in one of 
the black pots. — Mem. Not half as hungry as 
I was one hour ago. — Her authoritative ac- 
cents call Nance into requisition ; I pause a 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 159 

moment ; Nance retires into one of the bed- 
rooms; I hear her sweeping the clay-floor 
with a worn-out, grating broom ; she re-ap- 
pears, and I am summoned to my breakfast. 

" With closed door, I resume at my break- 
fast-table, certainly as anxious to describe the 
appointments of the meal as to eat it. I have 
salt in a wine-glass without a pedestal; the 
metal egg-cup is placed at my hand, together 
with a metal spoon of all-work ; my tea-cup 
boasts red flowers running round it, and rests 
in a saucer exhibiting three blue dogs pursuing 
a blue hare. As much exceedingly brown 
sugar as my landlady judged might just sweet- 
en two cups of tea, appears on another saucer ; 
and on another still, half of a small print of 
butter, with evidence that Mrs. Bridget Hogan 
had severed it from its brother-half with her 
fingers, unwilling to trust me with the whole. 
M The best o' crame" is served in a little 
copper-coloured jug — I hope it keeps Mrs. 
Bridget's promise, but I won't look into it; 
for the really fresh eggs that, to my surprise, 
lie on a really nice table-cloth, and the loaf of 
brown bread, that must be available in its 



160 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

heart, at least, (and I will cut boldly,) half 
tempt me to forego some of my misgivings in 
the kitchen, and to recollect, that, after an in- 
different breakfast and a worse dinner, yester- 
day, I have tasted no food for the last fourteen 
hours — so — " 

" The eggs quite a treat — the heart of the 
brown loaf sincere ; but my tea — atrocious. 
All Mrs. Bridget's distillation has not taken 
away the smack of the abominable water that 
was the basis of the fluid. The sugar does 
not help to purify it ; and, both these conside- 
rations apart, I cannot, as the black lethean- 
looking stream issues from the tea-pot, help 
calling to mind the convictions that some time 
ago took place against certain concealed mur- 
derers, who vended deadly nightshade for 
congo-tea. 

" So, I have done breakfast, resting on the 
eggs and brown bread ; and now take a glance 
round the bed-room which has served me for a 
parlour. It is whitewashed, or pretends to be, 
rather; for the wash seems to have been laid 
on with a bundle of rods, so streaky and par- 
tial is its effect. Besides being a sleeping- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 161 

apartment, the chamber appears selected to 
hold the principal treasure of the house. At 
one end, resting on the floor, is a great deal 
chest (I have seen its like before); upon 
it is piled another of less dimensions ; upon 
that a trunk; and still upon that, a curious 
black box, or perhaps casket, which, like 
Hudibras's dagger, is little for its age ; over- 
head—" 

But here Gerald was interrupted in his note- 
taking, by a conversation in the outer-room, 
which first aroused only his curiosity, but 
finally impressed him with more serious feelings. 



162 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Gerald has himself informed us, that he 
left behind him, in the kitchen, Mrs. Bridget 
Hogan, her daughter Nance, and an elderly 
peasant, whose connexion with the family he did 
not know. They, and some new comers, were 
the speakers in the ensuing conversations. 

" Come here, Larry !" bawled the landlady, 
at the entrance-door, to some one passing by : 
" What 'i the new hindhrance between you and 
that Bignel V 

" Why," answered Larry, in a smart, sharp 
tone, that Gerald judged to proceed from a 
hardy fellow of forty, who might do a rash 
thing without considering the consequences, — 
" Why, because I won't send the childer to 
his school, he wants to take the bit of ground 
from me, though he let it to me for two 
years." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 163 

" Did you make the bargain before wit- 
nesses ?" asked Mrs. Bridget Hogan. 

" Ay, did I ; before Shaun Goff and Peery 
Mallay." 

" Shaun Goff you may count all as one as a 
dead witness, by rason he's in foreign parts." 

" That 's a truth," said the staggered Larry. 

" But Mallay will come to the fore for you ; 
won't he, Larry ?" 

" By gonnies ! Peery wasn't, as I may say, in 
a manner, entirely present at the bargain ; but 
when he was working for Bignel, some time 
after, says he to him, * Mr. Bignel,' says he, 
' for how long a time did you let the ground to 
Larry O'Dea V — * For two years,' says Bignel 
to him." 

'* At any how, Larry, I 'd see the divvle to 
fetch him, afore I 'd give him a sod of it." 

" After digging and breaking my heart in it, 
late and early, and making fresh fences," con- 
curred Larry, " and now he wants to give the 
good of all I done, for a few pounds more a 
year, to some stranger — maybe, one from his 
own half-starved country; for I'm sure that's 
what he 's about, only he puts it all on the 
childer not going to be made Scotch Protes- 



164 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tans of, just as he turned out the poor Farrells 
for the sake o' the crony of his that 's on his way 
to us at last, as I hear." 

" We all know that," interrupted the land- 
lady, *A and expected, beyant, to-day, or in the 
evening; only he has friends may ax him to 
stop a bit on the road, Larry — " sinking her 
voice. 

" And there 's a good look-out for him, Mis- 
tress Hogan ?" demanded Larry. 

" Never fear that." 

" And the May-Boy among 'em ?" 

" Hushth !" whispered the landlady; and 
Gerald could imagine her pointing at his door. 

" But your own May-Boy, ould Dinny ?" 

" Come in, Larry ; here I am," answered a 
hoarse voice that Gerald traced to the hob. 

" And ar'n't you soon for a walk ?" asked 
Larry, his tones now sounding louder, as he 
had entered the kitchen. 

" Maybe so, avich ; only first I wish we could 
hear tidings of that gossip of ours, you spoke 
of?" 

" Poor lame Mickle, the poor boy ?" 

" No one else." 

" But is'n't he in it ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, 165 

" He says, no ; he came to see us, last night, 
at a friend's place, but it was only to prache 
a sarmon to us against our evil ways ; and then 
he left us, to go a start farther, on Jim Mul- 
laly's car, — for he's not able to use * shank's 
mare yet, — and make a noration to a few more 
friends, a little way off." 

" That 's quare ; what 's come over him ?" 

" The priest, I'm thinking; or as good a 
hand," sneered the old fellow ; and Gerald felt 
complimented upon the ultimate success of his 
efforts to reclaim Michael Farrell, which now ap- 
peared evident in the admitted reluctance of the 
young man to countenance whatever scheme of 
fierce revenge was in progress. 

" Sure," continued Larry, " if the Scotchman 
that 's to the fore, and the other that 's coming 
among us, happens to get a visit from some dis- 
tant relations of theirs, this night, or any other 
night, it will be as much or more on Mickle's 
account, than on any other of our own ; though 
there's not one of us but has a little compliment 
to pay at his dour. Bignel came into the field, 
a while agone, while I was burning the weeds, 
and he kicked the fire. 1 ' 

* His own legs. 



166 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I M kick his skull about the ground, the 
rascal P" said the old sinner. 

"An' I gave him one peg (blow), at any 
rate." 

" Musha, did you, Larry ? it was a pity you 
didn't give him plenty when you went about it, 1 ' 
said Mrs. Bridget Hogan. 

Larry went on in a triumphant tone. 

" When he kicked the fire, I took one o 1 the 
sods, and I put it down at his feet. * And will 
you kick that again, Misther Bignel ?' says I ; 
he did give it another kick, and so I gave him 
one clipe under the ear, in the right place." 

" Was it with your fist you done it ?" asked 
the silver-headed sire. 

" Yes ; but I 'm sorry I didn't split his head 
with the shovel." 

" Oh, if you had a gun then, Larry !" said 
Gerald's gentle Nance. 

" I was over talking to Bignefs wife, after 
you gave him the blow, Larry, just to make an 
excuse for laming if the bidder for Farrell's 
farum is expected in the course o' the day, and 
she tould me Bignel went to swear again you." 

" Arra! did she?" asked Larry, in a terrified 
tone. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 167 

" She did ; and the Peelers will soon be look- 
ing for you." 

M Why, then, by gonnies ! if they send me to 
gaol, Bignel will come and saze the ground." 

" Don't wait for em," advised old Hogan. 

" What else ?" demanded Larry. 

" Go wait for some one else, along with some 
one else." 

* And will you follow us, Dinny ?" 

" Whether or no, it's your only way, Larry : 
and then, if it plaises God that ye meet BignePs 
crony coming to visit him, why ye can just see 
the crature safe to Bignel's own threshold, and 
the both can be axed for a favour on your 
account as well as others. 11 

" Musha, I don't know what to do — I was 
never out afore ;" and Gerald heard Larry^ 
nails in perplexed contact with his head. 

" Well, don't then ; — have you the pipe and 
tobaccy, Larry ?" 

" Divvle a pipe or tobaccy have I." 

" / have a pipe" said the old fellow jeeringly. 

" It's asy to get a pipe, but not so asy to fill 
it," answered Larry, standing up. 

11 Don't be going, Larry ; what a hurry you're 
in P said the landlady. 



168 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Oh ! faith, I must be off:" and Gerald 
heard the tormented Larry make a sudden and 
hasty departure. 

" Larry's heart fails him," resumed Mrs. 
Hogan. 

" I think Bignel will have the ground," 
laughed her husband. 

" Ye want him ; and I '11 step over again 
to Bignel's wife, and tell her to send a threate- 
ing message to his dour, and maybe that would 
make him do the right thing," continued the 
landlady. 

" There's enough to be at the christening 
without him, if we only had Mickle," observed 
Dinny. 

" Oh ! he^ll come, when he sees ye bent on 
it. But, tell a body, Dinny, does any o' your 
gossips know the kind of a looking crature 
that 's expected at Bignel's ?" 

" I b'lieve not, Bridget ; nor whether he 's 
handsome or ugly, young or ould ; but that's 
no hindrance; sure he's easy to be guessed by 
the road he comes." 

" There's more than one road, Dinny." 

" And there is friends of his on every road," 
answered Dinny. 

" Do you think it 's walking he 'd come from 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 169 

the high road this way ?" questioned the land- 
lady, again sinking her voice. 

" Maybe so, by the divvle's stick, Bridget." 

It is to be observed that hitherto none of 
the speakers hesitated to converse at their ordi- 
nary pitch of voice, although, with the excep- 
tion of Larry CDea, they must have recollect- 
ed Gerald's proximity in the bed-room. We 
may conjecture, however, that judging of his 
appearance and manner, they set him down as 
a stranger totally unsuspicious of their secret 
practices, if not totally ignorant of them, and 
therefore not at all likely to comprehend the 
jeer and technicality in which they wrapped their 
meaning. And, indeed, had Gerald been such 
a stranger ; had he previously known nothing 
of Bignel and of Michael Farrell, they must 
have proceeded on safe grounds. 

After Mrs. Hogan's last question, and her 
excellent husband's reply to it, Gerald heard, 
however, little more than close and earnest 
whispering ; and that little he would have pre- 
ferred not to hear. 

" Pictur ! no such thing," were words which 
reached his ears from Nance, after her mother 
had whispered some time. 

VOL. III. I 



170 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Well, if it 's he, I believe I saw him afore," 
he next heard the old fellow say; and in the 
more prudent tone which followed, he seemed 
explaining where and how. 

" Here 's the boy can make sure, then, v 
resumed Mrs. Hogan, walking to the door. 

Other persons now entered the kitchen, work- 
men from the fields, as soon became evident to 
Gerald, expecting their noon-tide meal of pota- 
toes. Preparations were made for their reception, 
and in a short time, talking loudly, and stamp- 
ing heavily, they sat down to their (at least) 
smoking board. Amid the jumble of voices, a 
shrill, youthful one particularly interested Ge- 
rald's ear. He listened attentively, breathless- 
ly, and had already identified the speaker, 
when, at Mrs. Hogan 's admonition, " Get up, 
avich, and see what the gentleman wants in the 
next room," he prepared himself for a crisis. 
The mother and son whispered a moment at 
his door ; it was then pushed suddenly open, 
and the lad whom Gerald had first seen in the 
sea-coast cabin, and afterwards encountered, 
nursing his hurt arm, in the field within the 
bridle-road, certainly stood before him. 

They glanced, for an instant, at each other, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 171 

but both showed presence of mind. Gerald as- 
sumed a commonplace questioning stare, and 
the intruder an humble, stupid one. His mo- 
ther had sent him to see what his honour wanted, 
he said. Gerald very coolly replied that he had 
called for nothing ; and with clumsy apologies, 
and a clumsy bow, his old acquaintance retired, 
shutting the door, however, still closer than he 
had found it. 

" And the old genius of the gloomy hob was 
his fellow-sleeper P Gerald cogitated, very cor- 
rectly : "What eyes I have! what a memory! 
Not a face I meet but I blunder about ! Oh ! 
why could I not assure myself of the presence 
of that demoniacal sire of Rockites, when I first 
entered this Irish den !" 

What was to be done ? Sooner than run the 
evident risk of being mistaken for the bidder 
over Michael Farrell's head, had he not better 
avow his real name? That avowal would also 
be sufficient to save him from the dudgeon of 
the young brigand, who had formerly taken him 
for a magistrate come to arrest him. But 
would it, indeed ? Had these people sufficient 
confidence in the name to allow Gerald to re- 
main possessed of a secret which involved the 
i 2 



172 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

lives of the father and son together ? Rather, 
did they not hate him and his brother for ne- 
glecting them, as they said, and for sending an 
Englishman to be their agent, and a Scotchman 
to be their steward ? And, apart from their 
personal cause of quarrel with Gerald, would 
not their spirit of Rockism prompt them, of it- 
self, to offer him some outrage? But, both 
incentives taken together, what had he to hope 
by declaring who he was ? 

How could he even prove his assertion ? 
And here Gerald got another fright. The let- 
ter which Flood had addressed to him at Mor- 
rysson's he put into his pocket immediately after 
reading it ; had not since taken it thence ; and 
now he felt for it, as a voucher of his identity, 
if indeed his real identity was to be admitted. 
The letter was not forthcoming. He searched 
every pocket. He had it not : and if lost since 
he left the coach, and found by a Rockite, thus 
the Honourable Gerald Blount must become 
well known, whether he wished it or not, while 
delivered into the hands of the Philistines. 

The workmen made an end of their meal be- 
fore Gerald made an end of his disturbed reve- 
ries. He heard them pass the threshold of the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 173 

open door, one by one. He listened again, and 
assured himself that Mrs. Bridget Hogan's son 
remained behind them, speaking in a low tone 
with his father and mother. Would he at once 
boldly walk out amongst them ? Ere he came 
to a decision, a new visitor paced into the 
kitchen, bidding its inmates good-morrow, in a 
high, peculiar, sonorous accent, that told Gerald 
he was of a rank superior to those he accosted ; 
and their zealous and humble replies, and the 
dusting of chairs that took place, proclaimed 
their admissions of his superiority. Having be- 
come seated, he inquired if Mrs. Bridget Hogan 
had perused the last little book he lent her. The 
landlady said, not quite, yet ; but that it was 
worth its weight in gold; and she begged his 
honour would leave it with her till she finished 
it : and here Gerald imagined the hypocritical 
face of the dame, hinted by her tone, and per- 
haps her wink aside. 

The new-comer then addressed himself to the 
man of the house, and asked him if he could 
read. Dinny professed his regret that he could 
not. 

" Well, then, Dennis," continued the querist, 
" you curse and swear a great deal, and for the 



174 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

purpose of demonstrating to your understanding 
the very great offensiveness of that sin to the 
Lord of heaven and earth, I have here a few 
anecdotes that I shall read for you. And the 
first of them will show what it is you pray for, 
when you use the common and every-day ex- 
pression of ' Damn me V Listen." 

This speech, and the following extracts, were 
spoken and read in a deep, full, preaching tone. 

" When the sinner makes use of the phrase 
'Damn me' — thus he prays: — 'O bountiful 
God ! I beseech thee to shut me out for ever 
from thy blessed presence; to exclude me for all 
eternity from the joys of Heaven, shared by the 
saints before thy throne, and which thy own 
Word promiseth to those who walk in the ways 
of peace and blessedness V And that is not all : 
for thus further the sinner prays — 'Lord, plunge 
me for all eternity into the fires of hell : enchain 
my soul and body in everlasting torments ! — 
steep me, for ever and ever, in the fire that 
quencheth not — to which the fury of the hottest 
furnace is no more than are the snows of the 
mountain-top amid the blasts of the bitterest 
winter !" 

He paused, and a general " Lord save us, and 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 175 

forgive us, poor sinners that we are!" was sent 
forth by the hearers. 

" Upon my sowl, Sir J" began the landlady— 

" Oh, shame, Mrs. Hogan," interrupted the 
lecturer. 

" I ax your pardon, Sir." 

" Ask not my pardon, Mrs. Hogan ; ask par- 
don of Him who gave you the soul to swear by." 

" Well, and I do, Sir ; but I was only going 
to say, that if you stick to Dinny, you'll whip 
him up to Heaven in no time." 

" You speak in too much praise of my poor 
exertions, Mrs. Hogan : but listen still. The 
next anecdote will show you the tremendous visi- 
tations of God upon those who indulge in the 
abominable habit of cursing and swearing gene- 
rally." 

" ' A wicked and immoral shoemaker, re- 
siding near to Pimlico, in the vicinity of Lon- 
don ' " 

" All the ways to London, your honour !" 

" Yes ; but pray listen : — ' was much ad- 
dicted to the cruel and sinful practice of causing 
cocks to fight one with another ' " 

" The baste !" said Nance. 

" I Upon a certain day, while engaged in his 



176 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

inhuman sport, he lost, as is generally the case 
with gamblers, all he had earned by the lawful 
practice of his trade for the week before, and 
he cursed, "Damnation to his soul !" if he would 
ever again make a bet on cock-fighting. Some 
time after, he happened to be in the city of 
York, upon business of his calling. As he 
walked about the suburbs, he came up with a 
crowd who surrounded two fighting-cocks, and 
the Tempter drew him to look on, as a spectator. 
While he looked, his old weakness strongly 
assailed him, and he suffered himself to become 
greatly interested in the success of one of the 
poor birds. A fellow-gambler near to him cried 
out, * Three to one upon the red f thereby de- 
signating the cock opposed to that which the 
shoemaker thought so well of — * Done V said 
the oath-breaker, also elevating his voice ' " 

" By gor ! he had spirit in him, any how, and 
he desarved to win, 1 ' interrupted young Hogan. 

He was, as Gerald supposed, silenced by a 
look; for the reader resumed, so soon as the 
stifled laugh, succeeding to the interruption, 
had subsided. 

" ■ Done V said the oath-breaker, also elevat- 
ing his voice ; and he put his hand into his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 177 

pocket to draw forth the money, when his eyes 
closed, his limbs shook, and heaving a deep 
sigh, he fell lifeless ; a dreadful and memorable 
example to the wicked !' 

" So, Dennis, you see what may come of your 
immoral habit of cursing and swearing.' 1 

" Sure enough, Sir, it's a bad thing to do ; 
and I must try and drop it, in time, faith." 

A general discussion ensued between all the 
listeners, fully condemnatory of the sin. Each, 
in his or her own way, seemed disposed to give 
it up, principally because nothing could be got by 
it. For instance, young Hogan thus argued : — 

" And that 's why it 's one o' the worst sins, 
your honour. Staling isn't half as bad. If I 
stale one o' your honour's sheep to-night, I can 
ate him to-morrow, and my body is the better 
of it, whatever way it turns out with my sowl. 
But it 's not in the same manner with cursing 
and swearing ; for that brings the sowl into the 
divvle's own hobble, and my own self isn't the 
laste taste the better of it." 

Gerald was not as much amused by this scene 

as, under other circumstances, he might have been. 

He rather engaged himself during its intervals 

with making up his mind to enter the kitchen 

i 5 



178 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

before it should conclude, accost the lecturer, as 
a stranger in need of direction on his way, and, 
under his patronage, escape from the Hogans ; 
for, from some cause distinct from their awe of 
him as a religious instructor, it was evident that 
this individual was an object of interest to the 
landlady and her family. Gerald's lurking dis- 
inclination to run the chance of being asked for 
a name by a person sufficiently respectable to 
take such a freedom, made him still pause, how- 
ever, when an occurrence abroad seemed to sug- 
gest that he need not even so far commit himself. 
Old Denny, anxious, no doubt, to spend no 
more time idly, called upon his son to accom- 
pany him to " the work in the field, 1 ' as he said ; 
and in a few seconds both left the cabin, aban- 
doning the women to the apostle. " Either they 
have no harmful purpose against me," argued 
Gerald, " or they prefer attempting it out of 
doors ; but surely not in a populous village, nor 
even on the road leading out of it, in the broad 
daylight, and where people unconnected with 
their atrocities must meet me almost at every 
step ; so, I will only wait till this strange gentle- 
man also takes his leave, not wishing to have 
him see my person, in my present situation, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 179 

and then I can certainly continue ray unlucky 
journey." 

More edifying discourse ensued between Mrs. 
Hogan and the exemplary man, during which 
she was ail submission to his doctrines, and 
then she put him some questions, as to whe- 
ther the debt of his honour's servant-boy to her, 
would be allowed to Denny at the next payment 
of rent, and previously be stopped out of her 
creditor's salary. 

The index to Mrs. Hogan's character, con- 
tained in this sudden change of topic, marvel- 
lously pleased Gerald ; but he was more inte- 
rested by the evidence it supplied that the gen- 
tleman was no itinerant apostle, but a person 
residing close at hand in the neighbourhood, and 
withal possessing some local consideration and 
influence. He was doomed to be more enlight- 
ened on the point. When the visitor had dis- 
posed of Mrs. Bridget Hogan's query, to her 
satisfaction, be it added, he proceeded to say, — 
lt That leads me to ask you, Mrs. Hogan, if 
your silly and obstinate neighbour, Larry 
O'Dea, has come to see you this morning ?" 

While the landlady replied in a low and em- 
barrassed voice; "Yes!" concluded Gerald, 



180 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" the accent should have at once hinted as much 
to me — it is Clangore's very worshipful Mr. 
Bignel. Come ; now, indeed, I am patronized. 
Now, indeed, I march forth, for every reason. 
When this infernal old Rockite woman sees us 
meet as perfect strangers, her suspicions that I 
am his expected visitor will vanish. Then, 
whether or not I deem it necessary to announce 
myself to Bignel, he will at least escort me 
towards Lower-Court, whither I can truly say I 
proceed on business, allowing him to suppose it 
of an humble kind, if he likes. Besides, though 
I do not clearly comprehend what danger he 
stands in from these brigands, it is my duty to 
hint to him that he does stand in some disodour 
with them." 

Before he would enter the kitchen, however, 
Gerald stopped at his door to catch something 
else that fell from Mr. Bignel. 

" Well, Mrs. Hogan, I will leave for leisurely 
perusal these little tracts, out of which I have 
been reading for Dennis, and pray take good 
care of them.' 1 

" Never fear, your honour ; they '11 be as safe 
as if they were in your own desk, at home ; see 
here, Sir ;" Gerald heard her unlock, and lock, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 181 

some drawer near at hand, and gave her full 
credit for her assertion ; for it struck him that 
in that same drawer they were sure to remain 
till called for. 

" And as to O'Dea," continued Mr. Bignel, 
" tell him when you see him, that if he yields 
up the ground quietly, I may forgive him his 
recent outrage on my person ; but if he does 
not, that I shall consider myself bound, for the 
well-being of society, to punish him as far as 
the law permits. 11 

At this moment, Gerald made his appearance, 
holding his purse in his hand, and saying to Mrs. 
Hogan, " Your bill, Ma'am ?" The woman, 
smiling graciously, spoke her bill, "A hog, Sir." 
Gerald stared. Mr. Bignel, who turned back 
on the threshold, told him that she meant an 
English shilling, which then passed for one 
shilling and one penny, Irish. Gerald thanked 
the interpreter, and really delighted his land- 
lady, so far as the incident went, by handing 
her half-a-crown, and declining change. But 
during all this he noticed that her glances flew 
from Bignel to him, and back again, no doubt 
to ascertain if they were acquaintances. 

Mr. Bignel was a middle-aged, corpulent, se- 



182 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

cond-rate-clerical-looking person, and not at all 
like a Scotchman, or, at least, like a good re- 
presentative of one. His hair, instead of being 
red or sandy, was black, as, to an excess, was 
his beard, notwithstanding its close-shaven con- 
dition ; his cheeks, instead of being high-boned, 
were well filled out with firm, though super- 
fluous flesh : and altogether, as has been hinted, 
he might pass for a professional distributor and 
expounder of the pious tracts we have just seen 
him introduce into Mrs. Hogan's family. While 
Gerald settled his breakfast-bill, this gentleman's 
small grey eyes were almost as attentive to him 
as were the landlady's large black ones ; nor did 
Mr. Bignel remove his inquisitive regards, when 
finally Gerald addressed him. 

" Perhaps you will farther aid my local ig- 
norance," alluding to the dilemma about " the 
hog, 1 ' " by putting me into the road to Lower- 
Court, Sir." 

(< Lower-Court !" repeated Mr. Bignel and 
Mrs. Hogan, in a breath, both equally sur- 
prised — " Here, Tom !" continued the former, 
speaking to some one from the door ; a man led 
up a horse, saddled and bridled ; Mr. Bignel 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 183 

took the rein from his hand, and spoke apart 
with him. 

Gerald now fully resolved to make the land- 
steward of his brother's agent aware who he was, 
and for that purpose remained silent until the 
conference between master and man should end, 
when he, too, would speak aside with Mr. 
Bignel. He turned his back, meantime, to the 
door, that he should not seem to listen to the 
confidential discourse outside its threshold. 

While thus disposed, M Lower-Court ?" re- 
peated Mr. Bignel ; Gerald saw that the stew- 
ard was now mounted — " you '11 be one of the 
fancy-painters, from London or Dublin, Sir, 
come down to put the last hand to the vanities 
that have lately been going on there ?" 

" You shall know who and what I am in a 
moment." Gerald stepped out. 

" The road is not to be missed," resumed 
Bignel, spurring his stout horse, " 'tis straight 
forward out of the village ; Good-morning, Sir ;" 
and he trotted off. 

" Stay, Sir ! come back, I say !" cried Gerald. 

" Straight forward, — cannot you hear, friend? 
My duties leave me little time to know much of 
the comers to Lower-Court." 



184- THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Mr. Bignel was soon out of sight. Gerald 
looked round for his man. That person had 
before disappeared. He glanced to the door of 
the cabin. There stood Mrs. Hogan, eyeing 
him shrewdly. 

" Musha, Sir," said she, " what need you 
trouble yourself about finding a road that 's as 
plain afore you as the nose on your face, if it 's 
a truth that it 's to Lower-Court you 're for 
going ?" 

" Have I not said so, woman ?" asked Gerald, 
with sufficient reassumption of his usual man- 
ner to startle Mrs. Hogan. 

" Well, Sir, and you can no more miss your 
way than a bird going home to his nest, 1 ' ob- 
served a slow, dull voice, evidently that of a 
man, from some remote part of the interior of 
the house. 

Gerald, assured that he had not before heard 
this person speak, now just looked past the 
threshold into the kitchen to observe the con- 
cealed inmate. The mysterious third door, in 
the end wall, near the chimney, was open, and 
revealed, beyond it, an old, tall, dingy-faced 
man, sitting on the ground, his legs spread out, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 185 

and employed, with the aid of spectacles, in 
shaping little wooden pegs out of a piece of deal 
board. 

" What the deuce contingent process of 
Rockism can this be ?" thought Gerald. 

" The poor reduced brother o' me, Sir," said 
Mrs. Hogan, answering his look ; " once the 
natest broguemaker on Ireland's ground, and 
the best scholar in our parts, and knowing the 
most about ould things, and ould people ; only, 
for the last years, trade grew bad with him, 
and the little he does at it now, we let him do 
among us ; and when he hasn't the brogues to 
make, he makes pegs for 'em ; the same he 's 
doing the present time, Sir." 

Gerald did not believe a word of this story, 
though he might have done so ; for it was true. 
The hero of it arose, and pushing his spectacles 
up on his forehead, slowly and peaceably ad- 
vanced to him and Mrs. Hogan. Resuming his 
explanation about the road, he pointed it out, 
plainly running over a hill, from which you 
might drop a stone on Lower-Court, the old 
broguemaker said, and the sea " quite con- 
vanient," (a few miles,) at the back of the 
house. 



186 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

M By dad !" struck with a sudden thought, 
" I may as well walk to the top o' the hill by 
the side o' you ; where *s the ould hat ?" 

Gerald, not liking the over-civil proposal, 
demurred ; Mrs. Hogan earnestly pressed him 
to accept it ; and this questionable recommen- 
dation made him still more dislike it. " I shall 
give too much trouble, 1 ' he said — " The old 
rascal will lead me into the toils," he thought. 
" Oh, no trouble in life," the landlady assured 
him, and so did the broguemaker; — "But 
I had rather not," persisted Gerald ; — but 
he need not be so shy; they persisted in their 
turn ; and away went the old man for his 
hat. 

" Ould Dinny was saying, Sir," resumed the 
landlady, in a close tone, fixing her eyes upon 
Gerald's, " that you were taking an account of 
the furniture about the room ; but for what 
would you be doing that ? nobody has a call to 
my furniture ; not Bignel himself." 

" He was only drawing it all out, mother," 
interposed Nance, much to Gerald's relief. 

" Go along, you ^awk ! Didn't you say that 
making the pictur was no such thing?" asked 
Mrs. Bridget Hogan angrily. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 187 

" Yes, my pictur ; but the pots and the 
bellows were better things for a pictur, and so 
the gentleman drew them all out, as I tell you 
now, mother : sure it "'s his trade ; didn't you 
hear what Bignel said ?" — and Nance contrived 
one or two glances at Gerald : one, coquetish, 
to suit the first part of her speech; the other, 
friendly, earnest, and assuring, though Gerald 
could not distinctly read it. 

" Here, now, in the name o' God," said 
the old broguemaker, re-appearing with a 
curious, discoloured piece of felt on his 
head. 

" Harkee, Noll,"" resumed Mrs. Hogan, tak- 
ing him aside. 

" What do you mean ? shall I accept the old 
man's company ? v whispered Gerald to Nance, 
while her mother's back was turned. 

" Better for you, and do it bouldly — but 
don't fear — I '11 come up with ye on the road, may- 
be ; we can spake no more, now : I '11 watch the 
boys I mane — here 's my mother turning round 
— just throw an arum over my neck ;" Ge- 
rald did so, seconding the ruse with a real 
something not bargained for, however it was 



188 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

allowed to pass, although Nance kept strug- 
gling to edify her mother, and crying out — 
" Stop, I bid you ! be asy with your behaviour, 
Sir r 

" Sir, a-vourneen, are you for coming Y* de- 
manded the self-elected guide, and they set 
forward, Gerald expressing his readiness and 
thanks. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 189 



CHAPTER VIII. 

The road over which Gerald was led cer- 
tainly seemed to be the direct one out of the 
village to Lower-Court, that is, so far as a 
man could determine who did not certainly 
know in what direction Lower- Court lay, and 
who depended on his map alone (or rather 
upon his recollection of it, for it was safe in 
his portmanteau) for his presumptions on the 
subject. Gerald drew farther comfort from 
the guileless, almost silly features of his old 
companion, and from his primitive manner and 
conversation. 

Having cleared the last cabin of the village, 
they found their up-hill way running between 
uncultivated, swelling grounds, studded with 
patches of furze and with large stones; no 
fence of any kind prescribed its limits at either 
hand ; and yet it grew narrower at every step ; 



190 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and from the ruts and water-channels in its 
course, the mire and the loose pieces of rock, 
to say nothing of its abruptness, proved diffi- 
cult for the pedestrians. The broguemaker 
had likened it to a bird's flight home, for 
straightness ; — this was partly metaphorical, 
however. At about half-way to the line of 
the bleak eminence over which it passed, the 
road suddenly wheeled to the left, and, like a 
tired horse, continued to ascend obliquely. 
And now, looking back, Gerald found himself 
shut out from all view of the village beneath — 
indeed of every human habitation, barrenness 
and solitude alone surrounding him. 

All along, the old man, unaltered in his 
quiet dull manner, displayed the antiquarian 
lore for which, according to his sister, Mrs. 
Bridget Hogan, he was so celebrated. He 
harangued, eloquently, upon " the ould his- 
tory of Ireland's land," and scarce a little 
knoll appeared in sight, but he had some mar- 
vellous legend for it. Gerald's doubts were 
wholly giving way, notwithstanding even Nance's 
hints at parting ; there could not possibly be 
any harm, he was sure, in such a silly old 
fellow. They made another slight turn in 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 191 

the road, and the ruins of a square building 
appeared, nearly upon the edge of the hill, 
about a mile from the place where they pro- 
posed to cross it. As usual, the chronicler 
produced a cock-and-bull story. 

*' Oh, ye-a, Sir, and do you see it?" in 
reply to a remark from Gerald upon the ob- 
ject, which, indeed, seemed of very ancient 
date — " Oh, Sir, there used to be a bad light 
shining on that castle in former times, and was 
the death of many a one." 

" How r asked Gerald. 

" It used to shine bright, in the night-time, 
Sir; and when the poor sowls in their boats or 
ships saw it, they sunk to the bottom o' the 
say ; but it was put out, at last." 

" And who put it out ?" 

" It was put out, clane, by one that could 
put it out — Saint Patrick, Sir: just one o' the 
little things he done while he was doing greater 
things, in them times, to keep his hand in ; 
cursing the snakes and the toads, that they 
have in England, yes, Sir, and a power of other 
pisonous cratures. People came to him, Sir, 
and he making his way near this place, and 
they tould him of the bad light. ' Show it to 



192 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

us,' says Saint Patrick ; * maybe it won't kill 
me, boys :' " here the broguemaker assumed an 
authoritative tone, and spiritlessly flourished 
his stick, to give Gerald some idea of how the 
saint spoke the last words — " and then, Sir — 
but what the divvle !" again interrupting his 
tale, and again changing his tone, and his 
manner and simple features, too, into a fierce- 
ness that did not please his hearer — " what 
brings this idle hussey from the work o 1 the 
house, to be crossing our road, this way ?" 

Looking in the direction to which his guide's 
eyes turned, Gerald saw Nance Hogan bound- 
ing up a little ascent that, at one side, edged 
their path, laughing, and holding out something 
in her hand. 

" Did you forget any thing at the house, 
Sir ?" asked the broguemaker. 

" No, uncle, no 1 ' — answered Nance, who 
caught the question, though now she stood 
some distance before them on the road — " No 
— but the half-crown the gintleman gave us ;- — 
see ; my mother laid it down on the dresser, 
and went out a bit, and I took it up to look at 
it, and I'm sure it's not good coin."" 

" Show it here," said her uncle. 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 193 

Gerald stepped before him, secured it, peered 
at it, and taking Nance's hint, said he was very 
sorry indeed, but he was ready to replace it 
with good money ; nay, to give a crown back in- 
stead, — if he got some value ; and he now " threw 
an arm round her neck,*' without any invitation. 
She secured the crown, but resisted his salute 
violently, and whispering, "Don't, yet,"— pressed 
his arm, and cried aloud — "if that's what you 
want, you must have a run for it ;" — and then 
got free, and galloped down the way she had 
come, with the reckless speed of a young deer. 

Gerald, sure that he understood her, followed 
at his best. Nance's uncle shouted shrilly after 
them ; and Gerald, glancing back, at last saw 
the plausible old traitor flourishing his stick in 
real character. 

" Run, run I 11 cried Nance ; and run Gerald 
did — " but don't close on me," she continued ; 
"I see you can, if you like, though I didn't 
think you could — musha ! where were you born, 
at all ? — ay — and so does he see the same thing — 
pull up, then, in time ; — no — not that either- 
pretend to fall — that'll put him out, cute as 
he is." 

Gerald, worshipping woman's wit in his heart, 

VOL. III. K 



194 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

stumbled and fell flat, accordingly, at which, 
laughing loudly, as if in triumph, Nance in- 
creased her speed. Her pursuer, allowing him- 
self to scramble, as naturally as possible, for a 
few more seconds, regained his feet, and conti- 
nued the chase. They made way through a 
lonesome, pathless, little valley, one of several 
between the road from which they had started, 
and the spacious hollow in which the village 
stood. The broguemaker's shouts grew fainter 
on Gerald's ear ; and, at a quick turn amongst 
the fairy knolls around, he a second time looked 
back, and saw nothing of the hypocritical anti- 
quary. Nance, without a glance behind, also 
seemed aware that they were now out of view, 
for she suddenly stopped, sitting upon a large 
flat stone, and allowed Gerald to come up. 

" You know what I 'm about, Sir," she said, 
panting for breath — " so, no use of words ; 
there, straight afore you," pointing to a gap in 
the fence, some forty yards onward, u is the 
right road to Lower-Court, and the only one 
they are not watching, this moment, in hopes of 
meeting you — so, stir yourself. 1 ' 

" Why should they watch me ? They take 
me for another person, of course f 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 195 

" Yes, and there 's no time to show them the 
differ ; and if they and you meet aforehand — 
Oh, run, Sir, run .' my own father and brother 
went out, a while ago, to wait for you !" here 
the girl grew agitated. 

" I will follow your advice, and I am your 
debtor beyond expression : these few gold 
pieces cannot convey my gratitude; but if you 
call at Lower-Court, to-morrow — " 

" Put up the gould, Sir ; I did not sarve you 
for that." 

" Well, then ;" Gerald showed preparations 
for snatching the prize of the late race. 

" No, no !" resumed Nance ; " you 're out; I 
mane, that if I take the gould, my mother will 
find it after me, and want to know all about 
it, and that wouldn't answer — behave, Sir — 
divvle's in you, be asy — by this, and that, Sir, 
I '11 say something to vex you, if — " 

" If what now ?" 

" If you don't stop my mouth," laughed 
Nance, while recent tears stood on her lids : — 
" But give over now, in arnest, like a good 
boy ; there 's not a minute to lose ; we don't 
know what ould Noll Thong is doing, while^ 
you're just making a fool o' me here — Stop, I 
K 2 



196 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

bid you ! bad manners to you, for one strange 
gorcoon, how did you come to larn yourself 
such tricks in Dublin, at-all-at-all ? — Mind me, 
I tell you ; I won't have the gould ; maybe your- 
self can make use of it ; but I '11 stale up to the 
Coort to-morrow, as you say, and when you '11 
have an hour to spare from your work within 
doors, let you stale out the back-way, till I see 
that you 're safe and sound, for — " 

" Nance," interrupted Gerald, rising, while 
the girl stared at the sudden self-assertion of 
her companion — " I can come to meet you by 
no back-ways at Lower-Court, and your great 
kindnesses and services to me demand that I 
should tell I am Lady Augusta's brother." 

Nance, in her turn, slowly stood up, her 
eyes fixed on her new acquaintance, her colour 
gone, and her gaze almost one of terror. " I 
ax pardon, Sir, my Lord/' she began, dropping 
a quick curtsey at almost every word ; but her 
voice failed, perhaps under softer feelings ; 
tears flowed, and she put her hands to her 
face. 

" My good, kind girl — " 

" Whisht !" — she interrupted, letting her 
hands fall to her sides ; " there 's some whistling 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 197 

going on where I thought nobody was to make 
it. Run for the road, my Lord ! — ould Noll is 
outwitting me, and I desarve it ! — Oh, don't 
give 'em another moment ! To be BignePs 
crony, would turn out bad enough in their 
hands ; but if they larn your right name, on 
this woful day, and they bent on making it end 
in such a night— oh, my Lord, a-vourneen, run 
for the road !" 

" Farewell, then !" he flung the purse at her 
feet — " you can hide it from your mother, and 
don't forget to call at Lower-Court:" — he was 
half-way to the gap in the road-fence. 

" And don't you forget, Sir, my Lord, to 
keep your name from them, if the ould divvle, 
my uncle, and the rale divvle, his step-father, 
sends them in your road !" admonished Nance, 
keeping close enough to make her whispers tell 
on Gerald's ear : — " and when you're through 
the gap, stop your foot, and show neither haste 
nor hurry — and if you see any body coming 
again you, be whistling a bit, or, maybe, hum- 
ming the turn of a song ; and spake them 
fair and bould, and have a joke for them — and 
now the blessing o' God be in your path, Sir, 
my Lord !" 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gerald stood on the road to Lower-Court. 
He looked up and down, and did not see a 
human figure. He listened for a repetition of 
the whistling, but heard none. Tired and agi- 
tated, he then sat on the rugged fence to re- 
cover breath and presence of mind, and arrange 
a mode of action for future contingencies. 
Nance's string of instructions, drawn, as they 
were, from a knowledge of her own tribe, seem- 
ed well worth following up, if, indeed, her pre- 
sent pupil had a talent for the lecture. With 
heart and soul, Gerald loathed, however, the 
part she wished him to play ; the implied equi- 
vocation as to his name, and the buffoonery, the 
singing and the whistling, in the service of an 
Irish banditti — " Accursed be the moment," he 
began to think aloud, when three men appeared 
on the line of the road, where, like the former 
one, it crossed the summit of a hill; and, smother- 
ing his feelings, he tried, after all, to do Nance's 
tutelage some justice. 

The strangers were about a quarter of a 
mile distant. Gerald advanced to them at an 
even, careless pace, and certainly '* humming 
the turn of a song."" Upon a nearer approach, 
he soon concluded that he had nothing to fear 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 199 

from them. Of the three peasants, one was 
supported at either side by his companions, 
and came limping along. Indeed, one of his 
feet scarce touched the ground, and his head was 
sunk on his breast, while almost at every pace 
of his supporters he groaned deeply, and they 
replied by sympathizing lamentations. 

" What's the matter, lads?" asked Gerald, 
now within speaking distance, his late fears al- 
most forgotten in the sufferings of the poor 
peasant. 

'* Oh, the quarry, your honour !" replied one 
— " we were all working in it, there below, at the 
other side of the hill — and the divvle's own biff 
stone fell on poor Tim's leg, and it's smashed 
into smithereens, so it is ! M 

" And why do you move him in such a 
state? 1 ' continued Gerald: "for mercy's sake, 
let him lie here, at the road-side, and run, both 
of you, for the nearest surgeon ; I will take 
care of him till you come back." 

With earnest thanks and blessings for his 
honour's kindness, and a ready admission that, 
of all things in the world, letting him lie quiet 
would be the best for the present, they accord- 
ingly stretched their companion upon a patch 



200 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of grass near the fence. The man, still groan- 
ing deeply, turned his face to the ground, with- 
out moving the limb they pointed out as frac- 
tured, and round which was needlessly wrapped 
one of their celebrated frieze great-coats. Then 
they stopped to debate, an instant, if it would 
not be well for one to go back, " the Lower- 
Coort road," and another forward to the village, 
in order to call on two surgical practitioners at 
the same time. 

" Or, stop, 11 said the first spokesman, " here "s 
two sogers marching in from country- quarters 

to town, and since they '11 pass the village, 

maybe they 'd do our message there ; and you 
and I, Shawn, can run back to Mr. Kelp, that 
lives nigh hand to the Coort." 

Gerald saw, indeed, two soldiers, carrying 
their muskets at rest on their arms, half-way 
down the abrupt road by which the peasants 
had approached him. They came on slowly, 
walking as if jaded with a long march. The 
last speaker arose from the side of his groaning 
friend, and holding his hat in his hand, went to 
meet them, proclaiming the misfortune and im- 
ploring their aid, in a loud wailing voice. His 
unhurt companion stood looking down on the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 201 

sufferer, as if in silent grief. Gerald knelt on 
one knee, advising the principal of the scene to 
turn up his face, that he might breathe more 
freely. The soldiers, vouchsafing short and yet 
not unfeeling answers, cautiously followed the 
person who had harangued them, apparently 
anxious or curious to view the prostrate man. 

"Yes, gintleman, dears," pursued the zealous 
caterer for help, " all we '11 ax ye, is just to bid 
Mistress Bridget Hogan send out Peter Doyle, 
the bone-setter, while we run for Mr. Kelp ; 
and this good gintleman, that 's a rale stranger 
to us, as I tould ye afore, when ye thought I 
was joking ye, or worse, maybe — but a gintle- 
man, I '11 go bail, every inch of him — he'll stay 
with poor Tim ; isn't that it, gossip ?" address- 
ing his silent companion, who answered in Irish, 
just glancing up for an instant at the soldier 
next to him — " yes, indeed, they '11 do it ; God 
reward 'em for so great a charity," continued 
the less taciturn peasant ; " they will, indeed, 
Shaun ; and — see this, now ! — just to lighten 
'em for the road, we'll take care o' these guns 
for the cratures!" 

Simultaneously with his signal word, the 
fellow, breaking out into the wildest fierceness 
K 5 



202 THE ANGLO IRISH. 

of action, tone, and look, sprang upon the soldier 
at his side, and wrenched the musket out of 
the man's hand ; the silent mourner closed, at 
the same instant, with the poor fellow's com- 
rade, and was equally successful ; and the by- 
play of the scene consisted in Gerald's charge 
jumping up on two unhurt, muscular legs, and 
with a yell, responsive to the " see this" of his 
gossip, fastening his gigantic hands in Gerald's 
collar, and, in a trice, reversing their relative 
positions. 

While the disarmed and captured parties ex- 
pected nothing but threats of instant death, gig- 
gling laughter alone reached their ears, shortly 
followed by a speech, addressed to the soldiers. 

" Don't be afraid, now ; it's only these purty 
things we want from ye \ barring, we'll be axing 
ye for the little black pockets ye wear outside 
of your jackets, on your back parts, there," — 
they pointed the muskets, and the soldiers 
speedily delivered up their cartridge-boxes. 
" And now, luck and leisure in your road to 
the village, an' don't forget Peery Doyle, the 
bone-setter, an' we '11 thank you— only, the 
sooner ye 're off, the more we '11 be obliged to 
ye." The soldiers began to walk down the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 203 

remainder of the hilly road — " And, d' ye hear, 
honest boys ! — there 's no use in your having 
the trouble of looking to see what weVe going 
to do with ourselves; ould Nick sometimes 
pulls a trigger of a sudden, and we couldn't 
help it, you know, if your jackets went back 
to the army tailor with a hole or two in 'em : 
so, just keep never minding till ye come to 
the next turn; an' ye may use the shanks as 
fast as ye like, just for love." — The soldiers 
quickened their pace — " Stop, Shaun ! don't 
hurt the cratures — faith, boys, for the matter 
o 1 that, ye may run — asy, Shaun, I bid you !" 
The men rushed down the road, and at the 
turn spoken of, were soon out of sight. 

" And now for Bignel's crony," resumed 
the director of the Rockite party ; " let him up, 
Tim ; 'tisn't here we're to talk to him." 

" You mistake me for some one I know 
nothing of," remonstrated Gerald, as soon as 
his captor relaxed the iron grasp at his collar, 
and removed a knee from his person. 

" A-then, do we ? maybe you were not 
bound, a little while agone, for BignePs white 
house, on Curra-hill, where the nice dinner 
will be waiting for you ?" 



204 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I am not even acquainted with the man 
you speak of;" Gerald now stood up, well 
guarded. 

" Well, but maybe you seen him, once on 
a time." 

" I would not even be known to him," 
answered Gerald, skilfully evading the last 
point. 

" Why so, gossip ?" 

" Because, since I came to this country, 
every thing I have heard of him makes me 
dislike his character." 

" Why, what did he do ?" 

" In the first place, he destroyed the poor 
Farrels" — they glanced at each other — u and I 
am personally known to Michael Fareel ; and if 
you let me see him, he will assure you I can 
have nothing to do with Bignel." 

" And if we happen to meet poor Mickle, 
after parting from you, who will we say was 
axing about him ?" 

" He does not know my name, although, 
as I say, he knows my person well, and there- 
fore it would be useless to mention it to him." 

"But you may tell it to us. 1 ' 

" Excuse me." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 205 

" You 'd better, if you 're not a friend of 
BignelsV 

" Did you never hear that people travelling, 
for instance, on mercantile business, are some- 
times under an obligation to their employers 
not to tell their names ?" 

" None o' your palaver : tell the name that 's 
on you, at once, or we'll say it's all lies you've 
tould us, since you began to use your tongue ; 
tell it, or come to them that will soon take you, 
face to face, afore Bignel, along with us to help 
'em, and then, maybe, the truth would pop out, 
at last." 

Gerald, comforted by this implied removal of 
personal danger, and by the certainty that if al- 
lowed such a test as the man promised, he might 
ultimately escape all perils, replied : "I can 
only assure you, upon my hopes of life and of sal- 
vation, that already I have uttered nothing but 
the truth ; my name, however, I am not at li- 
berty to disclose." 

" Come off, then !" cried the fellow angrily ; 
" you are the man we were sent to watch, 
though you thought to snake round by Lower- 
Coort to your crony, and now think to bam- 
bouzle them that 's listening to your stories ; 



206 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

what else hinders you from answering our ho- 
nest question ? what else brings you amongst us ? 
Seldom 's the time that one like you comes this 
road for any thing but harum. Hurry, boys, 
down to The Dry Lodging." 

To their right, far under them, was a valley 
similar to that through which Gerald had pur- 
sued Nance, but more extensive, and more wind- 
ing. Down into this they hurried their prisoner, 
bounding over rock, and tuft, and bush, with 
an agility and a headlong speed which he could 
not rival ; in fact, during this race he fell, in 
reality, and his captors, muttering curses in 
Irish, were compelled now to support him along 
— now to regulate their progress by his. Oc- 
casionally they addressed him in ironical boast 
of their double success over him and the sol- 
diers, giving him to understand, that the en- 
counter with the muskets was quite a providen- 
tial " God-send," while they were engaged, at 
Noll Thong's hint, in the more important duty 
of crossing his road, from the other, by a short 
cut. Traversing the bottom of the valley, the 
party often wound to the right and to the left, 
sometimes coming on cultivated patches of 
ground. Then the soil began to grow marshy 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 207 

and black; and at last they entered an ex- 
tensive turf-bog, which, however, was still 
quite enclosed by successions of knolls and emi- 
nences, barren and rock-strewn. The bog 
had been worked, as was evident from oblong 
piles of black turf, called clamps, which appear- 
ed at different parts of it, as well as from its di- 
visions into pools of water, intersected by cause- 
ways of the soft soil, communicating with each 
other. Upon one of these causeways, attached 
to the more solid land, Gerald was ushered by 
his conductors. Here they were obliged to 
help him on more assiduously than before ; for 
while the trained " bog-trotters" bounded, like 
deer, out of every slough and hole, Gerald trip- 
ped or stuck fast. Not long pursuing a straight 
course, they turned upon many other tracks 
through the bleak waste, passing different huge 
piles of the fuel that had been wrought out of 
it, and at every step approaching, though cir- 
cuitously, to its centre. 

" Do you hope to find your Dry Lodging here- 
abouts ?" asked Gerald, when at last they paus- 
ed, and seemed to listen. 

" Never fear, my boy, v he was answered ; 
" there it is, in the inside o 1 that divvle's own 



208 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

big clamp, that looks to be as substantial as the 
rest, only it isn't — " the man pointed to one a 
short distance off, upon the track-way they were 
now pursuing — " whisht !" he resumed, as a loud 
burst of laughter issued from the singular den — 
" I wonder what 's the fun among the boys, to 
make them screech so hearty ? Stale asy, and 
we '11 ketch 'em at it, whatever it is ;" and set- 
ting the example, the speaker trod lightly for- 
ward. 

At the remote corner of the clamp, after 
turning which was the entrance into its interior, 
the party again paused, and Gerald now became 
the most interested of the listeners ; for, quickly 
succeeding to another gleeish laugh, he heard 
the following words, uttered in a voice that 
there was no mistaking : — 

« Very indubitably, yes, gentlemen-Rocks ; 
and furthermore, allow the most shadowy in- 
dication of a hint, to the effect, that by permit- 
ting my well-esteemed roadster to perish in 
yonder Stygian pool of bog-water, your conduct 
may be designated as embarrassingly unhand- 
some." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 209 



CHAPTER IX. 

Another loud laugh followed the words 
which Gerald overheard. It was evident that 
Flood was a source of great amusement to the 
Rockite party. " I am safe, 1 ' thought Gerald ; 
" it is not in human nature to harm him, or any 
friend of his ; but, first, let me take a precaution. 1 " 
He tore a leaf out of a small memorandutn-book, 
and requested permission of his guard to write 
a line upon it to the gentleman inside, who was 
a friend of his. The man suspiciously asked 
what was the use of writing, when he could 
walk in and see his friend at once ? He said 
that the gentleman might receive a shock at his 
sudden appearance in such a situation, for they 
were very great friends indeed. This expla- 
nation, assisted by a sovereign, (and here Gerald 
wondered that he had been permitted to keep his 
purse,) was allowed to pass ; so he penciled in 
French the following words : — " Call me by any 



210 THE ANGLO-IR SH. 

name but my own when we meet. Yours, — an 
old class-mate. 1 ' 

One of his captors went in with this commu- 
nication ; and as soon as Gerald heard Flood's 
absurd ejaculations of surprise, he signified his 
readiness to enter the hollow turf-clamp. 
At sight of his friend he could scarce refrain 
from laughter. The exquisite sat on the floor 
of the den, his hands clasped round one of his 
raised knees. It would seem, that when taken 
by the rovers, he had been dressed in civil at- 
tire, without any indication of military character 
about him. An almost white and beautifully 
cut surtout was buttoned to his chin, but ap- 
peared splashed and stained with bog-water and 
bog-mire, as if its wearer had often tripped and 
fallen during the progress to his present retreat ; 
one of his feet was bootless, some particular 
spot of the yielding causeway having doubtless 
played bootjack to him ; and his usually rosy 
cheeks were pale. The listless self-command 
of his features remained, however, with little 
change from its every-day character. " Friend 
of my bosom, 11 he said, rising as Gerald entered, 
" let me, even in reverse of fortune, in captivity, 



THE ANGLO-IHISII. 211 

and amid turf, embrace you. This will be per- 
mitted, warriors of the bogs," he continued, 
bowing around to a formidable circle of pea- 
sants, mostly armed, who answered with re- 
newed laughter; " this will be permitted to the 
David and Jonathan of your modern days, 
meeting, as we do, in unfelicitous though ho- 
nourable company.'" 

" How in the world, Sir Tristram, have you 
got here ?" demanded Gerald. 

" You may suppose me, most worthy, is- 
suing, well mounted " 

" Call each other by your right names," in- 
terrupted a voice, which Gerald recognized as 
that of Dinny Hogan. 

" Even as you wish it, be it, my general, 
for such I conclude you are, sitting here, in 
head-quarters, awaiting the execution of your 
various commands, issued to your gallant force ; 
and how trustily observed, the friend of my 
youth and his poor admirer will lastingly 
witness. Wherefore," again addressing Gerald, 
" good Daniel Mahaffy, suppose me, in answer 
to your question, issuing, I say, well mounted, 
from the town of -, and innocently bent 



212 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

upon paying a visit to certain fair features, 
somewhere in this neighbourhood, shining and 
blooming " 

'* Ay, but where, in the neighbourhood ?" 
again interrupted Hogan, — " you won't answer 
that, though we often axed it afore." 

" Willingly should I, Excellentissimo, did 
chivalry or manhood even remotely permit ; 
but who amongst your gallant band would 
counsel me to do so ? Who amongst them would 
do so himself, in my situation ? Who is here 
so recreant as to proclaim to the world his 
triumph over coy beauty ? To point out to 
squint-eyed Suspicion the generous nymph he 
may have slightly caused to smile upon him : in 
other words, rather more generally used, day 
after day, who is here so vile as to kiss and 
tell? I pause for a reply." 

" N9 one, by the powers o' man," roared a 
score of laughing voices. " Go on, my boy," 
continued a young fellow, the most delighted 
and edified of his party ; " give the general, as 
you call him, more of it." 

" No one, I am ready to uphold to the 
world, no one !" resumed Flood : " and how, 
then, can I be fairly or amiably admonished 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 213 

to do that which would shame the most beardless 
lip, or the most reverend hairs it is my happiness 
to harangue ? Nay, Excellentissimo, here, on 
ray couch of turf, let me lie, a sod of turf be my 
only food, a bowl of turf-water my only drink, 
the bottom of a pool of the same liquid my 
early grave ; — let me, I say, eat of turf, drink of 
turf, live on turf, sleep on turf, and of turf let 
me expire ; but hope not, aged chieftain of turf- 
bogs, that your poor prisoner, Valentine Blen- 
nerhasset by name " 

" Bother, my chap, 1 ' still interrupted Dinny, 
4C that 's no more your name than the name you 
gave your comarade is his right one, or than 
the raumawsh you 're spaking is the truth. 
And, boys, it 's trying to make fools of us he is ; 
don't ye hear hiin about the turf?" 

" Well, and let him try it, and what harum ?" 
said the lad who had before spoken. 

" Yes, when he's the biggest fool among us, 1 ' 
observed a second. 

" And we having more o' the laugh than him, 
barring he can do it with the back of his face," 
assented another. 

" And the crature is right about his sweet- 
heart, whoever she is," resumed Flood's warm- 



214 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

est advocate ; " and no more to Bignal than I 
am, after all." 

" That 's plain to be seen," agreed Dinny ; 
" for never such an amadawn came from Big- 
nal's country.'" 

" But the other, that's hand and palm with 
him," remarked a second elder. 

" Not the man we want, either ; just afore 
the boys came in with him, Nance was here 
and tould me as much ; Bignel and he stood 
face to face, at my thrashold, and didn't know 
one another.'' 

" Admirable Nance, 1 ' thought Gerald. 

'* Then, what are we to do with them ?" 

" It 's hard to tell," answered Dinny ; " the 
both has more knowledge of us, boys, by this 
time o' day, than we'd like they'd go away with, 
to give to the neighbours." 

" And one of 'em more knowledge of you and 
me, aforehand, father ; and more knowledge of 
where we're to be found, when convanient, since 
to-day morning, than he ought to be let to go 
away with," said Dinny's son. 

" We will pledge our words of honour, as 
gentlemen, to conceal every thing we know of 
you, or have known of you," said Gerald. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 215 

" Bind ourselves, by regular treaty, to such 
a course, very certainly," agreed Flood. 

" As gintlemen ! — how do we know what you 
are at all ?" pursued young Hogan ; " and you 

most of all didn't you once try to take me 

up, only my father made you run for it ?" 

Gerald eagerly explained how mistaken was the 
speaker in his notion of the rencounter alluded 
to. " We will go in your company, to one of 
your priests, and give an oath of secrecy," he 
continued. 

" The priest !" cried Dinny, with a sneering 
laugh — " which o' them ? Is it Father Dick, 
that found himself lying in the glin o' Boyle, 
the other night, with more holes than breath in 
his body, just for meddling too much with what 
no ways concerned him ? Musha, my boy, the 
priests and some o' their neighbours aren't as 
good friends as you think." 

" Nien," said the second grave counsellor, 
" that cock won't fight." 

" So, as I said afore, it's hard to tell what to 
do with 'em, bould boys. One thing is sartain, 
howsomever ; — they can't go their road to-day, 
for fear they 'd happen to spile the night's fun, 
unknownst to themselves." 



216 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Yes; bring the sogers on us, or give the 
wink to Bignal," added young Hogan. 

" Are our fair pledges nought, brave captors ?" 
asked Flood. 

" We don't believe a word out o' your fool 
of a mouth ; — shet it," replied Gerald's youth- 
ful enemy. 

" Out-spoken gallant," resumed Flood, " you 
are not, permit me to suggest, the most reason- 
able or civil of your tribe ; no other tongue here 
goes the unseemly and somewhat hazardous 
length of inducing the shade of a doubt upon 
the honour of your captives." 

M What do you mean by hazardous ?" de- 
manded young Hogan fiercely. 

"Whisht, Tom, good boy," interrupted Flood's 
former admirer, " and let us spake more in rai- 
son. Serjeant Dinney, there 's no denying that 
the gintlemen must stay with us the night ; 
what 's to happen after, will all be according as 
the future may turn out to be. And there 's 
some sense in that, I 'm thinking," added the 
young councillor, vain of his wisdom. 

" There is," said Dinny's elder friend. 

" And no one has a right to say as much on 
that head as Captain Mickle," continued the 



the anglo.irish. 217 

lad : the majority loudly assented ; — " and so, 
we must only wait for him, on this business, 
as well as on the rale business o' the night." 

Again there was a cheer of acquiescence, 
which revived Gerald's fallen hopes, and he 
hastened to say — " We are satisfied with that 
arrangement, and thank you for it : for I have 
no fear of meeting the person you allude to ; 
he and I are not bad friends. 1 ' 

" What fool's words are you spaking, at 
all ?" demanded Denny. 

" I mean plainly to say, that Michael Far- 
rel and I are known to each other;" many 
of the listeners started, and all looked as- 
tonished. 

1,4 And where did ye meet first, might a 
body be axing you ?" catechised Denny, with 
his sneer. 

" You need not ask," retorted Gerald, more 
boldly than prudently as he came to the cor- 
rect conclusion that the old Rockite must be 
perfectly aware of who it was that befriended 
Farrel when he fell from the coach, inasmuch 
as he had seen Gerald mount to the seat beside 
the ex-coachee, and no doubt had afterwards 
learned from the sufferer's own lips, the ser- 

VOL. III. L 



218 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

vice which Gerald now for the first time hoped 
might be remembered in season ; — " You need 
not ask, Mr. Dennis Hogan — " again the 
party looked surprised — " for, if I do not 
greatly err, I saw you run into the cabin to 
Michael Farrel, upon the day he broke his 
thigh, and I my arm, just as I entered my 
post-chaise to ride to Dublin." 

Denny coolly said — " You might happen to 
make a mistake ;" but the rest of the Rockites 
clamorously proclaimed their knowledge of a 
strange gentleman's kindness, upon the occa- 
sion spoken of, to their former captain — Mich- 
ael and his wife had spread the story far and 
wide— and they were sure, so they were, that 
Gerald must be the good Samaritan : the men 
who had captured him on the mountain-road, 
testified his recent avowal, to them, of an ac- 
quaintanceship with Farrel; and finally, after 
being desired to describe his friend's appear- 
ance, and after submitting a satisfactory por- 
trait, shouts of good- will arose from all, and 
many crowded round him, to assure Gerald 
and his * crony' of protection, until the arrival 
of their chief leader. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 219 

" Again we embrace," said Flood, theatri- 
cally folding his arms round Gerald — " again 
I hold you to my heart, — now, as well in gra- 
titude as in love, adventurous and life-preserving 
Mahaffy." 

" But it's a shame for Mickle to keep us 
waiting to know his pleasure," observed the 
elderly peasant before spoken of, after the new 
laugh which Flood sought to produce had 
somewhat subsided. 

" Maybe he thinks we are to take him at 
his word, and won't come at all," said Denny. 

" And it seems we can't have the pleasure 
of bringing Bignel's gossip to the dour, as we 
thought we could ; here 's two o' the roads 
he'll travel missed already," resumed his col- 
league. 

" Let the Boys run out again," advised 
old Hogan : " but stop — the man we want is 
coming, at last, I'm thinking — see there." 

" Yes, the patroul from the low road," cried 
several. 

** But how careful they are of him," remark- 
ed one ; " giving him a jaunt here on their 
showlders." 

l 2 



220 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Maybe he wouldn't walk for them," said 
Denny. 

" And how he kicks and tears with his legs, 
ay, and hits them with his stick," observed 
Gerald's young advocate : " musha, I wonder 
how they let him do that."" 

" Flood !" whispered Gerald, " lo, who comes 
to share our captivity ?" 

" Ha ! No, — it were redundantly too excel- 
lent ; call the apparition some evil, boggy, amus- 
ing thing, in his shape," answered Flood. 

M Musha, what an ould man he is, after all," 
continued the last Rockite speaker. 

The entrance to the turf-clamp faced a 
causeway through the bogs at right angles with 
that by which Gerald had gained it ; and along 
this track, and now near enough to be identified, 
certainly came Mr. Gunning, his hat and wig- 
gone, and borne, as the spectators have noticed, 
on the shoulders of two athletic fellows, who, 
with all the strength of their clasping arms, 
could scarce keep his foundered legs secure, 
while they were therefore compelled to excuse 
as they might the occasional visitation of his 
stick on their sides and thighs. He seemed 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 221 

half frantic with rage and impatience, and kept 
crying out, as he neared the retreat, " Rascals ! 
what 's all this ? what confounded place ? let 
me down, I say ! My leg, you reprobate ! I 
mean you that hold my left leg ! you crush 
it, you cruel villain ! Take that, and be d — d ! 
What am I to do here ? Who are those scoun- 
drels, yonder ? who or what are you all, — curse 
and confound you, one and all, together !" 

" Here he's for ye," said one of his porters, 
as both trundled down Mr. Gunning under 
the roof of the den ; " and our notion is, that 
it's the ould divvle we 're after carrying on our 
showlders, not to talk of an ould Scotchman." 
Gerald and Flood had stepped aside to indulge 
the laughter that rang through the turf-cavern. 

" Scotchman ! do you take me for a Scotch- 
man ?" asked Gunning, still furiously, as he 
sat squatting on the soft ground. 

" Yes ; and you 're name is Macintash ?" 
said Dennis Hogan. 

" Macin-devil!" screamed Gunning: " Macin 
— be d — d to you !" he continued, beating the 
turf puddle beside him with his stick. " It's 
a confounded lie, whoever you are that says 



222 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

it ! — I 'm an Englishman, and no Scotchman ! 
I hate a Scotchman, if that's any use to me, — 
and now what have you got to say ?" 

" As sure as you have mistaken my friend 
and myself," began Gerald, advancing with 
Flood 

'* What, the deuce !" interrupted Gunning, 
staring at them : " Aha ! I see it now, as plain 
as my stick. 'Tis all your work, you brace of 
puppies ! To give me a taste of Irish welcom- 
ing to the bog-holes, as it were ! but if I 
don't remember your jest, — stop though ; you 
couldn't come here to the world's-end, merely 
for that — and then, why or how have you come 
here ?*» 

" My dear Sir," resumed Gerald, making 
a secret sign, " give us time to speak, before 
you say any more ; — I was about to state," he 
continued, turning to the man, " that as sure 
as you have mistaken my friend and myself, 
you have also mistaken this gentleman.''' 

" Yes, I promise them ; they '11 soon find 
they've caught a Tartar," interrupted Gun- 
ning. 

" For," Gerald went on, " he is well known 
to both of us — although — " again glancing ex- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 223 

pressively at Gunning — " he may wish, as we 
atjirst wished, to conceal his name." 

" I don't wish any such thing ; not a bit ; 
why should I ? J 'm not ashamed or afraid of 
my name — 'tis Gunning — Miles Gunning — and 
my brother is Mr. Gunning, of Belleview, not 
many miles from this cursed place." 

" A man we like in our hearts," said one of 
the Rockites, which assertion was confirmed by 
an encomiastic uproar. 

f Do you ? I suppose he must be much 
obliged to you, — though I 'm not." 

"He's a good man to his tenants, though 
not bred or born in the country," added one 
of the eulogists. 

M Thank you much for your information,' 1 
resumed Gunning; " though here I am, his 
brother, also coming to live amongst you, I 
fear, and dragged off my horse, and forced to 
this infernal nook, on my road to dine with 
another of your neighbours, Mr. Knightly." 

f* Mr. Knightly ?" was repeated by all the 
hearers ; " three screaches for Mr. Knightly ! 
and let no friend of his fear hurt or harum from 
us," pursued an earnest voice. 

" Hurt or harm ?" retorted Gunning : *' why, 



224 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

what else can you do to me ? Confound your 
assurance. Where 's my horse ? where 's my 
hat ? where 's my wig ? And how am I to 
get across yonder labyrinth of black water and 
quagmire ?" 

'* Supposing we were to make all that as 
convanient as we could, after what has hap- 
pened," began a spokesman — ■ — 

" Yes, after what has happened, indeed," 
said Gunning. 

" Would your honour swear down on the 
book, aforehand, not to tell of us ?" 

" My honour will swear down on the book no 
such thing." 

" Maning to say, Sir, that if we let you off 
this moment, you '11 complain of us to the neigh- 
bours the next ?" 

" Yes ; meaning exactly that. 11 

" Then we believe your honour can't ate 
your dinner with Mr. Knightly, this blessed 
day." 

This threat, proposing a very climax to his 
hardships, made Gunning more violent and 
vituperative than he was before, — the men pas- 
sively enduring his abuse, partly out of love 
to his brother and to Mr. Knightly, partly 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 225 

because the frenzy, as well as the appearance 
of the old gentleman, amused them. Seeing 
them laugh aside, he lost all patience, and 
once or twice strove to start up. 

Gerald addressed him, in the hope of prevail- 
ing on Mr. Gunning to submit quietly to his 
situation, by giving him to understand its exact 
nature. He stated that Flood and he had 
been kidnapped, just as he had been ; he made 
him conceive how it had happened, and that 
they were all in the hands of a formidable 
Rockite band — (here Mr. Gunning cried, 
" They be d d !"" and looked round fierce- 
ly at them ;) — he hinted the kind of outrage 
which they were preparing to commit; and 
lastly, Gerald sought to calm and comfort his 
old friend, by assuring him of the protection 
of Michael Farrel, and implored him to col- 
lect his thoughts, in order to give him, Gerald, 
effectual support in endeavouring to persuade 
Michael and his men, upon the arrival, in the 
dreary haunt, of that important personage, 
from going to Bignal's house upon any hostile 
intent. 

But Mr. Gunning was little soothed after all 
Gerald could do. He said, " Pish !" and 
l 5 



226 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" stuff!" at each word that did not provoke 
him into violent invective, and at last began 
to complain of his leg, rubbing it tenderly, 
and calling down vengeance on the head of 
the malignant savage who had treated it so 
roughly. And this brought Captain Flood 
once more upon the stage, in a prominent and 
novel situation. 

" Arra, let the poor boy alone, with your 
cursing and swearing, you ould sinner," said 
young Hogan, observing upon Gunning's abuse 
of his comrade—" how could he know that you 
were such a bocca ?*" 

" Hold your tongue, you monkey, 11 snarled 
Gunning. 

" Hold you, your tongue, you father o' 
monkeys,' 1 retorted the young savage. 

U Inevitably, friend, 11 said Flood, turning to 
the rude youth, " I am rather bound to repeat, 
that you may be said to be the least polished 
of your brave people. 11 

" A crooked straw for what you say." 

" And moreover, allow yourself to compre- 
hend, that here I may not stand to hear you 
contribute to your former want of courtesy to- 
* Contemptuously used for lame person. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 227 

wards my poor self, by aggrieving the gray 
hairs of " 

" Why, he has no hairs at all," broke in the 
lad, laughing ironically, as he pointed to Mr. 
Gunning's close-shaven head. The old gentle- 
man missed a blow at the speaker, while Cap- 
tain Flood continued. 

" In that respect, athletic stripling, Art has 
incontrovertibly left him as deficient upon the 
exterior of the cranium, as Nature hath left you 
in the interior of the same : still may my words 
bear utterance, according to metaphorical usage, 
and therefore I go the length of asseverating, 
(again putting aside your indelicacies towards 
Valentine Blennerhasset, who addresses you, 
including, I would fain admonish you to re- 
member, a salute from your stalwart hand, upon 
his induction to this soddy tent ;) that I rather 
conceive myself urged to object to your strong 
language, directed towards a captive, whose 
hairs would be gray, or grayish, if they were per- 
mitted to shoot forth ; and whose body is infirm, 
and unprepared to recompense your misconduct. ^ 
" Aha, Murtuck, take that, and divvle 
mend you !" cried many of the hearers, who, 
amid loud laughing, evidently felt gratified at 



228 THE ANGLO IRISH. 

the vaguely-conceived rebuke experienced by 
young Hogan. 

" And how will you help yourself from stand- 
ing there to listen to any thing I have a mind 
to say ? v> asked the admonished party. 

" Even thus :" Flood stepped into the middle 
of the turf-floor, as gallantly as he could, con- 
sidering the halting-pace induced by his having 
one foot booted, and the other bare — "before 
this brave band, I wish to be understood as now 
arraigning you of the deficiences in good con- 
duct, already enumerated; before them, whose 
honour, I dare venture to believe, is as certain 
as their bravery, I incline to denounce you as an 
individual deserving of gentle personal chastise- 
ment therefor — I also solicit permission to be- 
come the instrument of awarding to you your 
deserts ; and finally, on this good quarrel, and 
always with allowance from the tribunal now 
besought to judge between us, I defy you to 
single combat, and heaven defend the right." 

The cheer that followed this speech, barely 
understood in its tendency, was uproarious : 
" All fair, all fair !" they cried, and a group 
of seconds soon stood at Flood's side. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 229 

" You mane, by your raumaush, to ax me 
to fight you ?" demanded young Hogan. 

" Thou hast said it very positively," replied 
Flood. 

" Come, this is good, after all," said Gunning, 
settling himself as comfortably as it was pos- 
sible on his primitive seat. 

" Are you mad ?" asked Gerald, catching 
Flood's arm. 

" With a method, perhaps," answered his 
friend. 

" To be sure he is, and nothing else," re- 
sumed the challenged: "look at him, — does he 
want me to break him across, at the first snap ? 
And, do ye think I 'd shame my father's son, 
by pulling the sting out of such a wasp as 
that ?" The gigantic youth pointed at Flood's 
refined waist. 

" Words may be called idle, robust foeman," 
observed Flood; " in stature and weight, I ad- 
mit your preponderance, though flatterers have 
designated me a goodish enough 'un ; also, 
about the region above the hips, my span is 
less than yours ; though here, art may mislead 
vour primitive judgment ; and though the pec- 



230 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

toral muscles, the deltoids, nay, even the os- 
teology of the shoulders — * 

"Don't be bothering with your gibberish," 
interrupted the sullen youth ; " but if you will 
try it with me " 

" He will, — to be sure he will !" exclaimed 
several, clapping Flood on the back : " and 
fair play he must have, by the powers !" 

" How, then ?" continued young Hogan. 

" Choose your mode," answered the chal- 
lenger. 

M You 're for the fists, I suppose, after your 
English fashion ?" 

" If so it please you, fair foe ; or more 
in accommodation to your brave Milesian 
practices, let it be a trial at wrestling, or a 
play at quarter staff, by you denominated shil- 
lelagh." 

" Let it be one after the other," shouted 
Flood's most zealous seconder, the same lad who 
had before pleaded Gerald's cause: " since 
Captain Mickle keeps us waiting for him, it will 
be good sport to fill up the time, boys ; — so, the 
fists, first; the wrastling second; and the sticks 
at last." 

Again there was loud assent, which young 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 231 

Hogan scowlingly said, " With all my heart," 
and instantly pulled off his coat. 

Flood did not so soon prepare himself for 
battle ; his first care being directed to arrange- 
ments for a ring, and enumerations of the rules 
of fair play. In these matters he found a 
zealous ally in Mr. Gunning, who, half-sup- 
ported, half-hobbling to a corner, gave out 
his commands with a loud, sharp voice. The 
Rockites, gleeishly enjoying the scene, readily 
carried into effect the instructions of both ; and 
Gerald derived some comfort from observing 
that, however his old friend might deport him- 
self, fair play and fair feeling were certainly 
to be expected. Even old Denny, smiling in 
real good-humour, seemed disposed to let his 
son take his own fortune, and more than once 
applauded Flood's spirit, calling him " The 
divvle's own quare gorcoon." 

With the,exception of two seconders, — Gerald 
one, — at each side, the peasants stood three deep 
round the turfy apartment, and thus a ring was 
formed. Young Hogan stepped out, and called 
to his opponent to come on. Flood implored 
him to have patience, while he got through the 
needful preliminaries. Sitting down, he first 



232 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

craved the aid of his seconders to pull off his 
single boot, in order to allow him to stand even- 
ly on his ground. This proved a difficult task, 
as, from its having been saturated with bog- 
water, the delicate article clung to his foot ; 
and the spectators much enjoyed the operation, 
eked out as it was by the intentional hard tugs 
of the peasant, which occasionally dragged 
Flood from his place. At length the challenger 
was free to stand up; and then his final prepa- 
rations for battle ensured an increase to the mirth 
of the spectators ; for when he had doffed his 
white surtout, green body-coat, and vest, 

" Why, it 's a woman is in it !" cried his 
antagonist, starting back, as if in terror, and 
pointing to the stays which were buckled tightly 
round the dandy's waist. 

" You considerably err, primitive being," said 
Flood, calmly and skilfully proceeding to divest 
himself of his elegant incumbrance, " as, I take 
your patron saint to witness, shall ultimately ap- 
pear to your dissatisfaction. ,, He flung the stays 
to his peasant friend, who held then up between 
finger and thumb ; and then Flood, whispering 
Gerald, " Now, Tom Crib, be honoured in your 
favourite pupil," spiritedly threw himself into 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

excellent attitude, and saying aloud — " For 
old Ireland's chivalry, whose son, after all, I 
am !" awaited his foe. 

Hearty shouts answered him. It was evident 
to Gerald that, notwithstanding his great stature 
and strength, the challenged party must fight 
under disadvantages, of some of which he was 
conscious — namely, a bad cause, and the un- 
favourable wishes of his friends. But what he 
had most to fear he could not perhaps suffici- 
ently estimate, — Flood's coolness, " science," 
and confidence. The battle began. He made 
a furious onset, aiming blows, the least con- 
siderable one of which must have decided the 
contest, had it told. But his antagonist par- 
ried them, with a skill that is only to be ac- 
quired; nimbly jumped round him, or retreat- 
ed ; until, at the entrance to the ring, he found 
opportunity to inflict a hit under the ear, which 
brought down Hogan, as if he had been shot. 
Those who were not silenced by absolute sur- 
prise, cheered loudly ; and Gunning, all his 
sufferings forgotten, became vociferous with de- 
light. 

" He '11 never come to time !" cried the old 
gentleman, as umpire, looking at his watch. 



284 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Hogan that instant sprang from his second's 
knee, not quite recovered, and still more blind- 
ed by rage, and jumped upon his challenger. 
He received between the eyes a second warn- 
ing to be more cool, and a second time, after 
staggering, fell. The third round was a scram- 
ble on his part, by which he succeeded in 
throwing Flood ; but not before that gallant 
person's knuckles had made free with every 
feature of his face. The young tiger would 
have leaped on his prostrate foe, but that he 
was prevented. Flood, now determined to keep 
him off, fought the next round admirably, and 
with another hit under the ear, and a ' left- 
hander' in the throat, as he went down, so far 
won the battle. Hogan did not answer the 
call to time. 

Amid roars of applause, Flood's hand was 
shaken by almost every Rockite around him ; 
and many offered ' his share' of the illicit 
whisky which others poured down young 
Hogan's throat, or applied to his bruised and 
bleeding face. 

" Let me at him again!" cried the hideous- 
looking fellow, scrambling up. His friends in- 
formed him that he was beaten, so far, accord- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 235 

ing to all the rules of fair play. He would 
not hear of it. They insisted : "Well; I'll 
wrastle him, then,"' he added. 

u My brave old class-mate," said Gerald, 
" well have you reminded me of your boyish 
victory over the hot-headed Milesian, at West- 
minster ; yet I dread this second trial.*" 

" Worthy fellow,'' 1 answered Flood, delibe- 
rately tearing off the skirts of his Bond-street 
coat, in order to furnish himself with a wrest- 
ling jacket, "if this juvenile giant will but 
engage me at what they call " the Fingallian,'' 
or " collar and elbow — 11 (remark my know- 
ledge of their technicals, acquired in early 
youth, and, it is probable, in later life, 
amongst them) — then shall I but slightly 
value his utmost ; but if he rather choose their 
" long-arm-wrestling, 11 I incline to agree that 
you may account your poor well-wisher a bro- 
ken-necked, or broken-backed man. Prudence, 
and a good cause, however, aided by your 
pious aspirations, befriend me." 

" Here I am, 1 ' bellowed his antagonist. 

" Collar-and-elbow ? w asked Flood. 

" Arra, bother, here it es ! — " and, rushing 
forward, he seized his hated foe round the 



236 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

small of the back, with both arms, clasping 
his hands firmly together, and stooping a little 
from his hips. Flood secured, in return, as 
good a gripe as was left open to him ; but his 
anticipations of this mode of wrestling proved 
correct ; he had now to contend with mere 
animal strength ; skill or activity little availed 
him ; and Hogan, after a few tugs, threw him 
a heavy fall, to which Gunning's groans, more 
than his champion's, responded. 

Gerald flew to take him up, much alarmed. 
The gallant though absurd fellow was not, 
however, materially hurt, and soon recovered 
his breath and spirits. His other seconder 
beckoned him aside, while Gerald strove to 
persuade him from farther struggle against 
the colossal muscles he had to encounter. 
" Thanks, amazingly instructive friend, and I 
will remember," said Flood, speaking to the 
peasant, as he soon joined Gerald ; and again 
to the tug he would go. 

Now he secured a better hold than at first, 
and for a longer time baffled his opponent's 
furious attempts to throw him. Hogan lifted 
him from the ground, and dashed him down- 
ward ; he alighted firmly on his outspread feet : 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 237 

and suddenly, while the revengeful lad forced 
him back, Flood dropped on one knee, and 
aiding the sleight with his hands, allowed the 
young brigand to propel himself, head-foremost, 
over his shoulder. 

" Was that it, esteemed tutor ?" he in- 
quired of his rude seconder. 

" Nothing else it was — hoo !" and the man, 
jumping high, slapped him on the back. 

But at the third and fourth struggle Flood 
was thrown ; and a fifth fall might have prov- 
ed very dangerous, if his trusty squire had 
not skilfully broken it. When Flood gained 
breath, he addressed his audience. 

" In this passage of wrestling, I may be 
allowed, without faint-hearted ness, to indicate 
my admitted inferiority. Victory to the de- 
scendant of your ancient giant and captain, 
Fin-mac-cool. And so stand we equal, battle 
for battle, if, indeed, success in the horse-like 
quality of tugging and of throwing man, be 
esteemed as glorious as triumph in the noble 
encounter of the pugilistic ring. A third 
species of engagement must, nevertheless, pro- 
claim the real victor. Give unto us the shille-r 
laghs." 



238 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Smiling perfect confidence, young Hogan 
grasped his primitive weapon. 

" He looks success,*" remarked Flood to Ge- 
rald, " but he may not be so near to it. Their 
shillelagh play is, incontrovertibly, admirable; 
yet have I practised it ; and my rather studious 
attention to the broadsword fence, under emi- 
nent tutors of Albion, of Germany, and of the 
Gaul, may moreover slightly stand my friend 
upon the present occasion. 1 ' 

Again the speaker made correct calculations. 
Though Hogan came on, shouting and dancing, 
and whirling his cudgel round his head, at the 
rate of a hundred flourishes to a minute, he could 
not make a blow tell inside his antagonist's scien- 
tific guard. Meantime, Flood hit him smartly, 
now upon his knuckles, now upon his up-raised, 
capering knees, or shins, and at length, while 
hard-pressed, was compelled to knock the mad 
fellow down. Silence prevailed amongst the 
Rockites, which Gerald at first feared might 
bode danger, but which was really suspended 
breath, caused by their utter astonishment and 
admiration. Up jumped Hogan, after a few se- 
conds, and frowning deathfully, flung by his short 
cudgel, and snatched from a by-stander a club 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 239 

of great length and weight. " Asy, gorcoon !" 
said his father. 

"He'll kill you, now, if he can! 1 ' — cried 
Flood's constant seconder, as the young ruffian 
attacked him. 

" And I hinder him, as I may, without aim- 
ing at life V questioned the brave dandy, as he 
with difficulty parried many a deperate blow. 

M To be sure ! — what else ?" — answered se- 
veral : " he desarves it." 

" Then must I very positively disable his 
weapon-arm ;" and scarce had Flood spoken the 
words, when young Hogan dropped his formida- 
ble club, and let fall to his side the member that 
had just flourished it so vigorously. The arm 
was broken. 



240 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER X. 

" Brave Rockites !" resumed Flood, now- 
appealing earnestly and naturally to the by- 
standers, whose seriousness, at the serious ter- 
mination of their amusement, probably urged 
him to forget his habitual eccentricity — " brave 
Rockites, I request you to take notice that this 
I have been compelled to do in self-defence, my 
antagonist having attacked me at odds not first 
agreed on ; and pray observe also, that the 
arm I have hurt, inflicted upon me, at my first 
introduction among you, the only degrading 
blow which, as a gentleman, and a man, I have 
ever received." 

The band remained silent. At last ; " What 
does yourself say, Dinny ?" asked Flood's 
staunch friend, while the father sat by his son, 
at one side. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 241 

" Why, I believe the gorcoon must go home 
to his mother to be nursed, for another start, 
and that's all," replied Denny. 

" This purse will pay his surgeon,'' resumed 
Flood, presenting it to his seconder. 

" It's heavy, 'faith," observed this person, as 
he handed it to the old man. 

" Thankee, your honour," said the father, 
coolly enough ; but as he put it up, the Rock- 
ites muttered their satisfaction. 

" The rascal should not have had a farthing 
from me," remarked Gunning to his champion. 

" Whisht, ould man, or maybe we M forget 
whose brother you are," counselled Denny. 

" Forget, and be d !" Mr. Gunning began 

to retort, when he was interrupted by the re- 
entrance into the den of men who had long 
before gone out to watch, a second time, on the 
neighbouring roads, for Mr. Bignel's expected 
new tenant. Every face grew still more serious, 
nay, stern, at their sudden appearance, and they 
were assailed with questions from every tongue. 
The tidings they had to communicate produced 
general disappointment. 

" Their gossip,' 1 as they called the doomed 
man for whom they had been on the look-out, 

VOL. in. M 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

had not yet come in their way ; and, moreover, 
must not be expected to-night, for intelligence 
to that effect had reached Bignel, as " a friend 
in the house," assured them. 

Gerald rejoiced in his heart at this providen- 
tial disappointment, and hoped that no outrage 
of any kind could that night be committed. 
But the sanguine brigands otherwise deter- 
mined. 

From their growling deliberations he inferred 
that, having assembled in great force, and bent 
their minds on an exploit, they were unwilling 
to disband and go home, without executing ven- 
geance upon at least the principal object of their 
hatred. 

This point decided, important questions next 
arose concerning " Captain Mickle." No one 
could account for him ; it seemed to all that, as 
Denny had at first said, he left them to pursue 
their own measures ; and again it was resolved 
to act without him ; old Hogan, as his Serjeant, 
succeeding to a temporary command over his 
comrades. 

The heavy and sunless winter's day was 
now failing ; the expanse of bog without grew 
blacker. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 248 

" Well, boys; an' we'll just have time, afore 
we go, for a mouthful, and a taste of the pot- 
teen ; but it must be a taste in rason ; remem- 
ber that, and no grumbling. And the gintle- 
men, too, that we're hindering from their good 
dinner, sure they must be hungry," said Denny. 

" What hogs 1 food have ye ?" asked Gun- 
ning. 

" Only just the praties, Sir, and the pot- 
teen." 

" Agh !" shrugging his shoulders, " the pra- 
ties ; raw, I suppose f* 

" Yes, your honour ; but we '11 soon roast 
'em. 1 ' 

" Roast 'em ? here, amid such a combustible 
pile ? Do you want to roast us along with 'em? 1 ' 

" If the place takes fire, sure there 's plenty 
o' water to go into from it," answered Denny. 

" Thank you," said Gunning. 

During this dialogue, several of the peasants 
rooted holes in the damp turfen floor, filled them 
with potatoes and straw alternately, heaped dry 
sods of the convenient fuel over all, struck lights 
with their pistols, and dinner was soon cooked. 
Themingledinterest and contempt, natural yearn- 
ing, (for he was very hungry,) and recollective 
M 2 



244 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

abhorrence with which Mr. Gunning eyed these 
proceedings, was amusing to Flood and Gerald. 
He would turn with a shrug, to gaze out at 
the inhospitable waste of bog, but as often glance 
back at the roasting process. The primitive 
meal was ready, and the Rockites, kneeling or 
stooping round the different fires, began, in 
great glee, to snatch up the hot potatoes, and, 
delving off the blackened peels with their skilful 
thumb-nails, to eat them ravenously, blowing 
upon them, all the while, and passing them 
from hand to hand, to avoid being burnt. Now 
and then, according to the permission of their 
new chief, they moistened their throats with a 
sip from a cow's horn ; and delighted with their 
dinner they seemed to be. Gerald now detect- 
ed his old friend eagerly watching their motions, 
and more than once heard from him that pecu- 
liar sucking in of the breath, between the part- 
ed teeth, which may philosophically be termed 
a symptom of strong animal desire, though a 
plain-spoken person would say that Mr. Gun- 
ning's teeth watered. At last, losing patience, 

" You break faith with us, old chap, 1 ' he 
said, addressing Denny ; and when his hint pro- 
cured him a little pile of roasted potatoes, near 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 245 

to his hand, and a spare cow's horn, half-filled, 
Mr. Gunning used his thumb-nails and his jaws 
to as good a purpose as any one around him ; 
and when pretty well helped, recommended his 
young friends to follow his example; adding, 
that he never before knew what it was to get 
a good potatoe ; that he saw London was 
not the place to get them ; and as to the 
bog-whisky, he assured Gerald that it was at 
least better stuff than Mr. Gore's Madeira 
puddle. 

" And what 's to be done with me, now ?" 
he inquired, as the men stood up from their 
meal, once more assuming serious faces. 

" Why, Sir, you must be sent off to your 
friend, Mr. Knightly," said Denny. 

" Sent off? how am I to go?" 

" In your kish, and hay about you,"" an- 
swered Gerald's humoursome advocate, using a 
kind of rustic, slang phrase, generally applied 
in a figurative sense, though now in a real 
one. 

" In my what ?" snarled Mr. Gunning. 

" There it is," said Denny, pointing to an 
oblong wicker-basket, about five feet in length, 
shallow, and open at top, with which two men 



246 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

entered, bearing it, like a barrow, upon poles 
which had just been thrust through it from 
end to end. In Ireland, such articles are made 
to fit into the peculiar * cars 1 of the country, 
for the purpose of ensuring a compact load of 
any loose material ; turf, stones, or coals. 

Though Mr. Gunning was pleased in his 
heart at the prospect of speedy escape, he 
strongly objected to travel by this mode of 
conveyance. His weight might burst the 
wicker bottom, or the poles might break, 
and then he must surely tumble into the bog, 
and perish, the night grew so dark. Denny 
and others ensured him against any such perils. 
Then came the more important question — 
" How do I know that I shall be carried to 
Mr. Knightly's ?" 

" Oh, honour bright," answered all : " a friend 
of Mr. Knightly, and a brother of Mr. Gun- 
ning of Belleview, need fear no deceit at their 
hands." 

"Well; I'll believe all that when I see it. 
And what becomes of my young friends ?" 

" They'll just stay here, with a friend or 
two of our own, till we come back, 1 ' answered 
old Dennis ; " and then, by the time, towards 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 247 

morning, when your honour will be left at Mr. 
Knightly 's gate— " 

" Towards morning ! — why, confound you, if 
I leave this infernal hole now, what should 
keep me on the road till near morning ? 'Tis 
but a few miles to Mr. Knightly's ; and if those 
savages only take me on at the rate of a sedan- 
trot, I can be there in an hour." 

" But your honour 'ill consave that we don't 
want you to tell on us, as you promised, till 
our night's work is done ; nor the other gentle- 
men either, though they don't threaten us as 
you do ; so, they '11 stop here, as I said afore, 
while we're on the fut ; (there's no use in 
letting 'em come with us, to be looking at us, 
you see, Sir;) — and you'll be axed to stop, in 
some convenient place to Mr. Knightly 's, if you 
plase ; and as soon as you can do no harum by 
informing again us—" 

With increased anger Mr. Gunning inter- 
rupted the speaker, protesting against being 
removed, on such an understanding. He 
would prefer staying with his friends. Denny 
replied that so he should, if it were as safe to 
carry him through the bog at a later hour of 
the night, of which the noon promised to be so 



248 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

"pitch-dark;" still he objected; but, at Den- 
ny's command, his appointed porters lifted him 
into the kish by main force, tied a handker- 
chief on his bald head, and, amid his abuse 
and maledictions, trotted off with Mr. Gunning 
along the narrow causeway that ran from the 
entrance. 

" And so we 're quit of the wickedest ould 
man that ever I seen with my two born eyes," 
observed Dennis; "it's a marcy he didn't 
bring down the roof on our heads. Come, 
boys, get ready." 

Gerald thought this the time to exhort the 
Rockites against the atrocities they were about 
to commit, and accordingly he addressed them 
earnestly. Flood seconded him in the most 
serious speech he had that evening delivered. 
The men, pausing in their preparations of 
blackening their faces, and kicking off their 
brogues, looked angry and threatening. While 
the gentlemen continued, Denny sternly inter- 
rupted them. 

" You 're spaking of what doesn't concarn 
you, and what you know nothing about ; and 
we never let strange people meddle or make 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 249 

with us ; no, nor our neighbours either ; re- 
member the story about Father Dick. And 
so, hould your tongues, gorcoons ; it 's the 
best of your play, maybe, if ye don't want 
to make us forget the smooth promises ye 
had ready awhile agone, and call to mind, 
instid of 'em, that ye are strangers, in earnest, 
without a friend to give ye a good word, 
like the gintleman that 's just gone, in the 
country wide. Come here, Sham us ; come 
here, Paudge," he continued ; two Rockites 
advanced, well armed ; " Stand here by their 
sides, and let us find 'em here, alive or dead, 
when we see ye again. Start off, bould boys ! 
The foremost o' ye carry red sods, that 
the rest may know their way along the 
tracks, and not go astray after the willy-the- 
wisps, that's beginning to dance about in the 
bog." 

Promptly obeying his commands, the men 
bounded out, barefooted, many holding sods of 
lighted turf in their hands. 

" Make off you" resumed old Dennis, ad- 
dressing his son, in the open air, " as fast as 
you can, to the mother and Nance." 
m 5 



250 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

"No; I'll stay here," answered the lad, 
scowling at Flood. 

" The divvle a stay, then, 1 ' said his father, 
shoving him far from the entrance to the re- 
treat — " no matter how the gintlemen 'ill happen 
to be settled with hereafter, you sha'n't bring 
me into trouble by hurting 'em behind my back. 
Go home, I bid you !" 

" Men," turning to the guards ; " don't let 
the born fool inside the place :" and the old 
brigand briskly followed his party. 

" Well, I know who Bignel 'ill have to 
thank, if ye are faint-hearted enough to let him 
off' to-night," muttered the ill-blooded youth, 
once more scowling at Flood ; and then he dis- 
appeared. 

" Not your own self, at any rate, my boy," 
cried one of the two men left with our friends, 
speaking after him — " for your hand was never 
the one to cry stop, when once it had a finger on 
the trigger ; — see," peering out into the increas- 
ing darkness, — "Salvation to my soul, Shamus ! 
but the young rap is staling after the boys, 
since he won't be let in here — but he can do 
no more than look on ; they won't give him back 
his pistol." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 251 

" So," said Flood to Gerald, as both retired 
and sat down in the remote end of their turfy 
prison ; " I may have remotely done this oft- 
named Bignel some good, without intending it." 

"But yourself none, I fear, Flood. 11 

" Explain slightly, good Blount." 

" We remain in the power of your enemy^ 
father, upon his return ; and I did not relish 
the old ruffian's last words, in allusion to that 
return, addressed either to our guards, or to his 
hopeful son." 

" Nor I, very positively. 1 ' 

" These men have been told to produce us 
here, alive or dead" continued Gerald. 

" Such were the orders, worthy fellow : nay, 
the allusion, touching the hereafter, vouchsafed 
to his son, appeared to me more disagreeable. 1 ' 

" It is my opinion, my dear Flood, that the 
old scoundrel only kept in his revenge because 
he saw his party indifferent to the cause for it ; 
and that he hopes to provoke them against us, 
when their passions shall have been roused to tiger- 
cruelty by the scene they have gone to enact." 

" And indubitably with that sage opinion I 
rather incline to agree.' 1 

" Self-preservation, then, as well as the claims 



252 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

upon us to try and prevent this outrage, by 
alarming the neighbourhood, suggests — what ?" 

,s Our seizing upon the persons of yonder fel- 
lows, securing them here, and effecting our re- 
treat," answered Flood, coolly, but with a cou- 
rageous sparkle in his eye. 

" Then we must not longer discuss it," re- 
sumed Gerald ; " for, supposing them mastered, 
we can find our way out of the black bog only 
while the lighted turfs borne by their comrades 
remain in view to guide us ; and see, — there 
they go, like wavering stars across the rayless 
gulph." 

" Forbid it, Heaven, that we mistake them 
for the facetious meteors of the bog, spoken 
of by Captain Dennis Hogan, my excellent 
Blount. 1 ' 

" No, they are too red ; see, again — there, 
nearer to us, glides one of the false lights you 
mean, and note how much paler." 

" Good. Let us remember the distinction. 
Now measure those two unsuspecting ones, as 
they look out after their friends from the en- 
trance, and take your choice of them.'" 

" Choose for me. 11 

" You have been an invalid, most eminent; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 253 

and therefore, only, I claim the biggest crea- 
ture, and him I rather propose not to struggle 
with, but merely fell, by aid of Mr. Thomas 
Cribb's best method. Are you ever tranquilly 
sure * of a floorer ?' " 

" I Ve never struck a blow in my life," said 
Gerald. 

" Enormously strange. The primitive ! But 
spare we comments. Your part, then, must be 
to embrace the lesser identity, rather of a sud- 
den, and him get to the earth, as well and as 
speedily as is within the range of possibility, 
not suffering him to poke his long-barrelled 
piece at your inexpressibly precious head dur- 
ing the effort. This you incontrovertibly can 
perform ; for, lo ! he lacks inches, five or four, 
of your aristocratic height, and withal is elderly, 
thinnish, and hard-worked.'" 

" I shall do my best," promised Gerald. 

" Then are we free as yonder bog-ranging 
phosphoric sprite. Now, mark ; steal up your 
hand to your neck, — innocently, as I do, so, — 
and unloose and cautiously convey to your friend, 
the ample silken kerchief which encircles your 
noble thorax." 

Gerald obeyed those orders. " Good. Out 



254 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of your poke also draw its proper square of 
silk — warily, still — an inch at a time ; thanks. 
Arise, now, heaving an audible sigh of captivi- 
ty, and walk a few melancholy paces up and 
down, while with corresponding articles of cos- 
tume, undeniably mine own, I contrive gentle 
fetters for yonder Goliah ; honours, to match, 
being already prepared for your prize." 

Gerald arose, following his friend's instruc- 
tions. The men turned at his step and 
his sigh, but immediately resumed their gaze 
after the receding turf-lights, and began to 
whisper earnestly. In a few moments Flood 
joined Gerald, nothing appearing in his hands. 
The friends linked each other, and now paced 
together up and down their singular prison- 
house. " They must face us, before we act,' 1 
said Flood, " in order to enable you to secure 
the long barrel, by hugging it affectionately to 
your breast. Friends,"" he resumed, plaintively 
addressing the guards, and languidly stepping 
towards them, still linking Gerald, " we 
thirst to extremity, and would give gold for 
water." 

" Here 's no water but what 's to be found 
in the bog, and you'll not be thinking it the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 255 

natest," answered the tall peasant ; " but what '11 
ye give for that V extending his cow's horn, 
with his left arm, upon which rested the pistol 
he held in his right hand. 

" This," said Flood, holding out a sovereign ; 
and still the friends advanced ; both men had 
now turned round — " This !" repeated Flood, 
tendering his " floorer" instead, while Gerald 
pounced upon his man. Mr. Thomas Cribb's 
" best method 1 ' partially failed : the huge 
Rockite only staggered like an ox, also bel- 
lowing like one ; and was about to cock his 
pistol, when Flood, jumping in with all his 
strength, at a second attempt struck him down. 
The next instant he wrested the pistol from 
his hand ; the next deliberately knocked him 
on the head with its butt, although the blow 
seemed a calculated one, and intended to stun 
only ; and then, crying out to Gerald, 

" ' Now, gallant Saxon, hold thine own !' " 
" That is, contrive to keep Poucet amazingly 
tight for one moment !" adroitly slipped his cap- 
tive's head into a running noose, formed at the 
end of one silk handkerchief; pinioned his arms 
with two others, attached to it ; tied a fourth 
round the fellow's ankles; jumped up; found Ge- 



256 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

raid tumbling, not quite at advantage, with the 
lesser Rockite, near the entrance ; a second time 
used the butt of the pistol ; then ran to a corner, 
where lay his own stays; assisted by Gerald, 
buckled them round the little old peasant, arms 
and all, — the straps, as may be concluded, 
stretched to their last holes ; tore a slip off his 
white surtout, from the lapel to the skirt ; with 
this fettered the man's legs; thrust his bare feet 
into one of the many pairs of brogues kicked 
off by the main band ; and, a moment after, Ge- 
rald and he were hurrying through the bog, 
armed with the weapons of their late guards. 

" When thelights first changed their straight 
course, it was to the right ; and this, therefore, 
must be our way," said Gerald, turning upon 
another causeway, at right-angles with that 
which had led them so far. 

" Agreed," said Flood, keeping at his side ; 
" and, veritably, yonder they still appear to 
give us assurance. 1 ' 

u At the verge of this dreary waste, I 
should think, if not beyond it, Flood." 

" Very possibly ; — but hold, doughty Blount, 
may they not be called stationary, now ?" 

" I fear so," answered Gerald. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 257 

" I venture to hint that the bellow emitted 
by my great animal may have aroused the 
suspicions of the flying band," resumed Flood, 
" and that they pause to hold counsel on us ?" 

" Supposing your case, what must we do ?" 
asked his fellow adventurer. 

" The gallant thing, yet - -push on, worthiest." 

" Till we come up with them P 11 

" I say not precisely so ; but, surely, till we 
have all possible aid from their breeze-fanned 
sods, to extricate ourselves out of this very 
abominable and perilous maze." 

The friends continued their course, often 
obliged to travel zig-zag, according to the whim 
of the trackways, and scarce able to distinguish 
the narrow and by no means firm slips of soil 
to which they were limited, from the sedges or 
from the water which edged them. Night, the 
real wintry night, had gained it deepest dark- 
ness ; overhead not a star twinkled. No dis- 
tinct forms of elevated land could be traced in 
the distance ; no tree, no house, no cabin ; all 
was vague gloom. The wind now and then 
swept gustily and sullenly over the drear ex- 
panse of bog ; or the black water-fowl, startled 
from their rushy tufts by the quick feet of the 



258 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

fugitives, plunged unseen, though near at hand, 
farther out into the stagnate lake, flapping it 
with their heavy wings, and booming wildly. 

" This is worse than the run from Burgos," 
said Flood. 

" Look at the lights, ahead l" cried Ge- 
rald. 

" A bull, — an exceedingly native bull, ex- 
cellent comrade, 1 ' answered Flood ; " one can- 
not see things out of sight.'" 

" They certainly all disappeared that in- 
stant, Flood — explain why." 

" Gallant fellow, your command rather pre- 
sumes me infallible, which compliment I 
waive ; and yet would attempt to pronounce, 
that the Rockites have extinguished our guid- 
ing-stars, either for the purpose of pursuing 
their expedition along the more solid and more 
inhabited country, which now they gain, with- 
out notice ; or haply, have done so in order to 
form an ambuscade for your admirable self, 
and your humblest — " 

" Stand r interrupted Gerald, as a light 
suddenly appeared about twenty paces before 
them ; and he presented his piece. 

" 'Tis but the fiend," said Flood ; while, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 259 

as both pressed forward, it fell back, and went 
out. 

" Ah ! — I forget — let us hold on," said Ge- 
rald, his voice tremulous. 

"So; a few of our honester sparks, again 
at the proper distance, though not precisely 
in the same direction," said his companion. 
" Come; suffer yourself to turn upon this 
track ; they have surely traversed it before 
us." 

" Let us be cautious of getting too near 
them," advised Gerald, following Flood. 

" They permit our free progress, for now 
they are not stationary, my Blount — so, for- 
ward." 

Some quick walking, or rather repeated 
bounds, brought them to the extremity of the 
trackway they had last chosen ; but that ex- 
tremity was surrounded by water. At the 
same time, the lights, of which Flood had just 
spoken, vanished from their sight. 

" How, my Pythias ? was it but the imp 
again, with many of his fellows ?" 

" Look here !" whispered Gerald : both 
turned; and a single flame advanced down 
the trackway, about a man's height from the 



260 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ground, and moving up and down, and here 
and there, as a light might do carried by a 
man who should come springing along — " Is 
it illusion or reality ? bewilderment or — death 
for us ?" continued Gerald. 

" The first it may be ; the second it shall 
not be, brave Blount. What ! sink before it ? 
cheer up ! 'tis borne but by one coward foe, 
remember, or by one exceedingly fantastic 
devil, after all.'" 

" You detect my nervousness/ 1 said Gerald ; 
" but will you believe the cause ? These 
strange though usual phenomena, now first 
seen by me ; the sense of bewilderment ; the 
uncertainty of true or false, around us, — this, 
rather than dread of a Rockite bullet, affects 
me. See ! that must indeed be a meteor — 
how it flickers towards us, as if waved to and 
fro by some malicious sprite, dancing with 
delight at our quandary." 

" And now he valtzes back again," said 
Flood, " and now he melts into atrocious 
boggy air." 

" And I can almost fancy his spiteful laugh, 
in that strange sound," resumed Gerald — 
" what is it ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 261 

" It is a laugh, poetically-Germanically- 
sensitive Blount, and no will-o'-the-wisp laugh, 
either, though yet a most distant one — allow 
yourself to listen." 

" I do hear feet hastening this way ; we are 
pursued, Flood."" 

" Veritably, good fellow." 

" What then ?" 

M You can swim, I positively conclude, else 
would you now be traversing the real Stygian 
shades, instead of this Irish imitation of the 
same?" 

" And shall we jump in here ?" 

" Even here ; for odds surely come against 
us." 

" And strike for what point ?" 

*' Yonder, I venture to be very well as- 
sured, is firm land ; see ; that must at least be an 
eminence, blacker than the sky ; and its base, 
sweeping towards us, is the lightish spread of 
something, that, at about sixty yards, edges the 
ebon pool we have to cross. 1 ' 

** Let us try ;" and Gerald, abandoning his 
piece, as many footsteps came closer, set Flood 
a good example. For dear, dear life they 
swam boldly to their point, often entangled 



262 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

amongst rushes and weeds ; it was indeed 
solid land which Flood had descried ; long be- 
fore they reached it, they could wade ; and they 
sprang lightly upon the spare grass, when almost 
the whole of the Rockite party rose from the 
ground, and without much trouble again made 
them prisoners. 

" I tould ye I heard them in the bog, 
where the weakness made me lie down," said 
young Hogan. 

" What's become of our poor gossips, that 
we left to keep you company ? Did ye — kill 
them ?" demanded his father, his last words 
uttered in an ominous tone. 

Gerald and Flood declared the true state of 
the case. 

" Do ye believe 'em, boys ?" continued old 
Hogan. A vengeful mutter answered him. 

" Make the Sassenachs kneel down," said a 
voice. Our friends once more remonstrated, 
eagerly, it may be concluded, proposing, as a 
very simple test of the truth of their state- 
ment, that a man should be dispatched to the 
retreat in the bog. Other voices concurred with 
this alternative. Denny resumed. 

" We can't spare a man the present time ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 263 

the four or five that went to hunt the gintle- 
men for us, is loss enough when we can't wait 
any longer till they come back. But maybe 
they 'd go to the Dry Lodging, and bring us the 
news we want. Morebetoken, howsomever, this 
brace o' foolish boys is to be paid for their 
peeping ; let them have a right peep now in 
arnest. Let them see somebody else kneel 
down, Jirst — if it's a thing that they must be 
behoulden to kneel down themselves, I mane. 
So, look after them, bould boys, in the front; 
ye know we let them stay behind, once afore. 
And now, up the hill, like hurlers." 



264 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER XI. 

Pursuant to old Dennis's order, Gerald and 
Flood were placed in the midst of those of the 
band who formed the advance, and all quickly 
moved up the eminence. Upon its brow a 
man appeared, starting out of a copse, like a 
guilty spectre. 

" Is all quiet below ?" inquired Dennis. 

'! As quiet as an empty church of a Sunday ; 
I was in the yard, a minute agone," answered 
the sentinel. 

" But he 's not gone to bed ?" 

" No, but going to sing his bed-psalms. 1 ' 

" So much the better for him and us ; — stale 
down, boys. 1 ' 

Opposite the hill upon which this dialogue took 
place was another, partially and newly planted, 
so far as the profoundly dark night allowed 
Gerald to judge, and near to its base twinkled 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 265 

lights, as if from the windows of a house. The 
hollow between both eminences seemed tra- 
versed by a road. As the Rockites descended 
to this hollow, they trod over fields in a good 
state of cultivation, and Gerald heard one of 
them whisper, " How well poor Mickle's ould 
farum comes on with him." They arrived at 
a dry wall which fenced one side of the road 
previously guessed at by Gerald, and here all at 
first crouched down, and then, one by one, crept 
stealthily over, and again bent low when they 
stood upon the road, causing the prisoners to 
follow all their movements. Gerald now more 
certainly knew that they were before a house. 
The candle-light vividly streamed through the 
shutters of its windows, and its humble front, 
one story high, became, from its white or 
lightish colour, a decided object in the gloom. 
It was not very distant from the road, in the 
opposite wall of which appeared a small, barred 
gate, that led up to it. 

" How mighty convanient it is, boys, that 
he 's in the Farrels"' ould house, to-night, warm- 
ing it for the new tenant," whispered Denny. 

" But no one is in the last empty house he 
made, to-night — in mine," said the elderly man, 

VOL. III. N 



266 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of whom mention has already been made during 
the scene in the Rockites' head-quarters, as 
the grave cabinet-minister of Dennis Hogan. 

u That's Martin spaking," said a weak female 
voice from the opposite side of the road. The 
man, crying " Jude !" under his breath, started 
across; the foremost of his comrades, taking 
our friends with them, followed. Close by Mr. 
Bignel's gate lay a woman, wretchedly habited, 
holding an infant to her bosom. Two other 
children, more grown, slept in her cloak, at her 
feet. She showed signs of feebleness and 
agitation. 

w Jude, machree," resumed her husband, 
kneeling by her side, " what are you and the 
childer doing here ? and how did you come 
here ? I left ye far away yesterday." 

" Yes, Martin," she answered; *' but the way 
you left us in, was worse to bear than a long 
road ; without house or home, bit or sup ; and 
when you turned your back on us, and the 
weenocks began to cry for what I couldn't 
give 'em, I said to myself, sure Bignel is a 
Christhen, any how ; and if Martin's wife and 
childer axes help at his dour, he'll remember 
who put 'em in the way to ax it : and so, Mar- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 267 

tin, with the babby in my arums, and little Jude 
and little Johnny by the hand, I walked the 
weary miles now between us and our own place, 
and that's the reason you find me here, to- 
night." 

'' Is it all the reason ? is it the reason I find 
you outside of his gate, instead of under his 
roof ? You hadn't the strenth to go up to the 
house ? eh, Jude ?" 

" I hardly had the strenth, Martin, but I 
did go up." 

"Well?" 

" And I knocked at the front-dour, but no 
one came, only a winda was lifted up, over 
my head, and shet down agin ; then I turned 
round to the back-dour ; and that was opened 
only to be slapt in my face : and they spoke of 
loosing the dog in the yard ; and then I grew 
afeard for the childer; and I thought to walk 
far away from the house ; but the load on my 
heart, and the weakness o' my feet, to say no- 
thing of the crature in my arums, made me 
drop here, where you see us afore you." 

" Better and better. And how is the babby ?" 
stretching his arms for it. 

" The hunger and the could troubled it, 
N 2 



268 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a-cushla, till awhile agone, but now it 's asleep, 
like the others." 

" Why it 's dead !" cried her husband, look- 
ing close into the face of the little corse. 

The mother's scream was drowned in the 
horrible shout with which the Rockites, now 
headed by Martin, instead of Dennis, rushed 
to attack Bignel's house. Their cry interrupt- 
ed another sound which issued from Bignel's 
parlour ; it was the swell of a hymn, sung by 
several voices. The furious barking of the 
unchained mastiff in the yard answered their 
threatening challenge, however ; but as Gerald 
and Flood were hustled by their guards into 
a small square enclosure before the hall-door, 
two shots killed the courageous animal on the 
spot, and, with the expressed purpose of giving 
Mr. Bignel a foretaste of his own fate, the 
bleeding carcass was instantly thrust between 
iron-bars, lately put up before his parlour win- 
dows^ — the shutters having first been burst in 
with the butts of muskets and fowling-pieces, — 
and flung upon the floor of the apartment. 

The lights had been extinguished all through 
the house. Without a moment's pause, the en- 
raged and revengeful band ran in separate 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 260 

groups, the prisoners' guard only excepted, to 
try for ingress at the front and at the back 
doors, and at the lower windows. None of the 
latter were found undefended, however, by iron- 
bars, which resisted their efforts ; and the former 
proved well-bolted, and locked. Meantime, 
Mr. Bignel and his garrison fired steadily from 
windows in the second story, themselves re- 
maining unseen, and were answered by volleys, 
which shattered the glass, and tore the slates 
off the slanting roof; while successive shouts, 
threats, and curses, accompanied the explosions, 
the crash, and the clatter. 

How the defenders fared, Gerald could not 
surmise; but he observed, with mixed wonder 
and pleasure, that none of their shots took 
effect upon the assaulters ; because, however 
the affair might end, he reflected that any 
personal injury sustained by the frantic pea- 
sants would greatly add to their thirst of 
blood. And doubtless his sympathy for Mr. 
Bignel had much to do with his present feel- 
ings and calculations ; but concern for himself 
and for his brave companion chiefly called them 
up. Nor was he made less selfish on this point, 
when Dennis Hogan, coming from the rear to the 



270 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

front of the house, to head a renewed attempt 
on the hall-door, said to the guards, while his 
features, tone, and manner at last reassumed the 
savage energy they had shown upon two former 
rencounters with Gerald, 

" Take the best care of the gintlemen." 

Three of the strongest of his party now hurl- 
ed huge stones, which they could barely lift 
and propel, against the hall-door, and crashes 
and increased cheers soon told that poor Big- 
nel's dangerous moment was near. Yelling 
like demons, the Rockites jumped into the 
house ; a few shots followed under its roof ; 
then Gerald saw the victors busily placing can- 
dles in every window ; and, amid the light thus 
thrown upon the enclosure in front, Bignel was 
dragged out. 

His head was bare ; his coat off, — perhaps 
he had thrown it by to leave himself more free 
for defence, — but he now made no struggle 
against his ferocious enemies ; his head hung on 
his breast, his eyes were cast down, and the hue 
of anticipated death swarthed his features. In- 
deed he seemed stupified, and insensible to the 
fate that awaited him. 

" Kneel down, Bignel !" cried Martin, dash- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 2?1 

ing him on the ground ; the victim fell pros- 
trate : " Stop a hand, boys !" continued the 
maddened husband and father, and he ran to- 
wards the road. Gerald repressed, at this re- 
spite, the acting of a determination formed in 
Bignel's favour. 

" It 's a shame for a pious body, like you, to lie 
flat there," said Dennis — " stay on your knees, 
as you Ye bid ;" and he seized Bignel's arm and 
placed him in a kneeling posture. The silence 
and repose that, for a moment, had previously 
ensued, most probably prepared the land-steward 
for becoming conscious of Hogan's sudden words 
and action, and now, wavering from side to 
side, as he knelt, he stared around him. 

" Yes ! It was I that stirred you," resum- 
ed Dennis, bending close to Bignel's face; 
" and don't you remember me, gossip ? I am 
the ould fellow that 's forced to take to labour- 
ing-work, and to selling sour beer and whisky, 
in a house, in the village below, that I have at 
a double rack-rent from one you know, because 
the same body took my dacent farum from me, 
to let it out at another rack-rent." 

" And must I give up the ground you let 
to me for two years, afore good witnesses/ 1 



272 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

asked Larry O'Dea; " or send the childer to 
your school, Misther Bignel ?" 

" Will your honour take the security I 
offered for the last gale, and let the cattle out 
o' the pound, to-morrow morning? 1 ' inquired 
another. 

" I 'd trouble you, Sir, if you plaise, for a 
good word in the next letter you write to Lord 
Ciangore, over to England, instead of penning 
us all down to be raps and rogues/ 1 said a 
fourth. 

" Bignel,' 1 demanded the youth, who had 
befriended Gerald and Flood in the bog, his 
good-humour now gone, his brow deadly, and 
his tones deep, — " was it by the psalm-singing, 
and the Bible-reading, and nothing else, you 
coaxed my mother to quit her fatherless childer, 
and her ould home, and her ould prayers, to 
go among the swaddlers,* and be a sarvant in 
your house ?" 

" Bignel ! how cum that ?" screamed Mar- 
tin, reappearing with the dead infant in his 
hands, and flinging it on the ground before the 

* Methodists, or other sects. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 273 

kneeling man : " Draw out afore him, boys, and 
give me the first offer !" 

" With a hearty good-will, 1 '' said old Hogan ; 
" and to bring to his mind as good a rason as 
any, let him remember the Farrels." 

" The Farrels !" shouted all, as they took 
their ground. Gerald was again about to in- 
terfere, but a second interruption checked him. 
The galloping of a horse was heard near at 
hand on the road, and then through the gate 
that led up to the house, and, mixed with the 
sound, a woman's voice repeated — " The Far- 
rels ! Never mind the Farrels ! ye have no 
right to spill blood in their name ! Hould your 
hand, Dinny Hogan, if it isn't too late to bid 
you ! — hould your hand, and listen to me !" 
The speaker, Moya Farrel, here came upon 
the scene, jumped from her horse, and ran be- 
tween Bignel and his executioners. The land- 
steward swooned. 

" No," she continued ; " if poor Mickle and 
I can't forget what he did to us, we forgive it ; 
and, I say again, that 's why ye have no right to 
harm a hair of his head on our account. And, 
morebetoken, Mickle has sent me here, to tell 
N 5 



274 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ye so, and to bid you, on every other account, 
not to touch Bignel ! And well ye know ye are 
book-sworn to do his bidding." 

" Where is Mickle himself?" asked Dennis. 

" Coming after me," replied Moya ; " and 
you have a rason of your own, Dinny Hogan, 
to be wondering at that I Good care you took 
to keep him from hindering this work, ever 
since he left me, last night ! But he got away 
from your boys, just in the nick o' time, Dinny, 
to stop your hand from it, and from more than 
it, maybe — Ah !* as, looking around, she espied 
Gerald, — " but there he is, too, safe and sound 
yet r 

" He ?" repeated Dennis ; " and do you know 
who the doul the Sassenach is ?" 

" I do, — and you know a little of him, as well 
as me, Dinny, though not as I do ; you know 
him for the good-hearted gentleman that saved 
your captain's life on the strange road, and 
his wife's and their poor childer's life — ay, and 
that helped him, by good advice, and kind 
words, to play the part he'll surely play to- 
night, in spite o 1 you. Oh, boys, boys ! can ye 
raise a finger again the man that was Mickle 's 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 275 

only friend, when he wanted one ? ay, or again 
the man afore you, for his sake ?" 

" How, for his sake ?" questioned Dennis ; 
" what do you mane at»all, Moya? What's the 
more you know of this strange gorcoon ?" 

" What I won't tell you, yet, Dinny Hogan. 
— Never fear, your darling honour !" she con- 
tinued, addressing Gerald. " Though I found 
the letter, that learned me who you are, just a 
while agone, no one but Mickle, and better 
friends, heard it from me — and Mickle — " 

" Boys !" interrupted Martin, " our own trou- 
bles, put on us by Bignel, gives us fair lave and 
licence to settle with him." 

" They do," assented Denny ; " and, more- 
betoken, Mickle isn't here, after all, to give us 
his commands his own self." 

"But he's coming after me, I tell you!" 
cried Moya Farrel. 

" We don't know that, Moya; and whe- 
ther or no, boys, just let us finish our good 
night's work ; and sure, if he 's angry at it, he 
can never say — " 

" Dinny Hogan !" in her turn interrupted 
Moya, " you want to do, before he comes, 



276 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

what you dare not do to his face, and for that 
rason you pretend not to believe me when I say 
he is on the road — but he is ! The lameness 
wouldn't let him mount a horse ; and besides, he 
was beholden to turn off o' the road, a start, 
to spake with friends that 11 give him better 
advice than you would, on the whole of the 
business, and consarning all you have now in 
your power. And have a care of Mickle, Dinny ! 
well he knows, from me, the honest way the 
stranger was sent on his road to Lower-Court, 
out of your house, this morning !" 

" Arra, boys, this is all the divvle's nonsense ; 
take her away !" said Denny. 

" They won't !" — she cried, falling on the 
yet insensible Bignel — " they won't, unless they 
drag the arms from my body !" she clasped the 
victim close : " they won't, unless they 'd earn a 
curse for themselves and all belonging to them !" 
Two men tried to bear her aside : " Hell-hounds, 
do, and rue it ! — ye don't know whose eyes are 
looking at ye, this night. — Stop — listen ! isn't 
that the noise 0"* the car that brings him to ye, 
as fast as a whip can speed the horse ?" 

" No such thing, boys, 1 ' resumed Denny ; 
" it's just making fools of us, she is ;— so, by 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 277 

your lave, Mova" — by main force, he nearly 
unclasped her arms from Bignel ; but the un- 
happy man, at last restored to consciousness, 
now clung as closely to her, and the struggle 
grew desperate : " Come, there 's no use, either 
in this, or in your big words, about this body 
and that body, and the other great buggaboo 
you want to frighten us with, that no one but 
yourself knows any thing about — lave off, I 
tell you !" 

Denny's last tug was nearly successful ; and 
now, indeed, Gerald felt himself called on to try 
another chance. Suddenly breaking from his 
guards, — " Hold, for me !" he said, " and you 
shall have Moya Fan-el's secret — I am the 
Honourable Gerald Blount." 

" Now, boys ! — " cried Moya. 

And if you are, by the G !" exclaimed 

Denny, who perhaps had before surmised the 
fact, " so much the better ! it's the very lesson 
we ought to larn you, for your brother's sake ! 
Step aside,— first — and see how we like the good 
steward he sends over to us." 

" Spare the man's life, and, in Lord Clan- 
gore's name, I promise you that he shall be 
removed from amongst you ! w 



278 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Divvle a spare !" cried Martin, and Denny 
and many others repeated the words, and warn- 
ed the new mediator to retire. 

" Spare him .' and I give the same pledge, 
that the injuries he has done you shall be 
retrieved ; that in future — " 

"Whisht! listen again!" — broke in Moya, 
and now the rapid motion of wheels sounded 
distinctly below the house. She ran to the 
limit of the enclosure, and assisted her husband 
to dismount from a car, on which he reclined, 
driven by another man. 

" Fall back, Rocks, all of ye," was Michael 
Farrel's command, authoritatively delivered, as 
he limped forward, supporting himself on a 
stick ; and the party at once obeyed him. 
" Kneel up, Bignel," he resumed, " and take 
this hand to help you. Such as you treat us 
badly enough, but this is not the way to make 
ourselves be better treated. And, after all, ye 
are not as much to blame as them that lets ye 
do it." 

Here, to Gerald's great surprise, and some- 
what to his consternation, his old acquaintance 
frowned threateningly at him. 

" I'm thinking, boys," he continued, "con- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 279 

sidering the comfort Bignel took from me and 
Moya, our downfal and sufferings, by his 
means, are greater than any of yours ; but, if I 
forgive him, every man here ought — and will, — 
except one — Dinny Hogan : and, look — I'm 
standing before my father's dour, that 's now a 
strange dour to me, and he and ye know why — 
and yet, on this very spot, I take his hand 
again, and I say — may God forgive you, Big- 
nel, for Mickle Farrel does ! Come, boys ; I 
must have more than one or two clerks to that 
prayer." 

In excitement, men pass rapidly from one ex- 
treme to another ; and the magnanimity shown 
by Michael, produced, indeed, an emulative 
" Amen P 

" Stand by me, then, Bignel — hould my arm ; 
for, to make all sure, III stand by you, in the 
house, till daylight. Now, where 's Dinny 
Hogan ?" 

After looking round them, the men answered 
that he had gone away. 

" So he ought. And let the rest o" 1 ye follow 
his example, barring the boys I'll call to my 
side for another business." 

He mentioned the names of four of the party, 



280 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

who, while their fellows dispersed, walked to 
him. 

" Mr. Bignel, you'll lend us your handsome, 
smooth-going, jaunting-car? — I knew you would. 
Jim, go for it." 

One of the four went into the back-yard. 

" I want it for these strange gentlemen, that 
must move a start farther to-night, to be made 
more secure than they could be made in your 
house, until the morning; for, though we're 
done with you, Bignel, we 're not done with 
them — I mane, if it 's the rale truth, that one o' 
them is the man that the letter Moya found 
would lead us to think he is :" and once more 
Michael Farrel glanced angrily at Gerald. 

" For the love o 1 God, Mickle " began 

Moya, in great wonder and alarm. 

" Hould you your tongue, Moya — you're a 
simple, foolish crature, and a body would be just 
as great a fool to tell you every thing aforehand 
— but, whisper a bit, now that my mind is made 
up." 

Leaving Bignel for a moment, he drew his 
wife aside, and, after exchanging a few words 
with her, she became, to Gerald's increased sur- 
prise, silent, grave, and reserved. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 281 

" Though I give up our boys, Mr. Bignel," 
he resumed, regaining the land-steward's side, 
" and won't let them have to do with my grand 
prisoners, maybe there's other friends, better 
able to keep the poor country quiet, that, with 
my help — " 

" Your prisoners, fellow !" cried Gerald, 
catching Flood's arm, who now stood near him, 
all his former notions of Farrel's duplicity con- 
firmed. 

" You'll see, Sir," answered Michael — 
" cock your pistols, and keep close to them," — 
addressing his three remaining brigands — " and 
here comes the jaunting-car : and now, gintle- 
men, listen. I'm sending ye, as I said, to a 
place where we can find ye safe in the morning ; 
but we don't want ye to know the road to the 
spot, just because ye might be talking of it 
hereafter. For this rason, ye must sit in the 
car, without being able to look about you ; and 
because, over again, the handkerchiefs mustn't 
slip off o' your eyes, by any manes, your arums 
will be tied behind your backs, if ye don't say, 
upon your honours, that ye won't touch 'em ; 
howsomever, if ye do bind yourselves down in 
that manner, ye will be treated like gintlemen, 



282 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and let to travel with your arums as free as God 
gave 'em to you." 

To these proposals, in general, our friends 
violently objected. When, Michael, however, 
grew stern, and insisted on no time being lost, 
and when their new guards advanced, as if to 
force them into the genteel Irish vehicle, and 
threatened to blindfold them, and more than 
that, whether they would or not, Gerald and 
Flood, accepting the only advantageous alterna- 
tive held out, gave their solemn words of honour 
upon the understanding required ; allowed thick 
handkerchiefs to be tied over their eyes ; and 
were then assisted into the jaunting-car, and, 
after Michael seemed to have held some private 
communication with his men, driven off, they 
knew not whither. 

" Fellow-playmate in this tragic farce, are 
you indeed yet with me ?" asked Flood, after 
a few minutes had elapsed in silence. 
" Yes ; that at least, Flood." 
" And ultimately very desponding ?" 
" I certainly fear much, for we are in the 
power of a hypocritical scoundrel." 

" Well ; to time and fortune I surrender 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 283 

up myself. Meanwhile, let us permit our- 
selves to beguile our minds of vain regrets 
and cloudy anticipations, by adverting to a 
few topics upon which, since we met this ad- 
venturous day, I have been prone to discourse ; 
although this may be said to be the first favour- 
able moment for my purpose. Poor Gore's 
exit from the world of Ireland has been vastly 
sudden and afflicting." 

" It has, indeed." 

" Close, very close, profound Blount. Yet 
must I come rather abruptly upon you by 
saying, that a certain letter, received this 
morning, renders unnecessary all farther mys- 
terious language between you and your worthi- 
est friend. Maria writes that you suspect our 
little fact." 

" And I now suspect where you were 
riding to, when the Rockites encountered you, 
to-day. To your wife, who is with the 
Knightlies." 

" Undeniably true. But on this tender to- 
pic I yearn to add a sentence or two. In 
solemn earnest, I am what is called anxious 
to let you know why I did not admit my 



284 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sentiments towards my present lady, to her 
excellent father — much less my amazingly hasty 
wedding." 

" Thank you. 1 listen with interest." 

" Then call to mind, sagacious Blount, 
certain hints I vouchsafed to yourself when 
you poetically would assert a tenderness which 
you never felt for the very brilliant being in 
question." 

" I do. Well r 

" In beseeching you to stand guarded 
against her eloquent parent, I gave an advice 
that experience had suggested for my own 
adoption. For, good Blount, (though these 
matters would come better from another mouth,) 
I must inform you, that your poor friend had 
previously been taught a lesson considerably 
more important than that inculcated by the 
voyage to India of your three hundred and 
fifty ; and well he comprehended, that if the 
unhappy Mr. Gore became aware of — as you 
would term it — the state of his heart, the ex- 
celling Maria could scarce be his, without 
enormous acquirements of knowledge in the 
same way. Wherefore, his necessitous mys- 
tery, shared, I rather should add, by the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 285 

peerless creature herself, whose most honouring 
confidence in me, whose excelling sound sense, 
and whose unavoidable coolness to her family, 
in return for their cruelties, permitted the 
amiable artifice. The words with which I 
conclude I am especially anxious to recommend 
to your consideration. Neither of us were, 
however, fully informed of the actual extent 
and nature of Mr. Gore's embarassments ; if 
we had been, allow me to venture to say, that 
neither could have taken any step farthermore 
to disturb him ; nay, that worldly prudence 
must then have yielded to mere human suscep- 
tibilities, by the agency of which Maria's ill- 
starred father might, at even extraordinary risk, 
have been preserved to us, and to his admiring 
Dublin. As it is, credit me, your old class-mate 
shall remember whose son he has so recently, and 
so much even to his own wonderment, become." 

" Thanks for all this, Flood," said Gerald, 
and he groped out his hand, and shook it. 
" And now you, of course, expect that I shall 
relapse into my old habit of asking you plain 
questions, on my own account, connected with 
the last interview between Mrs. Flood — " 

" Mrs. Flood ! Enormous."" 



286 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And myself." 

" Yes ; droopingly I have anticipated new 
infliction from you : proceed, nevertheless." 

" But a few weeks ago, — and how much has 
happened in that short time ! how long it seems 
to me ! — you assured me, in Pere la Chaise, that 
you did not know who our mysterious lady 
was." 

" And exceedingly correct you may still 
esteem my statement to have been.' 1 

" You farther gave me to understand that 
she had aroused a certain interest in your heart." 

" My sole, gentle disingenuousness, error-for- 
giving Blount ; put forward, in order to mystify 
even your astute brain upon the real state of the 
important portion of my viscera which you have 
mentioned." 

" But what was the necessity of inconvenienc- 
ing yourself as you did — " 

" I faintly remember the annihilating effort — 
spare me." 

" By hunting the lady through the laby- 
rinths ?" 

" You shall comprehend. The very amazing 
similitude existing between her and the still 
more shining beauty of my worship, which 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 287 

then almost perplexed me, as much as it has 
since rendered you amusing, — that alone com- 
pelled the unusual endeavours made to converse 
very closely with her." 

" Well ; how soon after did you ascertain who 
she was ?" 

" The same evening, positively ; having first 
ascertained that her excelling likeness — " 

" I deny that assertion, Flood ; and in its first 
shape, just uttered by you, I deny it." 

" Temerity, ancient friend, so to do; and 
future performance of battle between us, can 
alone arrange the point. Now, however, to pro- 
ceed in replies to your ruthless questions. Very 
briefly — after leaving your side upon that me- 
morable day, I learned that Maria Gore's self 
was in Paris.'" 

" Ay, indeed !f 

" Indeed — and, furthermore, slightly to add 
to your interest — in Paris as the visiting friend 
and guest of her copy, who— mark me — had just 
arrived from the south of the sunny country, with 
— mark me, I say! — an invalid brother — her — the 
third time, I cry, mark me ! — her elder brother !" 

" Here he comes again," said Gerald ; " Mr. 
Knightly's eldest son." 



288 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Indubitably I break faith with some of the 
very most divine of their sex, and yet, under all 
your present circumstances, much-injured, and 
much-suffering fellow, here, on our way to some 
noisome den, instead of progressing to the fairy 
abode in which the smiling and playful rulers of 
your destiny await, I little doubt, only your 
appearance to unweave all the gossamer webs 
it has been their pleasure and pride to wrap 
around your gigantic intellect, — thus circum- 
stanced, let me repeat, your eldest admirer has 
not the heart to avoid continuing the subject ; 
especially, guileless Blount, when your situation 
is to be consoled, by my treason against beauty, 
in hearkening to what will make you unmea- 
suredly felicitous, and of which, I fear, it has 
been cruelty to leave you so long ignorant." 

M Augusta's old cant," said Gerald ; " now for 
the mighty tidings, however. " 

" They come. The invalid brother, whom 
your radiant vision had been nursing, was — " 

" Mr. Knightly's eldest son?" interrupted 
Gerald, now using the hitherto disagreeable 
words with a new interest — " and, let me see ; — 
her elder brother — then she is, after all, — she is 
one of them ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 289 

" The second, in years, of her fair sisters, as- 
suredly — Rhoda Knightly ; her superior of some 
few months, you, yesterday, (as I can learn,) 
bowed to, very awkwardly." 

M Rhoda Knightly !" repeated Gerald, his 
mind now dazzled before the graceful beauty of 
Pere la Chais6, now astride on a donkey, up the 
hilly, Devonshire road, in her company. 

" Pass we a moment to her brother. This 
youth's father, as well as his sister, accompanied 
him, a few weeks before, to the sweet South, 
whither he had been removed from London, his 
life despaired of." 

" Well ? I 'm sorry for all their sufferings on 
the occasion — but what 's this to me ?" 

M And this youth and his father, learning 
from me, that you were in Paris, wrote you a 
joint letter, which, as now appears, you never 
received.' 1 

" And which, if I had received it, must have 
shown me cause, according to you, and your 
new married lady, and Augusta, and Miss Flint, 
and Mr. Gore, why I ought to be very anxious 
to embrace the writers ?" 

" True, to a proverb : permit yourself still 
to listen. And the first signature to that letter 

VOL. III. o 



290 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

was ' Ambrose Knightly ;' but, although Mr. 
Knightly's eldest son has been named in bap- 
tism after his worthy father, such was not the 
second signature." 

" Oh, yes, I remember ; while Miss Flint 
was abusing me the other day in Dublin about 
him, she mentioned that some rich relation had 
left him a great property, provided he would 
change his name ; but the matter made no im- 
pression on me, inasmuch as it was nothing to 
me ; and again, I ask, what can it be to me 
now ?" 

" And that letter proposed to you mutual 
forgiveness of the past, and expressed a kind 
hope for future amiabilities on both sides." 

" Of what past ?" 

" And hoping that you had received it in 
Paris, though the run home, immediately fol- 
lowing, did not permit you to answer it, the 
writers of that letter called upon you lately in 
Dublin, to comfort you after your shipwreck ; 
they having learned that enormous misfortune 
and adventure from Rhoda Knightly, your pre- 
server on the beach, although your sister Au- 
gusta was not immediately warned to the same 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 291 

effect, lest the tidings might prove perilous to 
her, but merely led to believe that you had 
voluntarily appeared near to Lower-Court, as 
if in a spirit of stealth or espionage; and 
hence her letter to command you back, contain- 
ing her advice of the progress to Dublin of the 
two persons, whose appearance, she well knew, 
would heap immeasurable joy upon your head." 

" Well ; I suppose I must let you go on with 
this in your own way, Flood. Before we break 
through the grand enigma, however, — which 
ought to be written about, and called — ' Mr. 
Knightly and his Eldest Son, a Mystery,' — an- 
swer me, if you can, a few less important ques- 
tions. From your wife's admissions, in Dublin, 
I know that, although Miss Rhoda encountered 
me on the beach, she did not absolutely dictate 
my destinies in the Rockite hovel.' 1 

" Then has my fallible, though superlative, 
partner, happened to misinform you." 

" No ; Rhoda did not write me the precious 
note.'" 

" Nevertheless did she prompt it, word for 
word, to her stalwart waiting-woman, her own 
pupil in penmanship ; because, in the true de- 



292 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

licacy of matchless woman, the lady would not 
address, with her own hand, a man who had 
never been presented to her." 

" Go on. Since I was so near, upon that even- 
ing, both to Lower-Court, and to her father's 
house, why did she not cause me to be conveyed 
under the roof of either, instead of into a place 
where my life was in many ways endangered ?" 

" Had you gone to Lower-Court, excellent 
fellow, then must your sensitive sister have in- 
deed learned your dilemma, and suffered accord- 
ingly. Unto Mr. Knightly's you must have 
gone, but that here, female dignity and nicety 
again interfered ; your protectress was, upon that 
night, almost alone, and quite unmatronized, 
and uncountenanced, in her father's house. Her 
mother, and her very abundant phalanx of gal- 
lant brothers, and of beauteous sisters, adolescent 
and infantine, had gone to meet her father, her 
elder brother, and herself, at Cork, after their 
debarkation in their native and verdant country, 
and the whole amazingly fine family sojourned 
a day in that famous city, she proceeding, singly, 
homeward, on necessary business. Not many 
hours after her arrival on her paternal ground, 
the waves washed you to her feet ; and however 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 293 

humanely she felt towards your sad condition, 
and however she could contrive to soothe it, 
Miss Rhoda Knightly declined the honour of 
receiving you in her unmatronized mansion, — 
haply her innocent calculations of how the mea- 
sure might rate, even in your punctilious estima- 
tion, slightly influenced her conduct ; wherefore, 
wave-worn man, the Rockite hovel was your 
fate ; though here, as the note informed you, it 
seems not intended you should have remained 
longer than three o'clock the ensuing day, at 
which hour her father, her brother, and so forth, 
were surely expected home, and a visit by one 
or more of the family to your uncomfortable 
couch, doomed on the part of your guardian 
angel ; and home to the very minute they did 
come ; and then, hearing of your fugacious 
escape to the metropolis, thither were you pur- 
sued by Mr. Knightly and his eldest son." 

" And my refusal to see this famous pair, 
sent them back again, very indignant, of course,' 1 
said Gerald. 

" More in sorrow than in anger, veritably ; 
inasmuch as your so doing, under circumstances 
believed to be known to you, must have lessened 
you in their estimation." 
o 3 



294 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" This grows exceedingly provoking, Flood." 

" However, since the evening at Mr. Gore's, 
when, by your answer to a question of your 
sister's town-prime-minister, proposed through 
me, you admitted the important fact of not 
having got the letter, every body is only mon- 
strously amused at your expense, and working 
all human means to get you down to Lower- 
Court, where the scales are to fall from your 
eyes, under circumstances of very romantic and 
well-studied effect." 

" But you have engaged to anticipate all that 
folly, like a good-natured and sensible person 
as you are ; and, therefore, for mercy's sake, 
make me half delirious with happiness, and with 
love for the Knightlies, at once, Flood." 

" Still gradually, not at once ; ever I object 
to vehemence, and prepare against it. Return 
we to the invalid elder brother of your Rhoda, 
at the moment of her arrival with him and her 
in France. 

" His life, as I have mentioned, I rather 
think, was then despaired of. Previously, in 
London, and before his friends reached him 
from Ireland, skilful leeches had utterly pro- 
nounced him a man whose hours were number- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 295 

ed ; yea, on the very spot upon which occurred 
the little affair that injured him so ominously ; 
— for, good Blount — and once more I ejaculate 
— mark ! — he had been very well hit, and exceed- 
ingly badly wounded, in that species of mortal 
combat, called a duel." 

" Flood !" cried Gerald, starting, " what can 
you mean ?" 

" Nay, credible reports of his death followed 
his poor antagonist to France, whither, faith- 
fully accompanied by his humblest though oldest 
admirer — " 

" Oh, gracious God, Flood ! gracious God !" 
— again Gerald groped out his companion's 
hands, and clasped and wrung them. 

" My dear fellow,' 1 answered Flood, to this 
appeal, " 'tis, thank Heaven, true — the only 
cloud that could darken your life is removed — 
the second signature to the letter was Robert 
Knightly Stanhope." 

" Oh, thank Heaven, indeed ! oh, indeed, in- 
deed, thank Heaven !" — and now, pressing his 
hands over his blindfolded eyes, Gerald wept 
with joy. 

His feelings were disagreeably checked by 
the stopping of the car at this moment, and by 



296 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

an abrupt announcement from one of the armed 
men, who had kept trotting at its side, that 
" Their honours were come to their journey's 
end." Gerald brought to mind they had re- 
cently entered through a gate. 

" And ye '11 just plase to step down at once, 
gintlemen — and you, Sir," to Gerald — " is it for- 
getting honour bright you are, with your hands 
on the handkerchief ?" 

Gerald assured him he was mistaken. 

" Then, here, Sir, — where 's your arum ?" 

" Stop a bit, Jer," said another voice ; " let 
us ax the governor if all's ready, first — see, he 
beckons us from the dour." 

" The governor ?" repeated Flood to Gerald ; 
" very positively, the amusing Rockites are send- 
ing us to jail ; I Ve heard of such tricks^ of 
theirs." 

" 'Tis but one of their conventional words," 
said Gerald. 

" Yes, every thing nate," resumed Jer, after 
his comrade had returned to the car, and whis- 
pered with him ; " Come, genteels ; and much 
good may your new lodging do ye." 

They were assisted down from the car, and led a 
few steps, along hard, sandy ground. Then they 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 297 

became conscious of entering a low doorway; 
and, two persons holding a hand of each, they 
pursued their course through narrow, winding 
passages, flagged under foot, and growing damp- 
er at every step. They passed through another 
door, which was closed and locked after them ; a 
rugged voice said, " Uncover your eyes, gintle- 
men ;" they did so, and found themselves in a 
low, square vault, from the arch of which over- 
head hung dripping petrifactions, but which 
was cheered, however, by a blazing wood-fire. 
The person who had spoken held Gerald's hand. 
He was an old man, respectably dressed, wear- 
ing powder, but the expression of his face 
seemed austere. 

" In receiving you into this establishment, 
your lives are not immediately hazarded," he 
resumed ; " for which rason, there," pointing to 
rude chairs before the fire, " you have the 
means of putting on dry things instead of your 
dripping clothes ; you must hurry, howsomever, 
for in ten minutes I '11 come back to lade you to 
my superiors, with the handkerchiefs on your 
eyes, once again," and he unlocked the rough 
door, went out, and relocked it upon the out- 
side. 



298 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Glancing in extreme surprise, and some ap- 
prehension upon each other, our friends advanced 
to the chairs, glad, at all events, of an opportu- 
nity to replace, comfortably, their wet, soiled, 
torn, and — so far as Flood's brogues went — 
stolen apparel. Every article of dress necessary 
for comfort appeared at their hands, including 
boots and shoes of various sizes, as if it had 
been sought to make sure of fitting them. 
Gerald's wonder increased, when he found one 
of the whole suits to consist of the principal 
contents of the portmanteau he had that morn- 
ing deposited at Moya Farrel's ; the other was 
quite new. 

They zealously engaged in their toilet, and 
had become respectable-looking men, when their 
old — or rather new — warder, re-entered, and 
immediately proposed to bind handkerchiefs 
again over their eyes. To object, would have 
been useless ; and once more, effectually blind- 
folded, they were led out of the vault, along 
another stone-passage, up a flight of stone-steps, 
again over a stone-floor, which echoed to their 
tread, giving an idea of a spacious apartment 
surrounding them ; then up a second flight of 
steps, which were of wood, and, from their not 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 299 

creaking or yielding, perhaps of old oak ; and 
a second time their conductors paused, upon a 
landing-place. 

" You are standing at the dour, gintlemen," 
resumed the old man, as he knocked, " and so, 
we '11 be ready to restore you to your eye-sight, 
for good t* as he spoke, he unknotted Gerald's 
handkerchief, and held it ready to be pulled off. 
Flood felt a second person attending to him, in 
a similar way. 

" Advance, prisoners," said a voice inside, 
evidently a woman's, while earnest whispers also 
sounded from the apartment ; the old man tit- 
tered as he whisked away Gerald's bandage ; a 
female titter responded to his from the stairs 
behind our friends ; the door was pushed open, 
and they entered a spacious and splendidly 
furnished drawing-room, lighted to an excess 
that dazzled them, in the middle of which, 
seated in an arm-chair, raised on a little plat- 
form, and assuming (for a moment) a very 
queen-like air, appeared Lady Augusta Blount, 
supported upon the right hand by her rural- 
prime-minister, Miss Rhoda Knightly, and 
upon her left, by — as Flood has drawn the dis- 
tinction — her civic-prime-minister, late Miss 



300 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Maria Gore ; both ladies standing ; both dressed 
alike ; both in the same studied, though graceful 
positions ; both showing the same expression of 
countenance ; and, in fact, both evidently doing 
their best to look very like each other : — and 
very like they certainly were ; but, spite of all 
their efforts, showing differences of feature, now 
that they stood together, which, at a second 
glance, left no doubt on Gerald's mind. For a 
moment only, as has been said, Lady Augusta 
played her regal state. The next, descending 
from her throne, and while Captain Flood 
more nearly approached his masquerading bride, 
she hastened to give Gerald a sister's salute, and 
bid him welcome to Lower-Court. Then fol- 
lowed his presentation to Miss Rhoda Knightly ; 
and the bow of the gentleman, and the obeisance 
of the lady, would — their characters, their breed- 
ing, and their relative situations considered — 
have supplied to Leslie a subject for the ex- 
ercise of that pencil which excels all others in 
the delineation of the elegant-ludicrous. 

" And has it not been well done ?" laughed 
Lady Augusta — " cleverly, charmingly got up, 
from beginning to end ? — Oh, you can't think 
how we have plotted and contrived, ever since 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 301 

poor Farrel, assuring us of your freedom from 
personal danger" — (a presumption and a hope, 
by the way, of Michael, rather than a certainty,) 
" came here to inform us of your presence 
amongst the Rockites in the neighbourhood, 
and then went off, a plotter, too, to send you 
to us. And how did he play his part ? — 
And old Shortall, the butler? — very well? 
that 's delightful ! And you never once sus- 
pected ? But indeed we all pitied your trials in 
the subterranean parts of the house — the old 
vaults are so damp — indeed, we did — though, for 
the sake of a good effect, we were compelled to re- 
press our amiable feelings. And, Captain Flood, 
a word with you ; you must not assume your 
horrid privileges too soon by scolding your lady 
and your wife, for seeming to forget for a mo- 
ment some recent afflictions — poor, dear Maria ! 
it was our persuasions, and pleadings, that forced 
her into it, much against her will— dear, dear 
girl ! M Lady Augusta took Mrs. Flood's hand. 

A knocking sounded at the hall-door. Rhoda 
Knightly and Lady Augusta both glanced at 
Gerald, one growing red, the other pale. He 
understood them. Some one entered below. 
His sister arose, offered her arm, led him down 

VOL. III. p 



302 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to the door of a parlour — he entered the room 
alone, and embraced, " Mr. Knightly's eldest 
son." 

" But I regret," said Captain Knightly Stan- 
hope, after some conversation delightful to both, 
" that my father, who follows me home, is 
doomed to cloud our second meeting, and, in- 
deed, this house, with sorrowful tidings." 

" This house ?" repeated Gerald : " oh, pray, 
pray, anticipate your father ?" 

" Lord Clangore's agent called upon us, just 
as we prepared to obey Lady Augusta's sum- 
mons," evaded Stanhope, "with the letter which 
contains the sad intelligence — he had been from 
home, and it awaited him on his table since 
morning." 

" But its contents ? " 

" Here comes my father to hand you the 
letter." 

After another peal at the hall-door, Gerald 
saw enter the parlour his stage-coach companion 
of the previous night. 

"I perceive that Robert has broken the news to 
you, — my Lord Clangore," said Mr. Knightly, 
when they had bowed to each other : " Yes, a 
second relapse has proved fatal ; — and Rhoda's 
London correspondent supplied her with more 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 303 

authentic bulletins, Robert, than the report of 
the physicians. 1 ' 

Here we for the present rest ; ending, without 
absolutely concluding. That Gerald, in about 
a year afterwards, married a mere Irishwoman, 
and since then continues to live in Ireland, as a 
mere Irishman, is not sought to be disguised. 
That a great change previously took place in 
his opinions ; that, following Mr. Knightly's re- 
commendation, he bundled up a good many of 
his Anglo-Irish theories, and, to use that gen- 
tleman's words, already reported, " flung them 
overboard,' 1 is also avowed. But how he came 
to permit such a change in his early and deeply 
rooted prejudices; by what experience, by what 
observation, incidents, new acquaintanceships, 
discourses, and adventures, proposes a continued 
subject so various, interesting, and withal impor- 
tant, that, should his reading friends vouchsafe 
their consent, it shall be embodied in some fu- 
ture volumes. 

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME. 
