TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 



Primed by J. Darlmg, Lcadenhall-Street, Loiidoii. 



THE 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE; 

OB, 

SCENES IN THE EMERALD ISLE. 
IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BY 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

AUTHOR OF 

THE CHILDREN' OF THE ABBEY, VICAR OF LANSDOWN, MAID OF THE 
H.\MIJET, he. 



" Ob Erin, luy cooiUry ! though sad and t'OTEakeii, 

In dreanis I rerbit iLy sea-beaten shore; 

Eot, alas ! in a far foreiga land I awaken, 

Aud sigh for the frieuda who can ir.ttl me no more.** 



VOL. IV. 



•*»Pt»^^<^>*«:f- 



london: 

PRINTED FOB 

A. K. MV. M,^ AND CO. LEADENHALL-STBEET. 
1824. 



2^3 



THE 

TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 



CHAPTER I. 



** The ways of Providence are dark and intricate, 
Puzzled in mazes, and perplex'd with errors ; 
Our understanding traces them in vain, 
L<»st and bewilder'd in the fruitless search; 
Nor sees with how much art the windings run, 
Nor where the regular confusion ends." 

vJN reaching the Vale, Donaghue was 
informed the whole party were out in the 
grounds ; he hesitated a moment, and then 
flinging the reins to Cormick, sprung from 
the curricle, and set out in quest of them. 
Should fortune prove sufficiently propi- 
tious to let him meet Miss Erin by her- 

VOL. IV. B 



2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

self, he determined, if possible, on leading 
to some explanation with her ; and, in con- 
sequence, looked and listened for her in 
every direction. 

The day was lovely, a summer one, 
without being overpowering; and, as he 
advanced amidst the enchantments of the 
place, a feeling of serenity, not lately ex- 
perienced, stole over his mind. The soft 
verdure of the ground, the fragrance of 
the flowers, that poured forth profuse over 
hill and dale, enamelling it, the freshness 
that every thing breathed, the luxuriance 
of the woods, thronged with sportive birds, 
the sparkling of the running rivulets in 
the sunbeams, formed, altogether, a scene 
of beauty and delight, that had an inde- 
scribable effect upon his feelings. In his 
enjoyment of it, he almost unconsciously 
loitered at times, as if, the moment he 
quitted it, he expected to be plunged a- 
gain into the agitation from which he 
seemed for an instant to have escaped; but 
the idea that was connected with it, asso- 
ciated with all that soothed and enchanted 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3 

in it, would perhaps have imputed an al- 
most equal charm to any other place. 

He had proceeded a considerable way 
without meeting any one, when, as he was 
slowly approaching a beautifully seques- 
tered cottage, recently erected under the 
direction of Miss Erin, near the channel of 
a stream, that, bursting in a picturesque 
manner through an arch of rock, covered 
over with ivy, seemed impatient, from the 
rapidity of its current, to gain the tranquil 
mazes of a dale at some little distance, 
one of the Miss Magennises, darting 
out of it, came flying towards him, and 
telling him she had not a moment to spare 
to speak to him, as her mother was wait- 
ing for her in another part of the grounds, 
but that, if he washed to see Miss Erin, 
he would find her in the cottage by her- 
self, rapidly passed him without another 
w^ord. 

Delighted at the intimation, Donaghue 
hastened onward, but stopped, irresolute, 
just within the cottage. Exactly opposite 
B 2 



4 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to him was the entrance to another apart- 
ment, and immediately within this he 
caught a ghmpse of Miss Erin, reading, 
with her back towards him, and, appa- 
rently, so attentively, that, uncertain as he 
was of the reception he might meet with 
from her, he knew not how to venture at 
any thing like an intrusion on her. 

While earnestly watching for some 
movement that might give him a hope of 
being discovered, approaching footsteps 
made him turn round, and, with a sensa- 
tion of surprise that may well be imagined, 
he beheld the very being whom he thought 
he had been watching within a short dis- 
tance of the cottage, unaccompanied by 
any one but lord Altidore, and with whom 
she seemed in earnest conversation. 

Donaghue now earnestly sought to as- 
certain who was the person really in the 
cottage, and a slight alteration in her posi- 
tion giving him an opportunity of obtain- 
ing a glimpse of her face, he discovered it 
was, as he strongly suspected, lady Jane. 
Indignant at the trick that had been play- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 5 

ed him, he rushed from the cottage ; and, 
from knowing he could not have done so 
without being seen by her, turned in the 
direction to meet jNIiss Erin. She evi- 
dently tried to meet him with her usual 
manner; but her smile was so forced, her 
air of pleasure so extremely languid, that 
Donaghue could not help feeling both 
awkward and embarrassed; and his em- 
barrassment, it may be supposed, was not 
lessened, when, just after he had replied 
in the negative, to her interrogatory of 
whether he had found any of their party 
in the cottage, either from a hope that she 
had no intention of entering it, or else a 
feeling that would not let him utter the 
name of lady Jane, her ladyship appeared 
issuing from it. — " So I suppose you 
thought I was lost," she cried, addressing 
herself to Miss Erin ; " but really when I 
left you, to look for the book I had forgot 
in the cottage, I had no idea of being de- 
tained so long in it, by finding " 

" Oh, don't apologize !" said Miss Erin, 
interrupting her; "there's not the slight- 



b TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

est occasion ; our coming this way was 
merely because lord Altidore knew no- 
thing before of this approach to the grotto 
— adieu!" kissing her hand to her — "If 
you and ]VIr. O'Brien," slightly glancing 
at him, " have any wish to join us, you 
will find us there with my mother " 

Donaghue stood for a moment looking 
after her, as resuming, of her own accord^ 
the arm of lord Altidore, she passed on ; 
and might have continued longer doing 
so, but for lady Jane's approaching him ; 
he directly turned av/ay, unable to control 
the feeling of anger, to say nothing of any 
other which she had excited, and hastily 
making his way back to the house, sprung 
into the curricle, with a determination to 
give up, as much as possible, for the re- 
mainder of the time he continued in the 
neighbourhood, his intercourse at the Vale. 
As soon as ever the departure of his 
friends left him at liberty to act as he 
wished, he firmly decided on leaving Al- 
toir-na-Grenie, convinced that nothing but 
his quitting the neighbourhood could, af- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 7 

ter the many embarrassing circumstances 
that had occurred, prove that his asser- 
tions, with regard to lady Jane, were nei- 
ther trifling or insincere. 

But long before the period for reesta- 
blishing hi Qi self in the good opinion of 
those whose esteem was so indispensable to 
him, with what indifference might ^liss 
Erin view the circumstance ! The earnest 
conversation in which she had been en- 
gaged with lord Altidore, the familiarity 
of her manner towards him, both were re- 
garded with the exaggerating eye of jea- 
lousy, as proofs of either a growing pre- 
ference for him, or a wish to dispose her 
heart to the admission of sentiments fa- 
vourable to him, from a conviction, Dona- 
ghue made no doubt, that those she had 
previously given way to for another, were 
such as the unworthiness of the object for 
whom they had been entertained demand- 
ed her conquering. And this was the 
work of lady Jane, destroying him thus in 
her opinion — but complaints, invectives, 
were useless, and indeed degrading ; and 



8 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he strove to divert his mind from the sense 
of unhappiness that oppressed it, by turn- 
ing his thoughts on the mystery, it ap- 
peared to him, so essential to have deve- 
loped. 

In expectation of the visit he was so 
anxious for, he kept a light burning all 
night in his chamber, his pistols carefully 
loaded, and with his sword beside him; 
and instead of going to bed, merely lay 
down in his morning wrapper beneath the 
counterpane, thus prepared to rise, and 
follow his mysterious visitant, should it 
positively be required. Two successive 
nights passed away without seeing him, 
when, on the third, quite exhausted by 
this mode of acting, he was on the point 
of rising, for the purpose of undressing, 
and actually getting into bed, when a 
rustling noise in the closet checked the 
movement, and the next instant, just as 
he had grasped a pistol, he beheld the 
semblance of his uncle Dennis cautiously 
stealing from it. Donaghue stirred not 
till he saw him at the foot of the bed^ 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 9 

looking in at him through the curtains, 
when, raising himself in it — " What is the 
meaning of all this, my friend ?" he said ; 
" you must be aware that, from your con- 
duct, I should be fully warranted in treat- 
ing you in a very dififerent manner to that 
in which I am now doing ; but something 
like a persuasion that it is not the result 
of any evil design, checks me from having, 
as yet, any recourse to violence ; but, rely 
on it, I will not be longer trifled with ; if, 
therefore, you have any thing to commu- 
nicate, it imports you, for your own sake, 
to no longer delay the disclosure; as, be 
assured, this is the last opportunity you 
will have of revealing it as a friend." 

The figure listened with the most pro- 
found attention till he had done speaking, 
when, uplifting its hands and eyes, it 
seemed calling on Heaven to attest the 
purity of its intentions ; then turning its 
looks again upon him, it motioned him, 
with the most earnest gesticulations, to rise 
and follow to the closet to which it pointed* 
£3 



10 TRADITION OF THE CASTLIT. 

Donaghue, as previously decided, could 
no longer hesitate to comply with this si- 
lent but expressive entreaty ; whatever 
was the secret that was lodged in the breast 
of his visitor, he clearly saw that nothing 
would force it thence but compliance with 
what was required, and his curiosity was 
by this time quite too strongly excited to 
permit any persistance in refusing this; 
accordingly, getting out of bed, he pre- 
pared himself to attend him, by securing 
one pistol and sword within the belt of his 
wrapper, and taking the other in his hand:. 

The figure remained motionless in the 
chamber till it saw him ready to follow, 
when, darting into the closet before him, 
it vanished from his view ; but in an in- 
stant the aperture in the floor through 
which it had disappeared was revealed, by 
the pushing up of a trapdoor, and Dona- 
ghue looking down, beheld a narrow flight 
of stairs, at the bottom of which stood the 
figure, holding up a lamp in one hand, 
and with the other beckoning him to de- 
scend. Donaghue obeyed the motion, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11 

the trapdoor was then pulled down by 
the same means by which it had been 
raised, a long iron rod, fastened to a ring 
in it 

The figure, with the greatest celerity, 
was now preparing to lead the way down 
another flight of steps, when it was check- 
ed by Donaghue's pausing for an instant 
— " Before I proceed," he said, " let me re- 
mind you of what you saw above ; give 
me the slightest reason to believe that I 
have been wrong in the confidence I re- 
posed in you, and that instant," holding 
up the pistol to his view, " is your last." 

The other nodded, as much as to say, if 
he merited punishment, he was satisfied to 
meet with it; and, putting his finger to 
his lips, in token of silence, again beckon- 
ed to him to follow. 

Donaghue no longer hesitated, when, 
after taking what he was convinced was 
nearly half the circuit of the castle, his 
conductor suddenly stopped, and pointing 
to a door, beneath which a glimmering 
light was seen, motioned to him to 



12 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

listen at it. For a moment Donaghue 
could only hear the clamorous voices of 
two men, each striving to be heard above 
the other; at length, he plainly distin- 
guished, in a tone that almost instantly 
struck him he had heard before — " What, 
you ungrateful rascal, do you hesitate at 
such a trifling matter as this, after all I 
have done for you and yours ! Would you 
have a hole for yourself or your family to 
shelter yourselves in, but for my genero- 
sity ?" 

" Why, then, upon my soul and con- 
science, I wish I had never earned such 
generosity, for I don't think I shall ever 
have any luck, or grace, or be happy 
again, after being concerned in the rob- 
bery of the discindant of the great king 
Brien Boru. What signifies what I have 
got for concealing from the young master 
the roguery of your father, since you talk 
so much about it ?" 

" Roguery ! you villain, do you say ?" 
" Pooh, pooh ! what signifies your at- 
tempting to humbug me? Do you think. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. IS 

because I haven't got as much larning as 
yourself (and, God knows, you have made 
a bad use of it), I don't know right from 
WTong as well as another? What else 
but roguery should I call your ould fa- 
ther's making the poor master that's dead 
and gone keep out of the way in England, 
that he might know nothing of what he 
was doing here, or find out that the long 
leases he coaxed him to grant, of almost 
the whole estate, for the sake of raising a 
little money, which he took care enough, 
however, he should never finger, w^ere 
made out to himself, from there being no 
such man as he had them drawn out for 
in the world !" 

" The short and the long of it is — am I 
to understand," asked the other, " that 
you will not assist me any further in this 
business? You are a sensible man, Der- 
mot; if I hadn't thought so, I wouldn't 
have placed the confidence in you I have 
done, because a fool is never to be trusted, 
neither knowing how to keep his own se- 
crets, or those of any other person ; and 



14 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

if I wished it, I see there would be no 
use in trying to deceive, or impose in any 
way upon you. The leases, as you say, 
that my father got the late Mr. O'Brien 
to grant, are not worth a rush, since they 
never could be legally executed, from hav- 
ing been made out for fictitious people; 
and that is the very reason I want to get 
this young man out of the way, for, after 
being led to think I was secure of a fine 
fortune, and the O'Brien one is certainly 
a noble inheritance, would it not be hard 
that I should find myself mistaken ? and 
there is no knowing the moment that 
might be the case, since there are always 
busy people in the world, interfering in 
what does not concern them ; and if once 
young O'Brien began to suspect, to be 
sure he would never rest till he came at 
the truth ; and then, Dermot, where would 
be the thirty acres of good land I promised 
you, whenever I saw him snugly laid be- 
side his father?" 

From the silence of a few minutes that 
ensued, this question seemed to occasion 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 15 

some consideration in the mind of Der- 
mot. — " Well, and may I make myself 
sure, then, of your keeping your word 
with me?" he then demanded; " not but 
I dislike the notion of having any hand in 
taking away the life of the young master, 
the last of his race, as one may say. — But 
perhaps Delaney will do the job, and so 
save me from having any thing to do with 
it, barring my knowing about it, to be 
sure." 

" Perhaps he may ; but if he does not 
accomplish it to-night, 1 shall depend no 
longer on him." 

" Yet he undertook the job readily 
enough," observed the other. 

" Yes ; but what signifies that, if he 
never executes it ? Here he has been keep- 
ing us in expectation every night for these 
three weeks and upwards, and still he 
comes back to us with an idle story of one 
time being obliged to fly, by hearing a 
bell ring, and another from finding O'Bri- 
en's man in the room with his master !" 

" Well, and it may be all true enough 



16 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

what he said ; for sure the other night, 
when I made certain of drawing O'Brien 
to the chapel, where you were ready your- 
self to do his business for him, didn't some 
devilment or other hinder his pursuing 
me?" 

" Ay, devilment indeed you may well 
say ! and only that Barney took an oath, 
that I know he would not dare to break, 
not to betray us, I should almost be tempt- 
ed to think he had given some hint." 

*' Oh ! the sorrow bit of him," interrup- 
ted the other; " and I can't help laughing 
when I think of the way the ould fox took 
to prevent any alarm, in case he was caught 
prowling about the castle, dressing him- 
self up in the ould silk nightgown he 
rummaged out of some of the ould stores 
of the castle, for he knows every hole and 
corner in it, to pass for the ghost of squire 
Dennis, come to discover about his crock 
of money." 

What the surprise of Donaghue was, at 
learning, as he did from these words, to 
whom he was so much indebted, may ea- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 17 

sier be conceived than described, he had 
so little knowledge of this man, and from 
what he had heard, would have deemed 
it so improbable, that he could have been 
the contriver of any scheme of the kind. 
With a start of exclamation, he hastily 
turned his eyes upon his companion, and at 
length obtaining what he had hitherto vain- 
ly essayed doing, a perfect view of his fea- 
tures, recognised in them the haggard ones 
indeed of Barney Delaney, the wretched 
old man for whom his humanity had been 
interested, on discovering him apparently 
on the point of being hurried out of life, 
either through the stupidity or w^ant of 
feeling of his wife. — " Good God !" he soft- 
ly ejaculated, involuntarily extending his 
hand. 

The other received it with a gush of 
tears, and for a moment seemed nearly 
overcome by his emotions; then endea- 
vouring to compose himself, he whispered 
to Donaghue what his further plan was; 
and without further delay, proceeded to 



18 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

admit himself to the room where the two 
villains were. 

Donaghue stood in a direction to allow 
him to see into it, as he opened the door, 
and with feelings more of indignation than 
surprise, from having begun to suspect it 
would prove so, in the person of O'Cal- 
laghan's son he discovered his Spanish ac- 
quaintance, don Callan, a circumstance 
that no longer permitted him to be at a 
loss to account for what had befallen him 
at Seville, the strange peculiarities of this 
gentleman's manner, neither the familia- 
rity of the voice to him he had just heard. 

" Well, you are come at last !" exclaim- 
ed don Callan, or O'Callaghan, on Barney's 
entrance; " if you had delayed much lon- 
ger, I should have left this in quest of 
you. But I hope you are not come back, 
as usual, with a cock and a bull story of 
being frightened here, and scared there, 
but to tell us at last the job is done?" 

" At last !" repeated Barney, dropping 
into one of the old seats that remained 
still in the place, as if utterly exhausted 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 19 

by emotion, ** at last, what I undertook is 
done." 

" God be praised !" impiously exclaimed 
O'Callaghan." 

" Amen !" responded Barney. 

** Well, you are an honest fellow, after 
all, Barney; and depend on't you shan't 
repent this night's business." 

" No, I am not afraid of that," replied 
Barney. 

" But may I indeed believe you ?" 

" I won't say another word," cried Bar- 
ney, " but that if you ever hear another 
word out of the mouth of young O'Brien, 
I give you leave to say I am not the man 
you took me for." 

" And it's done !" cried Dermot, in a 
bewailing tone, and as if awaking from a 
stupefaction. " Oh, well, well, well! this 
is the worst news I ever heard — to think 
that he who was so young and so comely, 
should be made food for w^orms before his 
time ! Now that it's done, wh^t wouldn't 
I give to have it undone! The thirty 
acres of land I have been promised, and 



20 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

thirty and thirty more to the back of them, 
for what good will they do me, when I 
know there's innocent blood crying out 
against me? and that at every turn I take, 
I shall think I see his ghost? and — and 
there ! — there it is already !" he shrieked, in 
all the indescribable agony of guilty terror, 
as, at the instant, his eyes encountered the 
tall and not unghostlike figure of Dona- 
ghue, enveloped as he was in his long 
morning wrapper, rearing itself above the 
head of Barney — " there it is !" and stag- 
gering back a few paces, he dropped in 
convulsions on the floor.- 

" Idiot!" exclaimed O'Callaghan; yet 
as he spoke, his own eye, as if involunta- 
rily, glanced slowly round the chamber, 
and, with a look of indescribable horror, 
he recoiled, as if to take shelter in the 
wall at the apparition it encountered ; but 
almost instantly recovering himself — " We 
are betrayed!" he almost shrieked, and 
was turning to seize a pistol that was 
near him, when Donaghue rushed upon 
him. On finding himself in his grasp, all 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 21 

his courage forsook him, and — " Have 
mercy ! have mercy !" he exclaimed, in 
the most abject tone ; " don't murder me, 
and I'll own " 

" Miserable, degraded WTetch !" cried 
Donaghue, " instantaneous death would 
be too great a mercy, from the horrors it 
would save you ; but it rests not with me 
to inflict the punishment due to your 
crimes. — Delaney, alarm the castle, that 
proper assistance may be obtained for se- 
curing these villains." 

" Stop, stop, Delaney !" cried the trem- 
bling wretch, in agony. " Mr. O'Brien, 
have mercy — have pity ! oh, do not — on 
my bended knees I implore — let me be 
dragged to an ignominious death ! if, on 
no other account, for the sake of my soul 
have compassion ! let me not be hurried 
out of life without having time to repent 
for ray sins !" 

** And what time were you inclined to 
allow me for this ?" demandejOonaghue ; 
" in planning my destruction, what consi- 
deration did you bestow on sending me to 



'^2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

my dread account, with all my imperfec- 
tions on my head ? No, villain ! it would 
be to rob justice of her right — to commit 
a wrong against society, to let such a 
wretch escape the punishment he merits 
in this life ; so again I say, Delaney " 

" No ! no !" shrieked the wretch, " spare 
me, and on my soul I swear " 

" Wretch !" indignantly exclaimed Do- 
naghue, " do not mock your Creator, by 
swearing by that on which you set no va- 
lue; for had you set any value on your 
immortal soul, would you have dared the 
perpetration of such crimes as you have 
meditated ?" 

" I have been a great — a terrible sinner !" 
cried the other, finding that no subterfuge 
would avail; " but it is in my power to 
make amends for all I did, or meant to do. 
All shall be your own again : the leases, 
the long arrears of rent now due to you, 
restitution, in short, of every thing that 
you were defrauded of through my father, 
shall be made you, if you but relinquish 
your design of giving me up to punish- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 23 

ment. And consider, consider," be add- 
ed, seeing Donaghue, as he imagined, he- 
sitate, " consider, that if you persevere in 
what may be your present intention, in 
exposing the villainy of me and mine to 
public scorn and contempt, so must you 
also the folly and imprudence of your own 
father; for if possessed of common sense 
or feeling, that regard for his family that 
ought to have been the case, could he, or 
would he, have acted in the manner he 
did?" 

Donaghue started at an appeal so in- 
controvertible ; and after a little conside- 
ration, not sorry, perhaps, to have a pre- 
text, in filial reverence, for yielding to 
mercy — " Well," he said, " supposing I 
could prevail on myself to hearken to your 
entreaties, how can I be certain that you 
will fulfil what you have promised?" 

*• Easily. There's a box now hid in the 
place w^here I lodge, containing every pa- 
per requisite for you to ohVdtt possession 
of, together with notes to the amount of 
what I acknowledge myself indebted to 



24 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you. Say I have nothing further to dread 
from your just indignation, and I am con- 
tent to remain your prisoner here till 
Barney, whom in that case I shall imme- 
diately instruct where to find it, shall have 
delivered it into your hands, and the con- 
tents of it have undergone an examina- 
tion." 

" Well," said Donaghue, after a pause 
of some minutes, " on these conditions I 
consent to let you escape, with a hope that 
the life that is spared may be so passed in 
future, as to render you better prepared 
to resign it into the hands of your Creator 
than you are now." 

0*Callaghan, with all the celerity of an 
overjoyed wretch, now hastened to instruct 
Delaney where the box was to be found, 
giving at the same time to Donaghue the 
key belonging to it ; and Donaghue, hav- 
ing taken the necessary precautions for se- 
curing him, and satisfied himself that the 
other misjjable wretch was recovering, 
quitted the place. 

Day was now breaking, and Delaney 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 25 

w^s not long in executing his commission. 
By the time he returned, ^lelville was 
prepared to witness Donaghue's examina- 
tion of the box he delivered to him. Its 
contents agreed with O'Callaghan's state- 
ment; and Donaghue, satisfied of this, 
forthwith proceeded, accompanied by Mel- 
ville, who almost looked as if he consider- 
ed all he had heard as a fable, so extraor- 
dinary did it appear, and attended by 
Cormick and Delaney, to fulfil his promise 
to him. But his curiosity was too strong- 
ly excited by many things that had oc- 
curred, not to induce him to put some 
questions to him, ere he suffered him to 
depart ; amongst others, w^hat the cause of 
that rancorous enmity to him was, that 
occasioned him to attempt his life ? 

" From you, Mr. O'Brien," replied 
O'Callaghan, coolly, now that personal 
fears were over, having completely recol- 
lected himself, " I should hardly have ex- 
pected such a question, since both reading 
and observation, I should have conceived, 

VOL. IV. c 



26 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

must have taught you that we always hate 
those we are conscious of having injured ; 
your very name was a reproach to me, 
from the feehngs it never failed of awa- 
kening ; and whilst you were in existence, 
I knew not the moment in which I might 
be compelled to restore what I was so 
anxious to retain." 

" But how is it," said Donaghue, " that 
you seemed to have a personal knowledge 
of me, as, from some expressions I recol- 
lect to have dropt from you, appeared 
to be the case, before our meeting on the 
Continent, as, till then, I have no con- 
sciousness of ever seeing you ?" 

" That is very likely, from the circum- 
stances under which you saw me ; but, to 
make you understand matters, I must 
trouble you with a brief outline of my 
story. Ambition and avarice were early 
implanted in my heart ; my father taught 
me, that, without a certain rank, neglect 
and scorn were sure of being our portion, 
and that, without wealth, there could be 
no enjoyment in life. What his plans 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27 

were for me I knew not, but while I was 
yet a boy, he was invited to send me over 
to a relation in the wine business in Spain, 
with a promise that, if he did, I should 
succeed to whatever this relative was pos- 
sessed of The temptation to accept the 
invitation was too great to permit him to 
refuse it. I went to Spain, and, in the 
course of a few years, found myself, through 
the death of my kinsman, in what certain- 
ly should have been a handsome indepen- 
dence to me ; but I had by this time con- 
tracted a taste for expence and pleasure, 
that, instead of allowing me to turn his 
bequest to any good account, led me to 
spend it in idle wanderings about the Con- 
tinent, where I gradually became acquaint- 
ed and connected with a set of the most 
worthless and depraved characters. 

" With a set of these sharpers, for they 
merited no other denomination, I at length 
repaired to London, to try what the exer- 
cise of my wits would do for me there ; and 
there, through the insinuations of my fa- 
c 2 



28 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ther, whose views on your paternal inhe- 
ritance were by this time disclosed to me, 
I laid myself out to become acquainted 
with yours, for the double purpose of try- 
ing to discover whether he was yet begin- 
ning to have any suspicion of the villainy 
that was practising against him in Ireland, 
or could be allured into any further act of 
imprudence, that might accelerate his 
ruin, or, in other words, drive him to some 
deed of desperation. 

" No wonder you regard me with such 
horror — but 1 will be as brief as possible. 
How I succeeded, under the name of don 
Callan, in introducing myself to your fa- 
ther's notice, and gradually insinuating my- 
self into his confidence, it would be tedious 
to relate ; suffice it to say, I perfectly suc- 
ceeded in my designs; but apprehensive, 
notwithstanding the change from boyhood 
to manhood, some one of the family might 
recognise me, though he did not, I care- 
fully abstained from visiting at his house, 
under one pretext or other, continuing to 
meet him only at the coffee-houses or ta- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 29 

verns he frequented, and thus you had no 
opportunity of seeing me. 

" At length I accomplished my grand 
object, of introducing him to my associ- 
ates but I see, by your changing coun- 
tenance, you anticipate what I am about 
adding.— On the fatal night you followed 
him to the gambling-house, I was indeed, 
as usual, of the party ; and there I saw 
you, under circumstances too agitating to 
allow you to notice any one particularly, 
but which impressed your image upon my 
imagination in such a manner, as would 
have rendered it almost impossible, I be- 
lieve, for you, under any disguise, to have 
escaped my recognition. 

" From what followed there, as this was 
known to be one of my haunts, and my 
person was well known about town, I 
deemed it unsafe to continue in the king- 
dom. Hardly had I returned to the Con- 
tinent, ere I received an account of my 
father's death, with a letter, written some 
short time before it, importing, that upon 
his decease, I would find nearly the whole 



30 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the estate of Altoir-na-Grenie vested in 
me, but in such a way as would require 
the greatest caution on my side in making 
good my claim to it. In a word, he so 
alarmed me, with fears of losing what his 
villainy had acquired for me, that the hor- 
rible idea of ridding myself of them by 
your death suggested itself to me. Once 
conceived, I determined never to rest till 
I had carried it into effect. I will not fa- 
tigue you by recapitulating all the me- 
thods I had recourse to for the accomplish- 
ment of this diabolical design; suffice it, 
from that period 1 almost became your 
shadow. But well as I thought all my 
plans laid for your destruction, still 1 found 
them defeated, as if by an invisible power ; 
and surely it was by an invisible power — 
by that Almighty Providence that still 
interposes its protecting shield between 
the arrow of the villain and the heart of 
the virtuous. 

" At last, my patience becoming nearly 
exhausted, I would probably have risked 
something desperate, when the battle of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 31 

Waterloo took place, and in the hurry and 
confusion of such a scene, I conceived I 
should at length find a favourable oppor- 
tunity for accomplishing my design. How 
I succeeded in obtaining the disguise of a 
trooper, for the purpose of lying in wait 
for this, it matters not to say ; again I was 
disappointed, and following you accord- 
ingly to Paris, there laid the scheme of 
entrapping you to Seville, where I had 
confederates ready to assist me in any plan 
of villainy, and wishing, all along, through 
considerations for my personal safety, ra- 
ther to effect your destruction through 
treachery than violence. 

" Finding you had again escaped m) 
snares, I pursued you hither; but here, 
without assistance, I found it next to im- 
possible to execute my design, and by de- 
grees, therefore, was led to break it to 
Dermot and Delaney, both agents in all 
the villainy of my late father; the one 
through necessity, I believe, and the other 
from resentment at his dismission from the 
castle. By bribes and promises I gradu- 



32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ally won them over to my purpose; at 
least apparently so, for, whether he was all 
along deceiving me, or his ultimately do- 
ing so was occasioned by some sudden 
compunction of conscience, Delaney him- 
self can better explain than I can." 

The departure of O'Callaghan was no 
longer delayed. Donaghue was indeed 
quite as impatient for it as he was him- 
self, so hateful was the sight of a wretch 
reviving the painful recollections he did, 
and so disgusted was he by the little feel- 
ing of shame which his quick restoration 
to coolness evinced. 

Having allowed him to escape the pu- 
nishment he merited, of course there could 
be no thought of inflicting it on the mise- 
rable being of whose necessities he had 
taken so terrible an advantage. Dermot, 
now restored to himself, with fear and 
trembling threw himself on his mercy, 
and which, after a due admonition, was 
granted, with a promise of future relief, if 
there was reason to believe there was pro- 
per repentance for the past ; what he had 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 33 

overheard from him, at the moment when 
he was led to believe the diabolical scheme 
against him had been carried into effect, 
not having been lost upon Donaghue. 

The scene closed with Delaney's con- 
fessing he knew not how he might finally 
have decided on acting, but for the feel- 
ings of gratitude and compunction awa- 
kened by the accidental visit of Donaghue 
to his cabin. — " From that day," he said, 
" when I had so much reason to think 
your honour was the means of preventing 
my miserable life from being hurried out 
of me, and that I saw what your generous 
heart was, from the relief you directly af- 
forded me, and your offer to serve me, 
spite of the stories that were told against 
me, I felt that I would rather let myself 
be shot through the head, than any longer 
think of any mischief against you." 

" With such feelings for me, it seems 
strange to me, Delaney," said Donaghue, 
" that you should not at once have dis* 
closed the plot against me." 
c 3 



34 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Oh, your honour, I couldn't, because 
I was sworn !" 

" Sworn !" 

" Yes, your honour, not to open my 
lips about it." 

" And is it possible, that a man of your 
good sense could possibly think yourself 
bound, either by religion or morality, to 
keep an oath of such a description! an 
oath is a solemn appeal to Heaven, to wit- 
ness the purity and sincerity of our inten- 
tions ; and how could you call Heaven to 
witness the violation of its most sacred 
commandments ?" 

" I can't pretend to argue with your 
honour," answered Barney, " but I have 
been always tould that an oath is an oath ; 
that is, that when once you are sworn not 
to tell a thing, it is black perjury to do 
so ; and so I couldn't, no how, tell your 
honour what was plotting against you; 
but since I couldn't open my lips about it, 
I set my brains to work, to think how I'd 
contrive, for all that, to let you know it, 
and so at last I hit upon the plan of dress- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 35 

ing myself up as the ghost of squire Den- 
nis, hoping you'd be tempted, from the 
story you heard about that, to follow me 
to the place where you'd be able to disco- 
ver all by just listening yourself" 

" And you don't call this breaking your 
oath, Delaney ?" 

" No, your honour, since I never open- 
ed my lips about what I was bound to 
conceal." 

" Well, well, I'll take another opportu- 
nity of speaking of the nature of the obli- 
gations of oaths; in the mean time, I hope 
this will be a caution to you how you 
bind yourself to any thing again, without 
first duly weighing the nature of it, since, 
you see, from having done so, with all 
your wish to save me, you might have 
failed of doing so." 

" Then I am sure I should never have 
known peace again in this world," said 
Barney; ** and indeed I must do Nelly 
the justice to say, bad as she is, it was not 
her fault that I didn't tell your honour at 
once, for she knew every thing that was 



36 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

going on, and what friends we'd be ma- 
king of her ladyship, if we proved ourselves 
friends to you." 

" Her ladyship ! who do you mean by 
that?" demanded Donaghue. 

" Why, lady Jane Morley, your ho- 
nour; doesn't your honour know that 
Nelly nursed her? Troth, and she did, 
though my lady, somehow, herself, in go- 
ing to England, seemed to forget it a lit- 
tle ; but since she's come back, Nelly has 
been so much backwards and forwards 
lately with her, she's beginning to do a 
little for us again." 

" Did Nelly," asked Donaghue, struck 
with a sudden idea, " ever mention any 
thing about me to her, do you know?" 

" Why, since I am not sworn to secresy 
now," replied Delaney, a little archly, " to 
tell you the truth, I believe she did. 
Hearing — no offence, I liope, to your ho- 
nour — that there was a liking between her 
ladyship and your honour, she thought 
what a pleasure it would be to my lady to 
hear that you were about getting back your 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 37 

own fine fortune, and so she told her you 
were, but not exactly how, only through 
great discoveries that were about being 
made." 

Here was a light thrown on a subject 
that had hitherto puzzled Donaghue, 
namely, lady Jane's apparently persevering 
attachment to him, as he knew she was 
by no means of a romantic disposition; 
and in ceasing to give her credit for the 
only thing that could have excused the in- 
decorum of her conduct, he became dou- 
bly disgusted by this conduct. But the 
tumult of his mind was too great at pre- 
sent to permit more than a transient 
thought to be bestowed on this ; so sud- 
den, so unexpected had been his restora- 
tion to the fortune of his ancestors, to say 
nothing of the extraordinary means by 
which this restoration had been effected, 
that there were moments when the ardent 
congratulations that were pouring in on 
every side, the loud rejoicings that met 
his ear wherever he turned, were requisite 
to persuade him of the reality of what had 



38 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

happened — what a proof, the sudden re- 
verse he was destined to experience, that 
despair should never find a place in the 
human heart, since we know not the mo- 
ment when the scene may shift, and a 
bright and glorious one succeed to that on 
which we gazed with such gloomy appre- 
hension! 



CHAPTER II. 



" These are the cliarming agonies of love, 
Whose misery delights." 

" Pleasure," says the poet, " never 
comes sincere to man, but is lent by Hea- 
ven upon hard usury." Hardly had Do- 
naghue recovered from the overwhelming 
effect of recent events upon his feelings, 
ere, with all the gratitude of his heart to 
Heaven for his unexpected restoration to 
the means of dispensing happiness and 
comfort around him, a pang assailed it at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 39 

the thought, that as far as immediately 
concerned his own happiness, the reverse 
in his condition might have been effected 
too late; the report of an attachment be- 
tween Miss Erin and lord Altidore had 
been revived ; and in spite of what he had 
been induced to think were her sentiments 
for him, he knew not how altogether to 
discredit it. But he would not \oncr re- 
main in suspense on such a subject; yet 
how should he summon courage to in- 
quire as to what would be like ascertain- 
ing his fate? His agitation was so great at 
the bare surmise of what he would suffer, 
should it prove as he feared, that it failed 
not of exciting the observation of Melville, 
who, inquiring into the cause, Donaghue 
at length opened his disturbed mind to 
him, disclosing all that he had ever felt 
for Eveleen, or thought about her, with 
the motives for every successive change 
of conduct towards her. 

jNIelviUe evidently listened to him with 
much emotion. — " I wish," said he, when 
he had concluded, ** you had a little sooner 



40 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

been equally explicit ; since, by satisfying 
you that sir William Erin was a very dif- 
ferent character to what lady Jane had 
artfully represented him to be, I should 
probably have prevented all those attempts 
at dissembling, that must have been so 
painful to you ; but I cannot blame you 
for what was occasioned by regard for 
Eveleen ; respect for her would not per- 
mit you to mention her father in any les- 
sening light to another person ; but surely 
your own observation, the generous and 
munificent acts you were continually hear- 
ing of him, should have opened your eyes 
to the falsehood of her ladyship." 

" No," replied Donaghue ; " because I 
attributed these to the pride of patronage. 
In short, prejudice has the effect of throw- 
ing a complete mist over us." 

" Well, don't unnecessarily keep your- 
self on the rack," said Melville ; " the 
sooner you ascertain your fate, the better." 
" Ay, if I thought I should have cou- 
rage to support it, if it proved unfortu- 
nate." 



thadition of the castle. 41 

" Pooh ! this is nonsense ; take my ad- 
vice, and set off for the Vale directly;'* 
and as he spoke he made a movement to- 
wards the bell, as if to order the horses. 

" ^^o, I cannot indeed ; I have not cou- 
rage to attempt ascertaining it in any 

other way than by writing; for You 

may laugh if you please; but positively I 
think if I saw the lips of Eveleen forming 
a negative to my hopes, I should " 

" Die at her feet !" cried Melville. 
" Tragic indeed ! But what says the bard 
of nature, through the lips of his lovely 
Rosalind — * Men have died, and worms 
have eaten them, but not for love !' No, 
no, my dear lad ; all-enchanting as Eve- 
leen is, and deplorable as it will be to be 
disappointed of her, yet if it is a disap- 
pointment you are doomed to, I trust and 
hope you will bear it like — a handsome 
young fellow, with a noble fortune at his 
back, to enable him to enjoy life, and who 
may have his choice, if he pleases, of half 
the fine women in the kingdom," 



42 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Really, Melville, at times you trifle 
most provokingly ; but " 

" But you are not going to write this, 
it would, to be sure, be treason, not to 
say doubtlessly terribly agitating, letter 
this morning, I presume; for consider lady 
Magennis's ball this evening, given, as she 
assures every one, expressly on your ac- 
count, will require all those spirits that 
may be exhausted by writing it ; let me 
therefore " 

Donaghue would listen to him no lon- 
ger; he hastened to the library, where, lock- 
ing himself in, he sat down to write this, 
as Melville had truly styled it indeed, agi- 
tating letter ; he poured forth his whole 
heart in it — told Eveleen, that, for the 
present, his fate rested with her, since, 
should her answer prove un propitious to 
his wishes, it was his determination to go 
abroad as soon as he had arranged his af- 
fairs, and done what was requisite for the 
comfort of those dependent on him, there 
to remain till such time as he should feel 
reconciled to her loss, and enabled to see 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 4S 

her another's with composure ; finally, he 
concluded by entreating her not to let 
the agonies of suspense be prolonged ; but 
at lady Magennis's, where they were to 
meet that night, to let him, if it was only 
by a look, understand what he was to ex- 
pect. 

Hardly was it dispatched, however, ere 
he repented not having taken Melville's 
advice, in postponing it a little longer, the 
state of agitation into which he was thrown 
by sending it, rendering the idea of the 
evening's entertainment absolutely disa- 
greeable to him. It was gone, however, 
past recall, and he strove to collect himself 
for what might be the result; such how- 
ever was his dread of this, that he delayed 
till the very last moment setting out for 
lady Magennis's, till, in short, the pa- 
tience of his companions was quite ex- 
hausted, Melville's, from knowing Lavi- 
nia was to be of the party, and Rosebud's 
from his eagerness for any thing that pro- 
mised amusement. 

Donaghue eagerly glanced round the 



44 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

room as he entered, but none of the Erin 
party were yet come, and he really felt 
the circumstance as a kind of respite ; but 
at length lady Erin was announced ; she 
was accompanied by lady Jane, Miss Bond, 
and Millicent, but no Miss Erin. Dona- 
ghue, for a moment, felt almost as if every 
thing swam round him. She was not 
coming then ; his unfortunate letter had 
prevented her, either from an unwilling- 
ness to occasion him any pain in such a 
place, or else a wish to consider how she 
might best soften that which she must 
give him. Well, he had entreated that 
the agonies of suspense might not be pro- 
longed, and she certainly had attended to 
the entreaty, for was not her staying away 
from the ball — her thus avoiding an im- 
mediate meeting, a convincing proof that 
he had nothing to hope ? Aware, how- 
ever, that this was no place for giving way 
to his present feelings, he tried to rouse 
himself, to subdue that deadly sickness of 
the heart which hope disappointed occa- 
sions ; and having watched lady Erin to a 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 45 

seat, he at length forced himself to ap- 
proach her, but with a feeling of embar- 
rassment, from which, however, he was 
quickly relieved, by being convinced, 
from her manner,that as yet she knew no- 
thing of his letter. The usual compli- 
ments having passed — " Are we not to 

expect to have the pleasure of seeing 

sir William," cried Donaghue, suddenly 
checking himself, " here to-night?" 

" Oh, yes," replied her ladyship ; " but 
not till it is very late, some gentlemen 
having dropped in, who will keep him till 
it is." 

** And," Donaghue's voice faltered a 
little, and he passed his hand across his 
brow, as if his hair had incommoded him — 
" and Miss Erin," he resumed, " does she 
wait for him, or " 

" Oh, no," interrupted lady Erin ; " she 
is merely waiting for Miss Audley. I ex- 
pect her every moment." 

What a revulsion did the feelings of 
Donaghue undergo at this intimation ! a 
sudden glow pervaded his bosom — his 



46 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cheek flushed, and he felt, in short, as a 
drowning wretch would, who, when all is 
black despair about him, suddenly beholds 
a glimpse of hope ; yet let him not be too 
sanguine— she might not perhaps have been 
able to have avoided coming, and 

He was interrupted in the reflection by 
lady Erin's touching his arm, and ex- 
claiming — " There she is ! and Miss Aud- 
ley, I see, is hurrying her to the ball- 
room, and I want so much to speak to 
her; do, my dear Donaghue, go and tell 
her I wish to speak to her, before she 
commences dancing." 

Donaghue could not hesitate to obey 
her; but with what agitation did he pro- 
ceed to do so! and how gladly, if he 
could, would he have declined being her 
messenger, for the sake of delaying a mi- 
nute that would decide his fate ! No one, 
to have seen him at this instant approach- 
ing Eveleen, would have imagined, from 
his lingering manner, that he was an im- 
passioned lover approaching his beloved 
mistress. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 47 

She did not immediately perceive him 
on his joining her, from being engaged at 
the instant speaking to a party that had 
come up to her; but when she did, by 
suddenly turning her head, the deep ver- 
milion that instantly overspread her coun- 
tenance, certainly did indicate something 
like emotion. But this might be merely 
owing to finding him beside her, without 
being at all aware of the circumstance; 
and his heart, if possible, beat with still 
greater violence ; for a moment its palpi- 
tation rendered him scarcely able to speak 
— he then proceeded to give her mother's 



message. 



" Wishing to speak to me !" said Eve- 
leen, in a hesitating tone, as if of doubt. 

" Yes," replied Donaghue, " there she 
is; " you may see she is looking this way 
for you." 

" Yes, I perceive," said JSIiss Erin ; and 
she permitted Donaghue to take her hand 
to lead her to her. As he did so, he felt 
it tremble — the emotion its tremor excited 
was not controllable ; he gently drew her 



48 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

back — " Oh ! for a moment," he cried, 
" let me detain you. Eveleen, can you 
not conceive — must you not know what I 
am enduring at this instant ? and can you 
therefore suffer its " 

" My mother will be impatient — see !" 
cried Eveleen. 

" I see nothing — I can see nothing, at 
this instant," interrupted Donaghue, 
"but the cruelty you wdll be guilty of, if 
you trifle another minute with my feel- 
ings Yet, let me ask, did you not re- 
ceive my letter?" 

" A letter ! pshaw !" under an air of 
playfulness, trying to hide her own evi- 
dent agitation ; " I did receive a " 

"Rhapsody of nonsense! Well, be it 
so ; the more incoherent it was, the more 
justice it must have done to the feelings 
under which it was ^vritten, for it is not in 
a moment of excessive agitation we can 
arrange our ideas to the best advantage; it 
must, however, be much worse than I can 
allow it to be," the agitation of the gentle- 
man subsiding in exactly the same degree 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 49 

that that of the lady seemed to increase, 
" if it did not make me perfectly compre- 
hended." 

" Really," cried Eveleen, making a faint, 
and perhaps therefore an ineffectual, effort 
to break away from him, "I cannot allow 
my mother to be any longer kept waiting 
for me." 

" Well, only say that I may hope." 

" Hope !" repeated Eveleen, half avert- 
ing her looks, with a glance of archness ; 
" don't you know what lady Anne says to 
the wicked Richard ? — ' All men, 1 trust, 
live in hope." 

" Well, really," cried Donaghue, laugh- 
ing, and thus betraying that the enchant- 
ing permission he required was no longer 
requisite, " this is what I call wicked tri- 
fling; well, if you won't tell me I may 
hope, say at least " 

But we shall give no more of their con- 
versation ; suffice it, that on joining lady 
Erin — " Well, really, Donaghue," she 
said, " you are the worst messenger I ever 

VOL. IV. D 



50 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

met with ; what, in the name of wonder, 
detained you so long ?" 

" Long, my dear madam !" said Dona- 
ghue, in a tone of surprise. 

" Long, yes ! I have been watching you 
both these — I don't know how many mi- 
nutes, without being able to catch your 
eyes. If I hadn't seen you, Donaghue, in 
the room, I should really have conceived 
that you had run away with Eveleen." 

" Well, my dear madam," said Dona- 
ghue, in a coaxing tone, as he seated him- 
self beside her, while Eveleen took the 
seat at the other side, to hear what she had 
to say to her, " could you have wondered 
at that, when you considered how great 
the temptation to do so?" 

" Oh ! this is very fine talking; but in 
that case, what would a certain lady, I 
w^onder," glancing towards lady Jane, as, 
yielding to her natural bent, she was flirt- 
ing away in another part of the room, 
" have said ?" 

" What lady?" demanded Donaghue. 

"Wdl, really, Donaghue," said her la- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 51 

dyship, a little pettishly, " this is the affec- 
tation that so provokes me ! what lady 
should I mean but one — she who, deny it 
as you may, has been so long the occupant 
of your heart — and does she not look very 
handsome to-night ?" 

" Not handsomer than usual," replied 
Donaghue, coolly, but at the same time 
glancing expressively across her ladyship 
at Eveleen; "nor would it be necessary, 
or rather possible, for her to do so, so love- 
ly has she ever been in my eyes." 

Her ladyship turned hers with quick- 
ness upon him, to see w^hether he was 
speaking ironically. — " Now are you 
laughing, or in earnest ?" she demanded. 

" In earnest; no language can do jus- 
tice to the admiration with which I regard 
the' lovely being who has long, as your la- 
dyship observes, been the occupant of my 
heart." 

" Well, really this is a confession at last," 
said her ladyship, but certainly in a tone 
indicative of surprise at its suddenness, 
" and all is explained, and forgiven." 
D 2 

uBRwt — - "^:i 



52 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" All candidly explained at one side, 
and generously forgiven, I hope, at the 
other." 

" Well, I really am quite pleased to 
hear this ; we may then look forward " 

" My dear mamma," interrupted Eve- 
leen, "this is really so like planning for " 

** My dear Miss Erin," cried Donaghue, 
in his turn interrupting her, " you know 
not the pleasure there is in having a friend 
plan for one. — I guess, my dear madam, 
what you would have said ; but — a lover, 
while he is only a lover, must have fears; 
and except I can make myself assured," 
taking her hand as he spoke, " of the kind 
interposition " 

" Now really this is intolerable," cried 
her ladyship, drawing away her hand an- 
grily from him, " relapsing again into this 
affectation !" 

"Good Heavens, affectation!" exclaimed 
Donaghue, emphatically; " would that 
what I now feel was indeed affected! 
But, no — and it will not be long, my dear- 
est madam, ere you will, I am certain, ac- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 53 

knowledge, that for me to have evinced 
greater confidence, greater security of hap- 
piness, than I now do, would have been 
the height of presumption. — But I see," 
catching the eyes of Eveleen turned ex- 
pressively on him at the moment, ** I must 
seek for another opportunity of explaining 
myself. To-morrow I shall hope to be 
fortunate enough to obtain it ; and then, 
when I shall have opened my heart to 
lady Erin — disclosed all its fears, its wish- 
es, and anxieties, should she indeed deem 
me worthy of that interest in my behalf I 
seriously solicit, I shall consider myself 
the happiest of men." 

" Really you excite my curiosity, Do- 
naghue," said lady Erin, with some little 
degree of emotion — " Eveleen, do you 
comprehend him?" 

" Me, my dear ma'am !" cried Eveleen, 
colouring, and averting her head. 

Whether lady Erin, who certainly did 
not want penetration, would have begun 
to suspect something from the ambiguous 
language of the gentleman, and the em- 



54 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

barrassment of the lady, if the scene had 
been much longer prolonged, we cannot 
pretend to say ; but at this instant lady 
Magennis came forward to inform Dona- 
ghue, who was to open the ball with Miss 
Magennis, that dancing was about com- 
mencing. 

Donaghue bowed, to signify he was 
ready to attend on the lady; yet, not- 
withstanding, lingered for a minute to 
speak toEveleen. — "As usual, I suppose," 
he said, half reproachfully, from certain re- 
collections at the moment, " I am to ask 
in vain — am to hear, if I solicit your hand, 
that you are engaged already for as many 
sets as you shall probably think it agree- 
able to dance !" 

" Well, it is exactly the kind of an- 
swer," said she, laughing, " that you me- 
rit, for having set me down as deliberately 
affronting; however, to shew you that " 

" You can be more gracious than I me- 
rit," said Donaghue, softly ; and seizing her 
hand, " may I indeed find it so ?" 

" Pshaw! nonsense! really," forcibly 



TllADlTION OF THE CASTLE. 55 

withdrawing her hand, " this is quite ab- 
surd; you'll never cease till you attract 
observation, and then " 

" Not expiring yet !" said Melville, in a 
significant tone, as he passed at the instant 
with his partner. 

" There, I told you how it would be !" 
she cried, half laughing, half vexed, at 
what she had overheard — " that you would 
not rest till you had attracted attention 
by your manner ; and see, your partner is 
waiting for you." 

" Don't make me guilty then of the 
rudeness of allowing her to continue doing 
so, but say " 

^ I really don't know that I mentioned 
any set, but rather than be the means of 
keeping the whole room waiting — perhaps 
— if I don't change my mind — the second 
set I may condescend " 

Donaghue kissed her hand with rapture, 
and flew off to Miss Magennis. His bo- 
som's lord sat lightly on its throne, and all 
the time a free and unaccustomed spirit 
lifted him above himself with cheerful 



56 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

thoughts. He was indeed again himself; 
gloom, fear, despondence — all had fled, 
like vapours before the rising sun. Eve- 
leen had given him hope, and lie would 
not for a moment suffer himself to appre- 
hend that sir William or lady Erin would 
crush it. What a blissful termination had 
his troubles experienced, and how much 
would the recollection, the review, of 
them, serve to enhance and heighten com- 
ing happiness ! 

But the morning brought with it so- 
berer feelings. The sudden transition from 
apprehension to hope had been, at first, 
too much for his steadiness ; but the ine- 
briation of sudden delight had passed a- 
way — Eveleen's parents, or at least her fa- 
ther, might see things in a different light 
from what she did ; and he again became 
anxious, and almost unhappy. But a 
short time would now indeed finally ter- 
minate suspense, for, had he been inclined, 
he could not have protracted it, after the 
intimation he had given to lady Erin of 
his intention of waiting on her this mor- 



TRADITIOX OP THE CASTLE. 57 

ning ; and to the Vale, divided between 
hope and fear, he accordingly went. Be- 
fore his arrival, his letter was submitted by 
Eveleen to her mother, and by her to sir 
William, so that all parties were prepared 
for the purport of his visit. 

Avoiding entering into needless parti- 
culars, we shall content ourselves with 
merely observing, that the result of this 
visit was all he wished. Lady Erin's wish 
respecting him and her daughter is alrea- 
dy known ; and now satisfied that he had 
never feigned what he did not feel, that 
his heart had never really felt a preferable 
regard for any woman but Eveleen, she 
could not feel less anxious for its realiza- 
tion than she had once been; while sir 
William, equally satisfied with the expla- 
nations that were given, that there had 
been no wilful deception or dissimulation 
at his side, and that he was quite as free 
from errors as young men in general are, 
if not more so, perhaps — and this was the 
truth indeed, for if he had not been tho- 
D 3 



58 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

roughly persuaded of this, he never would 
have given him his Eveleen — united with 
her in consenting to let him become the 
future guardian of their child's happiness. 

But, with all the explanations that had 
been given, still an awkwardness might 
have been felt in giving this consent, had 
Donaghue deferred, till now, endeavouring 
to clear up the mistake about lady Jane, 
as they might then have still imagined she 
was under some illusion about him. But 
this had not been the case; Donaghue 
was able to refer to the conversation he 
had had with lady Erin in particular on 
the subject, and from this they were now 
aware that they might have seen, some 
time before, that no engagement existed 
between them. 

Still, on many accounts, lady Erin wish- 
ed she had not till now remained at the 
Vale. To quit it, however, was not her 
ladyship's plan. To have done so, at pre- 
sent, would have seemed as if she felt the 
defeat she had now experienced, and which 
her pride would not allow her to endure 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 59 

the thought of; and, in the next, obliged 
her to give up some new schemes she 
thought hkely to make her amends for it. 
The fact was, lady Jane was not by any 
means mistress of the fortune that was ge- 
nerally imagined ; and though her passion 
for Donaghue was ardent, being, to make 
use of her own flippant language, one of 
the handsomest creatures in creation in her 
eyes, yet it certainly was not quite a dis- 
interested one. The old banker, in leav- 
ing her the estate he had done, appeared 
to have left it to her more for the purpose 
of tantalizing, than affording her enjoy- 
ment, since, from the annuities with which 
it was loaded, entailed on generation after 
generation, it certainly could only be con- 
sidered as a nominal one. 

This maliciousness on the part of the 
deceased, however, she took as much pains 
as possible to conceal, aware it was a cir- 
cumstance that, with all her attractions, 
might do her some little injury in the 
fashionable world. But how was she to 
keep up the appearance requisite for its 



60 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

concealment ? Distressed and bewildered, 
she knew not what to do, when all her 
plans on Donaghue were revived, by being 
positively assured, by a friend of his un- 
cle's, that there was not the shghtest doubt 
of his not only finally inheriting every 
thing the general was possessed of, but of 
being shortly put in possession of a hand- 
some independence by him, he was so 
much pleased by his conduct; since Do- 
naghue, she knew, w^as the last man in the 
world to be swayed by mercenary consi- 
derations, and certainly the being, of all 
others, she should prefer, if matters proved 
as they were represented. 

In the full hope of this being the case, 
she laid herself out, as already stated, for 
an invitation to the Vale, where the in- 
timation she received from her nurse, of 
the expected restoration of Donaghue's 
paternal inheritance, did not by any means 
tend to lessen her anxiety for the accom- 
plishment of the object that had brought 
her there. She had repeatedly heard her 
father declare, that he should not by any 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 61 

means be surprised, if the fraud through 
which Donaghue was deprived of this 
should yet be discovered ; and induced by 
this to give credit to the assertion of her 
nurse, she became still more intent and 
earnest in succeeding in her views respect- 
ing him. 

But in vain every allurement was essay- 
ed, and every artifice in her power to have 
recourse to practised, for the purpose of 
effecting them. Donaghue, absorbed by 
his passion for Eveleen, remained insen- 
sible to every advance, and she, at last, 
began to see that her hope, with regard to 
him, was indeed a forloiTi one. Still, how- 
ever, the idea of giving pain to a rival was 
too exquisite not to induce her to try and 
insinuate a very different belief into the 
minds of lady Erin and her daughter ; not 
without a faint hope, that if she could 
pique Eveleen into giving encouragement 
to lord Altidore, she might yet succeed 
herself with Donaghue. 

But in case she was doomed to final dis- 
appointment about him, she began to turn 



62 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in her mind what was to be done, as, by 
this time, she had involved herself in very- 
considerable embarrassments, through her 
own natural love of expence, and the esta- 
blishment she deemed it requisite to keep 
up, to impose on the world. Lawless was 
gone, and though she had several flatter- 
ers about her, she knew of no serious ad- 
mirer after him. But, by a little manage- 
ment, was not one to be procured? and, 
after some deliberation, and casting her 
eyes about her in every direction, sir Ed- 
ward Surrey was the person she decided 
on spreading her snares for, as more likely 
than any one else she knew to be drawn 
into them. It is true, he was a fool, but 
then he was a baronet, and had an excel- 
lent fortune ; and since she could not get 
the man of her heart, she cared very little 
who she married, provided it was a person 
possessed of the power of supporting her 
in the extravagance she delighted in, and 
who she thought she could manage ; and 
it was partly on his account, and partly to 
prevent its being thought she felt a pang 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 63 

about Donaghue, that she resolved on 
maintaining her ground at the Vale. 

From the moment Donaghue had re- 
gained his inheritance, she anticipated 
what would follow, and accordingly com- 
menced her operations on the baronet, by 
gradually beginning to pay that attention 
to him she had hitherto disdained bestow- 
ing, singling him out for her attendant in 
the walks she suddenly began to have a 
fancy for taking about the domain, and 
now and then asking him to take her a 
drive in his curricle, he really drove so well. 
Sir Edward w^as enchanted ; he certainly 
admired Lavinia a thousand times more, 
and, somehow, thought the conversation 
of poor little Miss Bond, whom he was in 
the habit of parading about, respecting the 
wonders she had seen w^hen she was in 
Paris, quite as agreeable ; but then, not to 
be delighted by the notice of lady Jane — 
the rich, the elegant, and every-way-dis- 
tinguished lady Jane, was quite out of the 
question ; and through his flattered self- 
love and vanity, her ladyship had every 



64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

reason to believe she should here at least 
succeed. 

Continually on the watch, and keenly 
penetrating the explanation that, in its re- 
sult, had been so propitious to the wishes 
of Donaghue, had hardly taken place, ere 
she discovered this result; and while lady 
Erin, from a feeling of delicacy, in conse- 
quence of all that had passed between them 
respecting him, was puzzling herself how 
to break to her what could not possibly 
for any time be concealed, the acceptance 
of Donaghue's addresses, she herself led 
to the subject, by at once bluntly telling 
her ladyship she was apprized of the fact, 
as well as perfectly aware of her motive 
for hesitating to acquaint her with it. — 
"But while I feel grateful, my dear lady 
Erin," she said, " for your kind and deli- 
cate consideration about my feelings, I am 
happy to inform you, that they are now 
not exactly such as to have been wounded 
by what you had to communicate. I 
have, for some time past, been so tho- 
roughly convinced, from the knowledge I 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 65 

acquired of Donaghue's disposition," (she 
could not deny lierself the gratification of 
speaking invidiously) *• that he is a person 
not to be induced to forgive, where he 
once conceives he has had reason to resent, 
that I have latterly been quite as ready to 
relinquish him, as he could possibly be to 
relinquish me ; as a proof of which, my 
sincerity in declaring that I am neither 
pained nor hurt in any manner by what 
has occurred, it is my determination to re- 
main here till our sweet Eveleen has be- 
come a bride." 

Considering all that had passed, lady 
Erin was not a little surprised at hearing 
her express herself in this manner, on a 
subject that she feared would have been 
the occasion of no little disturbance ; the 
pleasure, however, her perfect philosophy 
afforded her, was certainly a good deal 
damped by the determination she had 
avowed of remaining for the present where 
she was ; on many accounts she felt her 
longer continuance at the Vale would im- 
pose a constraint that would be painfuL 



66 TRADITION OF THE OASTLE. 

Politeness, or hospitality, however, would 
not allow any indication of her real wish- 
es, and which, indeed, must have been 
very plainly intimated, to have induced 
lady Jane to give up what she had deci- 
ded on. 

The approaching marriage at the Vale 
was soon notified to the neighbourhood, 
by the preparations that commenced for 
it. Numerous were the speculations its 
quick announcement put an end to. In 
the first of disappointment it occasioned, 
lady Magennis could not help being vexed 
at the expence and trouble she had been 
at about her recent ball, till she recollected 
it might be the means of silencing some 
invidious reports that had lately begun to 
be circulated about the family affairs. 

Whatever were the feeUngs of lord Al- 
tidore on the occasion, he seemed to have 
them in tolerable subjection, continuing 
to visit as usual at the Vale; yet there 
were moments in which Donaghue fan- 
cied he appeared thoughtful and melan- 
choly, and moments too in whkh Dona- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 67 

ghue also felt, that had he not been an as- 
sured lover, he certainly should not alto- 
gether have liked the friendship that ap- 
peared to subsist between Eveleen and his 
lordship ; for, whether it was that she ad- 
mired his conduct as a discarded lover, or 
had previously conceived a high esteem 
for him, but assuredly so it was, that she 
treated him with the most distinguishing 
attention, insomuch that Donaghue once 
or twice could not help feeling a little 
peevish, on coming to the Vale, and find- 
ing them conversing together by them- 
selves, and once or twice on finding they 
were out walking by themselves ; but the 
very moment after he could have abhorred 
himself for the thought, that, however 
Eveleen might have suffered a mother's 
wishes to have swayed her with regard to 
the rejection of a lover, she would have 
permitted them to influence her alone to 
the acceptance of a lover, without some 
preferable regard for him. But for what 
he so reproached, and almost abhorred 
himself, he tried to excuse himself, by be- 



68 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

lieving that a little selfishness, he chose to 
term it, is inseparable from the feelings of 
a lover. 

But all this time, what was Melville 
about? Melville was as busy as other 
people, in pursuit of what he thought 
would constitute his happiness. To go 
back a little : — on the night of the ball, at 
which Miss Lavinia had the surprise of 
finding him metamorphosed from Denny 
Scanlen into the elegant heir of sir James 
Melville, it had been the wish of lady 
Erin that she should have slept at the 
Vale ; but Lavinia feeling that half the 
pleasure of the ball w^ould be lost if she 
had not the power of talking over the par- 
ticulars of it immediately with Rosetta, 
made some pretext for preventing this ar- 
rangement, but with a promise of dining 
the next day at the Vale. 

Rosetta, quite as anxious to hear some- 
thing about the ball as Lavinia could pos- 
sibly be to tell of it, or rather to hear 
something of lord Altidore, lay impatient- 
ly awake, watching for her return. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 69 

Their rooms opened into each other; 
and Lavinia, instead of passing on to hers, 
stopped in Rosetta's to undress, that she 
might, while doing so, be gratifying her 
curiosity at the same time. The first 
question was involuntarily about lord Al- 
tidore, and her spirits suddenly reanima- 
ted by Lavinia's assuring her, she saw no- 
thing particular, no, nothing assuredly very 
particular, in his manner to JMiss Erin. 

" Well, come," she cried, " now tell 
me who you danced with." 

" Oh, Lord, half the room !" replied 
Lavinia. " You know I was a new star, 
and so attracted general observation." 

" Well, and who did you see to like ?" 

« To like ! Lord, half a hundred ! In 
the first place," a little archly, " there was 
lord — lord Altidore." 

" Pooh ! nonsense !" 

" Nonsense ! and why so, pray ?" 

" Because a — lord Altidore is engaged 
already." 

"Is he? I didn't know that. I thought 
you told me it was all over between you." 



70 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

"Now, Lavinia, this is just going on 
in your usual teazing way. You know I 
mean to Miss Erin." 

" And you tell me so in that tone ! 
Now, Hosetta, if I were to put you to 
the question, I wonder, would your an- 
swer be the same ! However, I shall leave 
it to your Ariel, who, for aught you know, 
may be hopping about your pillow this 
instant, to discover the truth, and " 

" Come, tell me what conquests you 
made ?" interrupted Rosetta. 

"Oh, innumerable! so much so, that 
in a day or two you may expect I shall 
employ you as Portia did her confidant, 
Nerissa, in conning over my lovers, to see 
which I shall discard and which retain." 
fit But, that's true," said Rosetta, " I 
had almost forgot ; what do you think of 
those two beaux that half the girls in the 
neighbourhood are raving about?" 

" What, Donaghue, or O'Brien, or — 
I am sure I don't know which is his name, 
or whether not both ; oh, he is certainly 
an exquisitely handsome creature ! so tall. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 71 

and with such dark eyes, and such daz- 
zling teeth, and such a smile to display 
them — and — I am much mistaken if there 
are not others who think him quite as en- 
chanting as I do." 

" And his friend — what do you think 
of him ? 

" His friend ! really I Do you know, 

Rosetta, that once or twice to-night I felt 
an inclination to love this invisible guar- 
dian of mine, on seeing my dress was one 
of the prettiest in the room, even equal 
to Miss Erin's, though hers was so chaste- 
ly elegant. If the hideous old man, for I 
am sure he is so, or he would have allow- 
ed himself to have been known before this, 
would but continue to act in this manner, 
without ever obtruding himself, I should, 
by degrees, begin to feel a great venera- 
tion for him." 

" Fy, Lavinia ! I am ashamed to hear 
you talk in this manner of a person to 
whom you are under such obligations! 
How have you been educated? — what 
pains, in every instance, have not been 



72 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

taken with you ! — and how are you in- 
troduced into hfe, with every advantage 
that pride and vanity can desire !" 

" Oh ! if you are beginning to scold," 
said Lavinia 

*' Well, stop ; I see you are not quite 
undressed yet, and tell me how you like 
this Melville? I am sure I don't know 
how the subject was brought up; but 
while we were sitting at supper, my fa- 
ther began speaking of him, and saying 
he heard he was a very fine young man, 
highly accomplished, and remarkably 
handsome." 

" Yes, he is well enough," said Lavinia, 
with carelessness. 

" Well enough ! is that all ? Then you 
don't think him by any means equal to 
his friend ?" 

" I didn't say that," cried Lavinia, with 
quickness. 

" Didn't you ? Well, I declare I think 
you did, as plain as you ever said any 
thing; or at least you allowed it to be in- 
ferred." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 7^ 

" Then I allowed what I didn't mean ; 
for I think him quite as handsome (hand- 
somer no one could be) as this Donaghue." 

" And v/hich really do you like best ?" 

" Which do I like best! Why, if I 
was ^orced to take either the one or the 
other, I — I believe I would take this Mel- 
ville." 

" Forced !" repeated Rosetta ; " really 
you have an extraordinary way of ex- 
pressing yourself, Lavinia ! Forced ! 
Great compulsion indeed 1 should con- 
ceive requisite to induce you to take the 
captivating owner of the stately old castle 
here, or the elegant heir of a baronetcy !" 

" What ! beginning again !" exclaimed 
Lavinia; " oh, then, good night to you 
in earnest !" gathering up her scattered or- 
naments as she spoke, and running into 
her chamber ; but stopping at the door — 
" though you are so cross, I can't be so 
ill-natured as not to wish you ban repos 
and pleasant dreams." 

"And what would be the consequence," 

VOL. IV. E 



74 TRADITIOX OF THE CASTLE. 

said Rosetta, with a sigh, as she re- ad- 
justed her pillow, to settle her head on it, 
" of the wish being fulfilled, but that, 
when I awoke in the morning, I should,, 
like Caliban, cry to sleep, that I might 
dream again?" 

But whether it was owing to pleasant 
dreams or not, we cannot pretend to say, 
but certainly the next morning she ap- 
peared in better spirits than she had been 
in for a considerable time before; and soon 
after breakfast, which, owing to Lavinia's 
being up so late the preceding night, was 
protracted to an unusually late hour this 
morning, proposed a walk to Lavinia, ere 
she set about dressing for her engagement 
at the Vale. 

Lavinia made no objection, and off they 
set, to ramble just as chance directed. 
They had just got far enough to be out of 
sight of the house, and were begun talk- 
ing and laughing over the incidents of the 
ball-room, when Melville, alias, still to 
Rosetta, Mr. Denny Scanlen, very unex- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 75 

pectedly appeared approaching, and re- 
spectfully saluted them. 

The compliment was hardly returned 
by Rosetta, and not at all by Lavinia, and 
who, as they drew close to each other, gave 
the arm of Rosetta a pull, to draw her to 
the other side of the road. E,osetta was 
a little surprised at this, though not dis- 
pleased, for she recollected her father's in- 
junction — an injunction that one or two 
observations had induced her to think it 
would be quite as well to attend to, and 
felt she should have, in consequence, ex- 
perienced some embarrassment, had La- 
vinia taken it into her head to have given 
the young man any encouragement to join 
them. That he would attempt to do so 
without it, she could not suppose ; she was 
therefore both indignant and surprised, 
when, instead of passing them as she ex- 
pected, he wheeled about, and joined 
them. For a moment she thought of ex- 
pressing her displeasure at the freedom ; 
but unwilling, from a feeling of delicacy. 



76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to give positive pain, she checked herself, 
and, vrithout appearing to know that he 
was at her side, decidedly turned away 
her head, and began again chatting with 
Lavinia. 

Lavinia, however, had hardly the power 
of replying to her, so still more incensed 
was she herself at what had occurred. 

In this manner they went on a little 
further, without deigning to cast a glance 
at their unfortunate companion, when two 
young ladies belonging to the neighbour- 
hood, hut not exactly to what was deno- 
minated the first class, came flying up to 
them, impatient to hear from Lavinia all 
the particulars of the entertainment of the 
preceding evening, from which the cir- 
cumstance just alluded to had excluded 
them, distinctions of rank being not more 
rigidly observed in what aie considered, 
with regard to these, the most rigid of all 
courts, the German ones, than in Ireland. 
Hardly allowing herself to ask her how 
she was — " Well, and was the ball quite 
as delightful last night as you expected ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLt. 77 

exclaimed the eldest ^liss Leland, eagerly 
addressing herself to Lavinia. 

" Yes ; I found it pleasant enough." 

" And were there many strangers?" 
asked the youngest. " We heard a great 
many were expected." 

" Oh, as to that," said Lavinia, " I 
can't tell you ; for I as yet know so few in 
the neighbourhood, that every face there 
was almost that of a stranger's to me." 

" Weil; but you know some of the 
company," resumed the eldest sister; 
" what heaus had you there?" 

" Beaus ! Oh, beaus upon beaus. Quite 
a superabundance of them." 

" And which amongst them did you 
think the handsomest ?" asked the young- 
est Miss Leland. " Did you see any one 
there to be compared to Mr. O'Brien, of 
Altoir-na-Grenie ? 

" ^Vhy, how do you know any thing 
of Mr. O'Brien ?" demanded her sister. 

" How do I ! Sure he was pointed out 
to me yesterday, as he was passing on 



78 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

horseback; and I think him the hand- 
somest creature I ever laid my eyes upon." 

" I have heard that the friend he has on 
a visit with him is quite as handsome. 
They were both at the ball last night, to 
be sure;" and so again addressing herself 
to Lavinia, " which do you admire most?" 

" Me! I don't know that I admire ei- 
ther of them." 

" Don't mind her," said Rosetta ; " she 
admires both of them so much, that if 
Mr. O'Brien had not brought his friend 
with him, she certainly would have lost 
her heart to him. If he is vain, he will 
be getting rid of him, when he finds that 
he rivals him in this manner." 

« Then she prefers Mr. Melville?" 

" Oh, decidedly," replied Rosetta, laugh* 
ing ; " if compelled to have one or other, 
she assured me she should make no hesi- 
tation between them." 

" I assure you of such a thing !" cried La- 
vinia, in extreme anger, and drawing away 
her arm. " I am astonished, Rosetta, to 
hear you make such an assertion ! To be 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 79 

sure, I— I know it is but in jest; but then,'* 
colouring violently, " there are some jests 
that are highly unpleasant !" 

" Then really," said Rosetta, in her 
turn somev/hat disconcerted, by this, as 
she conceived, unwarrantable petulance, 
" since you provoke me, Lavinia, I will po- 
sitively deny what I have now said being 
in jest. You positively did tell me." 

" I told you no such thing!"' cried La- 
vinia, abruptly interrupting her, in con- 
sequence of catching the eyes of Melville 
at the instant turned with archness on her; 
" so far from telling you I thought this— 
this Melville any thing that was agreeable, 
I told you I thought him one of the most 
disagreeable; but — but," bursting into a 
laugh, in spite of all her efforts to prevent 
herself, at Rosetta's stare of utter astonish- 
ment at this assertion, " it is all accounted 
for what you've said, by your being nei- 
ther asleep nor awake when 1 was talking 
to you, and so not perfectly understand- 
ing what you heard." 

" Well," said Rosetta, " after this, I 



80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

shall not be surprised at any thing ! Why, 
Lavinia, you amaze me!" 

" Oh well," said Lavinia, but almost 
convulsed by her efforts to stifle her laugh- 
ter, " wonder is a very pleasant sensation." 

" Poor gentleman !" sighed iMelville, as 
if through deep commiseration ; " how 
unhappy would he be, if he heard this 
young lady's contradiction of having said 
any thing in his favour !" 

The Miss Lelands, who had not before 
noticed him, from his having drawn back 
at their approach, turned their eyes upon 
him with a stare. 

" Something terrible indeed might be 
apprehended from it, were it to reach his 
ears," he resumed ; " it is fortunate, there- 
fore, for him, that he is about quitting the 
neighbourhood." 

Quitting the neighbourhood ! Lavinia 
started, and there was no further occasion 
to struggle with her inclination to risibi- 
lity. 

" You know the gentleman then, sir ?" 
said Miss Leland. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 81 

" Pooh ! nonsense !" exclaimed Rosetta, 
extremely provoked at his effrontery in 
intruding himself amongst them. " No, 
he certainly does not." 

Melville bowed, and Miss Leland open- 
ed her eyes still voider, unable to compre- 
hend the meaning of such implied con- 
tempt to so very elegant a young man, as, 
unblinded by the prejudice of Rosetta, the 
stranger appeared to her to be. — " But I 
should rather think he does !" she said. — 
" Pray, don't you, sir? Don't you know 
Mr. Melville?" 

" This lady says not, ma'am," was the 
reply, " and I never contradict a lady. 
However, I ^vill so far venture to say, 
that I have learned, through what I be- 
lieve is very good authority, that he is 
about quitting the neighbourhood, through 

a " and he glanced with significance and 

reproach at Lavinia, from whose cheeks 
the roses had by this time completely dis- 
appeared, " through a — a something un- 
pleasant that has occurred." 
e3 



82 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" You — you forget," said Lavinia, now 
involuntarily resuming the arm of Roset- 
ta, unable any longer to endure this tri- 
fling, from the alarm into which she was 
thrown, " that I have to dress." 

" Oh, no," replied Rosetta; "it is not 
very late ; however, we'll delay no longer," 
and she bade good-bye to the Miss Le- 
lands, who were proceeding in a different 
direction. 

She had not got many yards, when per- 
ceiving Melville was following, though 
certainly, on many accounts, with no in- 
tention of doing so much further, but 
merely from a wish to try whether he 
could not catch a forgiving glance from 
Lavinia ere he left them, she abruptly 
paused, and turning to him, at once, 
through indignation at what she deemed 
his presuming perseverance, and terror 
lest of his being encountered with them 
by her father, explicitly told him not to 
come any farther out of his way on their 
account, as liis continuing to walk with 
them was not agreeable. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 83 

Melville again afifected to sigh and look 
disconsolate — " I take the hint, madam," 
he said, touching his hat, and, with a bow 
he meant to appear submissive; " but 
what you have now made me sensible was 
intrusive, I hope you will have the good- 
ness to pardon, in consideration," and he 
again strove to catch a glance from Lavi- 
nia, but in vain, irrepressible emotion at 
the instant he sought her eyes making 
her turn aside her head, " that it will not 
be repeated." 

Rosetta coldly bowed, and he turned 
away. Hardly had he left them, ere the 
eyes of Lavinia were turned after him. It 
might be her last glimpse of him. Oh, 
the bursting agony of that thought ! and 
how could she deny it to herself? and one 
word might prevent this — one word stay 
his departure, for his glance in mention- 
ing it had given her to understand that to 
her it was owing ; and why, why should 
she inflict upon herself the misery of not 
preventing it ? and, unconscious almost of 
what she was about, she struggled to free 



84 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

her arm from Rosetta; but Kosetta held 
it fast, and at once affrighted and indig- 
nant at her emotion — " Good God!" she 
cried, " what are you about? You are 
not going to run after that young man ?" 

" Me!" said Lavinia, recalled to recol- 
lection by the question, and the paleness 
of her cheek giving place to a deep suffu^ 
sion ; " no, certainly not. I wonder what 
could make you think such a thing !" 

" Then I really wonder you can, when 
you attempted to pull away your arm in 
such a manner from me." 

" I might have done that, without 
meaning to run after him. But — but say 
what you will, Rosetta, indeed I cannot 
help observing, that you need not have 
been quite — quite so harsh — so abrupt 
with him as you were." 

" When people won't take hints, it is 
requisite to be explicit with them," re- 
plied Rosetta; " but indeed, Lavinia, you 
seem in a most contradictory humour this 
morning ! No one could appear more an- 
gry or indignant when he joined us than 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 85 

you did yourself; and yet now you ai-e 
reproaching me for having made him leave 
us — quite forgetting what my father would 
have said, had he met us with him for our 
companion." 

Lavinia hesitated, feeling a strong in- 
clination to confess the truth to Rosetta ; 
but a dread of embroiling her with her fa- 
ther, by confiding to her a secret he might 
hereafter reproach her for keeping, check- 
ed the impulse, and finally determined her 
on saying nothing to her on the subject of 
Melville. Yet, that now she knew his 
real rank, it may appear extraordinary her 
having any fear of doing so ; but this was 
accounted for, by the many hints that had 
dropt from IMr. Wheatley, as if to caution 
her from forming any attachment, her 
guardian having himself decided on dis- 
posing of her hand. 

That her indignation had been very 
great at the deception practised on her by 
Melville, we have seen — that it had a good 
deal abated, must be equally evident. The 
fact was, that, as the hurry and flutter of 



86 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

spirits, occasioned by the discovery of it, 
subsided, she could hardly, from the cha- 
racter of Melville, allow herself to believe 
that he would have pressed upon her a re- 
quest to be permitted to enter into an ex- 
planation of it, was he not aware that that 
explanation could not be to his injury. 
She had heard romantic stories of men 
wishing to prove the disinterestedness of 
the attachment of the person they were 
attached to, ere they avowed themselves, 
and this might have been the case with 
Melville. Be his motive, however, what 
it might, she certainly should have granted 
him the hearing he requested — the great- 
est criminals were allowed one before they 
were condemned. But the truth could 
no longer be disguised from herself — she 
liked first to triumph a little in the pain 
she saw she inflicted, and so, very proper- 
ly, he was leaving her to her pride, and 
she should never see him more. 

The moment she entered the house she 
flew up to her chamber, where, throwing 
herself on a chair, she sat leaning on a ta- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 87 

ble, with her face covered with her hands, 
in an attitude of utter disconsolation. 
Rosetta followed — " Why, what is the 
matter, my dear girl ?" she cried, on per- 
ceiving her sitting in this manner ; " you 
seemed in a hurry to return home to dress, 
and yet here you are, as if you quite forgot 
any thing further about it ! Lavinia," she 
said, on perceiving tears trickling through 
her fingers, attempting to draw away her 
hand from her face as she spoke, " you 
alarm me ! 1 hope — I trust, with your ad- 
vantages, your prospects in life, you are 
not giving way to — you are not indulging 
in any feeling that may prove inimical to 
them, or disappoint the fond wishes of 
your anxious friends?" 

" No, no ! why should you think — why 
should you suppose," said Lavinia, rising 
as she spoke, and walking to a window — 

" I 1 only felt myself a little fatigued, 

that's all; and see," brushing away her 
tears, ** I am now as well as ever I was ; 
' So, prepare to see by degrees new beau- 
ties rise. 

And keener glories sparkle from my eyes.* 



88 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

And yet, after all," carelessly twirling a- 
bout a coronet of flowers she was going to 
wear ; but suddenly — " What I would 
give this instant to know who will be at 
the Vale to-day !" 

" Oh ! all is safe then," thought Rosetta, 
internally smiling, " if this is what she is 
anxious about. — Oh, pooh! what signi- 
fies ?" she said — " a pleasant party, you 
may depend on it; but perhaps you are 
desirous, beforehand, to know whether 
this Mr. Melville, whom I so strangely 
mistook what you said about, is to be 
there?" 

Lavinia could not help bursting into a 
laugh at her so exactly hitting on the 
truth, and her spirits somewhat revived, 
set about dressing with alacrity ; a gleam 
of hope had begun to dawn upon her — 
Melville and Donaghue were engaged, she 
knew, at the Vale, and she tried to flatter 
herself, that, however determined he might 
be on an immediate departure, he would 
yet postpone it, for the purpose of keeping 
this engagement. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 89 

But, hardly had she entered the draw- 
ing-room, when this hope was destroyed 
by lady Erin's carelessly exclaiming, as 
. she glanced over a note that was handed 
to her at the instant almost of Lavinia's 
entrance — " Oh, an apology from O'Brien !" 
for this was the very day, it may be recol- 
lected, in which Donaghue, from what 
had occurred in his morning visit there, 
had decided against almost ever again 
going to the Vale, if possible to avoid it. 

So there was an end to all expectation 
of seeing Melville ; his friend had, doubt- 
less, given up his engagement, in conse- 
quence of his being about going ; and La- 
vinia felt herself turn pale at the idea she 
could not avoid giving way to, and, in the 
pain and confusion it excited, involuntarily 
turned away her head from every one, and 
sat, apparently, lost in the contemplation 
of the prospect she beheld from the win- 
dow by which she was sitting; though, 
had she been asked, at the moment, any 
question about it, she certainly would 
have felt herself rather at a loss to have 



90 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

replied whether it consisted of hill and 
dale, wood and water, or of all combined, 
she knew no more at the instant than the 
mole under ground ; neither did she hear 
a word of what was going on in the room, 
being, in short, in one of those agreeable 
reveries at the minute, that, for the time 
being, renders the senses of very little ac- 
count. 

Her deep abstraction, however, was not 
permitted to be of long continuance ; some 
one touched her gently on the shoulder, 
and starting from her kind of trance, she 
beheld sir William at her elbow, and Mel- 
ville (how instantaneous was the change 
her feelings experienced !) standing behind 
him, and earnestly regarding her — so at 
least she thought for the moment. She 
turned round; his eyes were directed to 
something in the park. Well, no matter, 
he was not gone, he was actually in the 
room, and she should yet see whether they 
would not again wander. 

'* Why so thoughtful, fair lady ?" asked 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 91 

sir William ; " I have been watching at 
least these ten minutes for a smile." 

" Ten minutes !" repeated Lavinia, 
laughing, now restored to all her wonted 
gaiety; "what an age! why, it wasn't 
worth watching for one tenth part of the 
time !" 

" If I was a younger — pooh ! I mean 
a single man, I should contradict that as- 
sertion; but that chain that is thrown a- 
bout us in the temple of Hymen is a ter- 
rible restraint upon our gallantry ! And 
you are really sincere in w^hat you say — 
you reall)^ think a smile not worth watch- 
ing a minute for? Ah! how does that 
roguish smile I see you cannot suppress 
contradict that assertion !" 

" Pooh !" said Lavinia ; " this is not 
fair, to be translating one's looks as smiles; 
but, supposing, sir, it w^ere as you insinu- 
ate, don't you know that what is easily 
obtained is not always valued as it ought 
to be?" 

" Assuredly ! and therefore it is my ad- 
vice to all young ladies, to be slow and 



92 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

careful in dispensing their smiles, since re- 
gret is an unpleasant sensation, and unde- 
served condescension cannot fail of exci- 
ting it." 

" Lecturing, sir William !" said lady- 
Jane, approaching, anxious to try whether 
she could not learn from Melville the real 
cause of Donaghue's not coming — " on 
heads, or hearts, pray ?" 

" On both, as, like the tides and the 
moon, I think them connected, the ebbs 
and flows of one being under the influ- 
ence, or at least ought to be, of the other." 

" Heavens, how ridiculous ! I beg your 
pardon, my dear sir William, but really to 
think that the movements of the heart 
could be regulated " 

" In the presence of lady Jane Morley 
would be utterly impossible !" said the ba- 
ronet, gallantly bowing ; " and now, will 
her ladyship do me the honour of setting 
mine palpitating, by accepting my arm to 
the dining- parlour ?" the butler at this in- 
stant having announced dinner. 

Lady Jane could not refuse accepting 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 93 

his arm, but she took it with a very bad 
grace, preventing her as it did from im- 
mediately questioning ^Melville about Do- 
naghue. 

As they were moving away, sir Wil- 
liam, glancing back at IMelville — " Mr. 
jNIelville," he said, " there's a lady," di- 
recting a look to Lavinia. 

Melville gravely bowed, but did not 
move. 

Sir WiUiam, a little surprised — " I say, 
Mr. JMelville," he repeated, '•' Miss Audley 
will do 3^ou the honour " 

Melville, as if it was a thing he could 
not avoid, now approached Lavinia. — " I 
am concerned, ma'am," he said, " there's 
no other gentleman in the way, to prevent 
my offering w4iat I am sure it will be so 
disagreeable to you to accept." 

Lavinia, with all her pretty little airs of 
dissembling, not quite so much au fait in 
the art as Melville, felt herself a good 
deal disconcerted by this speech, and the 
air and tone of gravity with which it 
was uttered; the bright vermilion, with 



94 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE* 

which the joy of seeing him when she 
thought him gone had painted her cheeks, 
faded, and timidly, as well as a little trem- 
blingly, passing her hand under his arm — 
" No, I — I don't know why you should 
think — that is — I am sure I don't consider 
it disagreeable !' 

Melville affected to sigh deeply, and 
turned away his head for an instant, as if 
she was making an effort to deceive him. 
— " Ah ! no, ma'am," he said, " delusion 
is now over — after what passed this mor- 
ning, so fully confirming the apprehen- 
sions of last night!" 

" But — I — I was not entirely to blame 
for what passed this morning," said La- 
vinia, becoming still more alarmed ; " and 
I assure you I was — yes, really I was vex- 
ed that Miss Wheatley " 

" Miss Wheatley ! it is not Miss Wheat- 
ley I am thinking — I am complaining of! 
not of her scornful looks, but of the un- 
kind, the indignant glances that shot from 
those eyes, when I approached with such 
humility, such " 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 95 

" Well, what can I say !" almost sighed 
Lavinia; " really you must acknowledge 
that I had reason to be displeased at find- 
ing that you had passed yourself on me 
for another person, or, of course, wonder 
at my appearing to resent it?" 

** No — nor of your still appearing to do 
so, if I had not entreated you to allow me 
to explain the cause of what appeared so 
extraordinary, or, perhaps to express my- 
self as I ought, in your opinion reprehen- 
sible, since the entreaty, I should have 
supposed, might have argued that it was 
in my power to do so satisfactorily." 

" Well, perhaps it was what I ought 
to have done," said Lavinia ; " but, you 
know, we don't always," and she spoke 
perhaps a little coaxingly, " do what we 
ought; and if you have the — the least 
wish still " 

" You will listen ?" 

" Yes." 

" Then you are the very angel I took 
you for !" cried Melville, in a moment re- 
suming himself, and pressing with glow- 



96 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing transport to his heart the trembling 
little hand, that all this time he had suf- 
fered to rest upon his arm with as much 
seeming disregard as if a lady's scarf; " in 
the course of the evening we shall have 
an opportunity of conversing without ob- 
servation, and if I do not induce my love- 
ly Lavinia to think she may forgive my 
offence with propriety, I will submit to be 
banished her presence without another 
murmur; though, in being so, all hope of 
earthly happiness must be relinquished!" 

The manner in which the eveninof was 
passed was propitious to the lover's wish 
of opening his heart to the fair object of 
its earthly adoration. After tea the com- 
pany dispersed, in detached parties, about 
the grounds, till they reassembled at 
the grotto, which was illuminated and 
prepared for dancing, and where an elegant 
collation was afterwards served up to them. 

Melville frankly confessed his motive for 
continuing the deception, which a love of 
frolic had first suggested — namely, a wish 
of being assured of her regard, ere he ran 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 97 

the risk of incurring his uncle's displeasure 
by explaining himself. This both grati- 
tude and policy opposed his doing, for sir 
James had been to him as a father from a 
very early period, and his own fortune was 
trifling, compared to what he might inhe- 
rit from him, if he retained his favour. 
To do so, of course, was his earnest wish ; 
but sir James had long since given him to 
understand that he had fixed on a particu- 
lar alliance for him ; and he was not with- 
out an apprehension that his disappointing 
him, with regard to this, might be the 
means of depriving him of what he so 
highly valued. 

The hazard, however, must be incurred, 
and Melville proceeded to assure Lavinia, 
that ere this it would have been the case, 
but that, as he was on the very point of 
addressing his uncle on the subject of his 
attachment to her, he received a letter 
from him, intimating his intention of com- 
ing down almost immediately to the Vale, 
and in consequence of which, he decided 

VOL. IV. F 



98 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on putting off his intended explanation 
till his arrival, conceiving, if any thing 
could induce him to overcome the resent- 
ment, or forgive the disappointment it 
might occasion him, it would be the sight 
of the lovely object of his attachment. — 
" I will not, however, attempt to dis- 
guise," pursued Melville, " that I greatly 
fear his admitting no excuse for the dis- 
appointment of a plan his heart has been 
so long set upon. Who the person is, 
whom he chose to make choice of for me, 
T never could, by any chance, discover ; so 
anxious, however, has he been for 'me to 
keep myself disengaged till my introduc- 
tion to her, that it has been the means of 
causing me to be almost dragged about, 
both on the Continent and at home, lest 
my long continuance in any one particular 
place should occasion the frustration of his 
plan. 

" ** That I shall greatly grieve at exciting 
jiis displeasure, I cannot deny, loving him 
a^ I do with all the ardent affectiori (tf a 
son ; but the conviction that I do not me- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 99 

rit it, for disappointing so unreasonable a 
plan, will, I make no doubt, in a very 
short time, mitigate the pain it must at 
first cause me. It never, indeed, was my 
intention to have given myself up to his 
disposal as a mere machine, but the com- 
pliment of passive obedience I deemed 
due to him, till after I had seen the lady 
selected for me ; for, as she might, I con- 
sidered, prove a person every way agree- 
able, why needlessly anger him, I argued 
with myself, by avowing what my deter- 
mination was, should this happen not to 
be the case ? 

" But any further dissembling with him 
is now out of the question, and should his 
conduct evince his conceiving, from the 
obligations conferred upon me, that he had 
a right to impose fetters on my mind, and 
restrict that freedom of choice, without 
which we must be miserable, I shall cer- 
tainly endeavour to reconcile myself to 
the result of his displeasure. In that case, 
a great deal of show and splendour must 
F 2 



100 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

certainly be relinquished ; but, with such 
a companion to share the partial retire- 
ment to which I may be driven," and he 
fondly pressed the hand of Lavinia to \m 
lips, " what will there be wanting for real 
happiness? for 

* Happy they, the happiest of their kind, 

Whom gentler stars unite, and in one fate 

Their hearts, their fortunes, and their beings blend.J 

" But let us hope the best, or, at least, 
hope as long as we can ; though the tem- 
per of my uncle is warm, and somewhat 
peremptory, his disposition is generous ; 
and when every thing comes to b^ oonsi- 
dered, and when he comes to see my sweet 
Lavinia, I am inclined at times to flatter 
myself he will not prove implacable in his 
resentment." 

What a similarity, Lavinia observed, 
between their fates — both, in a degree, 
under the control of others, and both des- 
tined for beings they never saw! and she 
explained more fully than he yet under- 
stood them, what she was taught to sup- 
pose were the intentions of her guardian, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 101 

and as much as she knew concerning her- 
self. This indeed was very little, or ra- 
ther nothing; the Wheatleys were the 
only friends she knew, but she had reason 
to conclude, from the education she had 
received, the expence that was lavished on 
her, and the introduction that had been 
obtained for her into society, that, who- 
ever was the person that interested him- 
self about her, he was a person of conse- 
quence and fortune. 

Finally, without puzzling themselves 
with conjectures, they engaged themselves 
as firmly to each other as vows could en- 
gage them — Melville protesting that no 
earthly consideration should induce him 
to give her up, and Lavinia, in her turn, 
declaring that not all the guardians in 
Christendom should prevent her being his. 
For the present, however, it was settled, 
that the greatest caution should be ob- 
served with respect to their mutual senti- 
ments, both on account of sir William and 
Mr. Wheatley, from both being in the con- 



102 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fidence of the parties they were apprehen- 
sive of offending. 

That Mr. Wheatley would hesitate a 
moment in betraying her, if he had a sus- 
picion of the truth, Lavinia could not 
imagine ; Melville was almost equally per- 
suaded that sir William would do the 
same with regard to him, from his fre- 
quent rallying allusions to be sure they 
appeared, of what he knew his uncle's in- 
tentions were respecting him, and his hope 
that they might not be disappointed. 

What an evening of bliss was this, that 
accounted for every thing that had ren- 
dered her uneasy, to Lavinia — reconciled 
her to her lover, and relieved her from all 
further terror about her guardian! No 
matter what he had planned or intend* 
ed, she was now secure of protection 
from him. The scene around her, the en- 
chanting one, in which this explanation 
took place, served, if possible, to heighten 
her happiness, by the delight which, of it- 
self alone, it was calculated to impart to 
her feelings. The grotto brought to the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 103 

imagination all that had ever been read 
of fairy palaces; the lights were so dis- 
posed, as to give it the appearance of being 
resplendent with sunshine; the soft green 
moss that embossed it in many places, was 
interwoven with violets and primroses, 
forming the ciphers of the young ladies 
assembled there. The alabaster vases were 
filled with glowing flowers; and when 
there was a pause in the dancing, the mu- 
sic that then ceased within was taken up 
l)y invisible musicians without, and gra- 
dually changing into soft and tender airs, 
was diffused through the woods as if by 
enchantment. 

But for the constraint which the lovers 
deemed it prudent to impose on them- 
selves at the Vale, they sought to indem- 
nify themselves elsewhere; this led to a 
want of caution, that rendered the escaping 
Charybdis of very little consequence, by 
casting them upon Scylla. In a word, 
they now and then forgot the equal ne- 
cessity for weariness with regard to Mr. 
Wheatley as to sir William, and the con- 



104 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

sequence was, their soon being involved 
in a most unpleasant predicament. 



CHAPTER III. 



" Oh, Memory, thou fond deceiver • 

Still importunate and vain ; 
To former joys recurring ever, 

And turning all the past to pain." 

The continual evasions of Lavinia, when 
at home, the confusion she frequently be- 
trayed, when interrogated as to where she 
had been, and her occasional thoughtful- 
ness, so unusual with her, united to two 
or three accidental encounters in the vici- 
nity of the cottage, with the still-supposed 
Mr. Denny Scanlen, began to raise strange 
surmises in the breast of Mr. Wheatley, 
such as determined him on keeping a 
stricter watch than he had ever done be- 
fore on Lavinia; but this was not all— it 
would not be amiss, he thought, to ad- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 105 

monish the young man of what the con- 
sequences of attempting to draw her into 
any indiscretion would inevitably be ; and 
accordingly, having decided on the admo- 
nition, set out in quest of him to O'Con- 
nor's ; but here he could obtain no infor- 
mation about him ; Mrs. O'Connor, exas- 
perated beyond description, at what she 
called his slighting and unnatural conduct, 
in never having called, after the night of 
the entertainment, notwithstanding the 
reception he had met with from her and 
her husband, and their kind offer of a bed 
to him, spoke of him in terms of the high- 
est indignation, declared she knew no- 
thing more about him, than that he was 
still slinging about the neighbourhood, she 
dared to say for nothing good, since, if it 
Was, why should he take such pains to 
hide himself, as it was easy to see he did, 
from no one's being able to find him ? but, 
to their cost perhaps, some one would 
yet discover the tricks he was about ; and, 
in short, expressed herself in such a way, 
fS 



106 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

about her supposed cousin, as sent Mr. 
Wheatley away from her in a state of ex- 
treme agitation ; but notwithstanding 
which, ere he took a step that might prove 
irreparably injurious to Lavinia, he re- 
solved to be first assured there were sufR- 
cient grounds to justify it, and accordingly 
resisted the impulse that would have led 
him directly to address her guardian on 
the subject of what he apprehended. 

As long as she was at the Vale, to which 
she went, and whence she always returned, 
in lady Erin's carriage, he was perfectly 
easy about her, but, except then, equally 
restless and unhappy, insomuch, that 
w^henever she was now at home, he re- 
mitted going out more than he had ever 
done before ; and if he missed her from 
the house, was instantly in quest of her, 
not witliout giving his wife a hint to have 
an eye on lier ; but Lavinia, quite as much 
on the watch to get out as they were to 
prevent her, still contrived, from time to 
time, to effect her escape to the place 
where she was in the habit of meeting 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 107 

Melville, since restricted by the whim of 
Mr. Wheatley from taking any of her 
usual rambles ; this was the arbour in 
the garden, w^hich, from being at the very 
extremity of it, and connected with the 
fields, prevented their being agitated, 
while conversing there, with any appre- 
hensions of a surprise. 

It so happened, however, that the means 
it afforded for a precipitate retreat, if re- 
quisite, at length struck Mr. Wheatley as 
well as it had done them, and made him 
wonder that it had never once occurred to 
him before, on missing Lavinia, to search 
for her there ; of course he remained si- 
lent on the subject, both of what he 
thought, and the stupidity he conceived 
he had been guilty of; but in an evening 
or two after, on suddenly missing Lavinia 
from the parlour, where he had for some 
time been engaged at backgammon with 
a neighbour who had dropped in, and 
learning from Rosetta, who was occupied 
by a book, that she had been for some 
time absent from it, searching for some 



lOS TRADITION OP THE CAlJTli£. 

work, she believed, he made a pretext for 
asking his wife to take his place, aiid forth- 
with proceeded to the arbour. Aware, 
however, that he could not approach it 
from the house without the chance df be* 
ing seen, notwithstanding there being 
some intercepting shrubs and hedges, the 
moon shining very bright, he turned up 
the lane, for the purpose of entering the 
garden from the adjoining field. Cau- 
tiously as he advanced, however, and close 
as he kept to the hedge, he was neverthe- 
less discovered. 

Melville, however, did not atteitipt to 
stir, till he saw him turn into the field ; he 
then, at one spring, cleared the hedge, 
but not without first whispering to Lavi- 
nia not to move, lest her being seen flying 
from the place should be a means of con- 
firming the suspicion that had probably 
brought him there. 

It was with the greatest difficulty La- 
vinia could prevail on herself to follow this 
advice, so great was her dread of encoun- 
tering Mr. Wheatley just at this precise 



TRADitlON i)T THE CAS^TLE. 109 

mstatit, from the cause to Which ghe at 
once Surmised his evidently having come 
in search of her was owing. However, 
sh^ conceived it was the best plan to be 
pursued, and accordingly forcing herself 
to remain, she tried to compose and col- 
lect herself 

The moment Mr. Wheatley had ad- 
mitted himself from the field into the gar- 
den, he darted to the arbour ; but a glance 
sufficed to let him see there was no one in 
it but Lavinia ; but that there had not been 
some one else there, he was not equally sa- 
tisfied, and accordingly looked about him 
in every direction, but to no purpose; but 
that she had merely cotne thei*e for the 
purpose of indulging her meditations, was 
a thing not to be imagined; and what 
really was the fact suddenly striking him 
to be the case, his rage at finding himself 
so completely baffled and outwitted was 
hardly controllable. — " So, Miss Audley," 
he cried, reentering the arbour, which 
for a moment he had quitted to look about 
him, " so, is this the place in which you 



110 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE- 

generally keep your work, for I under- 
stood you quitted the parlour in search of 
some ?" 

" Oh dear, no— no, sir !" replied Lavinia, 
and she affected a laugh at the idea; " how- 
could you suppose so? But I— I was 
seized with such a — a sudden headach, 

that I thought a little air " 

" If you had thought proper to tell Ro- 
setta you were coming here, you might 
have had her company, I dare say; for, I 
make no doubt, she too is sufficiently ro- 
mantic to like an arbour by moonlight." 

" Y-e-s, sir, I dare say I might; but she 
appeared so agreeably engaged with her 
book, that I did not like to disturb her/' 

" How considerate!" replied Mr. Wheat- 
ley, with a sneer ; " and that was your 
only reason for not asking her company ? 
Recollect yourself! you were not prevent- 
ed by the idea that she might have been 
an interruption — a check — a hindrance! 
The fact is. Miss Audley," no longer able 
to smother his passion, " who is it you had 
here with you ?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Ill 

" Who is it I had here with me, sir !" 
cried Lavinia, almost unconsciously repeat- 
ing his words, so great was the terror ex- 
cited by his vehemence ; " why, who do 
you suppose I should have had here with 
me, sir?" 

" No matter, madam, who I suppose — 
I demand an answer to my question." 

** Your question appears a very odd one, 
sir ; but, since you force me to answer it, 
I — I reply, no one." 

" You tell me this ! you deny that any 
one has been sitting in this arbour with 
you ! take care — beware how you commit 
yourself!" and he looked steadily in her 
face, which, unfortunately, the moon shi- 
ning full into the arbour (it was the first 
time Lavinia had ever had an inclination 
to quarrel with the moon) gave him a full 
view of 

" Really, sir- — you — you — are enough 
to agitate any one by these inquisitorial 
questions ! I am sure I see no great use 
in answering them, since you seem not in- 
clined to believe me." 



ll^ TRADITION OF T^HE CASTLfi. 

" And you pemst in wanting to make 
me think you have not been conversing 
with any one here?" 

" I do, indeed !" repHed Lavinia, with 
emphasis, as this actually happened to be 
the case. 

" Degenerate, degraded girl !" exclaim- 
ed Mr. Wheatley, with a burst of passion 
that made Lavinia tremble; " how " 

" Indeed, sir — you — you must excuse 
me," interrupted Lavinia, " but I can stop 
no longer here !" attempting, as she spoke, 
to effect her escape. 

But he opposed it with violence — " No, 
madam !" he cried, " you shall not stir till 
you hear me. Degenerate, degraded girl! 
I repeat; how impossible to give utter- 
ance to the indignation your conduct has 
excited! After all the pains that were 
bestowed on you — the expectations you 
were taught to indulge — to let it be said 
that the one have all been thrown away, 
and the others disregarded ! But I told 
you I was not to be deceived ! I may not 
perhaps have awakened compunction, but 



TUADlTiaK OF tH£ CASTLE. 115 

I think it hardly possible but you must 
feel shame, when you behold this evidence 
of your falsehood !" and, to her utter con- 
fusion, he held up to her view, at the mo- 
ment, one of JNIelville's gloves, which, in 
the hurry of escape, had dropped from 
him, and Mr. Wheatley had had his eye 
on, from the moment of his entering the 
place. ** Now, madam, what can you say 
for yourself — what suppose I must think 
of you T 

But questions were useless ; Lavinia 
was struck dumb, and perhaps motionless, 
for she remained transfixed, as it were, to 
the spot, without even the power of with- 
drawing her eyes from his, till Mr. Wheat- 
ley took her sternly by the arm, to conduct 
her to the house. 

On reentering it, he motioned her to her 
chamber, and remained in the hall till he 
was assured she had obeyed him. But he 
could not, at the moment, have given her 
a command that could have been more a- 
greeable. She was indeed ashamed, con- 
fused, distressed, at having incurred such 



114 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

reproaches as he had uttered. That she 
did not altogether merit them, was cer- 
tainly some consolation ; she knew she 
had not degraded herself by any unworthy 
attachment, but it was a severe mortifica- 
tion to her to think she must remain les- 
sened in his eyes for some time ; and the 
idea of the falsehood, too, she felt herself 
compelled to, was wounding to her feel- 
ings, insincerity of all kind being abhor- 
rent to her principles, as well as contrary 
to her natural disposition. She tried to 
hope, however, that the affair would soon 
blow over, like a transient storm. She 
concluded she should be required to give 
up Mr. Denny Scanlen ; and as this was 
a thing she could most readily promise to 
do, she supposed, when once she had bound 
herself to this effect, she should hear no 
more of what had happened. 

In imagining so, however, she was a lit- 
tle too sanguine. To free himself from 
all further anxiety about her, and prevent 
the possibility of being accused of wilful 
blindness to her imprudence, from inter* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 115 

ested motives, Mr. Wheatley decided on 
no longer concealing it from the person 
who had intrusted her to his care, and ac- 
cordingly, ere he retired to rest that night, 
addressed a letter to him on the subject of 
it, informing him that he would no longer 
take upon himself any responsibility about 
the young lady. 

The moment his visitor was gone, he 
proceeded to inform his wife and daugh- 
ter, to their utter surprise and distress, of 
what had occurred ; sternly demanding of 
the latter, if she had had any suspicion of 
what was going forward. 

Rosetta, in the most solemn manner, as- 
sured him she had not ; and, as a proof 
that she had no reason for this, mentioned 
what occurred in the last accidental meet- 
ing with the young man, the scorn and 
downright displeasure La\dnia had mani- 
fested on his joining them, forgetting, to 
be sure, to say any thing of the emotion 
she had afterwards betrayed on his leaving 
them, but which assuredly had been so 



116 TRADITION OP THE CASTLE, 

soon got the better of, as not to have made 
any serious impression on her memory. 

" Artifice ! sheer artifice all this T' ex- 
claimed Mr. Wheatley, as he paced up 
and down the room, in a manner that 
evinced the most extreme agitation.-^ 
" Good God! how this girl has lost herself! 
she for whom such fond expectations were 
formed, for whom such happiness was plan- 
ned ! What a shock, what a heart-break» 
will be what I have to communicate a- 
bout her ! But it must be done," he said 
to himself; " nothing could induce me to 
take any longer charge of her, than till I 
can give her up into the hands from which 
I received her.— Tis well for you," he cried, 
Suddenly turning upon his daughter, " that 
you have been able to acquit yourself of 
being her confidant in this disgraceful af- 
fair ; had you not been able to do so — had 
you allowed me to imagine that you en- 
couraged her in her imprudence by con- 
cealing it, knowing, as you have all along 
done, that I have held myself answerable 
for her conduct, I never would have for- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 117 

given you. Should she choose to speak 
to you on the subject of what passed this 
evening, you have my permission to listen 
to her, on condition that it is for the pur- 
pose of admonishing her of the conduct 
she has been guilty of, but on no other ; 
not for the purpose of indulging in the 
whine of sentimental sympathy, and weep- 
ing with her over the terrible cruelty that 
has prevented her running away with a 
handsome young vagabond !" 

" My dear," said his wife, in a tone of 
remonstrance, seeing Rose tta could not re- 
strain her tears, " why do you speak in 
this manner? lam sure our Rosetta has 
given you no cause of complaint." 

" No, thank Heaven, she has not !" ex- 
claimed Mr. Wheatley, with fervour ; and 
recalled to recollection by this remon- 
strance, he took his gentle girl in his arms, 
and — ** Forgive me, my dear child," he 
said, " for having affected you in this 
manner !" and Rosetta felt him fondly 
pressing her to his bosom, and another 
tear than her own bedewing her cheek as 



118 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he spoke ; " as your mother says, and I 
bless my God for it, I have no cause of 
complaint against you ; I can lay no er- 
ror, no indiscretion to your charge." 

Rosetta made a faint effort, as if to re- 
lease herself from his arms, and a convul- 
sive sob burst from her. 

" But I see," continued Mr. Wheatley, 
" your spirits are overpowered, by your 
distress about Lavinia. I cannot wonder 
at it, from your affection for her. Un- 
happy girl ! what a source of pain to all 
her friends, instead of the happiness she 
was so eminently calculated to be to them ! 
but regret is useless." Then saying he 
would not detain her, as rest might en- 
able her to recompose herself, he again 
kissed her tear-bedewed cheek, and, bid- 
ding her good night, she retired. 

To think of rest without looking in upon 
Lavinia was out of the question; but she 
could not do this till she had a little sub- 
dued the emotion w^ith which she had re- 
paired to her chamber. Censure perhaps 
from her father would not have pained 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11^ 

her so much as had his fond commenda- 
tions, for there was a consciousness ; but 
still, while she did not intentionally wish 
to deceive him — while her upright heart 
involuntarily shrunk from what she did 
not conceive merited, she could not bring 
herself to confess what must be a means 
of imbittering his tranquillity. She at 
length softly opened Lavinia's door, and 
found her sitting at a table, apparently 
reading, for in reality her thoughts wan- 
dered so, or rather her rnind continued so 
perturbed, that she knew not the subject 
she appeared engrossed by, though she 
had taken up a book, to try and enable her 
to tranquillize herself — " So," she cried, 
the moment she caught the eye of Roset- 
ta, starting up, and throwing aside the 
book, " so there is no interdiction then a- 
gainst your speaking to me !" 

" Ah, Lavinia !" exclaimed Rosetta, 
shaking her head, " how could you pos- 
sibly -" 

" Oh ! rib more ah-ing, or oh-ing, I be- 
seech you, my dear creature, to-night f for, 



120 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

really, after what has passed, I have not 
strength of nerve." 

" Ay, after what passed, indeed, to- 
night! Oh, Lavinia! again I say, bow 
could you possibly allow yourself to be 
drawn into " 

" So your father has been telling his 
story," said Lavinia, interrupting her. 
" Well, one story is good till another is 
told ; but don't look so alarmed — I am 
not going to deny any thing he has been 
saying, only that I am not quite so bad as 
I know he has been representing me ; 
how^ever, appearances were, I acknowledge, 
against me ; and as there is no castle of 
truth here, like madame de Genlis's, to 
thrust us into, why we must be judged by 
them ; but if I promise to be a good girl 
for the future, I hope papa will forgive, 
remembering, both with regard to himself 
and me, that— 'to err, is human— to forgive, 
divine." 

" Really, Lavinia, I am surprised to hear 
you talking in this manner, with almost 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 12l 

your usual giddiness. I really almost ex* 
pected to have found you " 

" Expiring ! — well, and would not that 
have given you a great deal more trouble 
than to have found me as you now do? 
for," throwing her arms round her neck, 
and fondly kissing her, " I know it would 
be a hard thing to turn my Rosetta's heart 
against me !" 

" Well, the fonder, you know, I was 
of you, the greater pain you must suppose 
I should have felt at your being accused 
of any impropriety; and therefore, if you 
had no regard or consideration for your- 
self, out of regard and consideration for 
your friend " 

" Oh, no abstract reasoning, I beseech 
you, my dear girl 1" cried Lavinia ; " you 
know it was a thing I never liked ; and, I 
am sure, just at this instant less than ever: 
but I see — yes, I feel," observing the 
traces of tears on Rosetta's cheek, and how 
pale she looked, " that I must have given 
you pain ; well, need I say that I grieve 

VOL. IV. G 



122 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

at the thought, or what I should suffer if 

I imagined " But suddenly checking 

herself — " I see you want rest, my dear 
girl, and, Heaven knows, so do I, after 
the agitation I have gone through, so I 
won't detain you from it," fearing, if they 
remained much longer together, she might 
betray herself; " and perhaps it may be 
granted me the happiness of yet making 
amends to my friends for the uneasiness, 
trifling and giddy as I may appear, I am 
sensible I must now have given them; 
but assuredly not, in justice to myself I 
must say, through any — any wilful im- 
prudence ; as a proof of which," she, half- 
laughingly, exclaimed, in the words of 
the Roman Vestal — 

" To you, ye uods, I make my last appeal, 
Or clear ray virtues, or ray crimes reveal." 

That the matter would pass over so 
lightly, as it was evident to Rosetta, from 
her manner, she flattered herself, Rosetta 
was decidedly convinced would not be the 
case ; not that she was aware of her father's 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 123 

intention of writing to her guardian, he 
for many reasons choosing to keep that a 
secret, till he knew what the result of it 
would be; but she saw him too thorough- 
ly incensed — that he considered the af- 
fair in too serious a light, to let her sup- 
pose he would pass it over in the manner 
Lavinia seemed to think. 

All Lavinia's courage was requisite to 
enable her to face Mr. Wheatley the en- 
suing morning ; but she knew her remain- 
ing in her room would have an appear- 
ance of sulkiness, and therefore forced her- 
self to make her appearance, as usual, at 
breakfast. 

Mr. Wheatley noticed her neither by 
word or look, and the cheek of Lavinia 
flushed to a deep crimson at this treat- 
ment. His manner occasioned a general 
restraint, and never perhaps were a party 
more impatient to be at liberty again to 
separate than the present. 

The moment this unsocial meal was 
over, Lavinia withdrew to her apartment, 
G 2 



124 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and Mr. Wheatley immediately set about 
inquiring of his daughter whether any 
thing particular had occurred between 
them ? 

Rosetta told the truth, by replying in 
the negative ; and he then proceeded to 
give orders, that on no account whatever 
any message should be delivered to Lavi- 
nia, or any one admitted to her, even 
though it were from the Vale, it being 
his secret determination not to allow her 
to quit the house, till an answer was re- 
ceived from her guardian. 

That he would not immediately permit 
her to do so again, except to go to the 
Vale, Lavinia made up her mind, but of 
his preventing her visiting there, as usual, 
she had not the slightest suspicion, be- 
lieving his doing so would be in absolute 
opposition to the commands of her guar- 
dian, whom she had many reasons for con- 
ceiving he was strictly bound to obey; 
and though vexed and surprised therefore 
at two days elapsing without any invita- 
tion or message from it, she still had not 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 125 

an idea that this was owing to him. Two 
such horrible days Lavinia had never 
passed ; Mr. Wheatley still continued to 
conduct himself as if he knew not there 
was such a person in the same apartment ; 
and his wife and daughter, fearful any 
kindness they shewed her might be con- 
strued into a rebuke for his harshness, 
hardly noticed her more. 

Well, really if this was not enough to 
drive any one to an act of desperation, she 
knew not what w^as ; but it could not last 
long — he must get tired of it himself; and 
really, terrific as his violence was, she felt 
she would prefer having him rave at her, 
to having him stalking about like a dumb 
necromancer. What he wanted, or why- 
he had not immediately required her to 
give up Denny Scanlen, she could not 
conceive; however, she supposed it would 
come to this at last, and then there would 
be an end of the affair ; and by not seeing 
Melville again, except at the Vale, she 
should avoid getting herself into another 
scrape. 



126 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Sooner than two days Mr. Wheatley 
could not receive an answer to his letter; 
by return of post he received it, full of the 
indignation, grief, and vexation, he had 
anticipated his communication occasioning, 
and desiring, that immediately after its 
receipt, the young lady should be brought 
up to Dublin ; but to obey this peremp- 
tory order was not in the power of Mr. 
Wheatley; the assizes had just commen- 
ced, and till they were over, no convey- 
ance of any description could be procured ; 
he was therefore obliged to write to ex- 
cuse a short delay, but with an assurance 
that he hoped would quiet any uneasiness 
it might create, that till he had delivered 
up his charge, his watchful vigilance over 
her should never be remitted. 

As Lavinia was to know nothing of her 
intended departure, till it was on the very 
point of taking place, nor even then whi- 
ther she was going, Mrs. Wheatley was 
apprized of it, in order that whatever pre- 
parations were necessary for it might be 
made by her; but with a strict command 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 127 

against letting Rosetta know any thing 
about it, lest, through weakness or inad- 
vertence, she should betray it to Lavinia, 
and thus be the means of occasioning him 
additional trouble. 

Mrs. Wheatley promised what was re- 
quired ; but when she came to reflect on 
the additional grief it would be to her 
daughter, the loss of her beloved compa- 
nion, without being allowed to bid her 
farewell, she could not bring herself to 
adhere to this ; in disclosing however to 
Rosetta what she had been so strictly 
commanded to keep secret from her, she 
exacted a promise, with regard to keeping 
it from Lavinia, similar to that which she 
had been herself obliged to give, with re- 
gard to keeping it from her, and which 
Rosetta kept exactly in the same way ; 
for on Lavinia's shortly after entering the 
apartment where she sat, nearly over- 
whelmed by the disclosure, and half play- 
fully, half tenderly, inquiring what was 
the matter, with a burst of impassioned 
grief she threw her arms round her neck. 



128 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and as she fondly pressed her to her bo- 
som, demanded, in accents scarce articu- 
late, how she could have had the cruelty 
to act in such a manner as to occasion 
what was about happening? 

Lavinia, somewhat startled, or rather 
with a fearful misgiving of what she was 
to hear, inquired what she meant ? 

"Oh, cannot you guess? — must you 
not anticipate?" said Rosetta. " Could 
any thing, almost, do you imagine, dis- 
tress me as I am now distressed, but the 
idea of our being separated ! — of your be- 
ing torn, dragged away from us ! Such 
is the cruel command of your guardian, in 
consequence of the communication made 
him by my father; and as I make no 
doubt it is entirely to his displeasure 
against him, for what has happened, there 
is very little probability I think of his 
ever allowing us to see or hear any thing 
more about you. And how, how can I 
endure to think," wringing her hands, in 
unutterable agony, " of losing you for 
ever !— the being whom I have so long re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 129 

garded in the light of a sister — the only 
confidant of my sorrowing heart— the dear- 
est friend that was ever given to any one !" 

Lavinia, though nearly overpowered by 
the shock she had sustained, made an ef- 
fort to try and sooth Rosetta. — " Take 
comfort, my dearest girl," she cried, but 
trembling, through agitation, as she 
spoke; " it may not be so bad as you ima- 
gine. Whatever may the cruel intentions 
of this unknown guardian be, we may yet 
be able to contrive some mode of commu- 
nication." 

" Oh, no, no !" cried Rosetta, despair- 
ingly ; " such a thing is next to impos- 
sible ; for as I neither know who he is, or 
where he lives, and cannot hope to obtain 
the information from my father, I have 
no clue by which to trace you — while you, 
on the other hand, will, I dare say, be so 
watched and guarded, as to render it im- 
possible for you to do what you wish." 

Lavinia now, in her turn, wrung her 
hands, and gave way to the most violent 

6S 



130 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

despair; and — " Your father," she said, 
" your father, Rosetta, I have to thank 
for the barbarity of betraying me into the 
power of a person that may be capable of 
what you have suggested, of separating 
me from those I love for ever, and even 
restricting me from the slightest commu- 
nication with them. Oh, Rosetta! but 
on your account, and your mother's, I 
think I never could forgive him !" 

Rosetta, covering her face with her 
handkerchief, wept still more violently; 
but Lavinia, from being weeping herself 
in the same way, could not immediately 
make another effort to console her ; and 
was this the way her Elysian prospects 
were to end — her hopes of happiness to 
terminate, in finding herself in the power 
of a person whose idea had never yet re- 
curred to her mind without inspiring it 
with something of dread, from the fancies 
with which her imagination was haunted 
about him ! But was there no way of pre- 
venting what was intended ? Could she 
but apprize Melville of what was threat- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 131 

ened, she knew he would risk every thing 
to hinder her being torn from him : but 
how was this to be accomplished? Or, 
supposing she could contrive to let him 
know her situation, was there time for 
him to form any plan to rescue her from 
it? She now recollected she had not ask- 
ed Rosetta the time fixed for her depar- 
ture, and was eagerly turning to make the 
inquiry, when, recollecting the necessity 
there was for the greatest caution, even to 
Rosetta, lest a suspicion of what she me- 
ditated might seal her lips, through dread 
of her father, with regard to the informa- 
tion she required from her, she checked 
herself, nor permitted herself to ask the 
question, till, by a few turns about the 
room, she had a little recovered from the 
flutter of spirits into which the sudden 
hope of being able to avoid what was in- 
tended had thrown her. 

" The day after to-morrow is the day, I 
understand, fixed for your departure," said 
the still-weepmg Rosetta, replying to her 
inquiry; " at a very early hour in the 



132 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

morning, my mother has given me to un- 
derstand, a chaise, will be at the door for 
you." 

" The day after to-morrow !" Lavinia 
internally repeated, with a silent ejacula- 
tion of gratitude. Then there was hope, 
for there was an intervening day for some- 
thing to be thought of — something to be 
planned. But every minute was precious ; 
if she could not accomplish seeing Melville 
that night, there might as well not have 
been the day she thought so much about; 
and believing she could induce the girl 
who attended on her and Rosetta to b^ 
the conveyer of a note to him, she became 
all impatience to get to her chamber, for 
the purpose of writing it ; but what pretext 
to make for leaving Rosetta she knew not ; 
at length indisposition was the only one she 
could think of, and accordingly feigning 
a sudden headach, through the agitation 
she had been thrown into, she left her, as 
if to try what lying down for a little while 
might do for removing it, with a solemn 
promise, that up alteration in her maune^» 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 13S 

for the remainder of the time she staid at 
Rosehill, should give Mr. Wheatley any 
cause to suspect the intimation she had 
received. 

The instant she gained her chamber, 
she bolted herself in, that there might be 
no unpleasant surprise, and having finish- 
ed her note, placed herself at the window, 
to watch for the expected messenger, who 
was often passing backwards and forwards. 
The following was the purport of what 
she wrote to Melville : — 



" To Sedley Melville, Esq. 

" I dare say you will hardly be 
able to make out this, I write in such tre- 
pidation ; but you will not be much sur- 
prised at my agitation, when I inform you 
that I have this instant discovered, that 
in consequence of the other night, Mr. 
Wheatley wrote to my guardian, and that 
the result has been, an order to convey 
me immediately to him. The day after 
to.>mQrrow is the one fixed for my depar^ 



134 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ture, which it appears I was to know no- 
thing of till the very moment it was about 
taking place. Should you wish to bid 
me, what, under all circumstances, may 
very likely be a last farewell — since, as I 
neither know to whom I am going, nor 
whither, I cannot give my friends any 
clue, by which they may be enabled to 
obtain any further information concerning 
me — I will, if possible, see you to-night in 
the arbour; but it cannot be at a very 
early hour, as I am literally a prisoner at 
present, and in every way indeed rendered 
most unhappy and miserable. 

" Lest any thing cross should occur to 
prevent the farewell I should be glad to 
receive, accept mine now, and with it, for 
your happiness in life, the sincere wishes 
of " Lavinia. 

« Bosehillr 



We need scarce say what the emotion 
of Melville was at the receipt of this bil- 
let. By this time, indeed, Lavinia had so 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 135 

completely entwined herself round his 
heart, that the idea of losing her was not 
endurable. He briefly answered it, with 
an assurance that he should both wait and 
watch all night, rather than forego the 
hope or chance of seeing her, and conju- 
ring her to compose, and endeavour to 
keep up her spirits, as something must and 
should be devised for preventing what was 
threatened. 

Well, so far all was well ; her billet had 
been safely delivered, and an answer re- 
ceived ; but, watched and restricted as she 
was, how was the appointment she had 
indirectly made with her lover to be kept ? 
that was the question. But for almost 
every thing in life a remedy can be found : 
the window of her chamber was low, and 
immediately beneath it was a garden-seat, 
by means of which she had not the slight- 
est doubt that she should be able both to 
get out and return, without either danger 
or difficulty. 

The remainder of this day passed, like 
the two preceding ones, in gloom and un- 



136 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

social reserve ; and it was evidently a re- 
lief to the party, the arrival of the hour 
that furnished them with a pretext for se- 
parating. Lavinia made her headach — 
not indeed that Rosetta would almost have 
attempted to detain her, so distressed was 
she by her father's conduct towards her — 
an excuse for immediately passing through 
Rosetta's chamber to her own, where, hav- 
ing secured the door, she sat watching, and 
sometimes weeping with apprehension, till 
she was assured Rosetta had been some 
time in bed, when, with the assistance of 
the garden -chair, she adroitly got out of 
the window, and in a few minutes after 
was weeping on the shoulder of her lover. 
— " Tear you from me !" exclaimed Mel- 
ville, holding her to his bosom, as if there 
was an attempt made at the instant to do 
so ; " no, not while I have an arm to hold 
you to my heart!" and he proceeded, 
without further delay, to unfold to La- 
vinia the plan which had suggested itself 
to him, for the prevention of what was 
dreaded. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 137 

Their situation was desperate ; Lavinia 
acknowledged she could see no way to 
hinder this; and, in acknowledging it, 
could of course start no argument against 
it, or make any objections ; and finally an 
elopement was agreed on the next night, 
by which time Melville undertook to have 
every thing ready for their proceeding to 
Scotland. 

To think of keeping secret from Dona- 
ghue what was in agitation, was out of the 
question ; neither his regard for him, nor 
the assistance he required from him in the 
affair, would permit of this; for disliking, 
on many accounts, to intrust his own ser- 
vant with a knowledge of it, he meant to 
take Cormick in his place, and procure the 
attendance of his mother for Lavinia. 
Accordingly, the moment he returned 
from arranging the matter with Lavinia, 
he hastened to impart it to his friend. 
Donaghue heard him with regret, fearful 
of what the consequences might ultimate- 
ly be, of disappointing the expectations his 
uncle had so long cherished. Remon- 



138 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

strance, however, was now useless, nor 
could he bring himself to censure or find 
fault with him for acting as he did, but 
too conscious he would himself have acted 
exactly in the same way, if similarly situ- 
ated. Checking, therefore, all indication of 
what he felt, and trying to hope the best, 
he readily promised what he required. 

The corporal was immediately summon- 
ed, and the necessary communication made 
to him. He undertook disclosing what- 
ever was requisite to his mother, and hav- 
ing her prepared against the time ap- 
pointed, and who, brisk, hale, and hearty, 
was nearly as well qualified as himself to 
be engaged in an adventure. Along the 
coast in this direction were a number of 
small vessels, sufficiently safe and commo- 
dious for so short a trip as that to Scot- 
land, and one of these Cormick was in- 
structed to secure ; and through his active 
exertions, long before the ensuing night, 
every thing was finally prepared, and ready 
for the lovers. 

To guard against the possibility of sus- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 139 

picion, Melville thought it expedient to 
appear to have left the neighbourhood; 
and, accordingly, immediately after break- 
fast the next morning, rode over to the 
Vale, for the purpose of taking a short 
leave, under the pretext of being about 
joining a shooting party at the house of a 
gentleman some miles off, and which in- 
deed he had previously meditated for a 
few days. He contrived to get his own 
man out of the way, by finding an occa- 
sion for sending him to Dublin ; and, af- 
ter riding some miles from the castle, to a 
place where Cormiek had appointed to 
meet him with a disguise, returned through 
by-roads to it. 

Donaghue could not avoid dining at 
the Vale, but he promised to be home suf- 
ficiently early to assist him in getting off 
Lavinia. About half a quarter of a mile 
from Rosehill, there was a little creek, in 
which a boat w^as stationed to receive her; 
and about eleven o'clock, ^vhen the fash- 
ionable world, by dressing, are preparing 
for their nightly vigils, and the unfashion- 



140 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

able, by undressing, to recruit themselves 
after " this day's work, or strengthen them- 
selves for morrow's next design," the 
friends set out for her residence, attended 
by Cormick, the nurse having previously 
been sent on board. 

On reaching the arbour, Melville made 
the concerted signal by shaking the bush- 
es, but for a minute it was not replied to, 
and his heart began to throb with appre- 
hension ; but in the next, timidly emerg- 
ing from it, appeared Lavinia, and he flew 
forward to receive her, at the gate opening 
from the field to the road. For an instant, 
indeed, her courage had faltered ; and not- 
withstanding all her love for Melville, her 
apparent giddiness, the natural delicacy 
of her sex made her wish she had not 
been compelled to such a step. As the 
hour for her flight approached, not all her 
ardent affection for Melville, the idea 
of being about to be united to the being 
whom she loved with all the sincerity of 
her nature, or her final deliverance fi'om 
the power of a person whom she could 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 141 

never think of without a feeling of dread, 
could prevent a thousand timid fears and 
fond regrets, such as more than once made 
her gaze on Rosetta, with a degree of 
emotion that must have created some sus- 
picion, but for its being accounted for by 
what Rosetta had herself told her. 

She was a good deal confused by seeing 
Donaghue; but his gentle manners soon 
reassured her, as much as she could then 
be possibly reassured; and the arrange- 
ments Melville informed her of having 
made, tended still more to recompose her : 
still, however, she remained extremely 
agitated, so much so, as sometimes to have 
seemed to have rendered her lover agitated, 
so that more than once Donaghue deem- 
ed it necessary to offer the support of his 
arm also to her trembling steps. 

At length they reached the romantic, 
and now moon-illuminated creek — for it 
was a night so bright, as perfectly to be 
adapted for an exploit of the kind — where 
the boat was waiting for them. — " Now, 
my Lavinia," cried Melville, attempting 



142 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to lift her up in his arras, on their coming 
within sight of it, but she checked him 
for an instant, to extend her hand to Do- 
naghue. 

Fervently pressing it to his lips—" Hea- 
ven bless you !" he exclaimed ; " henceforth 
my sister — for Sedley and I have long con- 
sidered one another as brothers. May you 
both be as happy as I wish you ! and if it 
can add the slightest additional satisfaction 
to your feelings, there lives not on the 
earth that man to whom, had I been bless- 
ed with a sister, I would, with such pride 
and pleasure, have given her, as to him." 

Melville's heart was too full to allow 
him to speak ; he wrung the hand of Do- 
naghue in silence, and in another moment 
Lavinia was lifted into the boat. 

Donaghue remained on the spot where 
the lovers had left him till he was assured 
they had gained the vessel, when he began 
to slowly retrace his way back, happy at 
the successful termination of the adven- 
ture; but still, not without a feeling 
of perplexity and confusion, at the idea of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 143 

the confusion and dismay that would, he 
was aware, be excited, by the discovery 
of Lavinia's elopement. 

He knew the interest which the family 
at the Vale took in her welfare, and felt 
extremely unpleasant at the idea of the 
distress he accordingly anticipated its oc- 
casioning there, as well as elsewhere. But 
this was not all that rendered him uneasy; 
he had by this time acquired a sufficient 
knowledge of sir William's disposition, to 
know that, with all his feeling, there was 
a something of sternness in his disposition, 
calculated to make him deeply resent, and 
not readily forgive ; and if, by any unfor- 
tunate chance, it should be discovered 
that he was any way concerned in what 
occasioned the frustration of the particular 
views entertained for Lavinia, and on 
which sir William so often dwelt, he was 
not without an apprehension of its being 
attended with injurious consequences 
to himself Yet such was his regard — his 
friendship for Melville, that, even if this 
apprehension had sooner occurred, he 



144 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

knew not, or rather felt convinced he 
would not have acted differently from what 
he had done; but though he would have 
run the same risk again for him, yet, as he 
certainly did not wish to suffer by it, he 
resolved to expedite his own marriage as 
much as possible, lest any thing unlucky 
should happen. 

But what he anticipated from the elope- 
ment of Lavinia fell far short of what 
it occasioned — the confusion, almost dis- 
traction of Mr. Wheatley, on the discovery 
of it, and the nearly equal distress of sir 
William, to whom he made an immediate 
communication on the subject, knowing, 
as he did, the cruel shock it would be to 
his friend, the total overthrow to the plans 
that had been so fondly cherished for her 
happiness. 

" Good God !" a hundred times Mr. 
Wheatley exclaimed, as he walked about, 
almost in a state of frenzy, " why — why 
did I suffer any thing to retard or delay 
my departure! or since delay was una- 
voidable, why did I suffer myself to slum- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 145 

ber or sleep, while I had this unfortunate 
— this wretched girl under my care ! Did 
I not promise that, while she remained 
under it, my vigilance should know no 
relaxation ? but how wofully will it now 
appear that I have kept this promise ! Yet 
who could have thought — who could have 
imagined? but there must — there must 
be some treachery in the case !" and no 
sooner had the thought occurred, than 
sternly questioning his wife, he drew from 
her trembling lips a confession of what she 
had revealed to Rosetta, and from tlie 
still jnore agitated, because stilFmore dis- 
tressed, Rosetta, an acknowledgment of 
her having betrayed this to Lavinia. 

" So, this is well 1" said Mr. Wheatley, 
in the tone of stifled passion — that forced 
calmness, that is so horrible, from evincing 
the terrible w^orkings of the soul at the 
moment; " to find myself deceived, im- 
posed upon, betrayed, where I had most a 
right to imagine I might safely repose 
confidence ! but I shall not be unrevenged; 

VOL. IV. H 



146 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you little knew what you were about," 
for an instant turning his gleaming eyes 
upon the trembling culprits, " when you 
suffered yourselves to act in the manner 
you have done ; but, ere the lapse of many 
more days, you will, or I am much mis- 
taken, be taught to know, like many 
others in the world, that truth and since- 
rity can never be violated with impu- 
nity." 

This dark hint was not wanting to add 
to the terrible distress of poor Rosetta and 
her mother, and completely overwhelmed 
by their feelings, they sought to be alone, 
that, without restraint, they might in- 
dulge together the anguish excited by the 
destruction they had every reason to ima- 
gine Lavinia had drawn on herself, and 
the apprehension suggested by this hint 
of some threatened misfortune. 

The absolute dread which Donaghue 
had of going to the Vale this morning, 
made him delay as long as possible ma- 
king his appearance there. He found the 
family exactly in the state he expected ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 147 

and the surprise he was obliged to feign, 
at their communication, was a most pain- 
ful effort to him. 

" Could you have believed it possible, 
Donaghue," asked sir William, suddenly 
pausing from walking about the room in 
the most agitated manner, " that that girl, 
looking so elegant, appearing so much 
every thing one could wish, could so com- 
pletely have lost and thrown herself away 
as she has done? But though her having 
gone off with so low and despicable a fel- 
low as is the one, I understand, she has 
made choice of, must be an aggravation of 
her offence, yet not entirely to this will be 
owing the feelings it will occasion. There 
were plans formed, expectations indulged, 
respecting her, for the disappointment of 
which I know nothing could compensate, 
and which would have prevented her be- 
ing allowed to accept the addresses of 
even a person suitable to her. I grieve — 
I almost dread to think of what will be 
felt, on learning their frustration, the per- 
H 2 



148 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

son SO deeply, so intimately concerned in 
her welfare being one of my very oldest 
and most valued friends. So anxious was 
I to save him from any risk of the cruel 
shock that now awaits him, that, as you 
must recollect, I was continually, half jest- 
ingly, half seriously, hinting at her being 
engaged, thus making it a point of ho- 
nour, that no one should attempt to lay 
themselves out for her. After this inti- 
mation from me, indeed, and my evident 
solicitude to have it attended to, I never 
should have forgiven an attempt of the 
kind, if made by any one I was acquainted" 
with. Neither the person themselves cap- 
able of what I should have considered so 
utter a dereliction from every principle of 
honour, or any one that, in any way, 
could have countenanced, or connived at 
it, would, or could, have been pardoned 
by me, however great my previous regard 
or esteem for them ; and, indeed, in pro- 
portion to these would have been my re- 
sentment — for what you may be tempted 
to pass over in a mere acquaintance, you 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 149 

cannot permit yourself to forgive in the 
friend you have trusted and beheved in." 

Donaorhue involuntarilv turned to a 
window, where, for a few minutes, he re- 
mained hardly conscious of what he was 
about, so terribly agitated and embarras- 
sed was he by this declaration of sir Wil- 
liam. All the fears that had previously 
rendered him so uneasy were now^ con- 
firmed, and he almost trembled to think 
of the obstacles that might be thrown in 
the way of his happiness, should its com- 
pletion be much longer retarded. Yet 
could sir WilUam, should any thing un- 
washed come to his knowledge, be so un- 
feeling, he could not help considering, as 
to attempt to punish him for aiding his 
friend? but after the avowal he liad just 
made of his sentiments, how^ ridiculous to 
have a doubt on the subject ! and with al- 
most a sigh of despair, he thought of the 
length of time that must yet elapse, ere 
the whole of the preparations deemed re- 
quisite for his marriage could be completed. 

He felt it a relief when lady Erin de- 



150 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sired him to excuse her and Eveleen for a 
short time, as they deemed it but right to 
call at Rosehill, to see whether they 
could do any thing for the alleviation of 
the distress there, while sir William, at 
the request of Mr. Wheatley, sat down to 
communicate to the guardian of Lavinia 
what had happened; but as he walked 
about the grounds by himself, he only 
found himself getting still more perplexed 
and uneasy, from the still greater oppor- 
tunity he had for reflecting on the very 
awkward predicament he stood in. 

Two days elapsed without any thing 
occurring, but such a change in the wea- 
ther as rendered Donaghue still more 
restless and unhappy, by the fears it ex- 
cited for the safety of the lovers, such as 
rendered him anxious in the extreme for 
some tidings from them. But his anxiety 
about them was terminated much sooner 
than he had either hoped or expected, 
though not exactly in the way he wished. 
Just as they got within sight of the wish- 
ed-for haven, as is but too often the case 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 151 

in life, they were driven back by a sudden 
change in the wind, and after being tossed 
about for two days, found themselves, on 
the night of the second, on the coast 
whence they had embarked, and where, 
to prevent the danger of being driven out 
again to sea, while the weather continued 
so unsettled and tempestuous, they landed, 
at almost the hazard of their lives, and di- 
rectly proceeded to the castle. 

As soon as Donaghue had seen them, 
a little recovered and refreshed, after the 
fatigue and danger they had gone through, 
he proceeded to inform ^lelville of an ex- 
press that had that very evening ariived 
from his uncle, requiring his immediate 
presence in town, in consequence of a very 
sudden and severe indisposition with which 
he had been seized. 

The announcement of this mandate 
threw ]Melville into a state of the most 
extreme perplexity and agitation, since 
there was no alternative, but either to in- 
cur the imputation of ingratitude and 
want of feeling, by not immediately obey- 



152 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing it, or else postpone, for a little longer, 
making another effort to get to Scotland. 
Yet how to propose such a thing to La- 
vinia he knew not; but as something 
must be decided on without delay, he at 
length summoned courage to refer himself 
to her, as the person who, in this case, 
must positively decide. 

Lavinia keenly felt the embarrassing 
awkwardness of her situation ; but the 
irreparable injury she might be the means 
of doing him, by preventing his immedi- 
ate obedience to the summons of his per- 
haps dying uncle, would not permit her 
to oppose any obstacles to his leaving her, 
more especially as she knew it would be 
no longer than was absolutely necessary ; 
and that under the protection to which he 
was resigning her, the protection of a person 
whom he regarded in the light of brother, 
and with a person so respectable as Mrs. 
Cormick, to give a kind of sanction to her 
remaining where she was, she had nothing 
to dread from want of due attention and 
delicacy, neither positive censure, should 



TRADITION OF THE CASTI.E. 15S 

how she was now situated ever transpire. 
Still there was a something in this situa- 
tion revolting to her natural feelings of 
delicacy and sense of propriety, and that 
had she conceived it owing to any volun- 
tary act of imprudence, she would severe- 
ly have reproached herself; but this was 
not the case ; brought up in mystery, she 
had reason to look with suspicion, if not 
dread, on the person at whose will she was 
taught to consider herself, and the natural 
consequence of this was an effort to free 
herself from his control. 

All matters being arranged, and Mel- 
ville, with almost a degree of solemnity, 
having given her up to the care of Dona- 
ghue, not another moment was lost in his 
setting off. Ere he departed, it was settled 
between him and Donaghue, that he should 
call in his way at the house of a friend, 
some miles from Altoir-na-Grenie> for the 
purpose of getting the doctor invited 
there, it being deemed expedient by both^ 
that he should, if possible, be got out of 
h3 



1 54 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. « 

the way at present, his insatiable curiosity 
inclining him too much to be a Marplot, 
to render him a safe inmate in a mansion 
where there was any thing to be kept se- 
cret ; but unfortunately, on calling at his 
friend's, Melville found him absent, nor 
was he expected back for some days, when 
his lady assured him the invitation he re- 
quired should be sent. 

Of course it were superfluous to say 
that Donaghue did all in his power to 
render his fair guest as tranquil and coni- 
fortable as existing circumstances could 
permit her to be. The apartments about 
being fitted up for the immediate use of 
his bride were given up to her ; she was 
well supplied with books ; every moment 
he could spare, without exciting suspicion 
at the Vale, was devoted to her ; and Mrs. 
Cormick was instructed to let her have 
the entire command of her time, a com- 
mand that met with ready obedience, from 
the affection she had conceived for her; 
uhile the corporal felt ready to encounter 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 155 

any danger for her sake, as well as those 
who were so interested in her safety. 

But while Donaghue could not but re- 
joice at every new occasion that afforded 
hira an opportunity of evincing the sin- 
cerity of his friendship for Melville, still 
he could not but feel, that what had now 
occurred had placed him in a situation of 
still greater hazard with regard to sir Wil- 
liam; but this w^as not the only reflection 
that rendered him restless and agitated at 
this juncture. The consideration of the 
happiness of his friend being in his care, 
rendered him so uneasy and anxious, while 
away from the castle, lest of any thing 
unpleasant occurring during his absence, 
as gradually to have the effect of rendering 
his visits much later to, and shorter at the 
Vale, than they used to be, or it was na- 
tural to suppose they would have been, 
the circumstances under which he now 
visited there considered. 

A few days, however, passed away, 
without any notice having been taken of 
this, when one evening, just after tea. 



156 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that he was decamping, as had lately been 
the case — *' Why what the deuce is the 
matter, Donaghue?" asked sir William, 
turning suddenly on him. " If I were 
Eveleen, I positively should begin to get 
jealous at the violent hurry I have ol>. 
served you to be in these two or three 
last evenings to get off; and then com- 
ing so much later than usual of a morn- 
ing, so much so, as sometimes to keep her 
waiting to take a walk or ride with you. 
Take care, my good fellow — you see I am 
generous to put you on your guard; but 
the next time I call, don't be surprised if 
you find me take a peep behind some of 
your large screens, remembering what 
our friend Joseph Surface has said of such 
articles." 

Donaghue tried to conceal his confusion 
by a laugh ; but the laugh was a forced 
one ; and lady Jane, whose keen eyes were 
on him at the moment, perceived it was, 
and that there was also agitation in his 
looks. She knew not what to think, but 
she determined it should not be her fault 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 157 

if this were long the case ; and what a tri- 
umph, what a glorious triumph would it 
be, if it were discovered that the gentle- 
man was not quite the saint he affected 
to be, and Eveleen should, after all, be 
destined to experience disappointment ! 

Sir William's raillery made Donaghue 
sensible of the error he had been betrayed 
into, by his over anxiety about his fair 
charge. Accordingly he was early at the 
Vale the next day ; and when we say that 
the morning was passed almost uninte- 
ruptedly with Eveleen, and that he ob- 
tained a promise from her, not to be the 
means of creating any unnecessary delay 
to their marriage, need we say it passed de- 
lightfully. But into what confusion was 
he thrown by the doctor, for whom the 
wished for and expected invitation had 
not yet arrived ! He joined the party at 
the Vale a little while before dinner, and 
after laughing and chatting with them for 
a few minutes, suddenly stalking into the 
middle of the apartment, drew something 
from his pocket, and putting his hand be- 



158 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hind his back with it, asked the ladies 
which amongst them had to complain of 
a recent loss, and what reward would be 
^ven to the fortunate finder of the stray 
article ? 

" Oh, a most liberal one !" they all ex- 
claimed; but at the same time not one 
amongst them could recollect missing any 
thing. 

" Come, come, ransack your memories, 
as you do your workbags," cried Rosebud, 
" when you are at a loss for any thing ; 
for I made up my mind to getting a hand- 
some reward, and I don't like being dis- 
appointed." Still the same answer was 
returned. " What, not a trinket ? nor a 
glove? nor such a pretty little article as 
this ?" suddenly holding up to their view 
a splendid reticule, which that very morn- 
ing Donaghue recollected to have seen on 
the arm of Lavinia, when she was taking 
a turn with him in the king's dining- 
room, a favourite promenade of hers, when 
the doors were closed, to prevent the dan- 
ger of a surprise, and where, unconsciously 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 159 

dropped by her, it was afterwards picked 
up by the doctor, who, under the suppo- 
sition of its belonging to some one of the 
ladies of the Vale, who, with lady Erin, 
were now very often in the habit of call- 
ing at the castle, to superintend and give 
their opinions of the alterations and im- 
provements going on there, had very care- 
fully folded it up in silk paper, and put it 
in his pocket, to return to the fair owner. 

" Ha ! what !" exclaimed sir William, 
with affected surprise. " Where did that 
come from ?" 

Rosebud, not quite certain whether the 
question was in jest or in earnest, very 
gravely answered, by informing him where 
and how he had found it. 

" Suspicious, I protest !" cried sir Wil- 
liam. " I am beginning to think that my 
raillery last night was not quite so mis- 
placed — that there is a way now of ac- 
counting for our being in so great a hurry 
to get away of an evening, as we have 
lately been in." 

** I am sure 'tis fortunate for me, my 



160 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

dear sir, that there is not,*' cried Dona- 
ghue, in a tone of irrepressible peevish- 
. ness ; " for if there were, I have ver}'- 
little doubt but that I should be betray- 
ed to the reprehension I merited. — -My 
dear doctor, where, in the name of won- 
der, were you roving about the castle, 
that you picked up poor nurse Cormick's 
intended present for her little goddaugh- 
ter ?" 

'* Ah ! then does it belong to her ?" 
said the doctor, good-naturedly. ** By this 
time I suppose she's in fine tribulation 
about it," and he was putting it up again, 
when lady Jane, who had all this time 
been watching Donaghue, and saw guilt, 
conscious guilt in the variations of his 
changing countenance, carelessly extend- 
ing her hand, desired to have a nearer 
view of it. 

The doctor was about complying with 
her request, when Donaghue, who saw 
there was something in it, probably the 
letter which Lavinia had that very morn^ 
ing received from Melville, enclosed in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6l 

one to him, and who felt sure that her 
ladyship would not be satisfied without 
examining the inside as well as the out- 
side, suddenly twitched it from him, and 
with a peevish " pish !" that it was not 
worth looking at, crumpled it up, and 
thrust it into his own pocket. 

Conduct so strange could not but ex- 
cite a stare ; for a moment it gave rise to 
an unpleasant sensation in the mind of sir 
William, but it was but for a moment, 
and he then thought no more of it. Not 
so lady Jane — she dwelt on it with a con- 
viction that determined her to be inde- 
fatigable in trying to discover what she 
thought, but, of course, with the greatest 
wariness, lest, in trying to injure others, 
she should eventually only harm herself, 
well aware, that once detected in any thing 
of artifice or deception, and we are ever 
after liable to the suspicion of it. 

Donaghue, not able now to consider 
poor Rosebud in any other light than 
that of an indirect spy, became more anxi- 
ous than ever to get rid of him for the 



162 TRADITION OT THE CASTLI!. 

present; but still no invitation came. 
Why, it may be asked, did not he and 
Melville decide at once on placing confi- 
dence in him ? Would not that have 
been their best plan ? But with all their 
reliance on his good-nature and honour, 
his ardent zeal in the cause of those he 
loved and esteemed, they feared to in- 
trust him on this occasion, from the ease 
with which they were convinced any art- 
ful person could draw a secret from him, 
and he still remained to occasion new em- 
barrassment to his host. 

The next morning, ere Donaghue had 
well sat down to breakfast, lady Erin, 
who, once or twice before, in the same 
way, had surprised him, made her appear- 
ance with the whole party at the Vale. 

Of course he affected all the pleasure 
that, under other circumstances, he must 
assuredly have felt on the occasion, but 
the consciousness of the discovery that 
could at the instant be made in the castle, 
took from him the real feeling of happiness. 

To be obliged to feign what we know 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 165 

we ought to feel, and are expected to feel, 
is, of all things, the most painful. In this 
distressing predicament was Donaghue at 
this moment ; and what but friendship 
could have reconciled him to himself, for 
having allowed himself to be placed in 
one so embarrassing — one that actually 
made hiai wish for the absence instead of 
presence of her whose beaming smiles, 
whose lovely countenance, irradiated with 
pleasure at beholding him, were a tacit 
reproach on his involuntary insincerity 
at the instant ! 

" Well, now that we are here," said 
lady Erin, as they rose from breakfast, " I 
think we may as well look at those apart- 
ments you were speaking of, since you 
have so positively declared nothing shall 
be done to them without the sanction of 
our taste." 

" Assuredly, certainly," said Donaghue, 
but so extremely confused at the sugges- 
tion, that he hardly knew what he was 
saying ; these being the apartments which 
had been given up to Lavinia, and which. 



164 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

from being intended for Eveleen, he had 
determined on having nothing done to 
till she had first seen them, that her own 
immediate taste might be consulted. But 
— ** How unfortunate," he added, as if sud- 
denly recollecting himself, " now I think 
of it, the key of the door which shuts up 
the whole suit has been missing this day 
or two !" 

" Oh, no matter," said lady Erin, " it 
will give us," laughing, " the excessive 
trouble of coming here again." 

The doctor, w^ho all this time had been 
sitting very demurely, listening to what 
was going on, in consequence of feeling 
himself a little offended by the peevish- 
ness of Donaghue about the reticule, now 
suddenly turning to him, demanded — 
" Who had told him that?" 

" What ?" asked Donaghue, but in 
alarm at the question. 

" Why, that the key you wanted was 
lost. Whoever told you so deceived you, 
for this very morning, as I was coming 
down to breakfast, I saw the door to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 165 

which it belongs lying partly open ; and 
more than that " 

" Oh, you mistake, you mistake, my 
dear friend !" said Donaghue, but colour- 
ing to the very eyes ; and in order to try 
and conceal his confusion, affecting to be 
busy in assisting the ladies on with their 
shawls, a walk being proposed to a part of 
the grounds that was deemed an advan- 
tageous situation for the erection of an 
ornamental building ; '* but I don't won- 
der at it, there being so many doors and 
places alike in this old rambling building." 

Sir William looked steadily at Dona- 
ghue; he saw he was flurried, and again 
the unpleasant sensation of the preceding 
day was experienced ; but, as then, it was 
but transient — he could not give way to 
any mistrustful idea concerning him. Yet, 
as he slowly followed the party, he could 
not help musing on the strange inconsis- 
tencies that often appear in the human 
character, and now^ pausing to look back 
at the windows of the apartments to which 
admission could not be obtained. 



166 THADITION OP THE CASTLE. 

Lady Jane was now confirmed beyond 
a doubt in her persuasion of Donaghue 
being a little more a man of the world 
than his friends at the Vale suspected. 
Were they people of the world, for in- 
stance, like the Magennises, the discovery 
of this she knew would be a matter of 
very little, or rather no concern to them ; 
but as they were, she was convinced the 
very reverse would be the case, and that 
in all probability it would be the means 
of depriving him of all further hope of the 
heiress. 

This persuasion decided her on no fur- 
ther delay in trying to effect it, but. Hea- 
vens ! how stupid they were to render it 
requisite her taking any pains to enlighten 
them on the subject ! How soon would 
people of the world have been led to sus- 
pect from what they had seen ! but no, 
they were too good to suspect ill in others ; 
sir William, indeed, she thought she had 
observed eyeing the gentleman keenly, 
but lady Erin and Eveleen neither appear- 
ed in the least degree struck by what was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 167 

SO evident an evasion about the apartments, 
his changes of countenance, or a hundred 
other circumstances, that, to her, would 
have been " confirmation strong as proofs of 
holy writ" of there being something wrong, 
something to conceal; and in her con- 
tempt and indignation at what she consi- 
dered their stupidity, she really believed 
she would not take the trouble of forcing 
them to open their eyes, but for the ma- 
licious pleasure she took in the anticipa- 
tion of the pain she was sure the circum- 
stance would occasion ; for, let matters end 
as they would between Donaghue and 
Eveleen, her hope of ever now attaching 
him to her was indeed very languid. 

But as a vague charge would not an- 
swer her purpose, she began to turn in 
her brain how she should herself be able 
to positively discover what she wished to 
discover to others. It was not long ere a 
plan suggested itself to her for the pur- 
pose, and her abigail, who was the person 
she meant to employ, was accordingly 
summoned, properly instructed, and with 



168 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

great pleasure and alacrity undertook the 
business. 

A flirtation had commenced between 
her and the corporal, who, in consequence 
of her appearing to admire him, thought 
he could do no less than return the com- 
pliment by appearing to admire her, and 
it w^as on this that lady Jane built for the 
accomplishment of her project. Feather- 
ston was instructed to try and betray him, 
through surprise, into the required disclo- 
sure, by affecting to have already a know- 
ledge of the affair — a method which, in 
similar instances, her ladyship had before 
found successful. 

The corporal, who was not without a 
pretty tolerable share of vanity, was gene- 
rally loitering about in the way of the la- 
dies of an evening ; and Mrs. Abigail, be- 
ing now on the watch for him, as she gene- 
rally was, indeed, when not particularly 
engaged with her lady, had soon an op- 
portunity of commencing the business she 
had undertaken. After a little chat, as 
usual — " Ah, you men !" she said, in reply 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 169 

to some compliments of the corporal, " who 
is to believe a word you say ? saying one 
thing and thinking another, as my lady 
says; there is not one of you the imma- 
culate characters you go for to want to 
persuade us, poor credulous creatures of 
the softer sex, to believe. Who that looks 
at your master but would take him to be 
half a saint at least ? and yet " 

"Yet what, my dear?" said the corporal. 

" Oh, no matter, I know what I know; 
but come, between ourselves, what does 
he mean to do with somebody, when he's 
obliged to bring somebody dse home to 
the castle?" 

" Somebody !" said the corporal, looking 
a little earnestly at her ; " well, if I know 
who you mean, Mrs. Featherston, may I 
be " 

" Oh ! what," exclaimed the lady — 
" but I wont be so hillhred as to say what ; 
but wull you look me straight in the face 
now, and tell me that you'll take your 
book oath that there's nobody in the castle 

VOL. IV. I 



170 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that your master cares nothink about the 
folks here knowing of? — No, I see by 
your colouring you couldn't, nor would it 
be any good, for 'tis no matter ; but maybe 
I could give a guess why a certain key 
couldn't be found yesterday, and why '* 

" Why then, how in the name of the 
old one," demanded the corporal, in a tone 
of mingled astonishment and alarm, " did 
you come to know any thing about this 
business?" 

" Oh ! so you are going to confess the 
truth now, because you can't help it, but 
I am not such a blab as to tell you ; a se- 
cret once ^^Tztrusted to my keeping is a 
secret still. But isn't that master of yours 
a sad un after all, now that he's going to 
be married, to be going on with such here 
tricks as these ?" 

" Why, you don't pretend to insinuate," 
said the corporal, " that he has any thing 
to say to the lady that's concealed in the 
castle?" 

" Don't I ?" exclaimed Mrs. Feather- 
ston, with a toss of her head. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 171 

" No, to be sure you don't ! because, if 
you did, you know you would be doing 
him injustice. How the devil you came 
to hear any thing about her is more than 
I can guess, and more than I'd have known 
for the world, because it would make him 
so uneasy on account of his fiiend Mr. 
Melville ; but since you've heard so 
much " 

" His friend Mr. xMelville !" repeated 
the lady, scornfully — " oh yes, very likely 
indeed, that he'd take such pains about 
concealing a mistress of his ! Xo, no, not 
quite so heasely hummed as this, I hassure 
you — that story won't go down !" 

" Why then, if 'tis not true, may I ne- 
ver be married myself," cried the corporal, 
" to the girl I love !" and he cast a very 
significant glance at the lady, though not 
one exactly in unison with the real senti- 
ments of his heart, as there certainly was 
more of profession than sincerity in his 
passion for her. 

** I defy you to make me believe it r* 
said she. 

i2 



172 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

*•' Done !" cried the corporal ; " when I 
explain matters, you'll find you'll say dif- 
ferently ;" and, without further hesitation, 
he proceeded to do so, disclosing every 
particular of the affair between Melville 
and Lavinia, the cause of the elopement, 
the occasion of their reembarking for Scot- 
land being delayed, and the important 
reasons there were for keeping her being 
in the castle concealed from every one, as 
well as his master's having had any hand 
in the business. 

" And you tell me this is all true?" 
said Mrs. Featherston, anxious not to .be 
imposed upon, on account of her lady. 

" Why, I'll swear it !" cried the corporal. 

" Well, do then ; but not by none of 
your i^zrish saints, because I don't know 
nothing about them." 

" Well, I'll — I'll swear by your own 
bright eyes," cried the corporal, " because 
I am sure you know something about 
them, that it is true as that no one can 
see you without admiring you." 

" Well, now I believe you," said the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 173 

flattered abigail, highly pleased by his 
compliments; "but I must be leaving 
you now, for this is about the time my 
lady will be wanting to dress for the party 
the folks here are going to to-night ; so, 
till we meet again, good-bye," extending 
her lily hand to receive its accustomed 
salute at parting, from the completely- 
taken-in Cormick. 

At first lady Jane was disappointed by 
the information she had succeeded in ob- 
taining her, but a moment's reflection suf- 
ficed to convince her, that the discovery 
of his having been concerned in the affair 
about Lavinia, would prove nearly, if not 
as entirely, injurious to Donaghue, with 
regard to sir William, as if what she had 
imagined had been ascertained. 

It was not of this, however, but of the 
still more heinous offence she had believed 
him guilty, that she meant to accuse him. 
With a hope and persuasion that he would 
enter into no vindication of himself, lest 
the explanation of the mistake should be 
a means of betraying the interests of his 



174 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

friend, she believed him perfectly ca- 
pable of such generosity; but should it be 
a stretch beyond him, where Eveleen was 
at stake, she congratulated herself on the 
probability, that in trying to escape Cha- 
rybdis, he would assuredly founder on 
Scylla. She knew sir William's senti- 
ments respecting the affair of Lavinia — 
she had heard his passionate avowal of 
never forgiving any one concerned in aid- 
ing in her elopement; and, act as he 
would, Donaghue had now got himself 
involved, in a way, she flattered herself* 
from which he would vainly try to extri- 
cate himself 

But though she panted to be revenged 
on him for all he had made her suffer, yet> 
as she was convinced the only hope she 
had of ever drawing him towards her a- 
gain, was by preventing his ever knowing 
or suspecting she was in any way concern- 
ed in the injury she was now about doing 
him with sir William, ere she allowed her- 
self to finally carry her plan into effect, 
she resolved on leaving the Vale, trusting. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 175 

by this measure, to escape what she feared. 
Accordingly, she suddenly pretended to 
lady Erin to have received an invitation 
to a lady's house in Dublin, which she 
could not decline without giving offence ; 
but from which, she assured her ladyship, 
she should make it a point of returning 
time enough to be present at the marriage 
of their sweet Eveleen. 

Lady Erin said all that politeness re- 
quired on the occasion, and lady Jane, 
without permitting herself almost to pause, 
set out with her trusty abigail on her 
pretended visit. Her journey to the me- 
tropoHs, however, ended at a small obscure 
town, about fifteen miles from the Vale, 
whence, the following day, a letter to this 
effect was dispatched to sir William by 
post, written by Mrs. Featherston, under 
her guidance, without which indeed its 
malicious aim might have been disap- 
pointed, as Featherston's writing and or- 
thography were both of a description to 
render her literary productions rather 
puzzhng : — 



176 TRADITION OF THE CASTLi!. 

" To Sir William Erin, Bart 

" If sir William Erin has that 
regard for the happiness of his daughter, 
which it is but natural to suppose he has, 
ere he allows the affair between her and 
Mr. Donaghue O'Brien to proceed any- 
further, it might be advisable to make 
some inquiry about the fair friend who 
has, for some time past, condescendingly 
given her company to that gentleman in 
the castle, as such appendages to an esta- 
blishment are not by any means calculated 
for the promotion of domestic happiness. 
The hint is given by an enemy to hypo- 
crisy, and a friend to innocence and truth !" 

This production was received by sir 
William in his library, where he was, a- 
lone, at the moment, the morning after it 
was sent. Such a hint as it contained he 
could not possibly have deemed himself 
excusable for disregarding ; but assuredly 
it would not have produced the striking 
effect upon him it did, but for what had 



TRAOTTION OF THE CASTLE. 177 

recently occurred — the surprise, not un- 
mingled with a dawning of distrust, which 
the recent conduct of Donaghue had ex- 
cited — the affair of the reticule, and the 
mislaid key, with the doctor's positive 
contradiction about the latter, instantly 
recurred to his recollection, or rather the 
confusion, the agitation, they had been the 
means of occasioning; and, without further 
hesitation, he ordered the chariot to be got 
ready, the day being too wet for riding, 
and forthwith proceeded to Altoir-na- 
Grenie, without allowing it to be known 
whither he w^as going. 

The invitation having at length arrived 
for the doctor, he had left it the preceding 
day for a short time, delighted to have 
something new to divert and occupy him 
till the wedding took place ; and, relieved 
fronT all apprehension of a surprise from 
him, and equally divested of all apprehen- 
sion of it from any other person, through 
the wetness of the day, Donaghue had 
invited Lavinia to take a little exercise in 
i3 



178 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the king's dining-room, or great hall, as 
it was now as often called, and where they 
were actually conversing together at the 
moment that he was thunderstruck by 
hearing the voice of sir William approach- 
ing the apartment, the sound of the car- 
riage having been completely drowned in 
the blustering of the wind without. — 
" Fly ! fly !'* exclaimed Donaghue, in al- 
most breathless agitation, to his fair com- 
panion, and opening, as he spoke, the fold- 
ing doors behind the chair of state for her. 

Lavinia obeyed, but, in the hurry of 
her flight, dropt a shawl she had thrown 
over her shoulders, but which the extreme 
confusion he was thrown into not allow- 
ing Donaghue to notice, was almost the 
first thing that caught the keen eye of sir 
William as he entered. — " This is a — a 
very unexpected pleasure indeed, sir," 
said Donaghue, trying to receive him col- 
lectedly ; " I should hardly have thought 
that you would have liked to come out 
such a day." 

" Well, I don't pretend to say I did," 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 179 

said sir William ; " I neither like to ex- 
pose my servants or horses to such a day 
as this; but when one is very anxious a- 

bout any thing But what fine affair is 

this?" suddenly taking up the shawl; 
" why, really, my dear fellow, this, in ad- 
dition to what the doctor picked up the 
other day, is almost sufiicient to excite a 
suspicion that " 

" Oh ! nurse Cormick's shawl," said 
Donaghue, attempting to speak with un- 
concern, and making an effort to take it 
from him ; " she was here receiving some 
orders from me, and " 

But he could not finish the sentence — 
obliged to raise his eyes to sir William's 
as he proceeded, he found his bent upon 
him at the instant, in such a manner as 
made him, he felt, change colour, and in- 
voluntarily turn aside his head. 

Sir \Villiam could hardly command 
himself any longer, so evident an attempt 
— so almost impudent a one he considered 
it — did this appear at impositi<>n. He 
was determined, however, to go coolly 



180 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

through the bushiess; flinging away, 
therefore, the unfortunate shawl, which, 
from its costliness, it was not to be be- 
lieved belonged to an old Irish nurse, or 
at least worn by her trolling about her 
daily concerns, he took out the letter, and, 
unfolding it, laid it before Donaghue on 
the table by which they were standing; 
and — " There," he said, " I should be glad 
you would glance your eye over that let- 
ter, for there is something in it that con- 
cerns you. Only say, on the word of a 
man of honour, that the insinuation it 
contains is false — that there is no such 
person beneath this roof as it alludes to, 
and from this instant I dismiss it from my 
thoughts." 

He turned away as he spoke, with a 
degree of emotion not immediately re- 
pressible — for how much depended on the 
next minute! Donaghue had endeared 
himself to him, and he felt it would be a 
hard struggle to fling him from his regard, 
if called ii pon to do so. 

Donaghue — the nearly - overwhelmed 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 181 

Donaghue, mechanically took up the 
scrawl of Mrs. Featherston; but, for a 
moment, a mist seemed to spread itself 
before his eyes, that prevented his deci- 
phering a line. When, at length, by the 
dint of exertion, he recovered the power 
of vision, in what a predicament did he 
find himself placed — compelled, either to 
rest under an imputation revolting to 
every feeling of truth and delicacy to have 
incurred, or else betray the confidence re- 
posed in him by his friend ! for, to pledge 
his solemn word to a falsehood, was out 
of the question — principle and pride alike 
revolted from that ; yet, what should he 
do? good God! what should be done? 
and he stood unconsciously gazing on the 
letter, as if still perusing it. 

" Well," said sir William, again ap- 
proaching the table, " what am I to infer 
from this silence ?" 

" That I merit not the questionings this 
invidious letter occasions." 

" Then you give me to understand the 
insinuation it contains is false? you assure 



182 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

me of this, on the word of a man of truth 
and honour, that there is no person be- 
neath this roof whom you wish to conceal 
from the knowledge of your friends ?" 

Donaghue shrunk back — " I should 
have hoped — I should have trusted," he 
said, " that no further denial than I have 
already given to the charge, would have 
been required of me ! Anonymous accu- 
sations are of a description that I should 
conceive a mind of liberality and candour 
would pay very little attention to, so very 
questionable must the motive be consi- 
dered for them." 

In a moment recovering his previous 
sternness, through the indignation excited 
by this apparent evasion — " Have done, 
have done with this futile reasoning!" 
haughtily exclaimed sir William ; " it is 
contradiction, not argument, sir," he still 
more imperiously added, " I require from 
you !" 

The proud blood of Donaghue mounted 
up to his very temples, and, for a mo- 
ment, he was obliged to turn away to re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 188 

collect himself — to recollect that it was 
the father of Eveleen who had addressed 
him in this commanding, this authorita- 
tive manner. 

" Well, sir," exclaimed sir William 
again ; then, after a slight pause — " But 
I am answered," he cried ; " were I to he- 
sitate any longer in thinking so, it would 
seem as if I was soliciting you to false- 
hood. Your silence has answered me, and 
I am glad — I am happy," but, in the hur- 
ried tone of extreme agitation, he added, 
*' to find that you are incapable of entirely 
forgetting yourself — that though, as a lo- 
ver, you have lost yourself, you have not 
entirely lost yourself as a man of honour ! 
Farewell, sir — our acquaintance ends here ! 
Regrets for the past I have ever consider- 
ed a weakness, yet I cannot so entirely 
command myself at this moment, as not 
to express my deep concern that we were 
ever known to each other !" 

" Good God! what are you about? 
What do you mean, sir ?" exclaimed Do- 
naghue, rushing between him and the 



184 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

door. " You do not want to drive me to 
distraction and despair? By all my hopes 
of happiness, both here and hereafter, I am 
not more undeserving of her, whom I will 
not resign, than I was at the moment you 
consented to give her to me !" 

" That I make not the slightest doubt 
of, sir," replied sir William, in a sarcastic 
tone, and with a sneer that suited it; " I 
have not the slightest doubt of your prin- 
ciples and sentiments being then what 
they are now, only not so well known 
then, or appreciated." 

Again Donaghue was obliged to recol- 
lect who it was that was speaking to him, 
to be enabled to command himself. 

" But you will not resign Eveleen Erin, 

you say ! You Were it possible, after 

the gross insult you have offered her, that 
she could forgive-— could ever degrade her- 
self by another thought about you, I 
would, dear as she is to my heart as my 
child, my only child, I would spurn her, 
so help me, Heaven ! with worse than ha- 
tred, with contempt, from my feet. Away, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 185 

sir, and let me pass ! I am not to be de- 
tained here, or in any way trifled with; 
our conference, if much longer prolonged, 
may perhaps end more disagreeably than 
either of us at present apprehend/' 

Donaghue immediately drew aside, and 
opened the door for him. But hardly had 
he seen him drive off, ere he was ready to 
pursue him, for the purpose of explaining 
the truth ; but a moment's reflection check- 
ed this impulse of despair, for what must 
be the result of such an explanation, but 
to have the innocent, the confiding Lavi- 
nia torn from his protection, and the hap- 
piness of his friend destroyed by the eter- 
nal separation that would then probably 
ensue between them. And could he, after 
this, ever face him again ? No, no ; and 
he rejoiced therefore that the timely de- 
parture of sir Wilham prevented his being 
guilty of this involuntary treachery. 

A sense of unmerited injuries is bitter 
and irritating, but still we have a support 
under them, which fails us when con- 
scious of being the cause of injury to others; 



186 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

yet to calmly endure the loss of such hap- 
piness as he was allowed to look forward 
to, to have the brim-full cup dashed from 
his very lips, Eveleen torn as it were from 
his grasp, how, how was he to endure it, 
and retain his reason ! and in all the wild 
extravagance of despair, he threw himself 
on a seat. 

At this moment, while yet every nerve 
was throbbing with the agony of conflict- 
ing feelings, and his brow was almost 
ghastly through the same, the crimson 
curtains behind the throne were parted, 
and the fair face of Lavinia was seen peep- 
ing through them ; and — " I may venture 
in," she said, advancing into the apart- 
ment as she spoke. " Such a fright," she 
continued, " as I was in when I missed 
this!" taking up the shawl; *' but I hope 
he went without noticing it?" 

Donaghue faintly smiled. 

" I scarce thought to have found you 
here," she went on, " concluding sir Wil- 
liam had called for you. But — but," turn- 
ing her eyes full upon Donaghue, " what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 187 

is the matter? You look as if something 
had happened to distress you. Nothing 
un — unpleasant," and her voice faltered, 
and she turned of a deadly paleness, 
" brought sir William here, I hope ?" 

" No, no, nothing," replied Donaghue, 
a little impatiently. 

Lavinia looked still more earnestly at 
him for a moment, and then — " You are 
deceiving me, I am convinced !" she ex- 
claimed. " Oh, tell me at once what has 
occurred — what it is I have to fear !" 

" Nothing ; I protest most solemnly no- 
thing," said Donaghue — " nothing has oc- 
curred in any way to disquiet you, either 
about yourself or Melville." 

" And can you make the same assu- 
rance with regard to yourself?" asked 
Lavinia anxiously, going to him as she 
spoke, and hanging over him, as he still 
sat resting his arm on the back of a chair 
adjoining the one he occupied, with all 
the fond solicitude of an affectionate sister, 
for in the light of a beloved brother her 
innocent and sensitive heart by this time 



188 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

regarded him. " Can you," she demanded, 
" really assure me that nothing has hap- 
pened to create disquietude on your own 
account ?" 

" Y-e-s; why should you imagine I 
could not?" answered Donaghue, again 
forcing a languid smile. 

*•' Because your looks are so disturbed." 

** Oh, no ; you mistake," said Donaghue, 
rising as he spoke, and endeavouring to 
shake off the air that had alarmed her ; 
" nothing — nothing is the matter with me, 
but a headach — the effect of the heaviness 
of the day, I suppose." 

" And I may believe you ?" she said, 
laying her hand on his arm, and looking 
up in his face. 

Donaghue took her hand, and kissed it ; 
and — " Don't you think you may ?" he 
asked evasively. 

" I hope so," she replied, but evidently 
doubtingly ; " and so I will go now and 
finish my letter to Melville, that it may 
be in time for you to enclose to him, 
before you set off for the Vale." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 189 

The Vale! Donaghue started. 

" For to suppose the day could keep 
you from it, would be idle, I am sure; 
and as to your headach " 

" Don't delay any longer," cried Dona- 
ghue, " about your letter," unable to en- 
dure the agony of speaking about the 
Vale. 

Lavinia kissed her hand, and vanished, 
but with a doubt, a misgiving on her 
mind, as to his not having been sincere 
w^ith her in this instance, that, on reach- 
ing her apartment, made her communicate 
her apprehensions to Mrs. Cormick, whom 
she found there, of something having hap- 
pened to disturb him. 

The nurse, taking the alarm, instantly 
hastened in quest of the corporal, to in- 
quire whether he knew of any thing that 
was the matter. 

Cormick, whose mind had been misgiv- 
ing him ever since his conversation with 
Mrs. Featherston, startled at the ques- 
tion, inquired what had occasioned it ; and 
on learning, became instantly convinced 



190 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that something disagreeable had occurred, 
more especially as he was confident he had 
heard sir William speaking in an exalted 
tone, and had remarked it as an extraor- 
dinary thing, his not being attended to 
his carriage by his master. 

Full of dismay, but without imparting 
what he thought to his mother, lest it 
should be a means of creating alarm in the 
mind of Lavinia, he forthwith proceeded 
to the apartment where his master was, 
and whom he found walking about it in 
such agitation as instantly confirmed his 
worst fears. So utterly lost was Donaghue 
at the moment, in the contemplation of 
the predicament in which he found him- 
self, that he did not perceive that any one 
had entered, till Cormick, after various 
devices to try and draw his attention, 
threw down a large book, the noise of 
which startling, made him cast his eyes 
on him, and angrily demand what had 
brought him there? 

" I — I came," said Cormick, appearing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 191 

to be fidgeting about the reading-table, 
« to— to settle the things." 

" What! at this hour? Begone! nor 
intrude again till I ring for you." 

"Yes, your honour; but I suppose 
your honour won't be for riding to the 
Vale to-day, but going in the carriage, it 
continues to rain so. At what hour shall 
I order it ?" 

Donaghue looked with almost fierce- 
ness at him for a moment, and then turn- 
ed away. 

" I say, your honour, at what hour?" 

" Leave me!" cried Donaghue, in such 
a tone as perhaps he had never before ad- 
dressed him in ; " leave me, nor, at your 
peril, I command, approach again without 
being called." 

" Well, I am going," but he still con- 
tinued loitering at the table, but as if only 
to put every thing into disorder there, 
throwing down the books at one side, and 
as fast as he picked them up there, tum- 
bling them down at another. 

" Do you know what you are about?" 



192 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

demanded Donaghue, hardly able any 
longer to control himself, for this was not 
a moment, the moment of sore vexation, 
for trifling or intrusion. 

" Troth, hardly, I believe," was the re- 

" Cormick," said Donaghue, with for- 
ced calmness, " don't give me cause for 
regret ; for you know how it would pain 
me to say or do any thing to hurt your 
feelings. Leave me, my good fellow; and 
when I want you, I will ring for you ; but 

now " Intolerable agony choked his 

utterance, and striking his forehead with 
his hand, he turned to a window. " Leave 
me," he repeated, after a transient pause, 
" again I order — I command !" 

" No, I can't," cried Cormick. 

" How !" exclaimed Donaghue, turning 
fiercely on him. 

" No ; you may look and do as you 
please," said Cormick, coolly ; " but I can't, 
nor I won't leave you, for you are not fit 
to be left by yourself — don't I see distrac- 
tion in every look? But no wonder, for 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 193 

I guess how it is ; my mind has been mis- 
giving me ever since I was talking with 
that witch, and she told me some one was 
blabbing. I thought there was mischief 
brewing then, and so I am not surprised 
at what has happened now." 

" That witch ! — whom do you allude 
to ? or what is it you mean by these bro- 
ken hints and sentences ?" 

" Why, that painted Jezabel — she that 
thought 1 was in love with her, though, 
God knows, I had as much thoughts of 
her, or the likes of her (for I soon saw 
what she was), as of one of my ould great 
great grandmothers, that's dead a hundred 
years, or more for aught 1 know — Mrs. 
Featherston, lady Jane's woman." 

" Ha! what of her?" exclaimed Dona- 
ghue, starting, as a sudden light seemed 
to flash across his mind; " what of her?" 
in extreme emotion he demanded. 

Cormick, without hesitation, proceeded 
to inform him of his last meeting with 
Mrs. Featherston, and what she had men- 

VOL. IV. K 



194 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tioned to him, or rather indeed the whole 
of the conversation that had passed be- 
tween them — a conversation that he now 
deeply regretted, from an internal convic- 
tion that it was framed for the artful pur- 
pose of trying to obtain some further in- 
formation through his means. 

Donaghue hardly heard him to a conclu- 
sion, ere, with a wild laugh — " Oh, I now 
see how it is !" he cried ; " I now see all i 
the hand from which the poisoned arrow 
has been discharged that is rankling in my 
heart! That woman, of course, was set 
on by her mistress, to draw you into some 
confession, that might enable her to know 
how to act against me; for whatever 
might be the knowledge she had contri- 
ved to obtain, of what there were so many 
reasons for wishing to conceal, it is evi- 
dent she knew not all she desired, till she 
learned it through you. Her woman's af- 
fecting to be perfectly informed on the 
subject, was all a stratagem, to betray you 
into the disclosure that was required l and 
lady Jane has barbarously taken advantage 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 195 

of the peculiarity of my situation to de- 
stroy me; for well, well she knew, at the 
expence of my friend's happiness, I would 
not, could not, attempt a vindication of 
myself — Devil ! devil !" he cried, through 
his clenched teeth, as he paced the hall, 
with feelings that shook his very frame. 

" Devil !" cried Cormick ; " you may 
well call her that, and the other one too; 
mistress and maid, they are both alike. 
Oh, then, how I wish I'd known, the 
other evening, what my lady was about, 
when she came over me so nately, with 
her smooth English tongue ! But there's 
no coming up to these women for guile 
and deceit; 'tis my belief, if he who 
tempted the first of them was to come 
amongst them now, he'd be no match for 
them; and, to be sure, there wouldn't 
be half the disturbance there is in the 
world, if it wasn't for them ; as I was 
reading in an old play-book the other 
evening, who was it but a woman caused 
the long ten years siege of Troy ? — who 
K 2 



196 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was it but a woman made Marc Ant(»iy 
lose the world? — who was it, in shorty 
that has been the occasion of all the mis- 
chief that ever was heard of, but a woman? 
— and who, to finish all, was it sold us 
all, but a woman ?" 

" But if there are devils amongst the 
sex, so are there angels !" cried Donaghue ; 
" and was I not assured of one of the 

brightest and loveliest of these But I 

have lost her !" staggering back to a seat 
through agony ; " I have lost her through 
the machinations of that vilest of women ! 
It is useless, Cormick, to try and conceal 
it from you — it must soon be every where 
known — lady Jane has ruined and undone 
me with sir William," and he proceeded 
to acquaint the agitated Cormick with the 
particulars of all that had recently occur- 
red. 

Cormick wrung his hands, in down- 
right agony. — " Oh, to think of this !" he 
cried ; " when we were all so happy and 
comfortable, after squire Dennis keeping 
his word of being the making of some one 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 197 

belonging to the family ; for, to be sure, 
it was all along of him that your honour 
got back your fortune. But it mayn't be 
so bad as your honour thinks Mr. Mel- 
\i\\e must now be coming back soon, and 
then " 

Donaghue again started up, and began 
traversing the hall. No, no, there was no 
hope of that. The letter received from 
him, only that morning, mentioned his 
uncle being still in such a state as to ren- 
der it impossible for him to leave him : 
but something must be done — he could 
not rest under the idea of being thought 
capable of offering so gross an insult to 
his Eveleen, to his own sweet bride, as he 
was now accused of He would write to 
sir William ; he would simply state the 
fact to him, and rely on him, both as a 
man of sense and sensibility, to forgive 
what friendship had occasioned ; and sure- 
ly it was impossible but that he must 
forgive what was both so natural and ex- 
cusable. 

The fever of his mind seemed in a mo- 



198 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ment to abate, at the hope suggested by 
this determination, and hastily placing 
himself at the table, he was in the very 
act of commencing his letter, when the 
reflection of all that was likely to accnie 
from it, made him suddenly check his 
hand. In acknowledging Lavinia was 
under his protection, should he not be be- 
traying her again into the power of her 
guardian ? That she would be forced away, 
the moment it was known where she whs, 
he could not doubt; and how, how, after 
thus appearing voluntarily to give her up, 
could he ever face Melville again ? — " No, 
no, it cannot be," he exclaimed, starting 
up, and dashing away the pen in despair; 
" I cannot, at the expence of my friend's 
happiness, purchase my own. — But, Mel- 
ville, my dear, dear friend, in what a pre- 
dicament have you placed me — but, be- 
tide what will, I swear to be faithful to 
the confidence you have reposed in me !" 

But though this suddenly- conceived 
plan was obliged to be relinquished, was 
there no other to be thought of that might 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 199 

answer i« its stead ? Could he but ob- 
tain an interview with Eveleen, he would 
at once confide to her what he had in- 
tended to disclose to her father, convinced 
that her sentiments, with regard to his 
conduct about INJelville, would indeed be 
very different from his on the subject, and 
consequently, however the intercourse be- 
tween them might be interrupted, or sus- 
pended, till it was safe to come to an open 
explanation, his interests with her would 
suffer no injury. But hov/ was this to be 
managed or accomplished, persuaded, as 
he was, that every precaution would now 
be taken, both by herself, offended as she 
must be, by the conduct imputed to him, 
as well as her father, to prevent any thing 
of the kind ? In short, it appeared next 
to impracticable to have it obtained ; and 
accordingly he decided on writing; but 
no sooner had he done so, than an equal 
difficulty appeared about the conveyance 
of a letter — how or by what means to ac- 
complish getting one delivered to her. 
At length he recollected something like a 



200 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hint he had received from Cormick's mo- 
ther, of an attachment between him and 
Miss Erin's maid ; and no sooner had it 
recurred to him, than he explained to 
Cormick what he wished to have effected 
through his means. 

Cormick looked very blank and confu- 
sed while listening to him, and at length 
confessed he feared having offended his 
mistress irreconcilably, by the flirtation 
into which he had unfortunately been 
dravv^n with her rival, INIrs. Featherston ; 
but whatever could be done, should be 
done; and Donaghue, without further 
loss of time, sat down to write his letter, 
which, the moment it was finished, Cor- 
mick went off with. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 201 



CHAPTER IV. 



'■r***^*.r 



*' Oh, look upon me, sir. 

And hold your hands in benediction o'er me!" 

In the mean time sir William had return- 
ed home ; the moment he alighted, he re- 
paired to lady Erin's dressing-room, where 
he understood she and Eveleen were 
then sitting by themselves, anxious to get 
through the unpleasant communication 
he had to make as soon as possible, aware 
that the longer a disagreeable business is 
delayed, the more unwilling we are to set 
about it. 

" So you have been out, my dear ?" said 
lady Erin, as he entered. " I had no idea 
of your going out such a day as this." 

" Nor I, but something occurred to 
oblige me." 

His tone was not his usual one; and 
k3 



2t>2 TRADITION Of THE CASTLE. 

both her ladyship and Eveleen, alike struck 
by it, raised their eyes from their work to 
look at him, and in the discomposure of 
his looks clearly saw that something had 
happened to disturb him. 

" I hope, my dear," said lady Erin, 
" you have heard nothing additionally 
distressing about our poor friend in Dub- 
lin?" 

" No, nothing. 'Tis not about him I 
am exactly thinking at the moment, with 
all my regard for him ; it is about some- 
thing that more intimately — more imme- 
diately concerns me, than what has hap^ 
pened to distress him. I have been to 
Altoir-na-Grenie ; an unpleasant letter 
brought me there — I had hoped to have 
had it contradicted; but in the hope I 
was disappointed, and-^and — the result 
is, that there is an end of all farther inter- 
course with O'Brien. There is the letter," 
he added, unfolding and laying it on the 
table before his thunderstruck wife and 
daughter; " when you glance over it, 
you'll hardly wonder, I believe, at what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 203 

it has led to. — Well?" he exclaimed, after 
he had allowed them time for its perusal. 
" Well, I am indeed shocked, shocked 
beyond language to express !" said lady 
Erin ; " a short time ago, and I could not 
have believed this possible !" 

" Then you do not blame me for what I 
have done," said sir William, " for having 
entirely broken off with him ? — And you, 
my dear girl," turning his anxious looks 
ijpon his daughter, " you neither, I hope ?" 
Eveleen tried to reply, but the effort 
was beyond her strength — the indistinct 
words died away upon her pale lips, and 
with a deep sigh her head fell upon the 
shoulder of her mother. 

Her father lifted her up, and bore her to 
a window, but some time elapsed ere either 
the air or the united efforts of her distressed 
parents succeeded in restoring her, so cruel, 
so terrible was the shock she had sustained. 
" My God !" exclaimed sir William, 
the fondest of fathers, as she lay reclined 
on his breast, " is not this a sight sufR- 



£04 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cient to excuse me for uttering execrations 
against that young libertine ?" v 

" No, no," cried lady Erin, as her trera^ 
bling hands continued chafing the temples 
of her daughter, " let us still, in the midst 
of resentment, remember Christian charity, 
and pray for the reformation of him who 
has indeed wrung our hearts with sorrow. 
Cost us what pangs he may, I never can 
forget his being the son of my dearest 
friend. Good God, how does the experi- 
ence of each succeeding day tend still 
more powerfully to prove what short- 
sighted mortals we are ! Since this re- 
verse in his fortune, how often have I 
dared to regret, and thus indirectly mur- 
mur, at her removal hence, when I now 
see that she was only taken away from 
the evil to come ! for had she been spared 
to witness it, what an hour of bitterness 
would this have been to her — to see the 
son of her fond affections lost, banished, 
cast off, by the friends whose esteem she 
was so anxious to obtain him, as an ob- 
ject of contempt and reprobation ! Un- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 205 

fortunate young man ! what a proof of the 
responsibility of parents about their off- 
spring! for this terrible dereliction may, 
I conclude, be imputed to the example 
early set by his poor, thoughtless, impru- 
dent father. How justly has it been said, 
that prosperity is the test of virtue ! How 
well, how correctly, how even nobly, may 
it not be said, did this unhappy young 
man conduct himself through the season 
of adversity, but the moment it changed, 
how has he lost himself!" 

On Eveleen's entirely coming to her- 
self, she almost feared encountering the 
glances of her father, lest she should read 
in them censure or reproach for the weak- 
ness she had betrayed; but his tender 
caresses, and endearing expressions, soon 
dissipated this fear. He might appear 
stern, and he was stern to vice and folly ; 
but he knew, and he felt what a young 
and bereaved heart must endure under 
the first shock of disappointed affection, 
and he could not crush the broken reed. — 
" I know, my dearest girl," he cried, " what 



M6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you must feel from the shock you have ex- 
perienced, since the rudest shock the hu- 
man heart can experience, is that which 
is inflicted by the discovery of perfidy in 
the object of its regard ; but while I am 
aware of this, I am equally so that proper 
exertions will be made for overcoming it; 
and these are what we never fail in. To 
give up a beloved object is, I know, a 
bitter pang — one that needs our utmost 
strength of mind to enable us to endure; 
but still, is it to be compared to the living 
in a state of constant distrust and anxiety 
with them ? But I will not detain you 
longer. I see it will be a relief to you to 
be by yourself a little; but ere you re- 
tire, give me the satisfaction of saying 
that you do not secretly reproach me for 
what I have done." 

" Reproach !" repeated Eveleen, em- 
phatically, and raising her eyes, from 
which, overpowered by the tenderness of 
her father, tears were now pouring in tor- 
rents ; " oh no ! could I be capable of re- 
proach of the kind, of even a murmur, in 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 207 

what a light sbould I regard myself! No, 
my dear sir, you liave acted just as I would 
myself have acted, if left to my own free 
unbiassed judgment; for to have passed 
over, to have forgiven-^ — '' Her lip qui- 
vered — she kissed her father's hand — press- 
ed her lips for an instant to her mother's 
cheek, tear-dewed like her own, and hasti- 
ly withdrew to her chamber. 

" There," said her father, looking after 
her w^ith mingled pride and affection, 
" there spoke the consistent principles 
and feelings I ever expected to find her 
possessed of, when put to the test — sensi- 
bility to feel, but firmness to resist, what 
must now be considered a weakness and 
an offence to virtue. What a treasure, for 
any one capable of appreciating her worth ! 
and how should we bless the superintend- 
ing Providence that has prevented her 
being thrown away ! That wretched 
young man — I could almost find it in my 
heart to pity him ; for what has he not 
lost in losing her ? Yet no, the man cap- 
able of acting as he has done, with the 



208 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

prospect of a union with such a woman 
as she is, merits nothing but contempt. 

Miss Erin started on entering her dress- 
ing-room; the preparations for her mar- 
riage were by this time far advanced, and 
several bridal dresses, that very morn- 
ing arrived from Dublin, were still lying 
spread out upon the chairs, on which they 
had been laid for her inspection; for a 
minute she involuntarily pressed her hands 
against her eyes, and a fresh gush of sorrow 
burst from her wounded heart — wounded, 
oh, how acutely ! by the very hand that, 
but a few short minutes ago, she had fond- 
ly, credulously, as it now seemed, imagin- 
ed would sooner have planted a dagger in 
its own breast, than allowed evil or injury 
to have approached her ! and was it, could 
it be, that, with his acuteness of feeling, 
his susceptibility to shame and censure, 
the regard which even hereditary pride 
made him feel for the good opinion of the 
world, Donaghue had so entirely forgot, 
so utterly lost himself, as to render his 
home, the very home he was preparing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 209 

for his bride, the scene of a degrading 
amour? But he had not denied the gross 
imputation, and who then was to discredit 
it? And this was his love for her — this 
the romantic constancy for which she gave 
him credit — this his respect for reputation 
— this his deference for truth and virtue ! 
Good God ! who, to know him, who, to 
converse with him, as she had done, could 
ever have believed him such a dissembler? 
And yet, did she actually believe him one ? 
was there not something in his manner so 
unstudied, an energy, an ardour, an ani- 
mation that, as recalled to recollection, 
checked the idea of his being insincere, 
either in what he had looked, or what he 
had professed ? But her giving him cre- 
dit, as, despite of herself she was tempted 
to do, for sincerity, both in what he avow- 
ed and professed, by no means operated 
to his advantage, but the very contrary ; 
for if, with a heart occupied by such an 
attachment as he professed for her, such a 
respect for virtue, and the esteem of the 
world, he still had^not power to resist 



210 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

temptation, or curb his lawless passions, 
what reliance was to be placed, or what 
confidence reposed in him? and as the 
thought occurred, how did she bless the 
interposition that had prevented her lead- 
ing that life of hardly endurable misery 
that is led by those " who doat, yet doubt 
— suspect, yet strongly love !" It was not in 
his power now to make her feel the pangs 
of jealousy, the tortures of alternate hope 
and fear, of reviving confidence and re- 
newed suspicion ; but as his wife — " Oh, 
good God !" she exclaimed, clasping her 
hands, " when this day commenced, 
would I have believed any one, Dona- 
ghue, that should have told me, long ere 
its close, I should rejoice at all prospect of 
ever becoming your wife being over? 
Unhappy man, if indeed your affection for 
me be w^hat you have persuaded me, what 
misery have you not drawn on yourself! 
from the trance of pleasure, on what a de- 
sert scene must your eyes open ! for hope 
extinguished, what but a desert scene is 
the world, with all its allurements, to the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 211 

afflicted heart ? If it be, as something 
within me tells me it is, may the lesson you 
have now received prove a salutary one 
to you, and teach you not to trifle again 
with your happiness !" 

The uninterrupted indulgence she was 
permitted to give to her feelings, enabled 
her sooner to recover herself than might 
otherwise have been the case ; for sorrow 
must have utterance ere it knows relief. 

At the usual hour of assembling in the 
drawing-room, preparatory to dinner, she 
joined the party there ; and the fond ap- 
proving smiles of her father and mother 
were a reward for her exertions to subdue 
her feelings. But her firmness was again 
put to the test, by the inquiries that, on 
the announcement of dinner, were made 
after Donaghue ; and still more, when, 
on entering the dining-room, she found, 
as usual, a chair placed for him. 

Her father's eye was upon her — he saw 
her change colour, and — " Take that away," 
he said to a servant, glancing at the chair. 

*' So you don't expect Mr. O'Brien then 



212 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to-day ?" said sir Edward. " I hope it's 
not the rain that is keeping him away ; 
for, upon my life, if it is, if I were you. 
Miss Erin, I should be vastly offended." 

" No, it is not the rain," said sir Wil- 
liam ; " the day being fine or wet would 
have made no difference, with regard to 
his dining here. I did not expect him 
to-day ; nor do I expect him shortly again 
here." 

A general stare was the consequence of 
this observation ; and some inquiries were 
about being hazarded, but which sir Wil- 
liam checked, and a turn was quickly 
given to the conversation. 

But the evening was a wretched one to 
Eveleen ; so still more acute became every 
moment the intense anguish she was en- 
during, that it seemed to her as if the 
shock she had sustained had at first a 
stunning effect upon her senses ; she still, 
however, tried to struggle with her feel- 
ings, but with every nerve throbbing with 
anguish, every idea wandering, to smile 
^and seem to converse as usual became at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 213 

length too painful an effort to persevere 
in ; and her mother, anxiously watching 
every look, suggested her withdrawing at 
an early hour to her chamber. 

In the mean while, Cormick had been 
exerting all his influence to try and effect 
a reconciliation with his offended mistress; 
imputing, as she did, all his efforts for this 
to his not having her rival now to flirt 
with, with the greatest difficulty he effect- 
ed an interview with her; but nothing 
could have induced her to comply with 
any other request, than the one he had to 
make ; but what her mistress was concern- 
ed in, she could not bring herself to re- 
fuse, and accordingly undertook putting 
the letter in her way, not having courage 
to deliver it directly into her hand. 

The ensuing day was fine ; happy would 
Eveleen and Donaghue have considered 
themselves, had the mental storm of the 
preceding one been succeeded by such a 
calm as had succeeded the storm that had 
rendered it so unpleasant ; but there was 
no assuagement of their anguish or per- 



214 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

turbation; they were disunited— they were 
separated— and how many days must elapse, 
ere that idea could cease to agonize and 
agitate ! 

Sir WiUiam's anxiety was so great about 
his daughter, as to induce him, under the 
pretext furnished him by the fineness of 
the morning, of inviting her to a walk 
before breakfast, to seek her, at an early 
hour, in her dressing-room ; he found her 
there, and though she expressed herself 
pleased at what he proposed, he thought 
there was something of embarrassment in 
her look. Nor was he mistaken ; tears had 
again been flowing ; and a fear of their, at 
length, degrading her in his eyes, made 
her indeed feel embarrassed at so unex- 
pectedly seeing him. 

As sir William was walking about the 
room, while she was tying on her bonnet, 
near the chair from which she had taken 
it, a letter on her dressing-table caught his 
eye ; involuntarily he glanced at the di- 
rection, and perceived it was in the hand- 
writing of Donaghue. A strong feeling 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 215 

of indignation instantly pervaded his mind; 
the embarrassment her manner had evinced 
was now accounted for ; she had been per- 
using this letter, and it was the narrow 
escape she had from being surprised read- 
ing what, she was conscious, she should 
have thrown from her with contem.pt, that 
had given her the appearance of confusion 
he had remarked on his entrance. His 
cheek flushed, and pointing to the letter — 
" I am sorry to find this here," he cried, 
" since it has, I will confess, disappointed 
the hope I entertained of your firmness — 
your " 

Eveleen regarded him for a moment 
with surprise, then hastily advancing to 
the table, and perceiving what it was he 
alluded to, she eagerly caught up the let- 
ter, and turning the other side to him, 
shewed him the seal unbroken. 

" Forgive me," said her father, " I need 
pardon for having allowed myself for a 
moment to doubt— to suspect, that you 
would act otherwise than I expected." 

" Do not pain me, my dear father," 



216 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

said Eveleen, " by speaking in this man- 
ner : you had a right to think what you 
did, from what you saw ; but as the seal 
must prove I know not the contents of 
that letter, so equally, I assure you, I was 
ignorant of there being such a one there." 

" I think we can be at no loss to sur- 
mise who placed it there," said sir Wil- 
liam ; " but there must be a stop put to 
this; I will allow of no tampering with 
any one belonging to me, nor intrusion 
or agitation to your feelings through these 
means," and as he spoke he rang the bell 
with some violence. 

Kate, of course, answered it. He had 
prepared himself for her entrance by ta- 
king up the letter, and the instant she en- 
tered, and saw it in his hand, her looks 
convicted her of being the guilty person. 
— " I see," he cried, regarding her with 
sternness, " there is no occasion to accuse 
you — your looks have done that. That 
you were conscious of committing an im- 
propriety, in taking charge of this letter, 
your not presuming to deliver it openly 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 217 

into the hand of your mistress is a proof. 
A person who wilfully does what is 
wrong, I do not think fit for my service ; 
you will prepare yourself, therefore, im- 
mediately to quit it." 

Kate turned pale, and trembled, and 
cast an imploring look at her mistress. 

" No," replied Miss Erin, " I cannot, 
after such conduct, intercede for you." 

Sir William allowed himself to appear, 
for some minutes, as if he was not to be 
moved ; then again addressing the culprit 
— " On this one condition," he said, " as I 
rather conceive it will please your mis- 
tress to be allowed to retain you, I con- 
sent to pardon your oflfence, that you do 
not suffer yourself to be ever tempted to 
repeat it ; should you do so, or should I 
discover that you hold any intercourse 
whatever with any one belonging to Al- 
toir-na-Grenie, from that moment make 
up your mind to being not only dismissed 
from my service, but for ever thrown off 
by my family." 

VOJL. IV. L 



218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLF. 

Kate fell on her knees, to thank him for 
his goodness in forgiving her, and to make 
the promise he required. She knew she 
was doing wrong, she confessed, in taking 
charge of the letter ; but what could she 
do? she demanded — what could she do, 
when the person she took it from went 
on his knees to make her take it, and said 
it might be the death of his master if she 
i-efused? boaofons ,ilDfid 

This incident did not tend to recomi- 
pose the mind of Eveleen. Donaghue 
then was suffering what she conceived; 
and, spite of resentment, she could not 
help commiserating his imagined wretch- 
edness. ^.dBfldriw no (r»f>^^ 

Cormick, at an early hour, was Tiover- 
ing about the Vale, to learn what had re- 
sulted from the letter. A length of time 
elapsed ere he succeeded in learning any 
thing on the subject ; at length, through 
the medium of one of the men, Kate con- 
trived to have a message conveyed to him, 
acquainting him with what had occurred, 
aad her positive determination, in ccmse- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 219 

quence, of having no further communica* 
tion with him. 

In utter discon sola tion Cormick took 
the way homewards, ahnost feehng as if 
he wanted courage to face his master with 
such tidings as he had to communicate. 
The pain, however, of actually being the 
person to inflict pain on him was spared, 
by the letter being returned ere he got 
back, enclosed in a blank cover, directed 
by sir William, together with a parcel 
containing some costly presents, which 
had lately been presented to Eveleen, and 
some notes addressed to her, for, with the 
fond artifice of love, to have something to 
feast on when absent from her, Donaghue 
had, from time to time, made pretexts for 
writing billets to her, requiring answers. 

Foiled in the stratagem about the 
letter, he could think of no other plan 
than now trying to see her himself; but 
how was this to be accomphshed, he 
again demanded, guarded as she would be 
both by her own caution and her father's? 
L 2 



220 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he cared not, he had got desperate, and 
attempt it, at all hazards, he was deter- 
mined he would. 

Eveleen, apprehensive of some rashness 
— some madness of the kind, kept herself 
almost a close prisoner, restricting herself 
from her accustomed walks and rambles, 
except accompanied ; though, to have now 
indulged herself in them alone would 
have been a luxury ; but every nerve 
shook with agitation, at the bare idea of 
encountering him again, till time, at least, 
should have subdued the regrets that each 
now felt, at the abrupt termination of eve- 
ry thing between them — the unexpected 
dissolution of an attachment so nearly on 
the ^oint of being cemented indissolubly. 
In vain she reflected on his conduct — no- 
thing could divest her of the idea of his 
affection for her being ardent and sincere, 
nor could all the resentn^ent inspired by 
that conduct prevent a pang of anguish, 
whenever the thought occurred, of what, 
in consequence, be must be now feeling — 
his despair— his desolation. She had her 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 221 

dearest connexions — her nearest friends 
about her, to sooth — to support — to bear 
her up under tl-e trial ; but he, unfortunate 
— he, at this moment, of dire and conflict- 
ing feelings, had not a being to speak 
peace to his distracted soul — to argue 
with — to calm or console him. But though 
her heart even melted, at moments, with 
pity for him — though many of the tears 
that now often, unconsciously, dropped 
from her bright eyes were caused by the 
affecting picture which her imagination 
drew of his distress, a wish for a reconci^ 
liation never once occurred ; on the con- 
trary, though even her own unshackled 
mistress, nothing she felt could induce her 
ever to renew those ties that had existed 
between them, since, after what had oc- 
curred, it was impossible her confidence 
in him could ever be restored ; yet long, 
long, she feared, her memory would lin- 
ger over his many amiable qualities — lin- 
ger over them with fond and deep regret, 
that they had not been accompanied by 
greater firmness and consistency. 



222 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

At length, his patience utterly exhaust- 
ed, Donaghue, after having vainly watch- 
ed and lain in wait for her some days 
about her well-known haunts, ventured 
one evening to approach the house at dusk. 
After reconnoitring in every direction, he 
entered the conservatory, which termi- 
nated one wing of the building, knowing 
it was a place Eveleen was sometimes 
fond of walking or sitting in at this hour, 
listening to the buzz of voices in the apart- 
ments it communicated with, or, perhaps, 
the sound of music. The extreme length 
of the place prevented his being able to 
ascertain whether there was any one in 
it till he had advanced some way into it, 
when he clearly perceived a female, in 
white, sitting in a pensive attitude, with 
her back towards him. It was Eveleen — 
Eveleen herself, he instantly felt convin- 
ced, and all sight of caution lost in the 
overpowering transports of his soul at 
again finding himself in her presence, he 
rushed forward, and ere she bad power ta 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 223 

make an effort for escaping, was at her 
feet, embracing her knees. 

So secure had she thought herself where 
tihe was, that the surprise of seeing him 
operated, for a moment, hke a shock upon 
her feelings. — " Good God !" she then ex- 
<jlaimed, endeavouring to force herself 
from his grasp, " how, after what has 
passed, could you venture to appear here ? 
how have the cruelty " 

" Do not talk to me of cruelty," said 
Donaghue, impatiently interrupting her, 
*' it is I only who have a right to speak — 
-to complain of it — I, who have been so 
'Scorned — so defamed — so driven to the 
very verge of despair and madness ; but 
this precious — ^this blessed moment com- 
pensates for all!" he exclaimed, press- 
ing her hands, with the almost convulsive 
-grasp of passion, to his lips and breast. 

Worked up to the highest pitch of in- 
dignation by this conduct — conduct so 
presumptuous, after what had occurred — 
*' Leave me ! unhand me !" said Eveleen, 
^ or you will provoke me to a measure I 



224 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

could, OB many accounts, wish to avoid. 
You have intruded on me, under the idea 
of my being passive under the intrusion, 
but you are mistaken. I need but a very 
slight exertion of my voice to make my- 
self heard, you must be aware, in the ad- 
joining apartments — do not drive me to 
such an expedient to compel you to retire." 

" Cruel, unkind Eveleen! you have 
then united with your barbarous father in 
condemning me unheard." 

" Unheard !" she repeated, with scorn, 
while she felt her blood mounting tumul- 
tuously to her cheeks ; " did he not gene- 
rously leave to yourself but I disdain 

myself, for being betrayed into any thing 
like an argument with you! Release me, 
sir, I insist ! I will not be detained ! it can 
answer no other purpose than to occasion ^ 
additional indignation. You may regret — 
you may repent— I dare say I should be ac* 
cused of weakness for believing it very 
probable that you do ; but neither sorrow "^ 
nor repentance can restore lost confidence*; 
and no earthly consideration could induce 



TRADITION OF THE CASTI.E. 225 

me to give my hand to a man, on whose 
principles and steadiness I could not place 
reliance." 

" And can you think that, if I were the 
degraded being you have been led to ima- 
gine, I could ever voluntarily have sought 
to meet your eyes again ? no, by those de- 
lightful hopes, which this propitious mo- 
ment has revived ! your own anxiety to 
shun me would not have been greater 
then than would mine to have avoided 
you : but I seem to forget the purpose for 
which I have come ; for a moment con« 
sent to listen to me calmly." 

" No, no !" exclaimed Eveleen, in an 
absolute agony of terror, " there is my fa- 
ther's voice approaching ! leave me ! leave 
me, if you do not wish to see me expire 
with terror !" 

" For an instant — only for an instant, 
hearken to me," said Donaghue, striving 
to retain her struggling hands — " one 
word almost will suffice." 

" Oh, Heavens, what cruel persistance !" 
L 3 



226 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cried the still more terribly agitated Eve- 
leen. " Good God ! how can you see me 
in this state of agony, and not relieve me 
from it?" 

" Tell me then," said Donaghue, who 
now really distinguished the voice of sir 
William, " where — how I can see you to- 
morrow, if, indeed, it be impossible to 
steal one minute for me to-night ?" 

" Detain me another minute," said Miss 
Erin, " and I never can forgive you. You 
see the agitation I am in, and yet you un- 
feelingly disregard it." 

" There then," said Donaghue, in a 
proud, resentful tone, letting go her hand ; 
" but remember, Eveleen, if your heart 
retains the slightest interest for me, you 
may yet feel a pang at the recollection of 
this moment." 

But Eveleen appeared not to hear him ; 
she sprang forward, apparently intent only 
on preventing the approach of her father, 
lest he should not retire with sufficient 
quickness to hinder himself from being 
seen. This was the case indeed. She 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 227 

knew sir William's deep resentment of 
his conduct, and she trembled, therefore, 
to think of what might be the result of 
the discovery of his having obtruded on 
her, such was the indignation she was 
well aware it would occasion. 

To relieve herself from this tormenting 
dread, she thought of writing to Dona- 
ghue, to solicit, as an obligation, his not 
attempting any thing of the kind again ; 
but the advantage that might be taken of 
the circumstance, or rather the interpreta- 
tion to which it was liable, prevented her ; 
and all she could finally decide on was, 
keeping a stricter guard over herself than 
before, and avoiding every place to which 
there was a possibility of his obtaining 
admission. 

Hardly had Donaghue left the conser- 
vatory, ere he felt enraged with himself 
for having allowed himself to be induced, 
by the impulse of offended pride, to re- 
lease her, ere he had forced her to hearken 
to him; yet, from the terrible state of 
agitation she was in, but very little benefit. 



228 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

after all, would have accrued to him from 
the circumstance, he was inclined to believe. 
Well, what was now to be done? writing 
was out of the question ; and put com- 
pletely on her guard,, as she now was, 
there was very little chance of obtaining 
another opportunity of conversing with 
her. Something, however, must be thought 
of, for he saw her irritation was deep 
against him ; and there was no knowing to 
what resentment like her's might lead— 
the resentment of wounded affection and 
exasperated pride ; and at length, as the 
only method he could think of for accomr 
plishing what he wished, he decided on 
making it appear that he had quitted the 
neighbourhood. 

This plan was immediately carried into 
effect, and so well managed, that not a 
doubt was entertained at the Vale of his 
positive departure from the castle;; it 
seemed indeed, to Eveleen, the natural 
result of the repulse he had met with 
from her. 
/I Well, he had resigned her; there was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SS9 

rrow, indeed, a final conclusion to the af- 
fair between them ; but was she not aware 
of this before? and why then did her heart 
feel such a pang at the first intimation of 
his departure? But the weakness was 
but a transient one; she quickly recover- 
ed, or rather recollected herself sufficient- 
ly to rejoice that he was gone, relieving 
her, as did the circumstance, from the ne^ 
cessity of imposing a very painful restraint 
a*>y longer on herself, as well as from the 
apprehensions she must have continued to 
be agitated by, while he remained in the 
neighbourhood, of some mal a propos 
meeting between him and her father. 

But to profit by having so far thrown 
her off her guard, as to induce her to walk 
out again by herself, it was requisite for 
Donaghue to adopt some disguise, lest a 
premature discovery of the imposition he 
had practised should cause the complete 
frustration of his aim; and, with the as- 
sistance of Cormick, this was done. There 
were some new embellishments making 
about the grotto; the person chiefly em- 



230 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ployed in them was a young man of Cor- 
mick's acquaintance, and matters were so 
managed, that Donaghue personated him, 
without any apprehension of being sur- 
prised by any of the other men employed 
in the grounds. But for a whole day he 
kept watch, without even catching a 
glimpse of Eveleen. Early on the second, 
however, he saw her coming towards the 
grotto by herself His heart throbbed, 
and his very hands trembled with emo- 
tion ; but it was requisite he should re- 
strain himself till she had entered the 
grotto ; and accordingly, stooping down as 
she approached, he affected to be most 
busily employed about some shrubs that 
were to be removed, to allow of a new 
channel being made for a stream of water, 
so as to form a cascade. Hardly, how- 
ever, had Eveleen passed him, when glan- 
cing back, she thought she saw him about 
taking up a shrub she wished to remain, 
from the picturesque effect it would have, 
she conceived, on the edge of the stream. 
^— **No, no, that is not to be touched,'* 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 231 

she said ; and she turned back to see what 
further directions she might hke to give. 
" Do you understand me ?" she said, look- 
ing at the supposed labourer, to shew him 
particularly what she meant — " these 
things are to remain where they are ;" but 
she could not even catch his eyes, he still 
continued busily employed, as if he had 
neither heard or seen her. 

" I say, my friend," cried Eveleen, a lit- 
tle surprised, " do you comprehend me ? 
or will you suspend your work for a mi- 
nute, that you may be enabled to do so ?" 

Further evasion the fictitious workman 
saw was useless ; he dropped the spade, 
and ere Eveleen could well believe her as- 
tonished senses, she found herself clasped 
to his bosom ; but terror and indignation 
soon enabled her to free herself from him, 
but her retreat was completely intercept- 
ed. — " This is intolerable !" she exclaimed ; 
" this cruel persecution — it is unmanly — 
ungenerous — to persevere in what you 
are aware occasions me such agitation ! — to 



2!32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

have recourse too, to the meanness of de- 
ception, and of such a disguise !" 

" Do not upbraid me," said Donaghue, 
with perhaps a slight sensation of indigna- 
tion, himself, at the moment, ** for what 
you yourself have occasioned ; it is you, 
that, by your cruel obstinacy, in refusing 
to grant me a moment's conversation '* 

" For what should I have granted it?" 
said Eveleen ; ** is it to draw upon myself 
the reproaches of my friends and con- 
nexions ? but don't mistake me," she add- 
ed, seeing the eyes of Donaghue sudden- 
ly sparkle, " their influence was not want- 
ing, I assure you, to make me act as I have 
done." 

" Well, I am sure," said Donaghue, 
half smiling, " I have no reason to advo- 
cate your feeling or humanity towards me. 
However, I am very much mistaken if^ 
ere we part, I do not make that unkind 
bosom feel some little degree of regret 
and compunction for its inexorableness 
towards me;" and with what might well 
indeed be termed new-flushed hopes, he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 233 

was on the very point of commencing his 
explanation, when Eveleen, with a faint 
cry of terror, uttered the name of her fa- 
ther, and following the direction of her 
eyes, he saw him approaching with lord 
Altidore. 

" Fly ! fly !" said Eveleen, " if you have 
any pity for me ! I tremble at the thought 
of your being found here! to. vindicate 
myself, I must acknowledge the truth, 
and what may not the indignation of my 
father be, at finding me thus persecuted 
by you! why— why," impatiently she 
added, perceiving he hesitated, " do you 
delay ? Oh, if not for my sake, at least 
for your own, do not let yourself be sur- 
prised here in that degrading disguise !" 

" Cruel, unfeeling Eveleen !" exclaimed 
Donaghue, in a tone of passionate resent- 
ment, " to again reproach me for what 
you have yourself occasioned." But there 
was no time for more ; sir William and 
lord Altidore were now close at hand, and 
he could not bear, indeed, that they should 
see him lessened to the necessity of dis- 



234 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

guise and artifice. A glance of involun- 
tary reproach escaped him ; and turning 
away with quickness, he was soon out of 
sight. But in what a state of emotion did 
he return home ! foiled in every effort to 
come to an explanation with Eveleen, he 
began to believe he was indeed fated to 
lose her, and need we say there was almost 
distraction in the thought. 
wHj Though there was an end, or, at least, a 
suspension of all further intercourse be- 
tween Cormick and his mistress, he yet 
found means of learning every thing that 
was going on at the Vale, and it was ac- 
cordingly ascertained that lord Altidore 
now visited there even more constantly 
than before — that let her be denied to who 
^he would, Miss Erin was never denied to 
him ; and that, in short, there were quite 
sufficient grounds to justify the report, 
that now again began to be revived in the 
neighbourhood, of the renewal of his ad- 
dresses in that quarter; and Donaghue, 
giving way to the apprehensions suggest- 
ed by what he heard, no longer hesitated 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 235 

to write to Melville, on the subject of his 
coming back, but without venturing to 
exactly explain the cause of his heighten- 
ed anxiety for it, lest it should be the 
means of leading to some abrupt disclo- 
sure to his uncle, that might irreparably 
injure him. 

All this time Lavinia remained in utter 
ignorance of the general distress and dis- 
turbance she had been the means of occa- 
sioning, Donaghue having given it in 
strict command that she should not be ac- 
<][uainted with any thing that could agi- 
tate her; nor did she want any thing ad- 
ditional to add to her uneasiness, so awk- 
ward did she feel her situation, and so un- 
happy was she, at the thought of what 
the Wheatleys must be suffering on her 
account, and the injury which her conduct 
might, perhaps, do Mr. Wheatley with 
her guardian. 

The state of agitation in which sir Wil- 
liam found his daughter, on joining her 
near the grotto, united to the sudden dis- 
appearance of the man he had seen her 



236 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

speaking with on his approach, excited a 
suspicion in his mind, that induced him 
to question her on the subject of what he 
had observed, the moment he had an op- 
portunity for the purpose. That it was 
Donao-hue himself he had seen in the dis- 
guise of a labourer, he had not the slight- 
est conception, but that it was some one 
belonging to him, employed to deliver a 
letter or message to her, he had hardly a 
doubt, from the state in which he found 
her. Eveleen having stipulated that he 
should not resent what she told him, ac- 
knowledged the truth ; and on his further 
inquiring, related what hiad occurred in 
the conservatory. 

Sir William was greatly vexed by what 
he heard. He saw that she had not nerves 
to bear the kind of shock which these sur- 
prises and intrusions occasioned her ; and 
yet how were they to be prevented? ar- 
gument or remonstrance would have very 
little effect, he feared, with a young man 
rendered desperate by the loss of a beloved 
mistress ; for, from all that had occurred, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 237 

he could not help being led to believe, 
like Eveleen herself, that however Dona- 
ghue might have dissembled in other in- 
stances, he certainly had not dissembled 
with respect to the passion he had pro- 
fessed for her, since, what but genuine re- 
gard, situated as he now was, with regard 
to worldly matters, could render him thus 
miserable for a reconciliation ? 

At last, the only plan he could devise 
for the purpose, was her quitting the Vale 
for a few weeks, till either Donaghue 
should have left the castle, which they con- 
cluded was now his intention, or else 
should be convinced of the uselessness of 
any longer persecuting her. 

Neither she nor her mother made any 
objection to the project ; on the contrary, 
both conceived nothing could be more ad- 
visable ; and all that remained to be con- 
sidered was, the place she should go to. 
Sir William at first thought of taking her 
to her uncle's, but when he came to reflect 
on the giddy imprudent disposition of 
Mrs. Erin, he relinquished this idea ; and 
at last it was settled with lord Altidore, 



238 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

who was now high in the confidence of 
all the family, and on the eve, indeed, of 
being rendered happy through Eveleen's 
means, that his aunt, a very amiable and 
pleasant old lady, residing about seventeen 
miles from the Vale, should be prepared to 
receive her ; it was also settled, that nei- 
ther when, nor where she was going should 
be made known, lest of any intimation 
reaching the ears of Donaghue, that might 
occasion him to set a watch to discover, 
and that the journey should be taken in a 
hired carriage, without the attendance of 
any of their own servants. 

But all these precautions were rendered 
unavailing, through the secret intelligence 
Cormick contrived to obtain for his mas- 
ter. His friend was the person employed 
to engage the chaise which was to convey 
Eveleen, under the protection of her fa- 
ther, from the Vale ; and due notice being 
given of the circumstance, Donaghue, at 
a proper hour, was on the watch, prepared 
to follow the carriage, full of hope that he 
should find her leaving the Vale a favour- 
able circumstance for him, sinc^- the agi- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 23^ 

tation of spirits into which she was thrown^ 
by encountering him there, on account of 
her father, could hardly be the case else- 
where, as sir William, he understood, was 
expected back immediately after leaving 
her wherever she was going. 

Muffled up, or rather disguised in a 
horseman's great-coat, for which a misty 
day luckily furnished a pretext, Donaghue 
slowly followed the chaise on horseback, 
not without a feeling, every now and then, 
of disquietude for the safety of those with- 
in, so. wretched was the vehicle, so miser- 
able the animals that were harnessed to it, 
and so terrible the road it had to pass over. 
Nothing that could be called a road could 
possibly be worse, indeed, rent and torn as 
it was, in every direction, and every here 
and there shelving down the sides of the 
frightful mountains it lay over, 
i^i Sir William, who had never traversed 
it before, was a good deal disconcerted 
"when he found what kind of one it was ; 
however, hoping every moment it would 
improve— w^orse it could not possibly get 



240 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

— a hope in which he was encouraged by 
the drivers, he allowed himself to proceed 
in it, rather than turn about and take a 
much better one certainly, but an infinitely 
more circuitous one, to the old lady's ha- 
bitation. 

At length, his patience completely ex- 
hausted, he was on the very point of or- 
dering the postilions to face about, when 
a sudden jerk overturned the crazy vehi- 
cle, within a yard or two of a horrible pre- 
cipice — so close, indeed, to it, that a cry of 
horror escaped from Donaghue, as he saw 
it overturning. In a moment he was off 
his horse, and had extricated himself from 
the cumbrous coat. Sir William and 
Eveleen were quickly extricated by him 
from their perilous situation, apparently 
uninjured ; but no sooner had the latter 
cast her eyes on the frightful abyss, down 
which they had so narrowly escaped being 
precipitated, than her head grew dizzy, 
and she fainted. 

Donaghue caught her in his arms. Sir 
Wilham attempted to take her from them; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 241 

but, opposing the effort, Donaghue carried 
her to a small public-house near the spot. 
It was some time before she shewed any 
signs of retuniing animation ; and while 
she remained in a state of insensibility, 
her father lost sight of every thing but his 
immediate consideration about her; but 
when at length she began to revive, dis- 
missing the people who had been busied 
in restoring her, he again made an effort 
to take her from the arms of Donaghue — -. 
but again it was resisted. — " No, no !'* he 
cried, unconscious of what he was saying, 
and putting out his hand, to keep back sir 
William — for never again might he be al- 
lowed to hold her to his heart, never again 
to gaze upon that countenance, so lovely, 
so interesting ! 

" You must let me take her from you,'* 
said sir William ; " her spirits will not al- 
low of any further agitation at present ;" 
and as he spoke he forced her from him, 
and conveying her into an adjoining room, 
committed her to the care of the woman 

VOL. IV. M 



242 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of the house. Then returning to Dona*- 
ghue — " Since we have so unexpectedly 
met, Mr. O'Brien," he said, " ere we part, 
I must be allowed to avail myself of th^ 
opportunity it has afforded for speaking t^ 
you on a particular subject. That it is not 
to chance we are indebted for the service 
you have just rendered us, I have eveiy 
reason to believe; but the feelings that 
might have been excited by the conviction 
are repressed by what has just occurred. 
It is not at the very moment that a man 
is sensible he has just escaped from the 
verge of death, that he can turn with ia* 
dignation upon his fellow man ; but I 
must observe, that should you continue to 
persevere in your present conduct, you 
will reduce me to the unpleasant alternat 
tive, of either living in my own house,^ in 
a state of constant distrust and suspicion, 
or else of quitting the neighbourhood^ 
since it is evident, that to the treachery of 
some one belonging to me, you owe you^ 
knowledge of our movements; as a man of 
feeling, therefore, and a gentleman, I must 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 243 

request and expect you to desist from what 
will occasion so ver}^ unpleasant a result. 
The uselessness too of it would, I should 
hope, induce you to pay attention to my 
request ; for if you hope that any altera- 
tion can be effected, in either my daugh- 
ter's sentiments or mine, you indeed de- 
lude yourself, and may very fairly be com- 
pared to him, who walketh in a vain sha- 
dow, and disquieteth himself in vain." 

" You talk of repressing your feelings, 
sir," said Donaghue, indignantly, " but 
could any utterance you could give to 
them wound me like this coolness — calm- 
ness, in speaking on a subject that, as you 
well know, rends my very soul? If I have 
descended to any conduct unworthy of me, 
have I not been driven to it ?" 
' " As how?" asked sir William ; " I w^as 
ready to listen, I avowed myself so, to any 
thing you could advance in your vindica- 
tion ; and, after this, what have you to 
complain of ?" 

^^ Donaghue could not reply — ** What in- 
taijuT 1 . M 2 



244 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

deed !*' and he walked about the room irt 
the most distressing agitation. But why 
not avail himself of this opportunity for 
revealing the truth ? Sir William's mind 
seemed softened by what had happened, 
and a more propitious moment, therefore^, 
might perhaps never be obtained for the 
explanation ; but the consequence that 
must result from it — the inevitable cer- 
tainty of Lavinia's being torn from his pro- 
tection, and given up to her guardian ! No, 
he could not so betray the happiness of 
his friend. Yet, to remain in this state of 
agonizing incertitude about lord Altidore 
— it was not endurable, and suddenly step- 
ping before sir William — " One question 
I entreat sir William to answer," he said, 
" and I take my leave — Is there any 
truth " He paused—emotion for a mo- 
ment overpowered his utterance — " any 
truth in the report that again prevails 

about — about lord Altidore and " He 

could not finish the sentence — he could 
not bring himself to unite their names to- 
gether. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 245 

Sir William looked at him steadily for 
some minutes, as if considering. Then, 
emphatically — " There is !" he replied ; 
•* at this very moment, preparations are 
making for the marriage of lord Altidore." 

Donaghiie turned pale as death ; some- 
thing he attempted to say, but he knew 
not what ; his sight failed him, and stag- 
gering back to catch at a chair for support, 
he would have fallen, but for sir William. 

" I grieve, I grieve," said sir 'William, 
*' to see this ; but surely it is what you 
should have been prepared for ! You 
could not have expected " 

" Nothing, nothing considerate for my 
feeling's !" said Donaghue, disengaging his 
arm from sir William, and throwing him- 
self on a chair. '• But it may not be too 
late," he suddenly exclaimed to himself, 
" to prevent this destruction of my happi- 
ness! Persuasion amounting almost to 
compulsion, I am convinced, could alone 
occasion Eveleen so soon to think of an- 
other. Melville must no longer remain in 
ignorance of the predicament in which he 



246 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

has placed me; and Lavinia once given up 
to him, nothing further remains to hinder 
me from doing myself justice." Not a 
minute was to be lost — he rushed from the 
house, and seeking his horse, was not long 
in reaching the castle. ''"^ '• 
^ Hardly had he entered it> when a letter 
was put into his hand by Cormick ; under 
the idea of its being from Melville, he was 
eagerly tearing it open, when Cormick, 
laying his hand on his arm, asked him first 
to look at the direction. JnuoooG, 

Donaghue, with a vacant stare at hiro, 
so bewildered was his mind, turned the 
letter. — *^ Well," he said, « what is the 
meaning of this ? this letter is not for me 
— it is directed to lord Rosenellis, whoever 

" You haven't far to seek for hin>," said 
Cormick ; " that letter is for yourself. It 
was brought half-an-hour ago by general 
O'Donaghue's servant ; and he told me all 
about your being made a lord, through 
the interest of his maste]^i'%8fn J lot iuo;^ 

Donaghue again cast a look at hifti, ^ 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 247 

if he did not perfectly comprehend him j 
then tearing open the letter, he read as 
follows : 



** That man is born to disappoint- 
ment, the experience of each succeeding 
day but tends still more forcibly to con- 
vince him. Pleased with your conduct, 
while suffering under a reverse of fortune, 
I felt impatient to return home on your 
account. What my intentions were, it 
matters not to say ; suffice it, that on the 
perusal of the letter I found awaiting me, 
from you, at my agent's in London, they 
were changed into a determination of ex- 
erting the interest which long services had 
allowed me to possess, for the revival, in 
your person, of a title that has long lain 
dormant in our family. The gazette of 
last week announced the accomplishment 
of this business ; and as nothing else had 
detained me in London, I immediately 
set out for this, amusing my imagination 
all the way with the bridal festivities I 



MS TRADITION OF THE CASTLF, 

should just, I expected, be in time to wit- 
ness. But hardly had I drawn near the 
end of my journey, ere I found I need not 
have been afraid of not being in time for 
these. What a tale, in short, was I des- 
tined to hear from the person I encounter- 
ed ! but I shall make no eomn>ent on it — 
sermonizing is not my forte ; it induced 
me, however, to immediately decide on 
postponing my intended visit to you a lit- 
tle longer, as I could not suppose that any 
interruption to the agreeable reflections 
you had been procuring for yourself, could 
just now be agreeable. Unfortunate young 
man ! I can no otherwise account for your 
conduct, than by admitting a belief that 
folly and indiscretion are sometimes here- 
ditary. Like too many others in the world, 
when too late to retrieve it, you will pro- 
bably become sensible of the happiness you 
have lost, through your own means. I 
pity you—but the man he pities, is not the 
man that can be esteemed by '-^ — i^ 

" C. 0'D0NAGtor!K^ 





TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 249 

But a short time ago, and such a letter, 
its sneer, its sarcasm, and its irony, must 
have stung the heart of Donaghue; but a 
short time, and its announcement would 
have perhaps gratified him ; but now both 
were alike disregarded. He had no time 
to bestow a thought on aught but the im- 
mediate situation he was in, and, uncon- 
scious of what he was about, he threw it 
aside, in a manner that certainly would not 
have had a conciliating effect upon the ge- 
neral, had he witnessed it, in order to 
write an explanatory letter to Melville, 
with which Cormick was to be dispatched. 

Cormick rode as if for his life, neither 
suffering himself to pause for rest or re- 
freshment, till he got to the end of his 
journey ; when he found Melville just re- 
turned from a short excursion with his un- 
cle, and in a state of great agitation, 
through the perusal of Donaghue's prece- 
ding letter, which he had only then receiv- 
ed — an agitation which the letter now pre- 
sented by Cormick did not by any mean$ 
m3 



250 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tend to lessen. The former had admitted 
of some hesitation, but the latter put an 
end to any thing further of the kind ; and, 
directly repairing to sir James, he inform- 
ed him, that the sudden illness of Dona- 
ghue, now announced to him as lord 
Rosenellis, rendered it so absolutely indis- 
pensable his setting off, forthwith, for Ai- 
toir-na-Grenie, that he hoped he would 
have the goodness to excuse his leaving 
him for a short time. 

" Assuredly," was the reply, " were it 
necessar}" you should do so; but as I have 
for some time been meditating a visit to 
the Vale, I may as well take the opportu- 
nity of accompanying you. You look 
vexed, from a fear that I may not be able 
to travel as expeditiously as you wish — I 
think I shall ; if not, you shall not be re- 
tarded on my account." 

This promise satisfied Melville; and the 
requisite orders were issued for every thing 
to be got ready for their immediate depar- 
ture. They travelled with such expedi- 
tion as to reach the Vale about the middle 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 251 

of the ensuing day, sir James never once 
flagging by the way, or evincing any wish 
for stopping. 

Melville had decided on not quitting 
the Vale, till he had fully disclosed to sir 
William every particular requisite to be 
known on Donaghue's account ; but whe- 
ther he should enter upon this disclosure 
before his uncle or not, required a little 
more time for deliberation. At length, 
anxious to be out of suspense with regard 
to what he had to apprehend from his dis- 
pleasure, on learning that his long-che- 
rished plan must be relinquished, he de- 
cided on the former, and accordingly, 
there being no one else present but the 
two baronets, entered upon the subject 
after a slight preface. 

The surprise of his auditors, as he pro- 
ceeded, appeared really too great for ex- 
pression ; from the emotion betrayed by his 
uncle, his own certainly was not lessened. 
— " So," said sir William, when he had 
concluded, " a pretty romantic tale this is 
of yours indeed ! And you are really that 



252 TRADITION OF THE CASTLK. 

terrible Mr. Denny Scanlen that we were 
all so shocked at the idea of our pretty lit- 
tle Hebe having thrown herself away up- 
on ! It is bad enough, to be sure," laugh- 
ing, " as it is ; but, since not quite so bad 
as at first imagined, I believe I must, 
from the pleasure experienced at the 
thought, allow myself to be prevailed on 
to pardon the part which your friend took 
in the affair." 

"But, alas, sir!" said Melville, anxious- 
ly, " of what use will your pardon be, if 
there's any truth iti the report about Miss 
Erin and lord Altidore ?" 

" Pooh ! did you really give any credit 
to it, knowing Eveleen as you do ? how 
could you possibly suppose that, so recent- 
ly engaged to one lover, she could possibly 
think of attaching herself to another? I 
thought none but an apprehensive lover 
could have given credit to any thing so 
improbable, from her character ; and, find- 
ing your friend had done so, I certainly 
todc advantage of the circumstance to an- 
swer bim evasively, trusting the error ifc 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

thus confirmed would be a means of put- 
ting an end to conduct that was produc- 
tive of very painful agitation to all parties. 
I did not, however, say what was incorrect 
about lord Altidore; his lordship is really 
going to be married, though certainly not 
to my daughter. More about him, how- 
ever, anon; we must bring our own story 
to a conclusion, ere we enter upon another 
person's ; but I'll not delay you any longer 
from hastening to your friend ; though I 
can punish, I don't like to torture. I shall 
expect to see you return with him, and 
should myself accompany you, but that 1 
wish to prepare lady Erin and my daugh- 
ter for seeing him here again." 

" Well, sir, friendship has wings, as well 
as love, and on its pinions, I assure you, 
I shall quickly fly to him; but that I 
should not appear too romantically uncon- 
cerned about myself, allow me, ere I de- 
part, to express my hope, that as I have 
completely committed myself to you, no 
advantage will be taken of the circum- 
stance to separate Miss Audley from me." 



254t TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" The young lady's situation is really a 
very delicate and embarrassing one," said 
sir William ; " however, as I presume she 
will not be permitted to remain much 
longer in it, I pledge you my word, that 
I will not interfere in the business, or in 
any way, directly or indirectly, be acces-^ 
sary to doing what I see you are appre- 
hensive of — betraying her into the power 
of this terrible guardian of hers." 

" And is he really a very terrible kind 
of being, sir ?" asked Melville, a little anx- 
iously ; " Lavinia, I know, holds him in 
great dread. And now that we are on 
the topic, I should like to know whether 
he really has any legal tie over her ?" 

" I am not at liberty to satisfy you," re- 
plied sir William ; " but I make no doubt, 
that, in due time, you will learn all you 
desire." ^ 

" And now, my good young sir," said 
sir James, fancying he saw him making a 
movement towards the door, " that yoa 
have told your story, pray who is to inter- 
cede for you with me ? You will presume, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

I suppose, to deny that I have very great 
reason to be angry with you, since you 
cannot deny being acquainted with my 
plans for you, and therefore cannot plead 
ignorance of them as an excuse for letting 
this chit of a girl tempt you to disappoint 
them ! Ay, you may laugh, sir — I see you 
can hardly refrain from doing so, at the 
very unexpected manner in which I am 
expressing myself; but it is not because I 
am not raving, that I am not displeased, 

and you shall find but, till I can better 

collect myself, I shall refrain from giving 
further utterance to my sentiments on 
your conduct ;" and rising as he spoke, he 
withdrew from the room. 

Melville, who really, from his manner, 
had been at first inclined to imagine that 
he was not very much disconcerted, since, 
when so, he was seldom very collected in 
the expression of his displeasure, now be- 
gan to fear he had been mistaken. His 
mind, however, was still much relieved by 
the explanation he had come to with him. 



256 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and, without further delay, he proceeded 
to his friend. 

Cormick had preceded him, so that his 
arrival was announced ere he made his 
appearance. — " Actually come ?" said Do- 
naghue ; then, to himself — " I shall soon 
know my fate." 

" Actually, your honour — that is, your 
honour — my lord, I mean !" replied Cor- 
mick. 

Donaghue gave him an angry glance — 
" This is no time for trifling, Cormick," he 
said ; " you see I am agitated." 

" Yes, your honour — that is, my lord, 
again I mean; but if one never begins, 
how will they ever be able to accustom 
themselves?" 

Donaghue ordered him to retire, unable 
to endure even observation now, agitated 
as he was in every nerve, from the assu- 
rance that a very few minutes would now 
put him out of suspense about all he 
hoped or feared. 

At length the voice of Melville met his 
ear, and — " My dear fellow," he cried, as 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 257 

he rushed into the room, and caught his 
extended hand, *' here I am, to implore 
forgiveness for all the pain and confusion 

I have been the cause of But, heyday! 

nervous, I protest ! Why, who would ever 
believe this hand had performed such gal- 
lant exploits as you stand recorded in the 
annals of fame for! it is really more like 
the trembling hand of a sensitive little 
being of the other sex — and, by-the-bye 
— but, no, I won't even ask a question a- 
bout her, till I have told you to discard 
your dolefuls, and set off for the Vale, 
where your liege lady is by this time pre- 
pared to receive your renewed vows ; for, 
in carrying her off from you, papa, finding 
he was running the risk of losing her in 
another way, by breaking her neck, very 
wisely brought her back, so that no delay 
will attend this most happy reconciliation." 
"And you really are serious, Melville?" 
said lord Rosenellis, as we must now begin 
to call him, as he rested his hand on his 
shoulder. 
*^" Serious, my dear fellow ! is it on such 



258 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

a subject you think I could possibly jest? 
No, no — * those only jest at wounds who 
never felt a scar !' and so," laying his hand 
upon his heart, " you need not suspect me, 
I believe. But now, with your lordship's 
permission — and, by-the-bye, it is quite 
time I should congratulate you on this 
new accession of dignity — 1 will, while 
you are preparing, retire to announce my 
return elsewhere, and prepare my sweet 

Lavinia " and while speaking, he was 

moving towards the door; but, ere he 
reached it, it was thrown open, and nurse 
Gormick rushed in, with a countenance 
quite as pale and wo-begone as his who 
drew poor Priam's curtain at the dead of 
night, to announce that Lavinia had just 
been carried off by Mr. Wheatley, who, 
in the name of her father, had come to de- 
mand her, and by representing to her, the 
nurse, who was the person he had called 
for, the serious consequences that might 
result from not complying with this de- 
mand immediately, had frightened her in- 
to doing so. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 259 

■* 1^ Then it's all over with me !" said Mel- 
ville, turning of a deadly paleness, and 
throwing himself on a chair ; " since the 
guardian is changed into a father, there is 
no hope of his authority being resisted." 

" Come, come, my dear fellow," said 
his friend, now in his turn becoming a 
comforter, " I will not let you despair; 
you know the intimacy that subsists be- 
tween sir William and this guardian, or 
father, or whatever he is, of Lavinia, and 
I think we need not doubt having all his 
interest at our side. The carriage will be 
ready in a minute, so let us not delay ; 
and if the worst comes to the worst, why 
I'll even run a risk for you again, and the 
deuce is in it, if, through one means or 
other, we do not bring all to a happy con- 
clusion !" 

What the shock sustained by Lavinia 
was, when she beheld Mr. Wheatley, may 
readily be conceived, and her augmented 
taror, on being apprized by him of the 
U^it in which she was henceforth to re- 
gard her guardian. A carriage was in 



260 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

waiting for her at a little distance from 
the castle, but, without his assistance, she 
could not have reached it. 

The moment she entered the cottage, 
she looked eagerly about for Mrs. Wheat- 
ley or Rosetta, but neither appeared. — 
" Collect yourself," said Mr. Wheatley, 
understanding her looks, and making her 
take a seat ; " you will see no one till you 
have first seen your father ; he is-^ — " 

" Oh, not yet — not yet !" cried Lavi- 
nia, anticipating what he had been about 
saying — " oh, not yet — do not ask me to 
see him ! I have not courage to do so, till 
I first know what kind of person — what 
kind of reception I am likely to meet 
from him; if a harsh one, I shall " (• 

She was interrupted by the door of the 
adjoining parlour gently opening; she 
looked eagerly towards it, and had a 
glimpse of a stranger. Life seemed to 
forsake her at the moment, she guessed it 
was her father she saw, and emotion over- 
powered her senses. When she recover- 
ed, she found some one supporting her ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 26l 

she wanted courage to see who it was. 
The idea of the looks she expected to en- 
counter, of the scene that awaited her, was 
terrific to her imagination ; but she must 
collect herself — there was no escape from 
what she dreaded — and she accordingly 
ventured to take a peep. 

Vyhat a change did her feelings instant- 
ly undergo ! instead of the stern, threat- 
ening, denouncing, countenance she pic- 
tured to herself she should behold, she met 
one all kindness and feeling. In the sud- 
den transport of relieved apprehension, she 
burst from the arms that enfolded her, 
and throwing herself at the feet of her fa- 
ther, rapturously embraced him. 

Mr. Wheatley retired. We shall not 
dwell on the scene that ensued; suffice it, 
Lavinia found that she had, in her father, a 
parent deserving indeed of the name of one. 
His reasons for having her educated apart 
from him, and kept in ignorance of their 
affinity, were explained. Some tears were 
the result; but there is seldom any human 
joy without some little alloy. Ardent in 



262 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

her feelings, she could refuse nothing to a 
parent who proved himself so different a 
being to what she apprehended, and who 
so fully satisfied her that she had long 
been his first earthly concern; and, in 
short, the conference ended with her 
plighting her word to him that she would 
never change her name, in consequence of 
his declaration that he knew not how he 
should ever be able to endure a separation 
from her. 

She obtained permission, however, to 
acquaint Melville with this, and a note 
was accordingly dispatched to the Vale, 
informing him that one more interview 
was permitted. He received it just as he 
was quitting the carriage that brought 
him there with lord Rosenellis. — " One 
more interview !** he repeated, as he fol- 
lowed to the drawing-room ; " what is to 
be done, my dear sir," to sir William, in 
a despairing tone, " except you intercede, 

or my uncle could be induced " rirnJc 

tK^* His interference would certainly be 
of more consequence than mine," replied 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 263 

'sir William ; " but to obtain it, how are 
we to reconcile him to the disappointment 
of his own plans ? but we will see what 
is to be done. In the mean time, do you 
repair to Rosehill, as you have been de- 
sired, and who knows but your uncle may 
be induced to give you a meeting there?" 

" Well, sir," said Melville, as he was 
about hastening back to the carriage from 
which he had just alighted, " I leave my 
cause in your hands, satisfied you will 
make every exertion to serve me." 

Lavinia received him alone. At the 
first glance he was inclined to flatter him- 
self, from her appearing so much more 
composed than he had expected to find 
her, that there was some revocation of the 
cruel sentence she had informed him of; 
but on his fearfully inquiring whether 
there was any thing to hope, she shook 
her head. 

"And can nothing move this cruel, this 
obdurate father of yours ?" said Melville. 
3(f* You must not speak of him in such 
t^rms," said Lavinia ; " you know not how 



264 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

very much the reverse of cruel or unkind 
he has proved himself to be." 

" What ! when he has decided on our 
separation-— when he has decided on giving 
you to another, notwithstanding your af- 
fections being engaged?" 

" He has decided on no such thing," 
replied Lavinia. 

" How ? What am I to infer from 
your note then ?" 

"The fact is simply this," said Lavinia; 
" his affection for me is so great, that he 
cannot bring himself to part with me, 
and so I have been induced to plight my 
word to him that I never will change my 
name." 

" Never change your name!" repeated 
Melville, recoihng through mingled in- 
dignation and alarm. 

" Never!" said Lavinia, putting her 
handkerchief to her face, and turning aside 
her head. 

" Good God ! and do you call this af- 
fection ?" exclaimed Melville. " No, it is 
selfishness — odious, revolting selfishness; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 265 

and if you have, indeed, unwarily been 
drawn in to make a promise, it was so un- 
natural, so unreasonable to desire, I will 
hope and believe that you cannot think of 
adhering to it." 

" You may reproach me as you please," 
said Lavinia, " but a promise so solemnly 
given I cannot think of breaking; I will, 
however, so far promise to you, that if, on 
an introduction to my father, you can pre- 
vail on him, by your arguments and en- 
treaties, to release me from it, I shall per- 
haps not prove myself unwilling to profit 
by the concession.*' 

*' When or how may I expect to be in- 
troduced to him?" demanded Melville; 
" I really cannot endure a much longer 
continuance of my present suspense : but 
should he prove inexorable, what — what 
then, my Lavinia," taking her hand, and 
fondly pressing it to his bosom, " is to be 
done? Am I then to be driven to des- 
pair?" 

" I hope not ; I am sure I do not know, ' 
said Lavinia. 

VOL. IV. N 



266 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" But do not you know whether you 
will adhere to your promise or not ?" 

" I have ah'eady said But who is 

that? there is a gentleman approaching." 

" My uncle," said Melville, in a tone of 
reviving confidence, as he flew to admit 
him, convinced, from his following him to 
the cottao^e, that sir William had succeed- 
ed in his arguments with him. — " How 
good ! how kind !" he ci'ied, as he ushered 
him into the parlour, " to allow sir Wil- 
liam to succeed for me !" 

" Sir William !" repeated sir James, a 
little indignantly ; " and pray, sir, is it to 
sir William's influence alone any indul- 
gence I may be inclined to shew you is to 
be ascribed ?" 

" Oh no, sir ! Though do not mistake 
me," said Melville; "to your own gene- 
rous heart ultimately I know; but the 
services of a friend are sometimes not 
amiss in the first instance." 

He then introduced him to Lavinia, 
>vhorose, evidently agitated at his entrance. 
Sir James went up to her, and saluted 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 267 

her. — " A fair excuse indeed," he said, 
" for disobedience ; do not be offended, 
young lady, but I did form certain plans 
for this young gentleman, but which, from 
this moment, I shall cease to feel any fur- 
ther anxiety about." 

" You are very kind, very good, sir, I 
am sure, to speak in this manner," said 
Lavinia ; " since I heaixi of Mr. Melville's 
uncle, it has been my wish to have the 
good fortune to please him if ever we met." 

" He must be a very strange being," re- 
pUed the old gentleman, gallantly, " who 
could look at you without being pleased 
with you." 

" Oh, what happiness would all this 
have given me a short time ago!" said 
Melville; "but now! — But would you, 
could you believe it possible, sir, that this 
cruel, this terrible father of my Lavinia 

" I cannot, indeed, let you speak of my 
father in such terms, Mr. Melville," inter- 
rupted Lavinia. 

b. N 2 



268 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" I can speak of him iii no other," said 
Melville. — " Could you think — -could you 
believe it possible, sir," again addressing 
himself to his uncle, " that he has had the 
unreasonableness, the inhumanity I will 
call it, to extort a promise from her never 
to change her name ?" 

" Really ! well certainly it appears ra- 
ther an extraordinary circumstance, for 
most parents are solicitous for the happy 
establishment of their children in life; but 
w^iat reason can he assign for it ?" 

" Oh, none, none !" said Melville, speak- 
ing for Lavinia; " he can assign none for 
it, that can in any way excuse or justify 
it — to the most unnatural selfishness it is 
owing." 

•' Well, I should rather hope some other 
motive might be adduced for it, for sir 
AVilliam Erin, of whose judgment I have 
a high opinion, does not altogether think 
unfavourably of him." 

" And has he given y^ou any reason to 
imagine, my dear sir," demanded Melville, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 269 

•* that he could be induced to alter any 
determination he had formed T 

" Why, on that head I will not flatter 
you," said sir James. 

ffY-^*, What is to be done then ?" said Mel- 
ville, in a tone of despair ; " for I cannot 
ask or expect your interference, if persua- 
-ded it would be unavailing." 

Sir James sat musing for some minutes 
— " Why, really I don't well know what 
to say," he replied ; " desperate cases have 
always been allowed to require desperate 
remedies ; so really I know not what to 
advise, but that as the carriage in which 
you came is at the door, and the coast ap- 
pears clear, you carry her off without fur- 
ther ceremony." 

■u " Ah, my dear sir, if I could believe 
you serious in this advice, and Miss Aud- 
ley would consent, be assured 1 should not 
be backward in following it." 

" Well, I am serious, I assure you." 

»1 " Excuse me, my dear uncle," said Mel- 

-tiille, a little resentfully, " but really this 

is not a time for jesting with me — you 



270 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

know not what I am suffering at this very 
moment." 

" I beg your pardon, I can easily con- 
ceive, if under an apprehension of losing 
this young lady; and, as a proof, have 
suggested a plan for relieving you from 
this apprehension." 

" What ! is it to attempt to carry her 
off in the broad face of day ?" 

" Why not? a favourable opportunity 
should never be lost, on any occasion. But 
if you have not courage for the attempt, 
suppose I make it for you ? — what say you 
to my running away with her for you ?" 

" AVhat am I to think of this?" said 
Melville, looking earnestly at him ; " there 
is something in all this I do not compre- 
hend — I see significant glances exchanged 
between you and Miss Audley — I see nei- 
ther in any degree appeanng to participate 
in the uneasiness under which I am suffer- 
ing, though I am aware neither are in- 
different about my feelings — what am I 
to think, to infer from this ?" » " 

" Hand this young lady into the ear- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 271 

riage," said sir James ; " and when we have 
got her safe there between us, your curio- 
sity may perhaps be gratified," 

With increasing surprise Melville turn- 
ed his eyes on Lavinia. The smile with 
which she met them completed his per- 
plexity. 

" Well, after this, call yourself an im- 
passioned lover !" said sir James ; " with 
an opportunity for carrying oflf your mis- 
tress, and yet not avail yourself of it ! — But 
come, ma'am," presenting his hand to La- 
vinia, " what he neglects to make use of, 
let me profit by." 

He led her to the carriage, ^lelville, in 
utter amazement, followed, and they drove 
off. While proceeding to the Vale, we 
shall explain all that is necessary to be 
known. 

Sir James Melville was a man of dissi- 
pated habits, though esteemed by his own 
sex a man of honour and integrity, and a 
ridiculer of marriage. When somewhat 
advanced in life, a beautiful cottage-girl 
struck his fancy, and all those arts that 



272! TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

had so often before proved successful, were 
again had recourse to, for the purpose of 
effecting her ruin ; but she was proof to 
all the temptations that fortune enabled 
hina to throw in her way ; and at length, 
rather than give her up, he resolved on mar- 
rying her. So long as they considered his 
views dishonourable, her parents treated 
him with disdain, and watched over her 
with unremitting vigilance ; but no sooner 
did they understand the alteration they had 
undergone, than they became his zealous 
advocates ; but in vain for some time they 
exerted themselves for him ; she had con- 
ceived a dislike to him not to be sur- 
mounted, and nothing but force at length 
induced her to become his. 

But though sir James had then too little 
command over himself to be able to give 
her up, he was perfectly aware of the ri- 
dicule which so disproportion ed a marriage 
in every respect must occasion, after being 
so long a contemner of matrimony, and 
so often arrogantly descanting on the nu- 
merous qualifications that, if ever he did 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 273 

change his state, could alone induce him 
to do so: and in order as much as possible 
to prevent what he dreaded, he resolved on 
not acknowledging his marriage, till his 
lady was in some degree fitted for the rank 
to which he had raised her. 

To remove her from her connexions was 
a material step. He accordingly took her 
over to England, where a house was taken 
for her in the vicinity of the metropolis, 
under a feigned name, and masters of the 
first eminence in every branch of polite 
education engaged to attend her. Sir 
James still figured as a single man in the 
circles of fashion ; and fond as he was of 
his beautiful wife, any thing like domestic 
life was still too little relished by him, not 
to occasion his absences, if not very long, 
to be at least very frequent, from her. 

This conduct exposed her to dangers he 
little dreamed of The pursuits in which 
he had her engaged he fancied would com- 
pletely occupy her mind ; but he forgot 
that from her early habits it was more 
n3 



274 TRADITION OF THE CAS1>i;^. 

likely they would be regarded with dis- 
taste than pleasure ; this was the case, and 
she often sought relief from what was tire- 
some and fatiguing, because bewildering, 
in stolen rambles about the village where 
she lived. i' 

These rambles exposed her to the obser- 
vation of a handsome young libertine of 
rank in the neighbourhood. How he con- 
trived to introduce himself to her, or im- 
prove those opportunities which this in- 
troduction afforded him to her destruction, 
it matters not to say — suffice it, the sensi- 
bility which sir James had failed of exci- 
ting, he but too fatally awakened. The 
connexion was continued for months, with- 
out the slightest suspicion of it ; at length, 
through some untoward circumstance, it 
was betrayed, and lady Melville, apprized 
of its disclosure to her husband, fled in 
terror and dismay to her seducer, for pro- 
tection from his rage and reproaches, with 
no other regret, at the moment indeed, 
than what resulted from leaving her infant 
daughter behind her. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 275 

How bitterly did sir James now regret 
having ever been tempted to change his 
original determination against matrimony ! 
however, it was some consolation that the 
folly he had committed still remained un- 
known. He finally decided on never ac- 
knowledging this disastrous union, and, of 
course, on bringing up his daughter in 
utter ignorance of her birth, to whom in- 
deed he had conceived a sudden dislike, 
from a strong suspicion of her not being 
his. 

Years passed away — the parents of lady 
Melville were dead, and there was no one 
to perplex or trouble sir James with in- 
quiries either about her or her child. At 
length she, in her turn, became forsaken, 
and in the bitter agony of finding herself 
so, was at length awakened to a full con- 
viction of her guilt. Grief and remorse 
brought on a rapid decline; and, convin- 
ced she had not long to Hve, she now de- 
termined on making that exertion for her 
child she had hitherto forborne through 
shame and fear. She had heard of sir 



^76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE: 

James's determination ; and aware of what 
it was owing to, could not think of going- 
out of the world without endeavouring to 
have justice done her. She accordingly 
summoned resolution to write to sir James 
on the subject, but in vain letter after 
letter was addressed to him — they were all 
returned unopened. She at length con- 
fided her story to the clergyman who was 
in constant attendance on her, and obtain- 
ing his interference, sir James was at last 
induced to consent to one interview — the 
result was, every suspicion prejudicial to 
the interests of his daughter being remo- 
ved from his mind. The dying state in 
which he found the wretched penitent 
would not permit him to doubt her solemn 
asseverations ; but his determination of 
still concealing his marriage remained un- 
altered, nor did he feel the slightest wish 
or inclination to do more for his daughter 
than he had at first intended. 

Lady 3Ielville died shortly after this in- 
terview. Some months after her decease, 
happening to be in that part of the coun- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 277 

try to which Lavinia had been sent, but 
without its being known to whom she be- 
longed, a sudden impulse, which he called 
curiosity, induced him to call and see her. 
She was then between three and four years 
old, a little angel in beauty, and so play- 
ful, so caressing, it was impossible to see 
her without being interested and delight- 
ed with her. In short, from that moment 
nature began to assert herself in his heart, 
and he felt regret at what he had done, for 
after so long concealing his marriage, there 
was an awkwardness in avowing it, now 
he could not get over; besides, in the 
first impulse of the resentment that had 
decided him on discarding or disowning 
his daughter, he had adopted his nephew, 
and after allowing the boy to consider 
himself as his heir, he knew not how to 
disappoint the expectations he had raised. 
Yet how could he bear to have his own 
sweet girl deprived of her just inheritance? 
At length a way occurred of reconciling 
all matters — this was by uniting the two 
cousins. The project was no sooner con- 



278 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ceiyed than it occasioned a complete change 
with regard to his original plan about 
Lavinia. He still decided on having her 
brought up in utter ignorance of her birth, 
but no longer in the obscurity he had at 
first intended. For the rank in which he 
now destined her, it was requisite she 
should receive a suitable education ; and 
all that remained for further consideration 
was, to whose care he should intrust her. 
This he was not long in deciding on — Mr. 
Wheatley, his agent in Ireland, soon oc- 
curred to his thoughts, as a person to whom 
he might safely do so, not merely from 
the opinion he entertained of his princi- 
ples, but from some certain circumstances 
that had so far put him in his power, as 
to render it an object to him to prove 
faithful to any trust he might repose 
in him. To him accordingly the se- 
cret of his marriage was disclosed, and all 
his plans and intentions with regard to 
Lavinia and her cousin. Mr. Wheatley was 
grateful for his confidence, and received 
the charge committed to him with all the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 279 

requisite assurances of secresy and vigi- 
lance. A house was taken for him and 
his family at Bath, where sir James chose 
she should be educated, that she might 
have a home on the spot, and Lavinia 
was placed at one of the first seminaries 
there. 

In due time master Sedley received a 
hint of the necessity of guarding himself 
from any entanglement, by being inform- 
ed by his uncle of his having already pro- 
jected an alliance for him; and as she 
grew up, Mr. Wheatley was instructed to 
give Miss Lavinia a hint to the same ef- 
feet, lest any attempt should be made to 
engage her affections. That any one 
would, however, have an opportunity for 
making the attempt, he deemed very un- 
likely, it being his strict command that 
she should never be taken into public, nor 
allowed to visit any where, except under 
the immediate care and control of Mr. 
Wheatley. One of his reasons indeed for 
not yet acknowledging her, was a fear 
that it might occasion the frustration of 



£80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his plan, for, as his heiress, he was well 
aware of the competitors there would be 
for her favour ; and so great was his affec- 
tion for Melville, that he could not bear 
to think of his being disappointed of the 
fortune he had allowed him to look for- 
ward to, or indeed of the fortune and title 
being disunited. A fear of exciting a sus- 
picion in the mind of Mrs. Wheatley of 
the truth, on whose discretion he could 
not bring himself to place the same reli- 
ance he did on her husband's, made him 
resist the longing inclination he felt from 
time to time to visit Bath, for the purpose 
of seeing his darling girl, for whom he 
gradually conceived the most doting fond- 
ness, insomuch as to be even more anxious 
for the gratification of her whims than she 
was herself. 

The pains he took to prevent any dis- 
appointment to his plan, through Mel- 
ville's means, are already known ; on one 
pretext or other, he was continually con- 
triving to drag him about from place to 
place, trusting, by keeping him in this 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 281 

unsettled state, he should prevent the dan- 
ger of his forming any attachment inimi- 
cal to his views. 

The time was approaching for an ex- 
planation, when Melville begged to be 
permitted to devote some time to his 
friend ; and it instantly struck sir James, 
that this would be a good opportunity for 
ascertaining what effect this explanation 
was likely to produce, by availing himself 
of it, to introduce Lavinia to him. 

Whatever was requisite for the purpose 
was immediately done — a residence pro- 
cured for Mr. Wheatley — and a letter writ- 
ten to sir William Erin, one of his oldest 
friends, and in his complete confidence, 
apprizing him of w hat he wished, and en- 
treating him to obtain the notice and pro- 
tection of lady and Miss Erin for his dear 
girl. 

The result is already known; but no 
language could do justice to w^hat was ex- 
perienced by sir James, when led to be- 
lieve she had completely thrown herself 
away. The shock given to his feehngs by 



282 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the news of her elopement, brought on a 
spasmodic attack, that had nearly proved 
fatal. Under the persuasion that he was 
dying, Sedley was summoned. Before 
his arrival, however, he was pronounced 
out of danger; and he then hesitated, from 
shame and regret, to make the disclosure 
he had at first intended ; tlms, as it proved, 
by delaying it, prolonging his own misery, 
and the anxiety and uneasiness of those 
for whom he was most interested. Some- 
times he blamed himself alone for what 
had happened, sometimes Mr. Wheatley ; 
now conceiving that if he had at once ac- 
knowledged Lavinia, the pride of birth 
would have prevented her so disgracing 
herself; then again, that if Mr. Wheatley 
had been properly vigilant, she never 
could have had an opportunity for acting 
as she did. That such would be his idea, 
Mr. Wheatley had little doubt, and the 
conviction was no small aggravation of his 
unhappiness at what had occurred. 

Mr. Wheatley was the son of an emi- 
nent merchant; he was on the point of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 283 

rnarriage with the eldest daughter of sir 
PhiHp Raymond, when the sudden failure 
of his father occasioned an interdiction to 
be put to his marriage by the haughty 
and avaricious baronet — an interdiction, 
however, that the young people were ei- 
ther too thoughtless, or too much attached, 
or perhaps both, to regard, and the con- 
sequence was a stolen marriage, under the 
full persuasion, that though their union 
would not be permitted, yet, when once 
it had taken place, it would be pardoned. 
In yielding to such a one, however, 
they did not thoroughly know sir Philip ; 
in the first transports of his rage, at find- 
ing his daughter had deceived, or rather 
disobeyed him, he took a solemn vow ne- 
ver to forgive her, or be induced by any 
means to do any thing either for her or any 
family she might have; and with his own 
father unable to assist him, Mr. Wheatley, 
through his implacabihty, would probably 
have been reduced to the greatest distress, 
but that sir Jathes Melville, with whom 
he had formed an intimacy in his more 



284 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

prosperous days, stepped forward to serve 
him, with an offer of his agency! 

For what had rescued him from the ex- 
tremity of actual distress, Mr. Wheatley 
could not but be grateful; but he had 
been brought up with pride and ambition, 
and to remain satisfied with a situation 
that placed him in a subordinate rank to a 
man he had long considered himself on an 
equality with, was not to be thought of 
Amongst those he flattered himself still 
interested about him, was a gentleman 
high in office ; he addressed an application 
to him, and received, in reply, an assu- 
rance that he might rely on his best exer- 
tions for obtaining him a situation worthy 
of him. 

Encouraged by this assurance, Mr. 
Wheatley suffered himself to be drawn 
into expences far exceeding his income, 
and by no means becoming his then level 
rank in life ; but he could not resist his 
wish to disappoint the malice of sir Philip, 
by letting him see he still had the power, 
in spite of him, of living in a manner con- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 285 

sonant to his inclination, trusting, that 
before he should be called upon by sir 
James for any particular settlement of ac- 
counts, he should be able to restore what- 
ever beypnd his own immediate salary he 
had made use of; but in this hope he was 
disappointed ; after being kept on, day af- 
ter day, in lingering expectation of its ful- 
filment, till patience at length became ut- 
terly exhausted, and wrought up to frenzy 
at the idea of the detection that must en- 
sue, the ingratitude and baseness he should 
stand convicted of, he resolved on the 
crime of self-destruction, to avoid the 
shame and reproaches he conceived he 
so justly merited. How this terrible re- 
solve came to be discovered in time, it 
matters not to say — his wretched wife got 
a friend to watch over him, and addressed 
a letter to sir James, then in England, ex- 
planatory of all that had occurred. 

Though highly and justly incensed at 
finding such a return had been made for 
his friendship, still sir James could not re- 
sist the feelings that urged him to say 



286 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

something consolatory to this miserable 
pair ; accordingly he replied to Mrs. Wheat- 
ley in soothing terms, desiring her hus- 
band might be informed it was his wish 
he should still continue to act for him, till 
he heard further from him. 

It was just at this juncture that his 
plans and intentions with regard to his 
daughter had undergone a change, in con- 
sequence of the project of uniting her to 
her cousin being conceived ; and still en- 
tertaining a high opinion of poor Wheat- 
ley's principles, notwithstanding what had 
happened, the expectations he had been 
allowed to entertain in some degree ex- 
cusing this, he decided, as already seen, 
on giving her up to his care, naturally be- 
lieving his anxiety to reestablish himself 
in his confidence would lead to all that 
vigilance about her he required. How 
matters were managed, so as to prevent 
Mrs. Wheatley from having a suspicion of 
the truth, it would be tedious as well as 
unnecessary to detail. 

At parting, sir James informed Wheat- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 287 

ley, that should he discharge the trust re- 
posed in him in the manner he wished 
and expected, the income he had then set- 
tled on him, should be secured as a per- 
petuity to him and his family ; but if, on 

the contrar}' -But it was unnecessary 

to finish the sentence. 

The intimation was not lost on the per- 
son it was addressed to, and continued to 
haunt his tortured imagination, from the 
moment of Lavinia's elopement, as the 
day was now gone by for looking else- 
where for friendship or patronage. His 
father-in-law was by this time dead, and 
had descended to the grave without ever 
giving Mrs. Wheatley any reason to ima- 
gine he had relented towards her, a cir- 
cumstance that would have occasioned her 
no little affliction, but for the involuntary 
resentment that was excited by the un- 
just distinction he had made between her 
and her sister, whom, for a similar of- 
fence, he had pardoned, merely because 
his pride was more gratified by the con- 
nexion she had formed than by his other 



288 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

daughter's, thus proving that it was not 
the crime of disobedience he punished, but 
the disappointnaent it occasioned. 

The brother of the late lord Altidore, a 
young man of very dissipated habits and 
inconsiderable fortune for his rank in life, 
proposed for the youngest Miss Raymond, 
and was rejected by sir Philip. This, 
however, had not the effect of inducing 
the young lady to give up her lover ; they 
were married in private, but with a de- 
termination to keep the circumstance a se- 
cret, till either a favourable opportunity 
should occur for acknowledging it to her 
father, or the bridegroom's affairs should 
be sufficiently retrieved to allow of his 
formincr an establishment suitable to their 
rank, without his assistance. She was not 
only a wife, but a mother, some time pre- 
vious to her sister's marriage, but still con- 
tinued to conceal her own, and might have 
done so much longer, but for the unex- 
pected death of her brother-in-law, which, 
putting her husband in possession of the 
family title and estate, rendered her re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. J289 

gardless any longer of the consequences 
that might result from avowing it; but 
as she had anticipated, from her know- 
ledge of her father's disposition, there was 
no longer any reason to apprehend any 
thing unpleasant from this. The result 
proved she was correct in this surmise; 
the pride of sir Philip was too highly gra- 
tified by the rank to which her disobedi- 
ence had been the means of elevating her, 
to be able to evince any displeasure at that 
disobedience; and finally, on her death 
and lord Altidore's, which happened with- 
in a very short period of each other, he 
took her two children under his care, with 
an avowed determination of leaving them 
the whole of his property. 

Mrs. Wheatley could not but think this 
a most unjust determination, since her 
offence had certainly not been a more hei- 
nous one than her sister's; but it was at- 
tended with mortifying circumstances to 
sir Philip, that would not permit him to 
forgive it, or even the children of her sis- 

VOL. IV. o 



290 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ter to know they had such a relation. 
What she was, Mrs. Wheatley could 
not entirely forget, and ardently, in con- 
sequence, wished her daughter to partici- 
pate in the advantages bestowed on Lavi- 
nia; but this Mr. Wheatley would by 
no means permit— as their expectations 
were widely different, so he conceived 
should their education. An expensive 
and fashionable seminary was not a place 
adapted for keeping her ideas from soar- 
ing ; and the evils accruing from their be- 
ing too elevated for our station, his own 
experience rendered him fully aware of; 
in short, suffering had rendered him wise. 
From the moment of his extrication from 
the situation in which aiming beyond his 
means had placed him, he determined on 
avoiding all society for the future, calcu- 
lated to lead him again into a similar er- 
ror, and not only to keep his daughter 
from it, but to positively restrict her from 
knowing to whom she was connected, lest 
it should be a means of inspiring her with 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 291 

vain or conceited notions. But though 
he could not be induced to gratify her 
mother's ambitious wish, he was too re- 
fined and well educated himself, not to 
bestow on her a polite as well as useful 
education ; and in every respect she grew 
up all he could desire, amiable in her dis- 
position, sufficiently accomplished to be a 
most pleasing companion, and vying in 
beauty with her dear Lavinia, whom she 
always regarded in the light of a sister. 
That, notwithstanding all his precautions, 
however, she had obtained some know- 
ledge of lord Altidore, must be obvious 
from what has occurred. We shall give 
her story, however, in her own words. 

In a walk one day to Rosehill, attended 
merely by a servant, Miss Erin encoun- 
tered lord Altidore, and was accompanied 
by him the remainder of the way. All 
the family were out but Rosetta. On be- 
ing introduced into the parlour where she 
was sitting, she was coming forward to 
receive Miss Erin, when a glimpse of lord 
o 2 



292 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Altidore behind her arrested her steps;, 
and, faintly uttering his name, she tot- 
tered back, and sunk, nearly lifeless, on a 
seat. 

Both hastened to her assistance. It was 
some time before she revived. As soon 
as lord Altidore saw her recovering, he 
bowed, with a look of great embarrassment, 
to Miss Erin, and precipitately withdrew, 
evidently much agitated. 

Rosetta's eyes sought him the mo- 
ment she recovered. On finding him 
gone, she attempted to address Eveleen ; 
but for some minutes tears impeded her 
utterance; then a little collecting herself, 
after apologizing for the trouble she had 
occasioned her — " You must doubtless, 
my dear ma'am," she said, " be surprised 
at what you have witnessed ; but if you 
will grant me your attention for a little 
while, I hope I shall be able to explain it, 
in a way that will prevent its being any 
injury to lord Altidore; for that his un> 
expected sight was the cause of my being 
so overcome, I am aware it would be use- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 293 

less to deny. I should grieve to be the 
means of doing him a prejudice in the 
mind of any one, but more especially in a 
person's about whom I know he feels so 
deep an interest," and again, spite of her 
evident efforts to suppress them, tears 
gushed from her. 

" 1 will not deny," said Miss Erin, " that 
my curiosity is excited ; " neither that, had 
I ever made up my mind, which, how- 
ever, I never did, to give any positive en- 
couragement to the attentions of lord Al- 
tidore, the recent scene would certainly 
have prevented me till explained. Be it ex- 
plained, however, as it may, I am pretty 
well convinced my sentiments will remain 
just the same they are at present for him, 
and almost equally inclined to believe that 
he has for some time ceased to desire any 
alteration in them, from seeing there v/as 
but very little chance of its being effected. 
I do justice to his merits ; but our affec- 
tions are not at our command ; and I have 
too good an opinion of the good sense of 
lord Altidore, and think, besides, he pos- 



294 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sesses too much pride, to suppose he would 
allow himself to be devoted to a person 
who never gave him much reason to sup- 
pose she could make a suitable return for 
his regard." 

Rosetta shook her head, as if incredu- 
lous of this. Yet certainly what Miss 
Erin said had the effect that was intended, 
that of soothing her, and if ever she had 
any hope about lord Altidore, of reviving 
it. After a little hesitation, she asked 
Miss Erin if she had any disinclination to 
accompany her to the garden, where they 
would be more out of the way of being 
interrupted than where they then were. 

Miss Erin replied in the negative, and 
to the arbour they accordingly proceeded. 

Rosetta prefaced her story with an ac- 
count of her parents, their early expecta- 
tions in life, and the circumstances to which 
were owing the disappointment of those 
expectations. — " But with all which I re- 
mained unacquainted, till I was grown 
up," she continued, " my father, from the 
wisest reasons, choosing I should remain 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 295 

in ignorance of my having any connexions 
more exalted than myself. His constant 
aim was to guard me from pride and 
vanity, and various restrictions were the 
consequence, but which I was then too 
happy to murmur at. 

" Our house was delicrhtfullv situated 
in the vicinity of Bath, so as to allow us 
at once to have the enjoyments of the 
country, with a little of the bustle and 
gaiety of a large town ; and one way or 
other, I always had so much to occupy 
my time, and agreeably diversify it at 
home, as never to breathe a sigh after 
amusement elsewhere. But certainly, the 
truly happy time was when the vacations 
permitted Miss Audley to be at home, as, 
exclusive of the delight derived from hav- 
ing her immediately with me, there was 
always then, if the season or weather al- 
lowed it, some pleasant excursion or other 
planning for her amusement. 

" But very few, I believe, are permitted 
to advance far in life, without meeting 
with something to cross or perplex them. 



296 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

I was about seventeen, when an old friend 
of my mother came to Bath ; they met 
by accident, and this meeting occasioned 
the renewal of all their former intimacy. 
My father rather regretted the circum- 
stance, from a fear of her betraying what 
he had taken such pains to have concealed 
from me. He gave her a hint on the sub- 
ject ; how she attended to it, I shall shortly 
shew. 

'•' Mrs. Brabazon was one of those rest- 
less characters that must be employed; 
having but few resources in her own mind, 
and very little to occupy her about her 
own affairs, she was always busying her- 
self about those of others, certainly, how- 
ever, not without a good-natured wish to 
be of service. She was quite enraged on 
learning that my grandfather was not yet 
reconciled to my mother, and suggested a 
thousand plans in consequence, not one of 
which, however, were acceded to, from a 
conviction that they could answer no other 
purpose, than that of reviving feelings that 
were by this time subdued. To conceive 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 297 

a project, however, and relinquish it, was 
not in the nature of Mrs. Brabazon. One 
way or other, she determined on endea- 
vouring to bring about a reconciliation be- 
tween my grandfather and mother, and 
since not allowed to do so openly, resolved 
on doing so privately ; not altogether dis- 
pleased, perhaps, at the ill success of her 
first suggestions, since it afforded her an 
opportunity for busying herself still more 
than she perhaps could otherwise have 
done ; and besides, the greater the difficul- 
ty in accomplishing what she undertook, 
the greater would finally be her merit. 
To effect what she was so solicitous for, 
however, it was requisite she should have 
an interview with my grandfather, and 
accordingly she proceeded to Cheltenham, 
where he then was, but of which my pa- 
rents were ignorant, years having elapsed 
since they had known any thing about 
his movements. By this time far advanced 
in life, feehngs of compunction had began 
to be awakened in the mind of sir Philip, 
o 3 



298 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

for his conduct to his eldest daughter, but 
which the consideration of the solemn 
manner in which he had bound himself 
never to notice her again, prevented her 
deriving any benefit from. They certain- 
ly had the effect, however, of rendering 
him more accessible than he would other- 
wise have been to the arguments and 
representations of Mrs. Brabazon, who, 
being a blunt speaker, and long acquainted 
with him, was not backward in saying 
what she thought of his conduct. 

" The result was, his agreeing to let 
me be introduced to him, provided our 
affinity was, for the present, concealed 
from me, and my parents knew nothing 
of the circumstance, under the idea that 
my cousin, lord Altidore, who was then 
with him, might perhaps take a fancy to 
me, and thus afford him, by sanctioning 
our union, an opportunity of indirectly 
making amends to my mother for the in- 
justice he was now sensible he had been 
guilty of to her. 

" Mrs. Brabazon undertook to manage 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 299 

every thing ; the more difficult and intri- 
cate any thing was, indeed, the more she 
dehghted in it. The moment she return- 
ed from her secret visit to Cheltenham, 
she announced her intention of passing 
some time there, and gave me the invita- 
tion that had been planned between her 
and my grandfather to accompany her 
there. 

" My father hesitated about permitting 
me ; but his objections were at length 
overruled by my mother, who could not 
help thinking he restricted me too much, 
and wishing to see me introduced a little 
into life ; and the wished-for consent was 
accordingly at length obtained. 

" Hardly was I seated beside Mrs. Bra- 
bazon in the carriage that was to convey 
us thither, than she set about relating all 
I have related to you, conceiving it re- 
quisite I should be acquainted with these 
particulars, for the better regulation of my 
conduct. What my surprise, my emo- 
tions were at her disclosure, may easily be 
imagined. When I had a little recovered 



300 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

from its effects upon me, however, I could 
not help wishing she had not made it, 
feeling almost convinced it would operate 
as an unpleasant restraint upon my feel- 
ings. What she had said, however, could 
not be unsaid ; and in a state of extreme 
agitation, I found myself set down, at the 
termination of our journey, at my grand- 
father's residence, where it had been set- 
tled we were to take up our abode. 

" In consequence of the state in which 
she saw me at the moment, Mrs. Braba- 
zon began to regret her communication to 
me, or, at least, to wish she had delayed 
it till after my introduction to sir Philip. 
Fortunately for his confidence in her, 
however, his own at the instant was too 
great to permit him to notice mine ; and 
all passed off without any suspicion at his 
side of my knowing more than he wished. 

" I have already mentioned that lord 
Altidore was then with him ; his sister 
also, the wife of general Southwell, had 
lately arrived at Cheltenham, to remain 
with her grandfather till the return of the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 301 

general from abroad with his regiment, 
and whom I soon understood she had 
married, more for the sake of becoming 
her own mistress, than from any attach- 
ment to him, there being a very great 
disparity in their ages. 

" It is requisite I should be explicit 
with you, my dear madam ; I will there- 
fore confess, that I had not long known 
lord Altidore, ere I felt a wish that the 
idea or hope under which I had been 
invited to Cheltenham might not be dis- 
appointed. I soon began to imagine he 
did not view me with absolute indiffe- 
rence ; nor, as I afterwards ascertained, 
was I mistaken in the surmise ; but igno- 
rance of my real pretensions, united to a 
wish to sound the sentiments of sir Philip 
on the subject, ere he unresistingly gave 
way to an attachment for me, often occa- 
sioned a restriction and interruption in 
those attentions that at length induced a 
belief, on my side, that he was apprized of 
the plan which Mrs. Brabazon had dis- 
closed to me, and that these variations I 



302 THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

perceived in his manner were owing to a 
struggle between pride and inclination 
about acquiescing in it. 

" In vain Mrs. Brabazon assured me to 
the contrary. Those capable of violating 
confidence in one instance, we are apt to 
believe capable of violating it in another ; 
and that she had done so, she had herself 
confessed to me. In vain she assured me, 
that if I would only be guided by her, 
only allow it to be seen I did not prefer 
any other person to lord Altidore, every 
thing would turn out as I could wish, as 
my grandfather only wanted to be assured 
that the scheme of our union would not 
be unpleasing to either, to speak explicitly 
to him on the subject. I would neither 
give credit to her assertions, nor pay at- 
tention to her advice. My pride took the 
alarm, from believing there was a struggle 
in lord Altidore's mind about me ; and, in 
consequence, I decided on acting in such 
a manner as should either deceive him 
with regard to my feelings, or so alarm 
his own, as to force him to put me out of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 303 

suspense about them. Opportunities for 
coquetting are never wanting in such 
places as I was then at. I had hitherto 
been shy and bashful in my manner, both 
from natural diffidence, and the timidity 
in general attendant on a first introduc- 
tion into life ; but I now forced myself to 
act contrary to my real feelings, and give 
just a sufficient degree of laughing en- 
couragement to the gay triflers of the 
place, to draw a host of them about me. 

Amongst them was lord S , a young 

nobleman, as, I dare say, you know, of 
high celebrity in the fashionable world. 
He only seemed to require a little en- 
couragement to distinguish me by his 
attentions; every day they became still 
more particular; and Mrs. Brabazon at 
last began to remonstrate with me on the 
subject, pointing out the consequences 
that could hardly fail of accruing from ap- 
pearing to encourage him. But I derided 
her remonstrances. I was literally wise 
in my own conceit, and determined on 
persevering in what I conceived would 



304 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

either be the means of having my own 
feelings spared, or compelling the speedy 
disclosure of lord Altidore's. I blush when 
I review this part of my conduct ; it was 
a departure from the ingenuousness and 
simplicity in which I had been brought 
up; but I have been severely, though 
only properly punished for it. While I 

imagined I was rendering lord S 

subservient to my designs, he, in reality, 
was rendering me subservient to his. 

*' I know I may place the greatest reli- 
ance on your honour, else I could not bring 
myself to proceed in what must so terribly 

criminate another. Lord S was an 

encouraged admirer of Mrs. Southwell ; it 
was entirely on her account he had come 
to Cheltenham ; but, doubly watched and 
guarded as she was, the general having 
expressly commanded her remaining un- 
der the protection of her grandfather and 
brother, until his return from abroad, 
they knew they could not be too cautious 
in the manner in which they carried on 
their correspondence. The idea of ma- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 305 

king me a pretext for being continually at 
the house, or hovering about it, quickly 
suggested itself to them ; but the little en- 
couragement I at first gave to his particu- 
larities, made them for some time despair 
of succeeding in their plan ; but at length 
they had the gratification of seeing me un- 
consciously forwarding their design. 

" The encouragement I by degrees suf- 
fered myself to give lord S , had the 

effect of rendering his visits to the house 
at last placed to my account; and thus sus- 
picion averted from the right person, 
they allowed themselves a greater latitude 
than perhaps might otherwise have been 
the case. The chief scene of their stolen 
interviews was a summer-house in the 
garden, in consequence of knowing it was 
a place I much frequented, and that, if 

lord S should therefore be discovered 

there, or visiting it at improper hours, the 
circumstance would naturally be imputed 
to me. 

" This at length was the case. His vi- 
sits to it were discovered by some of the 



306 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

domestics, and betrayed to lord Altidore. 
After a struggle, as he confessed to me, 
between pride and resentment, be reproach- 
ed me on the subject. I warmly repelled 
the justice of the accusation ; and the hap- 
piest result might have been the conse- 
quence of this half disclosure of his senti- 
ments for me, but for an unexpected in- 
terruption to our conversation. 

" Musing on the prospect of happiness, 
that I now began to fancy was opening to 
my view, I was sauntering in the even- 
ing in the shrubbery, at the end of the 
garden, when I suddenly beheld lord 

S stealing through the trees. As 

anxious now to avoid and shun him, as I 
had ever before been to meet or encourage 
him, since I had no doubt the confirma- 
tion of the suspicion now excited about 
him would be the means of subverting 
every hope I now cherished, I instinc- 
tively shrunk within the summer-house, 
to which I was close at the moment, and 
bolted myself in, but without being aware 
of there being another entrance to it ; but 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 307 

hardly had I secured myself within it, 
when I was rendered conscious of this, by 
hearing the voice of lord S , address- 
ing himself, in the most passionate terms, 
to Mrs. Southwell, who was already wait- 
ing for him in the outer apartment. 

" Their conversation quickly unfolded 
to me all I have disclosed to you ; and at 
once alarmed and indignant by the disco- 
very I made, I determined immediately 
to betake me from Cheltenham, as the 
only means of extricating myself from the 
terrible predicament in which I saw my 
folly had placed me ; but I was destined 
to meet with the full punishment my im- 
prudence merited. Lord Altidore, missing 
me in the drawing-room, had followed, to 
seek me in the garden, for the purpose of 
renewing the conversation that was broken 
off in the morning. He caught sight of 
me just at the moment that I was taking 
refuge in the summer-house, and which, 
almost at the same moment, he beheld lord 
S — — entering from a different path. To 
doubt, after this, what I had so solemnly 



308 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

denied in the morning, he justly conceived 
would be ridiculous indeed ; and irritated 
at the imposition I had, as it appeared, 
endeavoured to practise on him, returned 
to the house, with a determination of quit- 
ting the place immediately, in order to 
avoid any further intercourse with me. 
At first he decided on silence on the sub- 
ject ; but a feeling of generous anxiety for 
my welfare induced him to give up this 
intention, and speak to Mrs. Brabazon on 

the subject of lord S , believing, from 

the well known character of his lordship, 
the interference of a friend absolutely es- 
sential for me. Mrs. Brabazon was all 
consternation at what she heard ; and, 
under the hope of there being some mis- 
take in it, tried to dissuade him from 
leaving Cheltenham so directly, but in 
vain ; and ere I returned to the house, he 
was gone. What I felt on learning his 
departure, or rather, the cause of it, may 
easier be conceived than described. Yet, 
had I not the power of vindicating my- 
self? — But no, for how could I attempt 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 309 

what might be the means of endangering 
his life, or else of subjecting me to the 
odious imputation of being capable of 
basely slandering another ? and that Mrs. 
Southwell would do every thing, for her 
own sake, for the purpose of inducing the 
belief of this, was hardly to be doubted. 

" To be brief, I resolved on submitting 
to what I had incurred through my own 
conduct, rather than, by making an effort 
to clear myself from it, involve myself 
perhaps in still greater un happiness than 
I already experienced ; but with what an- 
guish, what difficulty, convinced as I was, 
that, by appearing to acknowledge the 
justness of the suspicion, I was depriving 
myself of the esteem I so highly valued ! 
The reproaches of Mrs. Brabazon were not 
wanting to add to my misery, so much 
did she resent the disappointment of what 
she had taken such pains to plan ; and, re- 
stored to my parents, she protested she 
would trouble herself no more about me. 
As impatient now to get rid of me, since 
there was an end of any further projects 



SIO TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

for me, as she had before been to obtain 
me for her companion, the next day was 
fixed for our departure from Cheltenham, 
without any opposition from my grand- 
father, who, under the persuasion that I 
had either ill-treated his favourite, or else 
failed of inspiring him with any interest, 
soon lost the little he himself had experi- 
enced for me. 

" Mrs. Brabazon kept her word ; from 
the time of my return to Bath, I never 
heard from her; nor, except by chance, of 
lord Altidore, till our coming to this 
neighbourhood, when " 

Here she paused, blushed deeply, and 
appeared extremely agitated. — " I guess 
what you would say," cried Miss Erin — 
" you heard of his particularity to me; 
but you heard, I am convinced, more 
than ever was the case, of an attachment 
between us, which, in reality, never had 
existence, but in the imaginations of those 
who reported it ; and I now joy to think 
lord Altidore is free as ever to renew his 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 311 

VOWS to lier who has the best right to 
have them plighted to her." 

"Ah, my dear ma'am !" sighed Rosetta, 
" such a thing is not to be imagined ! his 
being still at liberty to tender his addres- 
ses where he pleases, can be of little conse- 
quence to me, since, with such an impres- 
sion on his mind against me, it is not to 
be supposed I could ever occupy another 
thought." 

" Certainly, if that impression was al- 
lowed to remain," replied Miss Erin ; 
" but that must not be ; some method 
must be devised for preventing your hap- 
piness being completely sacrificed to your 
generosity." 

"Ah! impossible!" said Rosetta; "I 
see no method by which I could attempt 
the vindication so essential to me, but at 
a hazard I tremble to think of." 

" We must hope the reverse," replied 
Miss Erin. " If Mrs. Southwell possesses 
the slightest generosity, she will not refuse 
to do you that justice you have a right to 
demand from her." 



312 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" She should not," said Rosetta; " yet 
that she will criminate herself for my sake, 
I can hardly flatter myself. No, no, my 
dear madam, I know your kind motive 
for trying to inspirit me with hope ; but 
what is likely to prove delusive, I will not 
voluntarily yield to, convinced, as I am, 
that I should be unable to bear the renew- 
al of the agitation it must excite. When 
we have made up our mind to any certain 
loss or deprivation, we at least experience 
composure, and that I will not risk by 
again giving way to expectation. But I 
have trespassed too long upon your atten- 
tion ; I have nothing further to add, than, 
from the time of my return to Bath, a 
deep and consuming melancholy has prey- 
ed upon my health and peace ; but not so 
entirely from any disappointment I expe- 
rienced, as the conviction of the light in 
which I should be regarded by my pa- 
rents, if aware of the manner in which I 
acted; tormented by this, their tender- 
ness — their fond caresses, have often failed 
of soothing my feelings; for to be able to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 313 

derive real comfort and happiness from 
the affection of our friends, it is requisite 
we should feel conscious of truly meriting 
it." 

Eveleen could not dissent from the truth 
of this observation ; if praise undeserved is 
censure in disguise, she was well, aware 
the fond caresses of confiding friends must 
be a source of torture to the secretly up- 
braiding heart; she, however, said every 
thing she could to sooth the fair afflicted, 
nor left her till she was a little restored 
to composure. 

As she was slowly retracing her way 
back, musing upon what she had been 
listening to, and the extreme difficulty, 
she feared, would attend any attempt for 
the vindication of Rosetta, she was abrupt- 
ly joined by lord Altidore again. He look- 
ed all agitation; and Eveleen, not well 
knowing what he might like to acknow- 
ledge, felt utterly at a loss how to address 
him ; but from the embarrassment she ex- 
perienced he soon relieved her.—" I see I 

VOL. IV. r 



314 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Startled you," he said, " by the abruptness 
with which I joined you, but the agitation 
of my mind must be my excuse for this. 
You will not wonder at the emotions I ex- 
perience when I inform you, that I have 
overheard the whole of what you have 
been listening to. The anxiety I was in 
about the fair being whom you have ho- 
noured with your notice, would not permit 
me to retreat from the cottage till I had 
seen you again. While waiting for you 
in its vicinity, you entered the arbour with 
her, behind which I was sheltered, and 
without actually intending to listen, I was 
involuntarily ri vetted to the spot. What 
my feelings were at the recital I thus over- 
heard, may easier be conceived than de- 
scribed. To learn a relationsliip 1 had be- 
fore no idea of, naturally filled me witli 
surprise; and if the perfect vindication of 
a being that had been so interesting to me 
occasioned delight, yet how was that em- 
poisoned by the reflection of its being ef- 
fected at the expence of so near and dear 
a relative as a sister ! true, on the feeling 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 315 

and generosity of Miss Erin I knew I 
might rely for secrecy on the terrible sub- 
ject; but how gaUing — how afflicting to 
think, there should be any thing in the 
conduct of one so nearly connected to 
me, to render the exertion of these requi- 
site ! But I see I pain, 1 embarrass you," 
said lord Altidore; " let me, therefore, only 
briefly add, that had I obeyed the impulse 
of my feelings, I should, at once, have dis- 
covered myself; but what had previously 
occurred in the cottage rendered me fear- 
ful of yielding to them. I hasten home, 
however, to explain myself to my fair and 
newly-discovered relative, and trust the 
ample justice I now do her in my own 
mind, will be considered a sufficient atone- 
ment and reparation for the wrong before 
done her." 

Here was an unexpected termination, 
indeed, to the difficulties which Eveleen 
had before anticipated, in the way of Ro- 
setta*s happiness ! But Rosetta could not 
be brought so immediately to acquiesce in 
the wishes of her lover as was expected ; 



Sl6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

she was aware of the confidence it was na- 
tural for him to repose in the word of his 
sister, and that, should she therefore 
choose to deny what she had been accused 
of, the renewal of jealousy and distrust 
might be the consequence; and therefore 
finally decided, after some struggle with 
her feelings, on positively resisting the re- 
newal of his addresses, except assured 
there could be no danger of what she ap- 
prehended. The consequence of this de- 
cision was the delay of the introduction 
of lord Altidore to her parents, and that 
appearance of particularity between his 
lordship and Eveleen, from her being the 
confidant of both parties, that more than 
once excited uneasiness in the mind of 
Donaghue. 

Mrs. Southwell did not, by this time, 
require the admonitory letters of her bro- 
ther, to awaken her to a full sense of the 
injury she had done Rosetta; but still she 
knew not how to bring herself to acknow- 
ledge what must so essentially injure her 
in his estimation. The serious considera-. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 317 

tions effected by declining health, brought 
on by the appearance of culpability into 
which she had been drawn through the 

artifices of lord S , who, finding he 

could not completely triumph over her 
principles, at length deserted her for ano- 
ther, finally effected what was wished, and 
the happiest result was the consequence. 

Lord Altidore had, indeed, been seri- 
ously attached to Rosetta; so much so, 
that it was more through pique and re- 
sentment, than any real transfer of re- 
gard, he had been induced to think of 
another. Fully acquitted in his opinion, 
she no longer delayed making known 
to her parents what has already been 
detailed, and it may well be believed, 
they had no hesitation in receiving lord 
Altidore as a relative, or sanctioning her 
union with him. Preparations for this 
immediately commenced, though, out of 
respect to the feelings of sir James Mel 
ville, of a private nature, so that sir Wil- 
liam actually had not deceivpr! Oonaghue, 
P 3 



318 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

when he informed him that lord Altidore 
was on the very eve of changing his con- 
dition. 

Those who have never experienced dis- 
quietude cannot properly be said to know 
what real happiness is, so much does con- 
trast heighten every felicitous feeling. 
This was not wanting to add to the enjoy- 
ment of the party now assembled at the 
Vale, and perhaps a more truly happy one 
could hardly have been met with. 

Lady Jane, w^ho, through her emissaries^ 
kept up a kind of telegraphic communi- 
cation with the neighbourhood, soon re- 
ceived intelligence of all that had occurred 
at the Vale. How lord Rosenellis had 
been able to vindicate himself of the 
charge she had brought against him, she 
could not conceive, but she had a strong 
suspicion it was not without a detection 
to her prejudice, and, in consequence, de- 
cided on no more returning to the Vale, 
ietAir,^ it utterly impossible, with all her 
confidence, to be able to face any of the^ 
j)arUt;s she had so attempted to injure inx- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 319 

mediately again ; not that she apprehend, 
ed positive reproaches from them, but the 
idea of silent scorn was more insupportable 
than that of absolute invective ; and she 
accordingly hastened to Dublin, for the 
purpose of returning to London. Hence, 
however, not to be entirely foiled in every 
scheme, she dispatched a letter to sir Ed- 
ward, reminding him of the wish he had 
expressed to be allowed to accompany her 
to England, whenever she thought of re- 
turning to it. 

But this letter met with a very different 
reception from what she had hoped or ex- 
pected ; the spell she had cast round the 
flattered baronet was dissolved the mo- 
ment she had taken her departure, and 
with delight he returned to the enjoyment 
of poor little Miss Bond's conversation — an 
enjoyment he had not ceased regretting 
his relinquishment of, even at the very 
moment he was most gratified by the 
proud distinction to which he conceived 
the notice of lady Jane had elevated him, 
so perfectly was the conversation of this 



320 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

young lady adapted to the meridian of his 
understanding, and so inexhaustible was 
the amusement he derived from her de- 
scription of all the wonders she had seen 
when in Paris, Not immediately, how- 
ever, could he obtain her forgiveness for 
the sudden cessation of his attentions to 
her; perseverance, at length, subdued her 
resentment, and the result of their renew- 
ed intercourse was a proposal that devoted 
him to her for the remainder of his life. 

The party at the Vale were delighted 
to hear of the departure of her ladyship, 
since, after what had occurred, nothing 
could well have been more distressing than 
for those who could not, without pain, 
feign what they did not feel, to have been 
obliged to receive her again. Generously 
pardoning all the uneasiness she had caused 
them, their wish was more for her amend- 
ment than punishment ; but a wish which, 
when they afterwards encountered her in 
London, they had very little reason to be- 
lieve, either from what they heard or then 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 321 

saw, there was any chance of yet awhile 
being realized. 

Very little further remains to be added : 
a reconciliation was no sooner effected at 
the Vale, than Donaghue waited on his 
uncle, and, from the explanation that en- 
sued, had the pleasure of being accompa- 
nied by him from sir Ulick Magennis's, 
where he had taken up his abode, to Al- 
toir-na-Grenie. It was to the oblicrincr 
information, indeed, of sir Ulick, that Do- 
naghue was indebted for the letter he had 
received from the general; and, had the 
artifices of her ladyship prevailed, there 
would have been new claims upon his re- 
gard, that must have superseded those of 
his nephew. 

The preparations that were so abruptly 
interrupted for the marriage of Donaghue 
and Eveleen were quickly renewed ; and 
the fondest wish of lady Erin's heart was 
at length accomplished, in witnessing the 
union of her daughter with the son of her 
earliest and dearest friend. The marriage 
of Melville took place about the same 



322 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

time, and lord Altidore's quickly followed. 
From what has already been mentioned 
of the respective parties, we conceive, any 
of their respective plans or arrangements 
would be superfluous ; suffice it, therefore, 
that what they censured in others, they 
resisted being allured into themselves; 
and though occasionally obliged and in- 
duced to absent themselves from their re- 
spective homes, still made it a point to 
have it understood, that the land of their 
forefathers was their permanent residence. 
The result was all that was gratifying to 
their feelings; from it they clearly saw, 
that were their example followed, many 
of the evils now complained of there 
would be avoided ; for — 

'* 111 fares the land, to hast'ning ills a prey," 

when basely deserted by its own children. 

FINIS. 



Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London. 



NEW PUBLICATIONS 

PRINTED FOR 

^. K, JVKWM^Jf H CO. 



AT THE 



tyr linear a c^iL t€44f 
LEADENHALL-STREET, LONDON 



Prejudice, or Physiognomy, by Azilc D'Arcy, 3 vols.. . 15 
Jessy, or the Rose of Donald's Cottage, by the Author 

of the Bra^p of Bohemia, 4 vols. .., 1 .' ') 

Yamboo, or thd North American Slave, Sd edition, by 

the same, 3 vols o 

A Bride and no Wife, by Henrietta Rouviere Moss, 4 

vols 1 

The Foundling of Devonshire, or Who is she ? by Miss 

C. D. Haynes, 5 vols 5 ? 

Leap Year, or a Woman's Privilege, by Selina Daven- 
port, n vols 1 T ' ' 

Howard Castle, or a Romance from the Mountains, by 

a North Briton, 5 vols 1 ' ~- 

The Deserter, by the Author of Montreithe, and Hu<:- 

band Hunters, 4 vols i , o 

Edric the Forester, by Mrs. Ker, 3 vols m !.> o 

Beauchamp, or the Wheel of Fortune, 4 vols ] :^ 

Robertina, by Catherine G. Ward, 2 vols o lo 

Anti-Delphine, by Mrs. Byron, 2 vols 10 

Amabel, by Mrs. Harvey, 2d edition 1 4 

The Balance of Comfort, or the Old Maid and the Mar- 
ried Woman, by Mrs. Ross, 4th edition, 3 vols i6 

Mademoiselle de la Fayette, by Madame Genlis, 2 vols. l'» 6 
Secrets in every Mansion, or the Surgeon's Memoran- 
dum Book, by Anne of Swansea, 5 vols. ..,,.... I ' 6 

8] 



NEW Pb^BLlCATIONS. 

£ s. ti. 

My Native Land, or the Test of Heroism, by Catherine 

G. Ward 6 <> 

The Prior Claim, by Mrs. IlifiF, 2 vols 9 

Lady Durnevor, or My Father's Wife, by A. F. Holstein, 
Svols 16 

Beggar Girl and her Benefactors, by Mrs. Bennett, 

3d edition, 5 vols 1 7 6 

Rosaura di Viralva, 'Id. edition, 2 vols 10 <> 

Cambrian Pictures, or Every one has Errors, by Ann of 
Swansea, 3 vols 16 

Strangers of Lindenfeldt, or Who is my Father? by 

Mrs. Ross, Author of the Cousins, &c. 3 vols 15 '-' 

I says, says I, a Novel, by Thinks I to Myself, 2 vols . 10 t". 

The Monastery of St. Columb, or the Atonement, by 
Mrs. Roche, Author of the Children of the Abbey, 
Discarded Son, &c. &c. 3 vols 1 r 

Stories of the Four Nations, by the Author of Margiana, 
Sir William Dorien, &c. 5 vols 1 7 

Sir Ferdinand of England, an Historical Romance, by 

J. N. Brewer, Author of A Winter's Tale, &c. 4 vols 1 'J 

Substance and Shadow, or the Fisherman's Daughters 

of Brighton, 4 vols i "i. '^ 

Arrivals from India, by Henrietta Rouviere Mosse, 4 vols 1 l t> 

<* Says She to her Neighbour, What?" being a Com- 
panion to " Thiniis I to Myself," 4 vols 1 o 

Old Times and New, or Sir Lionel and his Protegee, 

4 vols i i" 

Ethelia, second edition, by the same, 3 vols u lo 

Santo Sebastiano, or the Young Protector, 5 vols 1 10 th 

Ferrandino, a German Romance, 2 vols 10 6 

Trecothick Bower, or the Lady of the West Country, 
by Mrs. Roche, 3 vols It; 

Midnight Weddings, by Mrs. Meekc, second edition, 
3 vols 1 ^ 

Conscience, by Mrs. Mceke, 4 vols 1 4 

Conviction, or She is Innocent, by the Author of Cam- 
brian Pictures, &c. 5 vols 1 -- Jh.-:^, 

Tales of the Passions, by G, Moore, second edition, 8vo. 10 6 
