TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



Printed by J. Darling, Lcadenhall-Street, London. 



TRADITION OF the CASTLE ; 

OR, 

SCENES IN THE EMERALD ISLE. 
IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BT 

REGINA MARIA ROCHE, 

AUTHOR OF 

THE CHILDRJEN OF THE ABBEY, VICAR OF LANSDOWN, MAID OF THE 
HAMLET, See. 



" Ob Erin, my country ! though sad and forsaken. 

In dreams I revisit thy sea-beaten shore; 

Bat, alas ! in a far foreign laud I awaken. 

And sigh for the friends who can meet me no more. 



VOL. III. 



-i9SS*»'^^<*<<^ 



LONDON : 

PRINTED FOR 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-STREET. 



1824. 



V, 3 



THE 

TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 



^^^^.^•^^ 



CHAPTER I. 



** We may hold it as an established maxim, that as no one 
was ever so completely wretched as not to have some 
intervals of joy, so no one was ever so happy as not to 
have some portion of bitterness mingled with the sweets 
of life." 

J_jADY Jane, never forgetful of any 
thing that concerned her own interests, 
failed not to take an opportunity of men- 
tioning to sir William the secret visits of 
Donaghue to the Vale; but though she 
was decided on doing so, in the most in- 
vidious manner,, she, at the same time, 
wished to do so in such a way as should 

VOL. III. B 



2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

excite no displeasure in the breast of Miss 
Erin, or create any suspicion of the fact. 
Accordingly, one morning that they chan- 
ced to be sitting together, that is, she, sir 
William, and Miss Erin, affecting to have 
forgot the date of a newspaper, in which 
she pretended there was something she 
wanted sir William to peruse — " Let me 
see, let me see," she said, musing, "what 
morning it was I read that paper — oh ! ay, 
now I recollect, it was the very morning, 
my dear," turning to Miss Erin, " in which 
you met Mr. O'Brien in the grotto; so 
you may know from that how many days 
ago it is." 

" Met Mr. O'Brien in the grotto ! my 
daughter meet Mr. O'Brien in the grotto !" 
repeated sir William, in a tone of utter 
astonishment, not unmingled with indig- 
nation. 

" Oh dear, yes,** said lady Jane, with af- 
fected innocence, " that — that is — I mean," 
pretending to stammer, in order to have 
aYi appearance of confusion, while Miss 
Erin blushed up to the very temples, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 3 

trembled with agitation — " I — I mean by- 
chance ; for it was entirely owing to that, 
that Mr. O'Brien said he came there." 

" At all events, whether it was or not, 
it was to chance, I am convinced," said sir 
WiUiam, in a still more indignant tone, 
and pacing the room in evident discom- 
posure, " that Miss Erin's meeting him 
there was owing." 

" Assuredly," said Miss Erin, making 
an effort to recover herself; though not 
without darting an angry glance at lady 
Jane, for what she conceived her girlish 
inadvertence, for she knew not how to im- 
pute to any thing else what had occurred 
— " And I am equally certain that the 
meeting was as much a matter of surprise 
to Mr. O'Brien as it was to me." 

" To be sure," said lady Jane, as if the 
remark had been addressed to her ; " how 
can that be doubted when he said so him- 
self? and really," laughing immoderately, 
" he gave the most amusing account of 
the chance that brought him to the grotto; 
b2 



4 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

for, in the first place, only think of his be- 
incr such an absent creature as not to know 
whither he was going, and, in the next, 
of his letting little Bill be his guide!" 
and she told the story of the day in a way 
well calculated to have it turned into ri- 
dicule, and create a belief of its being ow- 
ing to a consciousness that made him fear 
suspicion, taking care, of course, to give 
no hint of the looks, or sneers, or inuen- 
does, that forced him to give the explana- 
tion she now, by her manner, appeared so 
evidently to deride. — " I couldn't help 
rallying him," she invidiously continued, 
" on the lucky chance, or instinct, or what- 
ever else he pleased to call it, that always 
brought him to the exact spot where he 
could be serviceable, and just at the criti- 
cal moment; as for instance, when this 
dear creature here met with that frightful 
accident, and then again, the other morn- 
ino, when she was taken so ill in the grot- 
to ; so that really it would almost tempt 
one to imagine he was always wandering 
about here by himself, if one could possi- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 5 

bly account for his wishing to make a se- 
cret of what there is not the slightest ne- 
cessity for, from his acquaintance with the 
family." 

" 111 do you say?" cried sir William, 
catching at what she had said of the in- 
disposition of his daughter — " Eveleen 
ill ! — the other morning in the grotto, and 
nothing mentioned of the circumstance ! 
— really this seems altogether an extraor- 
dinary affair — such silence, such mystery 
about it." 

" Indeed, my dear father," said Miss 
Erin, in a tone perfectly collected, though 
still more provoked with lady Jane, going 
up to him, and taking him by the hand, 
" it was not worth, at least so I thought, 
mentioning;" and she proceeded to ex- 
plain, that while breakfast was preparing 
she had strolled to the grotto, and hearing 
the dog bark, had come out from the in- 
ner apartment, when she found the person 
he was jumping about was Mr. O'Brien, 
who was just retiring, being in a hurry, 
as was afterwards ascertained, to get home. 



b TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

owing to an engagement he had there, 
when she was seized with a — a dizziness 
(here she did perhaps hesitate for an in- 
stant), that rendered his support needful 
for a minute or two. " And this was all," 
she added ; "and I am sure you will allow 
not of sufficient consequence to mention." 
" Assuredly," involuntarily escaped the 
lips of sir William ; but he could not, or 
rather would not, have refrained from say- 
ing what he thought ; and let it be who 
it might that deserved to be accused or 
suspected of duplicity, or want of open- 
ness in their conduct, he felt exultingly 
convinced, from this simple little detail, 
that it was not his Eveleen ; and in the 
joy of his heart at the conviction, kissed 
her polished forehead. What an addition 
to his happiness would it have been, could 
he equally have acquitted others of these ! 
Various circumstances indeed had com- 
bined to render him highly interested 
about Donaghue, and inspire him with a 
sincere and fervent wish that he might be 
found worthy of that sincere friendship he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 7 

desired to evince towards him. But the 
invidious insinuations of lady Jane, or ra- 
ther, the inferences they led to, were not 
thrown away upon him. Anxious to 
cultivate the regard of his daughter, but 
ignorant of his real sentiments, Donaghue 
might have been led to decline the invita- 
tions to the Vale, for the purpose of letting 
all suspicion about him cease, while, in se- 
cret, he sought to win her regard, but in 
such a way, so much through seeming ac* 
cident, as would, probably, prevent their 
meetings being mentioned, where the 
cause of them might be suspected, or could 
not be without injury. 

Should this be proved to be the case — 
should it really be ascertained that he was 
capable of such degrading artifice, sir Wil- 
liam resolved, from that moment, to en- 
deavour to forget there was such a being 
in existence. But no, he would not give 
way to an apprehension of the kind; it 
might, it probably was, exactly as the 
young man himself had represented,though 
the decisive manner of lady Jane, who 



8 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was certainly keen and penetrating, seem- 
ed to imply the contrary. But come, was 
all fair and clear about her ladyship? 
Might not the spleen of jealousy have led 
to her speaking as she had done? for sir 
William had not been without hearing of 
the penchant with which her ladyship had 
once honoured the gentleman, or that it 
was generally supposed it would not, if he 
pleased, be a very difficult matter to occa- 
sion its renewal. But, in short, sir Wil- 
liam was of a disposition and way of think- 
ing that always inclined him to lean to 
the favourable side, and put the best con- 
struction on every thing. Aware of the 
fallibility of human judgment, he never 
could avoid remembering the necessity 
there was for our closely investigating 
every circumstance, ere we allowed our- 
selves to form a final judgment upon any ; 
so convinced was he of this, that he never 
suffered himself to be easily biassed or pre- 
judiced against any one; no matter whe- 
ther friend or foe, they were equally en- 
titled to be considered innocent, till ir- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 9 

refragable proof to the contrary was addu- 
ced. In this way he resolved to consider 
Donaghue, and believed he should be 
able; but the poison of suspicion is uncon- 
sciously imbibed. . From the moment of 
lady Jane's communication, he became 
restless and uneasy ; if he rode out, he was 
sure of returning with precipitancy, and 
if he kept walking about the grounds, 
which he now often did for the whole of 
a day, he failed not of asking every one 
he met something about Donaghue ; but 
he heard little of him, and saw less; for 
after what had occurred at the grotto, and 
the construction which lady Jane seemed 
maliciously determined on putting on it, 
prudence compelled Donaghue, for some 
days, to refrain from approaching the Vale ; 
but one morning he thought he should 
like to amuse himself with angling in a 
trout stream that lay in its vicinity. The 
thought had no sooner occurred than mat- 
ters were quickly prepared for the pur- 
pose; and taking his fishing-rod in his 
b3 



10 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hand, and giving the basket, with his 
tackle, to Neptune, that eagerly snapt it 
up between his ivory teeth, he set out. 
But it so happened, that by the time he 
reached the stream, all inclination for ang- 
ling was over; he wished, however, to 
rest himself for a while, but there was no 
pleasant seat or shelter here ; yet the moun- 
tains, amidst which the stream ran, were 
smooth and verdant, and in some places 
projected so far as to cast a shadow on the 
path ; but, somehow, Donaghue did not 
like stopping here ; a little further on was 
an entrance to the Vale, and in one of its 
delightful bowers, indeed, it would be a 
luxury to repose for a short time; and so, 
after a faint struggle with it, he suffered 
inclination to get the better of every other 
consideration, as is but too often the case 
with many, and entered the forbidden 
ground, closely followed by Neptune, with 
the basket still between his teeth. 

He had not advanced very far, when, 
through some flowering thickets, he espi- 
ed a beautiful circular building, raised on 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 11 

a gentle elevation ; he immediately, though 
cautiously, made his way to it, and hav- 
ing ascertained that there was no one 
within it, ventured to ascend the steps on 
which it stood, and take possession of an 
inner apartment, furnished with sofas and 
small reading-tables, and elegantly orna- 
mented; here he had been for some time, 
literally indulging all to thought, when 
Neptune, who having set down his basket, 
had stretched himself at his feet, to take a 
little nap, suddenly started up with a Avag 
of his tail, and, at the same moment. Miss 
Erin was seen tripping up the steps. 

To describe what the embarrassment of 
Donaghue was at this moment would be 
impossible ; though to see her was the wish 
of his soul, yet to be surprised thus, con- 
tinually intruding, as it should seem, where 
he ought not, was not endurable ; and ra- 
ther than it should have happened again, 
he could have wished himself a thousand 
miles off; but there was no help for it ; 
he looked about him, but there was no 



12 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

way of escape, and he strove, but certain- 
ly in vain, to collect himself. 

But if he was confused at what had 
happened, not less so was Miss Erin. She 
stopped for an instant, not merely through 
surprise, but from something of dismay 
at beholding him, but too well aware of 
the confirmation his thus continuing to 
visit the place clandestinely might, if dis- 
covered, be of the suspicions which, it 
was but too evident, lady Jane had infused 
into her father's mind respecting him. 
Making an effort, however, to recover her 
presence of mind, from a hope and trust 
that what she was apprehensive of might 
not be the case, she proceeded to ask Do- 
naghue whether he had found any one in 
the building, saying, when she had left it 
a short time before, to feed some favourite 
peacocks she had near it, she had left some 
friends there. 

Donaghue replied in the negative, add- 
ing, that if he had ascertained any one 
being there, he certainly should not have 
thought of entering it. — "But my being 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 13 

certain there was not, does not, however, I 
feel convinced," he continued, " exempt 
me from the necessity of making an apo- 
logy for what, I am aware, must be consi- 
dered an intrusion ; but I don't know how 
it has happened, that I have lately been so 
unfortunate as to be continually acting in 
a manner to incur the imputation ; to 
prevent any thing so disagreeable, I really 
could wish that sir William would bar his 
enchanting grounds to all strangers." 

" Then I am sure, if he did," replied 
Miss Erin, with one of her most bewitch- 
ing smiles, " he would not bar them against 
you ; though, indeed," recollecting the re- 
solve she had made, to take advantage of 
the first opportunity that occurred, for 
speaking to him on the subject of his de- 
clining the overtures that were made to 
induce him to visit at the Vale, " I cannot 
avoid observing, now that you have 
brought it to my mind, that it seems to 
be your wish that we should all here con- 
sider you in the light of a stranger. How 
is it, Mr. O'Brien, that we never see you 



14 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

at the house? of the pleasure — rather let 
me say the happiness, my mother would 
derive from the circumstance, you cannot, 
I think, be a stranger ; and as to my fa- 
ther, he must himself, I should suppose, 
have satisfied you on this head." 

Donaghue, who, at the mention of her 
mother, involuntarily opened his lips, to 
try and make some excuse for what she 
thus gently reproached him for, at this al- 
lusion to her father — her cold, her unfeel- 
ing father, who, under a specious shew of 
complaisance, had done so much to wound 
his feelings, started back, with an expres- 
sion of haughty emotion that did not es- 
cape her. — " Why, surely," she resumed, 
after earnestly regarding him for a minute 
in silence, " no one can have misled — no 

one can have prejudiced " but ere she 

could finish the sentence, Neptune, that, 
during this short scene, still keeping watch 
over his basket however, had been sitting, 
apparently admiring both of them, gave a 
sudden bark, and sprang towards the door. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 15 

and both turning to it, in consequence, 
they beheld sir William Erin entering. 

Unutterable was the confusion of both 
at the instant. Donaghue, without hav- 
ing heard any thing of lady Jane's invi- 
dious insinuations, was perfectly aware of 
the awkwardness there was in being thus 
found conversing, in private, with Miss 
Erin, while he declined opportunities of 
doing so in public; and Miss Erin, ac- 
quainted with these insinuations, trembled 
to think of the confirmation they might 
now receive. Of her father's giving way 
to any idea injurious to her, she had no ap- 
prehension, but she could not indulge the 
same confidence with regard to Donaghue, 
and her agitation was exceedingly extreme. 

" Don't let me disturb you, sir," said sir 
William, stiffly bowing to Donaghue, 
who, rather through the confusion he was 
thrown into, by his unexpected entrance, 
or his eagerness to fly him, had begun to 
scramble up his gloves, fishing-rod, and 
hat, all of which he had carelessly thrown 
on the floor, as he rested himself on a sofa. 



16 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

*' You don't, sir," replied Donaghue ; 
" having apologized to Miss Erin for be- 
ing found here, I was on the point of de- 
parting as you entered." 

" Yes," said Miss Erin, catching at what 
seemed to give an opening for an explana- 
tion, " Mr. O'Brien has been making 
quite as serious an affair of being found 
resting himself here^ ^ter his long, fa- 
tiguing walk, this warm morning, to the 
mountains, as if he knew not that the 
grounds were ©pen. to visitors; and I — I," 
continued she, a little disconcerted by per- 
ceiving no relaxation in her father's mus- 
cles, " I have been asking him why he 
makes himself so great a stranger at the 
house." 

" Indeed ! I should have conceived the 
question superfluous; for, from the over- 
tures he has received to visit there, I 
should have presumed he would have 
done so, if agreeable." 

Donaghue coloured like crimson, at the 
cold, repelling tone in which these words 
were uttered ; his heart heaved with in- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTTE. 17 

dignant feelings, and involuntarily casting 
a look of bitter reproach on sir William, 
was abruptly departing, when Miss Erin, 
still anxious to effect what she wished, 
stopped him, by saying she wanted to let 
her father notice his dog — " The fine 
creature, my dear sir," she said, patting 
the head of Neptune as she spoke, and be- 
ginning to give him some cakes from off 
one of the tables, " to which I am so 
much indebted — is he not a noble animal?" 

The features of sir William now, in- 
deed, relaxed — " A noble one," he said, 
" indeed !" laying his hand on the head of 
the dog. " Should his master ever get 
tired of him " 

" Tired !" repeated Donaghue, in a tone 
of indignation, as if at the bare possibility 
of such a thing — " tired of a creature, ex- 
clusive of every other consideration, that 

was the means of preserving " He 

stopped, checked by the rising blush on 
Miss Erin's cheek, from giving further ut- 
terance to his feelings at the moment; but 
he had said enough to betray them, and 



18 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

but too fearful of this, he again became 
confused, and hastily repeating his parting 
bow, was out of sight in a minute. 

Well now, after this, what remained to 
be done, but indeed decidedly to shun 
every place where he was likely to meet 
Miss Erin — to resolutely avoid every path 
where it was probable the impress of her 
steps could be traced. Yet to deny him- 
self — to give up the only gratification he 
now allowed himself, or rather the only 
thing from which he derived any gratifi- 
cation, that of frequenting the scenes with 
which her idea was associated ! but it must 
be done; there was no other method of 
clearing — of redeeming himself from the 
degrading imputation of having frequent- 
ed them for the purpose of throwing him- 
self in her way — an opinion which, it was 
evident to him, sir William entertained, 
and which, no doubt, made him highly 
applaud himself for the cold, calculating 
caution w^ith which he had previously 
acted towards him. He returned home in 
a state of agitation and abstraction, that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 19 

rendered his movements absolutely me- 
chanical ; in this way he continued walk- 
ing up and down the parlour, unmindful 
of Rosebud, whom he found sitting there, 
looking over some English newspapers, 
which he had just collected at the Vale. 
The doctor, however, was not equally un- 
mindful of him ; he soon perceived he was 
under some great disturbance of mind ; 
and, from some broken sentences that, 
from time to time, unconsciously escaped 
him, almost as quickly understood what 
the cause of this disturbance was. For 
some time he continued to watch him 
quietly; at length, unable longer to con- 
trol or contain himself — " Ah, boy, boy !" 
he exclaimed, suddenly starting from his 
chair, and throwing aside the papers, " is 
this the way you are going on, making 
a fool of yourself about one woman, 
when there are perhaps twenty others 
her equal, that you might have by only 
asking !** 

" Her equal !" repeated Donaghue, in 
a tone of lofty contempt, quite forgetting. 



20 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in the indignation excited by the sugges- 
tion, that he was, by this reply, admitting 
the fact of which he was accused by the 
doctor, that of being violently in love with 
some one. 

" Ye^ her equal !" returned the doctor : 
" I allow the lady in question — for it's use- 
less any longer to conceal, Donaghue, that 
I have, for some time past, being perfect- 
ly aware of the state of your heart — to be 
very beautiful, and very amiable, and, of 
course, very deserving of admiration ; but 
then it does not follow, that, in allowing 
this, 1 do not think others equally so. 
God help us all ! if there were only one 
Helen at a time in the world, the wars 
between the Grecian and Trojan worthies 
would be nothing to the wars we should 
have then amongst us ; though I am aware, 
for the time being, every lover esteems 
his mistress a Helen. Yet, go where we 
will, be thrown on what coast we may, 
where is the place where beauty, and 
merit, and agreeableness, may not be 
found? and how consolatory should the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 21 

reflection be to a person suifering, as he 
conceives, under a hopeless passion, if a 
man will but open his eyes !" 

" Consolatory !" said Donaghue, " what, 
when he would not, if he could, divest 
himself of the idea of her he loves ?" 

" Pshaw ! this is the rant of romance. 
If I long for a thing that is unattainable, 
can I give a better proof of sense, than by 
endeavouring to banish the thoughts of it 
as speedily as possible from my mind ?" 

" No, not an idea that while cherished 
in the mind must preserve it from any 
thing that is base and degrading, by keep- 
ing alive in it the recollection of what is 
lovely and excellent; while it dwells with 
delight on the idea of these, it is not pro- 
bable it will become perverted and de- 
based." 

" Pshaw !'' exclaimed the doctor again ; 
" but I see there's no arguing rationally 
with a man who is an enthusiast in every 
thing, as you are; when advancing life, 
however, has a little chilled the glow of 
blood that occasions this, I make no doubt 



22 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you'll allow I have not been incorrect in 
my observation." 

" Without waiting till then, I allow it 
now, notwithstanding what you have ac- 
cused me of being." 

" Not without reason," rejoined the 
doctor; " now do acknowledge that also." 

" Well, supposing I do," said Dona- 
ghue, with a smile, " may I not retort the 
charge on you ? for if warm friendships, 
a zeal in the cause of humanity that no- 
thing can cool, nothing intimidate, a 
readiness to brave every thing, even with- 
out solicitation, in the cause of the help- 
less and the oppressed, be not enthusiasm, 
I know not what is. Let neither, there- 
fore, my dear doctor, blush to be accused 
of it. The vulgar rail at, and sneer at it, 
because they do not understand it; to 
them it means nothing more than folly, 
or madness, or the extravagance of Hot- 
spur, that would make us attempt to 
' pluck bright honour from the pale-faced 
moon;' but the feeling and the enlight- 
ened comprehend it better. As sensibili- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. ^3 

ty is the source inexhausted of all that is 
precious in our joys, and costly in our sor- 
rows, so are they aware that this is the 
stimulus to whatever is great and glorious 
in our actions ; or, in other words, that 
nothing ever great or glorious was at- 
tempted without it; and that, therefore, 
to strike this spirit out of the human con- 
stitution, would be to check some of the 
main wheels of society ; since, if enthusi- 
asm did not add, at least an imaginary, 
value to most of the objects of our pur- 
suits — if fancy did not give them her 
magical colouring, they would generally 
be found too contemptible perhaps to ex- 
cite ardent desire." 

" Ay, this is all very fine," said the doc- 
tor, not however displeased at the compli- 
ment that had been paid him ; " but it 
won't, for all that, divert me, Donaghue, 
from speaking on a subject that I have 
long been anxious to converse with you 
on — that of your giving way to a passion 
that must be hopeless." 

" Must!" repeated Donaghue, witli ex- 



24 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cessive emotion. " But why allow my- 
self to be disturbed at hearing what I 
was before but too sensible of? — Yes, my 
dear doctor, since your penetration has 
enabled you to dive into the secret of my 
heart, I will own I love, with all the ar- 
dour of my nature, but love despairingly." 

" Then why, in the name of common 
sense," said the doctor, " encourage a pas- 
sion you confess to be hopeless ?" 

" Encourage it !" said Donaghue. 

" Yes, must you not confess it is en- 
couraging it, to be continually wandering, 
hovering about the residence of Miss Erin, 
and putting yourself in the way of meet- 
ing her ?" 

" But how can I help it ?" asked Dona- 
ghue, in a fit of despair. " How can I 
resist the impulse that hurries, that forces 
me there, whether I will or not ?" 

" Faith, I dont know," said the doctor, 
musing; " and yet — no — let me think. 
You have read the works of Alfieri, and 
doubtless recollect the expedient he had 
recourse to, for freeing himself from a pas- 



TUADITtON OF THE CASTLE. 25 

sion doubtless as distressing as yours — This 
is what he says on the subject^* I de^ 
vised,' says he, ' the following expedient, 
to render me wise, by force — to detach 
me from this unfortunate fit of love: 
keeping from the sight of the object of it, 
I deemed of the greatest consequence; 
but how was that to be done? my pas- 
sion was urging me every moment to seek 
her society. Whenever the paroxysms 
were on me, I got my servant to bind 
me to an arm-chair ; the cords were con- 
cealed under a large mantle, in which I 
was enveloped, and only one hand remain- 
ed at liberty. Of all those who came to 
see me, not one suspected I was bound 
down in that manner. I remained in this 
situation for whole hours ; my servant 
was my gaoler, who was alone intrusted 
with the secret, and he liberated me when 
the rage of love was over; thus, in the 
course of a short time, I was completely 
cured, and thus rendered myself wise by 
force.' Now the only thing I see for it," 

VOL. III. C 



26 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

continued the doctor, " is to have recourse 
to a similar mode of cure for you. When- 
ever you find the love fit coming on you, 
urging you to fly off like another Cardenio, 
to the woods and wilds of sir William, 
only give me a hint; and as from this 
time forth I shall always take care to have 
a strong cord at hand — nay, you needn't 
laugh, for, upon my soul, I am serious ! — 
I will immediately bind you to one of 
these great chairs, till it is over, and thus, 
as the poet says, make you wise by force." 

" Thank you, my dear doctor; how- 
ever, I shall try if I cannot, by the exer- 
tion of resolution, save you from this 
trouble." 

" Well, if you don't like this method of 
cure, there's another, certainly preferable, 
from being pleasanter. Let sir William 
give the heiress to whom he pleases; and 
do you put it out of your power to think 
any more about her, by taking the widow." 

" How !" exclaimed Donaghue, in ex- 
treme surprise. 

" Tut! this is all folly. Do you think 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27 

no one can see but yourself, Donaghue ? 
do you think I don't know you might 
have lady Jane Magennis by to-morrow, 
if you pleased? and a devilish fool you'll 
be if you don't take her ; for she's not only 
a fine creature, but what is still better, in 
my opinion, a funny creature; and has 
besides, that which, according to the vul- 
ger adage, * will make the mare trot, and 
the mill go,' a swinging fortune, left her 
by old Cent.-per-cent ; God knows how 
got — but that is not our consideration." 

" Never !" cried Donaghue, with vehe- 
mence — " Never !" 

" Never !" repeated the doctor, with in- 
dignation. 

But ere we proceed farther, it may be 
necessary to observe, that lady Jane had 
artfully managed so as to draw the doctor 
to her side ; she soon penetrated into his 
character, and ascertained his great regard 
for Donaghue, and was led, by the double 
discovery, to believe she could render him 
instrumental to her designs. Having laid 
e 2 



28 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE^ 

herself out, as much as she could, to es- 
tablish herself in his good graces, by hu- 
mouring his whims, laughing at his jests, 
and promoting his frohcs, she by degrees 
made him her confident, by disclosing 
what she called her own story ; she repre- 
sented the attachment that had, as she 
said, subsisted between her and Donaghue, 
her being compelled to marry another, in 
consequence of his loss of fortune, and her 
readiness to prove, as she had intimated 
to him, that this was owing to compul- 
sion, by bestowing on him the fortune she 
had obtained by this marriage ; and finally 
concluded by imploring Rosebud, as a 
mutual friend, to interfere between them, 
nor suffer him to let a wild pursuit after 
Miss Erin, entered into out of resent- 
ment, as she well knew, of her (lady Jane's) 
supposed inconstancy, to induce him to 
give up the good he might secure, since 
he might be convinced, that however libe- 
ral and generous sir William Erin might 
seem, or be reported to be, he might rely 
on it he was too worldly a man ever to be 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 29 

prevailed on to give his daughter, for 
whom he had a right to entertain such 
expectations, to a man in his circum- 
stances; and Rosebud, interested by iier 
detail, and firmly believing the truth of 
all she said, readily gave the promise she 
required, and had for some time been on 
the watch for an opportunity of beginning 
the operations it had decided him on, 
not without a strong sense of indignation 
against Donaghue for the folly, the obsti- 
nacy, that rendered any interference on 
the subject necessary. To have fortune 
absolutely wooing him, offering to restore 
to him all that he had lost, and yet per- 
versely to refuse profiting by the circum- 
stance — ^it was really bad enough to drive 
evena Job himself mad.—" Never!" he cried, 
repeating the emphatic " never" of Dona- 
ghue. " Is it, can it be possible, that you 
are in your senses, and yet reject this 
noble, this generous creature, ready to 
fling herself and her fine fortune into your 
arms ?" 

" Very," replied Donaghue. 



30 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" And pray may I ask what may be 
the reason ?" 

" Because I am not sufficiently attach- 
ed to her to requite the disinterestedness 
you ascribe to her." 

" Tut ! tut ! let me hear nothing of this 
romantic nonsense," said the doctor, im- 
patiently. " No, no, it is not owing to 
that, but because there is not sufficient 
difficulty in this affair to make it interest- 
ing to you. I will answer for it, that 
were lady Jane still under the control of 
a harsh arbitrary father, you would be quite 
as mad about her as you now seem cool 
and easy. Upon my soul, Donaghue, 
you almost remind me of the girl in the 
farce, who would only elope to her lover 
through the window, though the hall 
door was lying open !" 

" Well, if it amuses you to tliink so of 
me," said Donaghue, " you are perfectly 
welcome." 

" No, it does not amuse me ; quite the 
contrary — it sets me wild, to think that 
through your obstinacy in persisting in the 



TRAt>ITION OF THE CASTLE. 81 

pursuit of what may well be termed a sha- 
dow, you will probably lose the substance ; 
for, with your good sense, can you possibly 
persuade yourself that sir William Erin 
will ever be prevailed on to give his heir- 
ess to — to — a " 

" I understand you," said Donaghue, 
flushing up to the temples, and in evident 
emotion turning to a window. — " There's 
no occasion my dear doctor," he resumed, 
after standing there a minute to recover 
himself, " to be more explicit. No, I am 
too well aware of the romantic folly sir 
William Erin would be accused of, were 
he to bestow his daughter on a man like 
me, to suppose him capable of harbouring 
an idea of the kind." 

" Nay, there would be no folly in the 
case," said the doctor ; " only these men 
of the world are so selfish — so— — But I 
see I have hurt you, Donaghue, and I 
could shoot myself at the thought. But 
will you not forgive me ?" pleadingly ex- 
tending his hand. " You know my re- 
gard for you, and must therefore, I think. 



32 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

be convinced that whatever I have said 
has originated in my anxiety to see you 
restored to your proper enjoyments in life." 

" JNly dear doctor," as he warmly grasp- 
ed his hand, " after the many proofs of 
friendship I have experienced from you, 
how could I possibly entertain a doubt of 
that ? No, I must be stupid and ungrate- 
ful indeed, after what has occurred, if I 
could ascribe what you have said to any 
thing but the real motive — a sincere anx- 
iety about my welfare. But do not be 
offended at my asking you to let the pre- 
sent subject drop. From interested mo- 
tives I never will marry, and as, from the 
reverse of fortune I have met with, it 
w^ould not be prudent to marry from any 
other, I believe we may as well shake 
hands at once, as brother bachelors." 

" No, no, Donaghue, that must never 
be," cried the doctor ; " there is a wide 
difference between you and me. You, 
born and brought up in the very midst of 
domestic enjoyments, early acquired that 
taste and fondness for them that must 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 33 

ever prevent an unsettled and unconnect- 
ed state from being one of real pleasure to 
you ; whereas I, deprived of the shelter 
of a natural home ere I well knew what 
the comforts of one were, became, through 
the force of habit, so attached to a life that 
would allow of change of scene, whenever 
one pleased, without trammels of any 
kind to oppose, as to prefer it to any other. 
But though Benedict himself, before he 
fell into the snares of the lady Beatrice, 
never more strenuously stood up in the 
defence of bachelors than I do, yet no 
one can be better pleased than I am to 
see a friend resigning the title of one, pro- 
vided I be assured it is for his happiness 
to lose it." 

Here the entrance of the corporal, with 
a large packet from Teghadow, put an end 
to the conversation; and while the doc- 
tor, who was impatient about every thing, 
set about examining the contents of this, 
Donaghue, taking up his hat, strolled out to 
try if a quiet walk would enable him to get 
C 3 



34 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the better of the extreme perturbation of 
spirits under which he still laboured. 



CHAPTER II. 



*****■»* 



" Oh ! thou soft natural death (that art joint twin 
To sweetest slumb6r), no rough-becrested comet 
Stares on thy mild departure ; the dull owl 
Beats not against thy casement ; the hoarse wolf 
Scents not thy carrion : pity winds thy corse — 
While horror waits on princes." 

As he was sauntering on, lost in thought, 
the voice of a woman soliciting charity 
roused him from his abstraction. — " Ah ! 
then won't your honour be after giving 
something to a poor woman, towards bury- 
ing her husband ?" 

Donaghue put a few tenpennies into 
her hand, and was about trying to dis- 
cover whether she required further relief 
— there being something very shocking 
to his feelings, in the idea of a wife being 
obliged to quit the deathbed of a husband. 



THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 35 

to procure the means of interring him— 
when her attention was suddenly diverted 
from him by the approach of a funeral ; 
and — " Ah, then sure," she exclaimed, 
" if there isn't father Murphy himself! 
Well, I hope, any how, he won't be keep- 
ing me long ; for ould Barney was at the 
last gasp ; and he won't die continted with^ 
out seeing his reverence." 

" Barney ! Who is Barney ?" demand- 
ed Donaghue. 

" Sure, and plase your honour, it's my 
husband you gave me the money for." 

" Your husband ! why I thought you 
told me he was dead ?" 

" Och hone, jewel, it's all the same 
thing, so I am gitimg ready every thing 
in time, to have ould Barney ^mteelly 
waked ; and all that's wanting now is fa- 
ther Murphy, to give him his blessing be- 
fore he departs ; for I got the pot down 
before I came out to wash him; and I 
have got a Und of a white sheet, and be- 
spoke the pipes and the snuff, and the 
— *— But I'll run home^ and try to keep 



36 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Barney alive till the priest comes ; for I 
know he won't die happy without seeing 
him; and one would wish to make the 
crater as comfortable as they could, going 
to the other world. So a thousand thanks 
to your honour for your goodness, and 
when you die, may you be sure of a good 
wooden great-coat !" 

It had often struck Donaghue before, 
and from the conduct of this woman he 
was now confirmed in the observation, 
that he had never any where met with 
people so totally unconcerned about death 
as his own country people — that is, of the 
lower description — whether speaking of 
their own, or that of a friend, or relation's, 
speaking of it with the same coolness ; and 
as they certainly wanted not natural feel- 
ing, but were, on the contrary, extremely 
warm-hearted, and in general strongly at- 
tached to their kindred, he could only ac- 
count for their seeming indifference about 
it on every occasion to the wretchedness 
of their lives in general, and their being 
naturally led by this to think,, that thai 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 37 

which relieved them from further poverty 
and toil, was more to be welcomed than 
dreaded. 

The funeral just mentioned passed on- 
ward to the old burying-ground of a ruin- 
ed church ; a crowd attended, amongst 
w^hich were several old women close to the 
coffin, that kept howling as they followed 
it — " Ah, then, why did you die? it was 
himself that was good to the poor — ah, 
then, why did you die? that fed ould and 
young, no matter who came — ah, then, 
why did you die?" in this way detailing 
his praises, and still, at the end of each 
sentence, uniting in the chorus of " ah, 
then, why did you die ?" 

The ceremony of interment was soon 
over, simply consisting of lowering the 
coffin into the grave, and which was no 
sooner done, than friends, relatives, mourn- 
ers, all, in a moment, dispersed, as if by 
magic, leaving an old man, who acted as 
sexton, to quietly proceed, by himself, in 
his work of filling up the grave, when 
Donaghue, who had almost mechanically 



38 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

followed, and continued loitering about the 
churchyard, examining the inscriptions 
upon some of the old tombstones, was sur- 
prised by hearing the voice of the old 
woman who had solicited charity from 
him, concluding, from what she had told 
him of her husband, that she could not, 
or rather would not, have delayed return- 
ing to him. 

" Och hone ! oh ! but it's himself that 
had the iligint wake of it," she cried, ad* 
dressing herself to the old man who was 
shovelling the earth into the grave — " it's 
himself that ought to be satisfied and con- 
tinted, and, to be sure, so he is, for it's he 
that had every thing that was comfortable 
about him— but why not? he left her the 
means to give it him; and as his wife 
knew he liked the gmteel thing when he 
was living, so she might be sure he would 
when he was dead. But the widow Walsh 
is the ould thing for ever ! sorrow doubt of 
it, be couldn't have left his money to a bet- 
ter. There was the twelve priests there this 
morning, as well as last night, in the par- 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 39 

lour next the one where the corpse was 
laid out so iligantly, eating and drinking 
the best of every thing. I looked through 
the window, and, och hone ! what a piece 
of beef I saw, and fowls, and a leg of mut- 
ton, and a could leg of pork, with twenty 
other things on the table before them ; be- 
sides the tay, and the coffee, and the wine, 
and the whiskey galore ; it's themselves, 
no shame to them, that were making good 
use of them all. And then there was the 
widow, sitting at the head of the corpse— 
and a handsome corpse, I will say that for 
you. Jack Walsh, though you can't hear 
a word of what I am saying now, you 
made of it — dressed all in her best ; arid 
'tis she that has the iligint gowns and caps 
to put on here, with the keeners all about 

her, and " 

" My good woman," here inteiTupted 
Donaghue, who had gradually approached 
her, and could no longer contain himself, 
from the terrible idea of what her wretch- 
ed husband might be suffering, through 
h«r idle curioaty and love of prating, " you 



40 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

seem to me, in talking of the widow 
Walsh's dead husband, to have quite for- 
got your own unfortunate living, or ra- 
ther dying one." 

" Och hone! no, your honour, I am 
just going to him, and sure I was just go- 
ing to him when I parted from your ho- 
nour, but that when I saw the funeral, I 
could not help turning back with it, not 
to draw ill-luck upon myself, nor more 
nor that, when I found it was Jack Walsh, 
stopping to see him put in the ground, 
becase I knew it's himself that would have 
done the same by me, only he went first 
But stop a bit ; sure there are two ber- 
rings coming — ah ! then what luck I was 
in, not to have gone home before !" 

Here a violent uproar drew the atten- 
tion of Donaghue from her, and, at a lit- 
tle distance, he actually beheld two fune- 
rals. They had suddenly met, and a scuf- 
fle was the result, to see which should get 
first to the churchyard. In the course of 
it, one of the coffins was thrown to the 
ground; two men instantly darted for- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 41 

ward, and whipping it up between them, 
ran forward with it as fast as possible to 
the place of interment, when popping it 
into the first grave they came to, they set 
up a shout of exultation, waving their hats 
on high, in token of triumph. 

" Good Heavens ! what is the meaning 
of all this?" inquired Donaghue of the 
old man. 

" Why, plase your honour, 'tis the cus- 
tom here, when one funeral takes place, 
always to keep watch in the churchyard 
till there is another, and so on; and so, 
when there are two at a time, there's always 
a struggle to see which shall get first to 
the burying-ground on that account. The 
country, as your honour, I dare say, knows, 
was once overrun with wolves, that used to 
come down — the Lord save us ! — before the 
body was well laid in the earth, to scratch 
it out of it ; and so, to hinder this, the 
people, at last, were forced to keep watch 
over the graves till the grass grew upon 
them, and the custom has been kept up 



42 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

The old woman seemed in an absolute 
ecstacy at the exploit that had just taken 
place. — " Well, success to yourselves, 
boys !" she said ; " you are the ones for 
doing the thing nately. It's yourselves 
that have given them the proper good-bye 
ginteelly." 

" My good woman," again said Dona- 
ghue, provoked, beyond expression, by her 
conduct, after what she had told him — " if 
you do not return home immediately, I 
shall certainly suspect you of being an im- 
postor, and act accordingly." 

This threat, or intimation, had the de- 
sired effect; she directly quitted the 
churchyard, and was followed by Dona- 
ghue, determined to ascertain the truth. 
He had not, however, advanced many 
yards into the road again, when he heard 
Rosebud calling to him from a field at some 
little distance. The doctor still fearing 
he was not entirely reconciled to him, had 
hastily shuffled up the papers he left him 
looking over, and learning which way he 
was gone, set out in pursuit of him. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 43 

Donaghue hastened to him, and thus 
the old woman effected her escape from 
him ; for, on turning to look for her, after 
joining the doctor, she was out of sight. 
He related what had just happened, to the 
no small amusement of Rosebud, who 
was particularly diverted by his account 
of the old woman, and the absolute hor- 
ror with which she had inspired him. 

They were near the beach, and now 
proceeded thither, to view some very sin- 
gular and romantic rocks and caverns ; 
they were a good while in viewing them, 
and examining the different species of 
plants and grass that tufted or bespread 
them, and in their way back, were over- 
taken by a heavy shower, that drove them 
into a cabin for shelter. Two three-legged 
stools were immediately dusted for them, 
by a poor little girl, and placed before the 
fire, over which an immense-sized iron pot 
was suspended. 

" Ah ha !" said Rosebud, regarding it, 
** there is something good going on here ; 



44 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

a christening, or a wedding, for this pot is 
too large for murphies alone." 

" Och hone! and sure your honour 
may well say that; the sorrow praty, or 
any thing else we have to put in it ! only 
just some water we are warming to wash 
ould Barney in," and Donaghue instantly 
recognised his recently-made acquaintance, 
the old woman, emerging from a kind of 
inner division of the hovel, as she spoke. 

" Why is your husband really dead at 
last?" he demanded. 

** Och ! it's all the same thing, your ho- 
nour ; he can't live, any how, now above a^ 
minute or two." 

" My God, what callousness !" exclaim* 
ed Donaghue ; " to be preparing for a 
man's death ere his last debt is paid !" 

" Oh, then ! sure his last debt was paid 
long enough ago- — for sorrow one would 
trust ould Barney for any thing ! so the 
sorrow debt at all, at all, he had to pay." 

" Directed by her looks, Donaghue ap- 
proached a dusky corner, where, on some 
straw, he saw a heap of heaving rags, for 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 45 

nothing else could he distinguish. Inex- 
pressibly shocked — " For Heaven's sake, 
my dear doctor, come here !" he cried, 
" and try whether any thing can be done 
for this miserable wretch." 

The doctor obeyed, and after feeling his 
pulse for a little while, pronounced him to 
have just recovered from a kind of fit, oc- 
casioned by mere w^eakness; and ordering 
some milk to be warmed and immediately 
given to him, said, he had not the slightest 
doubt, by proper care, he might be brought 
about again. 

No sooner had he swallowed the milk, 
than, recovering the pow er of speech, he 
raised himself a little on the straw, and 
began pouring down blessings on his two 
preservers^ as he justly called them, for, 
but for their coming in as they did, he 
should have been a corpse by that time, 
as his wife and her cronies would not 
have waited another moment to wash and 
stretch him, and which he could not have 
prevented, as he had lost his strength and 
his speech at the same time, though he per- 



46 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

fectly understood all they were doing and 
saying about him. 

" Oh, then, Barney, are you really alive?" 
asked the wife, on seeing him sitting 
up. " Oh, then it's yourself that is !" for 
on getting within arm's length of him, he 
gave her a proof of his recovered vigour. 
" Well, to see that now ! well, Nelly, jewel, 
it can't be helped ; so, any how, run home 
with Mrs. Sullivan's white sheet, and tell 
her she needn't come to the wake this 
night, as ould Barney has disappointed us 
all ; and be sure mind and tell Mrs. Mur- 
phy we shan't be wanting the whiskey, 
or snufF, or pipes, or tobacco, or candles, 
to-night, but we are in great expectation 
we shall in a day or two : and mind and 
till all the neighbours, going and coming, 
that the wake is put off. Run, run, jew- 
el, gra ! but stop, don't be forgetting to 
remimber to tell Nat Doyle not to be 
minding putting the boards together yet 
awhile for your daddy's coffin; and ah, 
then, why don't you run gra ! but wait, 
here's the black ribbon Mrs. Rooney lent 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 47 

me for my cap to-night. Ah, then ! 
what's keeping you, Nelly ?" 

During the time these orders had been 
issuing, a little girl, about ten years old, 
barefooted, and flying in tatters, kept run- 
ning backwards and forwards before the 
door, in the greatest seeming perplexity. 
The moment she at length found herself 
actually at liberty, she darted off, and was 
out of sight in a moment. 

" Now, in the devil's name, Biddy," 
cried old Barney, evidently in a rage he 
could hardly control, " where did you git 
the money for all the things you just min- 
tioned?" 

"Ah! then where should I git it, but 
snug enough under your head ?" 

" Oh, then, be hanged to you ! did you 
take the tin tinpennies I had in the stock- 
ing to pay the rint ?" 

*' Arrah ! be asy, Barney ; sure I tould 
their honurs, deed nor alive, no one would 
trust you ; and so to be sure I wint rummag- 
ing for the money, that I might let you have 
every thing snug and comfortable; * for/ 



48 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

says I to Mrs. Murphy, when I had got the 
purse, * 'twill be the last expinse, and poor 
Barney always liked the ginteel thing." 

" So, when you had taken all my mo- 
ney, you tould Mrs. Murphy I liked the 
ginteel thing, did you? Oh, then, you 
are in luk's way, that their honurs are 
here, for if it wasn't for them, I'd make 
you remember the ginteel thing the long- 
est day you had to live, you garron /" 

" Oh, Barney, my boy, don't let us be 
a hinderance to you," said Rosebud, highly 
amused by the scene ; " don't let us stop 
your hand." 

" Come, come, my friend," said Dona- 
ghue, interposing, on perceiving him about 
rising, " this should be a day of thanks- 
giving to you, not of anger and revenge. 
I have already given your wife some mo- 
ney, which I shall be much displeased if I 
find she does not lay out for your mutual 
comfort. As soon as I return to the castle, 
I will send a basket of provisions to you, 
and shall take care that, till your perfect 
recovery, you are attended to, when, if 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 4^ 

not regularly employed, and I can be of 
any service to you, let me know, and I 
will see what can be done for you." 

The miserable object of his benevolence 
looked wistfully at him for a minute, and 
then, without speaking, threw himself 
back, with a deep groan, on the bed. 

They all thought him dying ; but by a 
motion of his hand, he gave them to 
understand they were mistaken, and kept 
them away from him for a minute ; then 
a little recovering himself — " No, no, it 
wasn't sick I was," he said, " it was only — 
only a pain I just got in my heart at the 
moment." 

" A pain in your heart !" cried the wife ; 
" oh then, Barney, if that's the way with 
you " 

" Stop," said Donaghue, in a tone of se- 
verity, anticipating what she meant to say. 

" No," cried old Barney, '* it wasn't 
sick I was again ; but it was—it was — " 
and he gushed into tears, " that the 
young master should be so — so good to — 

VOL. IIL D 



50 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to a But it's he that's of the right 

stock for that. There never yet was one 
of his race that wasn't good and gracious ; 
and the more shame, and bitter curses on 
those that would hurt him ! and I say, 
amen !" 

Donaghue now understanding what it 
was he meant, that it was gratitude that 
had overcome him, spoke still more kind- 
ly to him, repeating his promise of his 
being his friend, if he only found him de- 
serving of his being so. 

On his return to the castle, Donaghue 
inquired about him, and learned that he 
belonged to Altoir-na-Grenie, and had for 
a long time enjoyed the situation of under 
bailiff there, but from which, as well as 
every other employment about the castle, 
he had been at length dismissed, through 
improper and disorderly conduct, since 
when he had gradually got down in life, 
till he had at length sunk into the most 
deplorable state of wretchedness. 

What he heard to his disadvantage did 
not prevent Donaghue from keeping his 



TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 51 

promise to him; he supplied him with 
whatever was needful, till he was entirely- 
restored to health and strength, and would 
then have seen what farther could be done 
for him, but that Barney, on being sent 
for to the castle, respectfully excused him- 
self, by saying he had received assistance, 
that rendered it unnecessary for him to 
trouble his honour for any farther kind- 
ness. 



D 21 



UBRART 



52 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 



CHAPTER HI. 



Spreading herbs, and flow'rets brighty. 
Glisten'd with the dew of night ; 
Nor herb, nor flow'ret glisten'd there, 
But was carv'd in the cloister arches so fair ; 
The moon on the east oriel shone, 
Through slender shafts of shapely stone, 

By foliag'd tracery combined ; 
Thou wouldst have thought some fairy hand 
Twixt poplars straight, the ozier wand. 

In many a freakish knot had twin'd. 
Then fram'd a spell, when the work was done,. 
And chang'd the willow wreaths to stone. 
The silver light, so pale and faint, 
Shew'd many a prophet, and many a saint. 

Lai/ of the last Minstrel. 

DoNAGHUE had now given up his haunts 
at the Vale; but though he forbore enter- 
ing the grounds, he still indulged himself 
with a view of them, by making the ruin- 
ed abbey, already mentioned in the des- 
cription of the Vale, his now almost con- 
stant resort. Though, from the judicious 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 53 

'disposition of the grounds, it appeared to 
belong to the Vale, it was distinct from it, 
a circumstance that, of course, precluded 
all apprehension of being considered either 
as a transgressor or intruder, by frequent- 
ing it, if indeed his doing so should be 
discovered, which he conceived very un- 
likely, from the lonely situation of the 
pile, and the superstitious awe with which 
it was regarded in the neighbourhood ; so 
that, except a chance visit of curiosity, it 
was never troubled with one. It stood in 
a narrow valley, full of wood, and through 
which a mountain stream took an irregu- 
lar course, over a bed of stones, and frag- 
ments of rock, shivered from the steep 
cliffs above. In the middle were these 
ruins, which were evidently those of an 
extensive abbey, consisting of massy walls, 
buttresses, lofty arches, columns, and win- 
dows, with a great deal of beautiful tra- 
cery ; trees and shrubs had started from 
amidst the rubbish, and spread their 
branches amidst the dilapidated towers 
and windows. The walls were in many 



54 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

places completely covered with ivy, and 
in others thickly tufted with long stream- 
ing grass and flowers. The ivy, here and 
there breaking away from the walls, hung 
in thick groups of foliage between the 
trees; and altogether, the place was pic- 
turesque, solemn, and affecting. Every 
thing around it was in character with it, 
consequently, well adapted to keep alive, 
if not heighten, the sensations it inspired. 

The surface of the Vale was covered 
with briars and thorns ; the stream that 
ran murmuring through it was just suffi- 
ciently impeded in its course to create a 
melancholy sound ; while the dark woods, 
that hung nearly inverted in some places, 
on the almost-perpendicular cliffs, threw 
a solemn gloom over the whole. 

In wandering tlirough the dilapidated 
walls, Donaghue had discovered part of a 
flight of stairs in one of the towers. He 
ascended it, and on gaining the second 
landing-place, found himself at the en- 
trance of a long narrow gallery, that had 
connected this tower with another, and off 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 55 

of which were several chambers, but now 
almost all in a state of irreparable ruin. 
Amongst them, however, he discovered 
one still habitable, and with a window 
looking down through the valley full upon 
Ashley Vale, and which, of course, pre- 
sented to him a view he thought enchant- 
ing; and hither, in consequence, finding 
the remains of a seat or two here, and 
some pieces of wood, that could be used 
as a table, he brought some books and 
materials for writing and drawing, and 
gradually made it his favourite retreat, 
delighted with the romantic situation of 
the place, his perfect freedom here, from 
all apprehension of either being intrud- 
ed on or intruding, the uninterrupted 
opportunity it allowed him for reflection, 
and above all, for gazing without suspi- 
cion on those enchanting shades, beneath 
which his imagination still pictured the 
form of her he loved. But not to its idle re- 
veries were his hours here all devoted ; he 
had furnished himself with means of pass- 
ing them more rationally. Here he read 



56 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

some of the best authors; here he com- 
mitted to paper the sentiments and reflec- 
tions they gave rise to ; and here he 
sketched several beautiful landscapes, both 
from memory, and the immediate scenery 
before him. But perhaps the hour that 
prevented his finding a resource in any of 
these occupations, was not the least plea- 
sing one to him for being at the ruins ", 
the silent hour of eve, what time the 
" glowworm 'gins to light his pale and 
ineffectual fire," or when " the moon, ap- 
parent queen of all, with more pleasing 
light, shadowy sets off the face of things." 
But how, it may be asked, did he manage 
to pass so much of his time here without 
the knowledge of the doctor ? but it should 
be remembered, the doctor was always on 
the wing for pleasure, and though, on 
finding that his leaving Donaghue to 
soHtude had not had the intended effect, he 
would gladly have declined all further en- 
gagements for his sake, yet Donaghue, 
without appearing to oppose this, managed 
matters so as to prevent it ; so that actual- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 57 

ly he was nearly as much master of his 
time as if he had not had a guest with 
him. 

He had loitered here one evening to alater 
hour than usual, so lost in thought as per- 
haps to be unconscious of the circumstance, 
till his attention was suddenly caught by 
the moon, rising in splendid majesty above 
the wood-clad cliffs, and gradually dissi- 
pating the deep gloom that had but a 
moment before pervaded the scene ; some 
parts still remained involved in masses of 
shade, but not so totally obscured that the 
eye could not penetrate to them, so as to 
be satisfied they consisted of separate and 
various parts, although their exact shapes 
and forms could not then be clearly de- 
fined. Donaghue contemplated the sha- 
dowy scene with feelings of indescribable 
admiration ; its solemn, its soothing effect 
upon them was heightened by the still 
loneliness of the place and hour, that lite- 
rally deepened the murmur in the woods, 
and the sound of the torrent in the vale ; 
d3 



58 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

while the drone of the beetle was heard 
in the cloisters, and the owl, ever and 
anon, rustling in his ivied bower, where 
he had long held his unmolested reign. 

How long Donaghue might have con- 
tinued lost in admiration of the scene be- 
fore him, we cannot pretend to say ; but 
he was suddenly roused from his contem- 
plative posture, by the trembling sounds 
of a harp floating through the building. 
He started, and listened, as if imagining 
himself under some illusion of the ima- 
gination ; but no, the sounds were distinct, 
though low and mournful ; and it seemed 
to him, as if some fair daughter of sorrow 
waked her own sad tale from every trem- 
bling string. But could it actually be with- 
in the building ? Yet, to hear the sound 
of such an instrument from any one of 
the buildings at the Vale, was utterly im- 
possible ; and the next question was, who 
the performer could possibly be. In other 
times, when there was hardly a mind that 
did not own the influence of superstition, 
this was a question that might probably 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 59 

have been easily resolved ; for Donaghue 
was not ignorarit of the general belief that 
was entertained of the place being haunt- 
ed, or the reports that prevailed of the 
sound of wailing and of music having 
been often heard within it. Some one 
from the Vale he felt persuaded it was, 
and from what he knew of the party 
there, he conceived there was not so great 
a probability of its being any one as Miss 
Erin herself But how could he admit 
such a thought — how imagine any thing 
so wild, so improbable, so romantic, as 
that, at such an hour, she would frequent 
such a place ? Romantic it certainly was, 
but neither so wild, nor so improbable as 
at first seemed to be the case, since, for an 
instant, he had not an idea that she came 
there by herself; and in short, the suppo- 
sition was so pleasing, so captivating to 
his imagination, that he could not, would 
not persuade himself to rehnquish it ; for, 
should he do so, how totally devoid of in- 
terest would the place be, that but a few mi- 
nutes before had been so delightful to him \ 



60 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Leaving his own immediate retreat, he 
softly advanced into the gallery, and was 
cautiously proceeding in the direction of 
the harp, when it suddenly ceased. After 
waiting some time, without hearing it 
again, he hastened back to the stairs by 
which he ascended, in order to watch be- 
low for those he expected to see quitting 
the building. The music appeared to 
have come from the chapel, about which 
were various cells and cloistered galleries, 
denominated the friars' walks, from being 
the places, it was supposed, in which, 
when the weather would not permit their 
ranging abroad, or at times of rigid disci- 
pline, they used to meditate. Though 
hastening to decay, like the rest of the 
pile, it was still sufficiently perfect to allow 
imagination to supply what was lost, and 
form a just idea of what it must have 
been in its pristine days, when pealing 
anthems swelled the notes of praise within 
its lofty aisles, and golden censers flung 
their fragrant clouds around the shrines of 
saints and martyrs. Hither Donaghue 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 61 

now bent his steps, convinced that it was 
by this those he expected to see must 
quit the building, and equally that they 
could not yet have done so, from the 
number of intricate passages they must 
have to traverse, according to the direc- 
tion in which he heard the harp ; but in 
vain, concealed in a dusky corner, he 
watched and waited, no one approached ; 
neither voices nor footsteps were heard; 
nothing save again the murmur of the 
woods, and the continuous flow of the 
water ; and at length, perplexed and im- 
patient, he was on the point of rushing 
forward, to try whether his ear, or rather 
his imagination, had not deceived him, 
when a sudden recollection of the lateness 
of the hour, and the consequent uneasi- 
ness or alarm his protracted absence might 
occasion at the castle, induced him to 
check himself, and reluctantly depart. 
But the next morning he resolved on 
satisfying himself; the harp must remain, 
if he had not indeed been in a dream or 
trance, and was accordingly all impatience 



62 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

for it ; but, as is often the case with us, 
poor short-sighted mortals, he was impa- 
tient for that which was to bring him dis- 
appointment; for the doctor not only 
chose to give him his company the whole 
of this morning, but to dine with him, 
beginning indeed to experience something 
of remorse for having left him so much to 
himself; and from this feeling, would have 
remained with him for the evening, though 
he acknowledged, with a deep sigh, there 
was to be a delightful party at the Vale, 
had not Donaghue forced him to keep his 
engagement there, pretending that he had 
some matters to attend to that would 
oblige him to leave him. 

The moment he was gone, Donaghue 
hastened from the elastic, as if fearful, i^ 
he delayed an instant, he would return to 
prevent his going out, and cut across the 
fields, as usual, towards the Vale, by w^hich 
he considerably shortened the distance to 
the abbey. It was late before the doctor 
kft him, so that the gloom that pervaded 
the ruins by the time he reached them. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 63 

certainly rendered the exploit of travers- 
ing them rather a hazardous one ; but 
what will not impatience, or a romantic 
imagination, lead us to do ! In spite of 
all risks, Donaghue resolutely made his 
way to the place from whence he con- 
ceived the sound of the harp had issued; 
but no harp was now to be found there, 
nor the slightest trace or vestige of any 
human being having been recently in the 
place. 

Donaghue for a moment was lost in 
perplexity, and inclined to believe that 
his ear had deceived him; but no, this 
was to admit that he had been in a trance 
or delirium ; and all that was to be sup- 
posed was, that the harp had been re- 
moved. Well, this put an end to the ex- 
pectation he had been indulging in all 
day, the soothing, the delightful expecta- 
tion of again listening to Eveleen, and, 
unsuspected by her, catching a glimpse of 
her by the pale moonlight, and a listless- 
ness, a feeling of disappointment came 
over him at the moment, that made him 



64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

languidly retrace his way back to the 
chapel. Just as he reentered it, from the 
range of cells, or dormitories above, the 
moon had begun to partially dispel the 
darkness in which it was shrouded. There 
was something in the partial dispersion of 
this, the capricious manner in which the 
beams tinged the surrounding objects, 
fully revealing some, and to others giving 
a character and shape not belonging to 
them, that gave such scope to the fancy, 
as involuntarily detained Donaghue on 
the spot, and awakened him again to a 
feeling of admiration. While yet he 
gazed around him, he started, under the 
idea of again hearing the trembling strings 
of a harp. He listened with all the in- 
tensity of attention. The sound present- 
ly became more distinct, so much so in- 
deed, as to convince him it came from 
one of the upper cells, or cloisters, looking 
down upon, or rather into the chapel ; and 
after a short symphony, a voice of exquisite 
sweetness sung the following verses : — 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 65 

** When Nature form'd the human frame, 

And view'd perfection's mould, 
The eye its tend'rest care became 

T' express the mind untold. 

*' Her universal language dwells. 

Concise, correct, and pure; 
That in one glance more clearly tells, 

Than words could well ensure. 

^* Oh, precious orb, what equals thee, 

Thou index of the mind ? 
With rapture I my Delia see. 

And know that she is kind. 

" The eye, where sense appears enthron'd, 

Tells me she reads my heart; 
And what my tongue would not have own'd, 

Is thus made to impart. 

** Her looks I watch, and know full well, 

When joy or grief prevails ; 
Those beauteous orbs expressive tell 

The passion that assails. 

" Oh that the gods would soon decree, 

And Delia's heart incline. 
No mortal could so happy be, 

Than I, to call her mine." 



The voice ceased, and Donaghue be- 
came motionless, in expectation of hear 
ing some one speak, or descending ; but 



66 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he was disappointed — he neither heard 
footsteps nor voice again ; but the instant 
after, the rush of garnaents, as of some one 
sweeping through the* cloisters above, and 
then all was stillness, or dead silence again ; 
and the solemn voice of waterfalls posses- 
sed the ear, and the moaning wind rust- 
ling through the long dark grass, and 
wild flowers, and ivy that begirt the place. 
Well, it was strange, but there must, of 
course, be some other way of quitting the 
chambers above, than he was aware of 
Yet it was odd that such silence should 
have followed the singing ; for that Miss 
Erin, or indeed any other female, should 
have come to such a place, at such an hour, 
by themselves, was an idea that was not 
admissible. But though persuaded no one 
remained, yet he continued to loiter, or 
rather could not prevail on himself to de- 
part, till again the cruelty of awakening 
apprehension in the minds of those inte- 
rested about him, induced him to leave 
the place. 

That it was Miss Erin he had heard, he 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 67 

could not allow himself to doubt, so much 
did the singing resemble hers; and yet, 
where or how had the harp been disposed 
of, that he had so vainly sought after? for 
he could not suppose that she had it car- 
ried backwards and forwards every mo- 
ment, just as she felt a sudden whim or 
inclination to visit the place. 

He could not refrain from endeavour- 
ing to learn something about her the next 
morning at breakfast from the doctor, as 
he had indeed done the preceding one. 
But the doctor could give him very little 
information. There had been a great deal 
of playing and singing amongst the young 
people, and he concluded of hers, and that 
was all he could tell him ; for he had been 
engaged at cards the whole evening. 

Donaghue resolved never to cease till 
he had discovered whether he was wrong 
or not, in his conjectures respecting her, 
and if not her, who it was he had heard ; 
but any further attempts or eflforts for the 
present were necessarily suspended, by 
the unexpected arrival of Melville. 



68 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER V. 



Attun'd to happy unison of soul, 

To whose exalted eye a fairer world, 

Of which the vulgar never had a glimpse, 

Displays its charms ; whose minds are richly fraught 

With philosophic store — superior light, 

And in whose breast enthusiastic burns 

Virtue, the sons of interest deem romance." 

Nothing but his absence from the coun- 
try could have kept Melville so long from 
his friend ; his regard for him was truly 
fraternal, and he now joined him, under 
the hope of inducing him to quit his soli- 
tude, and take up his quarters with him 
the ensuing winter at his uncle's house in 
town, who united with him in feeling a 
very sincere interest about him, and much 
anger and indignation against his own 
uncle, general O'Donaghue, for not hav- 
ing before this done something essential 
for him. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 69 

Donaghue was more pleased than sur- 
prised by his appearance, being perfectly 
satisfied that the moment he was at liberty 
to come to him, he should see him. The 
first joy of meeting over, Melville could 
not suppress a sensation of melancholy at 
the alteration which he noticed in the 
looks of his friend. To a romantic eye, 
perhaps, it might have made him appear 
more interesting, but to a person rationally 
interested about him, it gave serious con- 
cern and uneasiness. When he heard 
however the manner in which he passed 
his time, the solitude to which he seemed 
to have devoted himself, he could not 
w^onder, however grieved he might be at 
w^hat he witnessed ; but a change should 
soon be effected, he determined : he avow- 
ed the determination, protesting he would 
never let him rest till he had made him 
return to his wonted habits, and resume 
his former intercourse with the world. — 
" For, at your period of life, to become a 
recluse, really the idea is not endurable !" 
and he spoke with something of indigna- 



70 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tion. Yet, at the very moment he did so, 
his soul was melting within him, at the 
recollection of other days — days of pleasure 
and delight — days that could not be re- 
called, and he now much feared could 
never be equalled ; but exertions must be 
made ; if Donaghue pined, as he much 
suspected, under a secret passion, either 
the pride that opposed obstacles to his 
seeking the attainment of the object of it 
must be combated, or else his good sense 
must be called into action, to enable him 
to overcome it. A thousand times he re- 
gretted not having joined him sooner, 
fearing, from the length of time he had 
been allowed to continue in solitude, he 
should find it a more difficult matter than 
he had at first imagined ; but he would 
persevere, and the exertions of friendship 
must surely be crowned with success — 
sacred friendship, next to religion, the 
only real soother of our cares and sorrows 
here ; for who has the power of calming, 
of allaying the passions equal to a friend ? 
Our acquaintances, prompted by good-na- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 71 

ture and religion, may be kind, and even 
consoling to us, in the hour of bodily pain 
and sickness ; but when the mind is tor- 
tured with anxiety — when the soul is torn 
by the infliction of baseness and ingrati- 
tude — when the heart is loaded with sor- 
rows, that still it wishes to hide from 
the garish eye of day, where, but in the 
bosom of a friend, can we find relief? 

Rosebud was delighted at the arrival 
of Melville, of whom he had heard so 
much from Donaghue, that he was actu- 
ally well acquainted with him before he 
saw him, and now received him quite as 
an old friend ; and Melville was previous- 
ly made sufficiently acquainted with him, 
to be pleased at finding him at Altoir-na- 
Grenie, and more particularly so, when 
he found that in him he should have a 
ready auxiliary in his determination con- 
cerning Donaghue. 

" And so, Donaghue, you actually do 
not visit at the Vale ?" he cried, on their 
being left for a little while to themselves 
by the doctor. " I should have conceived 



72 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

the family there the very kind of family 
to have allured you from your plan of se- 
clusion." 

Donaghue shook his head. 

" Ay, you shake your head, but, like 
our friend Burleigh, say nothing, and for 
a very good reason, because you have no- 
thing to say in vindication of your plan." 

" What," said Donaghue, with a smile, 
" when I have the arguments of poets, 
philosophers, and sages to support me in 
it ? I know what men of the world say 
against it — I know, that by adopting 
such a one, by withdrawing from society, 
they say, that, by degrees, we not only 
lose entirely our relish for it, but the ha- 
bits of polished life become troublesome 
to us, till at length they are cast off; so 
that should a period arrive for claiming us 
back into our former situations, we not 
only shrink from the thronging fancies of 
what we may have to encounter, but may, to 
our sorrow, not be able to recover our lost 
ground. But, in reply to these observa- 
tions, have we not to adduce the uninter- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 73 

rupted leisure and opportunity which se- 
clusion affords us for study — for acquiring 
a knowledge of ourselves, and preparing 
for that change, towards which we are all 
progressively advancing ?" 

" Yes," replied Melville, " no one can 
dispute that occasional retirement is ne- 
cessary—that to thoroughly understand the 
sense of what we read, to reap advantage 
from the studies we are pursuing, it is re- 
quisite we should, now and then, retreat 
into the calm shades of seclusion ; but re- 
tirement and solitude are widely different 
— the one only prepares and qualifies us 
for appearing to advantage in life, the 
other estranges us from it, destroys our 
social habits, and, finally, engenders mi- 
santhropy ; for those we shun, we gradual- 
ly, I may almost say naturally, begin to 
dislike and fear. In short, total solitude, 
or complete seclusion, is what I utterly 
abhor, as inimical to all the social charities 
of life, and what, I am convinced, no one 
ever adopted, without heartily repenting, 
hdwever pride may induce them to con- 

VOL. III. E 



74 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ceal this repentance ; for man is a social 
animal, and that love of our species that 
is implanted in us, and would voluntarily 
lead us to an intercourse with them, can- 
not be resisted or acted against, without 
the excitement of sensations that must be 
subversive of all contentment. Let any 
one only think what his feelings would 
be, if condemned to banishment from the 
world, and then ask why he should inflict 
on himself a punishment that w^ould be so 
intolerable from another." 

" Well, don't be alarmed," said Dona- 
ghue, again smiling; " whatever, in the 
first confusion of an unsettled mind, I 
might have half meditated, I am not yet 
going to renounce this wicked world. Se- 
clusion has been so far of benefit to me, as 
to afford me a proper opportunity for re- 
covering and collecting myself, and being 
thoroughly convinced, in consequence, 
that a life of supine indolence would, at 
my age, be indeed disgraceful and unsuit- 
able, even if it accorded with my temper 
or inclination, which it does not by any 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 75 

means. In a word, you shall find that I con- 
sider myself too green, yet awhile, to be 
cut down and made firewood of, as the 
moment my uncle arrives, I shall consult 
with him on the best plan for entering 
upon active service again." 

" But why devote yourself to retire- 
ment till his return," demanded Melville, 
" and thus lose the intervening opportu- 
nities that might occur for reversing the 
scene, without his assistance ? With your 
advantages of birth, of person, and educa- 
cation, there is no knowing, Donaghue, 
what, by this time, might have been the 
pleasing result of your having kept up 
your usual intercourse with the world : 
but there is nothing has exasperated me 
so much with you, as your declining to 
cultivate an intimacy at the Vale, where, 
from the sentiments, I am well aware, en- 
tertained of you by some of the family, I 
can hardly doubt but for your own fault 



6( 



I understand you," said Donaghue, 
E 2 



76 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

interrupting him with much emotion ; 
** but on that subject I must entreat your 
silence, my dear fellow. You are mista- 
ken, indeed, in what you think; and when 

I tell you " he stopped, checked the 

impulse that was hurrying him forward to 
detail what he knew, or rather had heard, 
and thought, in consequence, of sir Wil- 
liam, and prevailed on himself not to speak 
to the prejudice of Eveleen's father. 

" Well," replied Melville, " I will so far 
oblige you, as to say nothing on it, at least 
at present, only that I presume, out of 
complaisance to me, you will now and 
then honour the family at the Vale with 
your presence, as I must, occasionally, 
make my appearance there, which I will 
not however without you, except I wish 
to offend my uncle, w^iose oldest and most 
intimate friend, as I believe I have already 
told you, sir William Erin is." 

« Well, well, we will talk about that," 
siaid Donaghue; " let us now start ano- 
ther topic. I have a thousand questions 
to ask you about your travels. This uncle 



TRADITION QF THE CASTLE. 77 

of yours seems to have a strange rambling 
propensity." 

" He does," replied Melville ; " it could, 
however, be accounted for ; and I believe, 
by way of amusing some one of your so 
litary hours here, T will yet explain the 
cause; it may be as well to do so, and 
thus bespeak your sympathy in time." 

" Oh ! well," said Donaghue, laughing, 
" it will be always at your service ; and 
this will be quite the place for calling it 
into action, where we can so quietly tune 
our distresses, and record our woes." 

Melville wishing to devote a few days 
entirely to his friend, desired his arrival at 
Altoir-na-Grenie might not immediately 
be made known, and, in consequence, the 
doctor made up his mind to abstaining, for 
a little while, from going to the Vale. In 
consequence of the wish, therefore, that 
Melville had expressed, the party were a 
good deal disconcerted the next morning, 
by the sight of Foley crossing the court- 
yard, who was well known by them all, 
Melville as well as the others, owing to 



78 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his having been once an attendant on his 
uncle, to be an incessant tattler, and one 
who made it his business to run about 
from house to house, with all the news he 
could respectively collect at them. 

"The coxcomb!" exclaimed Donaghue, 
extremely provoked, and who indeed had 
a particular cause of dislike to him, from 
conceiving, from the impertinent ques- 
tions he asked, and the curiosity he evin- 
ced, on every occasion, about his affairs, 
that he was a kind of spy of sir William 
Erin, " only he has had a glimpse of us, 
through the windows being open, I cer- 
tainly should have given orders to be de- 
nied to him ; we shall now not only be 
tormented with his impertinence for an 
hour or two, but, through his means, be 
immediately broken in upon, as, the in- 
stant he leaves this, he will run about 
every where, proclaiming your arrival, 
Melville." 

" Ah ha !" said Foley, entering at the 
moment, and who, ere his doing so, had 
learned who were in the parlour, " this is 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 79 

what I call being fortunate indeed, to 
pounce upon a whole covey — to catch a 
leash, as I may say, in this manner. Mr. 
O'Brien, it is quite a rare thing to have 
the present pleasure. ^ — Mr. Melville, I 
congratulate you, and myself, on your ar- 
rival here; and, doctor, I hope I see you 
so well, as to need neither an exertion of 
your own skill or mine. Oh dear! I 
really am quite rejoiced, and yet, as my 
friend Herodotus has it, I am happy and 
I am grieved; and were I asked why, I 
should give the same answer that king 
Xerxes did to Artabanes, on his observing 
that he wept, just as he had pronounced 
himself happy at seeing the Hellespont 
obscured with ships, and all the shores 
and the plains of the Abydenians crowded 
with men — ' It has just occurred to me, 
reflecting how short the entire of human 
life is, that not one will arrive at his hun- 
dredth year." 

"And yet, doctor," said Melville, "Ar- 
tabanes' answer shewed that, for the enjoy- 
ments we have in this life, it is quite suf- 



80 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ficiently long — * For,' says he, * no man 
has been made so happy by nature, to 
whom it did not often, and not once only 
occur, to wish rather to die than live; for 
the misfortunes befalling, and the dis- 
eases disturbing them, short as it is, make 
life appear to be long and tedious." 

" Ah [ very correct indeed," said Foley 
— " very correct ; and I am happy to think 
of the reflecting turn of mind you possess, 
to let such observations make such an im- 
pression on you; for a reflective turn of 
mind indicates a philosophical one, and a 
philosophical one is absolutely requisite, 
when we are about hearing any thing un- 
pleasant." 

" Unpleasant I" repeated IMelville, with 
something of emotion — " why I hope that 
is not the case with me, doctor !" 

" My dear sir, I am sorry to say the re- 
verse ; but your worthy uncle " 

"My uncle ! why what of him, pray?'* 

" Is not long for this world." 

" Not long for this world!" 

" No ; if he was, he never would have 



T]^4^ITION OF THE C4STLE. 81 

been ordered about as he has been ; wlien 
I heard of the voyage to Lisbon, I guess- 
ed how it was ; and since he has lingered 
long enough to return from it, rely on it 
h)B will soon be ordered on another ; for, I 
ani sorry to say it, there are a set of nien 
amongst us, that for the sake of their re- 
putation, as they call it — that is, in order 
not to let a man die under their hands, as 
they say, will have the inhumanity to put 
an unfortunate patient to the torture of 
going to a considerable distance to breathe 
his last sigh. Now this is a custom I al- 
ways abhorred ; when once I get hold of 
a patient, I never, by any chance, loosen 
or release him from it, till I either see him 
completely on his legs again, or beyond 
the power of ever using them more." 

Rosiebud coughed slightly — " That is, I 
suppose you mean, doctor," he said, " pa- 
tients of a certain description." 

" Why, to be sure, my good friend, I 

won'it deny that the lives of some men 

must be more highly estimated than those 

of others ; pr, in other words, that it is a 

e3 



82 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

peculiar duty to exert all our skill for the 
preservation of a man, whose fortune gives 
him the power of being a benefactor to 
society." 

Rosebud gave another hem—" And only 
on that account ! How nobly and abstract- 
edly disinterested we sometimes are !" he 
said. 

" But, my dear sir," resumed Melville, 
" there is some mistake here; my uncle's 
voyage to Lisbon was rather more for 
pleasure than health." 

" Ay, so, I make no doubt, he was per- 
suaded to think ; but I, who had the ho- 
nour of attending him for some time, and 
during that time made it my business to 
study his constitution, I knew the re- 
verse : but don't let me affect you too much, 
Mr. Melville, by what I have said ; reflect 
how many like you are doomed to lose 
their dearest friends — that, in short, there 
are none of us exempt from cares and 
troubles ; even kings, as my friend Lucian 
has it, if you would more accurately con- 
template them, you would find they were 
not, in any degree, happier than others, what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 83 

through the insincerity and ambiguity of 
fortune, to say nothing of the disturbance, 
hatred, snares, and flattery, attached to 
their situation ; besides, there is no occa- 
sion, as yet, for utter despair. Could your 
uncle be prevailed on to seek a man who 
really understood his constitution, and 
who would esteem it an equal duty and a 
pleasure to devote himself to him, I think 
there might be a chance." 

" But where, my dear doctor," inter- 
rupted Melville, wdth affected eagerness, 
who now began to see into his drift, and 
was not a little amused by him, " where 
is such a man to be found ? or who is he ?" 

Foley made no reply, but he rested his 
chin on his gold-headed cane, slowly tra- 
ced on the hearthstone, near which he was 
sitting, and which happened, at the mo- 
ment, to be covered with dust blown in at 
the windows, " Doctor James Foley is 
the man." 

" Well done, Foley !" cried Rosebud, 
slapping him on the back, as he read these 
words over his shoulder ; ** who,, after this. 



84 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

will pretend to say you are not a modest 
man? — Mr. Melville, after the high re- 
commendation this gentleman has received 
from himself, I hope you will not fail 
mentioning him to your uncle." 

" Oh ! as to that, my good friend," said 
Foley, conceitedly, *' I need not depend 
upon that recommendation, if I did not 
choose it; but I — perceive, clearly per- 
ceive, from what has now occurred, that 
envy, more or less, is always excited by 
rising talents — that '' 

" Envy !" exclaimed Rosebud, fired by 
the insinuation ; " why, you insignificant 



Here Donaghue, well acquainted with 
the temper of his friend, hastily inter- 
posed, by asking Foley when he had been 
at the Vale? 

" At the Vaie, my good sir \ there is 
hardly a day in which I do not do EoyseHf 
the happiness of looking in there; not, I 
am proud tx) say, in my medical capacity, 
but merely as a friend; and I nev^r call 
there that I am not interrogated cooeem- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 85 

ing you, so great is the regret and surprise 
which your never yet having been prevail- 
ed on to make your appearance there has 
excited, as well as, indeed, your general 
seclusion; and, I must confess, I am 
amongst those who feel astonishment at 
it — astonishment, that a young gentler- 
man, so every way calculated to adorn so- 
ciety, should so pertinaciously persist in 
keeping himself apart from it : it is one of 
those things " 

Here Donaghue, in extreme disgust, 
gravely rose from his chair, and taking up 
a book, left the room. 

" He cannot bear any allusion, J see, 
yet to his particular sorrows," said Foley, 
as if utterly unconscious of the rebuke 
this was meant to convey. 

" Cannot bear any impertinenoe, you 
should say," cried Rosebud, vehemently, 
" Upon my word, Mr. Foley, you would 
do well if you were to content yourself 
with trying to dive into people's disorders, 
without trying, at the same time, to dive 
into their private concerns; but> to be 



86 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sure, you might want practice, or, at least, 
patients, perhaps, if you did, for a budget 
of news every morning is a great recom- 
mendation to old dowagers and antiqua- 
ted maids." 

" He ! he !" tittered Foley, " you speak 
from experience, doctor," he said, pertly. 

Rosebud again cast a look of fierceness 
on him, then suddenly checking himself— 
*^ As you are fond of quotations, I will 
give you one," he said — * The lips of talk- 
ers will be telling such things as apertain 
not unto them, but the words of such as 
have understanding are weighed in the 
balance ;' and now that we are on the sub- 
ject of quotations, I wonder you are not 
ashamed to be dragging in every moment, 
by the head and shoulders, no matter how 
inapplicable, those scraps of learning you 
have got, like a parrot, by rote." 

" Ha ! ha ! that is very well of you ! 
but not exactly so either ; for though my 
very great and extensive practice has pre- 
vented my devoting all the time I could 
wish to the study of literature, I have yet 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 8T 

been able to give up some hours to the 
lamp, and have ever considered the sub- 
lime, when properly introduced, after the 
manner of a thunderbolt, that shelters all 
things." 

" If you were to attend more to the 
meaning of your friends, as you call them, 
than to their words, you might derive 
some advantage from their sayings, but as 
it is, you just derive as much benefit from 
them as a parrot." 

" Ah ! very well ! but you have read 

« 

" Yes, I believe I have," interrupted 
Rosebud; " but if I had not to more ac- 
count than you seem to have done, I 
should have had prudence and discretion 
enough to have held my tongue." 

" Or if you couldn't, you might have had 
recourse to the same method of avoiding be- 
tray ing yourself that th e geese in Cilicia had. 
The geese in Cilicia, dreading the eagles, 
when they cross Mount Taurus, take a 
large stone in their mouths, that, by put- 



88 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ting a temporary stop to their garrulity and 
babbling, they may pass over in silence." 

Rosebud's indignation now exceeding 
all bounds, he again started up. 

" Come, come, gentlemen," said Mel- 
ville, interfering, " 1 can't permit profes- 
sional men " 

" What, Rosy," cried Foley, taking 
special care to get behind Melville, " are 
you driven to the argumentum haculu 
num ? You must be devilish hard run 
indeed, when that's the case !" 

" Such a pert gabbling blockhead merits 
chastisement !" 

" My friend Xenophon says — ' When 
beasts were able to speak, a sheep said to 
her master — " Ya, ya, ya !" 

But here Foley, who had been retreat- 
ing all the time, effected his escape, favour- 
ed by Melville, who, placing his back 
against the door, continued to guard the 
pass, until he saw him fairly out of sight. 

The doctor, having given up going to 
the Vale for a day or two, thought this 
would be a good opportunity for paying 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 89 

a visit to his friend Mr. Medlicott; ac- 
cordingly, the morning after Melville's 
arrival, he set off for this gentleman's 
house, distant about nine or ten miles from 
Altoir-na-Grenie, leaving the friends com- 
pletely to themselves, and relieved from 
any immediate apprehension of intrusion, 
through Foley's having met an express, 
just as he was quitting the court-yard, re- 
quiring his instant attendance on a lady, 
residing at a considerable distance. 

The doctor was hardly gone, ere an in- 
vitation was received from a Mr. Felim 
O'Connor, a rich miller in the neighbour- 
hood, requesting the company of Dona- 
ghue and any friends he might have with 
him, to a christening at his house the fol- 
lowing evening. 

Wishing to oblige, which he knew his 
acceptance of the invitation would do, 
Donaghue was on the point of sending 
such an answer as was wished for, when 
he learned that Miss Erin, who was to be 
one of the godmothers, was to be there, 
with a large party from the Vale, an inti^ 



90 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

mation that instantly decided him against 
going. 

Melville, who had anticipated a good 
deal of amusement from such a scene, was 
a little vexed. Donaghue, however, could 
not be prevailed on to change his resolu- 
tion; but at the same time he tried to 
persuade Melville himself to go, and this 
from a twofold motive — his seeing that be 
had an inclination to be present, and his 
wishing for the opportunity his absence 
w^ould afford him to pay another visit to 
the ruin, where, if he did not this evening 
hear the music, he should, of course, con- 
clude, or rather be confirmed in his con- 
jecture, of its being Miss Erin he had 
heard. His anxiety to be out of doubt or 
suspense about this was so great, as to 
render him really urgent with Melville to 
honour Mr. O'Connor with his company. 

Melville, however, appeared undecided 
for some time. At length, he thought he 
would go, provided he could do so with- 
out letting himself be known, conceiving 
he should have infinitely more amusement 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 91 

at such a place, by appearing in a feigned 
character, than in his own. This was not 
the first time he had enjoyed a masque- 
rade frolic, and he was now so bent on 
one, that he set about consulting the cor- 
poral on the subject. 

The corporal, having hearkened to him 
attentively, suddenly left the room, with- 
out any reply ; but almost as suddenly re- 
turned to it, with pleasure in his looks, 
and a bundle under his arm, which de- 
positing on the table — " Ah then, plase 
your honour, sure then I think," he cried, 
" I can rig you out in great style, so as to 
make you appear as nice a young farmer 
as any of them that will be at Felim 
O'Connor's this evening ; and you needn't 
have any objection to putting these things 
on," opening the bundle as he spoke, " for 
the devil a back they were ever on, since 
they came out of the tailor's hands, but 
are a bran new shute of clothes, which my 
late master, the Lord be good to his soul ! 
made me a present of, just a little before 
his death, and which, through one thing 



92 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

and another, the troubles that came on us 
after, and our going to the wars, have ever 
since, as a body may say, been lying up 
in lavender; and little did he who gave 
them think, when he was giving them, 
what would prevent their been worn, or 
that his only son would have been driven 
to fight and spill so much of his precious 
blood; but there's no use in talking of 
past grievances — they wouldn't signify 
now, if we could but get his honour to have 
a little of your fun in him, iVIr. INlelville ; 
but the sorrow bit of that now, though I 
remember the time when he had enough 
of it. But by saint Patrick, INIr. Melville, 
but you'll be making me proud of my 
clothes r for JNIelville, while he was talk^ 
ing, had been employing himself in trying 
them on; " for you quite cut a dash in 
them ; and it's myself that fears you'll be 
doing mischief in them ! for JNliss Biddy 
O'Shaughnessey, to whom I am to intro- 
duce you, you know, as a young farmer 
come dowp to the neighbourhood about 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 93 

cattle, is a great belle hereabouts, and 
admirer of beauty." 

" Upon my word you are quite com- 
plimentary, corporal," said Melville; " how- 
ever, I will hope that Miss Biddy's tran- 
quillity will not suffer any injury through 
my wonderful attractions." 

The frolic was carried into effect, with- 
out Donaghue, at present, knowing any 
thing about it, through his quitting the 
castle at an early hour for the abbey ; and 
shortly afterwards Melville, equipped as a 
young farmer, with his eyebrows a little 
darkened, to give a shade of disguise to 
his features, in case the party from the 
Vale cast their eyes upon him, set out for 
the habitation of Mrs. O'Shaughnessey, ac- 
companied by the corporal, and where 
they found the lady of the mansion, and 
her fair daughter, most impatiently wait- 
ing his arrival. 

The corporal having introduced him, as 
agreed upon, the party forthwith set off 
for Mr. O'Connor's, Melville in the mid- 
dle, and Mrs. O'Shaughnessey, a stout 



94 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

large-made woman, decked out in all her 
Sunday finery, leaning on one arm, and 
the daughter, a strapping wench of nine- 
teen, fat, red, and blowzy, attired in as 
many overalls as Betsy Blossom, and with 
as many streamers as a ship of war dress- 
ed in the colours of all nations, on the other. 

The day had been uncommonly sultry, 
and still there was an overcoming close- 
ness in the air, and the ladies in conse- 
quence soon becoming fatigued, began 
leaning all their weight upon Melville, in 
such a manner as plainly indicated their 
considering his offered support as by no 
means a mere complimentary thing ; what 
he felt therefore, long before their coming 
to Mr. O'Connor's, may well be imagined. 
He bore it however without any indica- 
tion of impatience, considering, since he 
had entered upon a frolic, he should good- 
humouredly endure whatever it subjected 
him to. 

Primrose Farm, the scene of the enter- 
tainment, was a long, low, thatched build- 
ing, constructed something in the form of a 



TEADITION OF THE CASTLE. 95 

St. Patrick's cross, with doors opening 
from the points, or passages that met in 
the centre of it. This mode of building 
rendered the rooms extremely cool and 
pleasant in warm weather, but very much 
the reverse in winter, as, let the wind 
blow from wdiat quarter it listed, it was 
sure, from having an inlet at every point, 
to gain admission litre. Adjoining it were 
the ruins of a Franciscan abbey, once of 
considerable extent and magnificence, as 
the remains indicated, particularly one of 
the windows, two of the aisles, and some 
of the octagon pillars, that still retained 
the outlines of ancient grandeur and ele- 
gance. On the other side of the house 
was an old round tower of rude workman- 
ship, and on the north an exceeding large 
cross, with a curious Oghem inscription on 
it. The chapel belonging to the abbey 
w^as turned into a ball-alley, so that where 
priests preached, and people prayed, idle 
fellows now loitered and wrangled, ren- 
dering the habitation of Mr. Felim O'Con- 
nor disagreeable in some respects, while. 



96 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in others, the vestiges of antiquity sur- 
rounding it rendered it interesting. 

A dwelling to which the builder had 
given so peculiar a form could not be seen 
without curiosity ; why it was built in so 
strange a manner occasioned a good deal 
of inquiry, and not less conjecture; some 
were of one opinion, some another; but it 
w^as the general one, considering the holy 
spot on which it was erected, that there 
must have been some very sufficient rea- 
son for giving it the shape it had ; and the 
prevailing one, or rather, report about it 
was, that it had been built at the cost of 
a Mr. Michael Delany, an old gentleman 
who had made a fortune abroad, no one 
knew how, and who, through some cir- 
cumstances connected with this fortune, 
being apprehensive of a visit from a being 
that shall be nameless, had decided on 
giving a form to his habitation that might 
operate as a spell in keeping him out, or if 
not, at least in procuring his own escape ; 
hence its numerous doors to the adjoining 
chapel, where he might defy him. Be 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 97 

that as it may, his successor, Mr. Felim 
O'Connor had, often reason to regret the 
whim, from the disturbance it was the oc- 
casion of to him, as, to say nothing of the 
dismal howlings of the wind through the 
building, it was hardly possible for any 
one to pass through the passages in winter 
without their light being extinguished — a 
circumstance that was always sure of cre- 
ating an alarm, when it happened to any 
of the female part of the family, insomuch 
as often to excite a belief that captain 
Rock, w4th some of his men, had gained 
admission, when it was only a harmless 
ghost or two, whisking back to the church- 
yard. As far, however, as good furniture 
and good cheer could render it comfort- 
able, it was rendered so — Mr. Felim 
O'Connor being rich and hospitable, and 
his wife well inclined to make a display 
of his money. 

Ere the arrival of Melville and his com- 
panions,all the guests, with the exception of 
the party from the Vale, who were not ex- 

VOL. III. F 



98 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

pected till a late hour, were assembled; 
tea and coffee were handing about, with a 
profusion of cakes of all descriptions, and 
all seemed to be enjoying themselves, and 
perfectly inclined to do justice to the en- 
tertainment provided for them. Mrs. 
O'Shaughnessey and her daughter had not 
been seated, when — " Ah, then, Tim Car- 
thy !" cried JNIrs. O'Connor, addressing 
herself to a great gaunt-looking fellow, who 
was officiating as attendant, " is this the 
way, and be hanged to you, you are mind- 
ing what you are about, not to have been 
after handing the tay yet to Mrs. O'Shaugh- 
nessey and Miss Bridget, or their friend ? 
— Ah, then, Mrs. O'Shaughnessey, honey ! 
what's the name of the gentleman you 
have brought along wid you ?" 

Mrs. O'Shaughnessey and her daughter 
stared at one another at this question, ut- 
terly unable to reply to it, the corporal 
havirig merely introduced Melville by the 
appellation of a young farmer. — " Why 
then, upon my faith," said the former. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 99 

" that's more than I can tell you — can 
you, Biddy ?" 

"No," replied Miss Bridget, "but I soon 
will ;" and tapping Melville on the shoul- 
der, whom she had contrived to make oc- 
cupy a chair beside her, but whose atten- 
tion happened at the instant to be diverted 
from her, " pray what's your name, sir?" 
she asked. 

" My name, ma'am !" repeated Melville, 
embarrassed by the suddenness of the 
question — " my name !" 

" Yes, sir ; but not the name your god- 
fathers and godmother gave you, but your 
father." 

" I — I believe — Dennis Scanlen, ma'am," 
he said, suddenly recovering himself, and 
fixing on the first name that came into 
his head. 

" Dennis Scanlen !" cried Mrs. O'Con- 
nor, almost with a scream — " why, then, 
have I the pleasure of seeing one of the 
Scanlens under my roof? I mean, if you 
are of the Ballinafod family, whose great 
F 2t 



100 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

grandfather, they have it recorded amongst 
them, had the honour of being made trum- 
peter to one of king William's ginirahr 

" The same, ma'am." 

" Ah, then, why didn't I know this 
sooner, that I might have given you a 
proper welcome at once? far don't you 
know that we are relations?" 

Melville bowed. 

" Nothing less than fifth cousins. Your 
grandmother, and my great grandfather 

But, Mr. O'Connor, dear," calling to 

her husband, who was making himself 
agreeable at the other end of the room to 
some ladies, " is this the way you are 
welcoming my relation to your house?" 

" Where?" demanded the obedient 
husband, turning round with quickness. 

" There he is, Dennis Scanlen ; and I'll 
be bound, when you look at him, you'll 
be saying you'd have known him any 
where for one of them." 

" Why then you may say that, 'tis his 
father's son I'd have known him to be 
any day, by his black eyebrows. — Well» 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 101 

i5ir, now that we have got you amongst 
us, you'll be letting us keep you a bit ?" 

" Ah, then, to be sure he will," said his 
wife ; " I'd take it very unkind — I'd take 
it indeed very unkind, if the child of his 
father wouldn't be stopping a bit with us." 

" You are very good," said Melville, " ex- 
tremely kind ; but, at present, I am " 

He was prevented proceeding in his 
excuse, by half a score old women, it seem- 
ed to him, starting forward to claim rela- 
tionship or acquaintance with him, through 
his supposed parents, and whose extrava- 
gant demonstrations of joy at seeing him, 
or rather the way they took to evince 
their pleasure at the circumstance, had 
very near been too much for his good-hu- 
mour and complaisance, more especially 
from the amusement he saw it occasioned 
in a quarter of the room where he did not 
like at all the idea of being laughed at. 
But more of this anon. He at length ex- 
tricated himself from the old ladies, and 
order being in some degree restored — 
'* Tim Carthy," cried Mrs. O'Connor, 



102 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

again addressing herself to the attendant, 
** I have been watching you all this time, 
and the devil a thing you have been doing 
but standing staring at my cousin Denny 
there, as if you had never seen a gentle- 
man before !" 

" Faith ! and Mrs. O'Connor," replied 
Tim, " it's no wonder if I do stare !" with 
his eyes still fixed upon Melville. 

" Ah, then, is this your manners, Tim, 
to be talking to your mistress before the 
company ? Be handing the tay about to 
the company — let them sugar themselves, 
and I'll milk them all round." 

" One eyebrow almost gone !" muttered 
Tim, as if unconsciously, on again hand- 
ing the tea-tray to Melville; and Melville 
immediately became sensible of what had 
occasioned his astonishment, and the re- 
buke of his mistress — namely, the brushing 
away of the black off of one of his eye- 
brows, through the caps of the old ladies, as 
they were saluting him, coming in contact 
with it. Before he came he might have 
laughed at the idea of such a mischance, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 103 

but now he did not like it, from the ridi- 
cule it might expose him to; so, by the 
aid of a looking-glass pretty near him, he 
slyly contrived to render both nearly alike 
again. 

" Ah then, Dennis, jewel," asked Mrs. 
O'Connor, as she continued to pour out 
the tea, " is there any chance of that 
match, that has been so long talked of, 
ever taking place between O'Dempsey 
and your cousin ?" 

" I really can't say, ma'am." 

" But you know whether it's off or 
not?" 

« No, really." 

" Well to be sure, that's odd ! but some 
people are very close. But any how, tell 
me, have you met, by any chance, with 
old Nell Rooney, since you came to the 
neighbourhood ?" 

" Not to my knowledge, ma'am." 

" Oh, then it's herself, poor soul ! that'll 
be taking on, if she doesn't see you be- 
fore you quit it ; for she's a kind of a re- 
lation, and was a great crony of your fa- 



104 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ther and mother's, when they lived here, 
a good many years ago ; more especially 
as the poor soul will be thinking your not 
seeking her out was owing to her being 
gone down in the world. Poor Nelly 
has been very unfortunate ; but indeed I 
think, Mrs. O'Shaughnessey, things seem- 
ed to take a turn with her ever since the 
trouble she caused to squire Riley's fami- 
ly about her pig, and no wonder — it was 
a bad thing to affront, or make inimies of 
people of their quality." 

*' Why, yes, to be sure," assented Mrs. 
O'Shaughnessey ; " but then if people are 
wronged " 

" Wronged!" exclaimed Mrs. O'Con- 
nor, with a stare of astonishment. " Why 
sure you don't imagine " 

" Oh, no matter," said the other. " I 
say nothing; for ' the least said the soonest 
mended." 

" Well," cried Miss Bridget, throwing 
herself back in her chair, and kicking up 
her feet, in rather a hoydening manner, 
♦* this is the way my mother always goes 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 105 

on, letting people think she knows more 
than she likes to tell !" 

" Why then I am sure you are very 
polite for saying so, Miss Biddy ! — But as 
you were observing, ma'am," to Mrs. 
O'Connor, drawing her chair closer to her 
as she spoke, but in doing which she un- 
fortunately set it upon Miss Biddy's foot, 
to her, no doubt, inexpressible pain, as 
the roar she gave intimated. 

" Good Heavens, girl! what is the 
matter ?" demanded the alarmed mother. 

" The matter !" repeated the daughter, 
as she kicked off her shoe, and began rub- 
bing her foot, " I think the devil's the 
matter with you sometimes, that you 
can't speak without fidgetting about so! 
and I wish he had had Mrs. Rooney, her 
pig, squire Riley, who had him stolen, 
and the whole set of them, before I had 
my great toe hurt as it is !" 

" Biddy ! Biddy ! I blush for you, to 
speak in such a way, before such ginteel 
company, and act so improper as you do, 
by shewing your bare foot I" 
F 3 



106 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" It's not bare," said Miss Biddy ; " for 
isn't the stocking on it still ?" 

But at this instant the sound of coach 
wheels, rolling towards the house, caused 
a general bustle ; an immediate arrange- 
ment took place — the chairs were disposed 
in better order, and Mr. and Mrs. O'Con- 
nor went out to receive their distinguish- 
ed guests from the Vale ; but a terrible 
disappointment awaited them — a sudden 
indisposition prevented Miss Erin from 
coming, so that the party merely consist- 
ed of lady Jane Morley, who, out of com- 
pliment to her family, had been asked to 
be one of the godmothers, Miss Bond, de- 
puted to stand in place of Miss P>in, Mr. 
Lawless, a dangler on lady Jane, for she 
could not exist without having some beaus 
at her absolute command, and sir Edward 
Surrey, one of the godfathers. 

Leaning on the arm of Mr. Lawless, 
lady Jane entered the room, and taking 
possession of the seat at the upper end of 
it, to which she was obsequiously ushered 
by her host and hostess, looked round her 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 107 

with a vacant stare, as if not perfectly 
comprehending that she saw any one in 
it. So far Miss Bond followed her ex- 
ample, in leaning also on her beau ; but 
as to seeming not to perceive there was 
any one else in the apartment, that was 
out of the question — so great was her anx- 
iety to ascertain what notice or admira- 
tion she, or at least her dress, excited, hav- 
ing on this evening attired herself in all 
the extravagance of the Parisian mode, as 
it prevailed on her quitting Paris ; so that 
from the quantity of furbelows and flow- 
ers, to say nothing of other ornaments 
with which she was decorated, she very 
much resembled a dancing puppet, and, 
in consequence, was very near meeting 
with a serious mischance; for Tim, who, 
throughout the evening, was evidently 
more intent on making remarks on the 
company than minding what he was him- 
self about, was so struck by her appear- 
ance, resembling nothing that he had ever 
seen before, that, on approaching her with 
the tea-tray — for though it had been sig- 



108 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

nified that the party from the Vale were 
not to be expected to tea, Mrs. O'Connor 
would insist on its being offered to them, 
ere any thing else took place, after their 
arrival — he became so entirely engrossed 
by looking at her, as not to perceive he 
was holding it unevenly, till it became com- 
pletely overturned, in such a direction as 
must have thrown all its contents into her 
lap, but for her own adroitness in push- 
ing it aside at the instant, in such a way 
as transferred them to her next neighbour, 
sir Edward's ; for, perceiving the careless- 
ness of the attendant, she was prepared to 
be on her guard against any ill conse- 
quences that might result from it. 

Not a little was the confusion winch 
the accident occasioned ; but as it was 
quickly ascertained that the tea had not 
been sufficiently hot to scald sir Edward, 
notwithstanding his exclamation to that 
effect in the first instance, and as every 
thing that could be done was done to 
prevent his suffering any serious incon- 
venience from it, order was quickly re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 109 

stored; but not without the baronet's ob- 
serving to Miss Bond, that, upon his ho- 
nour, she had done the thing neatly, for 
he had never seen a more complete slight 
of hand trick played than hers. 

The ceremony of the christening at 
length commenced ; but here again was a 
little confusion, for, on the infant, as 
usual, being offered to one or other of the 
godmothers to hold, both refused taking 
it. At length it was absolutely forced 
upon Miss Bond, who, extremely indig- 
nant at a greater liberty being taken with 
her than with her ladyship, was determin- 
ed not to put up with it quietly ; accord- 
ingly, by degrees sidling towards her 
ladyship, she made a sudden attempt to 
put it into her arms, but which the other 
preventing, by starting back, the unfortu- 
nate infant would have fallen to the ground, 
had not sir Edward Surrey started forward 
just in time to save it. 

" Good Heavens !" exclaimed lady Jane, 
darting a glance of contempt at Miss 



110 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Bond; " the awkward thing! does she 
mean to be the death of the child ?" 

" The awkward thing !" repeated Miss 
Bond, in a tone of high exasperation. 
" Well, really," with a toss of her head, 
" this is what I never met with be- 
fore ! When I was at Paris, I was con- 
sidered " 

" Pray let the ceremony proceed," said 
lady Jane. — " And do, sir Edward, I be- 
seech you," to the unfortunate baronet, 
who looked round in vain for some one 
to relieve him from his squalling burden, 
" try if you can't, by dandling it a little, 
stop the roaring of that miserable little 
thing!" 

" Oh, don't mind it, my lady," cried 
Mrs. O'Connor — " 'tis a lucky sign for an 
infant to roar when it's christening." 

At length the ceremony was over, and 
lady Jane instantly prepared to depart; 
in vain she was implored and entreated to 
stay and partake of a collation, which, at 
no small expence and trouble, had been 
prepared for her, and the party to which 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. Ill 

she belonged; go she would, to the no 
snnall pleasure of Melville, who felt that 
her remaining would impose a very irk- 
some restraint upon him, as he could not, 
from a fear of recognition, have then acted 
as he washed. The risk of this he had 
been careless about ere his reaching Mr. 
O'Connor's, but hardly had he got there, 
ere he felt he should like to remain un- 
known for the remainder of the evening, 
from the greater liberty it would allow 
him to devote himself to one object. In 
short, he had scarcely entered the room, 
ere his eyes were attracted, and his fancy 
captivated, by one of the prettiest crea- 
tures he thought he had ever seen. She 
appeared to be about nineteen, and had 
for a companion a girl who seemed to be 
about her own age, and was also exces- 
sively pretty ; but there was this diffe- 
rence between them — Melville's charmer 
looked all life and animation, the other 
pale and languid, as if some cankerworm 
had fed upon her damask cheek, and 
stolen away its bloom and dimples. There 



112 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was an air about them indicative of their 
not exactly belonging to the society in 
which they were met ; and Melville found 
the conjecture it gave rise to was not er- 
roneous, on eagerly inquiring who they 
were, being informed that one was the 
daughter, and the one he so particularly 
admired, Miss Audley, the relation, it 
was supposed, of a Mr. and Mrs. Wheat- 
ley, people of small but independent for- 
tune, and retired habits, who had lately 
taken a pretty cottage, called Rosehill, in 
the neighbourhood. 

One of the barns had been fitted up for 
dancing, and as soon as the party from 
the Vale had departed, the guests began 
to repair to this. Melville no sooner un- 
derstood that dancing was about com- 
mencing, than he flew, regardless of the 
looks and evident expectation of Miss 
O'Shaughnessey, to solicit the honour of 
Miss Audley's hand for the dance. 

It was granted, but with an air that 
plainly indicated a consciousness of its 
being a condescension its being so. Yet 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. US 

certainly it was impossible for the young 
lady to deny his being more deserving of 
it than any other person then present. 
Her friend declined following her ex- 
ample, though earnestly importuned to do 
so ; but though she would not dance, she 
attended her to the rustic ball-room, where, 
if there was not as much elegance as might 
have been pleasing to some of the party, 
there was at least as much mirth and en- 
joyment. 

Melville could not help continuing to 
be amused by the air of condescension 
with which his pretty partner continued 
to regard him. Yet that she did think 
him worthy of some regard was evident, 
from his still finding, whenever his eyes 
were for a moment diverted from her, on 
reverting to her, hers intently fastened 
on him. Sometimes she appeared a little 
confused at this; sometimes only laugh- 
ed, as if it really were of no kind of con- 
sequence what a person like him thought 
on the subject, whom, of course, if requi- 
site, she could check by a glance ; and her 



114 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

friend, keeping close to her elbow, though 
her wandering eye confessed her conversa- 
tion intended for him, she still addressed 
it to her, as if it could not possibly be ex- 
pected she could have entered into one 
with him. Well, Melville only admired 
her the more for these pretty little airs of 
supposed superiority, more especially as 
he thought he saw a little kind of strug- 
gle in her feelings about him. 

For the sake of amusement, he endea- 
voured to support the character he had 
assumed; but he was so every moment 
slipping into his usual style of speaking, 
that there is hardly a doubt but that, in 
some measure, he must have betrayed 
himself ere long, had not his fair partner 
been hurried away. Before the first dance 
was well over, the servant from Rosehill 
was announced, with a message that there 
must be no delay in the return of the 
young ladies ; and indeed, Mrs. O'Connor 
whispered Melville, it had been a great in- 
dulgence their being allowed to come at all. 

The moment they were gone there-was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 115 

an end of any farther interest or amuse- 
ment in the scene to Melville, and no- 
thing but politeness detained him after 
them ; but as he considered Mrs. O'Shaugh- 
nessey and her daughter under his care, 
he could not bring himself to depart with- 
out them. As if to try his patience, they 
staid till almost the very last moment, and 
he was absolutely dragging them along, 
when, to his great joy, they encountered 
the corporal, who, suspecting what would 
be the case, had come out to prevent his 
having the trouble of seeing them home, 
and to whom he immediately made them 
over, to the extreme indignation of Miss 
Bridget, who protested, after their civility 
to him, the least thing, she thought, he 
could have done, would have been to have 
seen them all the way himself, even though 
he had been a gentleman, instead of one 
of the Scanlens, who, God knows, every 
one knew to be no great things. 

While JNIelville was thus amusing him- 
self at the christening, Donaghue was wan- 
dering in a melancholy manner about. By 



116 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the time he reached the abbey, the sha- 
dows of evening were beginning to fall 
around it, and the air to hold that solemn 
stillness that was so calculated to add to 
the effect produced by the impressive 
loneliness of the place. Eagerly penetra- 
ting to the interior of the building, he 
searched and examined as before, but 
without being able to discover the trace 
of any human being. Yet so it was on 
the evening he had heard the singing, and 
this reflection involuntarily detained him 
in the chapel, on descending to it. He 
was lingering in it, almost against his con- 
viction of hearing any one that night, 
when, as he was watching the cold grey 
hue of twilight, gradually stealing over 
the glow of the western sky, he suddenly 
fancied he distinguished the sound of a 
harp, and at the very same moment that 
of approaching steps behind him. He 
eagerly turned to see who it was that was 
entering, or whether his ear had deceived 
him, and, to his unutterable astonishment, 
so entirely had he given way to the belief 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 117 

of its being her he heard on the harp, be- 
held Miss Erin, with one of her young 
cousins, the daughter of her uncle Erin. 
His surprise at seeing her entering, at the 
very instant he had imagined her above 
in the cloisters, from having again distin- 
guished the harp, was so great, as for a 
moment to deprive him of the power of 
doing more than staring at her with a be- 
wildered look, as if incredulous of its being 
her he really saw. At length, trying to 
collect himself, he was on the point of ad- 
dressing her, but with his eyes wander- 
ing towards the cloisters— for since it was 
not her he heard, who then could the 
being be who so mysteriously haunted 
the pile, rendering herself visible and in- 
visible, just as she pleased, it seemed? 
when the rush of female garments was 
heard, and the next instant a female figure, 
in white, was seen gliding through the 
gallery. 

Miss Erin started, and drew back ; and 
— " Good gracious!" cried her cousin, 
clinging to her, " who can that be ? Dear 



118 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

me, Mr. O'Brien, how frightened we should 
now be only you are here !" 

Donaghue made no reply ; he had not 
the power at the moment, so intense was 
his anxiety and expectation. 

Descending footsteps were heard — the 
little arched door that shut in the narrow 
winding stairs, conducting to the upper 
cloisters, was pushed open, and a tall figure 
stepped forward into the chapel. She 
suddenly stopped, threw back the long 
flowing veil, that gave a shadowy appear- 
ance to her form, and lady Jane Morley 
stood confessed to view. 

" Lady Jane Morley ! is it possible ?" 
was the general exclamation. 

" Is it possible !" she repeated ; and then, 
with a laugh to Donaghue — " Well, really, 

O'Brien, this is " " Good acting," it 

was evident she would have said, had she 
finished the sentence. — " And you to ap- 
pear so surprised too," she said, again turn- 
ing to Miss Erin, " as if you really thought 
no one had a love for sohtude but yourself!" 

" I never had the affectation to pretend 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 119 

a love for it," said Miss Erin, with a se- 
verity of tone not by any means usual 
with her. 

" No !" cried lady Jane, with the utmost 
unconcern — " I thought the very reverse 
then indeed, from your passion for shady 
groves and purling streams." 

" I can't see how a love for rural scenery, 
or even the occasional enjoyment of its 
quietude, can be construed into a passion 
for solitude," replied Miss Erin. " How- 
ever, whether it could or no, is of very little 
consequence ; nor is this a place or hour 
for the argument of tlie point. — It gets 
late, Millicent," addressing herself to her 
cousin, " and we must not, therefore, de- 
lay any longer here." 

" But you will not think of returning 
by yourselves ?" said Donaghue, eagerly, 
now only beginning to recover froui the 
agitating effect of the incident upon him ; 
for, from all that had occurred, it was plain 
to him Miss Erin conceived there had 
been an appointment between him and 
lady Jane, and he could not instantly 



120 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

suppress the feeling of anger and vexation 
which the conviction gave him. 

" Why not?" demanded Miss Erin, 
with quickness. " If we had been appre- 
hensive of any danger from doing so, we 
should not have depended on chance for 
an escort." 

Donaghue bowed, as if answered ; but 
on seeing her turn away, he involuntarily 
darted after her, and catching her hand — 
" At least allow me," he said, " to assist 
you through these passages; you know 
not how dangerous they are at such an 
hour as this." 

" You are mistaken," she replied, wrest- 
ing her hand from him ; " but whether I 
was or not, there is another lady that re- 
quires your services quite as much as I 
could possibly do." 

" Thank you, my dear," said lady Jane, 
catching him by the arm as she spoke, 
" for turning the gentleman over to me; 
for really I am a terrible hand in making 
my way through these horrible places*" 

" Then only to think of your coming 



f RADITION OF THE CASTLE. 121 

to them, lady Janej" said Millicent; " and 
then to go up by yourself, and glide about 
through those frightful dark galleries, 
making believe you were a castle spectre !" 

*' Very terrific indeed, and very amu- 
sing ! now was it not so, Millicent ? did 
not I please you very much ?" 

" Why a little, I believe," replied Mil- 
licent ; " any thing wonderful is so plea- 
sant !" 

Had Donaghue been a lover that dared 
aspire, how gratified — how more than gra- 
tified — how delighted would he have been 
— how enraptured at the inference it was 
fair to draw, from the suddenly altered 
manner of Miss Erin towards him ! for 
why, if careless about his sentiments — if 
indifferent whether the ardent passion he 
had once avowed for her were transferred 
to another or not — why that appearance 
of discomposure — that indication of re- 
sentment and anger, at the supposition of a 
meeting between him and lady Jane ? but 
as it was, what pleasure could he derive 

VOL. III. G 



122 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE 

from it, since, to give way to a farther 
hope concerning him, was out of the ques- 
tion ? But was not his vanity misleading 
him? could it be, that she who had so 
peremptorily rejected him — who had cast 
him from her, as it were, as a being un- 
worthy of her regard, entertained a fa- 
vourable sentiment for him, or rather such 
a degree of interest about him, as could 
occasion her to care who he thought of, 
or what he did ? Yet no ; he was too 
well acquainted with all the symptoms of 
the passion he now more than suspected 
her gentle bosom of harbouring, to allow 
himself to think he was mistaken in the 
construction he put on her recent con- 
duct — a construction, that, argue as he 
might with himself on the subject, it was 
not in the nature of a youthful lover not 
to experience, at least transient rapture 
from. When she had rejected him, then 
it was from a sense of offended pride and 
delicacy, and the offence he had given 
her forgiven, atoned for by repentance; 
had circumstances allowed the renewal of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 123 

his addresses, he might, even now, at this 
very moment, have been blessed in her pos- 
session. Oh, the bitter pang of that 
thought ! — a thought, that had it been 
possible for a heart like his, the seat of fi- 
lial piety, and love, and reverence, to have 
uttered a reproach against the memory of 
a parent, must have urged him to do so 
at the instant; and to a suspicion perhaps 
of this, her not altogether regarding him 
with unfavourable sentiments, was ow- 
ing the conduct that had so hurt him 
in her father; the idea struck cold upon 
his heart, as if it were only now he 
had become sensible of any obstacles to his 
hopes of her. But since such obstacles 
did exist — since fortune had placed insur- 
mountable barriers between them, v/as it 
generous to rejoice at what had just oc- 
curred? could it afford him pleasure to 
think she suffered such anguish as he was 
suffering — that the sympathy of wretch- 
edness existed between them? no; and 
he would therefore more sedulously than 
G 2 



124 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ever shun her, command every look, and si- 
lence every sigh, in her presence; and 
even — even permit her to continue in the 
mistake under which she at present la- 
boured. 

Of his wishing, or meaning, to do this, 
however, the almost sullen silence he con- 
tinued to preserve towards lady Jane was 
no proof. In vain, in an under tone, she 
half rallied, half reproached him ; his 
wdiole soul w^as abstracted at the moment ; 
and even if this had not been the case, a 
strong feeling of indignation at the con- 
duct she had been guilty of — the artifice 
and deception that, in some way or other, 
she had recourse to, would have prevent- 
ed her succeeding in having any effect 
upon him. 

Miss Erin, however, walking before 
them, without ever casting a glance be- 
hind her, was not sensible of this ; to her, 
indeed, it might have appeared, from only 
hearing the voice of lady Jane in whis- 
pers, as if they were carrying on a very 
agreeable conversation ; but whatever she 



tUADlTION OF THE CASTLE. 125 

thought, or whatever she felt, by the time 
she reached the house she had perfectly 
collected herself, and pausing on the steps, 
awaited there their coming up to her, to 
invite Donaghue in. 

This was an invitation, however, it 
may readily be believed, in the present 
state of his mind, Donaghue had no hesi- 
tation in refusing. Perplexed, bewildered, 
agitated, to a degree that robbed him of 
all self-possession, by what had occurred, 
he was impatient to be alone, and accord- 
ingly making his bow, hastily retreated. 

On repairing to the drawing-room, the 
party found only lady Erin and Miss 
Bond there, waiting tea for them. — " My 
dear child," said lady Erin, on seeing the 
languid manner in which Miss Erin threw 
herself on a seat, " how pale you look !" 

" The — the excessive closeness of the 
air has, I believe, overcome me a little," 
replied Miss Erin, leaning back her head 
as she spoke against the arm of the sofa, 
whilst, in spite of all her efforts to prevent 
it, a tear strayed down her cheek. 



126 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" It has indeed, I fear," said her lady- 
ship; " and languid as you appear, how- 
will you ever be able to endure the noise 
and bustle of the scene to which you are 
going?" 

" Oh dear ! it will be of service to her," 
said lady Jane, in a tone of the greatest 
unconcern, delighted to perceive that the 
poison she had taken such pains to instill 
was beginning to operate. 

" I cannot agree with you," replied lady 
Erin, " and I therefore very much wish 
Eveleen could decline going : this could 
be done," she anxiously added, " if she 
could get any one to go in her place." 

" What a ridiculous fuss about her!" 
lady Jane could with difficulty prevent 
herself from saying, but checking herself— 
" oh, that w^ould be a very easy matter, I 
should conceive," she said ; " here is Mil- 
licent, or Miss Bond, at least, would an- 
swer, I should conceive." 

** Oh yes ! certainly. Miss Bond," cried 
lady Erin, eagerly catching at the sug- 
gestion, " if she had no objection," 



TllADITION OF THE CASTLE. 127 

" Oh dear ! none in the world," replied 
Miss Bond—" that is, if I have time to 
change my dress." 

" Why, sure, my dear," said lady Erin, 
" there is no occasion for your changing 
the dress you put on for dinner." 

" Oh dear, yes !" cried the young lady ; 
" when I was in Paris, I got the custom 
of changing my dress for every fresh party 
I went to, and so " 

" Well, my dear, do as you like," said 
lady Erin, " only remember that you are 
now going to a mere party of rustics." 

Rustics had eyes, however, as well as 
other people, and as to be stared at was 
the very height of poor little Miss Bond's 
ambition, away she flew to dress herself in 
the manner that has been already descri- 
bed. 

It was not long before lady Erin began 
to fear that it was something more than 
the mere languor of fatigue that oppressed 
her daughter ; yet what could it be ? she 
knew not how to hint the suspicion, and 
yet she felt it must continue till she 



128 THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

knew whether she was mistaken. But 
she was not long allowed to torment her- 
self with conjectures. The impression 
made upon the imagination of Millicent, 
by the appearance of lady Jane in the ab- 
bey, induced her to mention it, and her 
relation of what had occurred there quick- 
ly accounted to her aunt for what had 
perplexed and alarmed her. The result 
of her reflections on the subject, was a de- 
termination to endeavour to bring matters 
to a speedy issue between her daughter 
and Donaghue, by trying to ascertain 
whether indeed there was any attachment 
between him and lady Jane, as appear- 
ances, which however she knew were 
often deceitful, now seemed to indicate. 
But for the purpose of enabling this to be 
done, she saw no other method than by 
inducing Donaghue to become a visitor 
at the Vale ; she accordingly decided on 
remonstrating with sir AVilliam on the 
subject, and urging him to take more ef- 
fectual measures for accomplishing this 
than he had yet done, by representing to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 129 

him, that surely, after all, the most likely 
and eJBfectual methods for obtaining that 
knowledge of, or insight into the young 
man's disposition and sentiments, would 
be by procuring opportunities for familiar 
converse with him, instead of pursuing 
vague inquiries about him; and that he 
might, besides, have other motives than 
were surmised, for hitherto declining any 
overtures towards an acquaintance there, 
and this indeed lady Erin knew, or rather 
was persuaded, was the case, being almost 
convinced, like her daughter, that it was 
owing to the embarrassing recollection of 
what had occurred between them, that 
these overtures were disregarded. This, 
however, was a surmise she would not 
venture to disclose to sir William, lest, 
from the light in which she knew he re- 
garded his daughter, and his certainly 
having a little tendency in his nature to- 
wards haughtiness, the presumption which 
Donaghue had, assuredly, been guilty of 
towards her, might be an offence not par- 
g3 



130 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

donable in his eyes ; and such were the 
fears of Miss Erin, else would she have 
revealed what she thought to her father, 
and thus probably have vindicated Dona- 
ghue from the suspicion of having any un- 
worthy motive for not visiting publicly at 
the Vale. 

But it now remains to explain lady 
Jane's motives for acting as she had done : 
of what avail, she considered, would it be 
to have Donaghue prevented from resort- 
ing to the Vale, if still a belief of a mu- 
tual attachment between him and Miss 
Erin were allowed to exist ? for destroy- 
ing this, at least on the lady's side, she 
saw no other method than that of indu- 
cing one of his being attached to another ; 
and the idea had no sooner occurred, than 
she quickly decided on exerting herself 
to make it appear that she herself was the 
object of his secret visits to the Vale, or, 
in short, that a secret intercourse subsist- 
ed between them, for which, she made no 
doubt, she should be able to assign some 
sufficient reason. Much, however, as she 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 131 

relied on her skill in plotting and plan- 
ning, she saw she must, in the present in- 
stance, proceed with the greatest caution 
and address, if she hoped to succeed in 
what she had undertaken, from pot having 
common minds to deal with, such as im- 
mediately gave way to appearances, and 
in a moment believed any thing that 
others chose to impose upon them : instead, 
therefore, of positively asserting any thing 
at first, she merely began to act in such 
a manner as was calculated to awaken 
suspicion, and gradually insinuate the be- 
lief she wished to inspire. She suddenly 
began to assume an appearance of restless- 
ness and abstraction, and to be continually 
out by herself, without explaining where : 
but this was not all ; she had several hillet- 
douoo of Donaghue's laying by her, the 
productions of other and very different 
days, and these she re-sealed, and contri- 
ved, from time to time, to have delivered 
to her before Miss Erin, as if just then 
sent, and who, she was aware, was perfect- 
ly acquainted with his handwriting. Still* 



1$2 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

however, she was not satisfied: there 
might be billets, without love in them ; 
and except she could make it appear that 
she and Donaghue had private meetings, 
she much feared, notwithstanding all the 
trouble she had been at, that she might 
ultimately fail in the accomplishment of 
what she wished. To effect this it was 
requisite to ascertain whether he had now 
any particular haunt; this she was soon 
enabled to do, through the spies she had 
set upon him ; and no sooner did she dis- 
cover that the abbey was the place he 
now frequented, than she decided on the 
scheme of exciting his curiosity, in such a 
manner as should prevent his forsaking it 
till the discovery of their both frequent- 
ing it had taken place, which, in one way 
or the other, she determined to have made. 
Through her emissaries she had a harp 
conveyed there, and a place of conceal- 
ment discovered for it, that none but a 
person perfectly acquainted with the build- 
ing could possibly have detected. She 
was in great hopes, from Miss Erin's ad- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 133 

miration of this old pile, and the pleasure 
she took in straying about, that she would 
have made the discovery she was anxious 
for of her own accord ; but, latterly. Miss 
Erin had not indulged herself as much as 
she was wont to do in this propensity ; 
she was afraid of meeting Donaghue, after 
what had passed at their last accidental 
encounter, and, if the truth must be told^ 
she was also afraid of meeting him with 
lady Jane, therefore avoided, more than 
she had ever done before, rambling about 
the grounds ; for the artifices of her lady- 
ship had not altogether failed of the in- 
tended effect ; suspicions w^ere awakened 
by what she saw — by what she remarked, 
for the notes were not lost upon her, and 
a kind of dread of having those suspicions 
confirmed, induced her to keep a constant 
watch over her footsteps ; for, let us talk 
as we may, of suspense — of incertitude, 
w^e involuntarily shrink from the confir- 
mation of any painful apprehension. 

Lady Jane finding this, had again re- 
course to artifice. On the evening of the 



134 TRADITION OF THE CASTLEr 

christening, her woman, encountering 
Miss Erin in one of the galleries, with 
much seeming anxiety inquired if she 
knew where her lady was ? 

No, Miss Erin replied, she did not; 
adding, she thought she had been in her 
dressing-room. 

"Oh dear, no, ma'am !" replied the well- 
instructed abigail, who was an English 
demoiselle, and had been some time in the 
service of her ladyship ; " and I want her 
so bad, having a message to give her ; but 
I suppose, since she is no where to be 
found in the house, she has taken herself 
off to that old ruination place." 

" What place ?" demanded Miss Erin, 
suddenly stopping as she was passing her. 

" Oh dear, mem ! the Aabby, they call 
it, in the ^ale yonder. I'm sure 'tis to 
me the ^oddest toagary in the world the 
one she has lately taken to be wisiting it, 
when there's such a number of nice, new, 
pretty buildings about the grounds here, 
where one would be in no danger of meet- 
ing ghostesses, or any rubbish of that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 135 

kind. I shouldn't, however, have known 
nothinA: about it but for an ^accident, so 
I hopes, mem, you'll tell her nothink of 
what I am telling you, for she makes 
quite a mystery of going there, as one 
may say. She comes to me last Monday, 
yes, it was last Monday — and — ' Oh, Fea- 
therston !' says she, all in a flusteration, 
* as sure as any thing, I have lost my dia- 
mond bracelet, and you must go look for 
it.' — * I go look for it, mem,' says I, laugh- 
ing, 'is it without knowing where?' — 
' Pooh, no, you fool !' says she ; ' do you 
think I want to send you of a wildgoose- 
chace? I'm certain sure I dropt it in the 
old habbey, and there you must go look 
for it.' — * Is it to that ruination place, 
mem ?' says I, with a scream, ' to be sca- 
red out of my seven senses by seeing a 
ghost, or a hobgoblin ? no, my lady, you 
must excuse me,' says I ; ' these wild jH'i- 
rish are bad enough, God he knows, in 
their own shapes, without running the 
risk of meeting them in any that's not na- 
tural.' — * Tut, you fool !' says she, * don't 



136 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

you know that ghosts never walk by 
daylight? so go you must, fori wouldn't, 
for all the world, that any body but your- 
self knew of my frequenting the old Aab- 
bey ; and if you find my bracelet, you 
shall have the fine crimson tabinet, that 
you told me you were so longing for the 
other day, when you went to the haber- 
dasher's for me.' 

" Well, mem, there was no resisting 
this," said Mrs. Featherston — " that is, 
mem, I mean her coaxing words — and so 
off I goes to the ruins, and there to be 
sure, sure enough, after kea^piormg, as 
she calls it, I don't know how many dark 
passages, I finds the bracelet." 

" Well, well," said Miss Erin, " since 
your lady has intimated that she does not 
like to have her visits there known, you 
must be silent on the subject;" quitting 
the gallery as she spoke, but almost lost in 
thought : she had lately once or twice heard, 
through the contrivance indeed of lady 
Jane, that Donaghue had been seen about 
the abbey, and from what was now men- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 137 

tioned, she drew a conclusion from the 
circumstance, that certainly made her fair 
bosom experience a momentary pang. 
Yet why — at liberty as they both were to 
act as they please — why give this appear- 
ance of mystery to any attachment be- 
tween them, if one really did exist ? but 
might not this be accounted for by the 
supposition of Donaghue's having an in- 
superable objection to visiting at the 
house? yet still there was a something, 
she knew not what, except it was the agi- 
tated manner of Donaghue, whenever 
they had lately met, that opposed her giv- 
ing absolute credit to what she was indu- 
ced to believe. 

Endeavouring, at length, to compose 
herself, she proceeded to join her cousin 
Millicent, almost all the rest of the party 
at the Vale being dispersed this day, with 
whom she had been going to take a short 
stroll before tea, at the very moment of 
encountering Mrs. Featherston; for, as 
already mentioned, it was not her inten- 
tion to go to Mr. O'Connor's, till the bus- 



138 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tie attendant on their receiving the guests 
there was over. 

In which direction she now walked, so it 
was not in that of the abbey, she cared not : 
determined against this, it certainly there- 
fore appeared rather extraordinary that 
still this should be the very direction that 
was taken, as she discovered to be the 
case, on suddenly raising her eyes from 
the ground, when within a few yards of 
the building, not before, we must con- 
clude from the agitation indicative of 
surprise she evinced at the moment. — 
" Good Heavens !" she exclaimed, abrupt- 
ly stopping, " how is it, Millicent, that 
we took this direction ?" 

" I am sure I don't know," said Milli- 
cent ; " but are you frightened at being 
at the abbey ? to be sure it is a dismal- 
looking place — but it is not late enough 
yet, I think, to make one sorry for having 
come to it; do let us just take a peep into 
the old chapel — I do so love these old 
places." 

" No, no ! by no means ! not now, my 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 139 

dear girl !" repeated her cousin, in a tone 
of resistance. Millicent, iiowever, held 
her firnaly by the arm, and so, in spite of 
herself, we must suppose, she was drawn 
onward, notwithstanding the tone in which 
she had spoken, till she found herself 
within the chapel, where what followed 
has been already described. Well, after 
this — after what occurred there, any lon- 
ger to have doubted the reality of what had 
been previously insinuated, and she would 
have been led to consider herself one of 
those obstinate kind of beings, who will 
never allow themselves to be convinced of 
any thing they dislike to believe. The 
extreme confusion and emotion of the gen- 
tleman, originating, no doubt, in feelings 
of delicacy for the lady, were proof posi- 
tive of his being there by appointment, 
and, of course, that in putting that con- 
struction on his manner to herself which 
she had done, she had led herself into an 
error. However this was known only to 
herself, and there was something soothing 
in that reflection : yet again, to counter- 



140 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

balance this, there was bitterness in the 
thought that, but for her secret derision 
of lady Jane's repeated hints of what was 
now actually proved to be the case, what 
she now felt might have been spared her : 
and how could she have persisted in her 
incredulity, with regard to these hints, was 
now the question, considering the gene- 
rally acknowledged attractions of lady 
Jane, or be so romantic as to suppose, that 
after her positive rejection of him, and the 
mortifying terms in which that rejection 
was couched, Donaghue could possibly per- 
sist in cherishing a passion for her ; altoge- 
ther she stood self-convicted of a degree of 
weakness, that induced a belief of her 
really having a greater degree of self-love 
in her composition than she had previous- 
ly been aware of: but nothing so terribly 
hurt her feelings as the idea of her con- 
duct to Donaghue in the abbey, the sense 
of injury it certainly seemed to imply — 
what must he infer from it, but that 
which she now shrunk from the idea of 
his imagining ? and this was the command 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 141 

she had over herself! ah, how premature 
is all praise, till we are put to the test ! but 
she could not help thinking the feelings 
incidental to any sudden surprise or shock 
excusable ; and that, of course, it was only 
their indulgence that was justly reprehen- 
sible — condemnation for this she determin- 
ed not to incur. All things considered, 
she almost felt she ought rather to rejoice 
than regret at what had occurred, uncertain 
as she was of what her father's final senti- 
ments might be with regard to an attach- 
ment between her and Donaghue; at 
least, it was by ingenious arguments of 
this description with herself on the sub- 
ject, she tried to compose her spirits, and 
regain her wonted appearance of tranquil- 
lity. 

Lady Jane saw with delight what she 
had achieved, from the belief with which 
she had so artfully been inspired; she had 
not the slightest doubt that, even uncon- 
sciously to herself, such an alteration would 
take place in Miss Erin's manner towards 
Donaghue, as could not fail of destroying 



142 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

any hopes that might have continued lin- 
gering in his heart about her ; and those de- 
stroyed, what was to hinder the final accom- 
plishment of her own aims ? at all events, 
if she failed in it, she would have the gra- 
tification of thinking, that a rival, whom 
she hated for the pangs, no matter how in- 
nocently or unintentionally, she had occa- 
sioned her, would not triumph over her. 

She took care to revert to what had occur- 
red at the abbey the next morning, fearful, if 
she left any thing to doubt or conjecture, of 
the failure of her scheme after all. Pur- 
posely seeking out Miss Erin, after break- 
fast, in the garden — " You were no doubt 
surprised," she said, " last evening," affect- 
ing something of an air of confusion, " at 
discovering that I sometimes met O'Brien ; 
but you'll acquit me, I hope, of any very 
great imprudence, when I inform you, 
that I certainly should not have done so, 
could I have prevailed on him to visit 
here, but which I found it impossible to 
do ; I am sure I don't know why ; and it 
was requisite we should sometimes see. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 143 

each other, in order to make arrangements; 
for the fact is — but I must entreat your 
positive silence on the subject, for the pre- 
sent — Mr. Morley's will is constructed in 
such a manner, that it is necessary I should 
come to some understanding with his 
heirs, ere I attempt to alter my condition." 

Miss Erin, perhaps unconsciously, stop- 
ping to admire some flowers, assured her, 
as she stooped over them, she might rely on 
her attending to what she said, though, at 
the same time, she could not help observ- 
ing, she thought she might have been sa- 
tisfied without this injunction to silence — 
it was what she would have observed. 

Between JNIelville's uncle and sir Wil- 
liam Erin a long and intimate friendship, 
as Melville mentioned to Donaghue, had 
subsisted ; and out of respect and regard 
to the uncle, sir William was now anx- 
ious to pay every possible attention to the 
nephew; but to hope for his company 
without his friend, he was perfectly aware 
W'Ould be useless ; and as the accomplish- 
ment of an object in which his friend, sir 



144 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

James, was particularly, or rather deeply 
interested, depended, probably, on Mel- 
ville's being induced to frequent the Vale, 
lady Erin's arguments, or representations, 
were not requisite to have decided him on 
altering his conduct so far to Donaghue, 
as to lay himself out more than he had yet 
done to overcome his evident unwilling- 
ness to visiting there; and this also, through 
at length beginning to think there was no 
other way of being enabled to form any 
decided opinion about him, without which 
he felt he could hardly bring himself to 
come to any other decision, than by en- 
deavouring to cultivate an intimacy with 
him. Donaghue, however, satisfied that 
Melville would not visit either at the 
Vale, or elsewhere, without him, and be- 
ginning, by this time, to be sensible that 
he could not persevere in the reserve and 
distance he had hitherto maintained in 
the neighbourhood, without incurring the 
imputation of an oddity, rendered, by the 
consequent determination he came to, any 
very extraordinary exertions for this un- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 145. 

necessary, as sir William found, on re- 
newing his invitation to the Vale ; and 
since he found himself compelled to go 
there, Donaghue knew not how to regret 
what had occurred at the abbey, since, to 
a certainty, the belief it could not but 
create, must, he conceived, acquit him in 
the eyes of the cold and wary father of 
those designs his conduct implied him 
fearful of his entertaining, and which, 
without indignation, he could not think 
of being suspected of harbouring. 



VOJL. III. 



1^6 TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 



CHAPTER V. 



<»^*^-*^.»^*:* .^^.^^■^^^■^■^^ 



" I pray, sir, tell n»e, is it possible 
That love should of a sudden take such hold ? 
Oh, Francis ! till I found it to be true, I never thought 
It possible, or likely. But see ! while idle I stood 
Looking on, I found the effect in idleness ; and 
. Now in plainness do confess to thee, thou art to 
Me as sacred and as dear as Anna to the queen 
Of Carthage was. Francis, I burn, I pine, I perish. 
If I achieve not this young modest girl !" 

Late as was JNIr. O'Connor's party, Mel- 
ville rose earlier than usual the next morn- 
ing, and pursuing a path altogether new 
to him, found himself, at the end of a walk 
of three miles, before a neat white cottage, 
which so particularly struck him, as to oc- 
casion him to slacken his pace the moment 
he came within sight of it; woodbine, 
roses, and jasmine, wantoned in profu- 
sion over the front, while a still greater 
variety of shrubs, plants, and flowers, em- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 147 

balming the breath of morn, embelHshed 
the little lawn before it. Sloping down 
to a clear purling rivulet, over which a 
rustic bridge was thrown, leading to a 
gate of a similar description, a green lane 
ran at the side of the house, along which 
extended, to some distance, a beautiful 
quickset hedge, dividing a well-cultivated 
and delicious garden in the rear from it, 
while the views all around were pleasing 
and picturesque, without any of that sa- 
vage wildness that distinguished some of 
the others in the neighbourhood. 

How long Melville might have conti- 
nued admiring the simple elegance and 
rural beauty of the place we know not, 
had not the sound of voices from the gar- 
den behind the cottage suddenly reached 
his ear, and made him hastily turn up the 
lane at the side of it, where he had not 
advanced many yards ere he espied two 
young lasses, sitting in an arbour in the 
garden, the one reading, the other work- 
ing, and in whom, at the first glance, he 
H 2 



148 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

recognised his new acquaintances of the 
preceding night. Lavinia Audley and 
Rosetta Wheatley, indeed, seldom knew 
what it was to indulge in luxurious indo- 
lence ; the cool, the silent, and the fragrant 
hour, was to them a delightful one indeed, 
and the rising sun a spectacle of grandeur 
they conceived well worth the relinquish- 
ment of an hour's sleep to behold. 

Melville had hardly taken his station at 
the hedge, when a little dog, that was ly- 
ing at their feet, disturbed or displeased 
by the sight of a stranger, flew out to 
bark at him. Miss W heatley, who was the 
one that was reading, interrupted by his 
noise, looked up to call him back, and in 
so doing, perceived Melville. Touching 
the elbow of her companion — " I protest, 
Lavinia," she cried, as she drew back her 
head, " if I don't believe there's your part- 
ner of last night !" 

"Where?" exclaimed Lavinia, raising 
her eyes from her work. " I declare so it 
is," glancing out from the arbour. " What 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 149 

fan have brought him here I wonder? 
does he know 'tis here we live ?" 

" 'Tis likely he may, for if he asked 
Mrs. O'Connor, no doubt she told him." 

" But then what use his coming, for he 
can never think of our considering him as 
an acquaintance?" 

" I can't say what he may think, but if 
you want to know what I think, I con- 
ceive it not improbable he may, as I con- 
ceive he has quite sufficient self-compla- 
cency to induce such an idea." 

'' Yes, quite sufficient of that indeed," 
assented Lavinia ; " I noticed that seve- 
ral times last night, insomuch as more 
than once to have almost repented of con- 
senting to dance with him." 

" Why% he surely wasn't presumptuous ?" 

" Why no, not a — what you may call 
downright presumptuous ; not indeed 
what could be called or considered so in a 
person in one's own rank — but then in his ! 
I really could not help staring at him se- 
veral times, from the dictatorial manner 
in which he spoke, as if it could be sup- 



150 TllADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

posed lie knew any thing, or had entirely 
forgot who he was." 

" Yes, I thought he appeared confident 
and conceited, but I suppose he has been 
cried up for his looks, and so it is that that 
has rendered him so ; he is rather, to be 
sure, what you may call a well-looking 
young man." 

" Yes, indeed, or rather what we might 
call handsomish, if he was in another rank 
of life." 

'' At all events," observed Rosetta, " he 
was the only decent person for you to 
dance with last night, the rest were all 
such a terrible set of jiggers." 

" Is he gone yet?" asked Lavinia — 
" but no, I declare not," peeping herself 
through the side of the arbour, " there he 
is, as stationary as a maypole ; I protest it 
will be a very awkward thing if he should 
lay himself out for any recognition from 
us, for, strangers as we are in the neigh- 
bourhood, we cannot be too particular in 
the acquaintance we form, lest, appearing 
to know people of one description should 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 151 

prevent our being noticed by those of ano- 
ther." 

" Oh ! he does not belong, you know, to 
this part of the country," said her friend ; 
" and should we meet him while he re- 
mains, we must only shew, by our manner, 
that we are decided on not allowing him 
to consider himself an acquaintance." 

" Yes, that will be the only plan for us 
to pursue ; however, I must confess I can- 
not help being sorry now that we went to 
Mrs. O'Connor's ; but it was all my fault, 
never resting till I contrived to have an 
invitation procured for us, from my wild 
curiosity to witness a real Irish entertain^ 
ment; — but do silence that noisy little 
wretch, her barking is not endurable." 

" Impossible," said Miss Wheatley ; "I 
could not raise my voice without betray- 
ing where we are, which, at present, it 
might be as well to avoid." 

" Well, I declare, let the consequence 
of doing so be what it may, I can no 
longer bear the noise; and so — 'Mabel! 



15^ TKADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Mabel!" she exclaimed, starting up and 
running towards her, " be silent 1 say P 

" I hope I see you well, ma'am, after 
your dancing ?" said Melville, raising his 
hat to salute her. 

" Oh dear, Mr. a " affecting an air 

of pretty surprise. " Yes, very well, I 
thank you, sir; but dancing is an amuse- 
ment that agrees extremely well with me.** 

" But the question was unnecessary," 
said Melville, as he leant over the hedge, 
" to a person with cheeks like roses." 

" Cheeks like roses," and Lavinia put 
up her pretty lip a little contemptuously ; 
but what else but a common compliment 
could be expected from such a person, the 
cousin of the elegant Mrs. O'Connor, and 
of the disconsolate Nelly Rooney, to say 
nothing of his being a descendant of the 
trumpeter of one of king William's gini- 
rals ! 

Melville noticed the turn of her pretty 
lip. — " You seem to ridicule my compli- 
ment, ma'am," said he ; " but it is not be- 
cause a thing is commonplace it should 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 153 

be derided ; flowers at all times have fur- 
nished metaphors, and allusions, and simi- 
lies, and I don't think any thing can be 
more apposite than the comparison be- 
tween a blooming cheek and a rose, and I 
only wish," plucking, as he spoke, one of 
the roses that was flaunting over the 
hedge, " that I had a looking-glass here 
at this moment to convince you of it ; but 
I have been admiring, for this some time, 
this sweet little paradise of yours — really 
worthy of the fair deities that have made 
it their abode; and, by-the-bye, how is 
your charming friend, ma'am ? I thought 
I had a glimpse of her in the arbour." 

" Perhaps you might," said Lavinia, 
half-laughing, not w^ell knowing whether 
to be most amused or displeased by this 
assumption of a manner she conceived fo- 
reign to his rank. 

" What a sweet retreat to pass the sul- 
try hours of noon in ! but I presume you 
do not confine yourself entirely to it — you 
doubtless walk a good deal ?" 
H 3 



154 TRADITION OF THE CASTI.E. 

** Yes, sometimes." 

" I wish I knew when and where?" 

" Why so, pray ?" 

" Why because I should try to profit 
by the circumstance." 

" You !" said Lavinia ; but any fur- 
ther comment on the declaration was pre- 
vented by a summons to breakfast at the 
moment; and with something very much 
resembling a derisive smile she turned off, 
and darting towards the arbour to meet 
Rosetta, proceeded with her to the house. 

" Pray who is that young man ?" asked 
Mr. Wheatley, addressing himself to La- 
vinia as they sat at breakfast, " who was 
conversing so familiarly with you this 
morning over the hedge ?" 

Lavinia coloured, and hesitated. 

" The young man she danced with last 
night at Mrs. O'Connor's," said Rosetta, 
replying for her; and she proceeded to 
mention all they had heard about him. 

" He seemed to be very much at his 
ease I think," rejoined Mr. Wheatley. 

" Oh yes, very much indeed," said La- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 155 

vinia, recovering from her transient em- 
barrassment — an embarrassment she knew 
not how to account for ; " he is quite an 
Irishman in that respect." 

" What brought him here?" demanded 
Mr. Wlieatley. 

Rosetta laughed. — " Indeed I do not 
know, except, as I shrewdly suspect, that 
Lavinia has made a conquest of him." 

" That would be a bad affair for the 
young man," said Mr. Wheatley, gravely, 
*' for Lavinia has no heart to dispose of." 

Lavinia, colouring like crimson, start- 
ed, and looking earnestly at him — " No 
heart to dispose of!" she repeated. 

" No, not of your own free will. How 
often have I told you that you must never 
think of disposing of it without the per- 
mission of your friend or guardian !" 

The conversation was changed. Mr 
Wheatley, not at liberty to gratify the 
anxious curiosity which the mention of 
this unknown guardian always excited, 
never made any allusion to him, except 
when he deemed it absolutely necessary;. 



156 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

but immediately after breakfast, Lavinia, 
finding herself alone with Rosetta — 
" Well, I wonder," she said, waking, as if 
from a kind of trance or reverie, " will 
the mystery of this guardian of mine be 
ever explained ? it is really high time I 
think it now should, that I may know in 
what light to consider or regard him ; for 
while ignorant of the claim he has upon 
my gratitude, my sentiments towards 
him must certainly continue dubious." 

" Well, really," said Rosetta, " from 
the care that has been taken of you, and 
the education you have received, I should 
conceive you could not be at any possible 
loss to know what claim he had upon your 
gratitude." 

" Ay, so it may appear," said Lavinia, 
" but for me to allow him fully entitled to 
it, I feel it necessary to ascertain whether 
w^hat he has done for me has been through 
a sense of duty, or from the mere dictates 
of benevolence ; for if nearly connected to 
hira, you must acknowledge my right to 
all that has been done : in short, I am ex- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 157 

cessively discontented at not yet being 
informed who he is, or any thing about 
him, since the means of still keeping me 
in ignorance concerning myself; and real- 
ly 'tis extremely embarrassing, and very 
awkward, not to know who I am, or what 
I am, whether I have tumbled from the 
clouds, or sprung out of the earth, uncon- 
nected with any one." 

" Well," cried Rosetta, " I conceive it 
hardly possible for you to doubt, from the 
pains, as I have already observed, that 
have been taken with you in every in- 
stance, that the deepest interest is enter- 
tained about you." 

" True," replied Lavinia, " but then I 
want to know in what that interest origi- 
nates ; in short, a thousand frightful fan- 
cies have suggested themselves to me ; we 
have more than once heard and read of 
old men having young girls educated for 
their wives." 

" Well, I think," said Rosetta, " you 
might be satisfied that my father would 



158 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

not lend himself to any thing that was un- 
just or tyrannical." 

" Ah ! but such a thing might not strike 
him as either. You see how, on every 
occasion, he tries to impress me with a 
conviction of his having a positive autho- 
rity over me; telling me, indeed, that I 
must not presume to like any one without 
his permission ! Were these fairy times, 
the only w^ay to guard against any danger 
of that kind would be to take out my 
heart and lodge it in a mountain of ice, as 
we have read of in those delightful nurse- 
ry tales, till the proper person appeared, 
according to his idea, for bestowing it on." 

" Whoever that may be, I am convin- 
ced," said Rosetta, " it will be some one 
in an elevated rank of life ; for, from the 
manner in which you have been taught 
to estimate yourself, 'tis evident to me he 
entertains high expectations for you." 

Some, time after this conversation, as 
they were sitting at work with Mrs. 
Wheatley in the parlour — " Dear, what a 
dehghtful morning," said Lavinia, sudden- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 159 

ly, " and how I should like to take a 
walk!" 

" A delightful morning !" repeated Mrs. 
Wheatley ; " it was fine, but I certainly 
think it very much changed now — it ap- 
pears to me as if there would be rain." 

" Oh dear, no, ma'am," said Lavinia; 
" what you take for threatening clouds 
are merely a few light vapours blown 
from the sea." 

" Well, I must differ from you; so if 
really anxious for a walk, I advise you to 
confine yourself to the garden." 

" Oh no," replied Lavinia, " that does 
very well for sauntering about in, but 
when one really wishes for a walk, nothing 
can be more tiresome than its eternal 
turnings and windings." 

" The fact is, you are in a restless hu- 
mour this morning, Lavinia, and must 
therefore, I suppose, be indulged in your 
humour." 

" Well, I believe I am," said Lavinia; 
so jumping up, and throwing aside her 
work — " Will you come, Rosetta?" 



160 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" What, to take a walk ? Ah, I sup- 
pose I may as well say yes at once, for if 
not, I dare say you would not cease teaz- 
ing me." 

In a few minutes both were equipped 
for going out. On Lavinia's returning to 
the parlour — " Why you are not going 
out such a threatening morning as this in 
your new bonnet, Lavinia?" said Mrs, 
Wheatley. 

"Oh dear, yes, ma'am, the other is such 
a fright." 

" A fright ! And who do you expect 
to meet, pray ?" 

" To meet ! to meet !" cried Lavinia, 
blushing, and half laughing — " who do we 
expect to meet ? I am sure I do not know; 
do you, Rosetta?" 

Without waiting to hear what answer 
her daughter would make — " Well, since 
you will risk yourself and your bonnet," 
said Mrs. Wheatley, " be advised by me, 
and take an umbrella with you." 

" An umbrella !" and Lavinia regarded 
her with almost a look of horror. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6l 

" Let Owen then attend you to carry 
it for you, since 'tis a thing you have such 
an objection to do yourself, or let Rosetta." 

" Owen !" Really this was almost as 
bad; to have a great lubberly footman 
following them, imposing quite a restraint 
upon their movements. So they set off, 
without taking an umbrella with them, or 
allowing Owen, that is, Lavinia, to follow 
with one. They had not got above half- 
a-mile, however, when Miss Lavinia, who 
had a very great regard for her new bon- 
net, from being assured by every one, as 
w^ell as her glass, that it became her ex- 
ceedingly, began to regret her inattention 
to the advice of Mrs. Wheatley, in conse- 
quence of some heavy drops beginning to 
fall, the evident precursors of a heavy 
shower.—" Dear! what shall we do?" she 
said ; " these parasols v^ill hardly be of any 
use to us from the rain that is coming on.'* 

" Hardly indeed ! " replied Rosetta. 
" And now you see, Lavinia, wliat the 
consequence of being conceited and obsti- 
nate is." 



162! TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" I protest," said Lavinia, half with- 
drawing her arm from lier, ** if you attempt 
to give me a lecture now, when I am in 
such distress, I will positively run away, 
and leave you to bide the pelting of the 
pitiless storm by yourself; and there is 
comfort for you, we are just near our fa- 
vourite beech tree, under which we may 
safely shelter ourselves, as I think there is 
no danger of any lightning." 

They quickened their steps to get to it, 
but suddenly stopped within a few paces 
of it, on perceiving a person already under 
its shelter. — " That abominable nephew 
of Mrs. O'Connor, I protest !" said Lavinia. 

" Really !" cried Rosetta. "I am afraid 
he will soon be as bad as a ghost, haunting 
our steps wherever we go." 

Ere Lavinia could reply, Melville, step- 
ping forward — " Ladies," said he, " you 
will drive me from the shelter which this 
friendly tree affords, if you allow me to 
think I am the means of preventing you 
also profiting by it." 

'* Oh ! certainly no," said Lavinia, but 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. l6S 

drawing back on his attempting to take 
her hand to lead her forward to it. 

Rosetta, though of the two the most 
displeased at meeting him, was the most 
gracious, condescending to answer him, 
and thank him for the pains he took in 
placing them so as to be out of the reach 
of the rain ; while Lavinia still turned to 
her companion whenever he spoke to her, 
as if to laugh with her at him. At length, 
beginning to get uneasy at the idea of 
Rosetta's exposure to the damp, who had 
for some time been rather in a delicate 
state of health—" Oh dear !" she said, " if 
we had but a messenger to send to Mr. 
Malone's (a farmhouse at a little distance)* 
I dare say we should be able to get their 
jaunting-car." 

"In this instance, ma'am," said Melville, 
"'tis only to wish and have ; in me behold 
a humble servitor, who will be as happy to 
do your bidding as ever the attendant 
sprite of Prospero was to do his ; let me 
know where Mrs. Malone's is?" 

Lavinia unhesitatingly gave him the re- 



1 64 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

quired direction, and as be flew off, Lavi- 
nia observed, that tboiigb certainly awk- 
ward and enabarrassing their having en- 
countered hinn, yet, in the present instance, 
it was well their having done so, from his 
proving so serviceable. 

He quickly returned with the car, cram- 
med with cloaks and umbrellas. Having 
assisted the ladies in muffling themselves 
up, and handed them into the ear — " Well, 
ladies," he said, still keeping the door of 
the vehicle open in his hand, "am I to bid 
you good-bye now?" 

Lavinia was now on the point, for the 
first time, of eagerly answering him, but 
checking herself, she looked at Rosetta. 

" Oh no, assuredly not," said Rosetta ; 
" that is," hesitating, " if you are coming 
our way." 

" Thank you, my dear ma'am," cried 
Melville, and without further ceremony 
he sprung into the car, and shutting the 
door, took the umbrella, which he had ex- 
panded over the head of Lavinia, out of 
her hand, to hold it over her himself. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 165 

The servant belonging to the car drove 
with such rapidity, that a few minutes 
brought them back to Rosehill. Owen 
came running out to open the gate for 
them, and from him they learned, that, 
shortly after their leaving home, Mrs. 
Wheatley had also gone out to pay a visit 
at a house in the neighbourhood, where 
she still was, so that Lavinia was saved 
the embarrassment of meeting her imme- 
diately. 

On the mufflings being thrown aside, it 
was ascertained that their clothes had not 
got a drop of rain ; of course, this called for 
a renewal of acknowledgments to Melville, 
to whom they were entirely indebted for 
the circumstance; and conscious of this, 
after a little hesitation — '' Perhaps you 
would Tike to step in, and take some re- 
freshment, sir?" said Rosetta. 

" I should certainly like to step in, but 
not to take refreshment," replied Melville; 
and motioning them to precede him, he 
followed them into the parlour. 

Here, seated at a table, over which some 



166 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

books and papers were scattered, they 
found Mr. Wheatley. Looking up as they 
entered, his surprise at seeing by whom 
they were accompanied checked what he 
had been on the point of saying. He in- 
stantly recognised Melville to be the 
young man whom he had seen conversing 
with Lavinia in the morning; and cer- 
tainly much displeased at now seeing him, 
after regarding him for a moment, with a 
look indicative of surprise, he turned his 
looks inquiringly on the young ladies. 

Lavinia, perfectly comprehending, and 
extremely disconcerted by them — "The — 
the young —the gentleman we met last 
night at Mrs. O'Connor's, sir," she said ; 
" he was so — so good " and she pro- 
ceeded to mention how they had encoun- 
tered him now, and the service he had 
been of to them. 

Mr. Wheatley stiffly bowed — " You 
must be obliged to the gentleman," he 
gravely said, " for taking so much trouble ; 
after his doing so, I should think it not 
amiss your offering him some refreshment." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 167 

" The young ladies have had the good- 
ness to do that ah*eady, sir," said Melville, 
highly diverted by this scene, and, in or- 
der to heighten it, taking a chair, without 
further ceremony, and beginning to chat 
and look about him, in a manner perfectly 
calculated to excite surprise, to say nothing 
of any other feeling, from the mistake un- 
der which the party were about him. 

After conversing for some time, if that 
could be called conversation which he had 
almost entirely to himself, casting his eyes 
upon a grand pianoforte — " I need not ask 
which of you ladies play on this delightful 
instrument, as I conclude you both do," he 
said ; " but may I ask which of you will 
oblige me with a tune on it ?" 

Rosetta and Lavinia looked at each 
other, without answering him. 

" You don't know how you will oblige 
me," he resumed, "if it is only for five 
minutes you allow me to hear you." 

" Well, really," said Lavinia, rising 
with an air of careless indifference, and ap- 
proaching the instrument, " I don't think 



168 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

there is any music here will please you ; 
nothing but some of Handel's, and Haydn's, 
and Where is that old book of coun- 
try-dances, Rosetta?" she asked, turning 
to her; " but no matter, I think I recol- 
lect some of them ;" and sitting down, she 
played Patrick's Day in the Morning, and 
one or two other things in the same style, 
and then rising — " There, now, you are 
satisfied?" she said. 

" No, by no means," replied Melville; 
" if, indeed, you were to play me one of 
those fine compositions you mentioned." 

" Really I don't see any use there 
would be in that, for to be able to derive 
pleasure from them, a knowledge of music 

is -but since you so wish to hear one 

of them," and turning again, with careless- 
ness, to the instrument, she went through 
one of Haydn's beautiful lessons, but in so 
slovenly a manner, as either intimated 
that she cared not how she played, or 
thought, that had she played in any other 
manner, her condescension for having done 
so at all, in the present instance, would 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 169 

have been too great ; but instead of the 
humble thanks she expected for this con- 
descension — " What a pity," said Melville, 
wli^n she had concluded, " that a person, 
who can play, as I clearly perceive you 
can, should play that fine lesson in the 
manner you did ! When I was a little 
boy, almost the first maxim that was im- 
pressed upon my memory was, to do what- 
ever I attempted to do in the best man- 
ner I possibly could, as habits of inatten- 
tion and carelessness are much sooner ac- 
quired than lost." 

Lavinia coloured, and stared at him — 
" Why, do you understand any thing of 
music ?" she asked. 

" Sufficient, at least," replied Melville, 
laughing at her look, " to find fault." 

The pride of Lavinia was now piqued, 
and without further questioning, she re- 
sumed her seat, and dashed through one of 
Handel's compositions in the most brilliant 
style. — " W^ell, now !" she said, in an ex- 
ulting tone, as she rose from the instru- 
ment. 

VOL. III. I 



170 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Ay, now, indeed," said Melville, " you 
did justice to yourself and this fine instru- 
ment ; and now you shall also find," laugh- 
ing, " that I understand music sufficiently 
to praise." 

Mr. Wheatley could no longer com- 
mand himself — could no longer endure 
this assumption of equality, and the pre- 
sumption it led to. Pulling out his watch, 
and looking at it — " Miss Audley," he 
gravely, perhaps a little sternly, said, " I 
thought I understood you had a letter to 
write by this day's post." 

** Y-e-s, sir," replied Lavinia, in a hesi- 
tating tone, extremely disconcerted by his 
manner. 

" Then why forget? you have hardly 
time enough to write it." 

" Pray, pray, use no ceremony with me, 
my dear ma'am," said Melville, in a tone 
of nonchalance that had the effect of al- 
most transporting Mr. Wheatley into a 
rage ; " and now that it is called to my re- 
collection, I rather think I have a letter to 
write myself; so adieu! adieu!" to her 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 171 

dnd Rosetta — " adieu, sir !" turning to 
Mr. Wheatley. 

" That young man must never, on any 
pretence whatever, obtain admission here 
again," said Mr. Wheatley, the moment 
he had departed ; *' and should you, by 
any chance, encounter him again, v^hich I 
think not unlikely, from his extreme ef- 
frontery, I must insist on no notice being 
taken of him. A pretty dangler, truly, 
the cousin of Mrs. O'Connor! but this is 
the consequence of having given way to 
your whim, Miss Audley, of going to such 
a place, or rather of your own imprudence, 
in suffering yourself to be induced to 
dance wdth any one there. I did imagine 
your pride would have prevented any 
thing of the kind : however, I see the gid- 
diness of girls renders it impossible for any 
dependance to be placed on them. If you 
wish to avoid the risk of doing yourself 
an injury, you will follow my advice about 
this young man ; for I must now inform 
you, that through the kind interference of 
i2 



172 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

your guardian, you are on the very eve of 
being admitted to the acquaintance of the 
family at Ashley Vale, for the purpose of 
being introduced, by them, into life; and 
I need not say how awkward and embar- 
rassing it would be, to have such a person 
as this Mr. Scanlen addressing and follow- 
ing you as an acquaintance, or admirer, in 
their society, or how completely such a 
circumstance might be the means of frus- 
trating your guardian's intentions, in get- 
ting you noticed by them." 

"Upon my word and honour," said La- 
vinia, on finding herself again alone, soon 
after this lecture, with Rosetta, " this 
guardian of mine is really making quite a 
bashaw of this father of yours; he insists, 
and " 

" Yet I think you can hardly wonder 
at his language being so peremptory, when 
you consider that he must feel himself an- 
swerable for you, from your having been 
intrusted to his care," said Rosetta. 

"Ay, true," replied the other; "but 
then I don't think it was necessary to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 173 

Speak, altogether, in so dictatorial a man- 
ner: one may be just barely civil to a per- 
son, without being blamed or scolded, I 
think. However, to let the subject drop, 
let us now speak of Ashley Vale. Are not 
you absolutely enraptured at the thoughts 
of visiting there?" 

" I !" cried Rosetta, 

" Yes, you," fondly kissing her cheek; 
" do you think I will visit there without 
you ?" 

" No, no," replied Rosetta, " that is out 
of the question my ever even going there. 
In the first place, my father, as you well 
know, has always objected to my being 
introduced into society beyond what I had 
a right, uniformly, to expect to mix in ; and 
in the next but can you — can you for- 
get ?" and involuntarily covering her face 
w^th her hands, she burst into tears. 

" How could I be so careless?" cried 
Lavinia, evidently greatly distressed — 
*' no, no, I do not forget." 

" Then how could you imagine," a lit- 
tle reproachfully, " that I could take plea- 



174 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

sure in the idea of visiting there, or, in- 
deed, be induced, by any circumstance, to 
go there ? for do you not know the pain, 
the fear, the reluctance, with which I 
thought of coming into this neighbour- 
hood, on lord Altidore's account — how al- 
most entirely, from a dread of meeting 
him, I have avoided going into society 
since I came here?" 

" Yes, I know all that," said Lavinia, 
" perfectly ; but if you could conquer 
your dread of meeting him again, do you 
not think " 

" No, no," interrupted Rosetta, impa^ 
tiently — "no, I know what you would 
say ; but you are mistaken ; and not for 
worlds would I meet lord Altidore again, 
lest he should conceive I threw myself in 
his way, from such a hope as you have insi- 
nuated — a hope, which a moment's re- 
flection on what you have heard, of his 
being a suitor for the hand of Miss Erin, 
must tell you would be ridiculous to in- 
dulge in." 

« Well, well," said Lavinia, " I will ne- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 175 

ver touch on the subject again ; but, in- 
deed, half the pleasure I anticipated from 
going to the Vale will be lost from your 
not accompanying me to it." 

" Oh ! but consider," said Rosetta, re- 
covering from the agitation she had been 
thrown into, and wiping away her tears, 
" you will have the gratification of talking 
over with me, almost immediately, every 
thing you see or meet with there, and that 
will be almost the same thing as if I went 
y>^ith you." 

Mrs. Wheatley had been to pay a visit 
to a Mrs. Brabazon, where there were a 
good many young people, and she brought 
a message to the two girls, inviting them 
to a little dance there that evening. 

Rosetta, whose spirits had been a good 
deal discomposed, at once declined going ; 
and Lavinia, on her account, did the same. 
This was so evident to Rosetta, and who, 
besides, was more inclined to musing than 
conversing that evening, that she made it 
an absolute point her going. 

On its being mentioned at dinner — 



176 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" And pray who are to be at Mrs. Bra- 
bazon's?" demanded Mr. Wheatley, ab- 
ruptly. 

" Oh ! merely a few young people be- 
longing to the neighbourhood," replied his 
wife. 

" Are you sure ?" 

** Yes, certain." 

" And you really wish to go?" he said, 
turning to Lavinia; "I should have thought 
your dance last night might have sufficed 
for three or four nights." 

" Lord, my dear ! you forget when you 
were young yourself," said his wife. " I 
only wish Rosetta resembled Lavinia a 
little more than she does, in her natural 
love of gaiety." 

** I am quite as well satisfied as it is," 
replied Mr. Wheatley drily ; " however. 
Miss Audley, since you must go, I desire 
Owen may attend you, since T cannot do 
it myself, from being obliged to go out 
immediately after dinner; and remember 
I charge you, when he is sent for you at 
night, he is not sent back without you. 



TBADITTOK OF THE CASTLE. 177 

under the pretext of there being some one 
else to see you home." 

Lavinia bowed assentingly; but the 
moment he was gone — " I declare it is 
quite preposterous," she said, " the parade 
of having Owen striding after one wher- 
ever they go." 

" Why, to be sure, the distance is so 
very short a one to Mrs. Brabazon's," said 
Mrs. Wheatley ; " and I certainly did 
want him very much this evening, for it 
is quite time the currants should be pick- 
ed for the wine; and if once he gets out, 
he is such a loiterer." 

" Then, for goodness sake, keep him at 
home, my dear ma'am," said Lavinia, and 
away she ran to get her bonnet, and in 
another minute, she was on the way to 
Mrs. Brabazon's. 

She had just turned up a rural lane, 
leading to the house, when — " How do 
you do this fine evening, ma'am, after 
your misadventure of the morning?" ex- 
claimed a voice from behind a hawthorn 
i3 



1Y8 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

hedge at one side of it, and the next mo- 
ment Melville sprang over a gate, and was 
at her side. 

Lavinia started back, and — " Really this 

is very " extraordinary, she was on the 

point of adding. 

" What !" said Melville, as if he under- 
stood what she had been near saying — " is 
it my enjoying this delightful evening, as 
well as yourself?" 

" No, sir, a very different one ; I am go- 
ing to drink tea at a lady's just by." 

'* Indeed ! really I am glad of it, for I 
was just wishing for tea, and you will in- 
troduce me as your friend." 

" Me!" repeated Lavinia — "no, indeed, 
you must excuse me ; that is a liberty I 
should hardly think of taking — introdu- 
cing a person I hardly know myself, and 
whom I must now beg leave to inform 

n 

'* Nay," cried Melville, interrupting her, 
" you don't know how you will grieve me, 
if you persist in regarding me in the light 
of a person you hardly know." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 179 

" Then whether it does, or not, I must 
say " 

" Nothing ill-natured — but don't dis- 
compose yourself; if you won't introduce 
me, I will introduce myself." 

" No, I should hope you would not at- 
tempt any thing of the kind," said Lavi- 
nia, in an alarmed tone — " that really 
would be too — too presuming." 

" Oh, by no means ; the Irish are very 
accessible good kind of people, and I dare 
say your friend won't consider it so ;'* and 
so, without further ceremony, he walked 
up with her to Mrs. Brabazon's gate, and 
followed her into the parlour, to which 
there was a glass door from the lawn. 

Lavinia felt very angry ; however, if 
she did not introduce him, she conceived 
she could not possibly get into any scrape 
about him, and not to do so she therefore 
positively determined. This, however, 
was of very little consequence in the pre- 
sent instance : Mrs. Brabazon, a careless, 
good-humoured woman, required nothing 
more than his having come with her, to 



ISO TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

give him a most gracious reception ; and 
Lavinia could not help being surprised at 
seeing him, in a minute, as much at his 
ease in this party of strangers, as he had 
been the preceding night at his cousin 
O'Connor's, laughing with, and compli- 
menting the ladies, and assisting the gen- 
tlemen in doing the honours of the tea- 
table. 

Well, really she did not know what to 
do ; she saw he was making acquaintances 
as fast as he could, and what might not be 
the consequence, when it came to be 
known who he really was ! and so, after a 
good deal of consultation with herself, she 
thought her best plan would be to explain, 
satisfied, that having once done so, she 
could not be justly condemned, or blamed, 
for any thing that might occur from his 
having appeared to be her acquaintance. 

" Well, really," exclaimed Mrs. Braba- 
zon, in reply to her whispered explanation, 
" who would ever have thought such a 
thing! that nice, genteel young man the 
cousin of O'Connor's wife ! But don't vex 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 181 

yourself, my dear, at his having made his 
way in here along with you — there was a 
great deal of assurance, to be sure, in it; 
and — but really he looks so pleasant, I 
don't think I could find in my heart to 
say any thing ill-natured to him ; but we 
must just tell the girls who he is, that 
none of them should dance with him." 

The young ladies were accordingly 
beckoned to her, and in the course of ano- 
ther minute, there was an end of any fur- 
ther smiles or glances to Melville. 

His amusement at the scene was inde- 
scribable — the distress of Lavinia, the ex- 
planation it led to, and the instantaneous 
effect this explanation had upon the party. 
Affecting, however, not to know that any 
alteration was affected towards him, as 
soon as they began to prepare for dancing, 
he severally addressed himself to every 
young lady whom he saw, at the moment, 
disengaged, in the room, to solicit her hand, 
but was, of course, or as he expected, re- 
ceived with a titter by some, as if diverted 
by his effrontery in asking it, and a vacant 



1821 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

stare in others, as if they could not ima- 
gine he was serious. Pretending great 
mortification, he retreated to a corner, 
where, for some time, he sat, apparently 
in utter disconsolation. 

The dance the party engaged in was a 
quadrille, but, with the exception of La- 
vinia, there was hardly any one of them 
knew any thing about it ; the consequence 
was, that there was nothing but confusion 
and apologizing. 

Melville, at length starting up from his 
seat — " Come, come," said he, " this will 
do no longer; I must take upon myself 
to be paster of the ceremonies here ;" and 
interrupting the dancers, he began in- 
structing them in the figure they had been 
trying to blunder through ; then suddenly 
turning to Lavinia — " Come," said he, "you 
and I will shew them what I mean ;" and 
without further ceremony, he took her from 
her partner, and calling to the music to 
begin again, the dancing was renewed. 

Lavinia again knew not whether to be 
pleased or displeased, or rather which to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 183 

appear to be, for, in reality, she could not 
feel displeased at being released from a 
partner, who had utterly exhausted her 
patience by his ignorance and stupidity ; 
but then not to seem to resent the free- 
dom that had been taken, so unbecoming 
in the person that had taken it, but to 
counterfeit what she did not feel, was, in 
this instance, impossible. Melville danced 
incomparably — she saw every one admi- 
ring him — and the frown she had tried to 
assume, gave way to the delight she felt 
at having such a partner. But where 
could he have acquired this knowledge of 
dancing? where the one he evidently had 
of music? the air of even striking fashion 
that distinguished him from every other 
person in the room ? it really was strange, 
extraordinary — and could it have been for- 
got that he was Denny Scanlen, the cou- 
sin of a common miller's wife, she would 
have been obliged to acknowledge that he 
was a person whom no one need be asha- 
med, or unwilling, to own as an acquaint- 
ance. But this was a recollection that 



184 TRADITION OF THE CASTLC. 

haunted and disquieted her; and more 
than once she involuntarily wished, with 
a sigh, that it had been otherwise than it 
was — that, in short, he had been in a rank 
in which one might have taken that no- 
tice of him she was now beginning to 
think he merited, for every moment he 
gained upon her — what had, at first, appear- 
ed presumptuous confidence, being now 
evidently nothing more than the ease of a 
well-informed, collected mind, conscious of 
a claim to distinction from innately-felt 
superiority. — " What a character for the 
patronage of a person in power!" she 
thought — " what a gratification to any one 
of feeling, to think of being the means of 
elevating such a being above the sordid 
condition in which his birth had placed 
him ! but it was very improbable that he 
should encounter any one with ability 
to be his patron, and she again sighed at 
the thought of the interest he inspired 
being of very little avail to him. She 
knew not how it was, the spirit with 
which she had commenced dancing gra- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 185 

dually forsook her, and more than once 
she went wrong, through downright in- 
attention to what she was about, to the 
no small amusement of those at whose 
blunders she had previously been laughing. 

Matters were now completely reversed; 
Melville, from having been utterly ne- 
glected and scorned, was now absolutely 
hung upon and caressed, for the sake of 
the instruction he had the power of giving, 
every one suddenly agreeing that he really 
was so good-humoured obliging a crea- 
ture, it would be a thousand pities not to 
be, in some degree, civil to him. 

In the riiidst of his triumph, Owen was 
announced; and Lavinia knowing Mr. 
Wheatley would be displeased if she de- 
layed a moment after being sent for, im- 
mediately prepared to depart. 

There had been again some rain, and in 
consequence the car was sent for her. A 
young lady, living in her direction, hear- 
ing this, said she would avail herself of 
the circumstance, to be dropped at home. 



186 TRADITION OF THE CAStLE. 

rather than, by waiting a little longer, be 
obliged to walk through the wet roads. 

Lavinia saw that JSIelville, though en- 
gaged in making up a set for a new qua- 
drille, had still his eye upon her, and fear- 
ful of his attempting to see her home, gave 
a hint to Mrs. Brabazon of her wish to be 
allowed to steal away, and which, through 
her assistance, she accordingly contrived 
to do. 

A long dusky avenue led up from the 
road, through a kind of wilderness, to the 
habitation of her companion, who express- 
ing a dread of going up it at such a time 
by herself, Lavinia desired Owen to alight 
and see her to the house, not being afraid 
of being left for a few minutes by herself, 
from there being a few cabins at the other 
side of the road, in which the people wer^ 
still up. 

But hardly was she left to herself, ere 
she was thrown into the greatest confu- 
sion, by seeing Melville approaching; 
unwilling, from the revolution her senti- 
ments had undergone respecting him, to 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 187 

hurt his feelings, by any intimation of 
what he might expect from Mr. Wheat- 
ley, should he attempt to accompany her 
home, yet at a loss to know how she should 
couch her refusal to permit him, if he 
made the request, in terms sufficiently 
strong to prevent him, without wound- 
ing them herself. 

** So you stole away ?" said Melville, 
coming up to the car; " but slyly as you 
managed it, I soon discovered the loss we 
had sustained, and instantly made my 
parting bow ; for there was then no longer 
any interest or attraction in the scene for 
me." 

" Oh, well, don't let me detain you 
now," said Lavinia, with a flurried voice ; 
" the ground is damp, and I expect the 
'servant back every moment." 

" But I am going your way, and an 
additional escort might not be amiss." 

" Oh, no, no !" exclaimed Lavinia, and 
she eagerly put out her hand to draw in 
the door, which Owen had neglected to 
close, upon the alighting of her com- 



188 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

panion. In doing so, she did not perceive 
that, as Melville's arm rested on the edge 
of the car, his hand lay carelessly dang- 
ling in the way of it; nor was he aware 
of what she was about, till, with a sudden 
jirk, he felt it jamming in his fingers. 

The excruciating agony occasioned by 
the accident caused an involuntary excla- 
mation to that effect to escape him. 

" Good God! what have 1 done?" cried 
Lavinia, in the wildest consternation — 
" Crushed your hand, I fear, to atoms l" 

" No, no," cried Melville ; " pray don't 
agitate yourself; the injury, I am sure, is 
of no consequence;" but as he spoke he 
grew deadly sick, and feeling himself stag- 
ger, caught at the car for support. 

Lavinia screamed, and the people front 
the adjacent cabins came running out. 
Melville took hold of the arm of a man, 
and went into one of them, where, throw- 
ing himself on a seat, he called for some 
water. 

Lavinia, springing from the car, follow- 
ed him — " And what have I done ? what 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 189 

have I done ?" she exclaimed, in the great- 
est distress. 

Again Melville besought her to com- 
pose herself, assuring her he was convinced 
the accident was of no serious consequence. 

" Oh ! how can you say so ?" cried La- 
vinia, taking up his hand, and uttering a 
loud shriek at the state in which she saw 
it, with the blood gushing from the ends 
of the fingers — " Oh ! how can you say 
so?" unconsciously pressing it to her lips, 
and beginning to bind it up with her own 
handkerchief " But I know what your 
reason is; but you cannot deceive me, 
nor can I ever forgive myself for my care- 
lessness; and then to think I can make 
no amends for it !" and she burst into 
tears ; for the least she thought she could 
have done, after what had happened, would 
have been to have sent him home in the 
car with Owen ; but this she durst not do, 
for fear of Mr. Wheatley, whom she trem- 
bled to think of even knowing they had 
met. 

" See," said Melville, rising, and appear-J 



190 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing to shake off the faintness that had 
come over him ; " see," said he, taking 
one of the fair hands that had been so 
busily engaged about him, and pressing 
it, with a look, not merely of admiration, 
but of passionate fondness to his heart, 
" I am well already, and quite ashamed 
of having been overcome by so slight a 
matter." 

" Slight ! oh, I v»^ish I could be con- 
vinced of that ! But how will it be pos- 
sible I should ? How shall I be able to 
know whether you get better or worse? 

for I cannot ask you to call at that — 

that is, I — I mean I cannot give you the 
trouble of calHng at oNIr. Wheatley*s." 

Melville perfectly understood her mean- 
ing, for neither the looks or manner of 
Mr. Wheatley had been lost upon him ; 
and so — " Well," he said, perhaps a little 
artfully, " should I be able to come out 
to-morrow — which I am sure I shall," with 
quickness he added, on seeing her turn of 
a deadly paleness at the bare surmise that 
he would not, " I shall be in the lane at 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 191 

the side of your house in the morning 
about eight, and should I meet with any 
one that I think may be intrusted with a 
message to you, shall certainly send one 
to let you know how I am, since you 
have so kindly condescended to express 
such anxiety about me." 

" And you'll be sure not to forget ?" 
said Lavina, with earnestness. 

** Forget," cried Melville, " what is 
connected with your idea ! Memory 
must be lost, ere any thing associated 
with that can be effaced from my recol- 
lection." 

" Oh ! I see you are getting better," said 
Lavinia, brightly blushing, and with some- 
thing of her wonted archness of look; 
and — " There, I hear the servant's voice !" 
and drawing away her hand, she flew 
from the cabin without allowing him to 
say another word, and darting across the 
road, sprung into the car, and was instant- 
ly driven away, accounting to Owen, who 
had been quite frightened at missing her, 
by saying that a slight accident had oc- 



192 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

curred to a person on the road, which had 
occasioned her alighting to see if she could 
render any service. 

She had given Mrs. Brabazon a hint to 
say nothing of Melville's having accom- 
panied her to her house, lest it should 
excite the indignation of Mr. Wheatley 
against him ; and as she made sure there- 
fore of the secrecy of all there on the sub- 
ject, she thought she would say nothing 
herself about it. Yet so much had she 
been hitherto in the habit of communi- 
cating every thought as it rose to Kosetta, 
of making her a second self, that she could 
not now be silent to her respecting the 
incidents of the evening, without almost 
a feeling of reproach. But then she knew 
she should not like to listen to the stric- 
tures which she was convinced llosetta 
would make upon them ; in short, that 
she should not like to have Denny Scan- 
len any farther laughed at, or turned into 
ridicule, and still less to be prevented hav- 
ing any farther communication with him, 
as she was convinced she should be, if 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 193 

possible, by Rosetta, out of fear of her 
father, though only for the purpose of 
havirrg her anxiety quieted about the ac- 
cident she had been the means of occa- 
sioning him, and which once out of sus- 
pense about, she positively, of her own ac- 
cord, determined to shun him, though no 
longer considering him in the light of a 
person whose acquaintance would not be 
pleasant; but prejudices were arbitrary, 
and what but ridicule and contempt should 
she draw upon herself by attempting to 
represent him in the light in which she 
now regarded him— that of being entitled, 
from his manner and appearance, to mix 
in any society ? 

A restless night was the consequence of 
the agitation her nerves had undergone, 
and to this, we must suppose, was owing 
her rising even earlier than usual the next 
morning, and repairing to the garden, to 
try if the fresh air would be of service to 
her. Here, after being some time, it cer- 
tainly occurred to her the great uncertain- 

VOL. III. K 



194 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ty there was of Melville's meeting any one 
with whom he might intrust a message 
for her. She thought she would just ven- 
ture into the adjoining fields, feeling she 
would be quite miserable if she did not 
see or hear something about him that day, 
and keeping along the hedge that divided 
them from the lane, watch for him herself, 
but of course without letting him see her. 

In the mean time Melville, with both 
his head and his heart full of her idea, had 
returned to the castle, where he was pass- 
ing to his chamber, in order to get his own 
man to examine his hand, when he en- 
countered doctor Rosebud, just come back 
from his friend, Mr. Medlicott's. 

" Heyday ! w^hat's the matter ?" ex- 
claimed Rosebud, catching a glimpse of 
his bound-up hand. 

" Pooh j nothing, my dear sir," replied 
Melville, affecting a laugh, and attempt- 
ing to. pass him as he spoke. 

" I am not so sure of that," said the 
other, catching him by the arm ; and at 
this instant Donaghue, hearing their voices, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 195 

came out from the parlour ; and Melville, 
perceiving any further argument with 
Kosebud would be useless, proceeded 
thither to let him examine his hand. 

" Nothing !" cried the latter, as he un- 
bound it, " nothing do you call this? 
Well, all I shall say is, that, upon my 
soul, if your heart has got as bad a squeeze 
as your fingers, you are in a bad way, my 
good sir. But, upon my veracity, this 
has very much the appearance of some 
freak or frolic. I hope you are not turn- 
ing a Henry the Fourth upon our hands — 
making love to the handsome wife of some 
miller hereabouts." 

" What, you judge of others by your- 
self, Mr. Doctor," said Melville, " I sup- 
pose; but come, my good sir, a little of 
your opodeldoc, and all will be well again." 

" I am not so sure of that," cried the 
doctor ; " 'tis a very ugly accident." 

" For Heaven's sake, Sedley, how did 
you meet with it?" asked Donaghue. 

" Tut ! what signifies ?" replied Melville, 
K 2 



196 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

a little embarrassed by the question, but 
trying to bide his confusion under a laugh 
— " You really, my good friends, remind 
me of an old lady, who, whenever she got 
a cold, tormented herself and every body 
about her, by endeavouring to ascertain, 
not how she could cure it, but how she 
had got it." 

" Humph !" said the doctor. " I see 
we can all practise a little evasion, when 

'tis necessary; but " and he glanced 

at the handkerchief, which he saw, from 
the size, was a lady's, as he took it off. 

But Melville was too quick for him — 
snatching it up, he thrust it in his bosom. 

Donaghue looked suspiciously at him ; 
Melville could not help laughing at the 
look, though he certainly felt a little dis- 
concerted at any curiosity being excited, 
since he did not choose to explain, or be 
in any degree explicit. 

Let it not, however, for a moment be 
supposed it was owing to any feehng or 
design he could have blushed to acknow- 
ledge, but an unwillingness to excite 



'TRAIDITION OF THE CASTLE. 197 

laughter or remonstrance ; one or other of 
which he should subject himself to, he 
was convinced, if he confessed all to Dona- 
ghue. He would either laugh, he was 
sure, at his being, what he might term it, 
so easily caught, or else remonstrate with 
him on the danger that might accrue from 
cultivating any further acquaintance with 
the pretty creature that had so interested 
him, and he therefore determined to be 
altogether silent on the subject, more es- 
pecially as he had said nothing about it 
in the first instance ; for though he had 
fully determined to mention to Donaghue 
his frolic at O'Connor's, yet, when at 
night he joined him, on his return from 
it, he knew not how it was he felt a dis- 
inclination to speak of it ; but the fact 
was, he feared, if he did, any thing that 
might afterwards happen, his wishing to 
view Rosehill, and know something more 
of its inmates, might be imputed to some- 
thing serious. But that such a feeling, a 
downright serious passion for the fair 
Lavinia, was now beginning to pervade 



198 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

his bosom, he could no longer deny to 
himself, from the powerful interest she 
had awakened this evening — through the 
sensibility, the tenderness of disposition 
she had evinced — the growing interest 
for him, spite of the force of prejudice, and 
the disdain of pride. 

To triumph over these, and inspire her 
with an attachment, in spite of their 
opposition, was indeed too gratifying a 
thought not to be dwelt on without rap- 
ture. In vain Prudence suggested the 
embarrassment in which yielding to the 
feelings it inspired might ultimately be 
the means of placing him. To be the ob- 
ject of a disinterested attachment to one 
so exquisitely lovely, was an idea too grati- 
fying, too delightful to self-love, not to 
overcome almost every other considera- 
tion, and determine him to risk something, 
for the sake of the happiness it might be 
the means of affording. In short, he was 
so completely captivated, as wilfully to 
shut his eyes against all that might result 
from his giving way to the passion with 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 199 

which he had been so suddenly inspired. 
Never had he seen any one possessed of 
more exquisite loveliness, more bewitch- 
ing ndiveU, than his fair enslaver — never 
any one to be compared with her, in his 
estimation, except one, that one whom 
honour and friendship had rendered sa- 
cred in his eyes ; and to resist her attrac- 
tions, therefore, he believed to be impos- 
sible, from the pleasure he took in yielding 
to them. Yet, as he was utterly incapable 
of harbouring a thought injurious to inno- 
cence and virtue, had her situation in life 
been such as to have precluded the idea 
of a positive engagement with her, he 
certainly would have resolutely decided at 
once against acting as he did ; but from 
the respectability, not to say elegance 
surrounding her, the education she had 
evidently received, and the watchful care, 
so indicative of her being of real conse- 
quence, with which she was guarded, he 
was convinced there could be no degrada- 
tion in an alliance with her ; and finally 
determined on following up the adven- 



200 TRADITION OF THE CASTLH. 

ture, but with caution and circumspec- 
tion ; since resolved on not disclosing him- 
self till fully satisfied that she was all he 
now imagined her, that in case of any dis- 
appointment to his wishes, and fancied 
and high-raised expectations, he might 
not needlessly have perhaps incurred the 
resentment of his uncle. 

His hand being dressed, the doctor ad- 
vised his keeping it in a sling for a day 
or two. The advice was not neglected, 
for he knew it was not calculated to pro- 
duce an uninteresting effect ; and the 
next morning, at the hour he had men- 
tioned, he was in the lane, reconnoitring 
for the fair being whom, a little artfully 
perhaps, as before observed, he had drawn 
in to make an indirect appointment with 
him ; for, from the anxiety she had evinced 
about him, he was almost convinced he 
should find her there watching for him. 
He had hardly cast his eyes about, when a 
glimpse of a white dress, through the hedge 
that extended from the garden to a common 
at the end of the lane, assured him he was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 201 

not mistaken in his expectation. He in- 
stantly stopped and coughed, but no one 
spoke; but in the course of a minute or 
two, he saw some one evidently trying 
to steal away. — " And so this is the way," 
he cried, immediately springing over a 
stile, a little way farther down, into the 
field, and hastening to the blushing La- 
vinia, " you are asking me how I am, after 
all the concern you flattered me by evin- 
cing last night !" 

" I am sure I need not say that that con- 
cern was not feigned," replied Lavina; ** but 

as I saw you But, good Heavens ! your 

arm in a sling ! Then the accident is, 
after all, more serious than you would 
have had me imagine last night ?" 

^' No, no," cried Melville, delighted 
with her emotion, yet at the same time 
anxious to sooth her anxiety ; " and were 
it even so, would not your regret be a 
sufficient compensation for it?" 

Lavinia tried to withdraw the hand, 
with which, unconsciously perhaps, she 
K 3 



202 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

had met his extended one as he approach- 
ed ; but he gently detained it — " No, no," 
he said, " 'tis not your breakfast hour yet, 
and where can there be a more delicious 
spot for enjoying the freshness of the morn- 
ing air than this — where, from his grassy 
bed, we see the lark soaring up to hea- 
ven's high gate ?" and by speaking in this 
way he led her to almost imperceptibly 
betray her favourite walks, and many 
other matters with which he wished to be 
acquainted. 

Of the knowledge he thus obtained, he 
failed not to avail himself, by being on 
the watch to meet her whenever she was 
unaccompanied by Rosetta, and the con- 
sequence of these apparently chance meet- 
ings, was the gradual deepening of the 
interest they had mutually inspired. 

But how impossible to describe the con- 
fusion and perplexity that now began to 
pervade the mind of Lavinia ! Deserving 
of condemnation, as she conceived herself, 
for having been betrayed into any farther 
acquaintance with Melville, and yet, un- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 203 

able as she was to force herself to abrupt- 
ly terminate it, she shrunk from the 
thought of what her pride would make 
her blush to acknowledge, and felt shock- 
ed at the idea of having acted in any way 
that could occasion a rebuke. Yet, not- 
withstanding this, the high estimation in 
which she had been taught to hold herself, 
the natural candour and ingenuousness of 
her mind, rendering hateful to her any 
thing that needed deception or conceal- 
ment, she still could not bring herself to 
turn aside when she met him, or to re- 
member any thing to his prejudice. It 
was only when she was not actually listen- 
ing to him, that the revolting idea of his 
being Denny Scanlen recurred to her re- 
collection ; whilst conversing with him, 
his name, his condition, were forgotten ; 
or if remembered, it was with a sigh, that 
they were such as would not entitle him 
to that society he seemed so qualified to 
adorn. How she could have viewed him 
in the light she at first did, now filled her 
with surprise; but such is the effect of 



204 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

prejudice to blind our judgment, and ren- 
der us insensible to real merit. Yet that 
she had continued to regard him in the 
same light, or rather had not met him 
again, which was pretty much the same 
thing, she could hardly help wishing, from 
the disquietude her farther knowledge of 
him had occasioned her. But there would 
soon be an end of this — she should shortly 
be introduced into scenes, and mix in so- 
ciety, it would be impossible for him to 
enter, and her mind would, consequently, 
be diverted from his idea, and every other 
feeling of regret, than what must still be 
continued to be experienced, for ever hav- 
ing been betrayed into any thing of mys- 
tery or concealment towards her dear Ro- 
setta, who reposed her entire heart in her 
bosom, and confidently believed she did 
the same in return. And why had she 
not? Because she dreaded her animad- 
versions, or from the awkwardness that 
would have attended the discovery of her 
having had concealment in one instance, 
was led to practise it in another ; so true 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 205 

is it that one error almost invariably leads 
to another, and that the slightest devia- 
tion from the road we should pursue, fre- 
quently plunges us into a labyrinth from 
which we know not how to extricate our- 
selves. 

Fortunately for Lavinia, Melville was 
really what he appeared to be, not what 
she imagined, else might her implied en- 
couragement of him have led to the dis- 
astrous consequences of drawing her into 
a connexion that she never would have 
been forgiven for forming. 



CHAPTER VI. 



" Fancies and notions -we pursue 

Which ne'er had being, but in thought; 

And like the doting artist, woo 

The image he himself had wrought." 

Much as Melville esteemed the characters 
of sir William and lady Erin, highly as 



206 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he admired Miss Erin, so much so indeed 
as to have occasioned quite a struggle be- 
tween honour, and friendship, and inclina- 
tion, to prevent a growing attachment for 
her, he was not now quite so anxious, 
on his own account, to become a visitor 
at the Vale, as he had been on his first ar- 
rival at Altoir-na-Grenie, conceiving his 
visits there must necessarily interrupt his 
meetings with the fair inmate of Rosehill ; 
not but that he consoled himself for this, 
by the reflection, that these occasional in- 
terruptions to them would probably be 
the means of enabling him to ascertain 
her real feelings for him. But however 
he might now have desired to keep out of 
the way of being constantly engaged, 
neither respect for the wishes of his uncle, 
nor anxiety about his friend, could pre- 
vent his delaying beyond a few days an- 
nouncing his arrival in the neighbour- 
hood, by calling at the Vale. Sir James 
had assured him he could not gratify him 
more than by cultivating an intimacy 
there ; and from what he already knew. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 207 

or at least suspected of Miss Erin's senti- 
ments, and the light in which he was aware 
Donaghue was regarded, from being the 
son of her mother's dearest friend, he was 
not without hopes, that, by also inducing 
his doing the same, he might be the means 
of putting him in the way of fortune again. 
Still ignorant of what had actually occur- 
red between him and Miss Erin, and equal- 
ly so of the opinion which the artful mis- 
representations of lady Jane had caused 
him to entertain of sir William, he knew 
of no other reluctance he could have to 
visiting there, than what originated in an 
unwillingness to expose himself to the 
farther attractions of a person whom his 
pride would no longer permit him to think 
of addressing, from no longer having the 
power of laying an adequate fortune at 
her feet, and which, as already stated, he 
determined on not resting till he had com- 
bated him out of, from deeming it ex- 
tremely ridiculous. Had he known the 
truth, he perhaps might not have been 
able to exert himself so much on the sub- 



S08 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ject ; but though a hundred times it ho- 
vered on the lips of Donaghue, when as- 
sailed by his arguments or raillery, still, 
as often they closed without the power of 
revealing it, so overwhelmed was he with 
shame and confusion, whenever the idea 
of what his conduct had been to Miss 
Erin suggested itself to his tortured ima- 
gination. 

In imagining that he himself should 
be the first to announce his arrival in the 
neighbourhood at the Vale, Melville was 
mistaken — Foley, after an absence of a 
few days, having called there just a short 
time before him, and mentioned it to 
Miss Erin, the only person who was in 
the way to receive him, and who, in con- 
sequence, was infinitely more pleased than 
surprised by seeing Melville in the course 
of the morning entering the drawing- 
room, where she was still sitting alone. — 
'' My dear Mr. Melville," she cried, with 
one of her most enchanting smiles, rising 
to meet him, with an extended hand, 
" how very glad I am to see you, and " 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 209 

Here the unexpected vision of Dona- 
ghue behind him actually struck her dumb, 
for so entirely had she now relinquished 
all idea of ever seeing him as a visitor, 
that had she been ignorant of his being in 
the neighbourhood, she could hardly have 
been more surprised than she now was at 
beholding him ; but not to surprise alone 
was owing her emotion at the instant — 
she had not seen him since the encounter 
in the abbey, and all that had occurred in 
that meeting now recurring to her recol- 
lection, she got confused, and almost with- 
out being conscious of what she was about, 
hastily rang the bell, and ordered a ser- 
vant to let lady Jane know that Mr. 
O'Brien was there. 

Melville stared. — " Lady Jane !'' he re- 
peated to himself; " and why to lady Jane 
send this intimation in preference to any 
other person ? Surely I have not been in 
an error all this time, and fancied Dona- 
ghue pining away for one object, when 
actually he had made a transfer of his 
heart to another ! Yet no, for what emo- 



210 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

tion has he ever manifested at the men- 
tion of lady Jane, while the slightest allu- 
sion to Miss Erin is sure to throw him 
into an agitation ; but then, if he has cho- 
sen to permit such a mistake to prevail, in 
order to free him from the suspicion of 
still harbouring a passion for Miss Erin, 
may not every hope or expectation rela- 
tive to him be frustrated? Well, I shall 
certainly watch him closely, and if I find 
he has been guilty of such romantic folly, 
shall assuredly take him severely to task 
for it ; for how ridiculous, because he has 
not a fortune equal to hers, to suppose he 
must be accused of interestedness for still 
thinking of the being I am convinced he 
alone admires !"' 

Lady Jane, who was loitering about her 
dressing-room, waited not a minute after 
receiving Miss Erin's message to hasten 
to the drawing-room. — " So, you two dear 
enchanting creatures," she cried, extend- 
ing a hand to each of the gentlemen as 
she entered, " this is really quite an agree- 
able surprise." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 211 

" To me, at least," said Melville, laugh- 
ing, " since, till this moment, I never had 
the presumption to think lady Jane thought 
me enchanting." 

" Oh, pooh !" she cried; " don't you 
know one naturally considers every one 
so, that is elegant, and handsome, and 
agreeable ?" 

" What an intoxicating inference!" 
bowing, with a sigh of affected sensibility ; 
" but really lady Jane flatters with such 
delicacy." 

" Nonsense ! if you felt my flattery, as 
you call it, you would not be able to speak 
of it in this manner, for its effect then 
would be too agitating for utterance." 

" Then we may deem silence, in some 
cases, suspicious," said Melville; and in- 
voluntarily, as he spoke, he glanced at 
Donaghue, who had hitherto continued 
without speaking. 

Donaghue coloured like scarlet at the 
look, and was involuntarily turning to a 
window, when suddenly recollecting how 
deeply he was interested in not letting 



212 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the mistake about lady Jane be detected, 
he checked himself, and replying to it by 
an affected laugh, followed her ladyship 
to the other end of the room. 

Melville fancied he heard, at the in- 
stant, a soft sigh stealing from Miss Erin ; 
if, however, there was any renewal of 
emotion at the moment, she had sufficient 
command over herself to conceal it ; yet 
still, as her conversation with Melville 
was renewed, her eyes wandered, and 
once or twice, for an instant, so appeared 
to do her thoughts. 

Sir William and lady Erin were both 
out, but now shortly expected back — one 
taking his usual morning's ride, the other 
paying some visits, from which her daugh- 
ter had got herself excused. Her lady- 
ship was the first who returned; on hear- 
ing who were in the drawing-room, she 
hastened thither, and was most deeply af- 
fected by the sight of Donaghue. After 
expressing her delight at seeing him — 
" And yet this exquisite pleasure to deny 
nie so long !" she said. " Good Heavens ! 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 213 

when I think of our having been so long 
in the same neighbourhood, as we have 
now been, without before meeting, I al- 
most feel the circumstance as a reproach 
to myself." 

" No, no, my dearest madam," exclaim- 
ed Donaghue, eagerly, " you are not to 
blame for it ; you " 

" Then why," said lady Erin, interrupt- 
ing him, " be guilty of the unkindness 
you were, in denying me this pleasure?" 

Donaghue blushed, hesitated, and while 
vainly considering what excuse to make, 
sir William Erin, to his great relief, made 
his appearance; he seemed much pleased 
at seeing the two friends, and gave them 
an invitation to stop the day, which was 
accepted. 

Hardly had they consented to stay, ere 
Rosebud, who had set out on a scamper- 
ing ride, as they were quitting Altoir-na- 
Grenie, and had promised to join them at 
the Vale, for the purpose of returning 
with them to the castle, was announced, 
and evinced no little pleasure at finding 



214 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

they were all to remain where they were. 
Other visitors dropped in, and the differ- 
ent guests belonging to the house, and 
the conversation became general. But in 
this Donaghue was not allowed to bear 
any particular share, through the contri- 
vance of lady Jane : she saw they were 
closely watched, and aware of the sus- 
picion that occasioned their being so, de- 
termined to do all in her power to con- 
firm it ; accordingly, making a pretext to 
get him to occupy a seat beside her, she 
did every thing she couid to engross his 
attention to herself, giving to her conver- 
sation with him, though, in reality, about 
nothing of any consequence, every appear- 
ance of its being so, from the manner in 
w^hich she carried it on with him. 

Donaghue could not be insensible to 
the belief of what all this was calculated 
to create, and to the conviction of it was 
owing his not making any effort to dis- 
engage himself from her ; so anxious was 
he to be exonerated, in the eyes of sir 
William, of the suspicions he was led, by 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 215 

her artifices, to imagine he entertained of 
his harbouring interested designs on his 
daughter, and so aware was he, of course, 
that nothing could so fully clear him of 
this, as allowing it to be supposed he had 
an attachment to another. 

Artifice or deception of any Icind was 
certainly hateful to him ; but so revolting 
was the suspicion just alluded to, that he 
preferred almost any thing to passively re- 
maining under it. Yet, when his thoughts 
glanced at what he had, from recent cir- 
cumstances, reason to imagine the senti- 
ments of Eveleen herself, how difiBcult 
did he find dissimulation in this instance ! 
but surely, if possessed of real generosity, 
the very knowledge of these sentiments 
should only operate as an additional sti- 
mulus to it, since what but misery must 
result from their being confirmed ? per- 
suaded as he was, from lady Jane's artful 
representations of her father, that, to hope 
for his consenting to his daughter's union 
with any man of unequal fortune, was to 
hope for what was utterly impossible. 



216 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Both interested in observing him, sir 
William and lady Erin, without being 
perhaps exactly conscious of it themselves, 
seemed to make him the object of their 
particular scrutiny. It was not lost, how- 
ever, upon Donaghue, and imputing the 
manner in which they regarded him en- 
tirely to anxiety to ascertain whether the 
suspicion they had entertained of him was 
groundless, he became, apparently, every 
moment more engaged with lady Jane. 

Lady Erin began to think she had been 
wrong in denying her belief till now, not- 
withstanding the grounds there were for 
it, to his feeling a preference for her lady- 
ship ; and yet, though she almost thought 
so, she knew not how it was, she could 
not bring herself, even now, to resign her- 
self implicitly to one of the kind. She 
w^atched Donaghue narrowly, and spite 
of the particularity that seemed to sub-, 
sist between him and lady Jane, there 
was a something in his look, in his man- 
ner, at moments, that precluded the be- 
lief it was calculated to inspire. Yet it 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. SIT 

might only be because she did not like 
to give way to it that she thought so. 
She had so long cherished a hope and wish 
of seeing a union effected between him 
and her daughter, that she knew not how 
to bring herself to entirely resign them. 
But the pain she was aware would attend 
their resignation must not prevent this, 
if she had any reason to apprehend her 
trying to avoid it was only trying to 
avoid a pain that must yet be experienced ; 
but she should soon, she was convinced, 
be out of suspense on the subject ; and the 
conviction that nothing would so soon 
put an end to this as obtaining opportuni- 
ties for judging for herself, had certainly 
tended to heighten her anxiety for seeing 
Donaghue at the Vale. 

In the course of conversation, some of 
those places which Donaghue had seen 
abroad were mentioned; and lady Erin, 
opening a portfolio that was lying on tlie 
table before her, called to him to come and 
look at some sketches of them which Miss 

VOL. III. L 



218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Erin had made, they, it seems, having 
been included in the tour which she had 
made on the Continent with her parents. 
They were exquisitely done; and had 
Donaghue given utterance to the admira- 
tion they excited, his language w ould liave 
been glowing indeed ; but a dread of now 
giving utterance to what she in any way 
inspired, lest of confirming the suspicions 
he imputed to sir William, made him now 
constrain himself, and regard them with 
the sober calmness of a person by no means 
interested about them. > tuit -oi mioo 03k 

Findhig him silent, lady Erin uplifted 
her eyes to his, and a shade of vexation 
certainly overspread her countenance at 
his manner at the moment 

" They are pretty," said lady Jane, 
" are they not?" following him to the 
table, and looking over his shoulder at 
them ; " but don't, don't, I desire you/* 
she cried, " look at that," attempting, as 
she spoke, to put her hand over one that 
had fallen out from amidst them. 



TltADlTION OF THE CASTI.E. 219 

U' ^* And why not?" said Donaghue, taking 
it up. 

" Why, because — because it is one of 
my doing.'" 

" Yours !" repeated Donaghue, in utter 
amazement at her having thrust such a 
hideous daub amongst things so exquisite- 
ly finished ; and through absolute surprise 
he continued gazing at it with an earnest- 
ness so different from the forced coldness 
with which he had regarded the other 
drawings, as to make Miss Erin, who had 
also come to the table, involuntarily close 
the book, on lady Erin's attempting to 
produce more of them, with a conviction 
that, after this, there could not possibly 
be any farther proof wanted of what the 
real nature of his sentiments for lady Jane 
were. 

Donaghue felt to his heart the inference 
that must be drawn from his conduct, and, 
hardly conscious of what he w^as about, 
hastily turned away to hide the emotion 
excited by the thought. 
L 2 



220 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Lady Erin now began to resign her 
doubts; and even sir William, without 
having been previously apprized of any 
thing concerning lady Jane, was inclined 
to think, from what he now witnessed, 
that he need never have suspected Dona- 
ghue of haunting the shades of Ashley 
Vale on account of his daughter. 

IMelville, however, was not deceived ; 
he knew more of the heart, he better 
understood the feelings of his friend, than 
they did ; he had had opportunities of ma~ 
king observations which they had not ; and 
tJie result of all was, even* of what he now 
witnessed, those variations of countenance, 
those wandering looks, and momentary 
abstractions, that Donaghue could not 
help, a conviction that he was now acting 
a part, and from a too sensitive pride, 
voluntarily leading those astray, with re- 
gard to his sentiments, who were really 
interested in their developement. 
. He was incensed at the thought ; in 
proportion to his solicitude for his happi- 
ness, was his exasperation at conduct so 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 221 

^culated to destroy all chance of it ; for 
he was well aware of what he would suf. 
fer, if he saw Miss Erin another's, and yet 
]Hyas he not now doing every thing in his 
power to deprive himself of her? for with 
all their liberality of sentiment (and from 
the knowledge he had, through a variety 
of circumstances, obtained of them, he 
gave them credit for as much as is perhaps 
generally possessed by most people), it 
was not to be supposed, if once induced 
to believe him indifferent about her, that 
sir William or lady Erin would think of 
wooing him for their daughter, or that 
she herself, persuaded of the same, would 
not quickly set about conquering any 
preference entertained for him ; and in 
her effort to do which, aided as it would 
be by pride, by female delicacy, the at- 
tentions of others, and the ardent anxiety 
of her parents to see her happily esta- 
bUshed in life, there could be but little 
doubt of her shortly succeeding, leaving 
Donaghue, too late, to bewail those chi- 



222 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

merical notions to which he had sacrificed 
her. 

A short time before dinner, and just as 
the party, after a scattered ramble in the 
grounds, were collected again in the draw- 
ing-room, previous to it, lord Altidore 
was announced, and having paid his com- 
pliments to lady Erin, and the company 
in general, he took a seat by Miss Erin, 
and seemed immediately to devote him- 
self entirely to her. 

The young lady received him with 
smiles; and, to judge from appearances, 
a very interesting conversation took place 
between them ; and had JNIelville been till 
then in doubt as to the nature of Dona- 
ghue's sentiments for JMiss Erin, he could 
have been so no longer, from the agitation 
he now betrayed. There was indeed suf- 
ficient in her inanner now to alarm an 
apprehensive lover— not, however, through 
any coquetry — not that she was perhaps 
altogether sorry that Donaghue was ob- 
serving her, but through the positive in- 



TRA.DITION OF THE CASTLE. 223 

terest she took in the subject on which 
she was conversing with lord Altidore. 

One day that she and lady Erin, with 
ajlparty from the Vale, had been to his 
lordship's, as he was shewing them the 
improvements, a poor woman was found 
in an almost dying state, through down- 
right poverty, near the house ; and, in 
consequence of her being found on his 
grounds, his lordship, insisting on doing 
whatever was requisite for her, had made 
his wishing to consult Miss Erin on the 
subject of the best plan to be pursued for 
her future comfort, a pretext for occasion- 
ally seeking to withdraw her attention 
from others. 

" Yet how weak," cried Donaghue, 
striving to struggle with the agony of soul 
he experienced, at the apparent encou- 
ragement given by Miss Erin to lord Al- 
tidore, " to feel what I am now enduring, 
since the pain of seeing her devoted to 
another is a pain I must have looked for- 
ward to experience, from the moment I 
saw the insuperable barriers placed by for- 



224 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE", 

tune between us! and what I anticipated, 
I should certainly have been better pre- 
pared to support ; but I now perceive that 
there is a wide difference between the for- 
titude requisite to contemplate an afflic- 
tion, and the fortitude required to bear it." 
Yet to think that but for himself, perhaps, 
it was an anguish that might have been 
spared him ! But then how was it to be 
avoided ? how but by probably endanger- 
ing the tranquillity of Eveleen herself, and 
subjecting himself to the imputation of 
the most degrading selfishness ? and rather 
than this — rather than allow the cold and 
wary sir William, as he still persevered in 
believing him, imagine he had not beea 
too cold or cautious in his conduct to- 
wards him, what was there he felt he 
would not prefer suffering ? In short, 
cost him what it would, he decided on 
persevering in his present conduct. 

Sir William, who had not been of the 
walking-party, did not make his reappear- 
ance in the drawing-room till just a few 
minutes before the announcement of din- 



T'HADITION OF THE CASTLE, 225 

trer. Looking anxiously about him as he 
■entered it — ** Our httle Hebe not come 
yet ?" he said. 

" Nor shall we have the pleasure of 
seeing her this day, sir," said Miss Erin; 
** I have just received a note from her, 
begging to be excused, on account of the 
indisposition of her friend." 

" Well, though I admire her for not 
eoming, I still feel her not doing so a dis- 
appointment. However, I hope we shall 
not be much longer denied the gratifica- 
tion of seeing her here." 

" Hebe!" repeated lady Jane, a little 
^neeringly ; " and pray, my dear sir Wil- 
iiam, who may the young lady be, to 
whom you have given this appellation ?" 

" Oh ! a sweet little creature, I assure 
you." 

" Oh, that we must infer, from the 
name you have given her. But I pre- 
4sume she is known by some other ? Does 
she belong to this quarter of the world ?" 

*' Not exactly ; she is a young person 
l3 



226 TRADITION OF THE CASTUE. 

for whom a most particular friend of mine 
is deeply interested, insomuch as to have 
requested lady Erin's immediate introduc- 
tion for her into life, and on whose ac- 
count we shall make it a point of render- 
ing her every attention in our power." Xt 
" And in obliging him, we shall cer- 
tainly oblige ourselves," said lady Erin ; 
" for I never saw a young creature more 
calculated to win esteem and affection; 
she is at once so innocent, yet intelligent ; 
so artless, yet polished; so much the child 
of nature, yet the accomplished girl." 

" Quite a rara avis, upon my w^ord??' 
said lady Jane, with something of a shrug. 
" Really, lady Erin, you and sir William 
have quite excited one's curiosity. Pray 
when may we expect to beheld your para- 
gon ?"^ .Vf t^ o 

" Very soon, I hope." -^ 

*' And till then are we to know nothing 
more of her ?" 

" Nothing more." 

" Upon my word, this is adding some- 
thing of mysterious importance to her ' 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 227 

However, I am not one of those who 
should feel any ardent curiosity or impa- 
tience about her; on the contrary, we 
belles should rather dread such a blazing 
star coming amongst us, test of a total 
eclipse ; but the beaus indeed— I should 
not wonder if they assailed your ladyship." 
" Then I give them due notice not to 
waste their eloquence on me," said lady 
Erin, smiling, " since I am determined 
that, in the present instance, neither flat- 
tery or coaxing shall prevail; our little 
Hebe must not be known till she is intro- 
duced here." 

^f From this day Donaghue became, with 
his friend Melville, a constant participatoi 
in the gaieties and pleasures of the Vale ; 
but he took not with him that Hghtness 
of spirit that was requisite for their enjoy- 
ment. Every day, every hour, rendered 
still more painful the struggle he was en- 
during, as every day, every hour, some 
new cause for esteem and admiration was 
discovered in her whom he adored; but 
the more arduous it became, the more 



2218 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

his pride seemed stimulated to persevere 
in it. Could he give a greater proof of 
love, love indeed worthy of the name, 
than by concealing it from her whom it 
would injure ? and was he not, by suffer- 
ing what he did, vindicating himself from 
any injurious thought that might have 
been entertained of him ? for must not sir 
William now be convinced, that if he had 
indeed suspected him of any sordid or un- 
worthy designs, he had done him in- 
J4istice ? and in the exultation of the re- 
flection, there was almost sufficient, at 
times, to console him for what he was en- 
during. In a word, he so steadily perse- 
vered in the course he had decided on 
pursuing, so carefully guarded against 
being betrayed into any thing that could 
lead to the detection of the mistake the 
artifices of lady Jane had occasioned, that 
every one soon became completely de- 
ceived with regard to his real sentiments, 
but lady Jane herself and Melville; for 
though he sought not for the furtherance 
of his own design, to avoid an appearance 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 229 

of particularity to her, not a word, or a 
look ever passed that could possibly be 
interpreted by her into any indication of 
passion ; while Melville, in that anguish 
he could not conceal from him, read the 
truth. But vain were his remonstrances, 
on what he styled the positive absurdity 
of his conduct ; w^hat love could not effect, 
raillery could not accomplish. The happi- 
ness which he could not aim at, without 
the sacrifice of pride, he resolutely deter- 
mined on relinquishing. 

It has already been explained, that it was 
not from not having been prepossessed by 
his appearance and manner that sir William 
Erin did not lay himself out more par- 
ticularly, in the first instance, for an inti- 
macy with him than he had done. An 
intimacy at length effected, it was not 
long ere it confirmed the prepossession 
previously excited, insomuch, that had sir 
William been called upon to give his 
sanction to his addresses to his daughter, 
there is very little reason to imagine he 
would have withheld it. That this, how- 



230 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ever, would ever be required from him, 
now appeared most unlikely, so much so, 
that he could not help imagining what he 
had heard of a mutual prepossession be- 
tween the young people to be chimerical. 

Without trying to ascertain whether 
he was better pleased to find it as it now 
seemed, or as had been represented, we 
shall merely say, that conceiving there 
was now nothing to hinder the addresses 
of another suitor, he decided on seriously 
speaking to his daughter on the subject 
of lord Altidore, of whose ardent wish to 
be permitted to pay them he was not ig- 
norant, and who, by this time, he knew 
sufficiently to deem deserving of her^i:\ j4c 

Lady Erin felt an equal degree of es- 
teem for his lordship ; but still she had so 
long cherished the idea of another union 
for her daughter, that it was not without 
a feeling of secret reluctance she could re- 
linquish it, more especially deepened and 
confirmed as was the interest previously 
experienced for Donaghue, by the know- 
ledge now acquired of him; but there 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 231 

was a captivating s\^eetness in his man- 
ner, that, exclusive of every thing else, 
his high accomplishments, his mental and 
personal advantages, that was resistless in 
its endearing effect on the mind ; but she 
tried to reconcile herself to the disappoint- 
ment of her wish respecting him, by the 
reflection, that finite as our views are, we 
know not what will ultimately be most 
for our happiness or comfort; that, in 
short, we must not choose for ourselves ; 
and it is well we must not, as we should 
very often make a bad choice ; and since 
all thoughts of Donaghue's being connect- 
ed with them by any other ties than those 
of friendship and esteem were now at an 
end, she knew no one, next to him, whom 
she felt more inclined to approve of for 
her daughter than lord Altidore. ^^ 

^5. Miss Erin, no more than her parents, 
was unjust to his merits ; she saw what 
their wishes were, and she determined to 
make every exertion in her power to gra- 
tify them. Donaghue was now only 
thought of as a being devoted to another; 



S32 TRADITION or THE CASTLE. 

but Still, till she was conscious of feeling a 
preferable regard for lord Altidore, she 
could not bring herself to do more than 
permit him to have the requisite oppor- 
tunities for recommending himself to her 
esteem. She would have been shocked in- 
deed, had she believed herself for a moment 
capable of the romantic folly of dwelling 
on the idea of a person now proved to be 
indifferent about her ; and that she had 
cherished it so long, was, at times, a mat- 
ter of surprise to her, till she reflected how 
much the interest excited by his change 
of fortune had contributed to keep it 
alive, and the early prepossession inspired 
for him by the representations of her mo- 
ther; and in short, from the attentions she 
now forced herself to permit from lord 
Altidore, and the familiar terms on which 
he now appeared to be at the Vale, it was 
shortly the universal report and belief of 
the neighbourhood, that a marriage was 
in agitation between them. 

What the feelings of Donaghue were at 
this juncture must be superfluous to say; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 233 

how alternately he condemned and ap- 
plauded himself for the manner in which 
he had acted, now accusing himself of fol- 
ly, then again conceiving, consistently 
with proper pride and generosity, he could 
not have acted otherwise than he did; 
suffice it, that whatever was his secret an- 
guish, his mind was shortly, in some de- 
gree, diverted from it, by the curiosity and 
^conjectures excited by some curious pro- 
ceedings in the castle. 

From an unquiet sleep, after a day of 
restless agitation at the Vale, Donaghue 
was suddenly awoke one night by a noise 
in his chamber ; gently drawing back the 
curtain to see from what it proceeded, by 
the light of the candle which he had left 
burning, under the idea that if he could 
not compose himself to rest, he might like 
to rise and resume the book he had been 
reading, he perceived the figure of a man 
stealing on tiptoe towards the bed. With 
equal caution Donaghue raised himself 
immediately in it, desirous of ascertaining 
what his intentions were ere he seized 



234 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

him. The intruder continued to advance, 
but not without looking behind him al- 
most every instant as he did so, like a per- 
son in terror and alarm of being followed, 
and to this circumstance was alone owing 
Donaghue's not almost directly giving 
way to the persuasion of his being some 
one belonging to the castle trying to play 
him a trick, when he discovered that he 
was habited in the exact manner so often 
described as the costume of his ancestor, 
Mr. Dennis O'Brien, the supposed fre- 
quenter of it still, namely, in a yellow silk 
nightgown, red morocco slippers, and a 
crimson velvet cap. Seeing him within a 
few yards of the bed, Donaghue was on 
the point of springing from it, when the 
other suddenly paused, stood listening for 
a moment with seeming anxiety, and then 
hastily turning to the closet, vanished 
into it from his view. 

Darting from the bed, Donaghue pro- 
ceeded to search it, persuaded he should 
find him concealed here ; but he was mis- 
taken ; and how he had effected his escape 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 235 

was to him a matter of extreme perplex- 
ity, since through the closet it had assur- 
edly been effected, and yet here was no 
door but the one into the bedchamber, 
neither window that was not firmly secur- 
ed at the moment. Whilst musing on 
the circumstance, and regretting his hav- 
ing delayed to seize him, he heard the 
corporal's voice demanding admission ; not 
a little surprised at this demand at such 
an hour, he was turning to open the door, 
when suddenly recollecting the disturb- 
ance that might be occasioned in the cas- 
tle by his at present letting the one he had 
met with be known, he thought the wisest 
plan would be for him to return to bed, 
ere he raised the night-bolt. As he did 
so — " In the name of wonder, corporal," 
he demanded, " what has brought you 
here at so extraordinary an hour as this ?" 

"Brought me here !" as if involuntarily, 
repeated Cormick ; " why sure, an' please 
your honour, your honour's bell." 

" My bell ! nonsense — are you mad, or 
dreaming ?" 



SS6 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Neither, plase your honour, at pre- 
sent; though, to be sure, I couldn't say so 
much a few minutes ago, for I was drean)- 
ing fast enough when your honour's bell 
woke me." 

" ISIy bell again !" said Donaghue ; '" why 
I tell you I did not ring for you." 

" Not ring for me ! The holy saints 
protect us, but if I could not swear I heard 
your honour's bell just as plain as I now 
hear myself speaking; and what is more 
remarkable, till I heard it a second time 
ringing quite a peal, as one may say, I 
thought it must be a fancy my thinking 
myself woke by it, owing to being dream- 
ing at the moment that your honour was 
calling to me in a great hurry to come dig 
with you for the money that the old gen- 
tleman had been to tell you about, and 
who (the lord save and defend us !) is, I 
believe, beginning to trouble the castle 
again ; for if your honour did not ring the 
bell I heard, as to be sure I know now 
you did not, who or what else but a ghost 
could have rung it?" 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 237 

** What old gentleman do you mean? 
or what are you raving about ?" cried Do- 
naghue, pretending not to know, though 
perfectly aware, in order to have a pretext 
for asking questions he might not other- 
wise have thought of, his curiosity being 
somewhat raised by what had just occurred 
in his own chamber, and drawing aside the 
curtains as he spoke. 

" Why sure your honour must know." 
" Do not be sure ; your meaning may 
not be as plain to others as to yourself." 
^ " Why, any how, it can't be now, sure, 
"that your honour has to hear the story of 
your great-uncle or grandfather, squire 
Dennis O'Brien, he whose picture hangs 
in the library, in the fine yellow silk night- 
gown, covered all over with roses, and 
with a velvet cap on his head, and red 
slippers on his feet, and who, to be sure, 
as your honour must have heard, will 
never rest till he has discovered to some 
one belonging to him the great pot of 
money he hid in the time of the troubles, 
somewhere in the castle !" 



S38 TRADITION OF THE GASTI.E* 

" If yoii verily believe in this stofy," 
said Donaghue, not however without 
thinking there was something like a cu- 
rious coincidence in its introduction at 
this moment, after what he had just seen, 
" I wonder, Cormick, you do not try to 
profit by it, by making a search after this 
hid treasure yourself" 

"Me, your honour! Ah then, it*s a 
good chance I'd have of finding it to be 
sure. No, no, your honour, 'tis your own^ 
self that will be yet getting it — as, to h6i 
sure, who has so good a right, being th^' 
nearest now living to squire Dennis, and^^ 
who, 'tis well known, never yet appeared' 
to any about it that did not belong to him- 
self, nor what -.vas more, didn't stand ini 
want of it just at the time? 'Tis many aai 
long year now since he was seen in the 
castle, and the last time he was, it's said 
it was in this very chamber, the tapestry 
chamber, by a young gentleman of the'^ 
family that was crossed in love for the 
want of a fortune, and who might have 
got all squire Dennis's money, but that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 239 

he wouldn't follow him, as he wanted, to 
the place where it was hid; my mother 

has the whole story, and But, Roly St. 

Patrick ! what was that ? didn't I hear a 
noise? wasn't that very like the rustling 

of a silk ? — speak of " 

" That is a very irreverent quotation, 
corporal," interrupted Donaghue, when 
speaking of so good-natured a personage 
as you have described my kinsman squire 
Dennis; but come," jumping out of bed, 
for he also imagined he heard a sound at 
the instant in the closet, " since your 
dreams or fancies have brought you here, 
be so good as to assist me in searching 
whether any cat has got in here, for I ra- 
ther thought I heard a noise in it," lead- 
ing the way to the closet as he spoke ; but 
again it was examined to no purpose, Do- 
naghue conceiving that there might be 
some means of evasion there, that, at the 
first glance, had escaped him, but nothing 
of the kind could be detected ; that, how- 
ever, there was some way of escape from 
it he could not possibly doubt, after what 



240 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he had seen ; and whoever had attempted 
to play this trick upon his creduHty had 
certainly, he conceived, managed the mat- 
ter extremely well, for that what had 
happened was a mere contrivance for 
amusement, he, of course, was by this 
time convinced ; the dress of the figure 
did not permit a doubt on the subject, and 
his suspicions fell upon Rosebud, know- 
ing the delight he would take in any 
thing of the kind. Lest, however, he 
should not like to confess the truth at 
first, he thought it better, for the present, 
to be silent on the subject, and according- 
ly dismissed the corporal, without permit- 
ting him to suspect any thing had happen- 
ed to disturb him, perfectly easy now with 
regard to it, from the supposition he liad 
given way to concerning it. 

But though he could hardly think that 
Melville would join Rosebud in any thing 
so boyish as the trick of the preceding 
night, this did not prevent his watching 
his looks as closely the next morning at 
breakfast as he did the doctor's, persuaded, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 241 

if guilty, they would betray him on meet- 
ing his scrutiny — that he was not, he was 
soon convinced, and indeed there was as 
little reason, from his looks, to persevere 
in suspecting the doctor; suspect him, 
however, he still did, and accordingly de- 
cided on not resting till he had led him 
to betray himself. 

In pursuance of this determination, 
breakfast was hardly over, ere he got him 
to the library, where, after engaging him 
for some time in chatting on various mat- 
ters, he suddenly paused in something he 
was saying, to ask him whether he did 
not think that picture, glancing as he 
spoke at the gentleman's in the yellow 
nightgown, a well executed one ? 

" I protest I don't know," said Rose- 
bud, advancing towards it as he replied ; 
" for I don't know that I ever before no- 
ticed it particularly." 

" Not that picture!" said Donaghue, 
with something of emphasis. 

"No; is there any thing particular 
about it r 

VOL. Ill, M 



242 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Well, really you surprise me by what 
you say ; I should have conceived, from 
the story here on record about the person 
it was done for, that it would have en- 
gaged your particular attention." 

" Story! what story, my dear fellow?" 
with the greatest eagerness ; " any thing 
very wonderful ?" 

" And now really have you never heard 
anv thinec of it ?" 

*' Really never." 

" May I positively believe you serious 
in saying so ?" 

"Positively; on the word and honour 
of a gentleman, and a regimental surgeon, 
you may. So come, if 'tis any thing very 
strange, wild, or wonderful, do let me 
have it ; for I have quite as greedy an ear 
for tales of this description as any old 
gossip or pretty little dairymaid whatever." 

" You must excuse me, my dear doc- 
tor, I am a very bad detail er of the mar- 
vellous ; but you have only to make love 
to nurse here, to get it from her, if you 
really wish for it." 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 243 

" Wish for it !" and he protested no- 
thing but having a long letter to write 
that morning would have prevented his 
immediately seeking her for the purpose. 

Donaghue knew not now what to think ; 
if he acquitted the doctor of what he had 
suspected, he was utterly at a loss whom 
to suspect in his place; and yet how, after 
what had just passed, his declared igno- 
rance of the story, to which was imputed 
all that had occurred last night, could he 
persist in imagining him the contriver of 
it? But he might not conceive there was 
any thing very re})rehensible in the de- 
nial of such a matter; and in short, from 
this idea, and his well known propensity 
to things of the kind, Donaghue could 
not bring himself to believe he was not; 
and what tended not a little to confirm 
him in the persuasion that he was, was 
the recollection of the artifice which the 
figure had had recourse to, by still keep- 
ing the head turned away, as if fearful of 
being followed, to prevent his seeing the 
M 2 



244 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

countenance. The only thing that puz- 
zled him was, how he had obtained a 
knowledge of the secret inlet into the 
chamber ; for that such a one existed was 
now clear, since, if even acquainted with 
it, he could not for a moment imagine any 
of the inmates of the castle would have 
ventured to aid him in playing the trick, 
by disclosing it to him ; that he had, how- 
ever, by some means or other learned it, 
was not to be doubted; and Donaghue 
now set himself more diligently than ever 
to work to find it out, in order to prevent 
any further interruption to his rest from 
him ; but in vain he sought, and indirect- 
ly inquired about it — neither old Cormick 
or his wife could give him the slightest 
idea of it. 

Melville had gone out, the doctor was 
still busied in writing, and Donaghue, in 
a very listless humour, at length strolled 
from the castle by himself Unconscious- 
ly almost he took the direction leading to 
the abbey, and ere he was well aware of 
it, found himself there. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 245 

The day was sultry, and it was now the 
hottest hour, when, vertical, the sun pours 
down his fiercest influence, and gladly 

" Dew-dropping coolness to the shade retires, 
There on the verdant turf, or flowery glade, 
By gelid fount, and ceaseless rills to muse." 

And all around there was a kind of lan- 
guid stillness in the place, that was not 
without its effect upon him. He advan- 
ced within the walls, and with loitering 
steps was making his way through the 
chapel, to another staircase he had disco- 
vered, leading to the chamber he had been 
in the habit of frequenting above, when 
the vsound of music made him suddenly 
check himself, and the next instant re- 
treat, under the idea of its being lady Jane 
he had heard — that unprincipled woman, 
to whose artifices he could hardly avoid 
believing his present misery imputable, 
since, but for her, he conceived he should 
never have thought of the deception he 
had practised — a deception that, spite of the 
command he struggled to maintain over 



246 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE* 

himself, his romantic notions of generosity 
he could not help at times repenting, at 
least whenever the maddening idea of 
seeing Eveleen another's occurred to his 
imagination. 

Anxious at all times to avoid her lady- 
ship, but more especially when in a hu- 
mour to contemplate her with bitterness, 
he was flying from the place, when the 
voice of Millicent Erin, asking him, with 
a laugh, as she thrust her head through 
one of the narrow arches of the cloisters 
above, whether they had frightened him,, 
arrested his steps. 

" Frightened me !" repeated Donaghue. 
** Why, who is with you ?" 

" Not lady Jane," said Miss Erin, laugh- 
ing, as, to his utter surprise, she also now 
came forward ; " and is it not a convin- 
cing proof that you knew it was not her 
delightful strains you heard, your attempt- 
ing to make so precipitate a retreat? 
But come, don't look so embarrassed ; as 
you could not guess who else it was, I 
shall not consider your doing so as any 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 247 

positively intended affront to me. But 
my nnother is here, and if you come up, 
you shall see what a delightful retreat we 
have fitted up here." 

Donaghue was in a moment with her 
in the gallery, and through various pas- 
sages she led the way to the apartment 
which he himself had frequented, and 
which by this time was tastefully furnish- 
ed with whatever was requisite for the 
accommodation of those who might like 
to amuse themselves with reading, draw- 
ing, or music, in it. 

" Well," said Miss Erin, advancing into 
it, while Millicent, missing her aunt, 
darted away to look for her, " what do 
you think of this now ? Do you not 
think it well adapted to the purposes to 
which it seems devoted ? But you should, 
and I know you will admire it, when I 
tell you, that the idea of it was suggested 
by lady Jane." 

" By lady Jane !" repeated Donaghue, 
with something of indignant contempt, 
hurried out of himself by the feelings ex- 



248 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

cited by this intimated belief of an at- 
tach nf)ent to her ; "and do you think 
that that is a circumstance to make me 
admire it ? Oh, no, no !" he passionately 
exclaimed, pacing the room with an agi- 
tation of which he was perhaps not con- 
scious, as he spoke — " oh, no, no! 'tis 
not lady Jane's idea that would give it 
any charm in my eyes; but hers who 
gives interest to whatever it is connected 
with." 

Miss Erin looked at him with asto- 
nishment; after all that had passed, the 
long continued constraint of his manner 
towards her, to hear such a burst of pas- 
sion But she suddenly recollected, that 

for the few last days there had appeared 
a coolness between him and her ladyship ; 
and it instantly struck her that to this 
was owing what had now occurred. Find- 
ing him still insensible to her advances, 
lady Jane, like a true coquette, suddenly 
thought what piquing his pride might 
effect, and accordingly renewed her sus- 
pended flirtation with Mr. Lawless, a ri- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 2!49 

val sufficiently formidable to alarm the 
jealousy of any admirer she conceived ; 
and to this, the resentment inspired by 
the circumstance, and a wish of rendering 
her instrumental to revenging it, Miss 
Erin was now led to ascribe what had es- 
caped him; and, in indignation at the 
thought, her cheek flushed to the deepest 
crimson, as with a look of scorn she turn- 
ed away her head from him. 

Her look recalled Donaghue to recol- 
lection and indescribable confusion, at the 
idea of what he had been betrayed into ; 
he stood gazing at her, utterly at a loss 
how to act, whether at once to throw him- 
self upon her mercy, and confess the truth, 
or remain under the injurious opinion he 
saw she had conceived of him. 

Whilst undecided, lady Erin entered 
from an adjoining gallery, and Donaghue, 
starting from his fixed attitude, hastened 
to meet her ; but the hand that used to 
be extended on seeing him was now held 
back ; and bowing to him, with an air of 
m3 



2150 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 

the coldest gravity, she passed him to a 
seat. 

A bolt of ice transfixing his heart could 
not have given acuter pain to Donaghue, 
than was experienced by him at this mo- 
ment. Stung to the very soul by her 
ladyship's altered manner, he hastily turn- 
ed away, and retreating to a window, lean- 
ed against it for a few minutes, with feel- 
ings nearly overwhelming. And was she 
too offended, his amiable, his maternal 
friend, whom he had so many reasons for 
regarding ? But to displease one, was, of 
course, to displease both ; and he saw he 
had had the misfortune to do so. Lady 
Erin had even heard, it was evident, what, 
in the agitation of a moment, had escaped 
him, and interpreting it in the same way 
her daughter had done, was equally of- 
fended by it ; and this was the effect of 
the deception he had allowed himself to 
practise — for surely it was a deception, to 
remain passive under the mistake which 
the artifices of lady Jane had laid tlie 
foundation of, with regard to his senti- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 251 

ments; for would it not have been ten 
thousand times better for him to have left 
the neighbourhood at once, since his no- 
tions of pride and generosity would not 
permit him any longer to think of Miss 
Erin, than, for the mere sake of being 
where she was, weakly run the risk of 
being betrayed into the semblance of act- 
ing a double part? But it was now too 
late to repent all this; all that now re- 
mained for consideration was, whether or 
not he should immediately fly the place. 

While these bitter reflections were pass- 
ing through his mind. Miss Erin, losing 
in the pity excited by the confusion into 
which her mother's manner had thrown 
him the anger he had caused, cast an im- 
ploring look at her ladyship, and perhaps 
also of a little relenting at her own side, 
at length made an effort to enter into con- 
versation with him; but Donaghue was 
hardly able to profit by her condescen- 
sion, so embarrassed and agitated did he 
remain from what had occurred; till at 
last, some wandering glances caught from 



252 TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 

Eveleen began a little to recompose him, 
from the hope they inspired, if he had 
offended, of not having done so irrepa- 
rably ; or rather, perhaps, of her having at 
length begun to surmise the truth; but 
their effect upon him was but transient. 

Commenting upon some remarks lady 
Erin had made on the prospect the apart- 
ment commanded — " But I think," she 
said, " in this scenery nothing is so beau- 
tiful as the fine opening in those woods 
yonder, that admits a view of the ancient 
mansion of lord Altidore on its elevation 
of green downs. Really, for the sake of 
seeing that alone, I should think this 
chamber delightful.** 

Donaghue felt almost as if a viper had 
bitten him at the instant, so acute was the 
sensation excited by these words. He had 
begun, almost unconsciously perhaps, to 
give way to an idea — for what are not the 
romantic fancies to which an ardent ima- 
gination leads! — that perhaps to some 
thought connected with him might have 
been owing Miss Erin's positive choice 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 258 

of this apartment for a temporary retreat, 
as he understood from lady Erin was the 
case, in preference to several others that 
were pointed out as equally desirable for 
the purpose; but after this declaration, a 
declaration that seemed made for the pur- 
pose of indirectly rebuking the vanity that 
led to the suggestion, he could no longer 
think so; she had given him clearly to 
understand, from what she said, that she 
had chosen it from no motive that could 
possibly flatter him ; but quite the reverse 
indeed — for the sake of one particular 
view, and that of the mansion of his rival. 
Ay, that was the offence, and he felt it 
as such ; for trifles light as air are indeed 
matters of moment to the enamoured ; his 
cheek grew red — his eyes sparkled with 
resentful feelings — his whole form seemed 
to dilate itself with offended pride — and 
rising from the window-seat on which he 
had languidly thrown himself, after loiter- 
ing for a few minutes about the room, 
pretending to look at some prints that 
embellished it, with an air that might 



254 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

have proved, to any one interested in it, 
he had not altogether forgotten the fashion- 
able nonchalance of former times, he sud- 
denly murmured something of having re- 
collected an engagement elsewhere, and 
took a precipitate leave of the ladies. 



CHAPTER VII. 



" Tis now the very witching hour of night, 

When churchyards yawn, and graves give up their dead.** 

We shall not follow Donaghue particu- 
larly through the remainder of the day — 
suffice it, after being dragged by Rosebud 
to a dinner-party at sir Ulick Magennis's, 
where, however, to his great relief, he did 
not meet the family from the Vale, he 
was, at twelve o'clock, in his chamber read- 
ing, determined against going to bed for 
some time, lest of any attempt being made 
to disturb him again this night. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 255 

From time to time his looks were turn- 
ed towards the closet, the door of which 
he had purposely left open, that he might 
be ready, on the slightest indication of 
any one's being there, to seize upon the 
intruder ; and he could hardly suppress a 
smile at times, at the idea of the absolute 
anger he was convinced the doctor would 
feel at being so immediately detected. 

One — two, however struck, and nothing 
was heard to disturb him ; no sound in- 
deed, save now and then the low moaning 
of the wind outside the casements, or the 
rustling of the long streaming grass and 
weeds that begirt them ; and at length, 
giving up all idea of seeing either a real 
or fictitious ghost that night, he thought 
he might as well go to bed, as he was 
getting sleepy ; and to bed accordingly he 
went, taking the precaution, however, of 
first locking the closet, so that, if he re- 
ceived a visitation this night, as the cham- 
ber-door was also secured, he really felt 
he should consider it rather an extraordi- 
nary circumstance. 



256 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

His head had not been long on the pil- 
low,' ere, spite of all the pangs and pains 
of the day, he fell fast asleep, probably ex- 
hausted by them ; but had not very long 
enjoyed this sweet oblivion of human 
care, when he was roused from it by the 
drawing back of his curtains, and starting 
up in the bed, he beheld the same figure 
as on the preceding night retreating from 
it towards the closet; and as it did so, 
beckoning to him to follow. 

" Well, really," cried Donaghue, " this 
is marvellous ! Now do, my dear doctor," 
he added, fully impressed with the idea 
of its being him he saw, " do let me know 
how you got access to my chamber, or I 
shall really have you taken up for a ma- 
gician. Consider how much it behoves 
me to know all the secret inlets and out- 
lets of this old fabric of mine !" No re- 
ply. " Then really, my dear friend, you 
must excuse my intercepting your re- 
treat," and as he -spoke he sprung from 
the bed ; but ere he reached the figure it 
had disappeared; and, to his utter sur- 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 257 

prise, he found the closet open, since 
from this it seemed as if it was by the 
chamber the intruder had entered, and 
yet the door of this still remained fastened. 

Donaghue stood for a moment lost in 
perplexity ; then conceiving, if it was 
indeed the doctor, he should, by hasten- 
ing directly to his chamber, be enabled to 
detect him in his return to it, and thus 
prevent the repetition of what was really 
very teazing, he threw on his nightgown, 
and without another moment's delay, pro- 
ceeded to it. The door was unbolted ; he 
softly opened it, and was speedily con- 
vinced, from the heavy breathing he heard, 
that whoever it was he had seen, it was 
not Rosebud, knowing it was utterly im- 
possible for him to have got to his room 
before him. 

More at a loss now than ever to account 
for what had occurred, since, from being 
now compelled to acquit the doctor of any 
concern in it, he knew no longer how to 
impute it to any idle contrivance for 
amusement ; and yet, if any thing serious 



258 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was intended by it, surely he would not 
each time have been put on his guard, by 
being roused from his sleep. The manner 
in which he had been disturbed on a for- 
mer occasion, by the violent shaking of 
his bed, when he had every reason to im- 
agine there was some one in the room, 
now recurring to his recollection, he slow- 
ly turned away, and retraced his way to 
his chamber, half inclined to call Cormick, 
and yet still unwilling, from a fear of cre- 
ating any superstitious terror in the castle. 
By the time he reentered his chamber, 
the candle, by the fitful light of which he 
had been able to perceive the motions of 
his visitant, was out ; but there was a 
bright moon by this time shining in the 
heavens, and he drew aside a window- 
curtain to admit her light. Hardly had 
he done so, when a rustling sound behind 
him made him turn with quickness, and 
he again beheld the figure stationary at 
the closet. He was instantly darting for- 
ward, when suddenly recollecting the man- 
ner in which it seemed enabled to evade 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 259 

his grasp, he checked himself, to demand 
who it was, or what it required of him. 

No other reply was made, than a mo- 
tion to follow into the closet, to which it 
made a movement at the moment. 

" Follow !" cried Donaghue, indignant- 
ly. ** No, assuredly. Have done, there- 
fore, with this idle mummery, which, let 
it be intended for what it may, will not 
in any way succeed, and may be the means 
of involving you in greater trouble than 
what you may be aware of. Confess at 
once your motive for coming here, if you 
wish to escape the consequences of that 
detection I am resolved on." 

Still, however, as if utterly regardless 
of this threat, the figure continued to 
beckon him to advance, keeping gently 
receding all the time into the closet. 

Donaghue kept his eye steadily fixed 
on it for a moment, and then making one 
dart forward, was sure of having secured 
it ; but at the very instant it seemed within 
his grasp, it was gone. 

To think of any further repose that night 



260 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was, after such an incident as this, out of the 
question. His perplexity at it was heigh- 
tened by not knowing how to mention it 
to any one, lest it should be the means of 
inquiries and conjectures that might be 
troublesome. His threat might, he re- 
flected, prove availing; and till he had 
ascertained whether it had or not, he final- 
ly decided on being silent on the subject. 
The recurrence of a few nights without 
any thing farther to disturb him, induced 
a persuasion that it had, and equally tend- 
ed to confirm him in the one of what had 
happened being the mere idle contrivance 
of some one for amusement ; but who that 
some one was remained still to be dis- 
covered, as also the secret means of access 
to his chamber, the knowledge of which 
occasioned him, from this time, to take 
the precaution of having firearms laid 
every night by his bedside ; and he would 
probably indeed have abandoned the apart- 
ment altogether, but that from what he 
had ascertained, he conceived it requisite, 
for the safety of the castle, that some one 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 261 

should remain in it. More than once the 
story connected with it, as related in the 
old papers he had by such chance dis- 
covered, now recurred to his recollection ; 
and altogether, he made not the slightest 
doubt, that if the present had been days 
of superstition, the coincidence between 
this and what had lately occurred would 
not have been without its due effect on 
his imagination. 

But all this time he was not unmindful 
of Melville. There was something, he 
thought, strange and unusual in his man- 
ner — an abstraction and restlessness he 
had never before noticed, united to which 
he was continually missing him, without 
ever learning where he had been, and al- 
together, from these circumstances, and 
the confusion he had betrayed about the 
hurt in his hand, he could hardly help 
suspecting, spite of the high opinion he 
entertained of his prudence and principles, 
that he w^as engaged in some adventure 
or other, and not unfrcquently rallied him 
on the subject. 



262 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Melville merely laughed in return; un- 
decided still how matters might end be- 
tween him and his pretty Lavinia, he de- 
termined, for the present at least, to re- 
main silent on the subject of the passion 
she had inspired. Every day, however, 
tended still more strongly to persuade 
him that they would yet have a very 
serious conclusion; for every day seemed 
to rivet still more firmly the chains she 
had wound round his heart. To be loved 
for himself alone ! there was really some- 
thing seducing in the idea; and JMelville 
knew hardly any thing that could tempt 
him to give up a conquest of which he 
had such reason to be vain. 

For his wish of seeing her, the indispo- 
sition of her poor friend Rosetta proved 
propitious, by delaying that introduction 
that would have prevented her having so 
much the command of her actions as at 
present ; for though she could not possibly 
think of exchanging the sick chamber of 
the invalid, the only confidant as she was of 
that secret anguish that was undermining 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 263 

her health, and like a worm in the bud, 
indeed, feasting on her damask cheek, for 
scenes of gaiety that would keep her 
whole hours away from her, yet there was 
no reason why she should not just now 
and then leave it, for the purpose of re- 
lieving the languor it sometimes occasion- 
ed, by breathing the pure air ; and some- 
how, it so happened, that wherever she 
turned her steps for this purpose, she al- 
most always found Mr. Dennis Scanlen 
inhaling it in the same direction, and so, 
by this means, very unintentionally to be 
sure, their acquaintance was kept up. But 
it would soon be at an end, for it was not 
to be supposed that he would continue 
much longer loitering in the neighbour- 
hood ; and when once introduced at the 
Vale, she had reason to believe she should 
not be allowed to pass much of her time 
at Rosehill. At the idea of the gaiety, 
and splendour, and admiration to which 
this introduction made her look forward, 
it was impossible for her not to be de- 
lighted, since, whatever her romantic feel- 



264 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ings might be, neither her pride or am- 
bition were at all subdued. Yet, not- 
withstanding, there was at times a heavi- 
ness on her heart she knew not how to 
shake off, and something like a wish to 
avoid what she yet loved to dwell on. 

The preparations made for her being 
introduced into society were of the most 
expensive description, such as plainly 
evinced her being held in no little estima- 
tion by her unknown guardian ; but 
though she was, of course, gratified by 
the advantages afforded her, yet, whilst 
she remained in ignorance of his motive 
for thus wishing to render her of conse- 
quence, she felt it impossible to be com- 
pletely happy — the most fearful ideas from 
time to time haunting her imagination 
respecting him, deeming it, as she did, 
most unlikely that, if any tie but that of 
whim or caprice connected them, she 
would not before this have been acknow- 
ledged by him. 

The mystery connected with her was 
imparted by sir William to lady Erin and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 265 

his daughter, on his mentioning her in- 
tended introduction to them ; the person 
who requested their patronage for her 
knowing it could not, with propriety, be 
expected without their really knowing 
who she was. The interest excited by 
her story was not lessened by her appear- 
ance; and to induce them to render her 
every attention in their power, they felt 
nothing more was requisite than this. 

Lady Erin wished to have brought her 
at once to the Vale ; but though Lavinia 
was much pleased with these new friends 
her guardian had obtained her, still she 
shrunk from the thought of being thus 
abruptly torn, as it were, from her first 
and long-tried ones ; and at her earnest 
request, her ladyship excused her then 
becoming her inmate, but insisted on the 
next day being spent with her. 

The Wheatleys, with whom the family 
were greatly pleased, were pressed in the 
warmest manner to accompany her, but 
which Mr. Wheatley positively, though 

VOL, HI. N 



266 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

gratefully, declined, having long ago, 
though he did not think proper to naake 
the acknowledgment peremptorily, given 
up for himself and family all society but 
that in his own level line, conceiving that 
one cannot feel independent if they accept 
attentions they have not the power of re- 
turning. 

How Lavinia's engagement came to be 
relinquished has already been explained. 
Kosetta's spirits were so much affected by 
the sight of Miss Erin, conjuring up as 
it did a number of painful ideas, that she 
grew ill ere she had well departed, and 
was unable, for some days after, to leave 
l^er chamber. 

But much as the thoughts of Lavinia 
dwelt on the Vale, not once did a word 
relative to it escape her to ]\Ir. Scanlen. 
She certainly did not wdsh him, by any 
means, to forget the difference between 
them ; yet still, she knew not how it was, 
she did not like immediately to remind 
him herself of it. He must hear of her 
introduction at the Vale without her men- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 26? 

tioning it to him, from the noise which 
her dthut in the fashionable circles of the 
place would no doubt make in it. Dear, 
how she should like to know what she 
was intended for ! whether the wife of this 
hideous old guardian of hers, for she would 
have him so, or his heiress ; and how pro- 
voking to think she must remain some 
time longer in suspense ! — the hope which 
she had indulged of being able to learn 
something of him at the Vale being de- 
stroyed, by Mr. Wheatley's telling her 
she must not, on any account whatever, 
make the slightest allusion to him there. 

The announcement of a subscription 
ball at , set her little heart in a flut- 
ter, and it was finally settled that her first 
appearance in public should be there. 

Inexpressible was her dehght on the 
occasion, aware, as she was, that all the 
fashion in the neighbourhood would be 
there — every young man of elegance and 
consequence belonging to it; lord Alti- 
dore — that, to be sure, was a prohibited 
N 2 



268 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

name at Rosehill; and the owner of that 
magnificent old castle she so much ad- 
mired, and his friend, Mr. Melville, two 
of the handsomest, most captivating crea- 
tures, she was assured, by several young 
ladies belonging to the place, in the world ; 
and certainly it would be pleasant to be- 
come acquainted with such ; and in short, 
in spite of some obtruding thoughts, she 
actually became impatient for the evening. 

The evening at length came ; nothing 
that taste and elegance could do to set 
her off was omitted ; and Rosetta, who 
assiduously attended at her toilet, thought 
it impossible she could be surpassed in 
the scene of gaiety to which she was going 
— an opinion in which we are inclined 
to think Lavinia herself did not very es- 
sentially differ from her. 

Could Donaghue possibly have excused 
himself from making one of the brilliant 
assemblage, he certainly would have been 
happy, so much was he teazed and tor- 
mented about lady Jane. 

Lady Erin, quickly getting the better of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 269 

the anger inspired by the incident in the ab- 
bey, set about remonstrating with lady 
Jane on the coquetry to which she im- 
puted what had offended her there, his 
wishing to have it appear, out of jealous 
pique, that he had veered about in his ad- 
dresses from her to her daughter. 

Lady Jane was delighted at her re- 
monstrance on the subject, from the con- 
firmation it afforded of her giving credit 
to what she wished; she affected the pret- 
tiest air imaginable of innocence and re- 
gret on the occasion — protested she did 
not know that Donaghue had any right 
to be offended — but since her ladyship 
said she should be more particular in her 
conduct, why she would be so, more es- 
pecially as she now saw what his temper 
was — so captious, so jealous ; and in short, 
she had not the slightest objection to her 
interfering between them, artfully calcu- 
lating on the possibility there was, by her 
doing so, of Donaghue's being betrayed 
into some acknowledgment from which 
he could not retract, or at least, which 



270 TRADITION OF THE CASTLIT, 

was the same thing, being led by it to be- 
lieve their attachment was too firmly cre- 
dited for him to be able to deny it with^ 
out injury to her honour. 

Donaghue, however, with all his warmth 
of feeling and acute sensibility, was not so 
easily to be betrayed into any thing re- 
volting to his feelings or principles as she 
hoped might be the case ; and according- 
ly, on being forced again to the Vale, 
which, after what had occurred at the 
abbey, he absented himself a day or two 
from, on her ladyship taking him to task 
about the little brouillerie, as she called 
it, existing between him and lady Jane^ 
and entreating him to think no more 
about it, as really her ladyship was quite 
penitent for any little cause of uneasiness 
or resentment she had given him, he posi- 
tively protested against feeling any re- 
sentment against her, vehemently decla- 
ring that, as far as he himself was inte- 
rested in it, it was not possible for her 
conduct, be it what it might, to give him 
any uneasiness or concern whatever. But 



TRADITION OI^^HE CASTI.E. 271 

in vain he persisted in this declaration ; 
lady Erin continued to smile incredulous- 
ly ; and his anger and vexation at her ob- 
stinate doubt of his veracity was aug- 
mented by Miss Erin's being present on 
the occasion* 

" After Vv^hat we have witnessed " 

said lady Erin, at length. 

" What we witness is not always to be 
depended on," said Donaghue, still more 
vehemently ; " errors and mistakes are 
continually occurring in life, through too 
much dependance being placed on chance 
circumstances. My manner to lady Jane 
may sometimes have worn the semblance 
of particularity ; but let it have deceived 
wlio it may, it could never possibly de- 
ceive her; for never did a profession es- 
cape my lips that could be construed into 
any thing like a hint of an attachment." 

" Come, come," cried lady Erin, play- 
fully putting her hand before his mouth, 
" I'll listen to no more of this, because I 
know, the moment your vow of allegiance 



272 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

is renewed to your liege lady, you'll be 
repenting and wishing it all unsaid." 

" My liege lady !" with a sigh from the 
very bottom of his heart, involuntarily 
repeated Donaghue, and a mom.entary 
glance at Eveleen, who all this time ap- 
peared to be so busily engaged with a 
drawing, as to be unconscious of the con- 
versation that was going on. Then, with 
still greater earnestness — " Upon my ho- 
nour," he exclaimed; " upon " 

" Stop !*' said lady Erin, again interpo- 
sing to prevent his utterance. " Though 
Jane laughs at lovers* perjuries, I cannot ; 
this is positively carrying resentment too 
far ; but lady Jane has explained all — your 
early attacliment, and the unfortunate dis- 
trust of hers, the cause of all this prone- 
ness to jealousy, which her being com- 
pelled to yield obedience to the arbitrary 
will of a selfish father occasioned." 

With all his vexation, Donaghue could 
not help laughing outright, at such a state- 
ment having been imposed upon her lady- 
ship. That lady Jane could for a mo- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 27^ 

ment have thought of representing herself 
in the light it seemed she had done to 
her — as a poor timid, trembling, submis- 
sive daughter, really struck him as so lu- 
dicrous, that he could not immediately re- 
cover from his risibility. — " Well, really," 
he cried, " this is amusing !" But his tone 
had all the bitterness of sarcasm in it ; and 
his laugh was evidently one more of ridi- 
cule than enjoyment. " The next thing 
lady Jane will do, I suppose, will be to 
entertain, I mean interest, your ladyship, 
by the account of the melancholy senti- 
mental turn she has since acquired." 

" Ay, there's the rub," cried her lady- 
ship ; " that's what offends — her not seem- 
ing to feel what happened more than she 
has done; but really 'tis but natural for a 
fine young woman like her." 

Donaghue could not command himself 
any longer ; he rose, impatiently, and ta- 
king up a new publication that was lying 
on a table, forced her ladyship to change 
the conversation, by beginning to speak 
N 3 



274 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

of it. Much, however, as this conversa- 
tion had irritated him, yet, upon a little 
reflection, he was not sorry that it had 
occurred, from the opportunity it afforded 
him of explicitly declaring himself, with 
regard to lady Jane : at present he saw 
indeed this could be of no use, but the 
time might come when, being able to re- 
fer to it, might be a means of preventing 
an imputation on his honour. How he had 
run the risk of incurring this, which he was 
now sensible he had done, by the encou- 
ragement he had given to the continuance 
of the mistake the artful contrivances of 
lady Jane had led to, he was now asto- 
nished. In time, however, he trusted he 
had become sensible of the consequences 
likely to accrue from such conduct, with 
a conviction that it is vain to hope we can 
ever turn into the maze of dissimulation, 
without regret and repentance. 

But though he now shunned every as- 
siduity to her ladyship, avoided every at- 
tention that was not absolutely required 
by politeness, still lady Erin, through the 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 275 

artifices of lady Jane, would not give up 
the persuasion that was so provoking to 
him, persisting in imputing this coolness 
and indifference towards her, entirely to 
the effect of jealous resentment at her flir- 
tation with Mr. Lawless, and in conse- 
quence took every opportunity that oc- 
curred, for either remonstrating with him, 
or rallying him on the subject, fearful in- 
deed, if he persevered much longer in such 
conduct, her ladyship, in some sudden 
pet, would veer about to some other ad- 
mirer, and thus deprive him of the chance 
he now had of retrieving his fortunes by 
a union with her ; and so convinced was 
Donaghue that she would go on the same 
way at the ball, no doubt from the best mo- 
tive, but still that did not prevent its 
being very teazing to him, on finding he 
would not dance with lady Jane, that 
could he have declined going to it witli- 
out disobliging Melville, he certainly 
would have done so. 

But Mr. Sedley would not have been 
quite so anxious as he was to exhibit him- 



276 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

self there, had he been aware of the sur- 
prise that there awaited him, in the person 
of Miss Lavinia. Having, as we have al- 
ready hinted, out of regard to his supposed 
feelings as Dennis Scanlen, carefully avoid- 
ed letting him know the introduction that 
was about taking place, no language can 
do justice to his gesture, to his astonish- 
ment, when, on his entering the ball- 
room, the first object he beheld was her, 
seated at the upper end of it with the 
Erin party, attired in all the elegance of 
fashion, glowing with resplendent beauty, 
and certainly neither, apparently, inatten- 
tive, nor yet undelighted with the general 
admiration it excited. Who could have 
thought of such thing? and was ever any 
thing so mal a propos f and what should 
he do ? for not for the world would he 
have their acquaintance discovered here, 
or the imposition he had practised on her 
detected ; and in short, he saw no other 
plan for him to pursue, by which to ex- 
tricate himself from the dilemma in which 
he felt himself, than to disengage liimself 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 277 

from Donaghue, and as soon as he had 
done so, quit the place, leaving a message 
for him, that it was owing to sudden in- 
disposition. 

Accordingly, as Donaghue was making 
his way to join the party from the Vale, 
he drew away his arm from him, pretend- 
ing he missed one of his gloves, and tell- 
ing him not to stop for him, abruptly 
quitted him ; but hardly had he done so, 
when, full plump, he encountered sir Wil- 
liam Erin. — " Well met, my dear fellow," 
cried the baronet, catching him by the 
arm, and whirling him about as he spoke ; 
" I have been on the look-out for you 
ever since I entered the room, to apprize 
you of an obligation you owe me." 

" I really owe you so many, my dear 
sir, for your kind attentions to me since I 
came here," said Melville, but rather in a 
languid tone, hardly able to conceal his 
vexation at this encounter; the baronet 
keeping firm hold of him by the arm. 

"Oh well, that is allowed," said sir Wil- 
liam, " but you will acknowledge this sur- 



278 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

passes them all, when you learn that it is, 
having secured for you the hand of the 
very prettiest creature in the room." 

" That certainly is one that can never 
be sufficiently acknowledged," replied 
Melville, trying to force a smile, but in a 
tone expressive of any thing but satisfac- 
tion, since, certainly, if the baronet's taste 
and his did not differ essentially, the very 
prettiest creature in the room was exactly 
the ver}^ person he most wished at that 
moment to avoid. 

"There! you may judge for yourself 
whether she is not," cried sir William, 
pointing out Lavinia to him, as, for a mo- 
ment, they were impeded in their approach 
to her; " that is my little Hebe, and I 
certainly do think she merits the name." 

Against what was to be, Melville saw 
it was useless to contend, and so suffered 
himself, without further resistance, to be 
led forward, hoping he should, by his looks, 
be able to render himself sufficiently in- 
telligible to Lavinia to prevent those iii- 
dications of surprise she must assuredly 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 279 

feel at the discovery that was now about 
taking place. 

What this surprise was may well be 
imagined ; no language, indeed, could 
portray her astonishment at finding Mr. 
Denny Scanlen, whom her pride made her 
continually reproach herself for having, 
in the slightest degree, noticed, metamor- 
phosed into the elegant, accomplished, 
fashionable Mr. Melville, the nephew and 
heir of sir James Melvillej and whom all 
the dashing belles of the place were vying 
with each other to attract. That it must 
have led to what Melville wished to pre- 
vent, there could be no doubt, but that at 
the very moment sir William was present- 
ing him to her, his attention was called 
away by a party that had come up to pay 
their compliments to lady and Miss Erin; 
and merely saying — " Miss Audley, this 
is the gentleman I wished to secure your 
hand for," he left them to themselves. 

" I do not wonder," whispered Melville, 
insinuating himself into a seat beside her, 
" at your look of surprise, but suspend 



280 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

your opinion of what appears extraordi- 
nary till I have a better opportunity of 
explaining the cause of it ; as soon as we 
stand up to dance, I shall be more explicit.** 

" Stand up to dance !" and Lavinia in- 
dignantly pushed him back with her el- 
bow ; no, indeed, there was an end of any 
further dancing or communication with 
him. If she could think of any further 
acquaintance with him, after the imposi- 
tion he had practised on her, she should 
conceive, to a certainty, that she was wil- 
fully exposing herself to still further de- 
ception from him, such as she now believ- 
ed him capable of; for to the most insidi- 
ous motives she imputed that which had 
been discovered ; there was no other way 
in which she could account for it, than by 
imputing it to some designs inimical to 
her peace and innocence ; and her pride 
and purity equally alarmed by the idea, 
she determined to let him see she was nei- 
ther directly or indirectly to be insulted 
with impunity. 

" Do not frown so terribly," said Mel- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 281 

ville, " it will excite curiosity ; have a lit- 
tle patience, and I shall be able to con- 
vince you, you have no reason to be angry 
or offended." 

" If my credulity was equal to your 
confidence, I might give credit to the as- 
sertion," replied Lavinia; "but as that 
does not happen to be the case, I shall not 
certainly put you to the necessity of rack- 
ing your invention : from this moment I 
must insist on it that you do not make 
any further attempt to intrude yourself on 
my notice ; should you do so, I shall feel 
myself reduced to the disagreeable neces- 
sity of explaining what I deem so affront- 
ing, as to wish, from a feeling of pride, to 
have concealed ; and as it is useless to ex- 
pect my dancing with you, if you have 
any wish to dance, do not let yourself be 
detained here another minute." 

She had all this time been speaking 
without looking at him ; and at this in- 
stant, sir Edward Surrey, who had for 
some time been gazing at her, as if she 
was a kind of wonder, approached. — "I 



282 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

presume, ma'am," he said, with what h^ 
certainly at least intended for one of his 
very best bows, " from seeing that gentle- 
man," glancing at Melville, " beside yon, 
it is useless to solicit the honour of your 
hand for the first set ; but for the second 

" Oh, by no means, sir," said Lavinia; 
" it so happens that for every set that will 
be danced this night I believe I am en- 
gaged, but for the very first, and that I 
shall have very great pleasure in dancing 
with you ;" immediately giving him her 
hand, and allowing him to lead her out to 
join the set that was now beginning to be 
formed. 

Poor Miss Bond, who had completely 
calculated on having the baronet for a 
partner, and had, in consequence, refused 
an overture or tv>^o that was made for her 
hand, was utterly unable to conceal her 
vexation at the disappointment she met 
with; expanding her little fan, she pro- 
tested, as she used it with some violence, 
it was very extraordinary, indeed, that 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 2B3 

Miss Audley had not given sir Edward 
time to explain that it was not for the first 
set he wanted to engage her. 

" Well, no matter," said Melville, who, 
with all his vexation, and vexed he cer- 
tainly was very much at what had hap- 
pened, from not knowing whether he real- 
ly should be able to vindicate himself in 
the opinion of Lavinia, of what it was 
evident to him she accused him of, was 
hardly able to refrain from laughing at 
the disconsolation she betrayed, " let me 
profit by the circumstance, by having your 
hand for this set." 

In a moment it was granted. Hardly 
had they taken their places in the set, 
which Melville contrived should be next 
to Lavinia, ere sir William joined them. 
— " Well, Miss Audley," he began — but 
whatever he was about saying to her was 
prevented by surprise at the change with 
regard to partners — " why how is this?" 
he said — " I thought, JNliss Audley, you 
had promised to dance with the gentle- 



284 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

man for whom I solicited the honour of 
your hand ?" 

" Yes, I believe I might, sir," said La- 
vinia, composedly, " but I changed my 
mind since I came into the room." 

" And pray may I take the liberty of 
inquiring why ?" 

" Because I liked dancing better with 
sir Edward Surrey than the gentleman 
you asked me for." 

" Hem !" said the baronet, coughing a 
little, " more blunt than polite this, it 
must be confessed. — Well, and, fair lady, 
pray are you always in the habit of doing 
what is most agreeable to yourself?" 

" Yes, when I can." 

" And do you," he hesitated a little, 
" think this is always the most eligible 
plan to be pursued ?" 

" I don't know — it is the pleasantest. — 
Yes, but what is pleasantest is not always 
the safest ; that is what I know you were 
going to say, sir," she said, laughing sau- 
cily in his face, as she turned away to join 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 285 

in the figure with the couple that were 
leading down. 

" So, so," thought sir William ; " I think 
there will be some little exercise for my 
friend here, if he takes this young lady in 
charge himself" Then crossing over to 
Melville — '* Why how is this, my friend ?" 
he cried ; " you do not seem to have play- 
ed your cards well with this Hebe of mine, 
that she gave you up for sir Edward." 

" So it seems, sir," said Melville. 

" Can you guess why it is she preferred 
sir Edward ? for of the two," and the ba- 
ronet laughed, " I should have conceived 
that you stood the best chance of pleasing 
her." 

" Thank you, sir," said Melville, in the 
same kind of tone, " for the flattering 
corapluTient; what a high one to allow 
me to think I could at all enter into com- 
petition with the baronet ! but as to your 
question, I really," a little evasively, " can- 
not answer it." 

" Only you are utter strangers to one 
another," said sir William, " I really should 



286 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

have conceived there was some kind of 
quarrel between you, that, in short, you 
had given her some kind of offence ; for, 
after all, I cannot think the bluntness with 
which she replied to my question about 
you natural to her. With all her apparent 
giddiness, there is an elegance and feminine 
delicacy about her that forbids the idea; 
besides, 1 thought I discerned, while speak- 
ing to me, something malicious lurking in 
that dimpling smile of hers/' 

" Oh ! I dare say you did," said Mel- 
ville, a little spitefully ; " it is not singu- 
lar for a flattered young beauty, I believe, 
to have pleasure in the idea of being able 
to give pain." 

" You allow then that she is a beauty ?" 
said sir William, as if he had only attend- 
ed to that part of the observation from 
which this inference was drawn. 

"Yes," but as if almost reluctantly, 
assented Melville, " I suppose I should be 
deemed singular if I did not." 

*' Why yes, I rather think you. would ; 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 287 

for, in my opinion, she is a sweet pretty 
creature, and then so playful." 

" Oh, yes, playful enough, I believe, 
and mischievous too, I fancy, might be 
added," said Melville, in an under tone. 

'* She's a kind of creature that one could 
hardly know, without feeling a high de- 
gree of interest about," resumed sir Wil- 
liam. 

Melville was very much inclined to be 
of the same opinion ; but not liking ex- 
actly to have this known, he affected care- 
lessness,- smiled, nodded, and looked about 
him, as if more engrossed by what was 
going on than what he was listening to ; 
then, but with rather a vacant air — " True, 
as you were saying, sir, it would indeed 
be impossible, at least for those acquaint- 
ed with her connexions ; and I — I — think," 
anxious to know a little more about her 
family than he yet did, " you said you 
were intimate with them ?" 

" Me! — Yes, very— that is with the 
friend who introduced her to us, and be- 
spoke our kindness for her. Yes, I am 



288 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

very intimate with him ; and on his ac- 
count both my family and I are most par- 
ticularly anxious to be of service to her 
on her introduction into life. — But if I 
keep you much longer abstracted in this 
way from Miss Bond, she will be telling 
me this was not the kind of politesse she 
was accustomed to when she was in Paris ; 
and besides, there's a whist-party waiting 
for me in the card-room ; so adieu for the 
present, and I hope, before the dance is 
over, you'll let the young lady see what a 
loss she has sustained, by not keeping her 
promise about you." 

The young lady, however, seemed de- 
termined to appear to regret nothing but 
that she had ever known the disgraced 
Melville. If, notwithstanding her studious 
avoidance of his glances, their eyes would 
perversely encounter, hers were always 
sure to be instantly turned away with a 
look of scorn ; in vain too was her hand 
sought in the evolutions of the dance; 
and in short, Melville began to be serious- 
ly alarmed. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 289 

While matters were going on in this 
way between them, Donaghue was anxi- 
ously watching the attentions of lord Al- 
tidore to Eveleen, who opened the ball 
with him, he and major Mackenzie being 
stewards. Young MilUcent was Dona- 
ghue's partner, to the utter rage and dis- 
appointment of lady Jane, who, being de- 
termined on making what may be called 
a dead set at him this night, had refused 
several solicitations, previous to his enter- 
ing the ball-room, for her hand, and 
amongst others, one from Lawless, under 
the pretext of being engaged ; so that, on 
being defeated in her plan of obtaining 
him for a partner, she was obliged to sit 
still, with every probability of being obli- 
ged to do so for the remainder of the 
evening, from the offence she saw her con- 
duct had given, it being now discovered 
that her rejection of so many partners was 
owing to her reserving herself for some 
particular person, contrary to the esta- 
blished rules of assemblies. But it was not 

VOL. in. o 



290 TRADITION OF THE Cx\STLE. 

entirely on this account slie was so exas- 
perated by his conduct, though it was 
quite sufficient to provoke her witli it, to 
think it might be the means of making 
her appear neglected, a thing hardly en- 
durable to her, from her wish to be thought 
the object of general attention every where. 
Should Donaghue persevere much longer 
in acting in this manner, she thought it 
hardly possible but that lady Erin must 
become undeceived, with regard to him; 
and what a deathblow might not this be 
to every future hope ! Slie had been on 
the watch for him from the moment she 
entered the room, and the instant she saw 
him approaching, she started up, and 
whispering to lady Erin that she had re- 
ceived a written entreaty that morning to 
make it up with him this evening, seized 
his arm, and ere he was well allowed to 
pay his compliments to the party, whirled 
him from them. — " I have been so anxi- 
ously expecting you, Donaghue," she said, 
as she forced him to parade her down 
the room, " being disappointed of seeing 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 291 

you yesterday, and not knowing but that 
I might be equally so when you next 

called — and I really wanted to — to " 

(she was for a moment at a loss to say 
what) — " to scold you," she then suddenly 
added, " for those abominable complaints 
you are continually making of me to lady 
Erin, getting me, in consequence, such 
long sermonizing lectures from her." 

" I make complaints of you to lady 
Erin !" said Donaghue ; " surely, my dear 
lady Jane, you must have been dreaming 
to think so ; for I cannot imagine her 
ladyship could possibly assert what was 
not the case." 

" No, 1 don't positively say she asserted 
it, but then from her continual lectures " 

" On what score could I possibly com- 
plain of you?" resumed Donaghue. " Com- 
plaint implies some right of interference, 
or sense of injury, and I neither pretend 
to one, nor suffer under the other; and 
should, in short, conceive myself guilty of 
a very unwarrantable liberty if I could 
o 2 



292 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

presume to mention your name in the 
manner you have insinuated to lady Erin." 

" Donaghue, how can you talk in this 
way ?" cried her ladyship — " how perse-* 
vere in still trying to deceive yourself and 
me ? Do you think I don't know, not- 
withstanding all this loftiness of language, 
that you still feel as if I had once wronged 
you, and that to this is owing all your va- 
riations of conduct towards me, and the 
jealousy and resentment with which you 
behold the slightest appearance of encou- 
ragement from me to the particularity of 
any other person — a jealousy and envy so 
apparent, as certainly to appear like indi- 
rect complaints, at least to an}' one who 
notices them, amongst which number is 
lady Erin?" 

Donaghue only replied to this speech 
by a smile of derision ; he would not allow 
her to suppose he deemed it worthy of any 
other reply ; and to make her still more 
perfectly comprehend the feeling inspired 
by this attempt to persuade him out of 
his senses, immediately proceeded to re- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 293 

mark, that dancing would now soon com- 
mence, as the gentlemen had begun draw- 
ing for places. 

" Well, no matter," said her ladyship, 
hardly able to control her rage at this cool 
contemptuous indifference, for so she con- 
strued it, *' you are not very anxious about 
yours, I suppose ; so there's no occasion 
to be in a hurry to rejoin the party." 

" Pardon me," said Donaghue, impa- 
tient to avail himself of the pretext he 
had for disengaging himself from her, " I 
should consider it a bad compliment to 
any lady who might honour me with her 
band, if I did not feel a little anxious about 
the place I had secured for her in the set." 

" Oh, well," and under the flattering 
persuasion that his expressing himself in 
this way was an indirect intimation of his 
considering that they were to be partners 
for the first set, lady Jane was beginning 
to declare, that so she liked her partner, 
she cared very little, except on certain oc- 
casions, when there was any thing of arro- 
gant pretensions, what place she occupied 



294 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

in a set, when Donaghue, having led her 
back to her seat, withdrew his arm, and 
directly turning to Millicent, asked her 
hand. 

The feelings that at this instant perva- 
ded the soul of lady Jane were almost be- 
yond suppression ; and lady Erin's whis- 
pering her, as she conceived, with a sneer, 
though in conceiving so she certainly did 
her injustice, did not assuredly tend to 
allay them. 

Whatever were the resolutions of Dona- 
ghue, with regard to the avoidance of any^ 
particularity to Miss Erin, he certainly 
had not the fortitude to retain them, when, 
at the conclusion of the first set, he found 
himself seated beside her, without any one 
to interfere in their conversation but Mil- 
hcent, sir William and lady Erin being 
engaged in the card- room, the rest of the 
party scattered, and lord Altidore obliged, 
by his duties as a steward, to leave her 
soon after conducting her to her seat. 

How long was it since he had had an 
opportunity of gazing on her — of conver- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 295 

sing with her without restraint ! but what 
happiness, what pleasure could he derive 
from this, when he dared not profit by it ? 
As if to heighten the feelings this reflec- 
tion inspired, the place, the scene, revived 
the recollection of the folly to which all 
this misery was owing; for in this very 
room how slightingly had he once treated 
her, from the ungenerous belief that he 
might trifle as he pleased with her feel- 
ings with impunity ! The deep, deep sigh 
that unconsciously escaped him, at the 
moment, seemed to startle Miss Erin. 
She turned with quickness towards him 
from Millicent, to whom she was speak- 
ing at the moment; and Donaghue co- 
loured like scarlet at her look of mingled 
alarm and inquiry. — " This — this room," 
he said, as if replying to it, " is so — so 
warm," affecting, as he spoke, in extreme 
confusion, to rub back his hair from his 
temple. 

" If you find it oppressive, had you not 
better repair to the card-room ?" said ]\Iiss 



296 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Erin. " Go, and see how Fortune is fa- 
vouring my mother." 

" No," replied Donaghue, in a melan- 
choly tone, and with a look that perfectly 
assimilated to it, " she has for an instant 
favoured me, and I will not slight her 
kindness." 

" Certainly not ; you would be wrong 
if you did," said Miss Erin, laughingly, as 
if treating what he had said as the indi- 
rect compliment of common-place gallan- 
try. " But is not our assembly here very 
brilliant to-night? The assemblage here 
gives encouragement to the plan of hav- 
ing subscription balls more immediately 
in our neighbourhood than these the en- 
suing winter, and which you must hold 
yourself in readiness to be called upon to 
patronize." 

" Nothing could afford me greater plea- 
sure," replied Donaghue, " than to concur 
in any plan or scheme that could promote 
sociability ; but Heaven knows before next 
winter where I shall be !" 

" Be !" repeated Miss Erin. " Why," 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 297 

in a tone of earnestness, "you are not 
going to leave Altoir-na-Grenie ?" 

" I should have done so before this, but 
that I rather wished not till the return of 
general O'Donaghue from abroad ; but as 
that now appears very uncertain, I cer- 
tainly shall not pass another winter at it, 
as I really have not courage to endure for 
another its lonely horrors." 

There was some slight indication of 
emotion in the manner of Miss Erin ; she 
paused for a minute, and seemed thought- 
ful ; then, again addressing him — " But are 
you not rather to blame yourself," she 
said, but rather hesitatingly, " for finding 
it so lonely? There's a pleasant neigh- 
bourhood." 

" There is," said Donaghue ; " but can 
you not well imagine, that tlie sight and 
enjoyment of domestic happiness abroad, 
must render a solitary home still more 
dismal?" 

Miss Erin was again silent for an in- 
stant. — " Yes, I believe I can," she then 
o3 



298 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

said ; " but — but — '* and her accent again 
became a little hesitating, " might not 
yours," half glancing at him, " be very 
different from a solitary home, if you 
pleased yourself? If — if — you would but 

forgive what was " 

Donaghue cast up his eyes impatiently ; 
he could not permit her to proceed — 
" Pardon me for interrupting you," he 
said, " but I cannot check my emotion, 
when I hear myself still suspected of 
what I have so peremptorily denied. I 
perfectly comprehend your allusion, but, 
beheve me, it is all a mistake, what is ima- 
gined of my ever having been attached to 
lady Jane, and that to anger and resent- 
ment is owing my not now acknowledg- 
ing that attachment. I conceive it due to 
her, as well as myself, to declare this, lest 
the continuance of the error respecting us 
should be the means of preventing a hap- 
py alliance elsewhere. How could I pos- 
sibly feel anger or resentment at what, to 
me, was a matter of total unconcern ? and 
with the conviction on my mind I have. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 299 

that I can never experience any particular 
interest about her, I should conceive my- 
self the most despicable of human beings, 
indeed, if I could possibly lay myself out 
to win her regard." Donaghue expressed 
himself with as much delicacy as he could 
about her ladyship — " Do not — do not, 
therefore," he added ; and as her hand lay 
temptingly in his way, his ventured to 
touch it, to give greater emphasis, perhaps, 
to his words — " do not, after this, wound 
my — vex me, by letting me imagine you 
still discredit me; but surely — surely — '* 
with an emotion that was not controllable, 
" you are the last being on earth who 
should have believed what has been insi- 
nuated — you, who " 

" Me !" cried jMiss Erin ; " and pray " 



but her deep blush, at the instant, she felt 
but too conscious had betrayed her per- 
fect comprehension of his meaning to per- 
mit her to finish the question. 

" Yes, you," said Donaghue, as if he 
had heard it, transported out of himself by 
the soft confusion of her looks—" you T 



300 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

again gently seizing her hand, in one mo« 
ment of emotion forgetting all the re- 
solves of pride and romantic generosity, 
and a hundred other absurd notions, as 
perhaps they might be termed ; and from 
the agitation of the lady, and the impas- 
sioned feelings of the gentleman, there is 
no knowing what eclaircissement might 
have ensued, had not, at this very critical 
moment, a young lady run across the 
room, to speak to Miss Erin. 

Donaghue, as she hastily withdrew her 
hand from him, turned away his head, to 
conceal his vexation at this interruption, 
and the next instant, without Miss Erin 
having an idea of what the occasion of it 
could be, her attention at the moment be- 
ing occupied by the young lady who had 
come up to her, he started from her side, 
and rushed towards the tea-room. 

Lady Jane, on finding herself compel- 
led to sit the first set, in order to prevent 
the mortifying circumstance as much as 
possible from being remarked, retired to 
this room, the entrance to which was 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 301 

nearly close to the seat now occupied by- 
Miss Erin, and just within which she pla- 
ced herself, for the purpose of seeing all 
that was passing without. Keenly watch- 
ful of every movement of Donaghue and 
Miss Erin, she no sooner saw they were, 
as it might be said, left to themselves, 
than she maliciously determined on in- 
stantly joining them; this determination, 
however, was prevented by her admirer, 
Lawless, as great a coxcomb as ever figured 
on the pave in Bond-street, and who hav- 
ing followed her from London on a spe- 
culating plan, was excessively enraged by 
her equivocal, or, as he termed it, jilting 
conduct towards him. 

Quite as watchful of her as she was of 
Donaghue, on seeing her enter the tea- 
room, he also took his station there, but 
without deigning to seem to notice her, 
so much was he offended by her refusing 
to dance with him, from her expectation of 
being asked by Donaghue, as it was now 
evident was the case, till he saw her rising 
to quit it, when, aware of her motive for 



30S TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

doing so, he rushed forward, and placed 
himself in the doorway in such a manner 
as to prevent her passing. 

" Pshaw [ what folly is this ?" she cried. 
" Really you are vastly disagreeable to- 
night. Lawless. Stand aside, I desire, 
and let me pass !" 

" No, I am too good-natured for that — 
it would only be to let you spoil sport to 
do so ; and if you had that regard for the 
gentleman you profess, or at least evince, 
you certainly would not endeavour to 
prevent his trying his chance with the 
heiress, now that the old fox that watches 
her is out of the way." 

In expressing himself in this manner, 
Mr. Lawless was not exactly aware there 
was any one but lady Jane to hear him, 
or he probably would have been a little 
more cautious in his language. It happen- 
ed, however, that Melville was at his 
elbow at the very moment, deliberating 
whether or not he should address himself 
any more to Lavinia that evening, and 
his rage at what he overheard — the inso- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 30S 

lence of the allusion to Donaghue, was so 
great, that nothing but prudential consi- 
derations — the injury it might be to Dona- 
ghue, to make him the subject of a quar- 
rel, could have induced the suppression 
of it. 

Not to give way in some degree, how- 
ever, to his indignation, was utterly im- 
possible ; and he accordingly made the 
impertinence of Lawless to lady Jane the 
pretext. — " Why don't you stand out of 
the way, sir," said he, " when her lady- 
ship wishes to pass?" 

" Sir !" cried the other, somewhat start- 
led, however, at finding he had been so 
near him all this time, but trying to con- 
ceal this under a tone of bravado. 

" I say, sir, how can you possibly have 
the insolence to obstruct any one's passage 
from one room to another? Your con- 
duct is excessively indecorous ; and if you 
don't immediately remove yourself, I shall 
take the liberty of doing so !" 

" Upon my soul !" with a laugh, but 
evidently a forced one, " that is very good. 



304 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

as if I would permit; but, to be sure, 
there's nothing like " 

" Keeping one's word," said Melville, 
catching him by the arm as he spoke, and 
dragging him from the door. 

The rage of the other, at so utter a dis- 
comfiture before lady Jane, was so great, 
that, transported beyond all considerations 
of prudence, he was in th^ act of paying 
Melville for his hasty ejectment of him 
from the doorway by a blow, when Dona- 
ghue, whose eye was attracted towards 
the spot at the instant, rushed forward to 
prevent him, by seizing his arm, just at 
the moment that Miss Erin's attention 
being called away from him, she was 
startled by seeing him dart off in such a 
manner. 

All was now tumult; lady Jane scream- 
ed ; Lawless, finding there was some one 
to interfere, affected to bluster, and every 
one came crowding to the spot; while 
Miss Erin, terrified beyond expression, 
tremblingly demanded what the matter 
was? 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 305 

** Oh, I — I," cried lady Jane, purposely- 
making her way to her, determined on 
trying whether she could not make some- 
thing of this incident — " I am the unfor- 
tunate cause of all this !" 

" You !" said Miss Erin, perhaps wil- 
fully wishing not to understand her. 

" Yes, I indeed," and affecting to trem- 
ble as if she required support, she passed 
her arm under the really trembling Eve- 
leen's. " But I guessed how it would be; 
I guessed the evening would hardly pass 
over without a burst between these hot- 
headed creatures." 

"What hot-headed creatures?" asked 
Eveleen. 

" My dear, how can you pretend igno- 
rance—I beg pardon — not instantly to 
guess who I mean? — Donaghue, to be 
sure, and Lawless. Yet I certainly have 
not been to blame, as I did all I could to 
keep peace between them, by refusing to 
dance with either, lest the other should 
be jealous, and so lost the first set entire- 
ly ; but, as I dreaded, all wouldn't do— » 



S06 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Donagbiie is of SO terribly jealous a tem- 
per. Didn't you see how he was watch- 
ing me ail the time he was conversing 
with you-^— that his eyes were continually 
in the direction of the tea-room, because 
he saw Lawless had stationed himself near 
the seat I had taken — just taken within 
the door ?" 

** No, I cannot exactly say I did per- 
ceive his eyes continually in that direc- 
tion," replied Miss Erin, turning upon her 
such a look of involuntary keen scrutiny 
as, notwithstanding all her effrontery, made 
her blush — a circumstance, however, that 
could do her no injury, as it could not be 
perceived. 

" Indeed! Oh, well, that was because 
you were not always minding him ; but 
you see, the moment your being engaged 
wdth another person gave him an oppor- 
tunity for interrupting me and Lawless, 
as he conceived, he embraced it ; and, Hea- 
vens ! like an enraged tiger positively he 
came down upon the poor fellow. — But 
how you tremble, my dearl Really, I 



TRADITION OP THE CASTLE. 307 

believe my tremour has been contagious," 
and she begged some of the company, that 
impeded them, to make way, and getting 
Eveleen to a window, she presently re- 
covered iierself. 

She had felt a shock indeed, but it was 
but momentary — that shock which a mind 
of integrity cannot help feeling, if it con- 
ceives itself wilfully imposed upon by a 
person whom it wishes to be allowed still 
to esteem. She could not believe it pos- 
sible, that Donaghue could be guilty of 
the deliberate insincerity of which she 
must accuse him, if she gave credit to this 
statement of lady Jane, or of ungene- 
rously seeking to revive former senti- 
ments, as certainly had appeared to be the 
case, for the mere purpose of making her 
instrumental to revenging the perfidy of 
another ; and in proportion as she acquit- 
ted him, she felt dislike to the person who 
had surprised her into a transient injustice 
towards him. 

Her looks were too intelligent not to 
let lady Jane, keenly penetrating as she 



308 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was, discover the distrust she had excited, 
and how to overcome it became now her 
object, since, if there was an end to any- 
further belief of Donaghue's entanglement 
with her, she feared there was an end to 
any further hopes of preventing the union 
she had made so many exertions, or rather 
had had recourse to many artifices to try 
and hinder, from the explanations that, in 
that case, it was too probable would take 
place. 

Whilst revolving the matter, Donaghue 
was in no little agitation, from the answer 
he had heard her give to Miss Erin's in- 
quiry, well aware of the invidious infe- 
rence to be drawn from it. 

The matter about Lawless was brought 
to a speedy issue. Lord Altidore, as one 
of the stewards, came forward, and insisted 
on his either apologizing to the parties he 
had offended, and the company in general, 
for the indecorum of which he had been 
guilty, or instantly withdrawing; and 
Lawless, not sorry to have a plausible 
pretext for making that apology to Mel? 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. S09 

ville, without which he rather argued dis- 
agreeable consequences to himself, very 
readily permitted himself to be prevailed 
on to do what was required. 

The moment the bustle attendant on 
this Jracas had subsided, Donaghue went 
to seek Miss Erin. The room Vvas ex- 
tremely crowded, so much so, as to pre- 
vent his directly seeing from one part to 
another ; and while he was looking about 
him, near the tea-room, to try if he could 
catch a glimpse of her, lady Jane approach- 
ed, with one of the Miss Magennises, for 
whom she had purposely left Miss Erin, 
in order that she might be at liberty to 
watch for him. She no sooner saw him, 
than withdrawing her arm from her com- 
panion, she darted to him, and catching 
hold of him — " So this silly affair is over !" 
she cried. " Really Lawless's conduct 
has been quite preposterous ; and then so 
very provoking, from the errors and mis- 
takes 1 dare say it will be the means of 
occasioning. I had the greatest difficulty 
in the world, in trying to make But 



310 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

we are in the way," and she drew him 
back towards the entrance of the tea-room, 
which was now quite vacated, "in making 
Miss Erin believe that you were not con- 
cerned in the quarrel ; and from explaining 
who was, and all about it, I suppose, be- 
fore to-morrow, your friend Melville will 
have the honour of being set down as one 
of my admirers." 

" And you really did explain how it 
was to Miss Erin?" said Donaghue, look- 
ing earnestly at her. 

" To be sure I did. I am sure you 
must have overheard my telling her I 
was the cause of it, and I naturally ex- 
plained how much I was indebted to Mel- 
ville for making that puppy Lawless re- 
gret his insolence. But 1 see you are im- 
patient to be gone, as dancing will soon 
be recommencing; and I am in a huiTy 
indeed myself to go to the card-room, 
where there is a loo-party waiting for me, 
as I shan't dance to-night; so here, take 
my hand, let what passed in the early 
part of the evening be forgotten, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 311 

give me the pleasure of thinking that — 
that as a friend I may at least consider 
you !" 

" Most assuredly, most decidedly," cried 
Donaghue, in the generous warmth of his 
heart, affected by the well-counterfeited 
emotion she betrayed at the instant, and 
delighted to think that no injury had been 
done him with Miss Erin, and eagerly 
taking her offered hand as he spoke, he 
was in the very act of raising it to his lips, 
with a look that might well have been ta- 
ken for one of real tenderness, when his 
eyes encountered Miss Erin's full upon 
him. He started, and with a feeling of 
indescribable confusion, let drop the hand 
of lady Jane. 

Miss Erin smiled superciHously, and, 
with a slight nod to lady Jane, passed on 
with her party. 

Alarmed by this smile, Donaghue turn- 
ed to lady Jane, and in her countenance, 
at the moment, read such an expression of 
malicious triumph, as left him no room to 
doubt his agitation being the result of 



312 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

treachery on her side. Nor was he mis- 
taken in the persuasion; she had been 
aware, all along, from the direction in 
which she stood, of the approach of Miss 
Erin; and to her perceiving that her 
eyes were upon them, was owing her hav- 
ing made the effort she had done to draw 
him into some appearance of tenderness 
towards her. 

Incensed, disgusted, Donaghue quitted 
her, without another moment's delay, and 
w^as involuntarily hastening after Miss 
Erin, when he encountered Millicent and 
Miss Bond. She took his arm, and in her 
way proceeded to detail the whole of what 
lady Jane had told her cousin of his jea- 
lousy being the cause of the recenty/^aca^ ; 
and, from her detail, Donaghue at once 
saw what the plan of lady Jane was, in 
betraying him into the appearance of at- 
tachment she had just done ; he feared 
its success ; from the manner in which she 
had managed, it certainly would seem as 
if she had been sought for the purpose of 
a reconciliation taking place between them, 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE, 313 

and he could have gnashed his teeth in 
downright exasperation of spirit, at the 
idea of being her dupe. But could he ob- 
tain an opportunity of conversing with 
Eveleen again before the evening was 
over, she might be defeated ; and under 
this hope, he now hurried forward his fair 
companions to join her. On coming up 
with her — " I almost fear," said Donaghue, 
" I am too iate for this set; but if, for the 
one after, you are disengaged, may I en- 
treat " 

" I am engaged not only for this set, 
but for as many after as, I beheve, will be 
danced this evening, or, at least, as I con- 
ceive will be agreeable to me to dance," 
she replied, abruptly interrupting him, and 
slightly bowing, passed on. 

Donaghue resigned the arm of Milli- 
cent, who immediately followed her cousin, 
and, in utter disconsolation, then turned 
away. 

The artifices of lady Jane, it was, now 
too evident, had prevailed, and in succeed- 

VOL. III. p 



314 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ing in them, she had succeeded in render- 
ing him an object of derision and contempt 
to Eveleen, through silly spleen and jea- 
lousy, denying what the next moment he 
was ridiculously anxious to proclaim. The 
idea was not endurable, yet endure it he 
must, for he now saw no way of vindica- 
ting himself from the imputation he had 
incurred but by quitting the neighbour- 
hood, and on this he determined ; but at 
what a moment to do so, when Eveleen 
had appeared relenting towards him, from 
a persuasion on her mind, perhaps, that if 
it were as he had represented, matters 
might yet, possibly through the interfer- 
ence of her mother, be brought to a happy 
issue between them ! 

Dancing recommenced, but he neither 
heard the music nor saw the dancers, and, 
in short, was so completely lost at the mo- 
ment as he walked down the room, that he 
did not perceive Melville till he caught 
him by the arm. — " What, so triste /" he 
said ; *' why you look like the knight of 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 315 

the rueful countenance, Donaghue ! what 
the deuce is the matter ?" 

" I do not know ; what should you sup- 
pose the matter?" replied Donaghue, a 
little impatiently. 

" Oh, this love— this love !" said Mel- 
ville, laughing, though certainly not with- 
out being a little internally vexed himself 
at the moment. " Upon my soul, I am 
beginning to think it was no bad plan that 
of some monks I read of in this isle of 
ours, in former times, forbidding the ap- 
proach of any woman to their sacred pre- 
cincts ! for, assuredly, if she is the source 
of all that is divine in our joys, she is also 
the cause of all that is tormenting in our 
sorrows. But come, what really has hap- 
pened to discompose you in this manner ? 
confess, for who knows but your inquie- 
tude may meet with greater sympathy 
than you are aware of?" And, in short, 
he could no longer refrain from communi- 
cating to him the affair about Lavinia. 

With all his vexation, Donaghue could 
p 2 



316 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

not help laughing as he listened to him ; 
but though involuntarily diverted by it, 
this did not prevent his commenting on 
the imprudence of it, aware, as Melville 
must be, of the consequences that might 
result from disobliging his uncle, and which 
nothing seemed more likely to occasion 
his doing than forming an attachment 
without his sanction. 

" Come, come," said Melville, a little 
vexedly, at length interrupting him, " have 
done with this sermonizing, which only 
goes to prove how deucedly wise we are 
when we come to consider the affairs of 
others." 

" Thank you for the inference," said Do- 
naghue, laughing ; "but supposing it be 
as you have intimated, it is not so wonder- 
ful after all, since in considering the affairs 
of others, we have not those feelings of 
passion and prejudice to blind and pervert 
our judgments, that is too often the case 
when our own are under review." 

" Very well explained indeed," said 
Melville, "the cause of our being so much 



THADITION OF THE CASTLE. 317 

wiser with regard to others than ourselves, 
and a very appropriate scene this for dis- 
cussionand argument; but "and touch- 
ing his arm, JDonaghue perceived JMiss 
Erin and her party approaching, the se- 
cond set being just concluded. A slight 
bow was the only mark of recognition as 
she passed, and even this Melville could 
not obtain from Lavinia, whose conduct 
had disconcerted him so much as to pre- 
vent his dancing the second set. He had 
almost decided upon making no further 
attempt to converse with her that even- 
ing, but on seeing her pass, he could not 
resist withdrawing his arm from Donaghue 
to follow her. Lavinia perceiving this, 
not without a little secret exultation per- 
haps, immediately affected to be most bu- 
sily engaged in conversing with ^liss 
Bond, on whose arm she was leaning, se- 
parated from Miss Erin by the gentleman 
with whom Miss Erin had been dancin^r. 
— " And so," she cried to Miss Bond, who 
had forgiven her the supposed mistake that 
robbed her of sir Edward for the first set, 



318 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

on perceiving that she evinced no anxiety- 
whatever to monopolize him — " so all this 
recent /ram.9 was about that painted thing!" 

" Painted thing !" repeated Miss Bond, 
with great earnestness — " painted thing ! 
Yes, to be sure, lady Jane paints ; but, 
when I was in Paris, every body painted, 
and nobody thought any thing of it ; I be- 
gan to rouge myself while I was there, but 
grandmamma made me give it up when I 
came home." 

" She was quite right," said Lavinia ; 
" it will be time enough for you to rouge 
forty or fifty years hence, when you want 
to look young." 

" But lady Jane is young." 

" Yes, but not so young, I suppose, as 
she wishes to look." 

" And very handsome," resumed Miss 
Bond, " at least the gentlemen think 
her so; but, for my part, were she seven 
times handsomer than she is, I couldn't 
like her, she is so cross and disobliging at 
times. Why the other night, at Mr. 
O'Connor's — where, by-the-bye, I quite 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 319 

wished to have been introduced to you, 
and that pretty girl that was with you, 
you both took my fancy so much — if I had 
died for it, she would not wait to let me 
have one dance, though she knows I am so 
passionately fond of dancing, and had put 
on one of my Paris dancing dresses for 
the very purpose. I declare I cried with 
vexation, both then and afterwards, when 
I heard what a pleasant dance there was 
there." 

" Who told you that ?" demanded La- 
vinia. 

" Who told me ! I protest I don't re- 
collect ; but some one I know did." 

" Then I assure you they told you what 
was not correct, at least I thought nothing- 
could be more disagreeable, for, not to ap- 
pear too fastidious, I consented to go down 
one dance, and I got such a lout of a 
partner — ^ — " 

Here Melville, who had kept close be- 
hind them, as she was indeed aware of, 
coughed. 

" Bless me, Mr. Melville !" exclaimed 



320 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

Miss Bond, " I did not know you were sa 
near us ; and now I think on it, as I sup- 
pose you have heard what we have been 
saying, there was a young man at the en- 
tertainment we were speaking of, that you 
have ever since very much put me in 
mind of, the only difference between you 
was his eyebrows being very black and 
somewhat bushy," as was the case indeed, 
when she observed him, but not exactly 
so when Lavinia did, the black about 
them being, by degrees, carelessly brushed 
away. 

" Ah, that was my partner ?* said La- 
vinia; " and yet," half turning round, and 
casting an affectedly careless glance at 
Melville, " I think there was a great like- 
ness between the fright I danced with and 
this gentleman." 

"Thank you for the compliment, ma'am !" 
said Melville, with a profound bow ; " let 
no one who has heard it wonder, after this, 
if I should be vain." 

Miss Bond laughed immoderately, nor 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 321 

could Lavinia, with all her efforts to pre 
vent herself, help joining in her mirth. 

Encouraged by this, Melville made a 
gentle effort to insinuate himself between 
them, and make each take an arm. Miss 
Bond most readily acquiesced in the plan, 
but on his attempting to make her com- 
panion, Lavinia darted round to the other 
side. 

" Don't you like him ?" asked Miss 
Bond, in a low tone, as Lavinia took her 
other arm. 

" Like him !" repeated Lavinia, colour- 
ing, and stammering at the question — 
" no ! why ? what makes you ask ?" 

" Why, because your saying what you 
just did, and your not accepting his arm, 
makes me think you don't ; and yet that 
seems so odd to me, as, I assure you, he is 
reckoned amongst our very handsomest 
and most elegant beaux here." 

" Indeed!" said Lavinia, composedly, 
perceiving he was attentively listening; 
" well, really I should hardly have thought 
p3 



322 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

that ; but some people have very singular 
tastes." 

Melville now suddenly thought what a 
little alarming Lavinia might effect; he 
clearly saw, with all her appearance of 
anger and disdain, that she was gratified 
by his following her about in this manner, 
and he suddenly decided on altering his 
conduct; accordingly, ere they had pro- 
ceeded many steps further, he begged 
Miss Bond to excuse his leaving her, and, 
with his usual bow to her, and as distant 
a one as he could possibly make to La- 
vinia, he turned away with an air of per- 
fect carelessness, and rejoined Donaghue, 
whom he found, by this time, anxious to 
depart, the disturbance of his mind ren- 
dering it impossible for him to derive any 
further entertainment from the scene. 

Melville, however he might have liked 
to linger a little longer in the room, made 
no objection, conceiving his positively 
quitting it might be a means of furthering 
his plan about I^vinia. The only thing 
that seemed likely to prevent their imme- 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 323 

diately withdrawing, was the apprehended 
disinclination of Rosebud, who had ac- 
companied them, to give up cards so soon. 
On repairing, however, to the card-room, 
to apprize him of their wish, they found 
him quite as ready to be gone as they 
were, owing to an excessive run of bad 
luck, which always completely disconcert- 
ed him. 

Donaghue remained in so unhappy a 
state of mind, that on his companions 
quitting him for the night, he repaired to 
the library, instead of following their ex- 
ample, by retiring to his chamber. He 
took up a book, but quickly threw it 
aside, too unsettled to be able to read. He 
was mechanically pacing the apartment^ 
completely lost in revolving the embar- 
rassing predicament in which the artifices 
of lady Jane had placed him, when he 
perceived the door gently opening, and 
the dark visage of a man obtruding into 
the room. Donaghue darted to the door ; 
the man started back, and fled before him 



324 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

down the passage communicating with the 
chapel. 

Donaghue was rapidly pursuing him, 
when an unexpected interruption was put 
to his further pursuit, by the sudden ap- 
parition of the figure, in the dress of his 
kinsman Dennis, before him. Seeming to 
dilate itself in the passage to obstruct his 
proceeding, it motioned him back, with 
gestures indicative of the greatest anxiety 
to prevent his doing so. Donaghue be- 
came transfixed for a moment, partly thro* 
surprise, and partly from incertitude whe- 
ther or not these gestures were to be at- 
tended to, when the voice of Cormick, 
muttering to himself in broken sentences, 
as he came rushincr down the staircase that 
led into this passage, made him involun- 
tarily glance upwards, and when he turn- 
ed round again the figure was gone. 

Well, this was really most extraordinary ; 
and he was looking about him, with the 
vagueness of a person that hardly knew 
what to think, when the corporal, who, 
with his great horse-cloak about him, had 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 325 

nearly sprung down the whole of the last 
flight of stairs, on seeing him in the pas- 
sage, recalled him to himself, by his loud- 
ly demanding whether he had seen him ? 

"Seen who?" demanded Donaghue, yet 
a little struck by the question, from what 
had just occurred. 

" The ould gentleman, to be sure, in the 
yellow dress," replied the corporal ; " there 
is no one else but him that disturbs the 
castle." 

" No !" said Donaghue, affecting a care- 
lessness he did not exactly feel at the in- 
stant ; " I know not how that can be said, 
considering the extraordinary manner in 
which you appear to be acting yourself 
now, starting out of your bed, when it 
might be supposed you were quietly asleep, 

and but before we argue the point 

further, have the goodness to assist me in 
securing the door to the chapel, which I 
must beg you may be more particular 
about in future, as I have every reason to 
imagine your forgetting to fasten it to- 
night was near costing me my life ;" and 



326 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

he recounted what had happened — that is, 
his being surprised by the appearance of a 
man in the passage, but, of course, nothing 
about the gentleman in the yellow dress. 

Cormick, blessing himself, protested 
that this door was the one that, of all 
others, he was particular about in the 
castle, and that he could safely swear, by 
any saint, or all the saints, in the calendar, 
that he had, as usual, fastened it that night. 

" Then it must have been broke open," 
said Donaghue; a very slight examina- 
tion, however, sufficed to let them see that 
this had not been the case ; and, of course, 
from the consequent conviction of its hav- 
ing been opened on the inside, no doubt 
could remain of treachery of some kind 
having been practised. 

" Well," said Donaghue, on his return 
to the library, not a little curious to learn 
the circumstance to which it was owing, 
" let me know, now, the occasion of your 
strange question to me, Cormick, as to 
whether I had seen the old gentleman 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 327 

that, let him haunt what he will, certainly 
haunts your imagination ?" 

" Why, your honour, because if there 
be faith in the word of a sinner, I had a 
glimpse of him myself to-night ; and I am 
now certain, from what your honour has 
told me, that there is something keeping 
watch over you." 

" I should be very sorry indeed not to 
be certain of that myself," replied Dona- 
ghue ; " I hope, and firmly believe indeed, 
there is a good and merciful Providepce 
watching over us all — that keepeth watch 
about our bed, and about our paths, and," 
looking a little slyly at the corporal, 
" spieth out all our ways." 

" Yes, that I know, your honour, but 
that is not what I exactly meant by what 
I just said; I meant, that I am sure the 
spirit of your uncle Dennis troubles the 
castle on your account, and that my being 
roused out of my sleep to-night, since I 
find your honour was not in your cham- 
ber yourself to ring the bell in it, was for 



328 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

the purpose of having me come to your 
assistance." 

" Explain yourself," said Donaghue, 
certainly with some indication of anxiety, 
so curious appeared this declaration, from 
what he had himself seen. 

" Why I was fast asleep, your honour, 
when I was suddenly woke, as I was a 
few nights ago, by your honour's chamber 
bell," began the corporal. 

" That bell appears to be quite an ala- 
rum-bell to you, Cormick," observed Do- 
naghue ; " but proceed." 

" Well, your honour, I only waited to 
be certain I was not dreaming by hearing 
it again, to jump out of bed, when catch- 
ing up my cloak, as the readiest thing to 
throw over me, I opened the door, and 
was rushing out, when — holy St. Patrick 
save and defend us ! — there, as plain as I 
now see your honour, I saw the ghost of 
squire Dennis, in his beautiful rustling 
silk nightgown, gliding away from it; 
and, to be sure, I won't deny, that, at such 
a sight, I lost the power of moving, and 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 329 

might not, perhaps, have recovered myself 
yet, but that I suddenly bethought me 
there must be something amiss, or I never 
would have been summoned in such a 
manner; and right enough it now seems 
I was, in thinking so ; and after this, sure 
your honour cannot doubt the castle being 
troubled." 

" It would be odd if I did," said Dona- 
ghue, " with such a restless being as you 
in it. However, as I do certainly think 
there has been something extraordinary 
going on in it to-night, I conceive you 
may as well stretch yourself on the couch 
in my room." 

Cormick was not sorry at the proposal, 
as, after what had happened, he by no 
means relished the thought of going back 
to his own chamber. The object of Do- 
naghue in making it, was to have his as- 
sistance in securing his nocturnal visitant, 
in case he should make his appearance 
again that night, which, all circumstances 
considered, he deemed not unlikely. The 
absurd idea to which he had at first im- 



330 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

puted this, was now given up — to some- 
thing infinitely more serious than he had 
at first imagined, his apparently keeping 
haunting him, as he did, was now ascribed. 
It struck him, from all that had occurred, 
his giving the alarm to Cormick at the 
very moment that he, Donaghue, was sur- 
prised in the library, and then interposing 
to prevent his pursuit of the ruffian into 
the chapel, which, unarmed as he was, Do- 
naghue was now aware would have been 
highly imprudent, that he was a person ac- 
quainted with some scheme of villainy 
against him, and on the watch to prevent 
its being carried into effect. But as it was 
impossible he could always be on the alert 
for this purpose, Donaghue deemed it ab- 
solutely essential to endeavour to secure 
him, should he appear again, since he was 
evidently either afraid or disinclined (and 
the latter seemed to be the case, fi'om the 
manner in which he had tried to allure 
him from his chamber) to reveal what he 
knew, except in some secret place. 

Donaghue, having examined his pistols. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 331 

put on his nightgown, and merely threw 
himself on the bed, leaving a candle, as he 
had latterly been in the habit of doing, 
burning on a table at some little distance 
from it. The couch for the corporal he 
had placed immediately behind the closet- 
door, so that if his mysterious visitant 
should appear, and, as usual, advance into 
the chamber, he hoped, by having him 
stationed there, to have his retreat cut off. 
Of course, that no premature alarm should 
be given, he wished to enjoin the corporal 
to silence ; but in vain he attempted to do 
so; ghosts were an exhaustless topic to 
Cormick; and though Donaghue even 
pretended sleepiness, for the purpose of 
inducing him to be silent, after having re- 
peatedly ordered him, to no effect, to be 
so, he would continue to talk. — " Ah, 
then, your honour !" he suddenly cried, 
after a pause of some minutes, thus disap- 
pointing the hope Donaghue had been 
under of his having at last fallen asleep, 
" does your honour remember poor Ned 
Macguire, my comrade ?" 



332 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Yes," a little peevishly, replied Dona- 
ghue ; " but what, in the name of wonder, 
has put him, poor fellow ! into your head 
now ?" 

** Why, your honour, what we were 
talking about, speaking of ghosts, brought 
him to my mind, for there is a curious 
story about him and a ghost, the second 
rright of the battle of Waterloo ; but to 
make your honour understand it " 

" I don't want to understand it," said 
Donaghue ; " and I desire, Cormick, you 
will hold your tongue; you are really 
very troublesome to-night, continuing to 
talk in this manner, when I have so often 
told you to be silent." 

" Well, your honour, just let me tell 
you this story, and then I will go to sleep 
in earnest. As I was saying, to make the 
story of the ghost understood, I must in- 
form your honour that Ned had a weak 
side, as who, indeed, is without one, as 
father Murphy often tells us in his ser- 
mons, in order to make us charitable to 
the failings of one another — poor Ned's 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

was having a mighty soft heart towards 
the fair sex; and after falling in love 
Lord knows how often, he fell in love 
again in his own town of Kilkenny — and, 
to be sure, it is he that used to uphold it, 
boasting to his comrades how it is there 
you would see fire without smoke, water 
without mud, and streets paved with mar- 
ble — with a mighty pretty girl there by the 
name of Nelly Keron ; but somehow, with 
all his love, he did not like to marry just 
then, but when he was taking leave of 
her to join his regiment, he bound himself, 
by all the oaths he could think of, never 
to make any one his wife but her, and 
Nelly, in return, said, if he proved false, 
he might be sure of her making away 
with herself, and haunting him." 

" Hush !" cried Donaghue, raising him- 
self on his elbow — " I thought I heard a 
noise." 

" A noise !" repeated the corporal, after 
listening a moment — " tut, your honour! 
no ! or if you did, it was only the rats 
scratching behind this old tapestry. Well, 



834 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

to go on with my story, Ned swore to 
Nelly he would never marry any one but 
her, and, to be sure, being a poor, honest, 
well-intentioned fellow as ever lived, he 
would have kept his word, if nothing had 
tempted him to break it, but it so happen- 
ed, that, in the place where he was quar- 
tered in England, he met with another 
mighty pretty creature of a girl, one Sarah 
Broadhurst, and she drew him on, and on, 
till poor Nelly was almost forgotten ; when, 
how^ever, it came to the point of going 
away, he shewed himself inclined to serve 
her as he had done the other, but faith it 
is in England the girls won't take promises 
for payments, so Miss Sarah said, off or on 
at once — marry, or quit for ever ; and ra- 
ther than lose her, Ned suffered himself 
to be forsworn to poor Nelly." 

" Then there is an end of the story," 
said Donaghue ; " so now go to sleep." 

" An end ! why I have said nothing of 
the ghost yet. Well, as your honour is 
so sleepy, to make a short story of a long 
one, as the saying is, ill news flies apace. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 335 

SO Nelly was not long before she heard of 
what Ned had done, and no sooner did 
she hear it, than what did she do, but walk 
quietly and softly to the river at the foot 
of the castle and drown herself, leaving a 
letter for Ned, reproaching him for his 
perjury, and bidding him remember what 
she told him at parting ; and sure enough 
she kept her word with him, for on the 
second night of the battle of Waterloo, as 
he was talking to one of his comrades, as 
they were resting on their arms, of the 
dismal sights they had seen that day, the 
blood that was spilled, and how many 
-were now lying cold and stiff about them, 
that but the day before were as hearty as 
themselves, and not knowing but that, 
before the next night, it might be the case 
with themselves — as to be sure it was with 
poor Ned — there came up to him a figure 
in a white sheet, with a blue Ian thorn." 

" Have done with this nonsense, Cor- 
mick, I desire," said Donaghue, now out 
of all patience, " or I will positively turn 
you out of the room !" 



336 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

" Well, I have done, your honour," and 
he rolled himself up in his great cloak, 
and settled himself to sleep. 

Donaghue had neither wish nor incli- 
nation to follow his example : as he lay 
anxiously on the watch, he endeavoured 
to recollect whether he had ever given, 
even unintentionally, any cause for en- 
mity — of intentionally having done so he 
at once acquitted himself; but he could 
not recall the slightest circumstance to 
mind, that even of this could induce him 
to accuse himself; yet that enmity was 
entertained against him, he could not 
bring himself to doubt, from what had re- 
cently occurred ; and as he yielded to the 
conviction, the extraordinary circumstances 
that had taken place in Spain suddenly re- 
curring to his recollection, he could not 
help believing, from never hut there hav- 
ing had reason to imagine that he had a se- 
cret foe, that whoever was the occasion of 
what had befallen him there, was assuredly 
the contiver of whatever treachery was 
planned against him here. 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 337 

This persuasion did not tend, as may 
well be imagined, to lessen his anxiety for 
the discovery he hoped to make, could he 
succeed in securing his mysterious visi- 
tant. In his impatience for an opportunity 
of doing this, he persuaded himself al- 
most, at times, he heard noises ; but still 
he found he had deceived himself, and 
was at length beginning to give up all 
hopes of his appearance that night in his 
chamber, when suddenly, his eye being 
kept fixed on it, he beheld him stealing 
with the greatest caution from the closet. 
— " Hallo ! hallo, corporal !" he cried, in- 
stantly springing from the bed ; and the 
corporal, accustomed to sudden alarms, 
from the life he had led as a soldier, was 
in a moment on his feet ; but he only start- 
ed on them in time to catch a glimpse 
of the figure retreating into the closet, not 
in time, as Donaghue had hoped, to in- 
tercept it. 

** Has he tould your honour — has he 
tould you where his gould is hid ?" de- 

VOL. III. Q 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

manded Cormick, staring wildly at Dona- 
ghue. " I think myself there can be but 
very little doubt but its in the vault under- 
neath the prison, as the safest place ; but 
what signifies guessing, when, to be sure, 
he has tould you about it ?" 

" Who and what are you talking about ?" 
asked Donaghue, decided, by a minute's 
reflection, on not allowing Cormick to yet 
know what he actually thought, since the 
object for which he retained him in his 
chamber had not been accomplished, lest, 
through over anxiety and zeal about him, 
some premature alarm might be given, 
that might be the means of finally pre- 
venting; Avhat he wished. 

" Holy saints! The ghost of squire 
Dennis to be sure ! Hadn't I a glimpse of 
his yellow silk nightgown this instant, as 
he was vanishing away into the closet? 
and don't T know what he came for? don't 
I know that it was to get rest for himself, 
by discovering where his money is hid? 
and don't I know, besides, that it has al- 
ways been believed, by every one about 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 339 

here, that he would yet be the making of 
some one belonging to the castle, by yet 
telling them of it ? and if ever he meant 
to do a kindness, this is the time, when 
there has been so much wrong and rob- 
bery out of doors; and people are yet 
quite young and hearty, and able to spend 
what they get with comfort and satisfac- 
tion to themselves and their friends." 

" Take my advice, Cormick," said Dona- 
ghue, " and return to your couch, for your 
head really seems bewildered, and you 
look, besides, as white as a ghost yourself, 
this instant." For, notwithstanding the 
corporal's delight at the discovery he per- 
suaded himself had taken place, he could 
not help his nerves being a little affected 
by the extraordinary manner in which, as 
he conceived, it had been made. " I am 
ashamed to see a brave fellow, who stood 
undaunted at the whizzing of balls, and 
the flashing of sabres about his head, now 
shaking with fancies that would disgrace 
a nursery-maid." 

q2I 



340 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

"And I didn't see the ghost of squire 
Dennis," said the corporal, in a tone of 
disappointment, " nor hear him halloing 
to me to get up, and help you to dig for 
thegould?" 

" Just as much as you now see mine, 
or hear me telling you to pull down the 
castle ; so try to compose your spirits, by 
a little sleep ; and remember, I charge you, 
not to let any thing that has occurred to- 
night, on any account whatever, transpire, 
for reasons which I shall hereafter explain ; 
but the morning is now breaking, and as 
I really feel fatigued, I wish to get a little 
repose before the hour for rising." 

The first thing that Donaghue did, the 
next morning after breakfast, was to take 
a stroll amongst the cabins in the neigh- 
bourhood, to try whether he could make 
a discovery of any stranger having been 
lately seen in it ; but his inquiries, though 
made with the greatest caution, procured 
him no satisfaction ; and he was very much 
inclined to believe, that he must depend 



TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 341 

on his nocturnal visitant for the elucida- 
tion of what appeared so mysterious. 

This belief confirmed the resolution he 
had by this time formed, of no more ap- 
pearing to regard him with suspicion. 
Every matter considered, to do so any 
longer would, he conceived, be the height 
of egregious folly, since, if his purposes 
had been evil, in how different a manner 
would he assuredly have acted ! The great 
hazard he had incurred of his life, by the 
manner in which he had obtruded him- 
self on his notice, not only tended to con- 
vince Donaghue that there must be some- 
thing very important to communicate, 
but that he must be a person actuated by 
no common feelings of interest about him ; 
and finally he decided, against his next 
visit, for he made sure of seeing him again, 
on being prepared to follow him from his 
chamber, should he still seem determined 
on not making that the scene for reveal- 
ing any thing to him. 

His mind made up on this point, his 
thoughts gradually reverted to other mat- 



342 TRADITION OF THE CASTLE. 

ters, and impelled by anxiety and complai- 
sance, he at length ordered his curricle, 
and drove to the Vale by himself, both 
his companions having taken themselves 
off immediately after breakfast — the doc- 
tor to scold with lady Magennis, over his 
ill luck of the preceding night, and Mel- 
ville to see what might occur from a chance 
meeting with Lavinia. 



END OF VOL. III. 



Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London. 
