THE 



SECOND MARRIAGE; 



CONTINUED. 



VOL. II. 



CHAPTER V. 



Fair Hero is won ; — and his good will obtained, name 
the day of marriage ! 

Much ado about nothing. 

With two young lovers eager to be married, 
and a father and mother equally eager to hasten 
their hymeneals, there is little likelihood of de- 
lay. It was not much more than a week before 
Julia Trevelyan suffered herself to be persuaded 
into an opinion that nothing could have been 
more natural than Redwood^s conduct towards 
her; and as to the squire and his lady, their 
triumph was unconditional. Mrs. Trevelyan 
had the comfort of proving to Lady Wadman 
how groundless had been her inuendoes respect- 
ing her future son-in-law; and Mr. Trevelyan 
the joy of discovering that Sir Alan's estates 
were full six thousand a year more extensive 
b2 



4 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

than he had been led to believe. Instead of 
going into the family of Redwood as an heiress, 
the fair Julia of Trevelyan Park would scarcely 
take with her an equivalent for all the splen- 
dours and prosperity of her new condition. 

A day was appointed for the marriage about 
SIX weeks after the eclaircissement of the Hora- 
tian Villa, to give time for the return of a courier 
"from England, where the legal preliminaries 
were to be adjusted; and in the mean time, the 
bride and bridegroom elect had nothing to do 
but to play Romeo and Juliet, in all the luxury 
of an Italian spring, while old Capulet and his 
Lady stood afar off watching their proceedings, 
and congratulating each other that they had not 
allowed their precious pearl to remain closed 
up in the dull oysterbed of their Cornish 
estates. 

It has been already admitted that Miss Tre- 
velyan's eyes were the bluest, her tresses the 
most silken, her figure the most symmetrical, 
that imagination can picture. But Julia pos- 
sessed a personal charm beyond even these im- 
portant advantages. She had a countenance full 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 5 

of sensibility; a countenance the very mirror of 
her mind; a countenance over which the clouds 
and sunshine chased each other with the sportive 
variability of an autumnal sky; one minute, sum- 
mer seemed lingering there in utmost glory, — the 
next, there was a cloud, a dreariness, a dark- 
ness, quickly to be dispelled by a new dawn of 
the refulgent sunshine of perfect happiness. 
And yet she was not capricious. — The changes 
of the weatherglass were solely dependent on 
the atmosphere shed around it by the one all 
potent orb, influencing the ebb and flow of her 
heart's emotions; and it was already in Red- 
wood's power to overcast her sprightliest mood, 
or call up an April ray amid the utmost desola- 
tion of her tears. To repress this exquisite but 
fatal sensibility, Miss Wilmot had laboured hard 
in her vocation. It is true she made no boast 
on the subject to her employers; for she knew 
full well that Mrs. Trevelyan's alarms once ex- 
cited, she would do her best to tranquillize her 
daughter's nerves by worrying her into a fever; 
nor would the old gentleman have hesitated to 
apply half the contents of his medicine chest to 



6 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

the aggravation of the disorder. She contented 
herself with striving to fortify the mind of 
her pupil with principle and her heart with 
reason ; trusting she might outgrow an infirmity 
commonly classed among the diseases of youth. 
On retiring to her modest retreat at Devizes, the 
worthy woman even flattered herself that the 
danger was past; and knowing her pupil to be 
fenced round by the prosperities of life from the 
common cares of human nature, ventured to an- 
ticipate for her as bright a destiny as any child 
of wrath is entitled to expect in a probationary 
world. One might almost venture to conclude 
that presentiment had led her to expect that 
the o^ect of her affectionate solicitudes would 
fall into the hands of the high minded Sir Alan 
Redwood, with an income of forty thousand per 
annum; a very creditable measure of precedency 
among the Sir Johns and Sir Thomases, his bre- 
thren ; and a character that might have borne 
the scrutiny of the most scrupulous club in the 
parish of St. James. 

She did not, however, anticipate, or if she 
had, would have repelled the notion as inauspi- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 7 

cious to the happiness of the gentle Julia, that 
the very sensibility she had so laboured to ex- 
terminate, with its sunshine and shadows, its 
smiles and tears, was the chief source of her at- 
traction in the eyes of her future husband. Red- 
wood was a distrustful man, and prized nothing 
more highly than the glass window thus enabling 
him to pry into the mmd of the object of his ten- 
derness. The enhancement of beauty arising 
from the variations perceptible upon Julia Tre- 
velyan's dimpled face, were as nothing in compa- 
rison with the insight they afforded into her 
thoughts and feehngs. " The eloquent blood," 
that spoke in her cheeks was a welcome tell- 
tale ; and her tears possessed an oratory of unap- 
preciable value 

There could not, indeed, be a greater con- 
trast of disposition than between Sir Alan and 
the lady of his love. Redwood's commanding 
height, austere address, stern features, and im- 
passive countenance, seemed only the sterner 
and more commanding now that a flower had 
sprung up beside the rock, in contrast with its 
rugged coldness ; and Lady Wad man and the 



8 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

coteries shrugged their shoulders and smiled 
contemptuously, when they saw them sitting to- 
gether evening after evening, often without ut- 
tering a syllable, and certainly looking none of 
those things that are said to be unutterable. 
J ulia, in truth, felt too happy, too contented, to 
venture on bending her radiant smiles on her 
observant lover ; while Sir Alan was too much on 
Jus guard against the world, against its inferences, 
and above all, against himself, to render his ten- 
derness a matter of comment to the vulvar 
tongue, or of self-assured possession to his fu- 
ture wife. 

Nevertheless, his expressions were not always 
measured, nor Julia's sweet looks ever hoarded 
up from his participation. Lady Wadman's 
eyes were not always upon them ; and during 
those long spring days that intervened between 
betrothment and marriage, those days of grow- 
ing daylight and progressive vegetation, when 
every morning dawned upon brighter blossoms 
and fresher verdure, it was indeed a holiday of 
spirit to them both, to wander together through 
the gardens of the Villa Borghese or some othev 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. ^ 

belrespiro; while the old people sat prosing to- 
gether in a favourite pavilion, bending their 
idolizing eyes from a distance upon the fair 
figure of their daughter; her white raiment 
glancing among the dark evergreens, like the 
shining radiance of an angel guest wandering 
amid the paths of Paradise. 

How happy she was, — how bright, — how beau- 
tiful ! — all her wishes accomplished, — all her 
hopes surpassed. It was no longer possible to 
doubt that Redwood loved her : — his looks, his 
words, his eagerness to secure her society, his 
anxious plans to render their future life less world- 
absorbed than the ordinary career of dinner- 
giving, ball-haunting existence, all conspired to 
re-assure her misgivings. That he had sought 
her for herself alone, was indisputable ; — and her 
only care was to appear, or render herself worthy 
of, the choice which she (lovely and gifted and 
good as she was) regarded as an effort of the 
most gracious toleration. 

There was still, however, one single speck on 
Julia's horizon— (what horizon can be altOi^^e- 
ther cloudless?) — which cast a hovering shadow 

B 5 



10 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

over the airy distance of her prospects. The" 
object of her tenderness had ah^eady loved ; 
the husband of her young heart had ah-eady 
cherished a beloved and loving wife in his 
bosom. Perhaps he was even yet influenced by 
the memory of those ties, that tenderness? — 
Perhaps she was secondary in his esteem to the 
Mary whose hair still encircled his finger? — 
Were not his thoughts sometimes secretly occu- 
pied in comparing her person with that of the 
first Lady Redwood, — her sentiments with those 
of his early choice, — her voice with the voice 
that was silent, — her smile with a smile now set 
for ever in the stillness of the grave? — This dis- 
piriting idea, once conceived, often caused her 
blood to freeze in her veins ! — To be subordinate 
in a heart that was all in all to her ! — To bear a 
part, only, in the destiny which was to her as the 
well-spring of her own existence ! — 

What worlds would she not have squandered 
to give utterance but to the smallest of her 
alarms on the forbidden subject, — to approach, 
even at a remote distance, the history of his 
wedded life; — to whisper, "Was she young, fair. 



't'HE SECOND MARRIAGE. 11 

confiding, affectionate ?— Did you love her as you 
love me, or rather as / doat upon yourself? 
Have I cause to apprehend that the shadow of 
the dead will interpose between your heart and 
your living wife?" — But no !— such an appeal 
would have been hazardous with any created 
mortal; and with Redwood fatal. Julia felt 
assured that, should she venture to breathe the 
most distant allusion to this delicate topic, he 
would start off,— fly from her presence,— abandon 
her for ever ! He would give himself no time 
to reflect upon the anxious tenderness suggest- 
ing her uneasiness on the subject ; but dismiss 
her at once from his heart, and see her face no 
more ! 

Often, when they sat together side by side 
and hand in hand, in some sequestered nook 
among the espaliers of blossoming orange-trees 
of the Ludovisian gardens, listening to die busy 
murmur of the bees and watching the gradual 
unfolding of the variegated parterres ; — or with 
upturned eyes speculating upon that majestic 
vault above, which in Italy seems to connect, 
unimpaired by baser matter, the throne of the 



12 THE SECOND MARRIAGE* 

Creator with the earth his footstool, — a sudden 
thought that even so he might have sat, so rumi- 
nated, so eloquently discoursed of the glory of 
God with another and more congenial spirit, 
caused the sweet face of Julia Trevelyan to 
glow with a sudden flush, and the words to ex- 
pire upon her trembling lips. What availed it 
to her affection to share the outpouring of his 
gratitude for the beauteousness and plenteous- 
ness of the created earth ; — what availed it to 
trace with him the palpable connection between 
every good and holy thought arising in their 
minds, and the eternal and informing Spirit 
whose dwelling place was so bright over their 
heads;~if that earth held its chief influence in his 
mind as the resting place of her he had lost, — if 
that ethereal realm on high, shone brightest in 
his eyes as the spot where she was waiting to 
welcome him to yet more intense communion ! 
—Julia, — Julia who in the excess of her at- 
tachment would have renounced every human 
pleasure and every human association for his 
sake, shrunk from this grievous division of his 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 13 

affections. It withered up the glowing pulses of 
her heart, to think that the love with which their 
energy was repaid was only comparative ! 

But where was her remedy? — what the alter- 
native ? — To love him less, to withdraw a pro- 
portionate quantity of her own tenderness, was 
impossible. Her fate was wrapt up in even that 
divided portion of his tenderness which he 
vouchsafed to bestow. She must be patient ; or 
rather must labour diligently in all the vigilance 
of day by day devotion to his will, to conquer 
to herself a stronorer hold on his feelin^js. 

Such were the sentiments with which she 
approached the altar. Such was the moderated 
triumph with which this object of envy to so 
many, of congratulation to more, accepted the 
brilliant prospects that awaited her on returning 
to her native country as the wife of Sir Alan 
Redwood, Baronet, of Farminghurst Castle in 
the County of York, and Burnley Wood in 
the County of Middlesex; as the proprietress 
of the prettiest villa, finest diamonds, best 
equipage, and most ancient plate ; the mistress 



14 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

in short of a destiny as bright and promising as 
even her too idolizing parents, in the plenitude 
^of their partiality, could have selected for their 
only child. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 15 



CHAPTER VI. 



Safe out of Fortune's shot she sits aloft, 
Advanc'd above pale Envy's threatening reach ; 
As when the golden Sun salutes the morn. 
And, having gilt the ocean with his beams. 
Gallops the ocean with his glittering car. 
And overlooks the highest peering hills. 

Titus Andronicus. 

English newspapers are generally very 
busy about new married people. The arrival in 
London of Sir Alan and Lady Redwood was 
announced with considerable pomp; and the 
world was moreover informed that it was the 
intention of " the amiable couple" to pass only 
a few days in London, previous to their de- 
parture for their seat in Yorkshire. 

Julia, who had not visited the metropolis 
since her attainment of woman's estate, had in 
fact very few connections there to induce a pro- 
longation of her sojourn; and although they 



16 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

made their appearance in the height of the 
London season, although the suffocating at- 
mosphere of many a ball-room demonstrated 
the fulness of town and the gaiety of the cote- 
ries, she had not yet been married long enough 
to have acquired the least ambition for the dis- 
play of her diamonds, or the exhibition of her 
trousseau, Mrs. Trevelyan, who had given a 
parting charge to her son-in-law on no account 
to postpone Lady Redwood's presentation, or 
encourage her taste for moping at home, would 
have been shocked had she suspected that a few 
visits to the theatre in a morning dress, for the 
purpose of witnessing certain chef-d'muvres of 
the English stage, formed the extent of her 
daughter's dissipation during this her bridal 
visit. 

" Do let us get away as soon as possible," 
whispered Julia to her husband, pointing out to 
him the moss-roses contained in the basket of a 
dirty flower-girl, who stood curtseying opposite 
the windows of the hotel. " The country is 
just now so beautiful ; and I am so anxious to 
have a glimpse of my new flower-gardens, and a 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 17 

ride with you through Redwood Forest before 
the wild thyme is out of bloom. — Why not go 
to-morrow ? — What have we to detain us? " 

" You forget," replied Sir Alan, coldly, 
" that the VValpoles have promised to be in 
town on Monday, to give me a sight of my little 
girl." 

" No ! I did not forget their promised visit," 
replied Julia, blushing deeply ; " but you never 
told me that httle Mary was to accompany 
them. I understood she was at W^eymouth for 
the benefit of sea air." 

" She is at Weymouth. But Mr. and Mrs. 
Walpole are of course desirous that I should 
see her; and, concluding that so long a journey 
would be unwelcome to you, and that I should be 
unwilling to leave you just now, they have wisely 
and kindly decided on bringing her to town. 
Mrs. Walpole is a very conscientious, as well as a 
very sensible woman. However desirous of re- 
taining her little grandchild under her care, 
she is too prudent to wish that Mary should be 
wholly estranged from her father." 

" Could you not persuade her, then, to let us 



18 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

take the little girl into Yorkshire;" inquired 
Julia, involuntarily trembling at the notion of 
sharing Redwood's affections with any other 
living creature. 

" No,'* replied Sir Alan, fixing one of his 
scrutinizing glances upon her face ; "it would 
terrify poor Mrs. Walpole were I so soon to 
demand the surrender of her little charge. 
Besides, knowing you to be unaccustomed to 
children, I fancy she would be alarmed at the 
notion of Mary's falling to your care before you 
have acquired a little nursery experience. She 
implied as much, indeed, in the letter I received 
from her at Paris." 

" The letter he had received from Mrs. Wal- 
pole at Paris ! " — He had then received a letter, 
without adverting to the contents, or even ac- 
quainting her with the circumstance. He pro- 
bably regarded the subject as too sacred for her 
participation. Mrs. W. had doubtless ad- 
dressed him to advocate and defend the rights 
and claims of her grandchild ; or perhaps, even 
with a view of keeping alive the memory of her 
daughter in his heart — of reminding him of 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 19 

" the former Lady Redwood; '' — or of " his 
dear Mary ! " — Yes ! he was certainly in the 
habit of calling her his "dear Mary" in his corre- 
spondence with her family. — His " dear Mary ! " 
— Oh ! that another woman should have pos- 
sessed — should still possess sufficient domi- 
nion in his mind to be the object of his endear- 
ing appellations — his lingering regrets ! Lady 
Redwood (the second Lady Redwood) turned 
coldly away from the window, observing in a 
tone of pique, " I dare say Mrs. Walpole is 
right; I am quite of her opinion, that the 
guardianship of her grandchild could not be 
committed to worse hands than mine." 

The bridegroom was now piqued in his turn. 
Nothing had he so much at heart as that his 
gentle Julia should attach herself to his little 
motherless girl, and that an aiFection should 
spring up between them. It was in the hope 
that some proposal would arise on her part for 
Mary's return to her natural home, that he had 
encouraged Mrs. Walpole's proposal of bring- 
ing her to town ; and partly in delicacy, or cal- 
culating perhaps too largely on the perversity of 



20 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

her sex, he had opposed her suggestion only in 
the hope that his apparent indifference would 
stimulate her own inclination for her daughter- 
in-law's company. Totally unprepared for her 
cool and abrupt dismissal of the subject, he was 
for a few minutes almost inclined to express 
resentment of her conduct; and nothing but the 
certainty that quarrels or reproofs would form 
a bad preparative for the tenderness with which 
he wished to inspire her, prevented him from 
assuring his bride that little Mary had too happy 
a home and too many friends and protectors, 
to be under any necessity for courting the kind- 
ness of a step-mother. It was only by hastily 
quitting the room, that he escaped the tempta- 
tion of giving vent to his feelings. 

But when they met again, all was forgotten ! 
The child did not altogether engross the hearts 
or minds of the bride and bridegroom. Sir 
Alan, when he entered the drawing-room a few 
minutes before dinner and found his lovely Julia 
watching beside the window for his return, her 
cheek flushed with expectation, and her lips 
parted by anxiety, could not refrain from 



THE SECONI/ MARRIAGE. 21 

folding to his heart the beautiful being who 
started up and sprang forward to welcome him 
home. She had made an engagement during 
his absence to pass the evening at her uncle Mr. 
Trevanion's, and was attired in something more 
nearly approaching to full dress than he had 
seen her wear for two months past ; nor could 
he resist drawing back from her embraces to 
contemplate, with renewed admiration, the 
graceful turn of her head, the rounded outline 
of her arms, the symmetrical elegance of her 
whole person. The vexations of the morning 
were forgotten in Julia's delio^ht at beinoj again 
by her husband's side ; — in Redwood's triumph 
in the lavish affeciion of so charming, so gifted 
a creature. He almost regretted that any 
other eyes were to feast themselves on her 
beauty; and prepared somewhat with an ill grace 
to fulfil their engagement to his old friend, the 
remote origin of his present happiness. 

The Trevanions were what is termed " serious 
people." They were not methodists — their 
worship was strictly orthodox ; but so strictly, 
that the worldly-minded, who grudged them a 



22 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

reputation and consciousness of sanctity, for the 
acquirement of which themselves had no mind 
to sacrifice the levities of life, branded them 
with the name of " Saints," and fled from the 
baleful example of their virtues. These it is 
true were not arrayed in their most attractive 
garb. Mrs. Trevanion's piety was of on austere 
and cheerless order ; and her husband, if he re- 
frained from the hair-shirt and discipline of the 
heretic church, scrupled not to apply a similar 
castigation to his mind ; and on a point of prin- 
ciple, to make himself and those about him as 
uncomfortable as he conveniently could. On 
learning, for instance, the tidings of his niece 
Julia's approaching marriage with a man whom 
he had himself announced to the Trevelyans 
as every way qualified to render her the happiest 
of women, he considered it his duty to dispatch 
a letter to his sister, reminding her that mis- 
fortune lurks in the palace no less than in the 
cabin; and that sickness, sorrow, and early 
death, appear to delight in exercising their 
cruel influence in the homes of the prosperous. 
To the eye of a man of this description the' 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 23 

arrival of Lady Redwood, young, gay, fair, 
smiling, joyous, brilliant, afforded only a theme 
for painful presentiments. It was not often 
that so briojht a creature sat smilinoj in his sober 
drawing-room ; and while poor Sir Alan fell to 
the share of Mrs. Trevanion and two sanctimoni- 
ous-looking individuals of questionable gender, 
who added little more to the conversation than a 
few hems and groans, — Julia was decoyed by 
her uncle to a sofa at the other extremity of the 
room, to be mortified into a more Christian 
frame of mind by his Jeremiads. 

" I am surprised, my dear," said he, " that 
your parents did not accompany you to 
England?"— 

" My father was of opinion that so long a 
journey was undesirable for mamma, during the 
summer heats." 

" Then you should have persuaded Sir Alan 
to defer his return to England till the autumn." 
" He has business in Yorkshire that admits of 
no delay." 

" Could not your marriage have been de- 
ferred till it was possible for my sister and Tre- 



24 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

velyan to come back with you for its solemniza- 
tion here ? My dear, I do not wish to blame you, 
but I think your duty to them might have sug- 
gested such a plan." 

*' Had I proposed it, my mother would have 
refused her sanction. She was very anxious to 
hasten the marriage." 

" Ay, ay ! — poor thing; I fancy she finds her 
health declining. My dear, I do not wish to 
alarm you ; but at her time of life, health is a 
precarious thing : and there is only too much 
cause to fear, in leaving a person of her years in 
a trying climate, that you may never meet again. 
I am sadly afraid, my dear Julia, that—" 

" Oh! no no, — pray do not say so," exclaimed 
Lady Redwood in great agitation. " I assure 
you my mother's health is much as I have known 
it for the last fifteen years. She has promised 
to be with us at the Castle in October; and I 
trust, my dear uncle, you will meet her there, 
and admit that your apprehensions were pre- 
mature.*' 

" I trust so,^— I am sure I trust so," replied 
Mr. Trevanion with a deep sigh ; " but I own 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 25 

I anticipate the worst. Pray my love, when has 
^ir Alan determined to quit town?" 

" We are w^aiting only for Mrs. Walpole's 
arrival," said his niece blushing deeply. " She 
has promised to bring up our little girl from 
Weymouth." 

" Our little girl ?— Oh ! little Miss Redwood 
I presume ? Ah ! poor little dear ; — she comes 
home to live with you I suppose? " — 

" No, — her mother's family are anxious to 
retain her some time longer." 

" And you intend to sanction such a measure ?" 

" Sir Alan very naturally thinks that as her 
health is delicate, it will be better for her to re- 
side near the sea, and with persons experienced 
in the care of children." 

"But surely, my love, you intend to resist 
such a determination?" 

" And why ? — I can have no object but the 
welfare of the little girl." 

" My dear, your own future happiness cannot 
but be of some account in your eyes." 

" I must not pretend to be less selfish than 
other people," said Julia, trying to rally her 

VOL. II. c 



26 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

spirits, which were sinking under the influence of 
her uncle's solemn tones and lugubrious aspect; 
" but I really see no cause to fear that I shall 
be a sufferer from Mrs. Walpole's kindness to 
her grandchild." 

"Are you acquainted with Mrs. Walpole ?" — 

" Only from Redwood's reports.'' 

Mr. Trevanion said nothing, but looked, " So 
much the better for you ! " 

" Sir Alan describes her as a sensible well 
intentioned person." 

" Yes, very sensible ; more sensible than 
tolerant or indulgent. She has great influence 
over your husband's mind, and you must take 
care that it is not exercised to your detriment. 
In your place, I should hesitate about having the 
child too long under her charge. Mrs. Walpole 
will probably inspire her with sentiments 
towards yourself, and general principles, such 
as may render her hereafter a somewhat uneasy 
inmate." 

" Do you think so ? " involuntarily ejaculated 
Julia. 

"The life of a stepmother is commonly a 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 27 

Stormy one,'" replied her uncle, without com- 
passionatiug the alarm betrayed in Lady Red- 
wood's change of tone. "You cannot be too 
much on your guard ; every step you take is 
important to your future happiness ; and I 
think it my duty to warn you that, unless you 
crush the influence of the Walpole family now, 
on your first assumption of your rights, you have 
every thing to fear from their ascendancy. 
Between ourselves, my dear Julia," — lowering 
his voice to a still more confidential pitch, " the 
old grandmother is the most imperious woman 
in existence, and her daughter Martha the most 
artful and insinuating. During Lady Redwood's 
lifetime " (Julia shrank within herself at the 
name) "they did not suffer Sir Alan to say his 
soul was his own ; and had he remained in Eng- 
land, I vei-y much doubt whether he ever would 
have ventured to contract a second marriage." 

" Perhaps," faltered his niece, growing paler 
and paler, more and more depressed, "perhaps 
it was to escape the thraldom of the Walpole 
family that Sir Alan visited Italy ? " 

"Many people thought so," rejoined old 
c2 



28 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

Trevanion, rejoiced to perceive that he had gra- 
dually subdued his sprightly niece into a proper 
frame of mind. " But take my advice, Julia. 
Resist from the first the innovations of these 
people. Show them that you are determined 
to be mistress of your own house, and to retain 
the superintendence of your family ; and by ex- 
ercising your firmness in the maintenance of 
your rights, and your fortitude in the endurance 
of their persecutions, you may perhaps have less 
cause than at present, alas ! I have reason to 
anticipate — for deploring the day you were ever 
tempted to give your hand to a widower.'* 

The "widower" was just then too close at 
hand to admit of a rejoinder on the part of his 
wife. Wearied out in patience by Mrs. Tre- 
vanion's tediousness, and the monosyllabic inter- 
jections of her two serious friends, he came to 
remind his wife that the carriage was waiting ; 
and great indeed, was his surprise, instead of 
being greeted with the endearing smile he was 
ever in the habit of receiving, to find her looks 
haggard, her words incoherent, her whole de- 
meanour changed. She suffered him to put 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 29 

on her shawl and reiterate her adieu to her 
uncle and aunt, without appearing to recognize 
his presence : and from Mr. Trevanion's door 
to that of the Hotel in Jermyn-street, not a 
syllable passed between them. Julia was silently 
weeping in the corner of the carriage ; and Sir 
Alan conjecturing, in gloomy abstraction, what 
mysterious communication or remonstrance on 
the part of her uncle had produced so remark- 
able a transition in the mood and manners of 
his bride. 



30 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 



CHAPTER VII. 



Love was a lambent flame that play'd about her breast. 
Light as the vapours of a morning dream ;, 

So cold herself, while she such warmth express'd, 
'Twas Cupid bathing in Diana's stream. Dryden". 

There is no one, perhaps, more to be en- 
vied in this world, than a youthful bride arriv- 
ing at the beautiful country seat which is to be 
the home of her future life, the scene of her long 
career of prosperity, the birthplace of her chil- 
dren, the shelter of her declining years : — unless, 
indeed, it be the happy individual on whose arm 
she contemplates its beauties, and to whose pre- 
ference she is indebted for its possession. Often 
during their courtship, and still oftener during 
their bridal journey, had Redwood pictured to 
the delighted Julia the fine features and pic- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE, 31 

turesque associations of Farminghurst Castle ; — 
had described the solemn grandeur of its woods, 
— the extent of its sea view, —the variety of its 
wild and rocky glens. Curiosity had long 
heightened the interest with which she reo^arded 
a spot, the scene of her husband's infancy and 
childhood; and frequently had her dreams fore- 
stalled the moments of her arrival there, till she 
woke with her heart beating in imaginary ex- 
citement. 

Since her arrival in England, these feelings 
had redoubled. Farminghurst was the spot 
appointed for her re-union with her parents, 
from whom she was now, for the first time, 
separated; and she longed to be there; — to 
make arrangements for their reception ; — to see 
the race of people among whom her destinies 
were appointed ; — to tear a leaf, if possible, from 
the book of futurity. 

'• In this world," says Rochefoucault, " our 
warmest wishes are seldom fulfilled ; or they 
come to pass in a way, or at a moment, which 
robs them of half their charm." Unfortunately 
for the bride of Sir Alan Redwood, the happy 



30 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

hour of her arrival at her princely residence, 
did not occur till after her interview with the 
Walpoles and her martyrdom to the interfer- 
ence of uncle Trevanion. Even had he refrained 
from pointing out to her observation the alarm- 
ing austerity of little Mary's family, she might, 
perhaps, have experienced some degree of ap- 
prehension on her first introduction to the 
nearest relation of her predecessor ; but, aided 
by Mr. Trevanion's notes explanatory, she shud- 
dered at the rigid formality of grandmamma's 
plaited lawn kerchief and powdered toupee ; and 
could scarcely find voice to answer Miss Wal- 
pole*s interrogations respecting her travels, 
given in a tone of dry catechismal regularity 
savouring awfully of the school-room. 

So much, indeed, was the gentle Julia over- 
awed by all she saw and all she conjectured of 
the Walpole family, that she took refuge, ac- 
cording to the custom of timid people, in an air 
of hauteur, and a tone of niost repulsive cold- 
ness. Nothing could be more mortifying to 
Sir Alan Redwood than the constrained manner 
with which his Julia replied to the old lady's 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 33 

Communications respecting little Mary's health 
and disposition. Lady Redwood, forewarned 
by her uncle, saw clearly through the assumed 
amiability with which the grandmamma w\as at- 
tempting to conciliate her confidence and secure 
her subjugation. But she was determined not 
to be caught,— wo^ to be captivated; and instead 
of taking her little step-daughter on her knee, 
as she would have done almost any other child 
as pretty and graceful, and stifling her with 
kisses as her strong resemblance to her father 
naturally prompted, — she scarcely deigned to 
notice her ; and concurred with the most 
ungracious alacrity in Miss Walpole's pro- 
posal that Mary should return to Wey-. 
mouth, and reside with them, another year. It 
was evident that this plan afforded as much 
satisfaction to the stepmother as to the aunt ; 
but amid all Martha Walpole's delight at the 
notion of retaining for some time longer the 
superintendence of her motherless niece, it was 
plain to the mortified Sir Alan, that she had 
already conceived the greatest contempt for 
Lady Redwood's pride and heartlessness. He 
c 5 



B4> THE SECOND MARRIAGEr 

took little Mary into his arms, and strove to 
conceal his vexation of spirit by the warmth of 
his caresses : and Julia's reserve did but increase 
when she noted this excess of tenderness. The 
mortified father was no less indignant than 
afflicted. How could he conjecture that, after 
her careless dismissal of his child, poor Julia 
retired into her own room, to weep over the 
violence she had done her kind and tender 
feelings ; or that her heart was beating with 
agitation throughout the two formal interviews, 
in which she deported herself so arrogantly 
towards the family of his first wife. 

Their feelings thus mutually estranged, it is 
not wonderful that the Yorkshire journey should 
be silent and cheerless. Sir Alan felt himself 
aggrieved, while Lady Redwood was of opinion 
that nothing but the most prudent management 
would preserve her from approaching martyr- 
dom. She was constantly on the watch to cir- 
cumvent the consequences of her husband's re- 
cent interview with her enemy, and to defeat 
the influence of the Walpole family ; while he, 
attributing the strangeness of her manner to 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 35 

cnprice, redoubled her uneasiness by his resent- 
ful abstraction. 

Such was the mood in which the bride and 
bridegroom arrived at Farminghurst ; such the 
tamper of mind which imparted to Julia's beau- 
tiful features an expression of sullen melancholy 
striking consternation into the old servants 
and chief tenants, and dependants, who were 
waiting in the hall and courtyard to welcome 
her arrival. 

If the haste with which she passed through 
the crowd and hurried into the saloon, pre- 
vented her from hearing the universal but invo- 
luntary ejaculation, '* Ah ! how unlike my late 
lady ! " — the feeling by which the phrase was 
dictated was too apparent in the countenances 
of her attendants to escape observation. In- 
stead of the pleased alacrity which flies to do the 
bidding of a cherished mistress, there was an 
air of unconcern in the comings and goings of 
the domestics ; and in answering the few trifling 
inquiries she addressed to them, Lady Redwood 
saw that their looks were invariably directed 
towards their master, as if hei' approval were of 
no account. 



36 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

But all this was of very secondary moment. 
From the time of changing horses at the last 
stage, where the extreme obsequiousness of 
landlord, landlady, waiters, ostlers, little dogs 
and all, sufficed to prove that they were ap- 
proaching the confines of home, Sir Alan had 
sunk into the corner of the carriage in the most 
mournful reverie. Instead of pointing out to 
her, as she had hoped and expected, his favourite 
spots, his peculiar haunts, naming such and 
such a wood, tracing the course of the river, 
and acquainting her beside which group of dis- 
tant poplars the Redwood iVJ ills,— and behind 
which jutting rock the village church lay niched 
in snug concealment, — his eyes wandered 
vaguely over the wide landscape — the hedges 
flew by unheeded— the turnings of the road 
brought new varieties of hill and dale before 
them, — but the bridegroom uttered not a word ! 
His mind was evidently absorbed in the past ; 
" Mary " was doubtless again by his side ! — and 
those 

Love-storied trees and passion-plighted spots 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 37 

were bringing back the lender remembrances, 
the hallowed regrets, which he had fled to 
Italy to obliterate. She ventured to steal a 
glance towards him, and saw that his eyes were 
filled with tears. How difficult she found it to 
restrain her own ! — how dispiriting, how bitter 
was the sense of her own insignificance in his 
eyes, — of her own insufficiency to his happiness ! 
Arrived at home, the evil did but increase. 
Not a chamber, — not a piece of furniture but 
was evidently fertile in associations agonizing to 
his feelings. Instead of replying to her ques- 
tions respecting one or two noble specimens of 
old masters with which the walls of the apart- 
ment were adorned, he retired to a distant win- 
dow, and gazing stedfastly on the prospect, 
seemed determined to conceal his countenance 
from her scrutiny. Her first thought was to 
quit the room, and retire to the one appointed 
for her use ; but she was prevented by the fear 
of seeming too much at home, or wishing to 
forestal his arrangements. She did not like to 
inquire of the housekeeper the way to her own 
apartment, till Redwood had expressed his 



38 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

choice and intentions, either privately or pub- 
licly. Perhaps, in ignorance or malice, the old 
woman might point ont the identical chamber 
he had inhabited with his first wife ;— her bridal 
chamber, — her death-bed. Perhaps, if the 
choice were referred to herself, she^ unconsci- 
ously might fix her preference on the self-same 
room. And then, how terrible would it be to 
hear from the lips of Sir Alan, for the first 
time, the name of his deceased wife ! — Suppos- 
ing he should say to her, — " No ! not there ; — 
do not choose that chamber ; — it was Mary's ; — 
it was my wife's ! " 

But no sooner did Sir Alan recover his self- 
possession sufficiently to quit his post and turn 
towards his lady, than he was struck by the 
paleness of her face. 

"Are you ill, dearest Julia?" he inquired, 
hastening towards her ; all his tenderness return- 
ing at the sight of her troubled countenance. 
" Has the journey been too much for you ? " 

« I am indeed greatly fatigued," said she, 
recovering some portion of her bloom, as a 
guilty blush overspread her cheeks, in terror that 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 39 

Sir Alan should surmise the origin of her un- 
easiness. 

" Will you lie down on the sofa till dinner 
time? — Or would you like to come at once to 
your own room ? " — 

"At once to my own room," faintly articu- 
lated Lady Redwood. " But do not let me 
trouble you ; I dare say Sterling can show me 
the way." 

" No ! " replied Sir Alan, proudly, almost 
sternly, " do not deny me the pleasure of con- 
ducting you thither myself. It is a happiness I 
have long and eagerly anticipated." 

With the air of a culprit, Julia accordingly 
accepted the arm tendered to her support. But 
as she slowly ascended the grand staircase by 
the side of her husband, the whole scene 
seemed to swim before her eyes. Instead of 
noticing the fine bronzes decorating the hall, or 
the magnificent vases of Sevres and Mandarin 
China placed at intervals along the galleries, 
her^ thoughts were engrossed by the considera- 
tion, — " Will he take me to his old room, — 
to her room ? — Does every thing remain there 



40 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

as in her time ? — Should any trifling object be- 
longing to her meet his eye, will his feelings be 
overcome by the sight ; — and will he visit upon 
me his consciousness of infidelity to her me- 
mory ? " — 

Nor were her terrors wholly groundless. 
There is not a spot in the wide world where 
the force of custom is so powerful as in an old- 
fashioned English country-house. Routine 
reigns there with its most despotic rule. In 
the household of the genuine squire, it is held as 
impossible to breakfast elsewhere than in the 
breakfast-parlour, to dine in any other than the 
dining-room, or hang a hat in any other place 
than the hall, as it would appear to an official 
man to transact colonial business at the Home 
Office, or arrange some diplomatic difficulty by 
reference to the Board of Control. The 
Baronets of Redwood, for the last four genera- 
tions, had appropriated to themselves a certain 
suite called the North Rooms, consisting of an 
ante-room, bed-chamber, and two dressing- 
rooms ; and it would have seemed quite as ex- 
travagant to Mrs. Haynes, the housekeeper, for 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 41 

the master of the house to inhabit any other por- 
tion of it, as that he should build a nest among the 
jackdaws in the parish steeple. Sir Alan, in writ- 
ing down to the Castle that Lady Redwood and 
himself might be expected on such a day, had 
desired, indeed, explicitly that the Chintz-room 
might be aired ; but as he limited his communi- 
cation to this solitary order, Mrs. Haynes natu- 
rally concluded that some member of the " new 
lady's" family would accompany them, to whose 
use it was destined ; and had been careful to 
direct the footman to carry my lady's trunks 
and imperials to the North-room, and to induct 
my lady's maid, Mrs. Sterhng, into the same 
locality. 

When Sir Alan accordingly threw open the 
pretty airy chamber he had selected for his wife, 
nothing was visible but the noble prospects from 
the windows, the lofty chintz bed, and the 
snowy muslin toilet-table. Tliere were no 
packages, — no dressing-boxes,— no Mrs. Ster- 
ling ; and the truth instantly flashed on his 
mind. He started with an involuntary shudder 
at the idea of the annoyance he had escaped by 



42 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

oflfering himself as Lady Redwood's conductor. 
The movement did not escape her. Nothing 
could be plainer than his agitation ; and she 
was now convinced that " Mary " had actually 
breathed her last in the lofty chintz bed, — had 
directed her dying eyes to that beautiful land- 
scape,— and taken her last look of her own faded 
countenance in that very tiring mirror ! It was 
well for her that Sir Alan hastily quitted the 
room to give orders for the removal of her bag- 
gage to her new apartment, or her perturbation 
could not have passed unnoticed. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 43 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Oh ! noble Love ! 
That thou couldst be without this jealousy. 
Without this passion of the heart,— how lovely 
Would st thou appear ! 

Beaumo.nt and Fletcher. 

Lady Redwood had now been two months 
a wife. Her bridal awkwardness had in some 
measure worn off; and she was now familiarized 
to the custom of sitting at the head of the table, 
and undergoing all the formal ceremonial of 
dinner. 

But on entering the magnificent eating-room 
at Farminghurst Castle, a new source of embar- 
rassment overcame all her self-possession. It 
was not the sight of the magnificent family pic- 
tures, the Barons Redwood by Holbein and 
Zucchero, and Baronets by Vandyke, Lely, 



44 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

Kneller, and Reynolds ; — it was not the gorgeous 
beauty of Venetia Lady Redwood, from the 
pencil of Gervas ; or of Selina Lady Redwood, 
from the hand of Hoppner, that suspended her 
footsteps on the threshold ; — it was, that she was 
about herself to assume the post of Mary Lady 
Redwood — it was that she was about to occupy, 
directly in the eyes of Sir Alan, the place and sta- 
tion filled by his late wife! As she advanced 
towards the board spread with costly plate, and 
a dinner of the most recherche kind, she almost 
expected to find " the table full ; " to see her 
predecessor, pale and menacing as the ghost of 
Banquo, arise and " push her from her stool ! " 
Sir Alan saw her hesitation ; but, not under- 
standing its motive, said and did nothing to 
assist her. 

"This long table looks tremendously formal," 
faltered Julia, flushing scarlet, with the effort 
she made to speak. " Will you allow me to 
have my chair placed nearer to you ? — I think I 
should like to act company to-day, and sit at 
your right hand/' 

" Willingly, willingly," cried Sir Alan, for a 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 45 

moment pleased by a proposal that seemed to 
spring from the desire of being near him. 
" Mansel ! place Lady Redwood's chair here.^' 
And he looked smilingly upon her, and would 
have extended his hand to welcome her to her 
new seat, but that he was restrained by the 
attendance of two or three inquisitive servants. 
He had not, however, finished his soup before 
his view^s of the case were entirely altered. He 
now conjectured that the beautiful Julia dis- 
dained to preside over his household board; 
that she despised the common-place regularity 
of his old-fashioned mansion ; that she was de- 
termined to play the fine lady from the begin- 
ning, by a refusal to comply with even the most 
ordinary forms of matronly duty. How often 
had he heard the equanimity of her temper set 
forth by the encomiums of her doating parents ! 
How often had Mr. Trevelyan assured him that, 
from the hour of her birth to that which saw 
her at the altar, she had never given them a sin- 
gle moment's uneasiness ; never frustrated their 
will ; never thought or acted but at the sugges- 
tion of those in authority over her ! Alas, poor 



46 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

man ! — he had been bnt eight weeks a husband, 
and already Lady Redwood had contrived to 
wound his feelings, mortify his pride, disturb his 
prejudices, traverse the customs of his house, and 
alienate his child from his roof. This was his 
gentle, sweet, submissive bride; this was the 
lovely being who, for six months of careful deli- 
beration, he had watched, examined, probed, 
assayed, in selfish anxiety to secure himself from 
an ill-assorted marriage — an unquiet home ! 

Vexatious, indeed, was that first evening 
passed at the Castle ! — Julia sat apart with swell- 
ing bosom and gloomy countenance; framing 
within herself a thousand wild conjectures — a 
thousand mournful forebodings; — while Sir Alan, 
seated in his arm-chair, bent his head over a 
book, to conceal his distemperature of spirits 
and countenance. Lady Redwood attributed all 
this discomposure to the lingering influence of 
his first wife. But she was mistaken : it was the 
second only — it was herself— who was the cause 
of his uneasiness. 

It is not to be supposed that a friend so highly 
esteemed as the worthy Maria Wilmot, had been 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 47 

neglected by her pupil on occasion of the bril- 
liant marriage which had crowned the destinies 
moulded under her auspices. Many a queru- 
lous letter had been despatched from Rome to 
Devizes, during poor Julia's season of tender dis- 
quietude ; and when the auspicious moment of 
proposal and acceptance came at last, her kind 
preceptress was the first and only person to whom 
the lovely heiress addressed a confession of her 
triumph. 

" I know you will be satisfied with my pros- 
pects," wrote poor Julia, " I am persuaded that 
even you, so indifferent to the value of worldly 
things, will admit me to be a very fortunate, and 
likely to be a very happy woman. Sir Alan 
Redwood's principles are as severe as even you, 
my dear friend, could desire. I am not going to 
marry the flirty, frivolous man of fashion you 
have so often laughingly predicted to me. My 
chosen husband is fonder of solitude than society, 
—of the country than town,— of books than men, 
—of study than pleasure. We shall forget the 
world in each other's sole society, and spend the 
greater portion of our lives at Farminghurst 



48 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

and Trevelyan. I have not a hope or a wish 
ungratified, — unless that I may have virtue to 
support as I ought, so unmerited an influx of 
prosperity." 

To this effusion of girlish ecstasy, Miss Wil- 
mot replied more after the manner of the gover- 
ness than of the woman of the world. Instead 
of perceiving that Julia, flattered into a god- 
dess, was inaccessible to vulgar arguments of 
mortal policy, or lessons of divine wisdom, she 
wrote to remonstrate with her young friend's 
too confident elation of spirits, — to remind her 
of the instability of sublunary happiness. 
Uncle Trevanion might have been, perhaps, 
more prosy, but he could not have been more 
ill-judging ; for Julia, apprehensive of provoking 
a further rebuke, refrained from all communica- 
tion with her prudent admonitress. 

Experience had not yet taught her how wel- 
come is the refreshing verdure of the evergreen 
of friendship after the summer flowers of love 
have blossomed and died away ! But no sooner 
was the sky overcast, no sooner did the occur- 
rences of her London visit tend to remind Lady 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 49 

Redwood that she was not alone exempted from 
the common cares of humanity, than her spirit 
yearned towards the kind and wise woman who 
had so often cheered her under the petty vexa- 
tions arising from the over sohcitude of her 
parents. It was not over sohcitude from which 
she was now suffering, it was not the dread that 
Sir Alan should love her too tenderly for her 
comfort, that rendered her stay in Jermyn- 
street so uneasy — her journey to the North so 
tedious : and yet the present irritation had pre- 
cisely the same effect as her transient Trevelyan 
Park fits of the sorrowfuls ; — for it made her 
eager for Miss Wilmot's assuaging pity. Miss 
Wilmot's cheering arguments. Miss Wilmot's 
mild philosophy. As she sat, on the evening of 
her arrival, with her eyes now intent on her 
husband's studies and now on the pattern of his 
carpet, she was revolving in what terms to 
address her old friend so as to obtain her 
counsel and commiseration, without rendering 
her too anxious, or inducing her to hasten the 
return from Italy of Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan, 

VOL. II. D 



50 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

and above all, without inferring an unkind 
feeling towards Sir Alan. 

Unluckily, the evening was only too propi- 
tious to Julia's desponding frame of mind. Sum- 
mer was already on the wane ; and the Autumn 
seemed inclined to look in upon the earth and 
remind it of stormy days to come. A high 
wind arose during dinner, which now howled 
desolately among the high old Gothic chimnies, 
and swept fearfully along the echoing corridors. 
Distant doors (the sound of which, at present 
unfamiliar to her, seemed ominous and awful) 
nov/ and then clapt too with a startling noise. 
The very candles beside which Sir Alan Red- 
wood sat reading, flared and fleckered with the 
gusts of wind that penetrated the old-fashioned 
oriel windows. Nothing could be more deso- 
lating than the sounds and sights around her. 

At length, the butler entered with his tray of 
bed candlesticks, and an inquiry whether her 
ladyship chose supper ; and great indeed was 
the surprise of the old man to observe the 
bridegroom seated in his usual reading chair, 
tranquilly perusing a new number of the Quar- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 51 

terly Review; and the bride at the opposite side 
of the room with a work box open on the table 
near her, but evidently doing nothing and saying 
as little. " If this is new-fashioned honey- 
mooning," thought old Mansel (as he proceeded 
to inform the household that my lady did not eat 
supper, and that Mrs. Sterling was to go up to 
my lady's room) — " give 7ne the old. I never 
saw Sir Alan so down-hearted in my late lady's 
time. Pray Heaven things may be going on 
right between the young people." 

According to Lady Redwood's order, her own 
maid was now sauntering up the back staircase 
to await her in her dressing-room. But had not 
Julia been afraid of excitinaj Sir Alan's sur- 
mises, she would certainly have desired Mrs. 
Sterling to attend on her at the drawing-room 
door to accompany her to her chamber. Be- 
tween the dispiriting state of the weather and 
the train of reflections she had been pursuing, it 
was far from agreeable to her to think of cross- 
ing the great hall alone. But having lingered a 
considerable time in the hope her husband would 
d2 



LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF lllmOtS 



52 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

bear her company, she suddenly took up her 
candle and prepared to quit the room. 

Sir Alan, who was seriously hurt and dis- 
pleasedj now raised his eyes from his book, with 
a cold inquiry, whether she could find her way » 
and Julia's pride, doubly roused by his tone of 
indifference, naturally suggested an answer in 
the affirmative. With faltering steps she accord- 
ingly made her way along the dimly illuminated 
vestibules and passages, where the tall bronze 
statues seemed frowning at her from their 
niches as she passed. The grand staircase was 
painted in fresco with devices of some Roman 
triumph; and casting a trembling glance upon 
its phalanxes. Lady Redwood could have almost 
persuaded herself that the eyes of the centurions 
glared out fiercely upon her. With hurried 
footsteps she hastened along the passage she had 
traversed before dinner on Sir Alan Redwood's 
arm ; but now, in her trepidation nothing was 
easier than to mistake the door of her own room, 
when with a trembling hand she flung open the 
one she fancied must belong to the chintz bed- 
chamber. She was mistaken. It was that of an 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 53 

old fashioned apartment seldom used; and thefirst 
thing that greeted her was the funeral achieve- 
ment of the late Lady Redwood, with its black 
bordering, and skull and cross bones ; which had 
been taken down in expectation of her arrival, 
and put there to be out of the way ! 

With some difficulty Julia refrained from 
shrieking aloud as this ill-omened object met 
her view. But hastily withdrawing from the 
unlucky chamber, she called aloud for Mrs. 
Sterling, and in a minute the smart person of 
her attendant emerged from a door at the fur- 
ther end of the corridor; and, for a moment. 
Lady Redv/ood's nervous terrors were tranquil- 
lized. 

One of the happy results of the strict system 
of Julia's education was a disinclination for fa- 
miliarity with servants. She was not in the 
habit of conversing with her maid on any thing 
but the duties of her calling ; and Mrs. Sterling 
would have been as much astonished at an idle 
question from the lips of her young mistress, as 
from those of one of the statues in the hall. Ne- 
vertheless, on the present occasion Lady Red- 



54 THE SECOND MARRIAGE, 

wood would have given worlds for courage to 
hazard a single sentence with her attendant. 
But she was still so young, — so timid, — so ap- 
prehensive of provoking impertinent criticisms, 
that the words expired on her lips as she at- 
tempted to frame an inquiry whether the cham- 
ber appropriated to her use was in truth that of 
her predecessor. Mrs. Sterling, meanwhile, 
catching a few words, managed, to confirm 
her suspicions. " The housekeeper had or- 
ders from Sir Alan," she said, " that every 
thing should be exactly as it was in her 
late lady's time;" and the long process of 
brushing and curling the present lady's beautiful 
chesnut hair, and of folding and laying aside the 
present lady's silken robes, being at length com- 
pleted, the waiting-woman, tired by her day's 
journey, hastened to light the night-lamp, draw 
the bed curtains, and inquire at what hour Lady 
Redwood would please to be called on the fol- 
lowing morning ; — adding that " her late lady- 
ship always breakfasted with Sir Alan, in the 
study, at nine o'clock." 

Julia knew not what she answered. She was 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 55 

wondering what construction Sterling would put 
upon her conduct, should she desire her to stay 
till her master made his appearance. But while 
still framing the terms of the request so as to 
make it appear as unimportant as possible, the 
sleepy woman glided out of the room, and the 
sleepless one was left alone. — Alone ! 

The wind howled; a wailing voice seemed 
mingled with its whistling gusts ; and the flame 
of the veilleuse was bowed almost into dark- 
ness, as they swept to and fro over its crystal 
vase. Lady Redwood had listened and listened, 
for the retiring footsteps of her maid, — but all 
was now silent ; — she heard nothing but the 
panting of her own breath, as she lay half 
hidden among her downy pillows. Perhaps 
Redwood might be already in his dressing-room? 
— and why should she patiently endure the per- 
turbation by which she was oppressed, when a 
slight effort of courage would bring her into his 
presence? — She abjured her pride, — she forgot 
her pique ; — she determined (whatever construc- 
tion he might place on the proceeding) to make 
her way into his room. Stealing from the bed 



56 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

without pausing to throw on her dressing-gown 
but hastily inserting her feet in her silken slip- 
pers, she seized the veilleuse ; and opening the 
door of her own dressing-room, which divided 
that of Sir Alan from the bedchamber, was 
about to traverse it, when an irresistible im- 
pulse induced her to shrink back and close the 
door. There is something in the aspect of a 
large, dark, deserted, unfamiliar chamber, dimly 
lighted by a lamp, very uninviting to a person 
of weak nerves. The thought struck her that 
even there the late Lady Redwood had probably 
lain in solemn preparation for the grave ; — that 
there — in that room, which she must have often 
crossed in the happy familiarity of matronly af- 
fection to consult with her husband, — in that very 
room the trappings of her funeral array had 
probably darkened the cheerful hangings and 
displaced the gay furniture. 

" This is childish, — this is degrading !" fal- 
tered poor Julia, as the moisture rose on her 
brow ; and she sat down on the nearest chair 
with the veilleuse in her hand, in hopes to re- 
gain her strength and courage. " A moment's 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 57 

space would suffice to convey me to dear Red- 
wood's presence. In his arms 1 should forget all 
these foolish fears. I will cross the dressing- 
room. — What is there to alarm me ? " 

Again she listened ; — again the wind howled 
fearfully in the corridor. Nay, its voice seemed 
breathing with a peculiarly melancholy inflec- 
tion from the very bed she had just quitted. — 
Its long curtains carefully drawn around, now 
seemed to exclude her ; or rather, to conceal 
some unseen and mysterious occupant. " It was 
there she used to lie ; — it was there her expiring 
breath called upon Redwood's name ; — perhaps 
adjuring him to be faithful to her memory, — 
perhaps, — I cannot — cannot stay here ; I will 
go to him," sobbed the agonized Julia ; and 
again throwing open the door of the dressing- 
room, with the ordinary impression of nervous 
persons that something was pursuing her which 
she dared not turn round and confront, she crept 
across the shadowy apartment. 

But, lo ! scarcely had she attained half the 
way, when the opposite door opened slowly, and 
D 5 



58 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

a tall white figure, partly enveloped in a black 
drapery, stood before her. She saw not the face 
of the spectre ; but with one long piercing shriek, 
fell insensible on the floor ! 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 59 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Stay illusion ! 
If thou hast any sound or use of voice. 
Speak to me ! 

If there be any good thing to be done 
That may to thee do ease, and grace to me. 
Speak to me ! 

Hamlet. 

It is an unlucky circumstance, inseparable 
from the forms of civilized, life, that domestic 
catastrophes can no longer take place without 
the intervention of servants ; by whose volumi- 
nous reporting, cases of squabbles between my 
lord and my lady at the dinner the breakfast 
or the supper table, — during an airing in the 
britschka, or a row on the lake, — are sure to find 
their way all over the country. Sir Alan Red- 
wood's first impulse on finding his Julia cold 
and breathless on the floor of her dressing- 
room, was to ring violently for the assistance of 



60 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

her maid; and both Mrs. Sterling, and the 
housekeeper, and even old Mansel, contrived 
to make their appearance on the scene in time 
to see her lying insensible on the sofa, with 
" master" bending over her, as well as to hear 
the first incoherent expressions of her returning 
conscientiousness. " Redwood, Redwood, why 
did you bring me hither? — Why expose me 
to this horrible visitation ? " — It was necessarily 
settled in the steward's room the following 
morning, that " my lady had seen something! " 
" My lady's" popularity in her new house- 
liold, which had already assumed a very doubt- 
ful aspect, was now at an end. " If their poor 
dear first lady could not rest in her grave be- 
cause of Sir Alan's giving such a stepmother to 
poor dear little Miss Mary, the case must be 
very bad indeed ! " The under-housemaid pro- 
tested " she would not stand in my lady's shoes, 
not for the vally of all the 'state of Farming- 
hurst Castle ; " and one very nervous laundry- 
maid, much addicted to novels and green tea, 
actually resigned office, and went to wring wet 
linen and her own hands in some less ghostly 
establishment* 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 61 

The first thing accordingly that transpired of 
the new Lady Redwood in the neighbouring town 
of Farmington, was that the castle became 
haunted from the moment she set foot in it; 
and that she was a proud, arrogant, hoity-toity 
woman, who would not so much as sit at the 
head of her husband's talkie ! Rumours, like 
clouds, gatlier as they go. The children be- 
longhig to the late Lady Redwood's various vil- 
lage schools, having imperfectly caught the 
general teilour of the reports gossipped over 
beside the cottage hearths, mistaking the effect 
for the cause, insisted that the new lady herself 
was the spectral apparition ; and the first time 
poor Julia, recovering from her temporary 
indisposition, drove down to the village in the 
pony-cart with her husband, a general conster- 
nation seemed to seize the little congregation 
drawn out for her inspection. Instead of re- 
ceiving with joyful gratitude the largesse be- 
stowed upon them by their new patroness, — 
instead of looking with admiration on her snowy 
robes and beautiful face, the trembling urchins 
held together by the hand with looks of terror and 



62 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

aversion, and regarded her benefaction as 
" fairy money," likely to bring misfortunes on 
the possessor. 

Tears came into Lady Redwood's eyes as she 
quitted the school-house. She could not blind 
herself to the ungracious mode of her recep- 
tion, — to the stern glances bent on her by the 
schoolmistress, — to the loathing looks of the 
poor children. " I see how it is," thought she, 
as the pony-chaise jolted along a beautiful 
green lane, matted with hazel bushes and fra- 
grant with honeysuckle; " they were too long 
the objects of the first Lady Redwood's bounty 
to look on me without disgust. They regard 
me as an interloper ; — 1 will never go among 
them again." — 

" I trust, dearest Julia," whispered Sir Alan, 
pleased to see the old people totter to the doors 
of the several cottages to make an obeisance to 
his beautiful bride, " I trust you will find an 
interesting source of occupation in promoting 
the welfare of these poor creatures. I have 
been accustomed to regard them as a charge 
committed to my guardianship. I am sure you 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 63 

will aid me in the discharge of so sacred a duty ; 
— I am sure you will visit and comfort them?" — 

" / have been accustomed " sounded in the 
ears of poor Lady Redwood very like " Mary 
and I were accustomed." Her heart, which was 
aching before, rebelled against the instigation. 
" I can trust to Sterling," said she, " to be my 
delegate. Papa never liked me to go into the 
cottages at Trevelyan ; he fancied my health 
might suffer." 

Stung to the heart by her cold selfishness. Sir 
Alan unconsciously administered a sharp cut of 
the whip to the little Shetland he was driving. 
Hard-heartedness in a woman is a hideous 
thing ; — hard-heartedness in a wife is a revolt- 
ing one; — hard- heartedness in Julia—the beauty, 
the heiress, the favoured of Heaven — a crying 
sin ! He might perhaps have been tempted to 
give vent to his feelings, but that they were now 
entering the vicarage-lane; and that a low 
paling, surmounted by a wall of Portugal lau- 
rel, dominated by six tall steeples of poplar 
trees, ancient and stalwart and mossy, soon pro- 
claimed them to have arrived at their destina- 



64 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

tion. Although she had set out with the inten- 
tion of a bridal visit to Dr. and Mrs. Hobart, 
the vicar and vicaress of Farmington, Lady 
Redwood would now have willingly declined 
the exertion ; but on mentioning to Sir Alan 
that she was suffering from an excruciating 
head-ache, his hasty reply demonstrated that the 
vicarage visit was inevitable. Remembering the 
brilliant bloom with which she had made her 
appearance at the breakfast-table, and unaware 
of the painful impressions she had been im- 
bibing at the school-house, he did not hesitate 
to attribute her plea to caprice or affectation. 
She wanted to play the fine lady to Mrs. Ho- 
bart, or the despot to himself. Resistance was 
useless ; Julia, mildly submitting to his decree, 
soon found herself stepping from the chaise 
under a porch covered with a profusion of the 
sweet scented clematis. 

Having reached the parlour, a small compact 
wooden figure, in a slate coloured gown, rose, 
curtsied, and pointed to a very severe looking 
armchair; and poor Lady Redwood found that her 
husband's announcement of Mrs. Hobart's cold 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 65 

formality of address had not been overcharged. 
After two minute's silence, broken by a polite 
inquiry from Sir Alan after "his friend Hobart," 
the figure rose again, and rang the bell ; when 
the footboy who had ushered them in having 
made his re-appearance and ducked his head to 
his silent mistress by means of a tug inflicted 
on the central lock of a shaggy red mane, she 
desired him to step to the vestry, and let the 
Doctor know Sir Alan and my Lady were there. 

" You seem to have a very pretty garden ? " 
said Lady Redwood, in a conciliating tone. 

" The Doctor is fond of flowers, and takes 
pleasure in cultivating it." 

"It strikes me that the finest flowers are 
generally to be found in old-fashioned gardens. 
Do you not think that stocks, and cabbage- 
roses, and honey-suckles are- generally far more 
beautiful in old farmhouses than in the choicest 
nursery grounds?" 

Mrs. Hobart was affronted. "The Doctor 
gets his plants and seeds from the first florist in 
the county." 

" I saw you, Mrs. Hobart, at a distance, when 



66 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

we drove into the village," said Sir Alan. " I 
conclude you were frightened in by the over- 
clouding of the weather ? " 

" The Doctor told me before he went out 
that it would not rain ; so I was under no such 
apprehension." 

" Hobart is, I know, an infallible weather 
glass ;*' replied the patron ; " thanks, I fear, to 
his rheumatism. Ah ! here he comes ! " 

Lady Redwood's hopes that the entree of the 
Vicar would serve to animate the scene, were 
very speedily undeceived. Mrs. Hobart, who 
was but the sympathetic reflection of a human 
being and destitute of an idea of her own, could 
no longer quote the Doctor when he was actually 
in presence ; and as to Hobart himself, he was 
precisely the man to inflict martyrdom on poor 
Julia. 

The Vicar of Farmington was an interpreter 
of minikin mysteries,— a prophet on a small 
scale, — a diamond edition of Albertus Magnus, 
— a duodecimo Roger Bacon, — a miniature 
Faust, — a nimini-pimini Galileo ; dabbled in 
chemistry; passed for an antiquary with the 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 67 

maiden ladies of the neighbourhood ; — was the 
proprietor of half a dozen black letter editions ; 
— corresponded with the Gentleman's Maga- 
zine ; — and, in the course of a second glass of 
negus, had been known to hint himself as the 
Philanthropos of the Statesman newspaper. — Ge- 
nerally speaking, an individual of this sort of 
universal genius, is a man of words ; but Hobart 
was intrinsically and exclusively a man of letters. 
Suspicious perhaps (for the most arrogant pre- 
tenders have often a tolerable insight into their 
real value) that his sayings were of very small 
account in the ears of mankind, he strove to in- 
crease their importance — as the Dutch planters 
augment the price of their spices, by clearing 
the market with a bonfire— by rendering them 
not only few and far between, but by giving 
utterance to his oracles in an unintelligible 
whisper. He would not inquire of one of his 
tithepaying farmers after the health of his cart- 
horse without taking him aside for so interesting 
an investigation ; — was always to be found whis- 
pering in a window seat at the squirearchical 
dinners of the parish ; — and shook his head with 



68 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

as much mysterious emphasis while bargaining 
in a corner for some old higgler's new laid eggs, 
as would have procured him considerable de- 
ference at a visitation dinner of the diocese. 

But if so mysterious the course of his inter- 
course with the every day world, what was the 
extent of his empty solemnity in his communi- 
cation with his patron ! — In presence of Sir 
Alan, his aspect grew as hieroglyphical as the 
Pyramids ; — his face was " a mystery" without 
being a "beauty;" — his discourse all periphra- 
sis; — his "nods and winks" were pregnant with 
emphasis and implication ; and as to his 
"wreathed smiles," not a simper of them but 
contained a judicial verdict!— Not a word did the 
Doctor utter, but " denoted a foregone conclu- 
sion ; " his dissertations (without a key) were 
as incomprehensible as a fashionable novel ; 
and his allusions to " certain persons," — and 
"certain events,"— and "one who shall be 
nameless," and " a mutual friend of ours whom 
it is needless to specify," would have defied the 
exposition of Messieurs Bos well, Croker, or 
Thomas Hill. 

His ko-tou to the bride reverentially but si- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 69 

lently performed, Dr. Hobart commenced an 
inquiry, partly by signs and symbols, and partly 
by word of mouth, " whether Sir Alan had re- 
ceived his letter of the 21st instant, relative to 
an interesting occurrence ; — and whether he 
might consider himself justified in the inferences 
he had formed on the occasion, relative to his 
patron's wishes on a certain head ? " — 

Redwood, albeit well-used to the Vicar's ten- 
dency to monster his own nothings, and those of 
other people, could scarcely refrain from a smile 
as he proceeded to invest his reply to the ques- 
tion in the plain English of '' Yes, my dear 
Doctor; and I have no doubt Lady Redwood 
will like green baize hassocks quite as well as 
red ; " but Hobart was not to be defrauded of 
his opportunity. It might suit the projirietor 
of Farminghurst Castle to admit his "woman- 
kind " into the cabinet council ; but the proprie- 
tor of Farmington Vicarage knew better. He 
was well aware by what means he had succeeded 
in enshrining himself as a divinity, — a Magnus 
Apollo, — a Socrates in a surplice, — in the eyes 
of his little Dutch doll of a wife;— and had no 



TO THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

mind to rend in her presence, the vail of his 
Temple of Mystery. 

Laying violent hands on the button of the 
Baronet, he accordingly drew him into the 
furthest window, — placed him with his back to 
the ladies, — and left nothing visible to the 
anxious Julia but his own self-important face — 
creaming and mantling like the standing pool, 
and foreshowing the nature of a tragic volume. 

What could they be talking about ? What 
could the Doctor be saying to Sir Alan in that 
sympathizing tone, that deprecating whisper, 
which required the enforcement of so much 
shaking of his well- powdered head, so much 
wagging of his forefinger, so many furtive 
glances towards herself, to ascertain that she was 
not listening;— so many whispered but audible 
injunctions to the Baronet to speak lower ; — to 
remember that they were not alone ? — Now and 
then, an italicized word reached her ears through 
the measured drone of Mr. Hobart's wishy- 
washy conversation ; such as, "poor thing;" — 
" the feelings of a woman so circumstanced ;" — 
" a voice addressing us from the grave ;" and 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 71 

without the least suspecting that the mystery en- 
veloped a communication from Hobart, as 
vicar, to Redwood, as magistrate, concerning a 
peccadillo of one of the female parishioners of 
the former, who was expiating the laxity of 
her morals on the treadmill upon six ounces of 
bread per diem, she referred every interjection, 
every sigh, and every grimace, to some direful 
circumstance connected with his former pa- 
troness. 

" I will step up to the Castle, and have a few 
minutes' private conversation with you on the 
subject," was the Doctor's concluding sentence, 
when Sir Alan, to the imminent peril of his 
button, at length tore himself from the window 
seat. 

" Do, Doctor," said Redwood, enchanted to 
have procured even a short respite. " You will 
always find me open to your arguments ; — but 
the less 1 hear on this painful subject the 
better. It is now too late,^' 

« Too late /"—Poor Julia. 

The visit was soon at an end ; but not so the 



72 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

increased and increasing distress arising to 
Lady Redwood from Dr. Hobart's diplomatic 
tone and impressive pantomime. Although Sh* 
Alan was keenly alive to his Vicar's foible, he 
respected him too much as a good man to hold 
him up to ridicule for not being a wise one ; 
and instead of pointing out to Julia, or even ad- 
mitting that he had not a grain of confidence in 
Doctor Hobart, nor the slightest inclination for 
the numberless private audiences insisted on by 
that worthy divine, he considered it his duty to 
maintain the importance of the Vicar of Farm- 
ington, in the eyes of his household, by indulg- 
ing those little innocent vagaries of his self- 
importance which did no harm to either of 
them. Whenever the man of mystery visited 
the Castle, Sir Alan either withdrew with him 
to the library, or talked with him in mysterious 
whispers at the furthest extremity of the room ; 
and it was really no great stretch of Lady Red- 
wood's morbid sensibility to believe that weighty 
business was transacted between them, in which 
she was not suffered to participate ; that they had 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 73 

a secret in common of painful import and une- 
qualled interest. Sometimes the name of Wal- 
pole transpired amid their whispers ; and though 
it arose only from Dr. Hobart's inquiry after 
the old lady's rheumatism when she last wrote, 
Julia no longer doubted that the gentleman in 
black was in collusion with that dreaded family ; 
and that, in all probability, he transmitted to 
Weymouth a regular diary of the proceedings at 
the Castle. And this was the individual with 
whom a large fraction of her country life would 
be passed : — this was the man who w^as to dine 
with her every Saturday, — exhort her every Sun- 
day, — regulate her beneficence to the poor, — and 
her intercourse with those whose young ideas 
w^ere being taught to shoot at her cost and care ! 
Dr. and Mrs. Hobart, and a husband whose 
heart was wedded to the grave, were the compa- 
nions destined to replace her doating parents, 
her discriminating friend Miss Wilmot. She 
almost longed to be back again on the once fa- 
miliar gravel-walk at Trevelyan Park. Nay, shci 
would have swallowed the bitterest concoction 

VOL. II. E 



74 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

devised by the malice of Buchan, only to feel her 
father's hand laid in benediction on her head, 
or her mother's clasped in yet tenderer endear- 
ment within her own ! — 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 75 



CHAPTER IX. 



A goodly spot. 
With lawns, and beds of flowers, and shades 
Of trellice-work in long arcades. 
And cirque and crescent, framed by wall 
Of close-clipt foliage, green and tall. 
Converging walks and fountains gay. 
And terraces in trim array. Wordsworth. 

It is very well for philosophers, who dry up 
their tears with the dust of mouldy libraries, to 
affect superiority to the ordinary vexations of 
life. But of what but petty cares and petty 
pleasures, is the grand sum total of destiny 
composed ? — Heroes and heroines bear a small 
proportion to the mighty multitude of their 
fellow-creatures; and for one individual who 
perishes by the Brobdignagian sabre-cut, a thou- 
sand are exposed to Lilliputian warfare; ten 
E 2 



T6 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

thousand doomed to the pin's-prick martyrdom 
of trivial afflictions. 

Lady Redwood had youth, beauty, virtue, 
fortune — was blest in affectionate parents and a 
husband of her own selection. But it was clear 
that she was fated to be a miserable woman : 
a single clear petrifying drop was incessantly 
dripping upon her head and chilling her to 
stone. The beautiful park of Farminghurst at- 
tracted day by day a host of admiring visitors to 
expatiate on the majesty of its woods, the variety 
of its prospects; but to the eye of the fair 
creature to whom they were as the dryad-haunt 
of daily life, they said nothing, — less than 
nothing : — her fancy was disenchanted, — the 
blight of disappointment was already on her 
young heart ! — Without sister or brother or con- 
genial spirit to exhaust the early impulses of her 
warm affections, — without romantic associations 
or romantic studies to exhalt her imagination 
or bewilder her passions — Julia Trevelyan's 
feelings had flowed undeviatingly in the pure 
channel marked out by nature. She had loved 
her tiresome father and mother dutifully and 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 77 

patiently ; — she had prepared herself to love 
her highly-gifted husband passionately and ex- 
clusively. Was he not her chosen one, her 
own, — her only ; — the companion of her mortal 
pilgrimage, — the partner of its crowning im- 
mortality ? — 

By how many chilling negatives were these 
and similar questions to be frozen into silence ! — 
No ! he was not hers ! — never, never could be 
hers. — He belonged to his dead wife, — his living 
child, — to the whole tribe of Walpole, — to any 
and every one but her; — to the mysterious 
vicar, — the importunate bailiff, — to stewards, 
tenants, gamekeepers, and constables ! Every 
human being at Farminghurst seemed to have 
a claim on his time, a title to his personal 
interest. Did he accompany his bride in a 
morning ride, every farmer who approached 
had his private tale to disclose, his petition to 
advance to his landlord, regardless of the value 
placed by the repining Julia on every word 
proceeding from Redwood's lips, every glance 
emanating from Redwood's eyes. Did she per- 
suade him, on tlieir return, to adjourn with her 



78 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. * 

to the library, and lavish the delightful hour of 
leisure preceding the dinner-bell on new books, 
old engravings, or passages from a favourite 
author shared in common,— the mysterious vi- 
car was sure to drop in, with a face as secret 
as a despatch-box, to draw his patron to a 
distant window, and engage him in discourse, 
in which Sir Alan's air of absorbed attention 
plainly denoted his interest. In a moment he 
seemed to forget her presence, and to become 
indifferent to her embarrassment. Nay, she 
could not so much as reckon on an unmolested 
stroll with him through the beautiful shrubberies. 
Every minute the head gardener was at their 
side, — imploring instructions, demonstrating im- 
possibilities, and courting praise from his mas- 
ter ; — while Julia, instead of rewarding him with 
her approval, fairly wished him at the bottom of 
one of his much-vaunted melon pits. 

Now had Lady Redwood been assured of 
possessing her husband's entire affection, — had 
she felt satisfied that, confer with whom he 
would, — debate with whom he must, — she 
was the one sole object to which inclination 



\ 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 79 

would have directed his time and thoughts, — 
vicar, steward, bailiff, butler, down to the game- 
keeper's crop-eared terrier, might have shared 
his attention without exciting her uneasiness. 
She would have entered into all his solicitudes, 
— all his pursuits ; — nor envied a single whisper, 
nor been jealous of a single ex parte audience. 
But a woman whose mind is perplexed by doubts 
of her husband's attachment, sees mischief in 
every thing. She persuaded herself indeed that a 
husband of but two months standing, ought to 
feel as impatient as herself of Dr. Hobart's impor- 
tunities, — as indifferent as her own heart to the 
fall of his timber and the rise of his underwood. 
If the vulgar cares of life were thus early to 
break in upon their intercourse, where was that 
blessed, that uninterrupted communion of wed- 
ded hearts, for which so many well-rhymed stan- 
zas had bespoken her admiration; — on which 
'* so much metre and much pains " have been 
from time immemorial thrown away. Oh ! 
those poetical dreams of her youth ! — those 
visions of the starry sky, the flowery vallies, 
and the quiet woods, enjoyed in sympathizing 



80 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

loneliness with the man of her heart, — of her 
choice, — her better, her far more precious self ! 
Was all to end in colloquies with the game- 
keeper about breaking a litter of setter-puppies, 
— or with a Scotch gardener about the best 
mode of cultivating the hundred-headed cab- 
bage? — Here was an end for her romance; — 
here a commencement of the common-place 
realities of life ! — Was it worth while to lavish 
the pure incense of her heart, that 

Rose like a stream of rich distilled perfumes, 
on one who cared more for the mash about to 
be administered to his favourite mare, than for a 
walk with her by moonlight on the terrace ? — and 
who preferred a debate with the Doctor touch- 
ing the new tiling of the workhouse, to her own 
quotations from Byron and Mrs. Hemans ? 
The thing was only too apparent ! — Nothing 
but a heart whose energies were destroyed, — a 
mind whose polish was worn off by devotion 
to one pre-engrossing object, could be capable 
of such trifling, such paltry, such mercenary 
worldliness ! — 

It had been well for a woman thus misguided^ 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 81 

to have been united with a husband stationed 
somewhat higher, or somewhat lower, in the 
scale of human dignities; with one who pos- 
sessed no delegates to require his superintend- 
ence, or a dignity too supreme to admit of 
contact with them. He was just planted on 
that round of fortune's ladder best calculated to 
add to the amount of her cares. 

People wlio brood over their sorrows, are 
usually successful in hatching a numerous 
covey ; and those who sit " nursing their rage 
to keep it warm," are sure of a comfortable 
temperature of indignation. Solitary medita- 
tion did but distort the medium through which 
Sir Alan Redwood's conduct was viewed by his 
wife ; and at length, after a dialogue with her- 
self of which the arguments were only too una- 
nimous, she took a sudden resolution, about as 
discreet and judicious as all sudden resolutions 
of ladies of twenty-one, whether wives or 
maidens. '' I will repress this glowing tender- 
ness," said she. " I will meet his coldness with 
coldness. Since he can interest himself with tri- 
E 5 



82 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

fles, let me seek objects of interest equally trivial ; 
since his pursuits are of so absorbing a nature, let 
me create to myself amusement from a thousand 
neglected sources. I will resume my drawing, my 
etching,— all the occupations which afFordedme so 
much gratification ere I became acquainted with 
Redwood. He gives his attention to the plant- 
atio^is and orchards, — I will busy myself in im- 
proving the flower garden ; — he puts his exclu- 
sive confidence in Dr. Hobart, / will make a 
friend (a friend ! ) of the Vicar^s wife." 

Of these intentions, the second was at once 
the easiest and pleasantest of execution. It 
possessed even the charm of novelty ; for not- 
withstanding Julia's rustic education and femi- 
nine passion for flowers, gardening w^as among 
Mr. Trevelyan's numerous interdictions, as a 
source of catarrhs and an enemy to the com- 
plexion. In her own old home, Julia had pos- 
sessed a little square ugly nook called her gar- 
den ; duly dug and planted by the under gar- 
dener, and weeded by seven ragged boys from 
the park lodge. But she had never yet enjoyed 
the glorious privilege of planting, — uprooting, 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. S3 

— raising the rustic temple, — and destroying the 
obsolete grotto. 

Now the o-ardens at Farinino^hurst were cer- 
tainly as well calculated for improvement as Rep- 
ton himself could have desired. There w^as a 
labyrinth of brick walls and lofty terraces, with 
balustrades and vases of stone; — a pleasaunce 
stuck with statues and yew-trees ; and a Dutch 
garden, of which the sun-dial in the centre stood 
towering above the tulip and polyanthus beds, 
and vying in solitary grandeur with the column in 
the Place Vendonie. All was surpassingly fright- 
ful ; and as the genius of harmon}^ was not 
likely to descend and whisper to its mistress that 
the whole was in curious and remarkable unison 
with the heavy gables and sixteenth century ar- 
chitecture of the castle, there seemed every pro- 
bability that not so much as a pebble or a chry- 
santhemum would be left to prate of the where- 
about of its straight parterres and straighter 
gravel walks. But Julia had not sufficient ardour 
to become a ruthless invader ; and instead of di- 
recting the force of her genius or of her authority 
to the demolition of the terraces and tulip 



84 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

beds, she determined to choose a spot for her 
exertions where what was ah-eady charming 
might be rendered still more delightful. 

Situated about half a mile from the house in 
one of the plantations (a rich shrubbery of ever- 
greens leading from the old-fashioned pleasaunce 
to the ridge of hills forming the first landbreak 
towards the sea) — there was a beautiful platform 
of greensward fronting the western sun, and 
fenced round with an extensive belt of flowering 
shrubs. The spot was evidently not a favourite 
with its master; for whenever the course of their 
walks led them that way, he proposed returning 
to the house. Nay, once upon Julia's proposing 
that they should rest themselves there on a rustic 
seat placed under shelter of a spreading mag- 
nolia tree, he had frankly invited her to select 
some more cheerful spot. " Any part of the 
grounds rather than this," said he; leading her 
onwards through the closer dingles of the shrub- 
beries. 

This, therefore, was the place that naturally 
pointed itself out to Lady Redwood as propi- 
tious to her operations. Here she might work 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 85 

in secret, secure from her husband's observation; 
here she might create for herself an interest, 
an occupation, a solitary haunt for her reve- 
ries, — a refuge from her desolation. It was an 
excellent field for the exercise of her taste ; — 
sylvan, remote, grassy, shadowy ; — with several 
fine cedars feathering down to the soft short 
turf; and dense masses of evergreen, that wanted 
only a skilful hand to break into picturesque 
groups. Nothing could be easier than to open 
a vista towards the sea, and add a beautiful 
landscape to the tranquil lonely stillness of the 
foreground. It was only to cut through the 
screen of shrubs, and the rustic pavilion (the 
chalet, for the erection of which her plans were 
already sketched) would command a magnificent 
prospect over the German Ocean ! — Eager as a 
child for the realization of her scheme, the axe 
was soon at work ; and in the course ot ti few 
days, the trunks of hemlock firs, stone pines, 
acacias, and tulip trees, which twenty years 
had coaxed into moderate growth, nay even the 
beautiful magnolia tree, — lay encumbering the 
lawn. Instead of their dull dim foliage, a beau- 



86 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

tiful glimmer of the distant sea, witli the hfehke 
variety of its chasing sails and changeful hues, 
gladdened the eyes of the delighted Julia ! — 
Having caused the rustic bench, originally placed 
under shade of the branching magnolia, to be 
disencumbered of the withering shrubs scattered 
around, and stationed on the spot she had se- 
lected for the site of the chalet. Lady Redwood 
sat herself contentedly down to contemplate the 
beautiful landscape she seemed to have called 
into existence. 

There is something peculiarly pleasing in the 
combination of movement and stillness inherent 
in every extensive prospect. The lofty platform, 
perched like a green nest on the edge of the 
hill, commanded a beautiful stretch of wood- 
lands shelving to the sea. A thriving village 
stood on a detached acclivity to the eastward ; 
the very movement of whose windmill with the 
measured swirl of its sails, served to animate the 
scene. The soft, nobly rounded tops of the 
oak trees below, formed a rich foreground; and 
at a distance (its dolphin-like tints varying with 
the reflection of the clouds sailing above) shone 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 87 

the majestic ocean, — the mightiest moving im- 
pulse of the created earth. 

It was a lovely scene, — a soothing spot. The 
humming of the insects among the branches, 
the distant call of the herd-boys gathering 
their cattle in the pastures, and now and then 
a blackbird waking up the mellow gurgle of its 
evening song, alone disturbed the deep tran- 
quillity; — and as Julia sat drinking in the 
balmy breath of evening, rich with the fragrance 
of the crushed grass and the aromatic exhala- 
tions of the pine trees, her heart felt freshened 
and her spirits brightened. She seemed to rise 
superior to the petty cares by which she had 
suffered herself to become oppressed ; — to rejoice 
in the beauty of the external frame of nature; — 
to recognize the beneficence of the mighty 
hand that spreads its gifts so bounteously 
around us, and still hovers over its works 
as if awaiting fresh occasion to beautify and 
bless ! — She began to recognise with thank- 
fulness the prosperity of her own situation. Her 
parents too would shortly arrive in England, — 
would soon be with her ; — would sit with her on 



88 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

that very spot; — and rejoice with her in the 
brightness of her destiny. Yes; — she felt that 
she was now happy, or on the point of be- 
coming so; — that she should soon be as light- 
hearted as ever, — recover her spirits, her bloom, 

her Alas ! what sudden spectacle caused the 

quick blood to mount into her cheeks ; and sus- 
pended this happy progress of thought and feel- 
ing? — What did she behold, — what hear — what 
apprehend, — to induce that air of consterna- 
tion ? — 

Never before had the approach of her hus- 
band produced so strange an emotion ! A 
rustlinoj of the bushes havin<T caused her to turn 
her head while summing up her vast amount of 
means of happiness, she was struck by the sight 
of Sir Alan standing motionless by her side; 
his looks haggard, — his lips quivering, — his eyes 
sparkling with indignation ! — 

" Who has done this ?" — cried Redwood, 
pointing to the uprooted trees, and disordered 
turf. " What accursed hand has dared to in- 
vade this sacred— sacred spot ! — Rather had my 
right arm been cut off, than one branch of 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 89 

yonder magnolia touched; rather had they 
taken my heart's blood, than presumed to lay 
their finger on a single blade of grass. It was 

hers! Mary, — Mary, — is this the way in 

which I have kept my promise; — is this the 
guardianship I have exercised over your favourite 
haunt !" — He wrung his hands distractedly as he 
spoke, with many an abhorrent glance over the 
scene of devastation. 

But Julia was now beyond reach of his adju- 
rations. She could no longer hear his cruel 
words — no longer tremble under the terrible 
expression of his countenance— she lay cold and 
senseless at his feet. 



90 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 



CHAPTER X. 



What tho' his other wife 

Out of her most abundant soberness, 

Forc'd him to blow as high as she, dos't follow 

He must renew that long-since buried tempest 

With this soft maid ? The Tamer Tamed. 

It was scarcely a week after this distress- 
ing occurrence, that Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan 
arrived suddenly at the Castle. Loving their 
only child so tenderly, and with so sure a trust 
in her reciprocation of affection, they had taken 
it into their heads to make their appearance 
without previous announcement, in order to give 
her what they called an agreeable surprise. 
Clearer-sighted people would have been aware 
that surprises (excepting in a pantomime) are 
never agreeable. Lady Redwood, who knew 
not of their arrival in England and believed 
them still in Paris, was very ill prepared to 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 91 

afford the welcome they expected. Recent in- 
disposition imparted languor to her address and 
Hstlessness to her air ; and there was no longer 
a single impulse of joy stirring in her bosom. 

Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan had expected indeed 
to see her weep in the joy of seeing them 
again — had expected to weep themselves : — 
they were prepared for a general overflow of 
tears. But they did not expect the flood to be 
of long duration. Satisfied that the sunshine 
of Julia's sweet smiles would very soon re-irra- 
diate the scene, the lively tones of her voice 
would again yield delight and gladness to their 
old hearts. 

But they were disappointed ! Lady Red- 
wood, after the first burst of surprise and emo- 
tion, regained the statue-like paleness and im- 
mobility which were now becoming habitual to 
her. The tears dried in her eyes, but it was 
only to be succeeded by the glassy vacant stare 
of a half-alienated mind. The shriek of her 
amazement was momentary; but, instead of 
giving place to joyful tender expressions of wel- 
come, a hoarse broken murmur seemed to have 



92 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

usurped her former sweet intonation. Fortu- 
nately Sir Alan was absent — gone to fulfil his 
magisterial duties at the neighbouring town ; or 
he would certainly have been apt to take offence 
at the involuntary exclamations of pity and re- 
gret with which the wondering parents contem- 
plated their altered child ;— the mortification ex- 
pressed by old Trevelyan, that he had ever 
suffered her to encounter the searchins: atmos- 
phere of Yorkshire, instead of her own soft 
breezes of the west ; — and the hints thrown out 
by the poor mother, that her child was less 
happy and less cared-for than she expected to 
be ! — On Julia's ear these insinuations fell innor 
caous. It was not what the world thought, it 
was not even what her parents thought, in dis- 
paragement of her condition, that constituted 
its shame or sorrow ; — it was that, according to 
the pathetic phrase of the Boothby monument, 
"she had ventured her store of happiness in one 
frail bark, and that the wreck was total ! " It had 
been her sole wish, her hope, her trust, to tri- 
umph in the exclusive affection of iier husband ; 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 93 

and disappointed in that blessed aspiration, her 
after hfe was a blank. 

" Tell me, Julia, my love," inquired her 
mother, trying to engage her in general conver- 
sation, as they sat together after dinner in the 
vast comfortless saloon (which Lady Redwood 
wanted courage or energy to render more mo- 
dernizedly habitable), " i^;/«o presented you at the 
drawing-room ? " — 

" I did not go. The weather was oppressive ; 
and Sir Alan was not particularly anxious on 
the subject." 

" You must have been languid from debility 
to suffer so much from the heat. I hope, my 
love, you saw Sir Henry Halford?" — 

" No, indeed. Papa ! Redwood was of opi- 
nion that the bracing air of Farminghurst 
would restore me ; and you see," she continued, 
faintly smiling, "that he has proved a true 
prophet." 

" Never saw you looking worse jn your life !" 
cried old Trevelyan. " I wish to goodness I 
had brought down some sulphate of quinine." 



94 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

"And how did you like the Duchess of 
Wearmouth?" inquired his wife. 

" I did not see her." 

" Not introduce you to his aunt the Duchess ! " 
cried Mrs. Trevelyan with indignation. 

" We had very little time to pay visits." 

" It was her business to visit you as a bride. 
And pray then, my dear Julia, which of the 
family did condescend to notice you when you 
were in town ? " — 

" The Walpoles came up for a day or two, 
to bring the little gh'l," said Lady Pt., blushing 
deeply. 

" The Walpoles ! — they are the relatives of 
the late Lady Redwood. It was to his ow7i 
connexions Sir Alan ought to have introduced 
his wife." 

" And would, had I desired it. But my chief 
object was to get into the country." 

"Probably he has not even presented you 
with the family jewels? — Have you your dia- 
monds yet, Julia ?" — 

" I fancy they are at the banker's. It would 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 95 

have been absurd, you know, to bring them 
down here, where we see so Httle company." 

" But why see so litde company ?— Your 
neighbourhood is a very good one, and your 
honeymoon over, I conclude, by this time ? " 

'' Yes^— quite over ! " responded Juha, sigh- 
ing deeply. 

*' Then why not comply with the customs of 
society, and receive your neighbours as they 
ought to be received in a house like this ?" — 

"We have had but little leisure since we 
came here," replied Lady Redwood, unwilling 
to admit the want of harmony between herself 
and her husband, which would have rendered 
the presence of strangers so embarrassing. 
" But Sir Alan was saying yesterday, that as 
soon as the Walpoles came down to assist me 
in doing the honours, we ought to send out our 
invitations." 

" The Walpoles again !" cried the old lady. 
" What have the Walpoles to do with your 
proceedings ? Surely, my dear Julia, the cus- 
toms of Trevelyan Park have qualified you 



96 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

to preside over Farminghurst Castle, without 
the intervention of such people as the Wal- 
poles?"— 

" Sir Alan has a very high opinion of them." 

"Which need not induce him to depreciate his 

wife. It is time that things were put on a 

different footing," said poor fussy Mrs. Treve- 

lyan. " 1 shall take care that the claims of a 

child of mine " 

" My dear, dear mother ! " interrupted Lady 
Redwood, clasping her arms round Mrs. Tre- 
velyan, as she sat beside her on the sofa. " If 
you value my comfort, you will not interfere 
betwixt me and my husband. My happiness 
is just now hanging on a thread. Touch it 
with ever so delicate, so tender a hand, and it 
will snap asunder. You must not talk to Red- 
wood of the Walpole family ; you must not 
torment him about diamonds and drawing- 
rooms ; you must not urge him into seeing 
more company at Farminghurst than suits his 
convenience. You must not ; indeed you must 
not ! — If you love me, you will promise to de- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE^ 9T ' 

sist from all these things. — You do love me ; — 
you will promise ? '* — 

" My dear child," cried poor Mrs. Trevelyan 
visibly affected, " I was in hopes I should see 
and hear no more of these nervous tremors. 
You remind me, Julia, of those disagreeable 
moments at Rome, when you were still in doubt 
respecting Sir Alan's attachment." 

" Do I remind you of those moments?" eja- 
culated Julia, withdrawing her arms. And she 
whispered to herself that even that period of 
suspense was preferable to her present cer- 
tainty of his sentiments. 

The old squire, meanwhile, having been ab- 
sorbed in a deep reverie, fancied he had made a 
notable discovery. Ever ready to espy a phy- 
sical cause for moral effects, it suddenly oc- 
curred to him that all his darling Julia's chil- 
liness, paleness, and nervous emotions, were 
attributable to the prospect of a little heir to 
Farminghurst Castle; and, vexed that he had 
said any thing to embarrass her, he now cut 
short the course of his lady's catechism, and 
began to relate the adventures of their own 

VOL. II. F 



98 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

journey from Italy, for the amusement of his 
daughter ; laughing at all the dull jests of his 
own narrative, and fancying it was Julia who 
diverted ; and dwelling with considerable em- 
phasis on certain situations and incidents which 
he found highly interesting, but which fell un- 
heeded on the vacant ear of poor Lady Red- 
wood. 

The old gentleman's illusion could not last 
for ever ; nor had he been twenty-four hours 
under the roof of his son-in-law, before a dis- 
passionate review of his own and his wife's 
observations, conjectures, and apprehensions, 
aided by the hints and implications of Mrs. 
Trevelyan's maid, sufficed to convince him that 
his Julia was an unhappy woman — a neglected 
wife ! 

" What shall we do, — what can we do ! " 
cried poor Mrs. Trevelyan, wringing her hands 
as she walked up and down her dressing-room, 
after a cabinet council with her husband. " In 
spite of all our care and caution, that our 
precious child should fall into the hands of a 
brute ! "— 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 99 

" We have no evidence entitling us to use so 
harsh a term." 

" What ! — when you hear that the poor clear 
girl has twice been found senseless in his arms?" 
" She seems in a very weak state of health, 
poor dear ; — perhaps she wants tonics." 

" And what has reduced her to a weak state 
of health? — She was always well enough and 
happy enough at Trevelyan Park. She was 
even well and happy in Italy, when this heart- 
less man first intruded himself into our society. 
But I doubt whether she will ever be well or 
happy again. Ah ! my poor dear Julia !— lit- 
tle did she deserve to be visited with such a 
destiny ! " — 

" Hush, my dear, hush ! — You saw how 
anxious the poor child was that we should be 
cautious in meddling with her domestic affairs." 
" And yet you affect to doubt that her hus- 
band is unkind! — What but actual, positive, 
and most severe unkindness could terrify her to 
such a degree? — Ah, Mr. Trevelyan ! the case 
is only too plain ; — I am convinced he uses her 
like a dog." 

f2 



100 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

" Well, don't convince me so, if you can 
help it; for were it once proved, he should die 
the death of one, if ever Providence put 
strenoth into a father's arm ! — But what chance 
have we of obtaining her confidence?" — 

" Sir Alan will be here to-morrow. You 
must point out to him, without warning Julia 
of your intention, that her health requires a 
milder atmosphere ; and ask his permission to 
take her back with us to Trevelyan Park." 

" Will she ever find courage to second the 
proposal ? " 

" We must place the necessity of the case in 
so strong a point of view as to leave him no 
alternative." 

" At worst, I can but end (where I would 
fain begin) with peremptory measures ; for, by 
fair means or foul, Julia shall accompany us 
home to Cornwall, or my name is not Richard 
Trevelyan!" 

There proved, however, no occasion for the 
threat. Fair means were perfectly successful, 
so far as regarded the accomplishment of the 
object ; but so far as regarded the advancement 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 101 

of their daughter's welfare, the wisdom of Mr. 
and Mrs. Trevelyan's tactics is much to be 
doubted. It was in Julia's presence they first 
proposed their project for the sanction of Sir 
Alan; who, having, in the first impulse of his 
surprise, turned his eyes upon his wife, was 
satisfied from the sudden flush overspreading 
her cheeks, that the plan originated with herself; 
and refrained from all demonstration of either 
surprise or mortification, while by a cold but un- 
conditional assent, he completed her own. Un- 
prepared for the scheme projected by the offi- 
cious zeal of her father and mother, she was 
still less so for the calmness with which her dear 
Redwood seemed to contemplate her absence ; 
and ill as she was inclined for the measure, Julia 
was now too much piqued by his indifference to 
oppose any obstacle to the plan. 

" The weather is just now very propitious for 
so long a journey," uttered by Sir Alan, by 
way of collateral inquiry into their intentions, 
sounded to his wife very like a hint that the 
sooner they were gone the better. Having has- 
tened her preparation accordingly, she now be- 



JOS THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

gan to express to Mrs. Trevelyan great anxiety 
for change of air — great desire to be at home 
again. She was sure she should be better in 
Cornwall ; — she should grow strong at Tre- 
velyan Park ; — it was so long since she had been 
at home" 

This last trait was conclusive !— Sir Alan 
Redwood would have forgiven her any thing 
but the feeling that still pointed out her " home" 
as elsewhere than at Farminghurst. He re- 
frained from expressing his desire to be the 
companion of her journey to the south ; — he 
refrained from even fixing a period for seeing 
her again ; and even expressed his request to 
hear of her safe arrival at Trevelyan Park in 
terms so cold and formal, that compliance had 
been ignominious. 

Heartstricken — disappointed — despairing, — 
poor Julia had scarcely fortitude to bear her 
up with any show of cheerfulness through the 
few days that elapsed previous to her depar- 
ture ; but pride — the suggester of so many per- 
nicious lessons — enabled her to at least disguise 
the feelings she could not subdue. While her 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 103 

bosom was throbbing with anguish, she ma- 
naged to make her adieux to the mysterious 
Vicar as decisive as if she were on the point 
of quitting Farminghurst for ever ; and to re- 
ceive her husband's cold farewell, as lightly and 
unconcernedly as if she were only intent on a 
party of pleasure. 



104 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 



CHAPTER XI. 



We shall write to you 
As time and our concernings shall importune. 
How it goes with us ; and do look to know 
What doth befall you here. So fare you well. 

Measure for Measure. 

Had Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan been aware of 
the exact nature of the duty they undertook in 
removing their darling Julia from the protec- 
tion of her barbarous husband, not even their 
tenderness would have adventured so arduous a 
task. But with their usual opacity of vision, 
they were deceived to the last moment ; — were 
persuaded that Lady Redwood's expressions of 
anxiety to quit Farminghurst were genuine, 
and that the wild merriment bursting at inter- 
vals from her lips, even on the very morning of 
departure, arose from a pleasurable excitement. 
They saw not— they heard not — they had not 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 105 

soul to know or dream, that it sprang from the 
bitterness of a deceived and breaking heart ! 

The flush upon her cheek, indeed, filled them 
with consternation. Regarding it as a hectic 
symptom, they were all eagerness to remove her 
from Yorkshire to the mild breezes of her natal 
atmosphere. But when (the portal past, — the 
last lodge — the last glen — the last wood of 
Farminghurst left behind and out of sight,) they 
saw their daughter sink heavily into the corner 
of the carriage, her hands crossed despairingly 
on her bosom, and the feverish glow of her 
cheek fading suddenly into the paleness of mar^ 
ble, Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan began to fancy 
that the state of her health was more perilous 
than they had imagined; and that she would 
scarcely bear the fatigue of so long a journey. 
They now blamed themselves for the responsi- 
bility they had incurred in the eyes of Sir Alan 
Redwood; and half resolved to dispatch a letter 
back to the Castle, requesting he would follow 
them as soon as possible to Trevelyan Park. 
Nothing but the apprehension of accelerating 
the progress of Julia's disorder by the agitation- 
F 5 



106 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

attendant on the unwelcome appearance of her 
tyrant, induced them to postpone this ill-judg- 
ing determination. 

Lady Redwood did, however, bear her jour- 
ney without inconvenience ; and the interest 
of revisiting the abode of her childhood did, 
for a single moment, disperse the mournful 
clouds gathered around her brows. But her 
heaviness of spirit came again only the more 
painfully for its momentary suspension. Nay, 
there was something in the unnatural isola- 
tion of her new position that seemed to strike 
her with double force, now that she found herself 
a wife — a widow— in the dwelling-place of her 
virgin years. It seemed as if she had cropped 
the flowers of her destiny ; — that nothing was 
left for her but its withering leaves, its bowed 
and faded stem ; — that Hope, the butterfly 
which once fluttered amid its perished blossoms 
was lying dead in the dust ; that the bee — that 
sanguine gatherer of its honey — had deserted a 
thing which now rendered back nothing but 
bitterness ; — that the rifled sweets were gone — 
that the eternal winter was at hand ! 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 107 

If the Trevelyans had indulged the flattering 
illusion that change of air and scene would bring 
back health and strength to their feeble charge, 
they were quickly undeceived. From the mo- 
ment she arrived at her old home (which rose 
before her eyes as a monument to her departed 
happiness) her step grew heavier — her breath 
shorter— her eye more languid — her pulse more 
fluttering — The Cornish physicians, who had 
seen her depart three years before in all the 
bloom and elasticity of girlhood, shook their 
heads as they noted her parched lips and hollow 
eyes, and listened to the nervous huskiness of her 
voice. It happened that their visits were paid 
immediately after the daily arrival of the post, 
when the excitement of expecting a letter from 
Farminghurst and the subsequent disappoint- 
ment of her expectations, filled her veins with 
fire and her nerves with irritation. Unable to 
account for the stir of pulse perceptible in her 
frame, they followed the course systematically 
pursued by persons accustomed to watch over 
English constitutions, and attributed the mis- 
chief they could not develop to the existence of 



^08 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

latent consumption. Although the lungs, they 
admitted, were not at present affected, they de- 
precated all exposure to atmospheric changes, 
and desired that their patient should be at once 
amused and kept quiet. The lungs ! — with the 
heart so near, that they should remain blind, 
deaf, and insensible to its influence ! — 

Meanwhile Lady Redwood profited by the 
privilege of an invalid to write no letters and see 
no company. After the few formal lines in 
which she officially announced to Sir Alan, her 
" arrival at dear Trevelyan after a safe and de- 
lightful journey," she resolutely refrained from 
addressing him. What indeed could she have 
said, debarred from reference to the one sacred 
subject uppermost in her mind ? — Or how could 
she have addressed him on common place topics, 
while her whole soul was withered up by the 
shadow of the unsurmountable barrier existent 
between them ? — 

With respect to society, it had been her in- 
tention in accepting her parents' invitation, to 
play her part of excellent dissembling to its 
utmost limit; to smile, talk, and apparently 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 109 

enjoy herself as she had been wont to do, among 
her early friends and connexions. But the first 
few days past at Trevelyan proved her incom- 
petency to such exertions. The neighbouring 
squirearchy— who came thronging to the Park to 
welcome back their fellow squire and squiress, 
and listen to wonderful tales of their Italian tra- 
vels, — regarding Julia's sojourn with her family 
as the visit of an only child to her adoring pa- 
rents, tortured her with facetious references to her 
absent husband, inquiries respecting the probabi- 
lity of his arrival, and expressions of anxiety to 
make the acquaintance of a being so idolized and 
idolizing. It was impossible to court the con- 
tinuance of these vexations; and entrenching 
herself accordingly in the decree of the phy- 
sicians that she was to be kept quiet, she 
confined herself to two cheerful comfortable 
apartments connected w^ith her own room ; 
which, in contemplation of the future visits of 
Sir Alan and Lady Redwood to a home which 
must one day become their own, had been 
splendidly fitted up for her by the kindness of 
her father. The country neighbours were easily 



110 THE SECOND MAllRTAGE. 

satisfied. Having been admitted to a sight of 
the great lady of Farminghurst Castle, they 
ascertained that she was by no means so pretty 
as when (as little Julia) she paced the gravel 
walk by Miss Wilmot's side ; — that she still wore 
a simple dress of white muslin ; — and that she 
was by no means so well worth looking at and 
litening to as her more chatty and equally 
travelled mother. The reality of her indisposi- 
tion was too apparent to induce any suspicion 
of fine ladyism in her self-sought seclusion; 
and seeing her so languid, pale, and thin, they 
politely wished in their hearts that the first little 
Redwood might prove a son and heir. 

Poor Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan were not, how- 
ever, to be so deceived. The Squire, to whom 
his daughter's merest finger-ache had ever been 
as an attack of the plague, now saw death 
inscribed in her hollow brows and attenuated 
form. Did not the very physicians talk about 
consumption ;— did not Julia, herself, though 
reluctantly, admit that she could neither eat nor 
sleep ? — Her appetite was gone, — her powers of 
rest;— it was all too plain,— too terrible !— His 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. Ill 

only daughter — his darhng daughter ! — Poor 
Mr. Trevelyan shuddered while he whispered to 
his poor old wife that the spring would come 
again, and find them childless. " So j^oung 
— so beautiful — to think that we should survive 
her," he exclaimed, with outspread hands, 
as he attempted to subdue his irritation by 
pacing up and down Mrs. Trevelyan's dressing- 
room. 

" No, no, no, — do not say so ! " cried the 
poor mother, laying down her work and taking 
off her spectacles, as if to recall all her pei'ceptive 
powers for a mental revisal of the case. " Camo- 
mile admits that, at present, the disease has no 
hold on the constitution. The dear creature 
suffers no pain, — breathes freely. 
"But her pale face, her debility? " 
** I sometimes think we have done wrongs 
to call in the aid of physicians. I have ne- 
ver (thank Heaven, and thank you, my dear 
husband,) had occasion to see much of human 
affliction; but I cannot help fancymg that a 
great part of her suffering is on the mind. That 
history of the ghost, which Sterling persists in, 



112 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

and which, I find, was the common talk of the 
country at Farminghurst, must have arisen 
from some nervous panic." 

" What say you to inviting Miss Wilmot 
here ? — Perhaps Julia may have less reserve 
with her than us." 

" Miss Wilmot, indeed ! " exclaimed Mrs. 
Trevelyan. " It would be hard indeed were 
my only child to show more confidence in her 
governess than in her mother." 

" She may hesitate about alarming ?/om.*' 

" True ! " replied the old lady ; and the 
woman having given vent to her little move- 
ment of pique, the mother readily consented to 
a proposal which, by any possibility, could prove 
advantageous to the beloved invalid. But un- 
fortunately, the friend of Lady Redwood's youth 
was absent on a distant tour; and still more 
unfortunately, a visitor arrived in her place, 
than whom the Fates could scarcely have pro- 
vided a more pernicious substitute. Mr. Tre- 
vanion, whose estates lay on the western coast 
of Cornwall, having accidentally heard of his 
niece's indisposition, considered it his duty to 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 113 

■come and remind her of the uncertainty of 
human life, and the insufficiency of human skill 
in repelling the progress of disease. His so- 
lemn face and doleful tones, combined with the 
fading hues of autumn and the dispiriting in- 
fluence of the equinoctial weather, completed 
the charm. Lady Redwood soon began to 
fancy not only that she was dying, but dying 
of a broken heart. The more persuaded, 
however, she grew of the fact, the more she 
was bent on screening it from her unfortu- 
nate parents, and preventing rumours of her 
situation from reaching her husband. Having 
hinted to Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan that she 
was in correspondence with the Castle, they 
were very ready to desist from all further com- 
munication with a son-in-law, now the object of 
their detestation. 

" When all is over,'' mused poor Julia, 
" when my end is approaching, — then let him 
come, and gaze upon the wreck of the wife he has 
sacrificed. Let him see me perish ; — let my clos- 
ing eyes but detect some expression of sympathy 



114 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

and pity in his own, and I shall die con- 
tented ! " 

But however contented she might wish to 
render her last moments, Uncle Trevanion took 
care that her present ones should assume a less 
amiable character. 

" And so, my dear," said he, having visited 
her dressing-room with a bundle of tracts under 
his arm, " I find by a letter from my wife, that 
the Walpoles have profited by your absence to 
take up their abode at Farminghurst?*' 

Julia pretended to turn a deaf ear. She was 
unwilling Mr. Trevanion should discover that 
he was the first to communicate the intelligence. 

" Pray did Sir Alan inform you in his last 
letters that Miss Redwood was established un- 
der his roof?" — 

" Miss Redwood?''— 

" His little girl. — Martha Walpole is in cor- 
respondence with one of my wife's sisters (whom 
you drank tea with one evening at my house), 
and writes her word that at Sir Alan's wish she 
has conveyed her poor motherless little charge 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 1 15 

to Farminghurst ; and installed her under the 
care of a regular governess, able to supply 
the deficiencies of your inexperience. It seems 
the Walpoles have engaged to pass the winter 
there." 

"Have they? — I rejoice to hear it. Sir 
Alan being detained there on business, I am 
glad to find he has secured a little cheerful 
society." 

" Cheerful ? the Walpoles cheerful society ? — 
Well — well ! — they are at least well-principled, 
right-thinking people, who will speedily coun- 
teract any little irregularities you may have in- 
troduced into the establishment. By the way, 
my dear Julia, I am sorry to find that their 
feelings have been very much hurt by the way 
in which you have set your face against every 
thing connected with the memory of poor Lady 
Redwood. I believe one of Mrs. Walpole's 
chief objects in taking up her abode at Farm- 
inghurst is to put an end to the reports you 
have circulated of the house being haunted." 

" I — I circulate such a report ! " — exclaimed 
his niece ; " I, who, with the exception of a 



116 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

few formal visits, have had no communication 
with his Yorkshire neighbours. The house 
haunted?— What an absurdity ! " — 

" I am glad to hear you say so. Mrs. Tre- 
vanion informs me an opinion is prevalent that 
you have quitted your husband's protection in 
consequence of seeing, or fancying, or stating 
that you saw, the apparition of the deceased 
Lady Redwood." 

" Can it be possible," exclaimed poor Julia, 
" that so absurd a report has been promulgated 
in consequence of my having been startled by 
the sudden entrance of Sir Alan into my 
dressing-room, when over-fatigued by a long 
journey?" — 

" It seems too that j^our coldness has given 
great offence to a worthy family in the village 
who always lived on terms of aflPectionate inti- 
macy with your predecessor ; — that you never 
so much as suffered poor Dr. Hobart to have a 
five minutes interview with your husband." 

Poor Lady Redwood, recollecting only too 
well that the Vicar's shortest sentence was of 
that duration, and his shortest visit one hundred 
times as long, groaned aloud. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. IIT 

" In short, my dear niece, I own it affords 
me considerable mortification to find that in the 
brief space of four months of married life, your 
conduct has alienated the affections of your hus- 
band, disgusted his whole family, his whole 
county, — driven the poor from his gates, his 
child from his protection, and thrown you back 
upon the hands of your father and mother ; — 
to say nothing of the vexation Mrs. Trevanion 
and myself experience, on hearing you described 
as a cold-hearted, artificial young woman ; too 
selfish to resign the idle habits into which you 
have been so unfortunately petted by my brother 
and sister." 

" This is too much — too much ! " cried poor 
Julia, bm'sting into tears ; " my conduct, — my 
motives, — my very feelings misrepresented. Oh 
that I had never formed this miserable con- 
nexion, the origin of so much suffering — so 
much humiliation !" 

" My love, it was a thing of your own doing. 
I find that your parents would never have con- 
sented to the match, but for the obstinacy with 
which your heart was set upon it; and you 



118 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

remember that even I, your uncle, considered 
it my duty to set before you in the clearest light 
the hazards of the step j^ou were taking." 

But Lady Redwood remembered nothing, 
heard nothing, saw nothing. The idea that Sir 
Alan, not content with banishing her from his 
heart had circulated calumnies respecting her, 
absorbed her every faculty, her every feel- 
ing. She longed for Mr. Trevanion's depar- 
ture that she might sit down and give vent 
to the wounded feelings so long repressed. 
Away with all reserve ! — She had done wrong 
in so lone: remaining silent ! — Henceforward she 
would at least express her sense of the injuries, 
the mortifications to which she was subjected. 
It is an easier thing to write than to give ut- 
terance to the effusions of wounded pride, of 
wounded affection. A pen obeying the dictates 
of an excited heart is always fluent — often elo- 
quent ; and within an hour of her uncle's de- 
parture to take his easy, jog-trot, morning's 
amble in the park, several pages of Julia's de- 
licate penmanship expressed in the following 
lines the tumult of her (jentle bosom. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 119 



CHAPTER XIL 



No language can express the smallest part 
Of what I feel, and suffer in my heart 
For you, whom best I love and value most. 
But to your service I bequeath my ghost. 
Which from this mortal body when untied. 
Unseen, unheard, shall hover by your side ; 
Nor fright you waking, nor your sleep offend. 
But wait officious and your steps attend. 

Palemon and Arcite. 

"Trevelyan Park. 
" I have been greatly to blame ! I ought 
not to have quitted your roof without a frank 
avowal of the bitterness of feeling instigating 
my return to that happy home of my childhood, 
which I would to Heaven I had never quitted. 
But I did not dream that the delicacy or timid- 
ity which sealed my lips, would expose me to 
the aspersions by which 1 find my character 



120 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

injured in the estimation of the world. I 
trusted that you, my lawful, my chosen pro- 
tector, would be the last to assign to the gossip 
of society the unwarrantable judgment you 
have formed of my disposition. What have I 
done to deserve all this ? — You found me 
happy, and conducing to the happiness of 
others, — the idolized child of doating parents. 
You saw (for how impossible was concealment 
to a heart unpractised as mine!) with what 
rash confidence I deposited every chance of 
future peace in your hands; — that my whole 
soul was absorbed in your affection ; — that with 
you ' either I must live or have no life.' 

" Why did you accept such a deposit f — 
Why foster and sanction a warmth of attach- 
ment which you knew was lavished in vain ? 
You,— -wedded to the grave, —engrossed by re- 
membrances of a tenderness as fond as that you 
discerned in my bosom towards yourself, — how 
could you venture, in the calmness of your 
deliberation, to chain me for life to the coldness 
of the sepulchre ! — I am raving ! I no longer 
know what I say or write ! Stung to the heart 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 121 

by your ingratitude, I am careless of giving 
offence. What avails a mornentary pang in- 
flicted on your self-love, compared with the 
gnawing anguish to which, for three months 
past, you have condemned me ? 

'^ But no matter. I write in haste, but with 
as much firmness as a year's deliberation could 
procure. — Let us part ! — Do not cheat tht vvorld 
by a semblance of harmony which exists no 
longer ; which, alas ! never existed. You have 
done your work in traducing me by accusations 
of hard-heartedness — of selfishness; even 1, who 
would have sacrificed every wish, every inclina- 
tion for your slightest token of approval. Af- 
ford me at least, by sanctioning my residence 
with my parents, the means of vindication; 
that, during the short remnant of my days, 
I may strive to knit anew the happy interests 
of my youth, nor subject myself to fresh charges 
of rebellion and disobedience. Enjoy yourself 
in the society of those to whom you should 
never have given a rival in your — ( 1 was 
about to say your affections — but when were 
they ever mine?) — your household and autho- 

VOL. II. G 



122 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

rity. You will soon be disencumbered of even 
the shadow of restraint. But when you learn 
my death,— do not, on peril of consigning an- 
other victim to an early grave, — do not again 
venture to take to your bosom a trusting, doat- 
ing, miserable being; who, once undeceived, 
may like myself dash away the remnant of life 
as a vain and valueless possession. Farewell ! 
I will not trust myself to say more. I will not 
expose the anguish of a devoted heart to the 
curiosity of those around you. I wait but your 
reply to prepare my father for a measure that 
will give liberty to you, and peace to me." 

Little did the affectionate parent of Lady 
Redwood conjecture, when he performed his 
quotidian duty of transferring the correspond- 
ence of Trevelyan Park from the letter-box to 
the post-bag, that the weighty epistle, double, — 
treble, — quadruple, — addressed in Julia's hand- 
writing to her lord and master, was so big with 
important matter. Still less did Trevanion, 
when he took his seat at the dinner-table, to ac- 
quaint his brother-in-law with the result of his 
morning's observations — the dilapidated state of 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 123 

his fences, the meagreness of his flocks and 
herds, and the rubious condition of his planta- 
tions, — conjecture that his jeremiads of the 
morning had produced so remarkable an effect 
on the mind of Lady Redwood. 

The little party humdrummed through their 
two courses, — aided by pretty nearly the same 
observations that had fallen from each on the 
same spot the preceding day ; lamenting that 
dear Julia should confine herself to her own 
room ; and concluding with a declaration that 
perhaps, after all, quiet was the best thing for 
her. Every thing went on as usual. The doors 
opened and shut the same number of times ; 
and Mr. Trevelyan uttered his accustomed ex- 
hortation to the butler to let the fire be looked 
to before the servants left the room. Who 
would have guessed that the only daughter of 
the house was pacing her apartment above, in 
indescribable agitation of feeling; her over- 
charged heart bursting with the excitement of 
her recent effort, her burning eyes unmoistened 
by tears, her flushed cheeks glowing with indig- 
nation. Could Camomile have peeped in upon 
g2 



124 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

her proceedings, it is probable that he might 
have added a strait-waistcoat to the rest of his 
useful suggestions. 

And all this perturbation was to last for a 
week ! — Six long days must elapse previous to 
the arrival of the answer which would unseal 
the lips and seal the destinies of Lady Redwood. 
Six long days, — six long nights ! — Could hu- 
man patience, could human strength, support 
her through a continuance of such a conflict; 
and enable her to bear up against the well-mean- 
inoj fussiness of her father and mother. It was 
at least some comfort that Mr. Trevanion 
would not be present at the crisis ; that he 
would be gone back to prognosticate evil to his 
own wife, previous to the announcement of her 
separation from her own husband. Already 
she counted the hours till the fatal day. The 
post came in early; she should have the day 
before her to communicate the astounding fact 
to her father and mother ; the preceding night 
to strengthen her spirit with quietness. — But alas 
the best digested plans are the sport of time 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 125 

and chance. Instead of supporting the conflict 
for one hundred and forty-four hours, the deli- 
cate frame of Lady Redwood sank on the second 
day of trial. A nervous fever manifested itself; 
Camomile was sent for ; his patient grew deli- 
rious, and the squire and squiress distracted. 
Long before the arrival of the Thursday which 
was to bring the fatal fiat from Farminghurst, 
an express was on its way thither to acquaint 
the hard-hearted Baronet that he might spare 
himself the discredit of negative or affirmative : 
— that the King of Terrors was about to take 
under his protection the fliir flower withered 
bv the bitinij blasts of his indifference. 

Fortunately the letter in which Mr. Treve- 
lyan hastily and harshly set forth both the evil 
and its origin, never reached the hand of Sir 
Alan Redwood. He had already quitted home. 
The appeal — the affecting appeal of his wife had 
instantly determined him to set forth and plead 
his cause in person ; explain all that was mys- 
terious in his own conduct,— and soothe away 
all that had been painful to herself. Never was 
there a man so overwhelmed with surprise as 



126 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

Julia's husband by the sudden avowal of her 
feelings, — her unlooked-for, her undreamed of 
feelings. So persuaded as he had been of her 
coldness, — her worldliness, — her egotism, it 
seemed, on the perusal of her letter, as if a 
mine of unappreciable wealth were opening at 
his feet ; and all his visions on the eve of realiza- 
tion. She had loved him then; — she had been 
willing to become a mother to his child, — a mi- 
nistering angel to his destinies. His reserve 
had been the cause of all their misunderstand- 
ing — her jealousy the origin of all her melan- 
choly ! How soon, how readily could all be ex- 
plained; — how delightful the meeting after so 
inauspicious a farewell ! — He had been on the 
point of losing his Julia ; she had been on the 
eve of deserting him for ever; but it was not 
too late ! 

Oh ! for a horse with wings ! — 
To bear him on its back to 

Trevelyan Park. Oh ! for an advent of Nat. 
Lee's divinities ; those 

Gods, who annihilated time and space. 
To make two lovers happy. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 127 

In a few hours he was in his travelling car- 
riage,— on his road to Cornwall, — on his road to 
Julia; — the Julia of the Ludovisian gardens and 
Horatian Villa. No longer the moping wayward 
Lady Redwood ; but the Miss Trevelyan who 
had wept on his bosom while uttering her 
avowals of love — her promises of faith. It is 
seldom that the leafless hedges and swampy 
roads of a November journey appear so charm- 
ing in the eyes of man, as they seemed to the 
Baronet, while traversing the cross roads and 
miry ways dividing the northern extremity of 
Yorkshire from the southern extremity of Corn- 
wall. Scarcely stopping to eat and never to 
sleep, on his route, it was midnight when he 
arrived within ten miles of Trevelyan Park. 
What was to be done? Sir Alan dreaded inter- 
fering with the routine of the squire's establish- 
ment, or provoking the comments of the family 
by making his appearance in the middle of the 
night; and half determined to remain at the 
inn so as to reach the hall by breakfast time on 
the following morning. Already he had reached 
the court-yard, when this project occurred to 



128 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

him ; where, to his surprise, the landlord having 
approached and flared a candle in his face, ut- 
tered an exclamation of disappointment. 

" What is the matter? "—cried he, preparing 
to alight. 

" Beg pardon, sir !" replied the man, appre- 
hensive of having displeased a gentleman in a 
new chariot and four. " Hope no offence. 

Took you for the doctor from Truro Squire 

Trevelyan's groom 's been waiting for him here 
these three hours. — Fancy he '11 be too late. — 
You 're a stranger in these parts I take it, or 
you 'd understand that gentle and simple — " 

"Who is ill at Trevelyan Park?" inquired Sir 
Alan in a faint voice, falling back in his car- 
riage. " The old lady — the — the — " 

" ///, sir ? Lor' bless you, sir, — I wish she 
may be ill at this present speaking. The squire's 
young man says as there wasn't half an hour's 
life in her when he came away. They 've been 
hunting all over the country for advice ; but, as 
I said before, ' Lor' bless you, Dick ! ' says I, 
' what signifies advice when the strength's gone?' 
She 's been raving these three days ; for all the 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 129 

bleeding in the world would n't keep down the 
fever, till she dropped all o' sudden like a spent 
ball ; and now — *' 

" Mrs. Trevelyan is advanced in years," fal- 
tered Redwood, for he had not courage to ha- 
zard a direct inquiry. 

" Mrs. Trevelyan ? — Lor' bless you, sir j 
it be'n't Mrs. Trevelyan ! — It be Squire's 
daughter, Miss Julia as was. — Married only a 
day or two back, as one may say ; and sent back 
home to die. — God love her, pretty lamb ! — I 
lived bailiff in the family, and have known her 
ever since she was as high as my stick.'* 

Poor Redwood heard no more. To the infi- 
nite consternation of the landlord of the Tre- 
velyan Arms, he cut short his communication 
with, "Horses on, instantly!" — nor was it till 
he was some hundred yards advanced on the 
road, that the ex-vassal of the family became 
aware of all he hazarded by his abrupt and un- 
called-for disclosures. 



G 5 



130 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



Oh! if thou hast at length 
Discovered that my love is worth esteem, 
I ask no more, but let us hence together. 
And I — let me say we — may yet be happy. 

Sardanapalus. 

Although the legislation of Lady Red- 
wood's sick room was at present consigned to 
the hands of four of the best-meaning and worst- 
judging persons in the world, — her father, 
mother, uncle, and apothecary, — they had just 
united sense enough among the party to pre- 
vent Sir Alan from rushing distractedly to her 
presence, and crushing the little hope remain- 
ing. The expected physician soon made his 
appearance ; but he came only to confirm their 
worst apprehensions, and to declare that in the 
remote possibility of the patient's struggling 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 131 

through the attack, mental alienation could 
scarcely fail to be the result. 

Even this was something. The poor old 
father and mother eagerly clung to the pros- 
pect of seeing their rescued child, led about in 
helpless imbecility, rather than surrender her 
to the grave ; and as to her husband, he was too 
lost, too utterly self-abandoned, to calculate on 
possibilities. All he could do was to kneel by 
the sufferer's bedside, — listening to every breath, 
every murmur, — watching every change on her 
countenance ; and, when the obscurity of the 
chamber permitted, supplying the attendance 
of those who ministered to her wants. He in- 
terposed indeed his authority, when on the first 
promise of returning reason Mr. Trevanion 
suggested the necessity of apprising her of her 
situation, and affording her spiritual prepara- 
tion for the grave ; and at length, on the ap- 
pearance of a decided amendment, succeeded 
in prevailing on her parents to retire to rest, 
and leave him in charge of a treasure which 
none knew better how to value. 

Many days had elapsed since Julia had ex- 



132 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

hibited any degree of personal consciousness; 
but the deep sleep that now overpowered her 
faculties, afforded the promise of refresh- 
ment; and with anxiety mingled with hope 
Redwood bent over her, — listened to her light 
breathing, — and noticed that the fever was 
abating in its virulence. The sighs that es- 
caped her bosom seemed to arise from some 
moral cause rather than from the oppression 
of disease : she was struggling back to life, — to 
the sense of her miseries. He even heard her 
breathe his name as if in the transportsof adream. 
" No letter yet?" — she faltered, without un- 
closing her eyes. " Will not Redwood deign 
to write to me ? " — 

" Hush ! " said he, in a low voice, apprehend 
sive that she would injure herself by further 
agitation. " He is coming." 

" No, mother, no ! — we must not meet again. 
He has broken my heart. Let me die in peace." 
And again she sunk into lethargy, as if incapa- 
ble of confronting the wretchedness of her con- 
dition. Towards morning she again betrayed 
symptoms of animation; again inquired for 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 133 

letters ; again, and with the tenderest adjura- 
tions, breathed the name of her husband. Half 
concealed behind the draperies of her bed, 
trembling lest he should augment her perilous 
excitement, he no longer dared trust himself to 
reply. She was now sufficiently recovered to 
detect his voice; and summoning her accus- 
tomed attendants he stole away from her apart- 
ment. 

It was no longer possible to doubt his influ- 
ence over her feelings. Even had her letter 
left a shadow of mistrust upon his mind, the 
tones of endearment in which this being, hover- 
ing on the brink of the grave, pronounced his 
name and clung to every token of his early 
'love, must have convinced the most obdurate 
heart. But he must yet refrain from explana- 
tion, — yet postpone that precious interview 
which, he flattered himself, would conduce 
more to her recovery than all the medicaments 
of the physicians. 

" My dear sir," said his friend Trevanion, 
drawing him aside as soon as Camomile and 
Company pronounced that they were beginning 



I34 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

to entertain sanguine hopes in her behalf, " as 
your departure would no longer leave any pe- 
culiar responsibility on the hands of the family, 
I am sure you will pardon me for suggesting 
that it would be highly prejudicial to my poor 
dear niece to find you an inmate of this house 
on her restoration to consciousness. It is a 
hint that could scarcely be given by Trevelyan 
and my sister, without incurring the charge of 
inhospitality ; but at my years, and considering 
the terms of confidential regard on which we 
mutually are, I am sure I shall be forgiven for 
candidly owning that the prejudice poor dear 
Lady Redwood appears to have conceived 
against you — " 

" Arises," cried Sir Alan, no longer able 
to repress his impatience, " from mutual misun- 
derstanding. I came hither only in compli- 
ance with — " he paused ;— he could not say with 
her invitation — " with Julia's wish for an inter- 
view." 

" Well ! my dear sir," replied Mr. Tre- 
vanion shaking his head. " I have candidly 
given you my opinion ; to which I will only 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 135 

add, that should you persist in your determi- 
nation, neither Camomile nor I will answer 
for Lady Redwood's life." 

He did, however, persist. In the face of 
Mr. Trevanion's homilies, Mr. Trevelyan's 
prescriptions, and the indignant remonstrances 
of the lady mother, he resumed his post by 
Julia's bedside ; and, after carefully concealing 
himself from her observation so long as her 
debility of frame rendered agitation dangerous, 
seized the first moment of returning strength to 
recall himself to her notice, to enfold her within 
his arms ; implore pardon for all his past 
offences, real and imaginary; and re-cement 
his union with his wife by sweeter and bitterer 
tears than had ever yet been wept by either. 

It was not, however, for many weeks,— (not 
till Lady Redwood was able to rise from her 
sick-bed, and niched cozily in her arm-chair by 
the fireside, give ear to the explanation now so 
eagerly tendered by Sir Alan,) — that the fol- 
lowing narrative sufficed to obliterate all traces 
of her jealousy, her repining, her ingratitude. 
It afforded no small subject of consternation to 



136 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

her father, when occasionally he intruded upon 
their Ute-a-tite (in order to ascertain that the 
apartments were regulated to thermometer tem- 
perature) to perceive that his darling Julia's 
eyes were often red with weeping, and her 
darling Redwood almost breathless with the 
interest of the conversation they were holding 
together. 

# # # * * 

" I need not remind you, dearest," said Sir 
Alan, while Julia averted her face lest she should 
betray an overweening interest in the narrative, 
" that it was in my earliest childhood I expe- 
rienced the loss of both my parents. I never 
knew them, — I never missed them, — but grew 
up in the family of my guardian, Mr. Walpole, ' 
as though it were my own. My school vacations 
were passed at his residence ; all my pastimes, 
all my enjoyments, seemed to originate from 
thence; and if they were scanty and different 
from those accorded to my companions, the old 
gentleman dealt with me only as with his own 
children, with his wife, with his very self 

" These worthy but most unconciliating 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 137 

poeple belonged in short to that austere class of 
the rigidly righteous, of which the Trevanions 
have afforded you a modified specimen ; persons 
who 

Hope to merit Heaven by making earth a hell ; 
and are so much on their guard against the 
frailties of mortal nature, that they dare not even 
taste the cup of sweets vouchsafed by Provi- 
dence, lest there should be poison in the lees ! 
Mr. Walpole was a noble-spirited man; but 
hard, dry, self-opinionated; his wife, one of 
those magnifiers of nothingnesses who have 
always a microscope in their hands, to quote de- 
formities in the fairest works of nature; and 
pry into causes where the effect alone concerns 
them. 

" Martha, the eldest,— by very many years the 
eldest daughter, — exhibited a promising combi- 
nation of the defects and deficiencies of both 
her parents; formal, pedantic, supercilious, with 
nothing human, nothing loveable in their na- 
ture. Bigoted in their religious principles, the 
creed of the Walpoles was of a selfish and re- 
pugnant kind; rebutting all human predilec- 



138 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

tions, — all sublunary gratifications; yet im- 
parting no charm to the state tendered in ex- 
change for so many sacrifices. Towards myself, 
the demeanour of the family never went beyond 
a compassionating toleration. They thought 
me, indeed, unlucky to have been born with so 
many temptations to criminality, as a consi- 
derable estate and family interest could not 
fail to supply;— in intellect a weakling;— in 
spiritual prospects a castaway. All their efforts 
(and they laboured diligently in their vocation) 
would scarcely, they feared, endue me with a 
becoming contempt of the world and its ways, 
but they did their best to preserve me from 
temptation, by carefully secluding me from 
communication with the heartless children of 
perdition. 

"Under these circumstances, you will not won- 
der that I was induced to regard my playfellow, 
little Mary (the youngest of the family) as a 
being of a very superior order; for although 
far from participating in the rampant wilfulness 
of my own disposition, she was free from the 
hard presumptuous self-sufiiciency, and piia- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 139 

risaical pride of her tribe. She was not pretty, 

scarcely even good-looking ; but by the side of 

Martha's gaunt figure, and the stern visages of 
the old people, her countenance grew pleasing 
and person graceful. She was young, too; 
and amid the dull solemnities of the Walpole 
establishment, my eyes rested upon Mary as the 
only living thing wkh which I could sympathise; 
and almost as great a victim as myself. By the 
time I attained my nineteenth year, I fancied 
myself desperately in love with her ; — told her 
so ; — implored her affections in return ; and 
having mutually plighted our girl-and- boyish 
faith, formally requested the sanction of old 
Walpole. 

" The world was of opinion that this attach- 
ment was exactly what he expected, — what the 
whole family had long been planning. Yet Mr. 
Walpole insisted that we should meet no more 
till the attainment of my majority ; and sent me 
abroad with a ' serious ' tutor to put the 
strength of my passion and my principles to the 
proof. This again the world hailed as a 
hazardous experiment, — predicting that Mary 



140 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

Walpole's pale face and spiritless demeanour 
would do little in restricting the wild courses of 
a boy of nineteen; but had they known more 
of the monotonous and chillino^ interior of Mr. 
Walpole's family, they would have been aware 
that a person whose growth had grown and 
strength strengthened in its iron trammels, must 
have acquired a lethargy of docility not easily 
thrown off. It is absurd to describe the ardent 
spirit of 3^outh as boiling only the more impe- 
tuously for the restraints imposed upon its im- 
ptdses ; nothing is more readily checked tlian the 
vigour of the human heart. Moreover, mine was 
to be a tour of instruction rather than of amuse- 
ment. The first year was to be passed at 
the University of Jena; and a considerable 
portion of the latter among those ' Isles of 
Greece,' which, although ' burning Sapplio' may 
have loved and sung there in the olden time, 
present fev/ modern beauties or modern blues 
to mislead the heart or mind of the youthful tra- 
veller. I had therefore but litde temptation to 
swerve from my faith ; and, on the whole, am in- 
clined to think that absence did but increase the 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 141 

Strength of my attachment ; — for fmcy or forget- 
fulness tended to beautify its object, while Mary's 
letters began to breathe a holy tenderness to 
which Mary's lips had failed in giving utterance. 
I returned home happy in the anticipation of 
assuming the possession and control of my ex- 
tensive property, and sharing it with my guar- 
dian's daughter ; unaware of the change which 
time had been silently working in my views and 
feelings. 

'• On re-entering Mr. Walpole's house, I be- 
came at once painfully sensible of the egotism 
dictating its narrow policy; — of the insignifi- 
cance of my guardian's character ; — of the ar- 
bitrary opinionativeness of his wife; — of Mar- 
tha's cold-blooded reserve and supercilious self- 
esteem. They still professed to despise the 
world, and live to and for themselves ; while I, 
in peace and charity with all mankind, and per- 
haps too easily captivated by the specious 
blandishments that courted me in society, was 
eager to open my house — my heart — my mind 
— to all the world. No act of treachery had 



142 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

put me out of humour with human kind : — they 
spoke me fair, — and I doubted not meant me 
well." 

" And Mary ? " whispered the anxious Lady 
Redwood, interrupting for the first time her 
husband's narration. 

" 1 would willingly avoid imputing the shadow 
of blame to her," he resumed, in a more sub- 
dued tone. " But I must admit that Mary shared 
the condemnation which my amended experi- 
ence brought down on every member of her 
family. She had gained nothing since we parted, 
and lost much. The freshness of early youth 
was gone, both from her countenance and cha- 
racter. If less frigid in demeanour than her 
elder sister, she had become reserved to a degree 
inconsistent with the fervour of love ; and in 
our private interviews, persisted in the same 
heartless formality necessitated by the presence 
of the family : — her notions of decorum were 
now so rigid, and her judgments so harsh, that 
I shuddered at the idea of passing my hfe with 
so precise and uncommunicative a person. But 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 143 

it was too late to recede. The Walpoles were 
bent on the early celebration of our nuptials; 
and trained as 1 had been under their yoke, it 
appeared to me impossible to contravene their 
authority or set aside their judgment. 

"The nearer, however, I drew to the mo- 
ment which was to operate so decisively on 
my destiny, the more I clung to the attrac- 
tive range of society now, for the first time, 
open to my participation. My engagements 
with Miss Walpole were not so generally 
known but that many a mother, many a daugh- 
ter, laboured to embellish my existence with 
the charm of female favour. Courted, adulated, 
welcomed to hundreds of the gayest houses of 
the metropolis, it was only at my guardian's 
that I was received with louring brows and 
ceremonious coldness; — that my actions were 
subjected to perpetual investigation, incessant 
blame, and my condition of life contemned as 
a source of empty show and worldly care. I 
longed to get Mary away from the influence of 
her friends. Since she must unavoidably be- 



144 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

come my wife, I resolved to do my utmost in 
modelling her to those graces which I was 
now beginning to prize so highly, or in render- 
ing society sufficiently attractive to tempt her 
from the solitude which she knew not how to 
embellish. I loved music; — and Mary was no 
musician. I was fond of poetry;— and Mary 
had been taught to regard it as a frivolous and 
profane thing. In Italy, I had begun to study 
the language of Metastasio; — and I found it 
qualified by the Walpoles as a vain and wanton 
dialect. I delighted in pictures ; — and my guar- 
dian persisted in defining them as a strip of 
canvas daubed with meretricious colours, at an 
infinite waste of time and pains to some indivi- 
dual who might have been usefully employed in 
mechanical labour. He seemed to pity me for 
being proprietor of so much superfluous brick 
and mortar as was wasted in my dwelling at 
Farminghurst ; and as to Burnley — what was 
the use of a second country-seat? — I might 
either let it, or convert its useless lawns to agri- 
cultural purposes. All these narrow views of Hfe 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 145 

and manners provoked not a single argument of 
opposition or remonstrance from Mary's lips; 
and, on the eve of her marriage with the man of 
her choice, it seemed far more a matter of 
regret to her to quit her Dorcas societies and 
Sunday-schools, her weekly pensioners and 
favourite preacher, than a subject of joy that 
she was about to join her fate to mine, to be the 
ornament of my home, and the sharer of my 
joys and sorrows. How could I be satisfied with 
so limited, so contemptuous a measure of per- 
sonal affection ? — How could I bear that a tie so 
momentous as that of conjugal faith should be 
regarded as secondary to the ordinary con- 
nexions of life ? — The more I saw of Lady Red- 
wood's impassive coldness, the more I withdrew 
from her those diminishing impulses of tender- 
ness, which required the genial atmosphere of 
sympathy to warm them into new and perfect 
growth ! 

" You, dearest Julia, may perhaps have been 
induced to inveigh against the dulness of the 
Castle. Judge what it was under the dominion 

VOL. II. H 



146 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

of that frigid and paralyzing spirit of bigotry, 
which banished music, poetry, flowers, from its 
desolate apartments; and rejected those still 
more cheering influences of endearment and 
mirth, which brighten even the dreary re- 
sorts of penury ! Dispirited by her grave and 
oppressive taciturnity, I soon took refuge from 
my unattractive home in an affected ardour 
for field-sports; profiting by the excuse thus 
afforded, to fill my house with my country- 
neighbours, or escape it altogether by pro- 
longed visits to their own. Mary declined 
accompanying me; and it was some relief to 
throw off", from time to time, the heavy yoke 
of dulness I had so madly affixed upon my 
own shoulders. The very name of home be- 
came loathsome to my feelings. No smiles 
awaited me on my return; — no interest ani- 
mated my pursuits: — I experienced the torment 
of the criminal of the olden time chained by 
Mezentius to a corse. My irritation settled 
into coldness, and indifference was on the point 
of becoming aversion. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 147 

" The autumn succeeding my inauspicious 
marriage, I agreed to join a shooting expedition 
to the Moors ; and on communicating to Lady 
Redwood the probability that I might be some 
weeks absent from home, I prepared myself for 
tokens of regret or displeasure. Mary con- 
tented herself, on the contrary, with a calm 
expression of satisfaction that I should be so 
long away ; requesting that she might be per- 
mitted to invite her own family to bear her 
company while I remained in Scotland. 

" 'My father will be well pleased to visit the 
Castle during your absence,' she observed. 
' Your views and opinions are so opposite, that 
no satisfaction or advantage can result from 
your being together.' 

"This declaration amounted to a tacit con- 
fession of her own discomfort in my society ; for 
no two persons could be more congenial than 
Walpole and his daughter, none more positively 
at variance than his daughter and her husband. 
Meanwhile, notwithstanding my efforts to get 
away previous to the arrival of my father-in- 
H 2 



148 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

law, circumstances occurred to retard my de- 
parture; and during the eight-and-forty hours 
we passed under the same roof, the breach be- 
tween us was incalculably widened by his perti- 
nacity in favouring me with the same lectures, 
dictations, and reprovals, to which I had been 
compelled to submit during my minority. Lady 
Redwood, if she did not chime in with his 
admonitions, preserved a dignified silence ; and 
never was there a sensation of release more 
gratifying than mine when, after a formal salu- 
tation from my wife, I turned my back upon 
Yorkshire, and felt respited for a time from my 
household tribulations. 

"Nor did absence diminish the breach thus 
opened between us. My companions, a set of 
jovial bachelors who were tolerably aware of 
the unsatisfactory nature of my domestic con- 
nection, not only laboured to render me sen- 
sible to the joys of liberty, but were inces- 
santly throwing out insinuations against petti- 
coat government, and the odiousness of women 
of sour or shrewish disposition. But the cheer- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 149 

ful life for which we were indebted to the pro- 
verbial hospitality of the Highlands, formed in 
my eyes the best commentary on Lady Red- 
wood's churlish unsociability; and when the 
period arrived for returning to Farminghurst, 
I shuddered at the prospect of encountering 
the Walpole circle, with its querimonious 
tones, its severity of universal condemnation, 
its selfish reserve, and pragmatical import- 
ance. I knew that all my thoughts, words, 
and deeds, were about to be sifted through 
the sieve of their peculiar doctrines ; — that my 
pleasures would be treated as sinful, my pur- 
suits as contemptible ;— that even Mary was 
beginning to regard me as a law-breaker and a 
reprobate ! 

" Under these circumstances, it was a con- 
siderable relief when a plan was suggested that 
our party, instead of breaking up at the close 
of the grouse-season, should re-assemble at 
Melton Mowbray towards the end of October, 
for the formation of a private hunting establish- 
ment; and, supported by so agreeable a pro- 



150 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

ject, I returned home, determined to defy 
guardian, mother-in-law, Martha, nay, even 
Lady Redwood herself; to assert my own au- 
thority, seek my own amusements, and leave 
her to the enjoyment of those so little conso- 
nant with the temper of a man in the prime of 
health and prosperity." 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 151 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Tlie silver shower, whose reckless burthen weighs 

Too heavily upon the lily's head. 

Oft leaves a saving moisture at its root. 

Wordsworth. 

" My wife's family," resumed Sir Alan, after 
havinoj paused to give audience to Julia's ex 
clamations of wonder and condemnation, " were, 
however, too much enlightened as to the obsti- 
nacy of my disposition, to suggest opposition 
to my plans. No proposal was made on either 
side that Lady Redwood should bear me com- 
pany Her father was anxious that she should 
return home with him, and as Mary had now 
the prospect of becoming a mother, the project 
was eligible enough. But she would not hear 
of quitting Farminghurst ; and succeeded in 
persuading the old people to permit her sister 



152 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

Martha to pass the winter in Yorkshire. My 
departure preceded theirs ; so that I knew no- 
thing of their state of feeling in taking leave 
of their widowed daughter — for such they al- 
ready regarded her. 

" I need not weary your patience, dearest, 
by a description of the heartless mirth and 
festivity in which I passed the winter. It was 
ni}' sole study to obliterate from my memory 
every thing connected with Farminghurst; — and 
I succeeded. Already I regarded my marriage 
as an act of boyish infatuation ; and was even 
base enough to concede to my intimate asso- 
ciates the privilege of rallying me respecting 
my methodistical wife and miserable home. 
One or two of my friends even urged me to 
bolder resistance ; to re-model my establishment 
and mode of life according to my own good 
liking. ' If Lady Redwood does not choose to 
conform to her husband's wishes,' argued they, 
Met her go home again, or pray and preach 
elsewhere. You have St. Paul's authoritv on 
3'our side to enforce her submission to your 
authority,' 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 153 

*^ My opinions began to coincide with theirs ; 
and ah-eady I determined that, after the event 
of Mary's confinement, a mutual explanation 
should place us on a different footing; that 
either she should consent to render my house 
the resort of cheerful society and conform 
her own habits to the usages of the world, or 
that we should form separate households after 
our several fancies. I insinuated something of 
the kind in one of my letters; but Mary's 
replies were so guarded and so cold, that it 
was impossible to judge whether the propo- 
sal was acceptable or painful to her feel- 
ings. She wrote regularly, giving me an ac- 
count of all that interested or ought to interest 
me, concerning my tenantry and estates; but 
the tone of her correspondence partook of the 
dry circumstantiality of all letters of business. 

"Never did I hail the approach of spring 
with so little satisfaction, as when a brighter 
verdure in the Leicestershire pastures reminded 
me that I should shortly have no further excuse 
for prolonging my absence. Lady Redwood's 
confinement was announced for the beginning 
H 5 



154 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

of May; and at the end of March, I found my 
companions beginning to disperse. I took 
my leave of them with regret and envy. They 
were looking forward with eagerness to tlie 
season, — to their clubs, the Opera, the Derby, 
Almack's, and all the. countless varieties of Lon- 
don pleasure y while / bad nothing to anticipate 
but a sullen wife and discontented home. My 
utmost hope suggested that Mary's new position 
as a mother would tend to humanize her cha- 
racter, and warm her feelings towards myself; 
or that it would afford me an excuse for leav- 
ing her more than ever alone, and dispensing 
with the company of her odious relatives. On 
one point, moreover, I was positive; and ex- 
pressed my determination so clearly in my let- 
ters, that even the coolness of Walpole blood 
was not proof against my authority. Of all the fa- 
mily, Martha had been the most audacious in her 
expressions of disapproval of my conduct ; and 
not choosing to expose myself to discussions 
with her at so critical a moment as that of her 
sister's indisposition, I signified my wish that I 
might find Lady Redwood alone on my return 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 155 

to Farminghurst. This was ungracious enough ; 
— but it was better than a family quarrel. 

" I did accordingly find her alone ; and not 
only more cheerless and dispirited than ever, 
but in a miserable state of health. But hav- 
ing neither sisters nor any near female relative 
of my own, I was little habituated to the 
peculiarities of feminine infirmity ; and attri- 
buting the delicate appearance of my wife en- 
tirely to her situation, gave little heed to her 
illness. It did not render her kinder or more 
conciliating; and trusting that the birth of her 
child w^ould restore her strength and soften her 
humour, I betook myself to my usual occupa- 
tions, — riding over my farms with the bailiffi-, 
making excursions in my yacht, and passing my 
evenings in the perusal of new works (certainly 
not selected by the Walpole dynasty) forwarded 
to me from town. It was inexplicable that, liv- 
ing together as we did, I could manage to see 
so little of my wife; or that she could persist in 
her cold and selfish alienation, — in cherishing 
so fixed a dislike to the father of her expected 
child. 



156 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

" One day, about a fortnight after my return, 
I had been occupied the whole morning with 
the keepers shooting landrails upon the marshes 
of Farming Level — (you remember it, Julia? — 
the salt-marsh extending from the cliffs to the 
sea, at the foot of tbe shrubberies ?) — and hav- 
ing dismissed my people, I took a short cut 
homewards through the grounds, followed by 
a favourite setter. It was a lovely day in 
April, — mild, balmy, full of promise, full of 
hope ; the trees budding around, the birds sing- 
ing among the branches as if to encourage their 
growth; every bank purple with violets, and an 
endless variety of spring flowers enlivening the 
borders of the shrubberies. The clear blue 
skies, the bluer sea, the woods just rousing from 
their winter lethargy, the very herbage under 
my feet announcing a more buoyant and life- 
like texture, — all tended to raise my spirits and 
brighten my views. As I sauntered along, 
watching the squirrels which Ponto's approach 
drove up the tall stems of the pine trees, I 
was forming a thousand projects for the future. 
I resolved that, on being assured of Lady Red- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 157 

wood's safety, I would visit London, perhaps 
Paris, and familiarize myself with the plea- 
sures and diversions so fondly described by my 
Melton friends. Although deprived of my 
hopes of happiness, amusement at least was at 
my command ; and I proajpised to repay myself 
the infinite arrears of enjoyment still owing by 
by the Fates. 

" Engrossed by these chimeras, I reached that 
platform of the shrubbery, that fatal spot — (Sir 
Alan looked significantly at his wife ; and Julia, 
nodding her comprehension of his meaning, im- 
patiently motioned to her husband to proceed,) 
to which you have since observed me affix 
a peculiar sentiment of interest ; when, to my 
surprise, I perceived Lady Redwood seated 
on the bench under the magnolia tree. Weak 
as she was, it was a considerable walk for her 
to have achieved; and common courtesy re- 
quired me to accost her, and offer my arm to 
facilitate her return ; when, on approaching her, 
I perceived with surprise that her features were 
swollen and discoloured with weeping. Strange 



158 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

to say, I thought her prettier under that aspect 
than I had seen her since our marriage. She 
was more like the Mary of my youth — Alas ! 
it was so long since she had appeared to indulge 
in any womanly emotion.— 

" ' What is the matter?' said I, in a kinder 
voice than usual, and seating myself by her side, 
' Have you received bad news from your family? ' 

" ' No.' 

" ' Are you indisposed ? — overfatigued ? ' 

" ' Not more so than usual.' 

"'But you have been crying. — What has 
distressed you ? ' — 

" ' I often cry without any new distress.' 

" * You are weeping even now ? ' — 

" ' Not for sorrow's sake. Do not disturb 
yourself. My feelings are little worth investi- 
gation or comment.' 

" My suspicions were excited by these incon- 
clusive answers ; and I now insisted on an ex- 
planation. I fancy I spoke harshly, for Mary's 
tears flowed unrestrainedly. 

" • Nay then,' cried she, at length, as if by 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 159 

an impulse beyond her own control ; * why 
not vindicate myself by an avowal of the 
truth ? — My lips will soon be closed for ever, 
my heart frozen into peace. Why, why — 
scruple to reveal its burning anguish ? Yes ! 
I have been weeping — enjoying the consolation 
of tears — the only comfort you have left me ! 
But they v/ere tears of joy ; for I know that tlie 
end of my pilgrimage is approaching, and that 
my heaviness shall not endure for ever ! Re- 
jected as I am from your bosom — contemned — 
reviled — the day of my release is at hand ; and I 
shall taste, after all my trials — my humiliation — 
my despair, — the tender mercies of a more for- 
bearing Master. — Yes, Redwood, I am about to 
die. Rejoice with me ! — rejoice for your own 
sake, — rejoice for mine ! — Our ill-assorted mar- 
riage is on the eve of dissolution. Y^ou will 
be free to form a tie more congenial with your 
feelings; and I — (pray for me, that it maybe 
so!) / shall be summoned to the enjoyment of 
a peace which passeth all understanding.' 

" Startled by her unexpected vehemence, I 



160 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

was Still far from entering into the source of this 
exaltation of feeling. 

" ' Calm yourself,' I replied ; ' calm yourself. 
Such are the apprehensions of every woman 
circumstanced as you are now.' 

" ' Was ever woman circumstanced as I am 
now ! '—cried Lady Redwood, clasping her hands. 
' Did ever woman sacrifice her happiness, her 
principles, her tenderness, to be rewarded as I 
have been ? — to ask for bread (even the nutri- 
ment of a craving heart) and receive a stone ; 
— to have forsaken her own people and her fa- 
ther's house, for the sake of one from whose 
bosom she is cast forth to perish ! ' — 

" « What mean you, Mary ? ' I exclaimed, 
' explain the cause of this excitement.' 

" ' Does it need interpretation, that the worm, 
long trodden under foot, should at length turn 
upon the iron heel by which its helplessness has 
been bruised ? — Is it so strange — so miraculous 
— that even 7, lowly and humiliated as I am, 
should pause upon the brink of the grave, and 
grieve that my youth has been spent in vain ; 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 161 

the warm impulses of my heart lavished on 
empty air, cast upon the waters, — disowned, 
disdained, polluted ! ' 

" « Suffer me to conduct you home,' said I, 
with assumed calmness ; for I was now per- 
suaded that my wife was labouring under a 
paroxym of insanity. 

" ' No ! ' — cried Lady Redwood. — ' No ! 
Since I have been unable to control the im- 
pulses of an overcharged heart, here let me 
speak; here, where the Almighty, to whose 
mercy I am hastening, looks down upon my 
sorrow; — where the abundance and beauty 
which nature has shed around me to so little 
purpose, remind me that something exists on 
earth to render death an act of resignation." 

" ' My dear Mary, you alarm me and injure 
yourself by this violence,' said I, inexpressibly 
awed by the solemnity of her voice and ges- 
tures, ' You will yet live many years for the 
enjoyment of — ' 

" ' Hush ! ' interrupted my wife, turning sud- 
denly towards me. * But that a voice has spoken 



162 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

to me, — but that I know myself on the brink of 
the great abyss, think you that my own lips, my 
own withered heart would have unclosed ? Talk 
not to me of living ! — Earth has no shelter for 
me but the grave.' 

" ' Mary — Mary ! ' cried I, ' you are tempt- 
ing Providence by these wayward ejaculations. 
With the poor, the naked, and the hungry 
suffering around, what right have you, the 
minion of prosperity, to rebel against God ? ' 

" ' The eye of Heaven hath a clear insight 
into the value of its gifts,' replied Lady Red- 
wood. * Gold silver and gorgeous raiment, 
are not all in all in the sight of God, as in the 
sight of man. To possess the means of happi- 
ness, according to our powers of enjoyment, con- 
stitutes real prosperity. For me, I care but 
little nor have ever cared, for a lofty dwelling, 
obsequious attendance, or the trinkets of pomp. 
From my youth upwards, I have coveted but 
the approving eye and caressing hand of affec- 
tion ; and these were fated never to be mine ! 
Admit then that I am a beggar, an outcast, a 



THE SECOND MARIIIAGE. 163 

miserable — miserable outcast ! ' And the tears 
poured down her cheeks as slie spoke. 

" ' Are you serious in these charges ? ' said 
Ij still hoping and believing that she laboured 
under mental delusion. ' Having rejected all 
my overtures of affection, of regard, of friend- 
ship, do you now accuse me of having been the 
first to outrage our vows of wedded love ?' — 

*'* Wherefore accuse you; — to whom have 
I to appeal for pity, or redress ?— Listen to 
me ! You know as fully as myself in what 
strict principles of piety I was reared. My 
parents, abhorring the idolatries of the world, 
taught their children to look upon images of 
silver and ojold as thino^s of no account to an 
immortal soul : — and so far it was easy to espouse 
their tenets. But they did more, and required 
more at our hands ; and then, and then only, I 
grew rebellious to their will. What availed it to 
insist on the sacrifice of all carnal affections, 
when from my very childhood every feeling of 
my bosom had been devoted to my playmate 
Alan Redwood ; — when, as I grew in years, that 



164 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

childish regard had deepened into womanly 
tenderness ? My father remonstrated ; — 1 told 
him it was already too late : — my mother warned 
and admonished me ; — I told her that my whole 
heart, my whole soul were yours, and yours for 
ever ! 

" ' At length, they ceded to my prayers — but 
their blessing on our union was even as a curse ; 
for my father reminded me that whoso goeth 
forth to dwell in the tents of Belial must eat 
the bitter bread of his service ; and that the 
worldling I had chosen for my husband would 
be as an avenger to punish the sinfulness of 
my choice ! ' 

" ' And such,' cried I, with indignation, ' such 
was Mr. Walpole's notion of the feelings to be 
instilled into his daughter's heart towards her 
husband ! ' 

" ' Blame him not ! ' interrupted Mary, ' He 
sees things after the manner of his people. 
Would I had never presumed to look on them 
in a different light. Yes, Redwood, even thus 
forewarned, I did dream, I did hope, that the 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 165 

companion of your infancy, childhood, man- 
hood, had attained a chief influence over your 
mind, and might one day succeed in touching 
your stubborn heart. But lo ! from the mo- 
ment of our marriage, my trust was undeceived 
— oh ! how bitterly undeceived. I saw that 
you despised my homeliness, — shrank from — ' 

" ' Desist, Mary, desist !' interrupted I ; ' you 
cannot justify yourself in such assertions.' 

" ' I can — I do ! Remember your silence 
your coldness your reserve, — your unwillingness 
to conciliate my gratitude by the smallest sacri- 
fice to the opinions you had seen consecrated 
in my eyes by the precepts and examples of my 
parents. You treated me with scorn, — almost 
with insult. I forbore to murmur, and you 
despised me only the more for the tameness of 
my submission. You quitted me, — abandoned 
me:— then, when in the languor of indisposi- 
tion I most needed the sustaining hand of kind- 
ness, you deserted me for the companionship 
of those whose heartless levity contributed more 
largely to your diversion. What had I in ex- 



166 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

change for the tenderness of which you defraud- 
ed me ? My tears /—Day after day, during your 
absence, I came hither,— to this secluded spot ; 
to weep over my own wretchedness and count 
the moments till your return.' 

" ' Why — why not even then address me 
thus ? * cried I deeply affected. * Why not deign 
to disclose a state of feeling which assuredly your 
own demeanour afforded me no clue to pene- 
trate ? ' 

" ' Was it in the nature of woman to degrade 
herself still further in the eyes of a husband by 
whom she was openly despised ?' 

" ' On my soul, on my life, you wrong me ! 
I too have been deceived — hav^. deceived myself. 
I believed you careless of my happiness, — indif- 
ferent to my regard — wrapt up in your own 
family, — accountable only to Heaven, — en- 
grossed by unceasing prayers.' 

" ' And were they not all for you — for your 
welfare? — Unless when, despite myself, an in- 
voluntary supplication burst from my lips that 
I miojht learn to love you less ; or that when I 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 167 

should in the grave, repentance might overtake 
you for the sufferings you were inflicting on 
me !' 

"'Dearest — dearest Mary!* cried I, folding 
her to my bosom, — « companion of my youth, — 
my chosen wife, — mother of my child, — why — 
why has this fatal reserve so long interposed 
between us ? But it is not yet too late ; — we 
have years of happiness in store ! * 

" ' No ! * faltered Lady Redwood, inclining 
her head (and for the first time for many 
months) upon my bosom. ' But that my des- 
tiny is sealed, I should not have spoken thus. 
But do you really love me ? Can it be possi- 
ble that all the wretchedness I have endured, 
— all the tears 1 have shed, — are attributable to 
the want of confidence which has suffered a 
cloud to gather between us ?* — 
" at is— it is!' said I." 

" ' I have wished for nothing but your affec- 
tion, and yet — ' 

" Say not another word ! " cried I, again 
fervently clasping her in my arms. " Provi- 



168 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

dence is merciful. With such prospects of hap- 
piness opening around you, Mary, you will live 
to gainsay your own predictions. We shall 
— we must be happy ! '^ 

« « For months past — nay ! from the period of 
your departure for Scotland, — from the period 
when I became convincingly aware of your in- 
difference, I have never enjoyed a night's re- 
pose. Food has not nourished me — sleep has 
not refreshed me. Nature can no longer sup- 
port the conflict.' 

" Gazing earnestly in her face, I discerned 
fatal confirmation of this opinion. 

" ' You must have advice ! ' I cried — 

" < Willingly — since you desire it. But do 
you really imagine that drugs have influence 
over a disorder such as mine ? ' 

" « The cause of your mental irritation re- 
moved, a restoration of strength will follow. 
Promise me, Mary, to take care of yourself?" 

«* « I will— I do;— and in evidence of my obe- 
dience, let us return home. The evening is 
growing chill.' 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 169 

" The interest of our conversation had in fact 
prevented either of us from noticing that a 
heavy dew had risen ; which, in Lady Red- 
wood's state of debility, was highly pernicious. 
The next day she was worse. I had no longer 
any inclination to quit her side even for a mo- 
ment ; — the neighjjouring physician, whom I 
had summoned to her aid, admitted to me that 
it was highly improbable she would surviv^e the 
event of her confinement ! Unwilling as I was 
to admit the intervention of a third person be- 
tween us in our altered state of feeling, I consi- 
dered it a duty to the Walpole family to ap- 
prise them of their daughter's precarious con- 
dition; nor, in the wretchedness and repentance 
of my soul, did I hesitate to acknowledge my past 
wrongs against her, and my earnest desire to re- 
deem them. In the course of a day or two they 
arrived at Farminghurst ; and they, who had been 
such unwelcome visitors in the house of feasting, 
were all that could be wished in the house of 
mourning. The stern grief of the old man who 
had so laboured to subdue every human emo- 

VOL. II. I 



170 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

tion within his heart, was inexpressibly affect- 
ing; and Martha and her mother were too 
much softened by the sight of Mary's suffering, 
to indulge in their former asperities. It seemed 
to afford peculiar satisfaction to poor Lady 
Redwood to see us all once more united on a 
friendly footing. 

" From the period of that fatal day, she had 
never been permitted to quit her ov/n room ; 
and nothing would persuade poor Martha, who 
was truly and tenderly attached to lier sister, 
but that extreme care, the skill of her at- 
tendants, and above all the vigour of youth 
renovated by prospects of returning happiness, 
would carry her in safety through her evil day. 
But Mary knew better ; — from the first she de- 
clared her death as certain, and never swerved 
from the opinion. 

" ' My sister wants to delude you into be- 
lieving me a false prophetess,* said she, with a 
smiling face and extended hand, one day as I 
approached her couch. ' Do not lend your ear 
to her, dearest Alan ; or you will perhaps turn 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 171 

aside from the petitions and remonstrances 
I have still to offer ! — It will soon be too late 1 
In the struggle of that hour, I shall have no 
voice to commune with my husband.' 

" ' If you have a wish to express,' I fal- 
tered, seating myself beside her, ' for the ease of 
your own mind, however needlessly, give it ut- 
terance/ 

" ' The spring comes forward so beautifully,* 
said she, pointing with her thin hand to the 
window, round which the China roses were al- 
ready clustering, ' the weather is so mild, so 
soft, so balmy, that I was in hopes of being able 
to reach that dear old spot with you again ; — 
that spot where your first kind tears of mercy 
announced that my day of tribulation was 
over ! ' 

" ' Wait another week,' said I, in a low voice, 
' and we will go there again together.' 

" « Another week ! ' murmured Mary, with a 
mournful wave of the head. ' In another week 

I shall be No matter,— why should I breathe 

a word to grieve you ? No, Alan — no ! I shall 
I 2 



1T2 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

go hence no more borne upon my own feet, 
or with the impulses of Hving breath in my 
bosom. And therefore, dearest, let me hasten 
to claim a promise at your hands. When all 
is over here, bequeath my poor babe to my 
mother's care, and quit a spot associated with 
so many unwelcome impressions. Go abroad 
— travel — bend your eyes upon other faces till 
you have forgotten poor Mary's; — and — ' 

" ' Never, never !' cried I, pressing her hands 
within my own. 

" ' It is presumptuous to suppose your bosom 
formed of other than mortal texture,' she re- 
plied, striving to smile. ' It is in the nature of 
the human heart to forget ; — it is in the nature 
of the human heart to love again, — again and 
again. Only, dearest Alan, when you are 
about to take a new wife to your bosom — ' 
(she prevented my remonstrances by plac- 
ing her cold hand on my lips) ' pause for a 
moment to recall the evil effects of former 
precipitancy ! — Pause, to consider whether be- 
tween yourself and the object of your affections, 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 173 

there exists that congeniality of principles, opi- 
nions, and condition, without which wedlock is 
a state of penance; — whether you are disposed — 
nay firmly determined, and at every personal 
sacrifice — to secure her happiness. — Less than 
such devotedness is not love ! I'hus much 
for her sake and your own. For mine — 
for the sake of my child, if indeed my child 
survive, — promise me, dearest, dearest husband, 
that however your fancy may be captivated by a 
fair face and pleasing demeanour, you will ascer- 
tain the principles and temper of the woman 
you make its mother. Martha — fetch hither 
the bed prepared for this babe of promise. 
There — Redwood ! — there stands the downy 
nest of the little being my heart so yearns to 
look upon, and which I shall never, never be- 
hold. — Clasp your hands in mine, dearest, 
clasp them in blessings upon its pillow; — and 
promise me that you will choose for it a mother 
who shall be tender to its infirmities and for- 
givinfj to its frailties.' " 

He paused, and Lady Redwood hid her sob- 
bing face in her hands. 



174 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

" I promised, Julia. — What would I not have 
promised to ease one pang of the unhappy 
creature who was hastening thus unrepiningly 
to the graVle. A few nights afterwards I was 
summoned from my bed to speak to her. She 
was restless, feverish; — her hour was approach- 
ing ; and Martha Walpole had reluctantly con* 
sented to summon me, that a few more — a few 
last parting words might pass between us. She 
commended her servants to me — she commended 
her poor to me ; — the naked whom she had fed-'^ 
the babes whom she had instructed. She bad me 
honour her father and her mother; be kind to 
her poor companionless sister; forbearing to the 
Hobarts, the pastor delegated to feed my flock ; 
— and above all, after solemn exhortations of a 
still holier nature, she placed in my hand her 
own well-studied copy of the Scriptures, and 
on my finger, a ring ( Juiia ! I wear it still, and 
you have grudged me the indulgence), con- 
taining her own hair and an obituary inscrip- 
tion. Her attendants then forced me from the 
chamber, and compelled me to retire to my own. 
And lo ! when I beheld her again, the struggle 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 175 

was over, — the flush had faded from her cheek 
— the beaming eye was closed. Mary lay com- 
posed upon her couch in the rigid stillness of 
death ; and the feeble wail of an infant in the 
adjoining chamber apprized me that I was the 
father of a motherless child." 



176 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 



CHAPTER XV. 



I charge you by your love, to take some pity 
On this distressed man. Help to restore him 
That precious jewel he hath lost. 

Beaumont and Fletcher. 

To one endowed with poor Julia's sensibility 
there needed no comment in illustration of the 
foregoing narrative, or in reprobation of her 
own offences. Recognizing at once the pecu- 
liar claims enforced by Lady Redwood's afflic- 
tions on the memory — the remorse of her hus- 
band, — as well as the weakness and wickedness 
of her own groundless jealousy, she was now 
more inclined to quarrel with Sir Alan's obdu- 
racy towards his patient and devoted wife, than 
to blame his too strict performance of those 
promises which had soothed her dying hours. 
She no longer wondered at the caution with 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 177 

which Redwood had yielded up her affection to 
herself— the vigilance with which he had studied 
her principles and practice ; the sort of reluct- 
ance with which he had admitted to himself his 
inconstancy to the memory of the dead ; and the 
fear and trembling with which he had elected 
her to be the mother of a child so solemnly com- 
mitted to his charge. 

And how had she repaid his confidence?— She 
blushed to think of it ! — Her ung\*aciousness 
towards the Walpoles, whose importance in his 
estimation arose from so sacred an influence — 
her insensibility towards his little girl — her 
indifference to his household — her neglect of his 
humble tenantry — her incivility to the Hobarts — 
her untoward interference with a spot thrice hal- 
lowed by the memory of his unhappy victim ! 
Poor Mary ! — who could better sympathize than 
Mr. Trevelyan's daughter with the wretchedness 
of a neglected wife ! — Poor Mary ! — Lady Red- 
wood actually longed to be at Farminghi^rst 
again, that she might renew and replace every 
object connected with one who had died so 
young and so full of sorrow. She yearned to 
I 5 



178 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

have the little motherless child in her arms ;— to 
visit the poor — whom Mary, even amid her worst 
of trouble, had never overlooked ; — to encourage 
the young — whom Mary, in the midst of sorrow 
and sickness, had laboured to train towards 
the skies. Satisfied of her unworthiness, she 
felt grateful to Redwood for loving her in spite 
of all her faults ; and determined to profit by 
the first hours of returning health to study the 
acquirement of Mary's spirit of righteousness, 
without neglecting her own spirit of concilia- 
tion. She thought it would be easy, she knew 
it would be delightful, now that she saw clearly 
through the clouds enveloping the character of 
her husband, to pursue a system of life calcu- 
lated to retain his affections, and render their 
future destinies as bri«;ht as she had dreamed 
them in the earliest hours of her enthusiasm. 
Every day added strength to her frame; every 
day added vigour to her mind. She felt almost 
inclined to rejoice that the stormy onset of her 
married life had compelled her to a course of 
such severe self-examination ; had arrested her 
in the wild career of girlhood — the flighty heed- 



THE SECOND MARRIA'gE. 179 

lessness of prosperity, — and rendered her consci- 
ous of all the gifts for which she had to be at once 
grateful and accountable to Providence. Re- 
stored to Redwood's affections and confidence, 
she was at peace with all the world. She had 
patience even with uncle Trevanion, and defied 
Dr. Hobart's most mysterious whisper to ruffle 
her temper. 

Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan, satisfied that no- 
thin<]f but the vigilance of their own attendance 
and the art of the Cornubian Galen had ena- 
bled their beloved daughter to overcome the 
miserable condition to which she was reduced 
by the indifference of the worst of husbands, 
profited by the earliest moment of her recovery 
to insinuate a hope that Sir Alan would never 
more remove her from their roof; and great 
indeed was their amazement when Julia, instead 
of seconding the petition, threv/ herself into the 
arms of her beloved Redwood, assuring them 
that there was no life for her save in his pre- 
sence. Nor was their surprise diminished when, 
with the most winning frankness and many 
tears, Lady Redwood honestly accused her own 



m 



180 THE SECOND MARRIAG]^. 

jealous perversity of all her past distresses,- 
and implored oblivion for the past, and indul- 
gence for the future. ^ 

The approach of spring enabled her to de- 
vote herself to the fulfilment of " vows made 
in pain," and resolutions conceived in a moment 
of penitence. On the return of Sir Alan and 
Lady Redwood to Farminghurst, no further 
complaints were made among the old domestics 
of the cold hauteur of her entrance into her 
husband's home, nor had she any cause to com- 
plain of the dreariness of their journey; for, 
having extended it through the metropolis, for 
the purpose of visiting the Walpoles and claim- 
ing their charge, little Mary's sallies and little 
Mary's smiles afforded continual matter of in- 
terest. 

A few months afterwards, the whole VValpole 
family became her guests; and although at times 
the dissertations of the old lady and the homi- 
lies of her husband were somewhat tedious, 
there was a conscientiousness in all their doings, 
and a tenderness of affection towards their little 
grandchild, which bespoke her forbearance. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 181 

Towards Martha, she was even more kindly dis- 
posed; — for Martha, taught by sad experience, 
was so willing to sacrifice her predilections to 
conciliate the father of her dead sister's only 
child, that there was something almost affecting 
in the docility with which she, a middle-aged 
woman, strove to acquire the qualities amiable 
in his eyes. With Martha, she visited the poor 
and comforted the sick ; — with Martha, she en- 
countered the oppressive inanity of the vicarage; 
— with Martha, she laboured to accomplish her 
mind by a course of serious reading, for the 
duty of presiding over her daughter-in-law's 
education. Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan were 
amazed when they saw that it was a chief ob- 
ject with their beautiful daughter, their noble 
heiress, to convert herseif into a governess; and 
implored her to invite Miss Wilmot from her 
retreat, to save her from such ignominious 
drudgery. But against this plan there was a 
serious objection. Lady Redwood's preceptress 
was now herself a happy wife ; and poor Julia 
would certainly have been left to the fulfilment 



182 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

of her task, but that maternal duties of her own 
soon interfered with the project. 

Before the family quitted London the second 
year after their marriage, Dr. Hobart had the 
happiness of whispering to every family within 
ten miles of the vicarage, that he was about to 
travel up to town to admiuist'^r the rite of 
baptism to the son and heir of his patron ; and 
on his return, had the satisfaction of subdi- 
viding his discourse into divers heads. Impri' 
mis, that the said son and heir was the finest 
infant in the kingdom ; secondly, that Lady 
Redwood had gratified her husband by pro- 
posing old Mr. Walpole, in conjunction with 
her own father, as a sponsor to the child ; thirdly, 
that her ladyship having been presented at the 
drawing-room by her cousin the Duchess, ar- 
rayed in all her family diamonds, had attracted 
universal admiration ; fourthly, that he himself 
had been introduced by his patron. Sir Alan, to 
the nod of the King's Majesty ; and, fifthly, 
that the united families of Redwood, Walpole, 
and Trevelyan were about to pass the summer 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. ]83 

at the Castle. Mrs. Hobart herself, indeed, was 
furthermore heard to insinuate that the Doctor 
had pronounced his patron to be the most for- 
tunate of men ;— nothing being left himself, his 

friends, or the parish, to regret, in his 

Second Marriage. 



THE OLD 



THE YOUNG BACHELOR. 



Satire recoils whenever charg'd too high. 
Round your own form the fatal splinters fly ; 
As the soft plume gives swiftness to the dart. 
Good-breeding sends the satire to the heart. 

Young. 



CHAPTER I. 



My strict hand 
Was made to seize on vice : and with a gripe 
Squeeze out the humour of such spongy souls 
As lick up every idle vanity. 

Ben Jonson. 

It is vain that we fill our libraries with reams 
of paper, encased in bindings of parchment, 
goat-skin, or calf-skin— and blotched with ink 
after the dialect of Greeks and Romans, Hebrews 
or Assyrians, — French, English, Italian, German, 
Spanish, or Sclavonic, — to prove to our sons and 
grandsons, classically and romantically, logically 
and rhapsodically, that all is vanity and vexation 
of spirit ; that man is made to mourn, and that 
the sage begins to live only by preparing to die. 
There is a season for all things. It is not till 



188 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

the fall of the leaf we begin to anticipate 
winter; the satiety of experience alone lends 
authenticity to the axioms of the preacher; and 
all the philosophy of ancient and modern pro- 
fessors united, will scarcely persuade a young 
man of one-and- twenty but that " pleasure is a 
very pleasant thing ; ''— Falernian and Cham- 
pagne superior to spring water, — pine-apples 
to pumpkins,— a blood-mare to a Welsh pony, 
— a picture gallery to a conventicle, — a German 
orchestra to a singing gallery of village 
psalmody, — more particularly if these lessons 
of ancient wisdom should be perused in a 
modern easy chair, in a luxurious library of 
carved oak lighted by stained windows or Tr^j'-jj 
ker's reading lamps, — ^with a favourite spaniel 
dozing on the rug, and a tchibouque or cigar- 
case lying on an adjoining table. These, our 
sons and our grandsons, are well aware that 

There are more things in Heaven and Earth 
Than are dreamt of in mere philosophy ; 

and we close our admonitions where we might 

have as well begun, by bequeathing them to 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 189 

the sharp schooling of experience ; — tiring out 
their evil propensities like those of a runaway 
horse, by giving free way to their impetuosity. 

Sir Francis Norton was a very fine young 
man when the bonfires blazed at Norton Park 
in honour of the attainment of his majority. He 
had some satisfaction in making his parting bow 
to his private tutor, and shaking hands with the 
two guardians appointed by his father, in token 
of their secession from office. He was now not 
only his own master, but master of five or six 
thousand a year, landed property, in one of the 
choicest counties in England ; and endowed, 
moreover, with personal accomplishments and 
^ulties, such as might have secured his elec- 
tion to be chief of a tribe of roving Indians: — 
six feet high, athletic, intrepid ; and (between 
author and reader) rash, prejudiced, and ungo- 
vernable as a Mohican. 

Of his two guardians, the elder, Mr. Cheveley, 
a representative in parliament for forty years 
past of the county in which his estates were 
situated, was probably most alive to the faults 



190 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

and frailties of his disposition, and most anxious 
concerning the follies they might induce. But 
he was a man of the old school, unversed in 
the characteristics of the age, and apt to mea- 
sure poor Sir Francis and his sins after a 
somewhat obsolete standard ; while his coadj u- 
tor, Lord Farnley, himself scarcely emerged 
from the season of youthful indiscretion, was 
only too ready in finding excuses for excesses 
similar to those in which he had so largely 
and so recently indulged. Although young 
Norton *was now virtually emancipated from the 
authority of his guardians, the accounts of 
their executorship were not to be given in 
for a year to come ; and in a formal interview 
with their handsome ward on his twenty-first 
birthday, it was amusing enough to observe the 
hot and cold blown upon him from the double 
judgment-seat of the twin consuls. 

" In twelve months from this time, my dear 
young friend," said old Cheveley, " we shall sur- 
render into your hands our account of the trust 
delegated to us by your late lamented father. 
By that period, 1 trust to see you permanently 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 191 

established on your family estates,— a husband and 
a father. The unsatisfactory intelligence which 
for some time past has reached my ears of the 
dissoluteness of your course of life, convinces 
me that nothing will serve to settle you down 
into a steady and serviceable member of the 
conununity so soon as a prudent matrimonial 
connection." 

" A year hence, my dear Norton," said Lord 
Farnley, on bidding him farewell, " I shall meet 
you here for the general audit of our accounts. 
By that time, I hope, my dear fellow, to find 
you grown a man of the world. As soon 
as you have done with Oxford, you must 
travel. / will furnish you with introductions 
such as will render your residence abroad plea- 
sant as well as profitable. When you come to 
town, you must allow me the pleasure of pre- 
senting you ; and at some future period, per- 
haps you will also give me the satisfaction of 
bringing you forward in political life as the son 
of one of my oldest friends, — the representative 
of one of the most ancient families in the king- 
dom,— and a member of the party to which, for 



192 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

the last two -centuries, the name of Norton has 
been attached. Farewell Frank ! — do not let 
me hear of any more tandem-matches or steeple- 
chases ; if you must play the fool, do it like un 
homme de honne compagnie^ and not like un 
evente de garnisonr 

Sir Francis promised, — although he scarcely 
knew what ; keeping to himself his opinion that 
Lord Farnley might have expressed his admo- 
nitions in plainer English. He admired his 
younger guardian as a graceful high-bred 
courtier ; but would have scorned to mould 
himself after a model so elegantly effeminate. 
Of the two, indeed, and despite his long-winded- 
ness, the young Baronet preferred the straight- 
forward country-gentlemanlike style of old 
Cheveley ; — and his first measure on quitting 
Oxford, was to set off to Cheveley Manor 
for a practical lesson in the presidency of his 
estates and the manifold duties of his squire- 
archical vocation. 

" The old boy has no daughter," said Sir 
Francis to himself, as his travelling carriage 
bowled along a fine old avenue of limes that 



OLD AMD YOUNG BACHELOR. 193 

looked gloriously green, and felt gloriously 
damp ; " so I need not fear that his advice 
about settling in life arose from any selfish 
view. I have the autumn and winter before 
me ; even Lord Farnley will sanction my devot- 
ing them to field sports, provided they are 
enjoyed in a dignified way, — battues and Mel- 
ton, and all that sort of thing ; and when the 
London season commences, I will go up to 
town and put myself under his tutorage for a 
month or two. I shall then have given a fair 
trial to both modes of life, society and seclusion, 
fashion and sobriety. It will be easy to decide 
under which influence I have derived most 
enjoyment; and having once determined the 
point, I will either marry and turn squire, or 
travel and turn dandy." 

It would have been lucky, perhaps, for Sir 
Francis Norton, had his guardian's establish- 
ment afforded him a specimen of country life 
more consonant with the modern habits of his 
station in life. The family mansion of the 
Cheveleys was one of those few residences 
of importance which still exhibit the formal 

VOL, II. K 



194 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

characteristics of the commencement of the last 
century. It was built in a bottom, having a 
large reservoir in front, at the end of an ex- 
tensive green lawn unbroken by the flower- 
beds and parterres now in fashion, and 
contrasting its bright verdure with the red 
brick of which the square packing-case of a 
house was composed. The lower half of the 
fa9ade was closely covered with phyllyrea, 
myrtle, pyrocanthus, and other dark- leaved 
evergreens ; while the upper stories exhibited 
their white stone window cases and parapet wall, 
in most unharmonious opposition to the glaring 
hues of the rest of the structure. Immediately 
under the window was a wide staring gravel 
walk, ornamented at intervals with clumsy 
garden seats and benches painted of a pale 
green ; and with the exception of the occasional 
cries of the water-fowl on the pond, not a sound 
interrupted the torpid monotony of the scene. 
It wanted only a tall lady in a Joseph and gypsy 
hat, holding a little dog by a string, to remind 
one of the — " View of a Gentleman's Seat" — of 
the last generation. 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 195 

After a short interview with Mrs. Cheveley, 
whom he found seated at an old-fashioned ma- 
hogany table, working a strip of muslin over a 
paper pattern, many yards of which were lying 
beside her in a huge roll, (an evidence of the 
perseverance of her industry,) old Cheveley, 
who had been summoned with intelligence of 
the arrival of his ward, led him through the glass- 
doors of the hall, to bask in the oppressive sun- 
shine of a September afternoon on one of the 
shadeless benches commanding a view of the 
house. It seemed a high gratification to the 
old gentleman to point out to his ward, that 
the manor, although kept in punctilious repair, 
did not vary, by the alteration of a single brick, 
from its original plan of erection; that not a 
shrub had been planted for fifty years ; that the 
old heavy-looking timber was unimpaired in its 
effect by pert plantations, or belts of sticks mis- 
called shrubberies; that every thing was in 
strict keeping with the old-fashioned coramo- 
diousness and respectability of the house. No 
flowers — no aviaries — no conservatories — no 
fancy dairies — no Swiss cottages; the garden 
k2 



195 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

was a mile from the house, presenting a series 
of red brick walls in one of the most picturesque 
parts of the park ; and the only green-house 
on the premises was one of those curious struc- 
tures of the last century, consisting of fifty square 
feet of bricks to one of glass, in which plants 
were buried for the winter, and allowed to spindle 
up in the dark, during the spring. Conscious, 
or rather proud that he had no lions to ex- 
hibit to his young visitor, the old gentleman 
took him to the stable to look at his set of 
fat coach-horses and favourite old mare ; 
then returned to the house, to introduce him 
into a mean wainscoted apartment contain- 
ing a small library of buff-bound books, and 
a lanky leather-covered table, blotched with ink, 
which he evidently regarded as a chamber se- 
condary only in importance to the Chapel of St. 
Stephen's; — and, finally after pointing out a 
miserable mezzotint of himself, " Giles Cheve- 
LEY, Eso. M. P. after a picture by Hoppner, 
painted at the request of his constituents," which 
graced the chimney piece, conducted him to his 
i>\\ n room, and left him to dress for dinner, with 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHEIOR. 197 

the announcement that the half-hour bell had 
already rung. 

It was very amusing, — it proved so at least to 
an accomplished valet de chambre, who had 
been recommended to Sir Francis Norton by 
Lord Farnley, — to observe the look of blank mor- 
tification and disappointment with which thd" 
young man threw himself into the hard dressing 
chair, when the old man quitted the room; — 
glancing on the scanty and tasteless furniture ; 
the cold square white dimity bed, ornamented 
with fringe of Mrs, Cheveley's own knotting ; the 
fireplace filled with branches of rue, and graced 
with a worsted hearthrug of Mrs. Cheveley's 
best tent-stitch. On the toilet-table, the tall 
narrow dressing-glass of which was decorated 
with sweeping draperies of muslin, the officious 
valet had been careful to set out a profusion of 
boxes and bottles of crystal and gold, belonging 
to his master's dressing-box, round two slender 
tapering cruets of peppermint and elder flower 
water, manufactured in the housewifely still- 
room of Cheveley Manor, 

" What abominations have we here ? " cried 



198 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

Sir Francis, on perceiving the medicated va- 
pours of his toilet table. " Pray take away this 
doctor's shop from among my brushes." 

" You will find it necessary, Sir Francis, to 
give a considerable number of similar orders," 
said Mr. Wittenham, removing the offending 
decoctions with a very supercilious air, " if you 
wish to make either the place or the people 
at all like the rest of the world. — Housekeeper's 
apartment quite a dispensary, sir ; — no news- 
paper allowed in the steward's room ; — and when 
we arrived, sir, (four o'clock in the afternoon, 
and a very sultry September afternoon,) I found 
Cheveley's people drinking hot tea, and eating 
hot bread and butter ! — Very nauseous habits ! 
— When I resided with the Duke of Whiteha- 
ven (although two hundred miles further north) 
I saw nothing half so barbarous." 

" Be so good as to remember, Wittenham, 
that M?'. Cheveley is my guardian and much es- 
teemed friend ; and however barbarous you may 
find the habits of his house, I expect my servants 
to conform to them." 

" Oh ! certainly. Sir Francis ; — certainly ! — I 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 199 

trust sir, I know how to assort myself to all de- 
scriptions of company. I pique myself on 
being a citizen of the world;— seen most parts 
of Europe, sir, and even touched a little on 
Africa. When I lived with Lord Mizen, Sir 
Francis, we usually yachted through the summer 
at the Mediterranean. I recollect a devilish 
awkward scrape we got into at Morocco ; — 
and" — 

" Give me my waistcoat. '^ 

" Mizen and I were going on shore one even- 
ing after dark, and " — 

" Bring me my shoes." 

" A confounded ugly-looking dog of an Alge- 
rine, who had been skulking about the landing 
place all the afternoon, took the opportunity 
of"- 

" My pocket handkerchief." — 

" I had afready warned his lordship that I did 
not choose to venture on terra Jirma unless we 
were to be properly armed; so just as " — 

" Have you scented it with bouquet ? " 

" With lavender w ater, Sir Francis. And as 
I was observing " — 



200 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

" Open the door—that is the second bell. 
Recollect, Wittenham, I expect you will con- 
duct yourself during my stay at the Manor, witli 
respectability and decorum." 

" I am sure it will be bringing coals to New- 
castle," was the valet's rejoinder, as he closed 
the door after his young master. " There is re- 
spectability and decorum in this same mansion 
of Cheveley Manor, enough to stock half a dozen 
families of distinction. I suppose we shan't stay 
long. A young man like Sir Francis, just come 
to his estate, and years of indiscretion, will be 
apt to have quite enough of respectability and 
decorum in the course of a week ;— so I shall just 
let fly a line to Farnley's people, to let them 
know how things are going on," 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 201 



CHAPTER II. 



A serving man is one of the makings up of a gentle- 
man as well as his clothes. He is indeed wholly his 
master's ; — of his faction, of his cut, of his pleasures. 
He is one that keeps the best company, and is none of 
it ; for he knows all the gentlemen his master knows, 
and picks from thence some hawking and horse-racing 
terms to swagger withal. 

Bishop Earle. 

At the close of the fourth day passed at the 
Manor, Mr. Wittenham's conjectures were 
amply confirmed ; for Sir Francis, instead of 
reproving as before the flippancy of his com- 
ments on the establishment, was ready to laugh 
at, and even join in his sarcasms. Already the 
tediousness of his guardian and the formality of 
Mrs. Cheveley had bored him out of all his 
sentiments of reverence ; and not even the ex- 
K 5 



S02 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

cellent sport afforded by the Cheveley preserves, 
could repay him for the annoyance of restricting 
his own movements to the old man's shuffling 
pace, equestrian and pedestrian ; — of receiving 
perpetual advice as to the mode of handling his 
gun or bitting his horse ; — of playing audience 
to his interminable harangues in the justice 
room, and partner to his evening game of back- 
gammon ; — of listening to an oft-told tale of the 
origin and progress of a favourite rheumatic 
fever; — of hearing the St. James's Chronicle 
read aloud during breakfast; — of drinking fat 
home-brewed ale, and eating fat home-fed mut- 
ton ; — of inhabiting a house where a cigar was 
held to be a sacrilegious pollution ; — of having 
his pet spaniel banished to the kennel, and his 
favourite valet refused access to the preserves. 

Worse, too, remained behind. Bad as were 
the first four days, the fifth promised an increase 
of evils. Mr. Cheveley, having reached the end 
of his personal anecdotes, was already beginning 
them all over again, with a variorum edition of 
the rheumatic fever; and Mrs. Cheveley an- 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 203 

nounced to him that they had invited a party of 
country neighbours to do him honour. 

" We shall have Sir Stephen and Lady Lax- 
ton." 

" The old gentleman I met riding with Mrs. 
Cheveley the other day?— Has he any family?" — 

" A son, married and settled in Devonshire." 

" And no daughter?" — 

" No daughter. And then we expect Mr. 
and Mrs. Homerton Frobishyre." 

"The Frobishyre Abbey people? — They^l 
fancy, have several daughters." 

" All married and gone away. And Lord 
and Lady Loring are coming, and their eldest 
son." 

" And have they no young ladies in the 
family?" 

" None that I ever heard of. Let me see ! 
That will be (two and two are) — four, — and the 
Lorings seven, with our three selves, ten ; a 
chaimmg little sociable party." 

" Charming ! " — mechanically repeated Sir 
Francis Norton; his mind unconsciously re- 
volving with regret, the strange paucity of the 



204 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

female moiety of the creation apparent in the 
neighbourhood of Cheveley. 

Nor did his sense of the deficiency diminish 
when the arrival of the " little sociable party " 
gave to view a Lady Laxton of the shape and 
almost the dimensions of a bison ; a Lady Lo- 
ring who squinted abominably, and a Mrs. Ho- 
merton Frobishyre, whose teeth extended a che- 
vaux-de-frise over one of the most venomous 
tongues in the three kingdoms. 

" Hecate and the three Witches ! " mut- 
tered the yatching citizen of the world, as he 
stood napkin in hand behind his master's chair, 
" Heaven be praised we have no chance of 
picking up a Lady Norton in this part of the 
country." And he tried to interest himself in 
a discourse carrying on between his master and 
a lumpish Mr. Loring (an individual having a 
a table-cloth twisted round his thick throat by 
way of a cravat, and a pair of black kerseymere 
tights with corded black silk stockings) touch- 
ing the quantity of game killed, killing, and to 
be killed, within twenty miles distance. But 
Mr. Wittenham, having lived in the Duke of 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 205 

Whitehaven's establishment where certain pre- 
serves were expressly set aside for the sport of 
the valetocracy, found this bare imagination of a 
feast extremely tantalizing ; and, after seeing his 
master safely embarked in a plate of sallad, he 
gave his attention to some very indignant sal- 
lies, in which Mrs. Homerton Frobishyre was 
indulging touching a certain Mrs. Woodford, 
who seemed to be a country neighbour, and 
well known to the rest of the party. 

" I really have no patience with that woman,'* 
said Mrs. Frobishyre. " There is something to 
me very unnatural in living among every-day 
people and every-day scenes, in an every-day 
house, with an every-day fortune, and fancying 
oneself so angelically superior to the rest of the 
world. Talk to Mrs. Woodford of some noto- 
rious atrocity, or of some person who has outraged 
decency in a flagrant manner, and she will shake 
her head incredulously, and tell you, ' she had 
rather not believe it.' As if her withholding 
her faith, would influence the fact one way or 
other !" 

" But then, you know, my dear Mrs. Fro- 



206 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

bishyre, it makes her so vastly interesting ! " said 
Lady Loring spitefully. " He?' purity of mind 
is such a reflection upon you or I, or any other 
wicked wayward persons who choose to walk 
through life with their eyes open. Just hear 
how the men talk, and even pretend to think of 
Mrs. Woodford." 

" And Sybella is such a very immaculate 
young lady ! " sneered Lady Laxton ; " and 
shuts her eyes so determinately upon all naughty 
doings — '* 

" I hope not ! " cried Lord Loring with a 
hearty laugh. " Sybella Woodford's eyes are 
a devilish deal too handsome to admit of being 
closed. We can't spare them, — eh ! Frobi- 
shyre 1—can we Frobishyre ? " 

" Really, my Lord," quavered the terrified 
husband of Mrs. Frobishyre, whose tenacity on 
points of conjugal prerogative was such as to 
provoke the malicious interference of every man 
in the county to draw down upon him the tor- 
nadoes of his wife's displeasure. " I don't see 
what I have to do with Miss Woodford, or her 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 207 

eyes, any more than your lordship, or any other 
of the circle of her friends ; and I—" 

" Mr. Frobishyre ! "—interrupted Mrs. H. F. 
in a silencing voice, " Mrs. Cheveley has asked 
you three times to carve the turkey." 

" Don't agitate yourself so, my dear fellow; 
you look as if you were going to be cut up your- 
self," cried Lord Loring mischievously. I de- 
clare the mere mention of pretty little Sybella's 
name quite oversets you." 

" Really, my Lord—" 

" Well, never mind ! — I dare say my friend 
Mrs. Frobishyre will excuse you ; particularly if 
I am good-natured enough not to peach about 
that morning I met you leading Sybel's pony 
through the gorse on Goldington Green." 

" On my word. Lord Loring, since you think 
proper to — " 

" / think proper ? Believe me I thought it 
any thing but proper, — on the contrary, very 
improper. You may remember I told Sybella 
so at the time. But she only showed me her 
white teeth and pretty dimples, and said your 



208 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

commander-in-chief would forgive you for being 
absent half an hour without leave." 

While Mrs. Homer ton Frobishyre was swel- 
ling and reddening with suppressed indignation, 
Sir Francis, whose attention had been as much 
attracted as that of his valet, began to ponder 
over these things in his heart. It was sufficiently 
plain that, however dull Mrs. Cheveley's sociable 
party, however solitary the rides to which he was 
instigated by his guardian, there did exist with- 
in visiting distance of the Manor, a young lady 
with a pretty name, having pretty dimples, pretty 
teeth, pretty eyes, and a pony, — whether pretty 
or ugly was very little to the purpose. More- 
over Mrs. Frobishyre (whom he had already in- 
scribed on his private list of antipathies) de- 
clared her to be a saint, and hinted her to be a 
hypocrite; while Lord Loring, who, like most 
stout gentlemen, was somewhat apt to wax face- 
tious and play the wag, evidently believed her 
capable of quizzing Homerton F. and his dicta- 
torial spouse. It was a consolation to Norton 
to learn all this, as he was in common politeness 
bound to extend his visit to another week or 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 209 

ten days ; but even while comforting himself 
with the prospect of being allowed to guide this 
Miss Sybella Somebody-or-other*s pony through 
the gorse of Goldington Green, he could not 
but think it odd that the Cheveleys had hitherto 
abstained, and, as it would appear, carefully 
abstained, from mentioning the mysterious fair 
one in his presence. 

" Who is this M iss Woodman ? " — he inquired 
in a low voice of his heavy neighbour, young 
Loring, unwilling to attract his guardian's at- 
tention. 

" I beg your pardon ?" — 

" I only inquired who this Miss Woodstone 
happens to be ? " 

" Woodford — Miss Woodford, you mean, I 
fancy. Mr. Cheveley — it is Miss Woodford 
surely of whom you are talking, and concern- 
ing whom your friend Sir Francis is inquiring ? " 

" Yes,— Miss Sybella Woodford,'* replied the 
old man ; proceeding with his operation upon a 
fine haunch, without adding a word of informa- 
tion. 

" Miss Sybella Woodford is a very amiable 
young woman who resides with her mother in 



210 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

this neighbourhood," said Loring, supplying the 
deficiency. 

" An only daughter, I presume ? " 
" I rather think Mrs. Woodford is a widow. 
Mr. Cheveley, perhaps you can tell us ? This 
Mrs. Woodford, about whom Sir Francis is 
questioning me, is a widow, is she not?" 

" A widow. — Mr. Loring, a glass of wine?" 
"With pleasure." "And Miss Sybella an 
only daughter ? " 

" An only daughter. Your health. Yes, 
Sir Francis; as I told you, an only daugh- 
ter. But I dare say, Mrs. Cheveley, you can 
tell us more about Mrs. and Miss Wood- 
ford than any other person, seeing so much 
of them as you do. Sir Francis Norton 
wishes very much to know on which side of 
Goldington Green they are to be found, and 
whether Mrs. Woodford is in the habit of ad- 
mitting morning visitors. Perhaps Mr. Homer- 
ton Frobishyre we ought to apply to you ? — Do 
the Woodfords admit morning visitors ? " — 

Sir Francis was satisfied. Eager as he was to 
silence the talking automaton he had thus wound 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 211 

up to loqacity he felt that the officious Loring 
had now drawn Mrs. Homer ton Frobishyre on 
his shoulders, and that his punishment would be 
tantamount to his offence. 

But if the young Baronet was indeed satis- 
fied, Mr. Cheveley was much more so. He 
perceived that Norton's interest was already 
strongly excited by their allusions to his 
Cynosure of neighbouring eyes, 

and this was exactly the state of things he had 
been cunningly plotting to accomplish. Ever 
since his ward was fifteen, and Sybella Wood- 
ford twelve, it had been the darling wish of old 
Cheveley's heart that they should become at- 
tached and united ; and wisely conjecturing 
that, to accomplish this, it was desirable Sir 
Francis Norton should not only never suspect 
the pre-existence of the project, but not expose 
himself to the precarious growth of a love which 
might perhaps burn to extinction ere the mo- 
ment for crowning it arrived, had forborne ever 
to allude to Sybella in his presence ; had com- 
manded Mrs. Cheveley to abstain from inviting 
them during Norton's visit ;— satisfied that be- 



212 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

tween two young persons of their age and ac- 
complishments, there exists sufficient animal 
magnetism to ensure their meeting within a week 
of Sir Francis's arrival at the manor. Having 
artfully laid the springe and watched the event, 
he was now satisfied that the bird was fairly 
limed ; and had no more doubt that his ward 
would be wandering in Cheveley gorse on the 
morrow, or pricking his palfrey round Golding- 
ton Green, than he had that his poor friend 
Frobishyre was predestined that very night to a 
curtain lecture, which nothing but the force 
of habit could enable him to endure with re- 
signation. 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 213 



CHAPTER TIL 



Let me see ! 
To be a Baron is no such great matter 
As people take 't. 

Beaumont and Fletcher. 

" Very singular individuals, sir, those mon- 
sters who quitted us this morning ! " said Wit- 
tenham, as he was assisting his master to un- 
dress the followinoj night. 

" Beautiful ! " cried Sir Francis, to the great 
surprize of his valet. But Wittenham was too 
well accustomed to the rapid changes and emen- 
dations introduced into the English language by 
those two important classes to whom the conser- 
vation of the slang dialect is delegated, (fel- 
low-commoners and hackney-coachmen,) to be 



214 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

long Startled by any use or abuse of his native 
tongue. 

" Beautiful indeed, sir ! " reiterated he, — satis- 
fied that this was the last Long's Hotel designa- 
tion of the tiger kind. *' Never saw finer speci- 
mens of the native.'' 

" Such a foot ! " cried Sir Francis, kicking 
off his French-polished shoe. 

" Why indeed. Sir Francis," rejoined the 
valet, satisfied that his master's admiration was 
excited by the symmetry of his own, "my friend 
Meyer says he has not such another last in his 
shop as yours ; and that one of the opera-dan- 
cers having strolled in, and chanced to take up 
your shoe — " 

"What the devil are you talking about?" 
exclaimed the young Baronet, with very little 
regard to the personal dignity of his accomplished 
valet. 

" You were saying, Sir Francis, that you 
never beheld such a foot as " — 

" Ay — ay ! " interrupted the disconcerted 
Norton, vexed to find how nearly he had been 
moved to betray the interest secretly excited in 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 215 

his mind ; and by way of diverting the prying 
Wittenham's attention from the subject, he sud- 
denly inquired the distance from Cheveley Ma- 
nor to Loring Park. 

" Good God ! — Sir Francis," exclaimed the 
valet, aghast; "you surely don't think of visit- 
ing those people ? " — 

" And why not?" — cried Norton, satisfied that 
he had started a new hare. 

" You have no conception, sir, how horribly 
we should be bored among the Lorings." 

" In what way ? — They seem very good sort 
of people." 

" Exactly so, sir. My Lord and Lady Loring 
are precisely what may be called good sort of 
people. But what business have such persons 
among the aristocracy ? — A few years ago, sir, 
while they were still Sir Harbottle and Lady 
Loring, there could not be a more estimable 
couple, or a more ' beautiful ' specimen of the 
kill-your-own-mutton species of English countr}'- 
gentlemen. They lived on their own estate ten 
months of the year, and came to town during 
the other two, (for the ' Ancient Music,' and a 



216 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

little dowager humdrummery,) to a great lum- 
bering house somewhere near Grosvenors-quare, 
whenever they had a daughter to present. 

" Indeed !" — said Sir Francis, inexpressibly 
amused by the supercilious finery of the gentle- 
man of the boot-jack. 

" I leave it to you, sir, what such a man as 
Sir Harbottle had to do with the peerage ; — un- 
presentable in person — (a mere Hottentot, as 
you must have perceived) ; limited in estate (they 
assure me he has not above ten or twelve thou- 
sand a year) ; a mere upstart in family — (the 
family never heard of I'm told before Cromwell's 
time) ; it was really madness in him to abandon 
the respectable vocation of Squire and take up 
that of a Lord, which does not become him, and 
which he does not become." 

" Admirably argued ! '' cried Sir Francis, 
eager to amuse himself with valetocratic philo- 
sophy. " And what is the result ? " 

*•' The result is, sir, that this gimcrack Lord 
is despised all over the neighbourhood. In point 
of fact, you see. Sir Francis, this neighbourhood 
( I speak it not in any disrespect to that worthy 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 217 

gentleman Mr. Cheveley, who is a man of very 
old family — I have known how to appreciate Mr. 
Cheveley, sir, ever since I noticed the old brass 
monuments over the servants' pew in the church) 
but in point of fact, it is not a neighbourhood of 
nobility. Nothing but squires and baronets 
within thirty miles round. And if the reports of 
the steward's room are correct, nothing could be 
more agreeable and friendly than the footing on 
which they all lived together ; — we]l meaning 
people, sir ! — ate their roast beef and mince-pies 
together at Christmas without ostentation or 
competition." 

" And can they not do so now, though poor 
Loring has dropped the Harbottle of his name? 
— What difference does his coronet make to 
them?'' 

"Every difference, sir. They fancied he wanted 
to set himself up above his neighbours; and 
when he returned from London, a Lord, — took 
every pains to mortify him. Sharp things were 
said among them at that time; and the same 
cordiality has never existed since. But that is 
by no means the worst of it." 

VOL. II. L 



S18 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

" And what is the worst of it ? '* 

" Between ourselves, sir, poor Loring is 
cursedly dipped. A baronet is rich with twelve 
thousand a year, — a peer, damned poor ! — 
People who are satisfied to make Frobishyre or 
Cheveley pay half a guinea, choose to have a so- 
vereign from my lord. Loring was the first man 
in this part of the county till he chose to go into 
a rank of life beyond his means ; — and now, sir, 
mortgage after mortgage, annuity after annuity, 
fall of timber after fall of timber, have done their 
worst for him. The gilding of his whipper- 
snapper coronet has cost him dear ; he is des- 
pised by his ow^n people, — hated by his neigh- 
bours ; and though my lord laughs louder at his 
own vulgar jokes in proportion as his heart 
aches, take my word for it, Sir Francis (as his 
own man plainly says), Loring's an unhappy 
man ! " 

" And pray," said the baronet, who had not 
been listening to his tirade for the last ^ve mi- 
nutes, — " who are those Woodfords who live at 
a place near the keeper's lodge ? " 

" A little citizen's villa sort of a place, eh ! 
sir ?— an owl's nest overgrown with ivy ? " 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 219 

" A very pretty cottage called Thorngrove. — 
I fancy they visit here. Mrs. Cheveley talks 
of having them to dine in a day or two." 

" Does she, sir ? " — said the valet, with most 
unconcerned insouciance, little imagining how 
eagerly his master's heart was beating with 
curiosity. " In all probability they are not 
county people, for I know nothing whatever 
about them. — Call you at the usual hour to- 
morrow. Sir Francis?" — 

" Of course." 

"Choose to have the lamp left burning, sir?" — 

" No, — go to bed. I want nothing more to- 
night ! " 

Notwithstanding this declaration, however. 

Sir Francis did want something more He 

wanted further intelligence of the charming Sy- 
bella, or no chance of sleep for him. Contrary 
to Mrs. Cheveley's expectations, instead of going 
wandering about in the neighbourhood of Thorn- 
grove, peeping over hedges, or trespassing in 
defiance of steel traps and spring guns, into 
shrubberies. Sir Francis had expressed in 
plain gentlemanly English his desire to have a 
L 2 



220 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

sight of the neighbours so much the objects of 
Mrs. Homer ton Frobishyre's antipathy as Mrs. 
Woodford and her daughters; and having pro- 
posed calhng on them in the course of their 
morning's ride — a proposal met with a thousand 
objections by the cunning old gentleman, — it 
ended with Mr. Cheveley and his ward finding 
themselves seated about luncheon time, in a 
pretty, cool, green-looking drawing-room shaded 
by a deep verandah, so as to leave a western 
view towards a lawn covered with beds and 
clusters and pyramids of rich geraniums; and 
littered with the usual picturesque accesso- 
ries of youth, beauty, and accomplishment; — 
pianoforte and harp, drawing- easel, work-table, 
and bouquets and china baskets without end. 
Sir Francis was enchanted. It was just the 
shrine at which to worship a goddess of eighteen 
summers,— it was just the local habitation for a 
heroine of modern romance. 

There was, however, nothing of the slightest 
tendency to romance in the appearance of either 
Mrs. Woodford or her daughter. The mother, 
who was occupied in writing letters on their 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 221 

entrance, was remarkable for nothing but a mild 
tone of voice and a subdued manner, as of a 
person who has wrestled with the world and 
found the encounter too much for her ; and as 
to Sybella, she was as undeserving to figure in 
heroic story, as a very pretty girl could well be. 
Her hair, instead of floating in picturesque dis- 
order, or "waving in natural ringlets over a brow 
of alabaster," was neatly arranged, (evidently 
with the aid of papillotes and her maid,) ac- 
cording to the prevailing fashion, and her dress, 
although formed of the white muslin correctly 
proper to the occasion, instead of being ga- 
thered into a tunic, was made in an elegant 
manner very much resembling that of the 
young ladies of Paris and London. She was, 
it is true, a distinguished looking girl, with 
considerable beauty and considerable grace ; 
but so far from blushing celestial rosy red at 
sight of the "youthful stranger," or "stammer- 
ing a few incoherent sentences indicative of the 
newly felt emotions throbbing within her heart,'* 
she received them with easy good breeding; 
found a great deal to say to Mr. Cheveley, quite 
as much as was necessary to his ward; and, 



222 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

taking them into the drawing-room while her 
mother finished her letter to be in time for the 
post-bag and Lord Loring's frank, distributed the 
partridge-pie and apricot-tart with as much dis- 
interested impartiality, as if Sir Francis had not 
been an unmarried baronet of the date of 1620, 
with a fortune of six thousand a year. Nay, 
when Mr. Cheveley, in pursuance of a project 
preconcerted with his wife, pressed Mrs. Wood- 
ford to dine at the manor on the following day 
and pass a day or two with them, instead of pre- 
serving a dignified or sentimental silence, 
Sybella eagerly entreated her mother to accede 
to the plan, and freely admitted that she should 
of all things like the expedition. 

" I have been taught a new way of cultivating 
heaths," said she; "and in my zeal for the in- 
terests of horticulture and for pleasing old 
Pearmain, I am dying to get to the manor to 
instruct your gardener in the mystery." 

Mr. Cheveley cared very little why she wanted 
to come, since the expression of her wishes 
instantly determined her mother to accept the 
invitation; and so rapidly did the intimacy 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 223 

between Sybella and Sir Francis proceed over 
the apricot-tart while she was showing ofF to 
her old friend Mr. Cheveley a beautiful new 
lory with which the heath-propagating friend 
from the Cape had just presented her, that he 
found courage to acknowledge at parting how 
very much delighted he was at the prospect of 
her visit to the manor on the morrow. 

The morrow came (a cheerful Autumn day), 
and with it the two ladies in the Thorngrove 
pony phaeton. Sir Francis, who had found 
Miss Woodford so enchanting in her morning 
dress of white muslin, found her far more so in 
her dinner dress of white silk ; and as no attempt 
was made to show her off by her judicious host 
and hostess, as she was suffered to sit quite still, 
looking very elegant and pretty all the evening, 
falling naturally to the share of the baronet, 
while her mother chatted with Mr. and Mrs. 
Cheveley, they managed to acquire before the 
supper tray made its appearance, a very tolerable 
insight into each other's sentiments on general 
topics. Sir Francis acknowledged his preference 
of a country life; Miss Woodford admitted 



224} OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

that, having seen but little of London, she should 
like to see more : — Sir Francis declared his 
partiality for his own county, and his intention 
of settling there for the winter and he hoped 
many winters to come, while Sybella pleaded 
guilty to a roving disposition, and hinted that 
her only wish was to visit the continent: — Sir 
Francis protested that he was a bigot to English 
music and detested the German Opera; his 
companion plainly declared that she liked 
nothing but Mozart and Beethoven : — Sir Fran- 
cis thought the Scotch novels overrated, and 
could not perceive the merit of writing in a 
barbarous and incomprehensible dialect ; Miss 
Woodford was equally certain that Scott was 
secondary in genius to Shakspeare alone, and 
protested that her admiration of Sir Walter 
amounted almost to idolatry : — and yet, with all 
this discrepancy of opinion. Sir Francis rose to 
open the drawing-room door for Miss Wood- 
ford's exit for the night, with the persuasion that 
he had found a kindred soul ; that their opinions 
were perfectly congenial : that she was the love- 
liest girl, and he the luckiest dog on earth. It 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 225 

was SO fortunate that he had paid his elder 
guardian the respect of visiting him, in prefer- 
ence to Lord Farnley , or that he had not flown 
off in a day or two, scared by the intolerable 
dulness of Cheveley Manor ! And, after all, he 
had very much exaggerated the faults and defi- 
ciencies of the place. The house was only what 
every country house in the kingdom had ap- 
peared half a century before; and as to his 
guardian and the old lady, they were sterling 
people;— a little dull to be sure;— but perfectly 
well principled and inoffensive. 

In these opinions, nevertheless, he could by 
no means persuade Mr. Wittenham to concur. 
The fine gentleman of the steward's room 
could not be brought to see, or at least to con- 
fess, that the arrival of the Woodfords had 
wrought much amendment in the uneventful 
monotony of the squire's house. They had 
brought with them no servant out of livery ; 
their female attendant was an old widow, who 
had been nurse to Miss Sybella ; and the utmost 
commendation he was moved to bestow on the 
family was, — " A pretty girl, that little Wood- 
l5 



226 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

ford, sir ; — fresh as a flower, —but a total want 

In the course of four-and-twenty hours, he 
had a great deal more to say, and a great deal 
of fault to find ; for among the five eternal pas- 
sions his master had struggled through during the 
six months he had entertained Mr. Wittenham as 
valet, the flirtation visible to the whole house on 
the pea-green settee on the grass- green lawn, 
concealed only by Miss Woodford's olive-green 
parasol, assumed decidedly the most alarming 
and matrimonial aspect. Instead of taking his 
usual afternoon's ride, Sir Francis insisted upon 
sharing with old Pearmain Sybella's instinic- 
tions in the greenhouse ; and as it was the first 
time for a week he had been seen loitering 
about the house between breakfast and dinner 
time, the housekeeper's room began to look 
grave on the matter. 

The next day, things became still more awful. 
The pony had been sent for ; and Miss Wood- 
ford accompanied her old friend and her new, 
to visit the ruins of an ancient castle in the 
neighbourhood ; concernino' the existence of 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 227 

which Mr. Cheveley had never breathed a sylla- 
ble to his ward, till there was an opportunity 
for him to ride leisurely by Sybella's side 
through the beautiful hazel copses, where the 
robins were singing among showers of falling 
leaves ; where the fern waved almost breast high ; 
where the fragrance of wild honeysuckles still 
betrayed the lingering breath of summer ; where 
Sir Francis quoted Byron, — Miss Woodford, 
Voss. Both were poetically disposed ; and old 
Cheveley was careful to loiter several hundred 
yards behind, in order to keep the observant 
eyes of the groom still further in the rear. Sir 
Francis tore down a branch of flowering ivy, as 
tliey passed a withered oak. Miss Woodford 
hung it to her saddle, and twisted it into her 
hair when she dressed for dinner. She looked 
handsomer that day than the day before ; and 
old Cheveley took care that the young people 
should pass the whole evening side by side, 
looking over Flaxman's designs from Homer 
and Sophocles. 

The following morning had been, from the 
first, fixed for the Woodfords' return home : 



228 OLD AND \OUNG BACHELOR. 

and old Cheveley, from first to last, had deter- 
mined that the arrangement should take ef- 
fect. Yet, although Wittenham had insinu- 
ated that morning during the progress of his 
toilet, that they were a most wretched descrip- 
tion of persons, — (the old woman keeping the 
key of the store-room, and the young one being 
lady president of half a dozen Dorcas Societies, ) 
Sir Francis persisted in giving his guardian 
to understand, in pretty plain terms, that the 
Manor would lose all its attraction in his eyes 
by losing Sybella ; and that if he persisted in 
letting them depart, he would be very soon left 
tete-d-tete with the old lady. But the old gen- 
tleman knew better. He knew that if his ward 
could scarcely make up his mind to live at the 
distance of a mile and a half from the goddess 
in the muslin gown, he was very unlikely to find 
courage for a long journey from the neighbour- 
hood; and without giving a moment's heed to 
Norton's irritation and petulance, saw the pony 
phaeton come round to the glass-door, handed 
Sybella into the vehicle, and, having lingered a 
moment on the lawn to applaud the excellence 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 229 

of Mrs. Cheveley's coach womanship, walked 
calmly off to the home farm, leaving poor Frank 
stretched at lover's length on one of the pea- 
green benches. 

The Squire found that every thing was in ex- 
cellent train ; and had no more doubt of seeing 
his favourite Sybella installed as mistress of 
Norton Park before the commencement of the 
winter, than he had of finding the estimable 
Mrs. Cheveley presiding over her roll of satin 
stitch, on his return from his walk. 

Had Sir Francis's prime vizier, the great Mr. 
Wittenham, been at all suspicious of the vile 
conspiracy in progress against himself (for he 
considered his master only as a subordinate part 
of himself ), he would not quietly have passed the 
evening seated in Byi'onic misanthropy on the 
parapet wall of the horsepond, with a cigar 
between his scornful lips. 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 



CHAPTER IV. 



The house she dwelt in was a sacred shrine ; 
Her chamber window did surpass in glory 
The portals of the dawn ; all paradise 
Could, by the simple opening of a door 
Let itself in upon him ; pathways, walks 
Swarm'd with enchantment. Wordsworth. 

From that day, nothing could be more clear 
than that the high respect entertained by Sir 
Francis Norton for his guardian and the old 
lady, had determined him to adjourn sine die 
his departure from the manor. Nay, so eager 
was he to render himself serviceable to the vene- 
rable Mrs. Cheveley, that no market-porter ever 
rendered himself more cheerfully a beast of bur- 
den than did the young Baronet. Every day, 
and sometimes even twice a day, he volunteered 
his services to carry books, patterns, flowers, 
music, messages, between Cheveley Manor and 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 231 

Thorngrove ; and if, in reward for his activity, 
Miss Woodford did occasionally favour him 
with an air on the harp, or a ballad with the 
guitar, no one could doubt that his efforts were 
completely disinterested. 

It must be admitted that the green drawing- 
room was a very charming place for falling in 
love : — a delightful retreat after the glaring dis- 
comfort of the treeless lawn and great square 
parlour at the manor ; — that the books and birds, 
music and flowers, and above all, the tone of 
easy sociability at Thorngrove, were very de- 
lightful. There was a modest simplicity about 
Sybella; an air of quiet, ladylike, self-concentra- 
tion about the mother ; and a spirit of orderli- 
ness in the whole establishment, from which Sir 
Franpis inferred wonders of the principles and 
predilections of the family. 

" She likes things exactly as / like them," 
mused young Norton, as he walked his horse 
leisurely across Goldington Green, on his way 
to carry back to Mrs. Cheveley some bodkin, or 
stiletto, or other nonsensicality she had borrowed 
of her friend. " I am able to offer her at Nor- 



232 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

ton precisely such a home as Thorngrove, on a 
better scale ; and she will be happy thercj and-.—" 
Had not his horse stumbled in a rabbit burrow, 
his contemplations might have been pursued 
much further ; but his momentary pause gave 
time to Mr. and Mrs. Homer ton Frobishyre's 
phaeton to cross him at the turnpike. 

" Good morning, Sir Francis," said a chuck- 
ling voice, much resembling the tenor of the 
demon chorus in Robert le Diable. " I thought 
it was you, coming out of the Thorngrove gates. 
Mr. Frobishyre would have it that it was Quin- 
sey on his way to purr away an hour at Cheve- 
ley ; but I said directly — ' No ! it is Sir Francis 
Norton coming from his matin devotions.' " 

" You were very kind to recognise me at such 
a distance," said Norton, touching his horse 
with the intention of escaping. 

" Very discriminating at all events ; for we 
are pretty well accustomed to see gentlemen of 
all shapes, sizes, and dimensions, make their 
exits and their entrances through those eventful 
gates. It is not written there, however, as per- 
haps it ought to be, ' Lasciate ogni speranza, 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 233 

voi cKentrate!' Miss Sybella takes care that 
every one shall hope in turn, till it suits her 
fancy to reduce him to despair.— Poor Mr. 
Loring ! " — 

" Poor Mr. Loring ? " reiterated Sir Francis, 
trying to look unconcerned. " Did he only suit 
Miss Woodford's fancy in the way you men- 
tion ? — I wonder at that ! He is such a remark- 
ably gay, lively, intellectual, irresistible young 
man.*' 

" He is Lord Loring's son, in the first place ; 
which might really entitle him to some little 
show of respect from such people as the Wood- 
fords. And in the next—" 

" I am sorry I must defer hearing the next, 
Mrs. Frobishyre, till I have the pleasure of see- 
ing you again," said Sir Francis, perceiving that 
the lady was waxing prosy as well as censorious ; 
" I fear, as it is, I shall be too late for Mr. 
Cheveley's punctual dinner hour." And away 
he went ; leaving the irate lady to wreak the 
residue of her wrath upon the meek-spirited in- 
dividual by her side. 

The hapless steed of the young Baronet pro- 



234 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

bably discovered in the course of the next half 
mile, that Mrs. Frobishyre's sarcasms had not 
been launched in vain; that his master was 
piqued to the very soul. Never had Sir Francis 
performed the distance from Goldington Green 
to Cheveley Manor, at a pace so much resem- 
bling his usual rate of speed from Cheveley 
manor to Goldington Green. He fancied in- 
deed, that he was only angry with the odious 
Mrs. Homerton Frobishyre ; and had any one 
asserted that it was Sybella herself who moved 
his indignation, he certainly would have rebutted 
the charge. 

Sybella, however, it certainly was ! — She, 
with her ingenuous air and muslin frock, to turn 
out a flirt — a coquette ! — and to have flirted and 
coquetted with even such a caput moy^tuum of beef 
and beer, as the squireling Loring ! — a mere 
boor, — an animal with no more intelligence than 
one of the stone lions on his father's park gates ! 
— " Such people as the So-and-soes," is at all 
times a most disparaging and mortifying mode 
of mention, — and he had been ready to repay 
Mrs. Frobishyre with a cut of his whip, for 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 235 

having presumed to apply such a phrase to the 
ladies of Thorngrove; but now, he was very 
glad she had done so ; — very glad that she had 
spoken of them despitefully ; — very glad that — 
No!— if the truth must be told, Sir Francis 
Norton was just at that moment glad of nothing 
in the world ! — 

In this mood he dressed for dinner. In this 
mood he listened, and for the first time for three 
weeks, to the tissue of impertinencies with which 
Wittenham was in the habit of favouring him, 
touching the Thorngrove family. The valet had 
been passing the morning at the Lorings, for a 
day's shooting with the butler ; and nov/ unwit- 
tingly confirmed Mrs. Frobishyre's insinuation, 
by declaring how delighted all " Loring*s people" 
were that the match had come to nothing be- 
tween their young master and the little girl at 
Thorngrove. " Nothing," he said, " could be 
more unsatisfactory to a domestic than the ser- 
vice of small gentry, like the Woodfords ; — 
people who were neither one thing nor the 
other, — who knew nothing of the world, and 
were totally unknown in it ;— people who paid 



236 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

their bills with that sort of petty regularity, so 
annoying to tradesmen on a respectable scale — " 

" People, in short, who have no steward's 
room, and no Mr. Wittenham," interrupted 
his master. " Mrs. Woodford's husband, how- 
ever, was a Baronet's son : who, dying young 
and without heirs male, left only a limited for- 
tune to his widow and child ; and — " 

" I dare say. Sir Francis — very probably," — 
interrupted Wittenham, who was quitting the 
room — " I don't the least doubt it. I have 
never made any particular inquiries about them. 
All I meant to assert was, that Loring's people 
did not want Miss Sybella; and were mighty 
glad when the young man threw her over." 

It was after the sleepless night caused by 
these and similar assertions on the part of his 
Mephistopheles, that Sir Francis opened his 
eyes in the morning to peruse an epistle bearing 
Lord Farnley's frank. The moment w^as only 
too propitious. Sir Francis was just then 
thoroughly out of humour with Thorngrove, 
thoroughly bored at Cheveley, thoroughly anx- 
ious to revenge himself by getting away, — and 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 237 

goino: he cared not whither. He wanted active 
movement, — he wanted change; and without 
the slightest feehng of resentment proceeded to 
peruse his younger guardian's reproofs and re- 
monstrances. 

Dear Frank, — Famley Hall. 

When I learned that, after a very short visit 
to Norton Park, you had proceeded to our ex- 
cellent friend Mr. Cheveley's hospitable man- 
sion, I felt convinced that you were eager to get 
rid, in the first place, of an unwelcome duty; 
and that, after a few days, you would find your 
way (according to your engagement) hither. 
Under these circumstances, I judged it unneces- 
sary to trouble you with my opinion relative to 
the course, both political and domestic, it might 
be advisable for you to pursue in that quarter. 
Aware that the Cheveleys have no immediate 
heirs or relations, nothing appears more pro- 
bable than that the old gentleman will bequeath 
to yourself, as the only son of his oldest friend, 
his vast estate and parsimonious hoardings; and it 
may therefore be highly desirable you should keep 
on the best possible terms with him and his wife. 



238 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

But this does not by any means necessitate an 
adoption of their old-fashioned ways and notions: 
and had I seen you before you set off for the 
Manor, I should have judged it my duty to warn 
you against contracting habits of squiredom, 
such as might disqualify you for shining in any 
other sphere of society. 

Unluckily, I have strangely miscalculated ! — 
I am assured, my dear fellow (pardon me if I 
speak plainly on so interesting an occasion), that 
you are exhibiting yourself at all the lumbering 
festivities of the county, as a mere facsimile 
of the old gentleman; that you are maunder- 
ing away your time in Cheveley's justice-room ; 
riding the cart-horses of his stud; eating his 
fat pasties, and running considerable risk of 
being caught in a matrimonial trap by a country- 
bred Miss, the squire's neighbour. Excuse 
me, dear Frank, for telling you that this must 
not, or at least ought not to be. With your 
fortunes and prospects, you have a right to form 
a very good connexion, to increase your es- 
tate, and obtain a higher standing in society. 
I am far from wishing to dissuade you from 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 239 

matrimony. Although myself (and for few 
things am I more grateful to Providence) a 
jovial bachelor, I do not point out a similar 
career to yourself; for you have not the rank 
or fortune indispensable to its embellishment. 
All, therefore, I wish to press upon you is the 
eligibility of seeing more of the world before 
you venture on a step so decided as marriage. 
Remember, Norton, you have fifty happy years 
before you ; do not run the risk of embittering 
them by the boyish precipitancy of rejecting 
my request for three months' delay, ere you 
tender your proposals to this damsel in the 
shades. I do not ask you to surmount your 
attachment, but merely to suspend your decla- 
ration : — you may live to thank me for the 
caution. 

In a word, my dear boy, come to Farnley. 
We have a large party assembled here, — all 
anxious to make your acquaintance, — all eager 
to make their own acquaintance agreeable to 
you. You shall not be bored with politics more 
than you can bear, or with music, waltzing, and 
proverhes more than I can help. Make my 



240 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

compliments and your own adieux to the 
Cheveleys as quickly as you can ; and come and 
fight over the ground of your Dulcinea's merits, 
inch by inch, with your faithful and affectionate 
servant, Farnley." 

The unsuspecting Baronet, entertaining not 
the slightest conjecture that the tidings of his 
helle passion for Miss Woodford had been con- 
veyed to Farnley Hall in a confidential letter 
from his confidential gentleman to the confi- 
dential gentleman of his guardian, dreamed not 
that, during his perusal of the epistle, Mr. Wit- 
tenham's eyes were fixed with eager curiosity on 
the expression of his master's face. Nothing 
doubting but that a letter under cover from 
Lord Farnley must abound in suitable admo- 
nitions and reprehensions, the valet was en- 
chanted to perceive that the utmost indication 
of Sir Francis's ire exceeded not a deep and 
guilty blush ; while the aspect of his handsome 
face, on reaching the signature, was such as to 
determine Wittenham on packing his port- 
manteau immediately after breakfast. 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 241 

** As sure as fate my Lord has sent for him 
away ; and as sure as fate he has not the slightest 
objection to go," ruminated th<> experienced 
valet, completing his arrangement of the jugs 
of hot water and cold, and the eau de Cologne 
for his master's toilet. " I hope old Cheveley 
won't put a spoke in the wheel ; for another 
week in this Hottentot's wigwam would be the 
extinction of me." 

So far from interfering, however, in the pro- 
ject announced during breakfast by his ward, 
the squire saw in the intended journey of Sir 
Francis only a proper form of respect towards 
Lord Farnley. He was persuaded that Norton 
was desirous of submitting to his younger guar- 
dian his project of alliance with his beloved 
Sybella. 

" The lad perceives," thought the kind- 
hearted old man, " that he is sure of my con- 
sent; that the Woodfords are all /can desire; 
and is willing to show his father's friend, the 
dandy Lord, the deference of asking his opinion, 
'Tis all very right. But I hope they won't 

VOL. II. M 



242 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

keep Frank long in Shropshire, or my pretty 
little friend will cry away all her roses." 

" I suppose you have taken leave at Thorn- 
grove, Frank?" said he with a significant smile, 
while Mr. Wittenham was standing beside the 
travelling carriage, directing two footmen how 
to lift in the chaise-seat and dispose the great 
coats. 

" No, indeed, sir," replied his ward, hoping 
he was speaking nearly in his usual voice. " I 
think all leave-takings, intolerable things ; and 
indeed when I quitted Mrs. Woodford yester- 
day, had no intention of visiting Shropshire 
so soon. Circumstances have since occurred 
which — that is, circumstances — or rather I should 
say-" 

" / understand — / understand,'* cried Mr. 
Cheveley. " Go, therefore, my dear boy, as fast 
as you can, and return as fast as you can. The 
sooner we see you back the better." 

" You will say every thing you think neces- 
sary for me to the families here, from whom I 
have received so much hospitality ? " 

" Every thing, and to every one; not omit- 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 243 

ting your foe, Mrs. Frobishyre, and your friend 
— whom shall I say, Frank?" 

" Have you put in my guncase?" inquired 
the young baronet of his valet, to cut short this 
embarrassing scene. 

" I have, Sir Francis. Every thing 's ready." 

" Farewell, then, dear sir," cried he, pressing 
Mr. Cheveley's hand. " I will write to you on 
my arrival at Farnley." 

The lodge gates were soon passed. It seemed 
but a step to Goldington ; and notwithstanding 
the indignation still fermenting within the bo- 
som of Sir Francis, he could not forbear casting 
a wistful glance at the shrubberies of Thorn- 
grove, in hopes to catch a glimpse of Sybel- 
la's white draperies among the acacia trees. It 
would even have been satisfactory to him had 
her favourite Persian greyhound, who was sus- 
pected of a tendency for poaching, made his 
appearance in the adjoining paddocks. But 
no ! not a creature was to be seen ; and when 
they had fairly cleared the bounds of the parish, 
—when they had attained the high road, and got 
beyond the reach of Cheveley associations, — Sir 
M 2 



244 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

Francis was glad that nothing had occurred to 
shake his purpose. For the last five weeks he 
had seen Miss Woodford every day; riding, 
walking, and talking with her, till he had fancied 
it impossible to ride, walk, or talk with any 
other woman. He had often blamed himself, 
(after a long stroll with her among the green 
coppices, or after a family dinner at Thorngrove, 
and the evening passed in listening to her music, 
or requiting it by reading aloud to her mother 
and herself the last new work from town,) — he 
had often blamed himself for lack of decision or 
lack of courage in failing to give some slight 
indication of his attachment. " So intimate as 
I am with both Mrs. Woodford and Sybella," 
thought he, "I have never yet breathed a syl- 
lable that can induce them to suspect I regard 
them with more interest than such people as the 
Frobishyres and Lorings ! " 

But now, on his journey from Cheveley to 
Farnley — from the arctic to the antartic pole — 
it was to this very delicacy and reserve he re- 
verted with the greatest satisfaction. 

" Had I been rash enough to give Miss 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 245 

Woodford any insight into my feelings," said 
he to himself, in sullen soliloquy, " what an end- 
less number of explanations might I not have 
been compelled to offer, concerning the motives 
of my change of sentiment ! And then, the 
ignominy of adverting to her flirtation — her — 
her — what shall I call it ? — with that brute Lor- 
ing. I could not have stood such a mortifica- 
tion. And now, ihank Heaven ! — I have nothing 
to reproach myself with. I have never uttered 
a word to Miss Woodford that could induce her 
to fancy I ever intended to offer her my hand ; 
and thus I escape the hazard, the more than 
hazard, of becoming husband to a jilt and 
coquette. After all, Sybella only loses the tri- 
umph of adding another name to her list of 
rejected suitors.'' 

It is surprising, however, in spite of all this 
philosophy, of all Mr. Frobishyre's inuendoes 
and Wittenham*s false witnessing, how often he 
found occasion, during his two days' journey, to 
revert to Thorngrove, its ways, and its inhabi- 
tants. Once or twice, he all but determined to 
turn back and decide the question at once, by 



246 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

a Strict investigation of Sybella^s conduct in 
the Loring affair ; and either proposing to her 
to become his wife, or taking a final fare- 
well. The fear of being sneered at by Witten- 
ham and quizzed by the Frobishyres, alone 
arrested his movements. 

" I will, at all events, comply with Lord Farn- 
ley's request," cried he at last, finding that he 
had advanced too far to return without incurring 
the charge of gross inconsistency. " Farnley 
is in the right. At present I know nothing 
of society, 1 have fallen in love with the 
first pretty girl who has fallen in my way, 
and found it worth while to make herself 
agreeable. — Why marry yet? — Why marry at 
all ?— What so independent as a bachelor's life? 
What so revolting as the condition of a Homer- 
ton Frobishyre !" And he went on, railing at 
Cupid and Hymen, love and matrimony, till the 
turrets of Farnley rose in all their grandeur be- 
fore his eyes. 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 247 



CHAPTER V. 



They talk of fevers that infect the brains. 
But nonsense is the new disease that reigns. 

Dryden. 

Love is proverbially the blindest and most 
blind-making of deities. Sir Francis Norton's 
auspicious acquaintance with the Thorngrove 
family had suddenly blinded him to the dul- 
ness, opacity, and torpor of Cheveley Ma- 
nor. From the moment of his connection 
with the Woodfords, Mrs. Homerton Froby- 
shire had found it impossible to extort from 
him a single sarcasm against the quaint ob- 
soleteness of the place ; and he had grievously 
offended Lady Loring by asserting that the old 
family-mansion aspect of the Manor was far pre- 
ferable to the modern gothic, or pert attempts at 



248 OLD AND \OUNG BACHELOR. 

classicism, exhibited in certain new seats of the 
new nobility. He had, in short, blinded him- 
self as completely in this respect, as in that of 
fancying that no demonstration had escaped 
him of his predilection for Sybella. 

But scarcely did his carriage pass through 
the grand archway of Farnley, when the scales 
seemed to fall from his eyes. Amid the stir and 
bustle of his fashionable guardian's splendid 
residence, he felt as if breathing a new atmos- 
phere, and mingling with a higher order of 
beings. It is the custom of right-thinking 
people to enlarge upon the respectable air of 
an ancient mansion, with its gray-headed ser- 
vitors ; but experience proves that the gray- 
headed servitors, from long indulgence in 
habits of stewardVroom sensuality, are generally 
deaf, blind, and inactive. Instead, therefore, 
of two or three old men, heavy with forty 
years freedom of the ale cellar, and totally un- 
versed in the refinements of modern life, the 
young Baronet found himself received and 
ushered into the library by smart, active, well- 
bred servants ; marshalled by a groom of the 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 249 

chambers with the manners and appearance of 
a gentleman, by whom their movements were 
regulated with the glance and nod of an Olym- 
pian Jupiter. It was already half past five, the 
dinner hour of the manor ; but he was informed 
that, at Farnley, he had two hours to spare be- 
fore the ringing of the dressing bell. — The pros- 
pect was somewhat alarming to a man recently 
experienced in the taciturn formality of Mrs. 
Cheveley's drawing-room during the fatal half 
hour preceding dinner ! — 

But Sir Francis had not even leisure to 
turn for amusement to the new publications with 
which the tables were covered, or to a portfolio 
of new engravings lying on a rack near the 
sofa. Within a quarter of an hour of his arrival, 
Lord Farnley (with two gentlemen whom he 
introduced to his ward as Lord Glendyne and 
Colonel Latimer) came in from his ride ; and 
soon afterwards two very lovely women, to 
whom he also presented Sir Francis Norton, 
made their appearance from an adjoining bou- 
doir. It was evidently the custom of the house 
to assemble for an hour before dinner at the 
M 5 



250 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

close of the morning's recreations, ere the so- 
lemnity of full-dress prevented the party from 
feeling and appearing at their ease. Lord 
Glendyne and the Colonel, complaining of a 
damp ride, seated themselves on a low divan 
near the ample fire-place ; Lord Farnley and 
Frank, profiting by the owl-light diffused 
through the room, were standing together at 
a distant v/indow discussing affairs which they 
would have found it difficult to talk about illu- 
minated by the mighty blaze of the wood-fire ; 
while Lady Kingcombe and her daughter Lady 
Margaret Enville, who had been joined by an- 
other lady and a very talkative gentleman, were 
assembled together on an ottoman in the centre 
of the room, comparing notes of their morning's 
amusements, and discussing the newspapers and 
letters of the day brought in by a late post. 
Every one seemed sociably inclined ; — every one 
seemed to experience that lively flow of spirits 
which a growing appetite for dinner calls forth, 
and which the weight of three abundant courses 
cannot fail to extinguish. The men were not 
elevated into hauteur by the stiffness of their 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 251 

cravats ; nor were the women encouraged into 
pride (like the Spanish mules) by the jingling 
of their chains and ear-rings. For one hour, 
at least, of the twenty-four, the conscious- 
ness of muddy boots, and tresses discomposed 
by the open air, suggested to them to be 
natural. 

" And where did you go, Madelina, after I 
quitted you ? " inquired Lord Farnley of the 
graceful diminutive figure lounging beside Lady 
Kingcombe. 

" Indeed I hardly know," replied a sweet but 
languid voice. " Ilowerton insisted upon tak- 
ing me to see a ruined forge, which he assured 
me was as picturesque and romantic as the Mer- 
maiden's well of the Ravenswoods. But, alas ! 
the only picturesque object I beheld was his 
august self, wading ancle deep in the water to 
guide my horse across the dam in safety. You 
never saw any thing so chivalrous ! " 

" As if you were not aware," cried Lord Farn- 
ley, " that he is cased in caoutchouc from head 
to heel. You are to know. Lady Kingcombe, 
that ever since my sister married poor Rower- 



252 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

ton, satisfied beforehand of the adventures and 
exploits likely to be exacted by so fantastic a 
dame, his garments have been made waterproof 
with Indian rubber, and fireproof with asbestos ; 
under favour of which concealed armour he per- 
forms prodigies of valour in her behoof." 

"Mere scandal! '' — cried Lady Madelina 
Rower ton, in a tone of affected pique. " Had 
he not been really wet to the skin, I should not 
have found it so easy to persuade him to go and 
change his clothes, and dress for dinner an hour 
before the first bell." 

" Rowerton is at this moment writing letters 
for the post in my study," said Lord Farnley. 
" Nay," he continued, interrupting his sister as 
ahe was about to rise, and holding her playfully 
with both hands on the ottoman, " I will not let 
you stir. He has been tormented enough, poor 
fellow, for this morning. Je nCen appelle a vous, 
mon cher Comte ! Has not Lady Madelina ex- 
hibited, since breakfast, at least ten fits of ca- 
price more than any reasonable husband is called 
upon to endure ? " 

" Miladi has condescend be var' provoking," 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 263 

said Count Hagelhorn, who was seated on a 
footstool near Lady Margaret; ostensibly in 
adoration of the little coterie of fair triflers, 
but in reality lost in contemplation of his own 
newly-acquired English boots and English pa- 
tois ; " and Maestaire Rourton — he so happy 
to possess the great good-humour. If he swear 
a leetel, at his horse, dis morning, his horse 
nevaire tell a vort of the mattaire." 

The ladies laughed vociferously; for Count 
Hagelhorn had obtained the reputation of say- 
ing humorous things ; and was therefore sure 
of finding his platitudes received with rapturous 
applause. 

" And you, Lady Margaret? " inquired Lord 
Farnley of a tall young lady sitting rapt in 
silent attention. " Have you been putting your 
rash threat into execution, of going down to the 
archery ground this cold day?" 

" Surely you remember issuing your com- 
mands to the contrary ? " said a rich mellow 
voice, that formed a strange contrast to the 
mincing affectation of the two last speakei's. 

" Certainly; for which reason, giving due 
allowance to the tendencies of your sex, I au- 



254 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

gured that your ladyship had been busy at the 
butts ever since I quitted the house." 

" As, Count Hagelhorn says of Madelina, 
* You condescend to be var' provoking.' But 
admit your conjectures wholly defeated, when 
I tell you that I have been occupied in the Gal- 
lery, making an outline of the figure of the Fila- 
trice ; and that Mamma has been good enough 
to sit and read to me, lest I should grow fright- 
ened at sitting alone among so many awful 
marble effigies." 

" And why have you been taking an outline ? " 
inquired Colonel Latimer, in a hoarse grating 
voice, that sounded like the hinges of a prison 
door. " I hate outlines; they are the mere ske- 
letons of beauty ; and my imagination is by no 
means active enough * to create a soul under the 
ribs of death.'" 

" But, if I understand rightly," cried Lord 
Farnley, " Lady Margaret's intention is to 
create a body rather than a soul. I think you 
told me," he continued, addressing Lady King- 
combe, " that you have bespoken a model of 
Schadow's chef-d'oeuvre from your daughter's 
hands?" 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 255 

" Oh, pray do not say a model,^^ replied the 
same sweet voice that had spoken before ; " an 
imitation is the best I am Hkely to achieve. 
Mamma is very anxious to have something that 
will, even remotely, remind her of that beauti- 
ful figure ; and however grievous my failure, the 
attempt will at least afford me a useful lesson," 

"But I am sure, if Lady Kingcombe wishes 
it,- Henry will let some man come down from 
town and take a cast of the statue," cried Lady 
Madelina Rowerton ; " it will save you an in- 
finite deal of bore and trouble." 

" And de zendimend !" — pathetically ejacu- 
lated Count Hagelhorn. "De width between 
de work of de man of de town, and of de fair 
hand of miladi Margarete ! " 

" By the way," exclaimed Lord Glendyne, 
who had been amusinfr himself stretchino: his 
hands to the utmost extent of the pockets of 
his riding frock, " does any body happen to 
know whether the book-box is arrived from 
Ebers ? "— 

" You inquire with all the fervour of a lite- 
rary man," croaked Colonel Latimer. 



256 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

" With twice the fervour, if you knew all," 
cried Glendyne, taking a pinch of snuif. " You 
are to understand that mine enemy (Lord Hil- 
caster) hath just written a book; mine enemy 
(being a fool) must have written a bad book; 
and the book of mine enemy (being a bad book) 
cannot fail to have been cut up by the reviews." 

" You have accounted very naturally, if not 
satisfactorily, for your eagerness," said his sister 
Lady Margaret gravely. " But for want of a 
better antagonist, / am willing to rebut your 
loo^ic. I am persuaded that Lord Hilcaster's 
book is only too good for the class of people 
into whose hands it is likely to fall." 

" Too goot, is goot for noting," said the 
Count, piquing himself above all things on the 
colloquiality of his English. 

" Rely on it, it is a complete failure," cried 
Glendyne. 

" Has any one heard how it is to be spoken 
of in the Quarterly?" — inquired Lord Farnley. 

" By the reviewers, it has been treated most 
unmercifully," answered Sir Francis Norton, 
who had been employed one evening by Mrs. 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 25t 

Woodford to read aloud the opinion of one or 
two leading periodicals respecting the work in 
question. " But by the world, I fancy, it is 
very generally commended." 

" By the worlds I conclude you mean so- 
ciety V said Lady Kingcombe, addressing the 
young baronet for the first time. 

"I do; a prejudiced tribunal perhaps; and 

yet-" 

"The one, which modern authors labour 
hardest to propitiate," observed Lord Farnley 
contemptuously. 

" At least the delineators of its vices and fol- 
lies, such as Lord Hilcaster," replied Norton 
modestly, but firmly. " Elsewhere, what chance 
of having the delicate lights, and shadows, and 
faint pencilling consistent with the lightness of 
the subject, duly appreciated ? The chief merit 
of a work of fiction treating of the manners of 
the higher classes, is a tone of quiet good 
breeding; and quiet good breeding passes 
with the hack critics of the lesser periodicals, 
for the tameness of a trivial mind. Every 
publication, according to their notions, must 



258 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

be piquant, — tranchant, — startling, — and capa- 
ble of conveying a strong impression. In the 
sketch of a field flower, the leaves must be made 
to start forth in unnatural prominency by a 
vivid alternation of light and shade ; and in 
describing simple traits of every-day life, a 
metaphysical analysis of motives and results 
must invest them with the dignity of his- 
torical fact. Lord Hilcaster's pictures are true 
to nature — nature in the gala robe in which 
he chooses to depict her ; and the critics might 
just as well quarrel with the domestic scenes 
of Mieris or the circumstantialities of Gerard 
Douw, for not being invested with the flowing 
grace of Rubens, or the impressive sternness of 
Michael Angelo, as with Hilcaster for painting 
our existence as uneventful and our manners 
as fade and artificial." 

" Excellent, my dear Norton ! " cried Lord 
Farnley ; " we shall soon find you engaging as 
one of the ungentle craft ! " " And entering 
with animated volubility into conversation with 
his ward, he attempted to cover the embar- 
rassment of hearing a long and pedantic speech 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 259 

pronounced in those brilliant saloons, which 
were intended to echo only the laugh of the 
trifler, and reflect the smiles of beauty or 
fashion. 

" Who is that prosy dog ? " — croaked Colonel 
Latimer aside to Lady Kingcombe, as the 
amiable guardian, anxious to secure the draw- 
ing-room reputation of Sir Francis from fur- 
ther scandal, made a pretence of showing him 
an armoury he had just completed, to draw him 
from the room. 

" It is Sir Francis Norton," replied her 
Ladyship stiffly, " a young man, I am informed, 
of great promise." 

" Good fortune, and ancient family,'^ con- 
tinued Lady Madelina; "a ward of my bro- 
ther's, and a person in whom we are all much 
interested. Margery, my dear, I think he 
would make a very nice match for you." 

" How ! — After you must have heard or seen 
that Glendyne thinks him a bore, and Colonel 
Latimer a pedant? — As to the excess of Count 
Hagelhorn's contempt you see it is beyond even 
his powers of utterance ! " 



260 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

" You are quite mistaken," said her brother. 
" The young gentleman is somewhat more di- 
dactic than altogether suits my small capacities ; 
but bookishness is just now the fashionable 
pretension. There is always some pet foll}^ in 
vogue, in which my Lord A — aiFects to surpass 
my Lord B — . One year, barouche-driving, — 
the next, ecarte, — the third, yachting, — the fourth 
smoking, — the fifth, book-making. We no 
longer hear it said ' Sir William is a deuced 
heavy fellow — but he makes amazingly clever 
speeches in Parliament/ It is,—' Sir William's 
as dull as the devil, (who, /?«r parenthise^ is 
any thing but dull,) but he writes wonderfully 
clever books. 'Tis the only way now to bring 
oneself into any sort of distinction/' 

" Ay ! " grumbled Colonel Latimer ; " and 
one may so exactly guess at a man's defici- 
encies by the nature of his work ! Your sober 
John Trot chooses to play antics before the 
public in a light novel ; your sporting men try 
their hand at a sentimental romance; while the 
arrant fifth form dunces, expand into the his- 
torical, and give us ' Commentaries on the 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 261 

Saxon Heptarchy/ — 'A Treatise on the Sa- 
cred Oil in use among the Druids,' — or « Me- 
moirs of Cardinal Ambon ifazio/ " 

" Positively, I think I must fling down the 
gauntlet to Hilcaster," cried Lord Glendyne. 
" But I scorn red tabby, and fashionable no- 
vels. No Keepsakes or octavo volumes for me. 
/ shall travel, and come down upon him in a 
quarto. Eh, Margery ! Where shall I go ? 
What would look well in a title-page ? And in 
what costume should I shine as frontispiece ? " 

" Gallop across the Pampas on a lama," 
cried Lady Madelina. 

" Or canter over Abyssinia on an ostrich." 

''Or make your appearance mounted, like 
Waterlon, on an alligator." 

"It would be difficult to make a sensation, 
I fear, with any thing less than the Celestial 
Empire. If one could but get smuggled to 
Pekin in a case of hardware, and come back 
a Mandarin of the third button ! Think of 
lionizing for the season in London, with the 
order of the yellow dragon ! — One might marry 
the best heiress going, or elope with a Lady 
Mayoress." 



262 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

" De laty vhat?*' — inquired Count Hagel- 
horn. 

" The centauress of Cornhill," growled Lati- 
mer. 

" That was Lord Byron's system," said Lady 
Kingcombe to her son ; " and see how it 
ended ! '* 

" Do you alkide to his marriage or death ? " 
inquired Lady Madehna. 

" Ah ! my dear mother," interrupted Lord 
Glendyne; " you need apprehend no heroics 
from me. /want to lead the pet-of-the-pet- 
ticoat life of an author ; and not die the pet- 
of-the Annual-Register death of a hero. I 
« like not such grinning honour,' as you would 
assign me. Does any one dine here to-day, 
Lady Madelina?" 

" No ! I fancy not. To-morrow we have a 
menagerie from the neighbourhood ; to whom, 
for dear Farnley's sake, we must play the 
amiable. Come, Margaret, allow me to dis- 
enchant the lady from her chair. There is the 
dressing bell !" 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 263 



CHAPTER VI. 



I know not whether 'twas pride. 
Which out of daily fortune ever taints 
The happy man ; whether defect of judgment. 
To fail in the disposing of those chances 
That he was master of. 

CORIOLANUS. 

Although Sir Francis Norton did not re- 
turn to Thorngrove and its inhabitants, — we 
must. 

Mrs. Woodford, the friend of the worthy old 
Cheveley was, as asserted by his ward, and ad- 
mitted by his ward's valet, the widow of a 
younger brother of a good family, who had sur- 
vived their marriage just long enough to do his 
best towards squandering her fortune, and his 
worst towards breaking her heart ; — and although 
she mourned his loss with the tenderness of a 
first affection still unextinguished, her family 
were far better pleased to hear of his funeral 



264 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

than her weddmg. During those three short 
years of marriage Mrs. Woodford had suffered 
much, but suffered silently ; for she felt that if 
for her own sake she had a right to resent, for 
the sake of her child it was wiser to submit. 

At length the death of the scapegrace to 
whom she had so rashly devoted herself, left her 
at liberty to make a better choice. But she 
made no better ; — not even when importuned 
with the addresses of more than one distin- 
guished suitor, could she be induced to hear of 
a second marriage. Experience had rendered 
her distrustful. Harry Woodford had promised 
as plausibly as the most plausible of her new 
adorers, and what had been the result of her 
credulity ? — No ! she would never marry again ; 
— she would devote herself to her little Sybella ; 
— she would not entrust her happiness to the 
keeping of mortal man. 

The death of Captain Woodford had restored 
to his family the enjoyment of a portion of his 
property, of which he had been able to alienate 
only his life interest. Twenty thousand pounds, 
her mother's fortune, were settled upon Sybella ; 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 265 

and on the income arising from this vested fund, 
Mrs. Woodford retired to the neighbourhood 
of her family estates in Yorkshire ; and with 
the aid of occasional journeys to London for the 
assistance of masters, had managed to complete 
her daughter's education without a day's sepa- 
ration from her darling. Nothing could be 
happier, nothing more endearing than the 
union between such a child and such a mother. 
Living almost exclusively in the society of her 
amiable and indulgent parent, not a thought 
had ever crossed Sybella's mind unknown to 
Mr. Woodford. Her opinions, her sentiments, 
even her girlish sallies against the quizzi- 
calities of such country neighbours as Mrs. 
Homerton Frobishyre, were expressed unre- 
servedly ; and Mr. Cheveley, their nearest 
neighbour, who for fifteen years had watched 
the unfolding of the flower, and obtained the 
confidence and esteem of the mother by an un- 
remitting series of good offices, often observed 
with admiration the almost sisterly tone of 
friendship subsisting between them. Sybella 
was quite as proud of her mother as Mrs. 

VOL. II. N 



266 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

Woodford of her child ; and the first movement 
of each originated on all occasions in consi- 
deration for the comfort of the other. Ambi- 
tion, when seared in early life by a general 
blight of the affections, seldom puts forth a second 
shoot. Mrs. Woodford never grew dissatisfied 
with the obscure seclusion she had selected; 
and laboured only to embellish her solitude for 
the sake of her beloved daughter. 

If any course of life and education can be 
favourable to the maintenance of female purity, 
it must surely be such as the almost conventual 
simplicity of Mrs. Woodford's. Sybella grew 
up seeing no evil, hearing no evil, thinking no 
evil, speaking — suspecting none. Her manners 
were ladylike and graceful; but she boasted 
none of the meretricious accomplishments of the 
advertising-governess system. And when she 
grew to womanhood, and wa^ admitted as a mem- 
ber into those circles of which she had been 
hitherto the plaything, the only difference per- 
ceptible in addition to the development of her 
beauty, was increased deference towards her 
mother, increased reserve with such persons as 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 267 

Mrs. Frobishyre and Lady Loring. Mrs. 
Woodford felt, indeed, that she should like 
to talk with her in a somewhat altered tone 
respecting the world and its ways : but like 
a tender mother she shrank from giving to 
her child to taste of the fruit of the tree of 
knowledge of good and evil ; and felt that it 
would be time enough for the lessons of worldly 
policy to force themselves on her attention, when 
the beautiful bloom of childhood had withered 
on her cheek. She was apprehensive perhaps, 
that Sybella might question her touching the 
painful experience of her own earlier years ; or 
provoke inquiries concerning her future pros- 
pects, incompatible with the secresy promised by 
herself to old Cheveley, on a project they 
had for many years vaguely yet sanguinely che- 
rished, of uniting the fair recluse of Thorngrove 
with his ward Sir Efi^ncis Norton. 

One would think that love was not among the 
most natural impulses of human nature, and 
marriage among the holiest institutions of 
human destiny, by the care taken by parents 
and guardians in general, to silence all mention 
n2 



268 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

of either in presence of young persons. The 
subject is treated as profane or contraband ; 
till, like the lacunes in a mutilated book 
or newspaper, it is invested with undue value ; 
and half the foolish love-letters and runaway 
matches written and perpetrated, have arisen in 
families where a rigid " censure" was main- 
tained by its elder branches. Thanks to the 
unreserved communication between young per- 
sons in English society, a timid girl is often 
exposed to addresses Avhich her own mother 
would treat as a very shocking subject of dis- 
cussion; and at a period of life, and under 
circumstances when the assiduities of a lover 
require all a parent's counsels to counteract 
their evil or promote their advantageous 
tendency, the very name is banished, as re- 
pugnant to delicacy and good taste. Mrs. 
Woodford had not been remiss in disciplining 
Sybella to all the forms and usages of good so- 
ciety ; had discoursed with her without hesita- 
tion on many sacred and many abstruse sub- 
jects; but the colour rose in her face, and her 
breath was suspended, whenever she was about 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 269 

to say to her: " Mr. Cheveley is expecting a 
visit from his young ward Sir Francis Norton. 
Take care, my dear Sybel, that you do not in- 
terest yourself too warmly in his favour." She 
was of La Bruyere's opinion, that many people 
would never experience the tender passion did 
they not hear it talked about ; and trembled at 
the idea of introducing so fatal an enemy into 
the bosom ol* her child^ 

Even when the young Baronet's daily visits 
to Thorngrove, and the opinions entertained on 
the subject by the Cheveley family, left her little 
cause to doubt that he was becoming seriously 
attached to Sybella, she could not find courage 
for a discussion of the subject. " Girlish as she 
is," thought Mrs. Woodford, " she certainly 
does not see through his advances, or dream of 
the sentiments entertained by Sir Francis Nor- 
ton. Nor dare I enlighten her on the subject; 
for should he change his mind, (and young as 
he is, any objection on the part of Lord Farn- 
ley might determine him against the match,) I 
should never pardon myself for having filled her 
mind, and perhaps her heart, with anticipations 



270 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

never to be realized." Poor woman ! she did 
not perceive that the mischief was already done ; 
that it was against herself, ao^ainst her own sen- 
timents, Sybella required a warning ; and that, 
whatever might be the case with the young 
visitor at Cheveley Manor, the young resident 
at Thorngrove was, as Meta Klopstock phrases 
it, " very seriously in love." 

Day after day, the prudent mother and the plot- 
ting guardian found their young hero return and 
return to the green drawing-room; morning after 
morning, devise new walks to be taken with the 
mother and daughter ; new rides to be enjoyed 
with the daughter and Mrs. Cheveley; and 
evening after evening, draw closer to Sybella's 
harp or worktable. Rejoiced in the success of 
their scheme, they readily detected the raptur- 
ous admiration beaming from the eyes of the 
young lover, — the mild satisfaction experienced 
by the young lady in his presence. — Not a word 
of love passed between them ; but all their ac- 
tions, and all their expressions, were manifestly 
actuated by its influence. Miss Woodford 
could now detect the step of Sir Francis long 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 271 

ere he approached, and his figure as soon as he 
came in sight. Unconsciously she grew dispi- 
rited and languid when his daily visit was post- 
poned by the delay of a few minutes ; but no 
sooner were his horse's hoofs heard on the gravel 
than her colour returned, and her eyes bright- 
ened ; and she would rise from her work to fly 
and kiss her mother, ere he entered the room, — 
although not a syllable of comment or gratula- 
tion on the subject ever passed between them. 

Mrs. Woodford had experienced a wish that 
her daughter might become sensible to the 
merits of Sir Francis, and was captivated by the 
graceful ingenuousness of his manners ; but she 
grew almost alarmed in noting this excess of sen- 
sibility. Every day her delight in his company 
grew more apparent ; her exultation in his de- 
votion more absorbing. Mrs. Woodford fan- 
cied for a moment that even she, the idolizing 
mother, was becoming secondary in importance 
with the beloved Sybella. She longed to implore 
her to keep watch over the growth of her new 
partiality. But in what words to admonish her 
on so delicate a point? — In what terms, without 



*272 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

terrifying her with an insight into the abyss on 
whose verge she was standing, to forewarn her 
against the mighty power of love ? — 

It was under these circumstances that one 
morning, after a parting the preceding day be- 
tween Norton and Sybella of more than ordi- 
nary familiarity and regard, the usual hour of 
his visit arrived, and passed away, and brought 
him no more. For some time the disappointed 
girl said not a word on the subject; but towards 
evening she suddenly broke forth into exclama- 
tions against the tiresomeness of Mrs. Cheveley, 
the exigeance of her husband, and the proba- 
bility that some absurd commission given to Sir 
Francis Norton by either one or the other, had 
been the means of keeping him away from 
Thorngrove. Already she felt the weariness, 
the difficulty of passing a whole day without 
seeing him. She predicted that he would drop 
in according to his frequent custom to tea, and 
suffered the tea-things to remain for two long 
hours upon the table. At length the hour 
came for closing the windows aud retiring to 
rest ; and Sybella, more petulant than she had 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 273 

been ever seen before, was compelled to go to 
bed. Yet even afterwards, when the house-dog 
chanced to bark at some stray passenger on the 
road, she could not help fancying that Frank 
was come at last to offer a moment's apology 
for his inexplicable absence. 

The next day she was on the lawn by day- 
light. The Autumn and the flowers were almost 
over; yet still by recourse to a few sheltered 
nooks and corners, w^here auriculas, pinks, and 
gentianellas were to be found blooming a se- 
cond time, — to her geraniums, and the beau- 
tiful rose of four seasons, — Miss Woodford ma- 
naged to refresh the bouquets of the drawing- 
room, and give it a summer aspect almost as 
bright and glowing as when he entered it first. 
For the first time, she prepared for his arrival; 
placed his favourite chair on his favourite spot ; 
opened her music books and perfected herself 
in his favourite airs ; took up her guitar, and 
after trying a few chords, threw it aside again ; 
to wander once more among the shrubberies, 
and cross the lawn, and marvel what strange 
event could have occurred at Cheveley Manor ! 
N 5 



274 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

She even sauntered to the gate, and stood mus- 
ing upon the grim expanse of Goldington Com- 
mon. Alas ! — nothing was there but the furze, 
sprinkled like Danae with its golden shower; 
except the remnants of Widow Wall's flock of 
Midsummer geese, and a donkey and foal be- 
longing to the village postmaster. 

Again the day passed, and still no Sir Francis 
Norton appeared. For a few moments Sybella 
grew angry, and determined when he did make 
his appearance to receive him with the coldness 
of oflPended dignity. But this notion was quickly 
dispelled by fresh alarms for his safety ; his 
horse was by no means a safe one — his habits 
were so absent — what might not have happened ? 
" We will drive over to Cheveley to-morrow, 
and inquire what has become of Sir Francis 
Norton," said her mother, compassionating her 
silent distress. " I dare say he has been stay- 
ing with the Homerton Frobyshires." 

" I have no doubt of it ! " cried poor Sybella, 
brightening at this fortunate suggestion, and 
feeling happier than she had done for eight-and- 
forty hours. " For as soon as he quitted us 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 275 

on Tuesday, I went to the gate, and saw him at 
a distance stopping with them at the turnpike. 
I dare say they were inviting him to the Abbey." 

On the following day — the third day, (the 
third, an epoch on many occasions so mo- 
mentous,) the arrival of Mr. Cheveley sufficed 
to dispel this illusion. But although he came 
to communicate the startling intelligence that 
Sir Francis had actually left the Manor, actually 
quitted the county, — he uttered the tidings with 
a glance so significant to the mother, a smile so 
cheering to the daughter, that even before he 
added, " But he will soon be amongst us again," 
poor Sybella felt assured that all was right. 

" My ward is gone to his other guardian, my 
Lord Farnley," continued the kind-hearted old 
man. " Although I flatter myself Frank pins 
no great reliance on the advice of that fine, 
flimsy, fashionable gentleman, yet he judges it 
his duty (and very properly) to go through the 
ceremony of consulting him before he takes any 
step of importance. He will not be long at 
Farnley ; — no doubt we shall have him back by 
the end of the week.*' 



276 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

Long before the end of the week, howevei'j 
Mr. Cheveley had received a letter from Sir 
Francis, which, although he could not entirely 
interpret its motives or meaning, explained in 
very comprehensible terms that he had no 
thoughts of returning to the Manor, and that 
he should probably pass his Christmas in Shrop- 
shire; nay, the concluding sentence, " Pray re- 
member me to the Lorings, Woodfords, and 
Frobishyres," was of a nature to put to flight 
all his romantic illusions, and to startle the old 
man into an inquiry whether he had not been 
deceiving himself and his old friend, in the sup- 
position of Norton's attachment to Sybella. He 
was alarmed, vexed, angry with himself in ad- 
mitting on what slight authority he could have 
grounded his belief and assertion. One thing 
was plain enough ; that having assisted in de- 
ceiving Mrs. Woodford, it was his business to 
take the earliest possible opportunity of ac- 
quainting her with the real state of the case. 

Unluckily, as he entered the green drawing- 
room, he was struck by the sonorous voice of 
Mrs. Homerton Frobishyre; who, on learning 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 277 

the abrupt departure of the young Baronet, had 
come to examine what sort of countenance the 
family at Thorngrove would put upon the busi- 
ness. Chancing, however, to call at Loring 
Park on her road, she had there become ac- 
quainted with several new rumours; and was 
now come to communicate rather than to seek 
intelligence. 

" I have been sitting with Lady Loring," 
said she, as Mr. Cheveley was announced ; 
" who informs me that Loring's steward has re- 
ceived a letter from that impudent valet of Sir 
Francis Norton's; and that they are gayer at 
Farnley, than any thing that ever was known. 
That demure gentleman, who was so cold and 
quiet amongst us all, is now^ acting plays and 
dancing Mazurkas. But then they have half a 
dozen professed beauties staying in the house to 
inspire him: — that dangerous woman Lady 
Madelina Rowerton, and Lady Margaret En- 
ville, and I know not how many more. I dare- 
say he amuses them finely at the expense of his 
Yorkshire friends ! " 

" Frank Norton is incapable of acting un- 



278 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

gratefully or ungenerously towards any one," 
cried Mr. Cheveley with indignation. 

•* Oh ! you know, my dear sir, young men 
will be young men. We have no reason to 
suppose Sir Francis a lusus naturce ; and now 
that he is among those ranting, flighty, graceless, 
unprincipled women of fashion — " 

Even Mrs. Homerton Frobishyre had no 
courage to proceed. A glance towards the op- 
posite mirror showed her Sybella Woodford's 
face so colourless and bewildered in its expres- 
sion, that she was frightened into silence. 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 279 



CHAPTER VII. 



Des gens qui ont re9u de la nature Taimable talent de 
sourire a propos ; qui savent entendre finesse a tout, et 
trouver mille petits traits ingenieux dans les choses les 
plus communes. Montesquieu. 

Nothing could be easier, yet nothing more 
strictly in accordance with the established cere- 
monial of life, than the mode of existence at the 
residence of Lord Farnley. Few men in the 
kingdom could boast of higher refinement of 
mind and manners ; and although somewhat 
past the prime of youth, the prime of man- 
hood still lent animation to his character and 
dignity to his person. No longer estimated in 
the world of fashion as a manning man, a lin- 
gering tinge of romance in his air and tone 
still rendered him an acceptable companion to 



280 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

women of all ages, — from the debutante to the 
superannuated coquette ; and, thoroughly Paris- 
ianized in his notions by frequent residence 
abroad, Lord Farnley looked upon music, 
dancing, and what is termed esprit de societe, as 
the natural and indispensable elements of a life of 
luxury : — gaiety was not in his house, as in those 
of many other of his aristocratic contemporaries, 
an effort made for credit sake and the amuse- 
ment of others, — a gala suit assumed at inter- 
vals, to be thrown oiF after the departure of the 
company. No one denied him the character of 
a munificent patron, — a magnificent noble, — 
an accomplished man ; — and if some there were 
who sought to deteriorate his high reputation, 
by hinting that he was heartless, superficial, and 
a slave to fashion, Lord Farnley had too many 
old and attached friends to give colour to the 
charge. Certain of the " wit-crackers" still per- 
sisted, that nothing could be easier than for the 
lord of Farnley Castle to have friends as old and 
as attached as he chose to purchase in the golden 
friend-bazaar of London Society; but it is 
ascribing too much to thf baseness of human 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 281 

nature to suppose that all the smiles smiled 
upon him on his entrance to Almack's, — all the 
sighs sighed for him on the newspaper an- 
nouncement of his indispositions,— arose from a 
tender predilection for his excellent balls, and 
still more excellent dinners. 

It must be admitted, that the inexperienced 
head of Sir Francis Norton was very speedily 
intoxicated by the artificial atmosphere into 
which he was thus introduced. Sages and 
institutors, moral or religious, assure us that 
the dignity of man is, or ought to be, in- 
accessible to external impressions; — that he 
should see with his mind's eye, and feel at the 
suggestion of his principles. But so long as 
five influential senses are allotted to the children 
of wrath, to adorn and dulcify the ruggedness of 
their path of life, it is expecting too much to 
suppose that the boy of one-and-twenty will be- 
come unsusceptible to the sweet sounds, soft 
things, and delicious cates, which made Christo- 
phero Sly, the tmker, imagine himself " a lord 
indeed." The excitement of a scene, such as 
that presented by the gilded saloons, sombre 



282 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

libraries, glowing conservatories, and dainty 
boudoirs of Farnley, — illuminated by paint- 
ing, sculpture, and all the beautiful visions 
vv^hich throw a poetic veil over the every-day 
monotonies of life,— redolent of fragrance,— 
gleaming with artificial light,—" without one 
jarring atom" to mar their luxurious harmony, 
— and contrasted, moreover, with the chilling 
dulness of the Manor, the tame mediocrity of 
Thorngrove villa, could not fail to predis- 
pose the mind of Frank Norton for a favour- 
able view of the fair sprites by whom these deli- 
cious regions were fitly haunted. — Lady Made- 
lina laughed and jested, — Lady Margaret smiled 
and philosophised,— and Lady Kingcombe, like 
a superior spirit, alternately enlightened them 
with her wisdom, or encouraged them with her 
endearments. Lord Farnley's giddy sister was 
the daughter of her dearest friend ; and the ex- 
cellent woman loved her even to her very weak- 
ness;— but Lady Margaret, her own child, — 
her only, her gifted child, — had no weakness to 
require indulgence. She was mild, wise, vir- 
tuous, beautiful, submissive,— all that the ten- 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 283 

derest mother could desire in her daiightei\ 
Unconsciously, young Norton whispered to him- 
self, after an evening passed in the society of 
the brilliant party assembled at the Castle, 
that Lady Kingcombe had all Mrs. Wood- 
ford's feminine maternal gentleness, with higher 
breeding and greater decision of character: — 
and that Lady Margaret, with scarcely less than 
Sybella's personal attraction, had a nobler sense 
of her own dignity, and powers of mind more 
worthy to command the reverence and esteem 
of her husband. — Lady Margaret Enville 
would as soon have encouraged the addresses 
of the butler, as of the boor, — the brute, — 
the bore, — Lord Loring's son. Inebriated by 
the thousand sources of enjoyment open to 
him every evening at the Castle, he was 
blind enough to attribute all to Lady Mar- 
garet*s presence : making no allowance for 
the efforts of the French cook, — the Italian con- 
fectioner, — the bugles sounding in the vestibule, 
— the ruby Burgundy, the topazine Tokay, — 
the spicy Mocha, — the luscious Cura^oa. On 
reaching the saloon, where new books, new 



284 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

music, new engravings, new caricatures, new 
plants, (incessantly renovated by the skill and 
labour of those v^^ho exercise their gift of inge- 
nuity only to stimulate the exhausted fancy of 
the great), were unfolded around him; — where 
the mechanical organ poured forth its involun- 
tary volume of sound, — where the golden harp 
appeared to yield spontaneous music, — where 
the hours were marked by melody, — and the 
bowers of the East seemed transported as by an 
enchanter's wand, — he beheld Lady Margaret, 
leaning quietly over her book ; and fancied that 
the spectacle of her gentle beauty, alone caused 
his pulse to beat, and his heart to flutter with 
delight. 

" Margaret has so much real dignity of man- 
ners ! " observed his guardian, contriving to get 
him into a remote sofa, one evening, a few days 
after his arrival. " And I confess / lean to the 
prejudice, that dignity of manner is inseparable 
from dignity of mind. I have no patience with 
your little weeping, blushing, sighing, dying 
damsels, — who tremble at the death of a but- 
terfly, and make a scene if the « object of their 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 285 

affections' is kept away from home an hour 
later than usual, by a good run with the hounds." 

" Nor I ; — I hate sentimental girls ; — they are 
generally vulgar, and always silly." 

" Now pray observe with what self-respect 
Margaret parries the adulation of that coxcomb 
Hagelhorn ! Without offending him. or show- 
ing herself offended, she contrives to prove to 
every person present, that she entertains no in- 
tention of encouraging his addresses. I cannot 
bear to see a young person trifling faute de 
mieux with any man's courtship ; even when, as 
in the present instance, she knows it to be sug- 
gested by interested views." 

" Nor I, — I detest coquettes ! " cried Frank 
fervently, and again involuntarily reverting to 
Mr. Loring. 

" I have no hesitation in saying to you, my 
dear Norton," continued Lord Farnley, more 
explicitly, " that nothing would give me greater 
pleasure than to promote your union with the 
charming daughter of my friend Lord King- 
combe. I am not like our friend Cheveley, who 
entraps you to his dull old mansion, and with 



286 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR, 

a pretension of giving you good shooting and 
teaching you the difference between Swedish 
turnips and early Dutch, throws you in the way 
of a pretty girl dropped from the clouds, with- 
out birth, — without fortune, — without " — 

" If you allude to Miss Woodford," inter- 
rupted Sir Francis, feeling himself called on to 
speak, " believe me, Mr. Cheveley made every 
effort in his power to prevent our becoming ac- 
quainted. Her mother is the widow of a ba- 
ronet's son, and lives with credit and respect- 
ability, and " — 

" Credit and respectability— one would ima- 
gine you were talking of an innkeeper ! And a 
baronet's son ! My dear Frank, — when you 
have lived more and longer in the world, you 
will find that rank of life present precisely the 
worst class of educated society ;— displaying all 
the arrogance of mock dignity, and all the boor- 
ishness of country squireism. But to return 
to a more agreeable subject !— Lady Margaret 
Enville, already in independent possession of 
two thousand a year, will also inherit a hand- 
some fortune from her father ; and, in the event 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 287 

of Glendyne's death (her only brother), she 
comes into one of the most ancient baronies in 
the kingdom, and the whole of the Kingcombe 
estates ! These inducements, I am aware, are 
nothing to a man like yourself, — already en- 
dowed with all that is indispensable for happi- 
ness; but with me^ your guardian, they have 
some weight; nay, even with yourself, Frank, 
they ought not to be wholly destitute of in- 
terest, when you consider that they cannot but 
secure a brilliant alliance for Lady Margaret ; 
and that, in the event of her becoming your 
wife, you are pre- assured her motives are dis- 
interested ! " 

" Wife ! — my dear Lord ! you are surely 
very rapid in your conclusions? — You, too, who 
were the first to warn me against the perils of 
early matrimony ! " 

" I was, indeed ; and even now, should be 
far better satisfied to know you were on the 
point of making the tour of Europe, than of 
making proposals to any ladyship in the land. 
But this, I see clearly, cannot be. You are 
just the fellow to fall in love at the first race 



288 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

ball with the belle of the evening, and tender 
your proposals to the Squire her father the 
following morning. I am happy to find (no 
matter how) that you have not seriously en- 
tangled yourself with this pretty adventurer of 
Cheveley Manor, — for, by Heavens, I would as 
soon see you married to a strolling actress ; and 
if you must provide yourself with a Lady Nor- 
ton before you settle for life under shelter of 
your own old oaks, let her be at least one who, 
like Lady Margaret Enville, accepts you as a 
husband from her own free choice and predi- 
lection ; not because you can give her a com- 
fortable jointure, and have a certain number of 
slaves in livery dining daily in your servants' 
hall. I abhor the market system on which the 
girls of the present day are brought up to dis- 
pose of themselves ! " 

" And so do L But believe me, Sybella 
Woodford is as incapable as- " 

" Believe you ? No, no. I have not a grain 
of faith for a single word you can utter on that 
head ; if not in love, you have only escaped by 
the breadth of a hair. But believe me, Frank, 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 289 

that I never would have given my consent to 

your union with a girl whose alliance would 

have conferred neither honour nor advantage on 

you or on your children." 

Meanwhile the evenings at Farnley Castle 

were enlivened with amateur music of the hiorhest 

o 

order, varied by an occasional attempt at a 
charade or proverb, when the arrival of fresh 
visitors and more determined pleasure-seekers 
suggested the effort ; and the mornings de- 
voted to those convenient parties of pleasure, 
where ruins are to be scrambled over, and ferries 
passed, and sketches taken; and whereas the 
weather, although mild for the season, was such 
as none but a madcap like Lady Madelina, or 
a novice like Lady Margaret, or an insouciant 
like Lord Glendyne, would have chosen for simi- 
lar expeditions, Sir Francis Norton was doubly 
in request to follow the fair sketcher with her 
shawl and boa, to cloak her up in the open 
carriage, or sustain her steps in the boat. Had 
he not taken such tender care of her and 
watched her so closely, Lady Margaret might 

VOL. II. o 



290 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

have fallen a victim to some of the wild pranks 
of the Rowertons, or to the absence of mind of 
her clever but eccentric brother. 

Glendyne, indeed, seemed to attach him- 
self as readily to Lord Farnley's ward as if 
he entered into the project of his friend for 
making Sir Francis Norton his brother-in-law. 
There was something in the inartificial character 
of the young Baronet extremely prepossessing 
in the eyes of a man who had been living 
in, with, and for the world ever since he 
was emancipated from his nankin petticoats ; 
and who had passed through Westminster, 
Cambridge, and the Guards, without falling in 
with a single spirit, male or female, on the 
purity of which he could implicitly pin his 
faith. 

" Norton is the only fellow I ever met," he 
observed to Colonel Latimer, as they com- 
menced their twenty-third game of oilliards one 
rainy morning, " who is perfectly single- 
hearted without being a bumpkin. It is so 
comfortable to an idle fellow like myself, to live 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 291 

with a man against whom one is not obliged to 
be perpetually on one*s guard." 

" He is new at present," croaked the Colonel. 
" Let us see what a season at Newmarket and a 
bout at Crockford's will do for him." 

" No doubt they would do for him ; and it is 
precisely by being done that a fellow learns to 
become a do in his turn. But I don't see what 
concern Norton has with either your Scylla or 
your Charybdis. He has no caste to lose by not 
being known on the turf. His grandfather was 
not the owner of Gohanna ; his father was not 
Buckle's first patron ; his buiFet is not graced 
with as many racing cups as those of Sardan- 
apalus or Belshazzar in one of Martin's pictures. 
The rattle of his infancy was not a dice-box ; 
nor was the arithmetic of his boyhood imparted 
in the goodly game of vingt-et-un.'* 

« Like '' 

" My lordship's ! — I, you know, my dear 

Colonel (a canon by Jupiter ! — the first good 

stroke I have made to-day) — I, you know, 

(mark two) — am intitled by right hereditary 

o2 



292 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

to pass (five) — as many hours out of the twenty- 
four as I can exist without sleeping or feeding, 
— at the gambling table. But Norton's vocation 
is that of " 

" Becoming lord and master, or baronet and 
slave, to the lovely Lady Margaret Enville! " — 

" Do you think so?" cried Glendyne, throw- 
ing down his cue, and enchanted with a view of 
the subject which had not yet presented itself to 
his mercurial imagination. " Have you any 
reason to fancy he is in love with Margery? — 
Faith, I'll go and ask him ! It would be the 
very thing for both of them, and more than 
the very thing for me. I have always been so 
afraid of hating my brother-in-law ! — I wonder 
whether Margery likes him ! " 

Without the slightest regard for the fine feel- 
ings of either party, Lord Glendyne did actually 
2:0 in search of Sir Francis to make this sino-ular 
inquiry ; and having chanced to time his inves- 
tigation just after a long morning passed by 
Norton in the library with Lord Farnley, his 
sister Rowerton, and Lady Margaret Enville, in 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 293 

which the companionableness of the latter on a 
rainy day, her general intelligence and very par- 
ticular diffidence, had become charmingly ap- 
parent, the young baronet had no hesitation in 
avowing that he thought her the most enchant- 
ing creature in the world, and that he required 
only a little encouragement from herself, and the 
sanction of her family, to tender his proposals 
for her hand. Entering warmly into a project 
which promised so welcome an addition to what 
he called the " domestic Dullery at Kingcombe 
Hall," Lord Glendyne promised his hearty sup- 
port to the motion ; aud from that period rested 
not till he had secured an affirmative from Lady 
Margaret and her parents. Sir Francis Nor- 
ton's good qualities needed little avouchment ; 
his fine ingenuous temper revealed every feeling 
of his bosom. His fortune and expectations, 
although by no means equivalent to the preten- 
sions of the lady of his love, sufficed at once to 
satisfy her ambition and the views of her father; 
Lord Kingcombe, who was something of a poli- 
tical jobber, preferring a son-in-law without 



294 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

public connexions, who would be amenable to 
his views, to an older man, with opinions and 
pledges of his own ; who would neither sit for 
the Kingcombe boroughs, nor support the King- 
combe interest. 

In short, there was not a word to be urged 
against the match ! The young couple became 
daily more attached, and were unexception- 
ably well assorted to each other. Of the King- 
cjmbes, — father, mother, brother, all — were 
pleased; — Lord Farnley perfectly satisfied; — 
and if Mr. Cheveley were less disposed to exult 
in the happy prospects announced to him in a 
letter from Frank within seven wrecks of quitting 
the Manor, he opposed no obstacle to the mar- 
riage. He consented in silence, indeed, and 
declined the gracious invitation dispatched 
to him by the Earl and Countess of King- 
combe to be present at the ceremony. But 
on affixing his signature to the deeds of settle- 
ment forwarded him by the family solicitor, he 
fairly admitted to the young clerk charged with 
the duty of witnessing their execution, that no- 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 295 

thing could be more liberal in a pecuniary point 
of view than the conduct of the Enville family. 

It was a very handsome wedding. The jewels 
and equipages selected by the exquisite taste of 
Lord Farnley, were perfect in their way ; and 
he himself vied with the delighted Glendyne in 
loading Sir Francis and Lady Margaret Nor- 
ton with all that could embellish their new home. 
All the world admitted that there could not be 
a more suitable match, or a more fortunate 
couple. Even Wittenham was of opinion that 
" Norton had done a devilish good thing for 
himself;" — and Lord Farnley, when he returned 
to the castle after witnessing the gorgeous cere- 
mony, and the festivities by which it was fol- 
lowed, could not forbear congratulating himself 
that he had secured his handsome, intelligent, 
distinguished ward, from an. alliance with a 
country dowdy; who would probably have 
crushed him into obscurity with the weight of 
her vulgar mind, and disgusted him with society 
by her unacceptableness in its circles. 

" Poor Frank ! " said he, as he paced 



296 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

through his magnificent statue gallery. " He 
will one day or other thank me for having pre- 
vented him throwing himself away on an un- 
presentable quiz ; fit only to grace the parlour 
of Cheveley Manor and copy cures for the 
heartburn into Lady Bountiful's family recipe 
book. — A half-bred country miss, is the most 
odious animal in the creation I " 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 297 



CHAPTER VIIL 



And what, I pray, is Margaret more than her ? — 
Her father is no better than an Earl. 
Or what is wedlock forced but a hell. 
An age of discord and continual strffe. 

Henry VI. 

Two years had elapsed since the celebration 
of Lady Margaret Eriville's well-omened nup- 
tials. The young bachelor, Sir Francis Norton, 
was settled down into the married man, ami fa- 
ther of a young Frank ; — the old bachelor. Lord 
Farnley was still a bachelor ; and as is frequently 
the case, under such circumstances, grew younger 
in proportion as he advanced in years. At five- 
and-thirty, he had taken no heed of time ; at 
forty, or somewhat more, he was beginning to be 
o 5 



298 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

Studious concerning his appearance, and ambi- 
tious of passing for the best dressed and best 
mounted man in London. 

Of course he succeeded. It is so easy to suc- 
ceed, so easy to be popular, "with the assistance 
of a splendid fortune, an ancient name, and the 
power of applying our interest and opulence to 
theserviceof other people I Lord Farnley^s means 
of obligation were exhausted by no privileged 
hangers on, no swarm of locusts followmg in 
his train. His only sister, Lady Madelina, was 
married to one of the first commoners in the 
realm, and elevated above all interested views ; 
and Farnley House in town, and Farnley Castle 
in the country, (to say nothing of his opera 
boxes, equipages, and ministerial influence,) 
were freely open to the speculations of the mer- 
cenary. But althot^h his lordship was not alto- 
gether born to be a dupe, a long career of distinc- 
tion, and exposure to the flatteries of society, 
had endued him, perhaps, with too excessive 
a reliance on his own sagacity. It is a hard 
task for a potentate to distinguish between 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 299 

the homage paid to his ermined mantle, jewel- 
led crown, gilded throne, and the reverence 
of personal veneration ; — even bishops and 
judges naturally, but vmadvisedly, take to 
themselves all the respect testified towards the 
wigs adorning their very learned and very re- 
verend shoulders. If Sir Francis Norton had 
deluded himself by the supposition that all the 
satisfaction he experienced in dining at his 
guardian's well-served table, arose from the cir- 
cumstance of being placed next to Lady King- 
combe's daughter, his noble host was persuaded 
that the charm of his own graceful manners, 
and the sprightliness of his epigrammatic 
conversation had a considerable share in at- 
tracting so many distinguished visitors to his 
board. Worshipped by a little system of satel- 
lites, he had the weakness to fancy himself per- 
sonally supreme in society, and exclusively pri- 
vileged to regulate other people's affairs, and 
interpret other people's conduct. 

That his lordship was not superior to the 
common lot of mortals, and that his judgment 



300 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

was by no means infallible, was proved by the 
very marriage he had so officiously formed for 
his ward. Whether his activity had arisen 
from regard to Lady Margaret, or regard to 
Sir Francis Norton, his good intentions were 
equally infructuous. The domestic affairs of 
Norton Park had, it is true, run pretty 
smoothly in their channel ; for during the first 
two years of wedlock, even the common obsta- 
cles incumbrances and drawbacks which render 
modern life a sort of hornpipe in fetters, are 
luckily wanting. Neither bride nor bridegroom, 
neither husband nor wife, had yet infringed the 
laws of mutual affection and forbearance, — 
neither of them had been guilty of any wan- 
ton extravagance, — neither of them had done 
any thing to rouse the jealousy of the other ; 
— and yet, if the truth must be told, both were 
dissatisfied. 

Lady Margaret, accustomed to the gorgeous 
splendours of Kingcombe, and brought up from 
her childhood in the midst of a crowd, was 
startled by the sober solitude of the domestic 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 301 

life allotted to her; while Norton discovered, to 
his great surprise, that the routine he had des- 
pised as monotonous at Cheveley Manor, was 
after all the ordinary mode of life of an English 
country gentleman. Thanks to indifferent neigh- 
bours and worse roads, Norton Park was a dull 
uneventful place ; and he was too young, and 
had seen too little of the world, to have formed 
a large connection to aid him in supporting the 
ponderous weight of leisure. The consequence 
of this deficiency was apparent in the fact, that 
of the persons assembled as visitors under his 
roof, all — or the greater part — were friends or 
adherents of the Kingcombe family. At first, 
indeed, his pride was gratified by this cir- 
cumstance. He was as much pleased to be 
surrounded by the friends and connexions of a 
beloved wife, as by the friends and connexions 
of the Right Hon. the Earl of Kingcombe. 
The consort who had stooped from so high an 
estate to select his humble self as the stay and 
guidance of her life, had sacrificed so much in 
his favour, and marked her personal attachment 



302 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

in SO disinterested a manner, that he could 
not requite the generosity of her conduct by 
too much deference or too much self abnega- 
tion. 

It was his eager desire that she should form 
her new home according to her own good lik- 
ing; select her own associates, command her 
own measures. 

Unluckily, the woman thus unreservedly 
trusted, had not sufficient experience of the 
world for so important a charge. One only 
mode of existence, the routine of Kingcombe, 
had been open to her observation ; and she na- 
turally fell into the error of supposing that all 
which was good for Lady Margaret Enville, 
was good for Lady Margaret Norton ; that thi^ 
habits, style, and associations of her father's 
house, were applicable to the establishment of a 
Baronet, boasting, even with the acquisition of 
her own income, considerably less than ten 
thousand a year. Yorkshire is a county of Co- 
lossal fortunes ; the standard of comparison is 
on a mighty scale : and the magnats of the 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 303 

Farnley class, who observed the Nortons vyinsj 
(as they supposed) with the magnificence of 
their equipage, or the solidity of their hospi- 
tality, now grew spiteful and contemptuous. The 
squires, squiresses, and squirelings, who had 
been more than on a par with the good Sir 
Thomas his father, finding the present propri- 
etor of Norton Park affect fashions and displays 
beyond their means of competition, could not 
help attributing his new-fangled notions to the 
pride of being married to an earl's daughter ; 
while his superiors in rank, the nobility of the 
county, laughed at the young baronet as full of 
unmeaning assumptions. A contested election 
having festered the venom thus engendered, he 
was even nicknamed (by a libellous, pamphle- 
teering, attorney's clerk of the neighbouring 
town) " Lord Margaret Norton ; " and it 
was pretty generally asserted, if not generally 
believed, not only that the gray mare was the 
better steed in his establishment, but that the 
really dignified and indolent Lady Margaret, 
was a domineering termagant. Old Cheveley 



304 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

was assailed with rumours, which created more 
regret than surprise in his mind, that his ci- 
devant ward was running rapidly through his 
fortune, by emulating the magnificence of the 
class upon which he had so unadvisedly en- 
grafted himself; and that Lady Margaret had 
filled his house with " her people, " and his 
head with deference to her consequence. 

All this was totally unnecessary. — Sir Francis 
Norton was in his own circumstances too in- 
dependent, and in his own rank of life too res- 
pectable, to need any importance derived from 
his matrimonial alliance ; and the first time the 
rumour reached him, (and, thanks to the amia- 
ble ingenuousness of modern friendship, what 
personal imputation is long in reaching our 
ears ? — ) that the world was of opinion he was go- 
verned by his wife, and his wife governed by an 
overweening spirit of vanity and pretension, he 
felt, as he had a right to feel, bitterly mortified. 
Nothing could be more natural than that he 
should immediately proceed to a revisal of his 
whole line of conduct since his marriage, and 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 805 

to an examination of Lady Margaret's real 
influence over his conduct and feelings. No- 
thing could be more natural than that, look- 
ing through the distempered medium sup- 
plied by the malicious interference of others, 
he should see every thing in a distorted 
shape. He could not, indeed, even in his 
haste, accuse Lady Margaret of petulance 
or arrogance; — he still loved her too well to 
discover any faults in her. But he began to 
fancy, that however free in her own person 
from the evil qualities imputed to her by the 
evil tongues of mankind, her mother was by 
no means equally faultless. Lady King- 
combe was, in fact a very superior woman; and, 
— possessing over her son-in-law and daughter 
that influence which (as Leonora di Galigai 
expressed it) a strong mind always possesses over 
a weak, — never hesitated in thinking and acting 
tor the Nortons as she would have done for 
herself, — in reproving their absurdities and 
pointing out their neglected duties. Tenderly 
attached to Margaret, her only daughter, as to 



306 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

her better self, — and tenderly attached to Mar- 
garet's husband for Margaret's sake, she looked 
upon Sir Francis as a son of her own, and dealt 
with his little foibles as with those of Lord Glen- 
dyne; forgetting or unaware — (for there are 
few points on which even sensible women are 
so grossly ignorant as on that of the management 
of the harder sex) — that no man of three- 
and-twenty will bear to be tutored by his 
mother, — still less by the mother of other 
people. 

Lord Kingcombe's political leading strings 
were, if possible, still more irksome than 
Lady Kingcombe's lectures; for Sir Francis 
felt that his lordship had not the excuse of an 
overweening interest for his dear girl, to apo- 
logize for his despotism. It could signify very 
little to the comfort of Lady Margaret Norton, 
whether her husband voted on the leather ques- 
tion, or supported ministers in their opposition 
to the establishment of a Coast Blockade off 
Cape Cod ; — and it was therefore a double im- 
pertinence on the part of the Earl to address 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 30T 

two letters of instruction and two more of re- 
monstrance to his son-in-law, concerning his 
vote on those momentous motions. Sir Francis 
felt himself, moreover, of an age to decide un- 
prompted on the propriety of bowing or being 
seen on the arm of this or that leading orator 
or politician. Yet he was perpetually getting 
into scrapes with his father-in-law on similar 
formalities. He was always hearing, " My dear 
Norton, you don't sufficiently reflect that, al- 
though your actions are of no manner of im- 
portance in themselves, yet as committing your 
party they are of the greatest moment." — Thus 
hectored, he often wished he had no party ; — 
and sometimes, if the truth must be told, that he 
had no father-in-law. 

Lord Glendyne was the member of the 
family against whom he cherished least re- 
sentment ; yet even Glendyne was not always 
cautious of giving him offence. With every ne- 
cessary feeling of regard for Frank, whom he 
still looked upon as an open warmhearted fel- 
low, Lord Glendyne was fully aware that Lady 



308 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

Margaret Enville, handsome, rich, high-born, 
and accompKshed, might, in a worldly point of 
view have formed a far better connection for 
herself. He was therefore prepared that Nor- 
ton should feel himself an obliged party ; that 
he should be conscious to the fullest extent of 
his happiness in possessing so lovely and loving 
a wife ; and, upon one or two occasions when 
Norton, piqued by the overbearing tone of 
Lady Kingcombe into the assertion of his prero- 
gative, seemed inclined to mark somewhat 
strongly his sense of the independence of his own 
position. Lord Glendyne was certainly moved 
to treat of Lady Margaret Norton to her hus- 
band as " his sister," — very much as if he forgot 
that she was also the wife of Sir Francis. But 
this was not the worst. Glendyne, by nature 
caustic and clever, was one of those persons who 
indulge to any extent their love of mockery, 
regardless whose feelings they offend ; or rather, 
who conceive their own bon mots so super- 
excellent as to excuse their poignancy even in 
the eyes of the unfortunate butt. If Sir 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 309 

Thomas More was known to jest on the scaffold, 
Glendyne had been heard to make mockery of 
his dentist in the crisis of an operation ; which 
is as near as modern heroism can approach 
to that of the olden time. Even liking his 
brother-in-law as well as he did, and he was 
\ery sincere in his goodwill towards him, the 
young lord found it impossible to resist the 
temptation to make fun of him when he 
" talked squire ; " — or to show up the subservi- 
ence of his deference towards the superior cle- 
verness and fashion of his guardian of Farnley 
Castle. 

AH these things, and a thousand minor 
touches, so easy to feel so trivial to describe, 
united to produce many an unsatisfactory hour in 
Sir Francis Norton's life of prosperity and dis- 
tinction. He hallooed as loud or louder than 
ever with the hounds,^ — rode harder, — drank 
harder, — and affected a sort of dare-all joviality, 
in order to impress the world with a notion of his 
independence. If he had not yet gone the 
length of acknowledging to himself that he 



310 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

would have been a happier man as the husband 
of the tranquil unworldly Sybella, the son-in- 
law of the gentle Mrs. Woodford, he was 
willing to admit in his soliloquies (all men are 
prone to soliloquize during the operation of 
shaving, or as they ride home from hunting) 
that Lord Farnley was right ; — that a man may 
marry too early ; — that it is as well to taste the 
pleasures of life before we begin to feast upon its 
happiness ; — that in doubling our joys and sor- 
rows by matrimony, we lose half our self-con- 
tent and all our self-security. It was very de- 
lightful, to be sure, to be welcomed home by the 
beautiful and stately Margaret; but it would 
have been equally so to have retained the pri- 
vilege of staying to dine at that " devilish good 
fellow Marrowby's," close to where the hounds 
had found ; — and still more so, to be able to 
run up to town, and run over to Paris, en 
gar f on, to see the new opera and hear the 
debates in the new Chamber. Men are apt 
to talk of " running " hither and thither as 
if life were a steeple chase; and enjoyment 



OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 311 

attainable in proportion to the speed of the 
sport. 

These things, or rumours of these things, 
were suflBcient to prove to the wopthy veteran 
at Cheveley Manor, that if he cherished any 
rancour against his ci-devant ward for his blind 
but blameable subservience to Lord Farnley's 
projects, the conduct of Sir Francis Norton had 
brought its own retribution. He had not, 
however, the comfort of sauntering to Thorn- 
grove to make a clear breast of his vindictive 
feelings. The Woodfords were gone abroad. 
Not that Sybella had exhibited any vocation for 
planting herself either under a monument or 
upon one, " to pine inly and smile at grief." 
Her mother had the happiness of recognizing a 
right spirit in her, — of perceiving that from the 
moment she was aware of having been capri- 
ciously deserted and unworthily used by Sir 
Francis Norton, she ceased to think of him 
with ' tenderness. But she dreaded the saucy 
sneers of Mrs. Homerton Frobishyre, and the 
stately scorn of the Lorings, who had never 



312 OLD AND YOUNG BACHELOR. 

pardoned her unhesitating rejection of the suit 
of their son and heir; and Mrs. Woodford 
wisely judged, that it would be better to remove 
her beloved girl beyond the reach of their ill- 
nature. 



END OF VOL. II. 



J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT STREET. 
