PART VII.— (continued.) 



VOL. II. B 



THE WONDROUS 



TALE OF ALROY, 



PART VII.— (CONTINUED.) 



V. 



Hassan Subah, after five days of forced 
marches, pitched his sumptuous pavilion 
in that beautiful Oasis, which had afforded 
such delightful refreshment to Alroy 
when a solitary pilgrim. Around, for 
nearly half a mile, were the tents of his 
warriors, and of the numerous caravan 

B 2 



4 THE WONDROUS TALE 

that had accompanied him, laden with 
water and provisions for his troops. Here, 
while he reposed, he also sought informa- 
tion as to the position of his enemy. 

A party of observation, which he had 
immediately dispatched, returned almost 
instantly with a small caravan that had 
been recently plundered by the robbers. 
The merchant, a venerable and pious 
Moslemin, was ushered into the presence 
of the Governor of Hamadan. 

'' From the robbers' haunt ?" inquired 
Hassan. 

" Unfortunately so," answered the 
merchant. 

'^ Is it far ?" 

'' A day's journey." 

'' And you quitted it ?" 

*' Yesterday morn." 

'' What is their force ?'' 



OF ALROY. 5 

The merchant hesitated. 

" Do they not make prisoners ?" in- 
quired the Governor, casting a scruti- 
nizing glance at his companion. 

'' Holy prophet ! what a miserable 
wretch am I !" exclaimed the venerable 
merchant, bursting into tears. " A faith- 
ful subject of the Caliph, I am obliged to 
serve rebels — a devout Moslemin, I am 
forced to aid Jews ! Order me to be 
hanged at once, my Lord," continued the 
unfortunate merchant, wringing his 
hands. " Order me to be hanged at 
once. I have lived long enough/' 

" What is all this ?" inquired Hassan ; 
'' speak, friend, without fear.'' 

" I am a faithful subject of the Ca- 
liph," answered the merchant ; *' I am 
a devout Moslemin, but I have lost ten 
thousand dirhems." 



6 THE WONDROUS TALE 

*' I am sorry for you. Sir ; I also have 
lost something, but my losses are nothing 
to you, nor yours to me." 

'' Accursed be the hour when these 
dogs tempted me ! Tell me, is it sin to 
break faith with a Jew ?" 

'' On the contrary, I could find you 
many reverend Mollahs, who will tell 
you that such a breach is the highest 
virtue. Come, come, I see how it is : 
you have received your freedom on con- 
dition of not betraying your merciful 
plunderers. Promises exacted by terror 
are the bugbears of fools. Speak, man, 
all you know. Where are they ? What 
is their force ? Are we supposed at 
hand ?" 

*' I am a faithful subject of the Caliph, 
and I am bound to serve him," replied 
the merchant ; '' I am a devout Mosle- 



OF ALROY. 7 

min, and 'tis my duty to destroy all 
Giaours, but I am also a man, and I must 
look after my own interest. Noble Go- 
vernor, the long and the short is, these 
scoundrels have robbed me of ten thou- 
sand dirhems, as my slaves will tell you : 
at least, goods to that amount. No one 
can prove that they be worth less. It is 
true that I include in that calculation the 
fifty per cent. I was to make on my 
shawls at Hamadan, but still to me it is 
as good as ten thousand dirhems. x\sk 
my slaves if such an assortment of shawls 
was ever yet beheld." 

" To the point, to the point. The 
robbers ?" 

" I am at the point. The shawls is 
the point. For when I talked of the 
shawls and the heaviness of my loss, you 
must know that the captain of the rob- 
bers " 



8 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Alroy ?" 

'' A very fierce young gentleman ; I 
don't know how they call him. Says the 
captain to me, ' Merchant, you look 
gloomy.' ' Gloomy/ says I, ' you would 
look gloomy if you were a prisoner, and 
had lost ten thousand dirhems/ ' What, 
is this trash worth ten thousand dirhems >' 
says he. ' With the fifty per cent. I was 
to make at Hamadan,' says I. ' Fifty per 
cent.,' says he, ' you are an old knave/ 
' Knave,' says I, ' I should like to hear 
any one call me knave at Bagdad.' 
^ Well, knave or not,' says he, ' you may 
get out of this scrape.' ' How?' says I. 
' Why you are a very respectable looking 
man,' says he, ' and are a good Moslemin 
into the bargain, I warrant.' ' That I 
am,' says I, ' although you be a Jew : but 
how the faith is to serve me here I am 



OF ALROY. 



sure I do not know, unless the angel 
Gabriel, as in the fifty-fifth verse of the 
twenty-seventh chapter of the Koran — " 

'' Hush, hush, hush !" exclaimed Has- 
san ; '' to the point ! — to the point !" 

" I always am at the point, only you 
put me out. However, to make it as 
short as possible, the Captain knows all 
about your coming, and is frightened out 
of his wits, although he did talk big ; 1 
could easily see that. And he let me go, 
you see, with some of my slaves, and gave 
me an order for five thousand dirhems on 
one Bostenay, of Hamadan, (perhaps you 
know him, I don't ; is he a good man ?) 
on condition that I would fall in with you, 
and, Mohamed forgive me, tell you a lie !" 

- A lie !" 

'' Yes! a lie; but these Jewish dogs 
don't understand what a truly religious 

B 5 



10 THE WONDROUS TALE 

man is, and when I began to tell the lie, 
I was soon put out. Now, noble Hassan, 
if a promise to a Jew be not binding* on a 
true believer, and you will see me straight 
with the five thousand dirhems, I will 
betray every thing at once." 

" Be easy about the five thousand dir- 
hems, good man, and tell me all." 

'^ You will see me paid ?" 

'' My honour upon it." 

" 'Tis well ! Know then, the infamous 
dogs are very weak, and terrified at the 
news of your progress : one, whom I 
think they call Jabaster, has departed 
with the great majority of the people 
into the interior of the desart, about 
seven hundred strong. I heard so ; 
but mind, I don't know it. The young 
man, whom you call Alroy, being wounded 
in a recent conflict, could not depart 



OF ALROY. 11 

with them, but remains among the ruins 
with some female prisoners, some trea- 
sure, and about an hundred companioas 
hidden in sepulchres. He gave me my 
freedom on condition I fell in with you, 
and assured you that the dogs, full five 
thousand strong, had given you the go 
by in the night, and marched towards 
Hamadan. They wanted me to frighten 
you ; it was a lie, and I could not tell it. 
And now you know the plain truth ; and 
if it be a sin to break faith with an infi- 
del, you are responsible for it, as well as 
for the five thousand dirhems, which, by 
the bye, ought to have been ten." 

'' Where is your order V 

" 'Tis here," said the merchant, draw- 
ing it from his vest, '' a very business- 
like document, drawn upon one Bos- 
tenay, whom they described as very rich, 



12 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and who is here enjoined to pay me five 
thousand dirhems, if in consequence of my 
information, Hassan Subah, that is your- 
self, return forthwith to Hamadan with- 
out attacking them/' 

'' Old Bostenay's head shall answer for 
this." 

«« Pm glad of it. But were I you, I 
would make him pay me first." 

'' Merchant," said Hassan, ^' have you 
any objection to pay another visit to your 
friend Ah'oy ?" 

'^ Allah forbid!" 

'' In my company?" 

'' That makes a difference.'' 

'' Be our guide. The dirhems shall 
be doubled." 

'' That will make up for the fifty per 
cent. I hardly like it; but in your com- 
pany, that makes a difference. Lose no 



OF ALROY. IS 

time. If you push on, Alroy must be 
captured. Now or never ! The Jewish 
dogs, to rifle a true believer !" 

'' Oglu/' said Hassan to one of his 
officers. '' To horse ! You need not 
strike the tents. Can we reach the city 
by sunset, merchant ?" 

'' An hour before, if vou be off* at 
once." 

'' Sound the drums. To horse ! to 
horse !" 



VI 



The Seljuks halted before the walls of 
the deserted city. Their commander or- 
dered a detachment to enter and recon- 
noitre. They returned and reported its 
apparent desolation. Hassan Subah, then 



14 THE WONDROUS TALE 

directing that a guard should surround 
the walls to prevent any of the enemy 
from escaping, passed with his warriors 
through the vast portal into the silent 
street. 

The still magnificence of the strange 
and splendid scene influenced the temper 
even of this ferocious cavalry. They 
gazed around them with awe and admira- 
tion. The fierceness of their visages was 
softened, the ardour of their impulse 
stilled. A supernatural feeling of repose 
stole over their senses. No one bran- 
dished his scimitar, the fiery courser 
seemed as subdued as his lord, and no 
sound was heard but the melancholy, me- 
chanical tramp of the disciplined march, 
unrelieved by martial music, inviolate by 
oath or jest, and unbroken even by the 
ostentatious caracoling of any showy 
steed. 



OF ALROY. 15 

It was Sunset ; the star of Eve glittered 
over the white Ionian fane that rose 
serene and delicate in the flashins: and 
purple sky. 

" This way, my lord !'' said the mer- 
chant guide, turning round to Hassan 
Subah, who, surrounded by his officers, 
led the van. The whole of the great way 
of the city was filled with the Seljukian 
warriors. Their ebon steeds, their snowy 
turbans, adorned with plumes of the black 
eagle and the red heron, their dazzling 
shawls, the blaze of their armour in the 
sunset, and the long undulating perspec- 
tive of beautiful forms and brilliant co- 
lours, — this regiment of heroes in a street 
of palaces, — War had seldom afforded a 
more imposing, or more picturesque spec- 
tacle. 

'' This way, my lord !" said the mer- 



16 THE WONDROUS TALE 

chant, pointing to the narrow turning 
that, at the foot of the temple, led, 
through ruined streets, to the amphi- 
theatre. 

*' Halt !" exclaimed a wild shrill voice. 

Each warrior suddenly arrested his 
horse. 

" Who spoke ? •' exclaimed Hassan 
Subah. 

'' I !" answered a voice. A female 
form stood in the portico of the temple, 
with uplifted arms. 

'' And who art thou ?" inquired Hassan 
Subah, not a little disconcerted. 

'' Thy evil genius, Seljuk !" 

Hassan Subah, pale as his ivory battle- 
axe, did not answer ; every man within 
hearing shuddered ; still the dread woman 
remained immoveable within the porch of 
the temple. 



OF ALROY. 17 

" Woman, witch, or g-oddess," at 
length exclaimed Hassan Subah, '^ what 
wouldst thou here ?" 

'' Seljuk ! behold this star. Tis a sin- 
gle drop of light, yet who even of thy 
wild band can look upon it without awe. 
And yet thou worse than Sisera, thou 
comest to combat against those, for whom 
even ' the stars in their courses fought/ '' 

" A Jewish witch !" exclaimed the Sel- 
juk. 

" A Jewish witch ! Be it so ; behold 
then my spell falls upon thee, and that 
spell is Destruction. 

'' Awake, awake, Deborah : awake, 
awake, utter a song ; arise Barak, and 
lead thy captivity captive, thou son of 
Abinoam !'' 

Immediately the sky appeared to 
darken, a cloud of arrows and javelins 



18 THE WONDROUS TALE 

broke from all sides upon the devoted 
Seljuks : immense masses of stone and 
marble were hurled from all directions, 
horses were stabbed by spears impelled 
by invisible hands, and riders fell to the 
ground without a struggle, and were 
trampled upon by their disordered and 
affrighted brethren. 

'' We are betrayed," exclaimed Hassan 
Subah, hurling a javelin at the merchant, 
but the merchant was gone. The Seljuks 
raised their famous war cry. 

'' Oglu, regain the desart," ordered the 
chieftain. 

But no sooner had the guard without 
the walls heard the war cry of their com- 
panions, than, alarmed for their safety, 
they rushed to their assistance. The re- 
treating forces of Subah, each instant 
diminishing as they retreated, were baffled 



OF ALROY. 19 

in their project by the very eagerness of 
their auxiliaries. The unwilling conten- 
tion of the two parties increased the con- 
fusion ; and when the Seljuks, recently 
arrived, having at length formed into 
some order, had regained the gate, they 
found to their dismay that the portal was 
barricadoed and garrisoned by the enemy. 
Uninspired by the presence of their com- 
mander, who was in the rear, the puzzled 
soldiers were seized with a panic, and 
spurring their horses, dispersed in all di- 
rections of the city. In vain Hassan 
Subah endeavoured to recall order. The 
moment was past. Dashing with about 
thirty men to an open ground, which his 
quick eye had observed in his progress 
down the street, and dealing destruction 
with every blow, the dreaded governor of 
Hamadan, like a true soldier, awaited an 



20 THE WONDROUS TALE 

inevitable fate, not wholly desperate that 
some chance might yet turn up to extri- 
cate him from his forlorn situation. 

And now, as it were by enchantment, 
wild armed men seemed to arise from 
every part of the city. From every mass 
of ruin, from every crumbling temple and 
mouldering mansion, from every cata- 
comb and cellar, from behind every co- 
lumn and every obelisk, upstarted some 
desperate warrior with a bloody weapon. 
The massacre of the Seljuks was univer- 
sal. The horsemen dashed wildly about 
the ruined streets, pursued by crowds of 
footmen ; sometimes formed in small com- 
panies, the Seljuks frequently charged 
and fought desperately ; but however 
stout might be their resistance to the 
open foe, it was impossible to withstand 
their secret enemies. They had no place 



OF ALROY. 21 

of refuge, no power of gaining even a 
moment's breathing time. If they re- 
treated to a wall, it instantly bristled 
with spears ; if they endeavoured to form 
in a court, they sank under the falling 
masses which were showered upon them 
from all directions. Strange shouts of 
denunciation blended with the harsh cry- 
ing of horns, and the clang and clash of 
cymbals and tambours sounded in every 
quarter of the city. 

" If we could only mount the walls, 
Ibrahim, and leap into the desart," ex- 
claimed Hassan Subah to one of his few re- 
maining comrades, " 'tis our only chance. 
We die here like dogs ! Could I but meet 
Alroy !" 

Three of the Seljuks dashed swiftly 
across the open ground in front, followed 
by several Hebrew horsemen. 



22 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Smite all, Abner. Spare none, re- 
member Amalek," exclaimed their youth- 
ful leader, waving his bloody scimitar. 

*' They are down, — one, two, — there 
goes the third. My javelin has done for 
him." 

" Your horse bleeds freely. Where's 
Jabaster ?" 

" At the gates : my arm aches with 
slaughter. The Lord hath delivered them 
into our hands. Could I but meet their 
chieftain !" 

" Turn, blood-hound, he is here,'" ex- 
claimed Hassan Subah." 

" Away, Abner, this affair is mine." 

'' Prince, you have already slain your 
thousands." 

'' And Abner his tens of thousands. Is 
it so ? This business is for me only. 
Come on, Turk." 



OF ALROY. 23 

'' Art thou Alroy ?'' 

'' The same/' 

'' The slayer of Alschiroch ?" 

'' Even so." 

'' A rebel and a murderer.'* 

" What you please. Look to yourself." 

The Hebrew Prince flung a javelin at 
the Seljuk. It glanced from the breast- 
plate ; but Hassan Subah staggered in his 
seat. Recovering, he charged Alroy with 
great force. Their scimitars crossed, and 
the blade of Hassan shivered. 

*' He who sold me that blade, told me 
it was charmed, and could be broken 
only by a Caliph,'* said Hassan Subah. 
'' He was a liar !" 

" As it may be," said Alroy, and he 
cut the Seljuk to the ground. Abner had 
dispersed his comrades. Alroy leaped 
from his fainting steed, and mounting the 



84 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ebon courser of his late enemy, dashed 
again into the thickest of the fight. 

The shades of night descended, the 
clamour gradually decreased, the struggle 
died away. A few unhappy Moslemin, 
who had quitted their saddles and sought 
concealment among the ruins, were occa- 
sionally hunted out, and brought forward 
and massacred. Long ere midnight the 
last of the Seljuks had expired. 

The moon shed a broad light upon the 
street of palaces crowded with the accu- 
mulated slain, and the living victors. 
Fires were lit, torches illumined, the con- 
querors prepared the eager meal as they 
sang hymns of praise and thanksgiving. 

A procession approached. Esther, the 
prophetess, clashing her cymbals, danced 
before the Messiah of Israel, who leant 
upon his victorious scimitar, surrounded 



OF ALROY. 25 

by Jabaster, Abner, Scherirah, and his 
chosen chieftains. Who could now doubt 
the validity of his mission ? The wide 
and silent desart rang with the acclama- 
tions of his enthusiastic votaries. 



VII. 

Heavily the anxious hours crept on in 
the Jewish quarter of Hamadan. Again, 
and again the venerable Bostenay dis- 
cussed the chances of success with the 
sympathizing but desponding elders. Mi- 
riam was buried in constant prayer. Their 
most sanguine hopes did not extend be- 
yond the escape of their Prince. 

A fortnight had elapsed, and no news 
had been received of the progress of the 

VOL. II. c 



g6 THE WONDROUS TALE 

expedition, when suddenly towards sun- 
set, a sentinel on a watch-tower announc- 
ed the appearance of an armed force in 
the distance. The walls were instantly 
lined with the anxious inhabitants, the 
streets and squares filled with curious 
crowds. Exultation sat on the triumph- 
ant brow of the Moslemin : a cold tre- 
mour stole over the fluttering heart of 
the Hebrew. 

" There is but one God," said the cap- 
tain of the gate. 

" And Mohammed is his prophet," re- 
sponded a sentinel. 

'* To-morrow we will cut off the noses 
of all these Jewish dogs." 

''The sceptre has departed," exclaimed 
the despairing Bostenay. 

'' Lord, remember David !" whispered 
Miriam, as she threw herself upon the 



OF ALROY. 27 

court of the palace, and buried her face 
in ashes. 

The Mollahs in solemn procession ad- 
vanced to the ramparts to shed their 
benediction on the victorious Hassan Su- 
bah. The Muezzin ascended the minarets 
to watch the setting* sun, and proclaim 
the power of Allah with renewed enthu- 
siasm. 

" I wonder if Alroy be dead or alive,'* 
said the captain of the gate. 

'' If he be alive, he will be impaled,'' 
responded a sentinel. 

'' If dead, the carcase will be given to 
the dogs," rejoined the captain ; '' that 
is the practice.'' 

'' Bostenay will be hung," said the 
sentinel. 

" And his niece, too," answered the 
captain. 

c2 



28 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Hem !" said the sentinel. '' Hassan 
Subah loves a black eye." 

'' I hope a true Moslemin will not 
touch a Jewess/' exclaimed an indignant 
black eunuch. 

" They approach. What a dust !" said 
the captain of the gate. 

'' I see Hassan Subah !" said the sen- 
tinel. 

'' So do I/* said the eunuch, '' I know 
his black horse.'' 

'' I wonder how many dirhems old 
Bostenay is worth/' said the captain. 

" Immense !" said the sentinel. 

"No plunder, 1 suppose?" said the 
eunuch. 

'' We shall see/' said the captain ; '' at 
any rate, I owe a thousand to old 
Shelomi. We need not pay now, you 
know." 



OF ALROY. 29 

" Certainly not," said the black eu- 
nuch. '' The rebels !" 

A body of horsemen dashed forward. 
Their leader in advance reined in his 
fiery charger beneath the walls. 

'' In the name of the prophet, who is 
that ?" exclaimed the captain of the gate, 
a little confused. 

'' I never saw him before," said the 
sentinel, "although he is in the Seljuk 
dress. 'Tis some one from Bagdad, I 
guess." 

A trumpet sounded. 

'' Who keeps the gate ?" called out the 
warrior. 

" I am the captain of the gate," an- 
swered our friend. 

'' Open it then to the King of Israel." 

'' To w^hom ?" inquired the astonished 
captain. 



so THE WONDROUS TALE 

" To King David. The Lord hath de- 
livered Hassan Subah and his host into 
our hands, and of all thy proud Seljuks 
none remaineth. Open thy gates, I say, 
and lose no time. I am Jabaster, a lieu- 
tenant of the Lord ; this scimitar is my 
commission. Open thy gates, and thou 
and thy people shall have that mercy 
which they have never shown ; but if 
thou delayest one instant, thus saith the 
King our master—^ I will burst open 
your portal, and smite, and utterly de- 
stroy all that you have, and spare them 
not; but slay both man and woman, in- 
fant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel 
and ass/ " 

'' Call forth the venerable Lord Boste- 
nay," said the captain of the gate, with 
chattering teeth. '' He will intercede 
for us." 



OF ALROY. 31 

" And the gentle Lady Miriam/' said 
the sentinel. '' She is ever charitable." 

" I will head the procession," said the 
black eunuch ; ''I am accustomed to 
women." 

The procession of Mollahs shuffled back 
to their college with most profane preci- 
pitation ; the Sun set, and the astounded 
Muezzin stood with their mouths open, 
and quite forgot to announce the power 
of tlieir deity, and the validity of their 
prophet. The people all called out for 
the venerable Lord Bostenay and the 
gentle Lady Miriam, and ran in crowds 
to see who could first kiss the hem of 
their garments. 

The principal gate of Hamadan opened 
into the square of the great mosque. Here 
the whole population of the city appeared 
assembled. The gates were thrown open 



32 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Jabaster and his companions mounted 
guard. The short twilight died away, 
the shades of night descended. The 
minarets were illumined/ the houses hung 
with garlands, the ramparts covered with 
tapestry and carpets. 

A clang of drums, trumpets, and cym- 
bals announced the arrival of the Hebrew 
army. The people shouted, the troops 
without responded with a long cheer of 
triumph Amid the blaze of torches, a 
youth, waving his scimitar, upon a coal 
black steed, bounded into the city, at the 
head of his guards— the people fell upon 
their knees, and shouted, '' Long live 
Alroy !" 

A venerable man, leading a beauteous 
maiden, with downcast eyes, advanced. 
They headed a deputation of the chief in- 
habitants of the city. They came to 



OF ALROY. 33 

solicit mercy and protection. At their 
sight the youthful warrior leaped from 
his horse, flung away his scimitar, and 
clasping the maiden in his arms, ex- 
claimed, " Miriam, my sister, this, this 
indeed is triumph !" 



VIII. 

'' Drink," said Kisloch the Kourd, 
to Calidas the Indian ; " you forget, 
comrade, we are no longer Moslemin." 

" Wine, methinks, has a peculiarly 
pleasant flavour in a golden cup," said 
the Guebre. '' I got this little trifle to- 
day in the Bazaar," he added, holding up 
a magnificent vase studded with gems. 

'' I thought plunder was forbidden," 
grinned the Negro. 

c 5 



34 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" So it is," replied the Guebre : '' but 
we may purchase what we please — upon 
credit/' 

'' Well, for my part, I am a moderate 
man,'' exclaimed Calidas the Indian, 
'' and would not injure even these ac- 
cursed dogs of Turks. I have not cut my 
host's throat, but only turned him into 
my porter, and content myself with his 
harem, his baths, his fine horses, and 
other little trifles." 

'' What quarters we are in ! There is 
nothing like a true Messiah !" exclaimed 
Kisloch, very devoutly. 

'' Nothing,'' said Calidas ; " though, 
to speak truth, I did not much believe in 
the efficacy of Solomon's sceptre, till his 
majesty clove the head of the valiant 
Seljuk with it." 

'' But now there's no doubt of it ?'' said 
the Guebre. 



OF ALROY. 35 

" We should indeed be infidels if we 
doubted now," replied the Indian. 

'' How lucky/' grinned the Negro, 
'' as I had no religion before, that I have 
now fixed upon the right one !" 

'' Most fortunate !" said the Guebre. 
" What shall we do to amuse ourselves to 
night ?". 

" Let's go to the coffee-houses and 
make the Turks drink wine," said Calidas 
the Indian. 

'' What say you to burning down a 
mosque ?" said Kisloch the Kourd. 

'' I had great fun with some Der- 
vishes this morning," said the Guebre. 

" I met one asking alms with a wire 
run through his cheek,'^ so I caught ano- 
ther, bored his nose, and tied them both 
together !" 

'' Hah ! hah ! hah !" burst the Negro. 



36 THE WONDROUS TALE 



IX 



Asia resounded with the insurrection 
of the Jews, and the massacre of the Sel- 
juks. Crowds of Hebrews, from the rich 
cities of Persia, and the populous settle- 
ments on the Tigris and the Euphrates, 
hourly poured into Hamadan. 

The irritated Moslem in persecuted the 
brethren of the successful rebel, and this 
impolicy precipitated their flight. The 
wealth of Bagdad flowed into the He- 
brew capital. Seated on the divan of 
Hassan Subah, and wielding the sceptre 
of Solomon, the King of Israel received 
the homage of his devoted subjects, and 
dispatched his envoys to Syria and to 
Egypt. The well-stored magazines and 



OF ALROY. 37 

arsenals of Hamadan soon converted the 
pilgrims into warriors. The city was 
unable to accommodate the increased and 
increasing population. An extensive 
camp, under the command of Abner, was 
formed without the walls, where the 
troops were daily disciplined, and where 
they were prepared for greater exploits 
than a skirmish in a desart. 

Within a month after the surrender of 
Hamadan, the congregation of the people 
assembled in the square of the great 
mosque, now converted into a synagogue. 
The multitude was disposed in ordered 
ranks, and the terrace of every house was 
crowded. In the centre of the square 
was an immense altar of cedar and brass, 
and on each side stood a company of 
priests, guarding the victims, one young 
bullock, and two rams without blemish. 



3S THE WONDROUS TALE 

Amid the flourish of trumpets, the 
gates of the synagogue opened, and dis- 
played to the wondering eyes of the He- 
brews a vast and variegated pavilion, 
planted in the court. The holy remnant, 
no longer forlorn, beheld that tabernacle, 
of which they had so long dreamed, once 
more shining in the Sun, with its purple 
and scarlet hangings, its curtains of rare 
skins, and its furniture of silver and of 
gold. 

A procession of priests advanced, bear- 
ing, with staves of cedar, run through rings 
of gold, a gorgeous ark, the work of the most 
cunning artificers of Persia. Night and 
day had they laboured, under the direc- 
tion of Jabaster, to produce this wondrous 
spectacle. Once more the children of 
Israel beheld the cherubim. They burst 
into a triumphant hymn of thanks- 



OF ALROY. 39 

giving, and many drew their swords, 
and cried aloud to be led against the 
Canaanites. 

From the mysterious curtains of the 
Tabernacle, Alroy came forward, leading 
Jabaster. They approached the altar. 
And Alroy took robes from the sur- 
rounding priests, and put them upon Ja- 
baster, and a girdle, and a breast-plate of 
jewels. And Alroy took a mitre, and 
placed it upon the head of Jabaster, and 
upon the mitre he placed a crown ; and, 
pouring oil upon his head, the pupil 
anointed the master, High Priest of 
Israel. 

The victims were slain, the sin-offer- 
ings burnt. Amid clouds of incense, 
bursts of music, and the shouts of a de- 
voted people ; amid odour, and melody, 
and enthusiasm, Alroy mounted his 



40 THE WONDROUS TALE 

charger, and at the head of twenty thou- 
sand men, departed to conquer Media. 



X. 

The extensive and important Province 
of Aderbijan, of which Hamadan was the 
capital, was formed of the Ancient Media. 
Its fate was decided by one battle. On 
the plain of Nehauend, Alroy met the 
hastily-raised levies of the Atabek of 
Kermanshah, and entirely routed them. 
In the course of a month, every city of 
the province had acknowledged the su- 
premacy of the new Hebrew Monarch, and, 
leaving Abner to complete the conquest 
of Louristan, Alroy entered Persia. 

The incredible and irresistible progress 
of Alroy roused Togrul, the Turkish Sul- 



OF ALROY. 41 

tan of Persia, from the luxurious indo- 
lence of the palaces of Nishabur. He 
summoned his Emirs to meet him at the 
imperial City of Rhey, and crush, by one 
overwhelming effort, the insolent rebel. 

Religion, valour, and genius, alike in- 
spired the arms of Alroy, but he was, 
doubtless, not a little assisted by the 
strong national sympathy of his singular 
and scattered people, which ever ensured 
him prompt information on all the move- 
ments of his enemy. Without any pre- 
paration, he found agents in every court, 
and camp, and cabinet, and by their as- 
sistance he anticipated the designs of his 
adversaries, and turned even their in- 
genuity to their confusion. The imperial 
City of Rhey was surprised in the night, 
sacked, and burnt to the ground. The 
scared and baffled Emirs who escaped. 



42 THE WONDROUS TALE 

fled to the Sultan Togrul, tearing their 
beards, and prophesying the approaching 
termination of the world. The palaces of 
Nishabur resounded with the imprecations 
of their master, who, cursing the Jewish 
dogs, and vowing a pilgrimage to Mecca, 
placed himself at the head of a mot- 
ley multitude of warriors, and rushed 
upon the plains of Irak, to exterminate 
Alroy. 

The Persian force exceeded the Hebrew 
at least five times in number. Besides a 
large division of Seljuks, the Caucasus 
had poured forth its strange inhabitants to 
swell the ranks of the faithful. The wild 
tribes of the Bactiari were even enlisted 
with their fatal bows, and the savage 
Turkmans, tempted by the Sultan s gold, 
for a moment yielded their liberty, and 
shook their tall lances in his ranks. 



OF ALROY. 43 

But what is a wild Bactiari, and what 
is a savage Turkman, and what even a 
disciplined and imperious Seljuk, to the 
warriors of the God of Abraham, of Isaac, 
and of Jacob ? At the first onset, Alroy 
succeeded in dividing* the extended centre 
of Togrul, and separating the greater part 
of the Turks from their less disciplined 
comrades. At the head of his Median 
cavalry the Messiah charged and utterly 
routed the warriors of the Caucasus. The 
wild tribes of the Bactiari shot their 
arrows and fled, and the savage Turk- 
mans plundered the baggage of their own 
commander. 

The Turks themselves fought despe- 
rately ; but deserted by their allies, and 
surrounded by an inspired foe, their ef- 
forts were unavailing, and their slaughter 
terrible. Togrul was slain while heading 



44^ THE WONDROUS TALE 

a desperate and fruitless charge, and after 
his fall, the battle resembled a massacre 
rather than a combat. The plain was 
clotted with Seljukian gore. No quarter 
was given or asked. Twenty thousand 
chosen troops fell on the side of the 
Turks ; the rest dispersed and gained the 
mountains. Leaving Scherirah to restore 
order, Alroy the next morning pushed on to 
Nishabur at the head of three thousand 
horsemen, and summoned the city ere the 
inhabitants were apprised of the defeat 
and death of their Sultan. The capital of 
Persia escaped the fate of Rhey by an 
inglorious treaty, and a lavish tribute. 
The treasures of the Chosroes and the 
Gasnevides were dispatched to Hamadan, 
on which city day dawned, only to bring 
intelUgence of a victory or a conquest. 
While Alroy dictated peace on his own 



OF ALROY. 45 

terms in the palaces of Nishabur, x\bner 
having reduced Louristan, crossed the 
mountains, and entered Persia with the 
reinforcements he had received from Ja- 
baster. Leaving the government and 
garrisoning of his new conquests to this 
valiant captain, Alroy, at the head of the 
conquerors of Persia, in consequence of 
intelligence received from Hamadan, re- 
turned by forced marches to that city. 



XI 



Leaving the army within a day's march 
of the capital, Alroy, accompanied only by 
his staff, entered Hamadan, in the evening, 
and immediately repairing to the ci- 
tadel, summoned Jabaster to counsel. The 
night was passed by the King and the 



46 THE WONDROUS TALE 

High Priest in deep consultation. The 
next morning a decree apprised the 
inhabitants of the return of their mo- 
narch, of the creation of the new " king- 
dom of the Medes and Persians," of which 
Hamadan was appointed the capital, and 
Abner the viceroy, and of the intended 
and immediate invasion of Syria, and 
reconquest of the Land of Promise. 

The plan of this expedition had been 
long matured, and the preparations to 
effect it were considerably advanced. Ja- 
baster had not been idle during the ab- 
sence of his pupil. One hundred thou- 
sand warriors were now assembled^ at the 
capital of the " Kingdom of the Medes 
and Persians ;'* of these the greater part 
were Hebrews, but many Arabs, wearied 
of the Turkish yoke, and many gallant 
adventurers from the Caspian, easily con- 



OF ALROY. 47 

verted from a vague idolatry to a religion 
of conquest, swelled the ranks of the army 
of the ^^ Lord of Hosts." 

The plain of Hamadan was covered 
with tents, the streets were filled with 
passing troops, the bazaars loaded with 
military stores ; long caravans of camels 
laden with supplies every day arrived 
from the neighbouring towns, each in- 
stant some high-capped Tartar"^ with dis- 
patches rushed into the city and galloped 
his steed up the steep of the citadel. The 
clang of arms, the prance of horses, the 
flourish of warlike music, resounded from 
all quarters. The business and the trea- 
sure of the world seemed as it were in an 
instant, to have become concentred in 
Hamadan. Every man had some great 
object ; gold glittered in every hand. All 
great impulses were stirring; all the 



48 THE WONDROUS TALE 

causes of human energy were in lively 
action. Every eye sparkled, every foot 
trod firm and fast. Each man acted as 
if the universal fate depended on his ex- 
ertions ; as if the universal will sympa- 
thized with his particular desire. A vast 
population influenced by a high degree 
of excitement is the most sublime of 
spectacles. 

The Commander of the Faithful raised 
the standard of the Prophet on the banks 
of the Tigris. It was the secret intelli- 
£[ence of this intended event that had 
recalled Alroy so suddenly from Persia. 
The latent enthusiasm of the Moslemin 
was excited by the rare and mystic cere- 
mony, and its effects were anticipated by 
previous and judicious preparations. The 
Seljuks of Bagdad alone amounted to 
fifty thousand men : the Sultan of Syria 



OF ALROY. 49 

contributed the warriors who had con- 
quered the Arabian princes of Damascus 
and Aleppo, while the ancient provinces 
of Asia Minor, which formed the rich and 
powerful kingdom of Seljukian Roum, 
poured forth a myriad of that matchless 
cavalry, which had so often baffled the 
armies of the Caesars. Never had so 
imposing a force been collected on the 
banks of the Tigris since the reign of 
Haroun Alraschid. Each day some war- 
like Atabek^ at the head of his armed 
train poured into the capital of the Ca- 
liphs, or pitched his pavilion on the 
banks of the river ; each day the proud 
Emir of some remote principality asto- 
nished or affrightened the luxurious Ba- 
bylonians by the strange or uncouth 
warriors, that had gathered round his 
standard in the desarts of Arabia, or on 

VOL. II. D 



50 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the shores of the Euxine. For the space 
of twenty miles, the banks of the river 
were, on either side, far as the eye could 
reach, covered with the variegated pavi- 
lions, the glittering standards, the flow- 
ing streamers and twinkling pennons 
of the mighty host, of which Malek, 
the Grand Sultan of the Seljuks, and 
Governor of the Caliph's palace, was chief 
commander. 

Such was the power assembled on the 
plains of Asia to arrest the progress of 
the Hebrew Prince, and to prevent the 
conquest of the memorable land promised 
to the faith of his fathers, and forfeited 
by their infidelity. Before the walls of 
Hamadan, Alroy reviewed the army of 
Israel, sixty thousand heavy armed foot- 
men, thirty thousand archers and light 
troops, and twenty thousand cavalry. 



OF ALROY. 51 

Besides these, a body of ten thousand 
picked horsemen had been formed, all of 
whom had served in the Persian cam- 
paign, styled " the Sacred Guard." In 
their centre, shrouded in a case of wrought 
gold, studded with carbuncles, and car- 
ried on a lusty lance of cedar, a giant — for 
the height of Elnebar exceeded that of 
common men by three feet— bore the scep- 
tre of Solomon. The Sacred Guard was 
commanded by Asriel, the brother of 
Abner. 

The army was formed into three divi- 
sions. All marched in solemn order be- 
fore the throne of Alroy, raised upon the 
ramparts, and drooped their standards 
and lances as they passed their heroic 
leader. Bostenay and Miriam, and the 
whole population of the city witnessed 
the inspiring spectacle from the walls. 

D 2 



LIBRARY 
UNIVERSITvoFiiiiNnift 



52 THE WONDROUS TALE 

That same eve, Scherirah, at the head of 
forty thousand men, pushed on towards 
Bagdad, by Kermanshah ; and Jabaster, 
who commanded in his holy robes, and 
who had vowed not to give up his sword 
until the rebuilding of the temple, con- 
ducted his division over the victorious 
plain of Nehauend. They were to con- 
centrate at the pass of Kerrund, which 
conducted into the province of Bagdad, 
and await the arrival of the king. '"^'"" 

At dawn of day, the royal division and 
the Sacred Guard, the whole under the 
command of Asriel, quitted the capital. 
Alroy still lingered, and for some hours 
the warriors of his staff might have been 
observed lounging about the citadel, or 
practising their skill in throwing the jer- 
reed as they exercised their impatient 
chargers before the gates. The King was 
with the Lady Miriam. 



OF ALROY. 53 

The King- was with the Lady Miriam, 
walking- in the garden of their uncle. 
His arm was wound round her delicate 
waist, and with the other he clasped her 
soft and graceful hand. The heavy tears 
burst from her downcast eyes, and stole 
along- her pale and pensive cheek. They 
walked in silence, the brother and the 
sister, before the purity of whose surpass- 
ing love even ambition vanished. He 
opened the lattice gate. They entered 
into the valley small and green ; before 
them was the marble fountain with its 
columns and cupola, and in the distance, 
the charger of Alroy and his single at- 
tendant. 

They stopped, and Alroy gathered 
flowers, and placed them in the hair of 
Miriam. He would have softened the 
bitterness of parting with a smile. Gently 



54f THE WONDROUS TALE 

he relaxed his embracing arm, almost in- 
sensibly he dropped her quivering hand. 

'^ Sister of my soul/' he whispered, 
" when we last parted here, I was a fugi- 
tive, and now I quit you a conqueror.'* 

She turned, she threw herself upon his 
neck, and buried her face in his breast. 

'' My beautiful, restrain yourself, we 
shall meet at Bagdad." 

He beckoned to her distant maidens; 
they advanced, he delivered Miriam into 
their arms. He seized her hand and 
pressed it to his mouth, and rushing to 
his horse, mounted, and disappeared. 



xn. 

A body of irregular cavalry feebly de- 
fended the pass of Kerrund. It was car- 



OF ALROY. 55 



ried, with slight loss, by the vanguard of 
Scherirah, and the fugitives prepared the 
host of the Caliph for the approach of the 
Hebrew army. 

Upon the plain of the Tigris, the 
enemy formed into battle array. The 
centre was commanded by Malek, tiie 
Grand Sultan of the Seljuks himself, the 
right wing, headed by the Sultan of Syria, 
was protected by the river ; and the left, 
under the Sultan of Roum, was posted 
upon the advantageous position of some 
irregular and rising ground. Thus proud 
in the number, valour, discipline, and 
disposition of his forces, Malek awaited 
the conqueror of Persia. 

The glittering columns of the Hebrews 
might even now be perceived defiling 
from the mountains, and forming at the 
extremity of the plain. Before night-fall 



56 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the camp of the invaders was pitched 
within hearing of that of Malek. The 
moving Hghts in the respective tents 
might plainly be distinguished ; and ever 
and anon the flourish of hostile music fell 
with an omiinous sound upon the ears of 
the opposed foemen. A few miles only 
separated those mighty hosts. Upon to- 
morrow depended, perhaps, the fortunes 
of ages. How awful is the eve of battle ! 
Alroy, attended by a few chieftains, 
personally visited the tents of the sol- 
diery, promising them on the morrow a 
triumph, before which the victories of 
ISehauend and Nishabur would sink into 
insignificance. Their fiery and excited 
visages proved at once their courage, and 
their faith. The sceptre of Solomon was 
paraded throughout the camp in solemn 
procession. On the summit of a huge 



OF ALROY. 57 

tumulus, perhaps the sepulchre of some 
classic hero, Esther, the prophetess, sur- 
rounded by the chief zealots of the host, 
poured forth her inspiring inspiration. 
It was a grand picture, that beautiful 
wild girl, the groups of stern devoted 
warriors, the red flame of the watch-fires 
mixing with the silver shadows of the 
moon as they illumined the variegated 
turbans and gleaming armour of her 
votaries ! 

In the pavilion of Alroy, Jabaster con- 
sulted with his pupil on the conduct of 
the morrow. 

'' This is a dififerent scene from the 
cavern of the Caucasus," said Alroy, as 
the High Priest rose to retire. 

*' It has one great resemblance, sire ; 
the God of our Fathers is with us." 

'^ Ay ! the Lord of Hosts. Moses was 

1^5 



58 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a great man. There is no career except 
conquest/' 

" You muse ?'' 

'' Of the past. The present is pre- 
pared. Too much thought will mar it." 

'' The past is for wisdom, the present 
for action, but for joy the future. The 
feeling that the building of the temple is 
at hand, that the Lord's anointed will 
once again live in the house of David, 
absorbs my spirit ; and when I muse over 
our coming glory, in my fond ecstasy I 
almost lose the gravity that doth beseem 
my sacred office." 

" Jerusalem — I have seen it. How 
many hours to dawn ?" 

" Some three/' 

'' Tis strange I could sleep. I re- 
member, on the eve of battle I was ever 
anxious. How is this, Jabaster ?" 



OF ALROY. 69 

** Your faith, sire, is profound." 

" Yes, I have no fear. My destiny is 
not complete. Good night, Jabaster. See 
Asriel, valiant priest. Pharez !" 

'' My Lord !'* 

" Rouse me at the second watch. Good 
night, boy." 

'' Good night, my Lord." 

'' Pharez !" 

'^ Be sure you rouse me at the second 
watch. Think you it wants three hours 
to dawn ?" 

'* About three hours, my Lord." 

" Well ! at the second watch, remem- 
ber ; good night." 



60 THE WONDROUS TALE 



XIII. 

'^ It is the second watch, my Lord." 

^' So soon ! Have I slept ? I feel 
fresh as an eagle. Call Scherirah, boy. 

'' Tis strange I never dream now. 
Before my flight, my sleep was ever 
troubled. Say what they like, man is v 
made for action. My life is now harmo- 
nious, and sleep has now become what 
nature willed.4t, a solace, not a contest. 
Before, it was a struggle of dark passions 
and bright dreams, in whose creative 
fancy and fair vision my soul sought re- 
fuge from the dreary bale of daily 
reality. 

^' I will withdraw the curtains of my 
tent. Oh ! most majestic vision ! And 



OF ALROY. 61 

have I raised this host ! O'er the wide 
plain, far as my eye can range, their 
snowy tents studding the purple land- 
scape, embattled legions gather round 
their flags to struggle for my fate. It is 
the agony of Asia. 

" A year ago, upon this very spot, I 
laid me down to die, an unknown thing, 
or known and recognized only to be de- 
spised, and now the Sultans of the world 
come forth to meet me. I have no fear. 
My destiny is not complete. And whi- 
ther tends it ? Let that power decide 
that hitherto has fashioned all my 
course. 

" Jerusalem, Jerusalem — ever harping 
on Jerusalem, With all his lore, he is a 
narrow-minded zealot, whose dreaming 
memory would fondly make a future like 
the past. Oh ! Bagdad, Bagdad, within 



62 THE WONDROUS TALE 

thy glittering halls, there is a charm 
worth all his Cabala ! 

^^Hah ! Scherirah ! The dawn is near at 
hand ; the stars still shining. The air is 
very pleasant. To-morrow will be a 
great day, Scherirah, for Israel and for 
you. You lead the attack. A moment 
in my tent, my brave Scherirah !" 



XIV. 

The dawn broke, a strong column of 
the Hebrews, commanded by Scherirah, 
poured down upon the centre of the 
army of the Caliph. Another column, 
commanded by Jabaster, attacked the 
left wing, headed by the Sultan of Roum. 
No sooner had Alroy perceived that the 
onset of Scherirah had succeeded in pene- 



OF ALROY. 63 

trating the centre of the Turks, than he 
placed himself at the head of the Sacred 
Guard, and by an irresistible charge 
completed their disorder and confusion. 
The division of the Sultan of Syria and 
a great part of the centre were entirely 
routed and driven into the river, and the 
remainder of the division of Malek was 
effectuaUy separated from his left wing. 

But while to Alroy the victory seemed 
already decided, a far different fate 
awaited the division of Jabaster. The 
Sultan of Roum, posted in a^i extremely 
advantageous position, and commanding 
troops accustomed to the discipline of 
the Romans of Constantinople, received 
the onset of Jabaster without yielding, 
and not only repelled his attack, but 
finally made a charge which completely 
disordered and dispersed the column of 



Q4f THE WONDROUS TALE 

the Hebrews. In vain Jabaster endea- 
voured to rally his troops, in vain he 
performed prodigies of valour, in vain he 
himself struck down the standard bearer 
of the Sultan, and once even penetrated 
to the pavilion of the monarch. His 
division was fairly routed. The eager- 
ness of the Sultan of Roum to effect the 
annihilation of his antagonists prevented 
him from observing the forlorn condition 
of the Turkish centre. Had he, after 
routing the division of Jabaster, only 
attacked Alroy in the rear, the fortune 
of the day might have been widely dif- 
ferent. As it was, the eagle eye of Alroy 
soon detected his inadvertence, and pro- 
fited by his indiscretion. Leaving Itha- 
mar to keep the centre in check, he 
charged the Sultan of Roum with the 
Sacred Guard, and afforded Jabaster an 



^ 



OF ALROY. " 65 

opportunity of rallying some part of his 
forces. The Sultan of Roum perceiving 
that the day was lost by the ill-conduct 
of his colleagues, withdrew his troops, re- 
treated in haste, but in good order, to 
Bagdad, carried off the Caliph, his Harem, 
and some of his treasure, and effected his 
escape into Syria. In the meantime the 
discomfiture of the remaining Turkish 
army was complete. The Tigris was dyed 
with their blood, and the towns through 
which the river flowed were apprised 
of the triumph of Alroy by the floating 
corpses of his enemies. Thirty thousand 
Turks were slain in battle : among them 
the Sultans of Bagdad and Syria, and a 
vast number of atabeks, emirs, and chief- 
tains. A whole division finding them- 
selves surrounded, surrendered on terms, 
and delivered up their arms. The camps 



66 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and treasure of the three Sultans were 
alike captured, and the troops that es- 
caped so completely dispersed, that they 
did not attempt to rally, but, disbanded 
and desperate, prowled over and plun- 
dered the adjoining provinces. The loss 
of the division of Jabaster was also severe, 
but the rest of the army suffered little. 
Alroy himself was slightly wounded. 
The battle lasted barely three hours. Its 
results were immense. David Alroy was 
now master of the East. 



XV. 

The plain was covered with the corpses 
of men and horses, arms and standards, 
and prostrate tents. Returning from the 
pursuit of the Sultan of Roum, Alroy or- 



OF ALROY. 67 

dered the trumpets to sound to arms, and 
covered with gore and dust, dismounted 
from his charger, and stood before the 
pavilion of Malek, leaning on his bloody 
scimitar, and surrounded by his victorious 
generals. 

" Ah, Jabaster \'' said the conqueror, 
giving his hand to the pontiff, '' 'twas 
well your troops had such a leader. No 
one but you could have rallied them. 
You must drill your lads a little before 
they meet again the Cappadocian cavalry. 
Brave Scherirah, we shall not forget our 
charge. Asriel, tell the guard, from me, 
that the victory of the Tigris was owing 
to their scimitars. Ithamar, what are our 
freshest troops ?" 

'' The legion of Aderbijan, sire." 
'' How strong can they muster }" 
'^ It counts twelve thousand men : we 
might collect two thirds/* 



68 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Valiant Ithamar, take the Aderbijans, 
and a division of the guard, push on to- 
wards Bagdad, and summon the city. 
If his Sultanship of Roum offer battle, 
take up a position, and he shall quickly 
have his desire. For the present^ after 
these hasty marches and sharp fight- 
ing, the troops must rest. I guess he 
will not tarry. Summon the city, and 
say that if any resistance be offered, I 
will make it as desolate as old Babylon. 
Treat with no armed force. Where is 
the soldier that saved me a cracked skull — 
his name Benaiah ?" 

" I wait your bidding, sire.'' 

" You're a captain. Join the division 
of Ithamar, and win fresh laurels ere we 
meet again. Gentle Asriel, let your bro- 
ther know our fortune." 

'' Sire, several Tartars have already 
been dispatched to Hamadan." 



OF ALROY. 69 

"' 'Tis well. Send another, with these 
tablets to the Lady Miriam. Dispatch 
the pavilion of Malek as a trophy for the 
town. Elnebar, Goliath of the Hebrews, 
you bore our sacred standard like a hero ! 
How fares the prophetess ? I saw her 
charging in our ranks, waving a sabre 
with her snowy arm, her long, dark hair 
streaming like a storm, from whence her 
eyes flashed lightning." 

" The King bleeds," said Jabaster. 

'' Slightly. It will do me service. I 
am somewhat feverish. A kingdom for 
a draught of water ! And now for our 
wounded friends. Asriel, do you marshal 
the camp. It is the Sabbath eve.^ Time 
presses." 



70 THE WONDROUS TALE 



XVI. 

The dead were plundered, and thrown 
into the river, the encampment of the 
Hebrews completed. Alroy, with his 
principal officers, visited the wounded, 
and praised the valiant. The bustle 
which always succeeds a victory was in- 
creased in the present instance by the 
anxiety of the army to observe with 
grateful strictness the impending Sabbath. 

When the Sun set, the Sabbath was to 
commence. The undulating horizon ren- 
dered it difficult to ascertain the precise 
moment of his fall. The crimson orb 
sunk behind the purple mountains, the 
sky was flushed with a rich and rosy 
glow. Then might be perceived the 



OF ALROY. 71 

zealots, proud in their Talmudical lore, 
holding a skein of white silk in their 
hands, and announcing- the approach of 
the Sabbath by their observation of its 
shifting tints. While the skein was yet 
golden, the forge of the armourer still 
sounded, the fire of the cook still blazed, 
still the cavalry led their steeds to the 
river, and still the busy footmen braced 
up their tents, and hammered at their 
palisades. The skein of silk became 
rosy, the armourer worked with renewed 
energy, the cook puffed with increased 
zeal, the horsemen scampered from the 
river, the footmen cast an anxious glance 
at the fading twilight. 

The skein of silk became blue ; a dim, 
dull, sepulchral, leaden tinge fell over its 
purity. The hum of gnats arose, the bat 
flew in circling whirls over the tents, 



7S THE WONDROUS TALE 

horns sounded from all quarters, the Sun 
had set, the Sabbath had commenced. 
The forge was mute, the fire extinguished, 
the prance of horses and the bustle of men 
in a moment ceased. A deep, a sudden, 
and all pervading stillness dropped over 
that mighty host. It was night ; the 
sacred lamp of the Sabbath sparkled in 
every tent of the camp, which vied in 
silence and in brilliancy with the mute 
and glowing heavens. 

Morn came ; the warriors assembled 
around the altar and the sacrifice. The 
High Priest and his attendant Levites 
proclaimed the unity and the omnipo- 
tence of the God of Israel, and the sym- 
pathetic responses of his conquering and 
chosen people re-echoed over the plain. 
They retired again to their tents, to listen 
to the expounding of the law; even the 



OF ALROY. 73 

distance of a Sabbath walk was not to 
exceed that space that lies between Jeru- 
salem and the Mount of Olives. This 
was the distance between the temple and 
the tabernacle ; it had been nicely mea- 
sured, and every Hebrew who ventured 
forth from the camp this day might be 
observed counting the steps of a Sabbath- 
day's journey. At length the Sun again 
set, and on a sudden fires blazed, voices 
sounded, men stirred, in the same en- 
chanted and instantaneous manner that 
had characterized the stillness of the 
preceding eve. Shouts of laughter, bursts 
of music, announced the festivity of the 
coming night; supplies poured in from 
all the neighbouring villages, and soon 
the pious conquerors commemorated their 
late triumph in a round of banquetting. 
On the morrow, a Tatar arrived from 

VOL. II. E 



74 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Ithamar, informing Alroy that the Sultan 
of Roum had retreated into Syria, that 
Bagdad was undefended, but that he had 
acceded to the request of the inhabitants 
that a deputation should wait upon Al- 
roy before the troops entered the city, 
and had accorded a safe conduct for their 
passage. 



XVII. 

On the morrow messengers announced 
the approach of the deputation. All the 
troops were under arms. Alroy directed 
that the suppliants should be conducted 
through the whole camp before they 
arrived at the royal pavilion, on each side 
of which the Sacred Guard was mustered 
in array. The curtains of his tent with- 



OF ALROY. 75 

drawn displayed the conqueror himself 
seated on a sumptuous divan. On his 
right hand stood Jabaster in his priestly 
robes, on his left Scherirah. Behind 
him, the giant Elnebar supported the 
sacred sceptre. A crowd of chieftains 
was ranged on each side of the pavilion. 
Cymbals sounded, muffled kettle- 
drums, and the faint flourish of trum- 
pets ; the commencement of the pro- 
cession might be detected in the long 
perspective of the tented avenue. First 
came a company of beauteous youths, 
walking two by two, and strewing flowers, 
then a band of musicians in flowing 
robes of cloth of gold, plaintively sound- 
ing their silver trumpets. After these 
followed slaves of all climes, bearing a 
tribute of the most rare and costly pro- 
ductions of their countries : Negroes with 

E 2 



76 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tusks and teeth of the elephant, plumes 
of ostrich feathers, and caskets of gold 
dust; Syrians with rich armour ; Persians 
with vases of atar-gul, and Indians with 
panniers of pearls of Ormuz, and soft 
shawls of Kashmere. Encircled by his 
children, each of whom held alternately 
a w^hite or fawn-coloured gazelle, an 
Arab, clothed in his blue bornouz, led by 
a thick cord of crimson silk a tall and 
tawny giraffe. Fifty stout men succeeded 
two by two, carrying in company a silver 
shield laden with gold coin, or chased 
goblets studded with gems. 

The clash of cymbals announced the 
presence of the robes of honor,^ culled 
from the wardrobe of the Commander of 
the Faithful ; the silk of Aleppo and the 
brocade of Damascus, lined with the furs 
of the sable and the ermine, down from 



OF ALROY. 77 

the breast of the swan, and the skins of 
white foxes. 

After these followed two grey dro- 
medaries with furniture of silver, and 
many caparisoned horses, each led by 
a groom in rich attire. The last of these 
was a snow-white steed, upon whose 
front was the likeness of a ruby star, 
a courser of the sacred stud of Solomon, 
and crossed only by the descendants of 
the Prophet. 

The muffled kettle-drums heralded the 
company of black eunuchs with their 
scarlet vests and ivory battle-axes. They 
surrounded, and shrouded from the vulgar 
gaze, fourteen beautiful Circassian girls, 
whose brilliant visages and perfect forms 
were otherwise concealed by their long 
veils and ample drapery. 

The gorgeous procession, as they ap- 



78 THE WONDROUS TALE 

preached the conqueror, bowed humbly 
to Alroy, and formed in order on each 
side of the broad avenue. The deputa- 
tion appeared : twelve of the principal 
citizens of Bagdad, with folded arms, and 
downcast eyes, and disordered raiment. 
Meekly and mutely each touched the 
earth with his hand, and kissed it in 
token of submission, and then moving 
aside, made Avay for the chief envoy and 
orator of the company Honain ! 



XVIII. 

Humbly, but gracefully, the physician 
of the Caliph bowed before the conqueror 
of the East. His appearance and de- 
meanour afforded a contrast to the aspect 
of his brother envoys ; not less calm or 



OF ALROY. 79 

contented his countenance ; not less 
sumptuous or studied his attire; than 
when he first rescued Alroy in the bazaar 
of Bagdad from the gripe of the false 
Abdallah. 

He spoke, and every sound was hushed 
before the music of his voice. 

'' Conqueror of the world, that Destiny 
with which it is in vain to struggle, has 
placed our lives and fortunes in your 
power. Your slaves offer for your appro- 
bation specimens of their riches ; not as 
tribute, for all is your's ; but to show you 
the products of security and peace, and 
to induce you to believe that mercy may 
be a policy as profitable to the conqueror, 
as to the conquered ; that it may be bet- 
ter to preserve than to destroy ; and wiser 
to enjoy than to extirpate. 

" Fate ordained that we should be 



80 THE WONDROUS TALE 

born the slaves of the CaUph : that same 
Fate has delivered his sceptre into your 
hands. We offer you the same devotion 
we yielded to him, and we entreat the 
same protection he accorded to us. 

" Whatever may be your decision, we 
must bow to your decree with the humi- 
lity that recognizes superior force. Yet 
we are not without hope. We cannot 
forget that it is our good fortune not to 
be addressing a barbarous chieftain un- 
able to sympathize with the claims of 
civilization, the creations of art, and the 
finer impulses of humanity. We ac- 
knowledge your irresistible power, but we 
dare to hope everything from a Prince 
whose genius all acknowledge and admire, 
who has spared some portion of his youth 
from the cares of government and the 
pursuits of arms, to the ennobling claims 



OF ALROY 81 

of learning, whose morality has been 
moulded by a pure and sublime faith, and 
who draws his lineage from a sacred and 
celebrated race, whose unrivalled anti- 
quity even the prophet acknowledges." 

He ceased ; a buzz of approbation 
sounded throughout the pavilion, which 
was hushed instantly as the lips of the 
conqueror moved. 

'' Noble Emir," replied Alroy, '' re- 
turn to Bagdad, and tell your fellow- 
subjects that the King of Israel grants 
protection to their persons, and security 
to their property." 

" And for their faith ?" inquired the 
envoy in a lower voice. 

'' Toleration," replied Alroy, turning 
to Jabaster. 

'' Until further regulations," added the 
High Priest. 

E 5 



82 THE WONDROUS TALE 

''Emir/' said Alroy, ''the person of 
the Caliph will be respected/* 

" May it please your Highness/' re- 
plied Honain, " the Sultan of Roum has 
retired with our late ruler/' 

" And his Harem ?" 

" And his Harem/' 

" It was needless. We war not with 
women/' 

" Men, as well as women, must ac- 
knowledge the gracious mercy of your 
Highness/' 

" Benomi/' said Alroy, addressing 
himself to a young officer of the guard, 
" command the guard of honour that 
will attend this noble Emir on his re- 
turn. We soldiers deal only in iron, sir, 
and cannot vie with the magnificence of 
Bagdad, yet wear this dagger for the 
donor's sake /* and Alroy held out to 



OF ALROY. 83 

Honain a poignard flaming with 
gems. 

The Envoy of Bagdad advanced, took 
the dagger, kissed it, and placed it in his 
vest.^ 

'' Scherirah,'' continued Alroy, " this 
noble Emir is your charge. See that a 
choice pavilion of the host be for his use, 
and that his train complain not of the 
rough customs of our camp." 

" May it please your Highness," re- 
plied Honain, '' I have done my duty, 
and with your gracious permission would 
at once return. I have business only less 
urgent than the present, because it con- 
cerns myself." 

'' As you will, noble Emir. Benomi, 
to your post. Farewell, Sir." 

The deputation advanced, bowed, and 
retired. Alroy turned to Jabaster. 



84 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' No common person that, Jabaster ?" 
" A very gracious Turk, Sire." 
'' Think you he is a Turk ?" 
'' By his dress." 

'' It may be so. Asriel, break up the 
camp. We'll march at once to Bagdad." 



XIX. 

The chiefs dispersed to make the neces- 
sary arrangements for the march. The 
news that the army was immediately 
to advance to Bagdad soon circulated 
throughout the camp, and excited the 
most lively enthusiasm. Every hand was 
at work, striking the tents, preparing the 
arms and horses. Alroy retired to his 
pavilion. The curtains were drawn. He 



OF ALROY. 85 

was alone, and plunged in profound me- 
ditation. 

'' Alroy !" a voice sounded. 

He started and looked up. Before him 
stood Esther the prophetess. 

" Esther! is it thou?" 

" Alroy ! enter not into Babylon." 

'' Indeed." 

" As I live, the Lord hath spoken it. 
Enter not into Babylon." 

'' Not enjoy my fairest conquest, 
maiden ?" 

" Enter not into Babylon.'* 

" What affrights thee ?" 

" Enter not into Babylon." 

'^ I shall surely change the fortunes of 
my life without a cause !" 

'' The Lord hath spoken. Is not that 
a cause V 

" I am the Lord's anointed. His warn- 
ing has not reached me." 



86) 



THE WONDROUS TALE 



'' Now it reaches thee. Doth the King 
despise the prophetess of the Lord ? It 
is the sin of Ahab." 

'' Despise thee ! despise the mouth 
that is the herald of my victories ! 'Twere 
rank blasphemy. Prophecy triumph, 
Esther, and Alroy will never doubt thy 
inspiration." 

'' He doubts it now. I see he doubts 
it now. Oh ! my King, I say again, 
enter not into Babylon." 

'' Beauteous maiden, those eyes flash 

lightning. Who can behold their wild 

and liquid glance, and doubt that Esther 

'is inspired! Be calm, sweet girl, some 

dream disturbs thy fancy." 

" Alroy, Alroy, enter not into Baby- 
lon !" 

" I have no fear — I bear a charmed 
life.'' 



OF ALROY. 1^87 

"Ah me! he will not listen. All isj 
lost !" 

" All is gained, my beautiful/^ 

'^ I would we were upon the Holy| 
Mount, and gazing on the stars of sacred[ 
Sion" 

" Esther," said Alroy, advancing, and| 
gently taking her hand, " the capital ofj 
the East will soon unfold its marvels to| 
thy sight. Prepare thyself for wonders.) 
Girl, we are no longer in the desart.j 
Forget thy fitful fancies. Come, choose] 
a husband from my generals, child, and l| 
will give a kingdom for thy dower. I| 
w^ould gladly see a crown upon that| 
tall imperial brow. It well deserves! 
one." 

The prophetess turned her dark eyesi 
full upon Alroy. What passed in her( 
mind was neither evident nor expressed.! 



88 THE WONDROUS TALE 

She gazed intently upon the calm and 1 
inscrutable countenance of the conqueror, | 
she flung away his hand, and rushed out I 
of the pavilion. I 



OF ALROY. 89 



PART VIII. 



The waving of banners^ the flourish of 
trumpets, the neighing* of steeds, and the 
glitter of spears ! On the distant horizon, 
they gleam like the morning, when the 
gloom of the night, shivers bright into 
day. 

Hark ! the tramp of the foemen, hke 
the tide of the ocean, flows onward and 
onward, and conquers the shore. From 
the brow of the mountain, like the rush 
of a river, the column defiling, melts into 
the plain. 

Warriors of Judah ! holy men that 



90 THE WONDROUS TALE 

battle for the Lord ! The land whereinj 
your fathers wept, and touched their | 
plaintive psaltery ; the haughty city \ 
where your sires bewailed their cold and | 
distant hearth ; your steeds are prancing » 
on its plain, and you shall fill its palaces. ) 
Warriors of Judah ! holy men that battle | 
for the Lord ! 

March, onward march, ye valiant \ 
tribes, the hour has come, the hour has ) 
come ! All the promises of ages, all the ) 
signs of sacred sages, meet in this ravish- j 
ing hour. Where is now the oppressor's j 
chariot, where your tyrant's purple robe ? j 
The horse and the rider are both over- ) 
thrown, the horse and the rider are both ) 
overthrown ! 

Rise, Rachel, from the wilderness,^ 
arise, and weep no more. No more thyi 
lonely palm-tree's shade need shroud thy j 



OF ALROY. 91 

secret sorrowing. The Lord hath heard 
the widow's sigh, the Lord *hath stilled 
the widow's tear. Be comforted, be com- 
forted, thy children live again ! 

Yes ! yes ! upon the bounding plain 

fleet Asriel glances like a star, and stout 

Scherirah shakes his spear by stern Ja- 

basters scimitar. And He is there, the 

chosen one, hymned by prophetic harps, 

whose life is like the morning dew on 

Sion s holy hill : the chor^en one, the 

chosen one, that leads his race to victory, 

warriors of Judah ! holy men that battle 

for the Lord ! 

♦. They come, they come, they come ! 

The ramparts of the city were crowded 

with the inhabitants, the river sparkled 

with ten thousand boats, the bazaars were 

' shut, the streets lined with the populace, 

j and the terrace of every house covered 



92 THE WONDROUS TALE 

with spectators. In the morning, Itha- 
mar had entered with his division and 
garrisoned the city. And now the van- 
guard of the Hebrew army, after having 
been long distinguished in the distance, 
approached the walls. A large body of 
cavalry at full speed dashed forward from 
the main force. Upon a milk white 
charger, and followed by a glittering 
train of warriors, amid the shouts of the 
vast multitude, Alroy galloped up to 
the gates. 

He was received by Ithamar and the 
members of the deputation, but Honain 
was not there. Accompanied by his staff 
and a strong detachment of the Sacred 
Guard, Alroy was conducted through 
the principal thoroughfares of the city, 
until he arrived at the chief entrance of 
the Serail, or palace, of the Caliph. 



OF ALROY. gS 

The vast portal conducted him into a 
large quadrangular court, where he dis- 
mounted, and where he was welcomed by 
the captain of the eunuch guard. Ac- 
companied by his principal generals and 
his immediate attendants, Alroy was then 
ushered through a suite of apartments 
which reminded him of his visit with 
Honain, until he arrived at the grand 
council chamber of the Caliphs. 

The conqueror threw himself upon the 
gorgeous Divan of the commander of the 
faithful. 

'' An easy seat after a long march/* 
said Alroy, as he touched the coffee with 
his lips, which the chief of the eunuchs 
presented to him in a cup of transparent 
pink porcelain, studded with pearls.^ 
'' Ithamar, now for your report. What 
is the temper of the city ? where is his 
Sultanship of Roum ?'* 



94 THE WONDROUS TALE 

** The city, Sire, is calm, and I believe 
content. The Sultan and the Caliph are 
still hovering on the borders of the pro- 
vince." 

'' So I supposed. Scherirah will settle 
that. Let the troops be encamped with- 
out the walls, the garrisoii, ten thousand 
strong, must be changed monthly. Itha- 
mar, you are governor of the city : Asriel 
commands the forces. Worthy Jabaster, 
draw up a report of the civil affairs of the 
capital. Your quarters are the College 
of the Dervishes. Brave Scherirah, I 
cannot afford you a long rest. In three 
days time you must have crossed the river 
with your division. It will be quick 
Work. I foresee they will not fight. 
Meet me all here in council by to-mor- 
row's noon. Farewell/' 

The chieftains retired, the high-priest 
lingered. 



OF ALROY. 95 

" Were it not an intrusion, Sire, I 
would fain entreat a moment's audience." 

'' My own Jabaster, you have but to 
speak." 

*' Sire, I would speak of Abidan, as va- 
liant a warrior as any in the host. It 
grieves me much, by some fatality, his 
services seem ever overpast." 

" Abidan ! I know him well, — a valiant 
man, but a dreamer, a dreamer." 

'' A dreamer, Sire ! Believe me, a 
true son of Israel, and one whose faith is 
deep." 

" Good Jabaster, we are all true sons of 
Israel. Yet let me have men about me, 
who see no visions in a mid-day sun. 
We must beware of dreamers." 

" Dreams are the oracles of God." 

" When God sends them. Very true, 
Jabaster. But this Abidan, and the com- 



96 THE WONDROUS TALE 

pany with whom he consorts, are filled 
with high-flown notions, caught from old 
traditions, which, if acted on, would ren- 
der government impracticable — in a word, 
they are dangerous men." 

" The very flower of Israel ! Some one 
has poisoned your sacred ear against them." 

'' No one, worthy Jabaster. I have no 
councillor except yourself. They may 
be the flower of Israel, but they are not 
the fruit. Good warriors, — bad subjects : 
excellent means, by which we may ac- 
complish greater ends. Ill have no 
dreamers in authority. I must have 
practical men about me — practical men. 
See how Abner, Asriel, Ithamar, Medad, 
— see how these conform to what sur- 
rounds them, yet invincible captains, in- 
vincible captains. But then they are 
practical men, Jabaster ; they have eyes. 



OF ALROY. 97 

and use them. They know the difference 
of times and seasons. But this Abidan, 
he has no other thought but the rebuild- 
ing of the temple : a narrow-souled bigot, 
who would sacrifice the essence to the 
form. The rising temple soon would fall 
again with such constructors. Why, Sir, 
what think you, — this very same Abidan 
preached in the camp against my entry 
into what the quaint fanatic chooses to 
call ^ Babylon,' and bored me with 
some vision !" 

" There was a time your Majesty 
thought not so ill of visions." 

' •' Am I Abidan, Sir ? Are other men 
to mould their conduct or their thoughts 
by me ? In this world I stand alone, a 
being of another order to yourselves, in- 
comprehensible even to you. Let this 
matter cease. Ill hear no more, and have 

VOL. II. F 



98 THE WONDROUS TALE 

heard too much. To-morrow at council, 
to-morrow at council/' 

The High-priest withdrew in silence. 

'^ He is gone — at length 1 am alone. 
I cannot bear the presence of these men, 
except in action. Their words, even their 
looks, disturb the still creation of my 
brooding Thought. I am once more 
alone ; and loneliness hath been the cra- 
dle of my empire. Now I do feel in- 
spired. There needs no mummery now 
to work a marvel. 

'' The sceptre of Solomon ! It may be 
so. What then ? Here's now the scep- 
tre of Alroy. What's that without his 
mind ? The legend said that none should 
free our people, but he who bore the scep- 
tre of great Solomon. The legend knew 
that none could gain that sceptre, but 
with a mind to whose supreme volition 



OF ALROY. 99 

the fortunes of the world would bow like 
fate. I gained it ; I confronted the spec- 
tre monarchs in their sepulchre ; and the 
same hand that grasped their shadowy 
rule, hath seized the diadem of the mighty 
Caliphs by the broad rushing of their im- 
perial river. 

'' The world is mine : and shall I yield 
the prize, the universal and heroic prize, 
to realize the dull tradition of some 
dreaming priest, and consecrate a le- 
gend ? He conquered Asia, and he built 
the temple. Are these my annals ? 
Shall this quick blaze of empire sink to a 
glimmering and a twilight sway over 
some petty province, the decent patriarch 
of a pastoral horde ? Is the Lord of Hosts 
so slight a God, that we must place a bar- 
rier to his sovereignty, and fix the boun- 
daries of Omnipotence between the Jordan 

f2 



100 THE WONDROUS TALE 

and the Lebanon ? It is not thus writ- 
ten ; and were it so, Til pit my inspira- 
tion against the prescience of my ances- 
tors. I also am a prophet, and Bagdad 
shall be my Sion. The daughter of the 
Voice ! Well, I am clearly summoned. 
I am the Lord s servant, not Jabaster's. 
Let me make his worship universal as his 
power ; and where 's the priest shall dare 
impugn my faith because his altars smoke 
on other hills than those of Judah ? 

'' I must see Honain. That man has a 
great mind. He alone can comprehend 
my purpose. Universal empire must not 
be founded on sectarian prejudices and 
exclusive rights. Jabaster would mas- 
sacre the Moslemin like Amalek ; the 
Moslemin, the vast majority, and most 
valuable portion, of my subjects. He 
would depopulate my empire, that it 



OF ALROY. 101 

might not be said that Ishmael shared 
the heritage of Israel. Fanatic ! Til 
send him to conquer Judah. We must 
conciliate. Something must be done 
to bind the conquered to our con- 
quering fortunes. That bold Sultan of 
Roum,— I wish Abner had opposed him. 
To run off with the Harem ! I have half 
a mind to place myself at the head of the 
pursuing force, and Passion and po- 
licy alike combine— and yet— Honain is 
the man — I might send him on a mis- 
sion. Could we make terms ? I detest 
treaties. My fancy flies from all other 
topics. I must see him. Could I but 
tell him all I think ! This door — where 
leads it ? Hah ! methinks I do remem- 
ber yon glittering gallery ! No one in 
attendance. The discipline of our palace 
is somewhat lax. My warriors are no 



102 THE WONDROUS TALE 

courtiers. What an admirable Marshal 
of the Palace Honain would make ! Si- 
lence everywhere. So ! 'tis well. These 
saloons I have clearly past through before. 
Could I but reach the private portal by 
the river side, unseen or undetected ! 
Tis not impossible. Here are many 
dresses. I will disguise myself. Trusty 
scimitar, thou hast done thy duty, rest 
awhile. 'Tis lucky I am beardless. I 
shall make a capital eunuch. So ! a very 
handsome robe. One dagger for a pinch, 
slippers powdered with pearls, a caftan of 
cloth of gold, a Kashmere girdle, and a 
pelisse of sables. One glance at the mir- 
ror. Good ! I begin to look like the 
conqueror of the world !" 



OF ALROY. 103 



11. 



It was twilight : a small and solitary 
boat, with a single rower, glided along 
the Tigris, and stopped at the archway 
of a house that descended into the river. 
It stopped, the boatman withdrew the 
curtains, and his single passenger disem- 
barked, and descended the stairs of the 
archway. 

The stranger reached the landing-place, 
and, unfastening a golden grate, pro- 
ceeded along a gallery, and entered a 
beautiful saloon of white and green mar- 
ble, opening into gardens. No one was 
in the apartment ; the stranger threw 
himself upon a silver couch, placed at the 
side of a fountain that rose from the cen- 



104 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tre of the chamber, and fell into a por- 
phyry basin. A soft whisper roused the 
stranger from his reverie, a soft whisper, 
that faintly uttered the word '' Honain/' 
The stranger looked up, a figure, en- 
veloped in a veil, that touched the ground, 
advanced from the gardens. 

" Honain !" said the advancing figure, 
throwing off the veil, " Honain ! Ah ! 
the beautiful mute returned !" 

A woman more lovely than the rosy 
morn, beheld an unexpected guest. They 
stood, the lady and the stranger gazing 
on each other in silence. A man, with a 
light, entered the extremity of the hall. 
Carefully he closed the portal, slowly he 
advanced, with a subdued step ; he ap- 
proached the lady and the stranger. 

^' Alroy !" said the astonished Honain, 
the light fell from his hand. 



OF ALROY. 105 

" Alroy !'* exclaimed the lady, with a 
bewildered air : she turned pale, and 
leant against a column. 

" Daughter of the Caliph !'' said the 
leader of Israel ; and he advanced, and 
fell upon his knee, and stole her passive 
hand, " I am indeed that Alroy to whom 
Destiny has delivered the empire of thy 
sire ; but the Princess Schirene can have 
nothing to fear from one who values, 
above all his victories, this memorial of 
her good will f and he took from his 
breast a rosary of pearls and emeralds, 
and rising slowly, left it in her trembling 
hand. 

The Princess turned and hid her face 
in her arm, which reclined against the 
column. 

" My kind Honain," said Alroy, ''you 
thought me forgetful of the past, — you 

F 5 



106 THE WONDROUS TALE 

thought me ungrateful. My presence 
here proves that I am not so. I come to 
inquire all your wishes. I come, if in 
my power, to gratify and to fulfil them." 

'' Sire," replied Honain, who had re- 
covered from the emotion in which he 
rarely indulged, and from the surprise 
which seldom entrapped him. '' Sire, 
my wishes are slight. You see before 
you the daughter of my master. An in- 
terview, for which I fear I shall not easily 
gain that lady's pardon, has made you 
somewhat acquainted with her situation 
and her sentiments. The Princess Schi- 
rene seized the opportunity of the late 
convulsions to escape from a mode of 
life long repugnant to all her feelings, 
and from a destiny at which she trembled. 
I was her only councillor, and she may 
feel assured, a faithful, although perhaps 



OF ALROY. 107 

an indiscreet one. The irresistible soli- 
citation of the inhabitants, that I should 
become their deputy to their conqueror, 
prevented us from escaping as we had 
intended. Since then, from the move- 
ment of the troops, I have deemed it more 
prudent that we should remain at present 
here, although I have circulated the intel- 
ligence of my departure. In the kiosk 
of my garden, the Princess is now a will- 
ing prisoner. At twilight she steals forth 
for the poor relaxation of my society, to 
listen to the intelligence which I acquire 
during the day in disguise. The history, 
Sire, is short and simple. We are in 
your power; but instead of deprecating 
your interference, I now solicit your 
protection.'" 

'' Dear Honain, 'tis needless. The 
Princess Schirene has only to express a 



108 THE WONDROUS TALE 

wish that it may be fulfilled. I came to 
speak with you on weighty matters, Ho- 
nain, but I retire, for I am an intruder 
now. To-morrow, if it please you, at 
this hour, and in this disguise, I will 
again repair here. In the meantime, this 
lady may perchance express to you her 
wishes, and you will bear them to me. 
If an escort to any country, if any palace 
or province for her rule and residence — 
but I will not offer to one who should 
command. Lady ! farewell. Pardon the 
past ! To-morrow, good Honain ! pr'y- 
thee let us meet. Good even V* 



III. 

'' The royal brow was clouded," said 
Ithamar to Asriel, as departing from the 



OF ALROY. 109 

council they entered their magnificent 
barque. 

'' With thought ; he has so much upon 
his mind, 'tis wondrous how he bears 
himself." 

'' I have seen him gay on the eve of 
battle, and lively though calm, with 
weightier matters than now oppress him. 
His brow was clouded, but not, methinks, 
with thought ; one might rather say with 
temper. Mark you, how he rated Jabas- 
ter ?" 

" Roundly ! The stern Priest writhed 
under it ; and as he signed the ordinance, 
shivered his reed in rage. I never saw a 
man more pale." 

'' Or more silent. He looked like an 
embodied storm. I tell you what, Asriel, 
that stern Priest loves not us." 

*' Have you just discovered that secret, 



110 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Ithamar ? We are not of his school. Nor, 
in good faith, is our ruler. I am glad to 
see the King is so staunch about Abidan. 
Were he in council, he would support 
Jabaster.'* 

" Oh ! his mere tool. What think 
you of Scherirah ?'* 

" I would not trust him. As long as 
there is fighting, he will meddle with 
nothing else ; but, mark my words, Itha- 
mar : in quiet times he will support the 
Priest." 

'' Medad will have a place in council. 
He is with us." 

^' Heart and soul. I would your bro- 
ther were here, Asriel : he alone could 
balance Jabaster. Alroy loves your bro- 
ther like himself. Is it true he marries 
the Lady Miriam ?" 



OF ALROY. Ill 

'^ So the King wishes. Twill be a fine 
match for Abner." 

" The world is all before us. I won- 
der who will be Viceroy of Syria ?" 

" When we conquer it. Not Sche- 
rirah. Mark my words, Ithamar : he 
never will have a government. You or I 
perchance. For my own part, I would 
sooner remain as I am." 

'' Yours is a good post ; the best." 

" With the command of the city. It 
should go with the guard." 

'' Well, then, help me in getting 
Syria, and you can ask for my command/* 

" Agreed. Jabaster will have that in 
a Hebrew monarchy, the Chief Priest is 
in fact the Grand Vizier." 

" Alroy will be his own minister."' 

" I am not so sure of that. He may 
choose to command the Syrian expedition 



112 THE WONDROUS TALE 

in person ; he must leave some head at 
Bagdad. Jabaster is no general." 

" Oh ! none at all. Alroy will be 
glad to leave him at home. The Sultan 
of Roum may not be always so merciful." 

" Hah ! hah ! that was an escape !" 

'' By heavens ! I thought it was all 
over. You made a fine charge." 

'' 1 shall never forget it. I nearly ran 
over Jabaster." 

'' Would that you had !" 



IV. 



It is the tender twilight hour, when 
maidens in their lonely bower, sigh softer 
than the Eve ! The languid rose her head 
upraises, and listens to the nightingale, 
while his wild and thrilling praises, from 



OF ALROY. 113 

his trembling bosom gush : the languid 
rose her head upraises, and listens with a 
blush. 

In the clear and rosy air, sparkling 
with a single star, the sharp and spiry 
cypress tree, rises like a gloomy thought, 
amid the flow of revelry. A singing 
bird, a single star, a solemn tree, an 
odorous flower, are dangerous in the ten- 
der hour, when maidens in their twilight 
bower, sigh softer than the Eve ! 

The daughter of the Caliph comes 
forth to breathe the air : her lute her 
only company. She sits her down by a 
fountain's side, and gazes on the water- 
fall. Her cheek reclines upon her arm, 
like fruit upon a graceful bough. Very 
pensive is the face of that bright and 
beauteous lady. She starts ; a warm 
voluptuous lip presses her soft and idle 



114 THE WONDROUS TALE 

hand. It is her own gazelle. With his 
large and lustrous eyes, more eloquent 
than many a tongue, the fond attendant 
mutely asks the cause of all her thought- 
fulness. 

" Ah ! bright gazelle ! ah ! bright 
gazelle !" the Princess cried, the Princess 
cried; ''thy lips are softer than the 
swan, thy lips are softer than the swan ; 
but his breathed passion, when they 
pressed, my bright gazelle ! my bright 
gazelle !" 

" Ah ! bright gazelle ! ah ! bright 
gazelle I" the Princess cried, the Princess 
cried; '' thine eyes are like the stars of 
night, thine eyes are like the stars of 
night ; but his glanced passion when they 
gazed, my bright gazelle! my bright 
gazelle !" 

She seized her lute, she wildly threw 



OF ALROY. 115 

her fingers o'er its thrilling chords, and, 
gazing on the rosy sky, to borrow all its 
poetry, thus, thus she sang ; thus, thus 
she sang. 



1. 



He rose in beauty, like the morn. 
That brightens in our Syrian skies ; 
Dark Passion glittered in his eye. 
And Empire sparkled in his form ! 



My Soul ! thou art the dusky earth, 
On which his sunlight fell ; 
The dusky earth that, dim no longer. 
Now breathes with light, now beams with 
love ! 



116 THE WONDROUS TALE 

3. 

He rose in beauty, like the morn. 
That brightens in our Syrian skies ; 
Dark Passion glittered in his eye. 
And Empire sparkled in his form ! 

'' Once more, once more ! Ah ! sing 
that strain once more !" 

The Princess started and looked around. 
Before her stood Alroy. She rose, she 
would have retired ; but advancing, the 
conqueror stole her hand. 

*' Fair Princess," said Alroy, " let it 
not be said my presence at once banished 
beauty and music/' 

" Sire, I doubt not, Honain awaits you. 
Let me summon him." 

" Lady, it is not with Honain, that I 
would speak." 



OF ALROY. 117 

He seated himself by her side. His 
countenance was pale, his heart trembled. 

" This garden/' at length he observed 
in a low voice; '' this garden — a brief, 
brief space has glided away since first I 
wandered within its beauteous limits, and 
yet those days seem like the distant 
memory of another life.'' 

" It is another life,'' said the Princess. 
" Ourselves, the world, all forms and 
usages, all feelings and all habits, verily, 
they have changed as if we had breathed 
within another sphere." 

" 'Tis a great change.'* 

'' Since first you visited my bright 
kiosk. Pretty bauble ! I pray it may 
be spared.'' 

" It is sacred, like yourself." 

'' You are a courteous conqueror." 

" I am no conqueror, fair Schirene, but 



118 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a slave more lowly than when 1 first 
bowed humbly in your presence." 

*' And bore away a token not for- 
gotten. Your rosary is here/' 

'' Let me claim it. It has been my 
consolation in much peril, beauteous 
lady. On the eve of battle I wound it 
round my heart.'' 

She held forth the rosary, and turned 
away her head. Her hand remained in 
his ; he pressed it to his lips. His right 
arm retained her hand, he wound the 
other round her waist, as he fell upon his 
knee. 

*' Oh beautiful, oh ! more than beau- 
tiful ! for thou to me art like a dream un- 
broken," exclaimed the young leader of 
Israel, '' let me, let me breathe my 
adoration. I offer thee not empire; I 
offer thee not wealth ; I offer thee not all 



OFALROY. 119 

the boundless gratification of magnificent 
fancy -these may be thine, but all these 
thou hast proved ; but if the passionate 
aiFections of a spirit, which ne'er has 
yielded to the power of woman, or the 
might of man — if the deep devotion of 
the soul of Alroy be deemed an offering 
meet for the shrine of thy surpassing 
loveliness, I worship thee, Schirene, I 
worship thee, I worship thee ! 

" Since I first gazed upon thee, since 
thy beauty first rose upon my presence 
like a star bright with my destiny, in the 
still sanctuary of my secret love, thy idol 
has ever rested. Then, then, I was a 
thing whose very touch thy creed might 
count a contumely. I have avenged the 
insults of long centuries in the best blood 
of Asia ; I have returned, in glory and in 
pride, to claim my ancient sceptre ; but 



120 THE WONDROUS TALE 

sweeter far than vengeance, sweeter far 
than the quick gathering of my sacred 
tribes, the rush of triumph and the blaze 
of empire, is this brief moment of adoring 
love, wherein I pour the passion of my 
life ! 

'' Oh ! my soul, my life, my very 
being ! thou art silent, but thy silence is 
sweeter than others' speech. Yield, yield 
thee, dear Schirene, yield to thy sup- 
pliant ! Thy faith, thy father's faith, 
thy native customs, these, these shall be 
respected, beauteous lady ! Pharaoh's 
daughter yielded her dusky beauty to 
my great ancestor. Thy face is like the 
bright inspiring day ! Let it not be said 
the daughter of the Nile shared Israel's 
crown — the daughter of the Tigris 
spurned our sceptre. I am not Solomon, 
but I am one that, were Schirene the 



OF ALROY 1^1 

partner of my throne, would make his 
glowing annals read like a wearisome and 
misty tale to our surpassing lustre !" 

He ceased, the Princess turned her 
hitherto hidden countenance, and bowed 
it on his heart. '' Oh ! Alroy/' she ex- 
claimed, ^^ I have no creed, no country, 
no life, but thee ! 



V. 



" The King is late to-day." 

*' Is it true, Asriel, there is an express 
from Hamadan ?" 

" Of no moment, Ithamar. I had 
private letters from Abner. All is quiet." 

" 'Tis much past the hour. When do 
you depart, Scherirah ?" 

" The troops are ready. I wait orders. 

VOL. II. G 



12i2 THE WONDROUS TALE 

This morning's council will perchance 
decide." 

'' This morning's council is devoted to 
the settlement of the civil affairs of the 
capital/' remarked Jabaster. 

" Indeed !" said Asriel. '' Is your re- 
port prepared, Jabaster ?" 

'' 'Tis here/' replied the High Priest. 
*' The Hebrew legislator requires but little 
musing to shape his order. He has a 
model which time cannot destroy, nor 
thought improve." 

Ithamar and Asriel exchanged signifi- 
cant glances. Scherirah looked solemn. 
There was a pause, which was broken by 
Asriel. 

'' 'Tis a noble city, this Bagdad. I 
have not yet visited your quarters, Jabas- 
ter. You are well placed." 

'' As it may be. I hope we shall not 



OF ALROY. 123 

tarry here long. The great point is still 
not achieved." 

'' How far is it to the holy city ?" in- 
quired Scherirah. 

'' A month's march/' replied Jabas- 
ter. 

'' And when you get there ?" inquired 
Ithamar. 

'' You may fight with the Franks," re- 
plied Asriel. 

" Jabaster, how large is Jerusalem ?" 
inquired Ithamar. "Is it true, as I have 
sometime heard, that it is not bigger than 
the Serail here, gardens and all ?'' 

" Its glory hath departed," replied the 
High Priest ; '' the bricks have fallen, 
but we will rebuild with marble ; and 
Sion, that is now without the Christian 
walls, shall yet sparkle, as in the olden 
time, with palaces and pavilions." 

g2 



124 THE WONDROUS TALE 

A flourish of trumpets, the portals 
flew open, and Alroy entered, leaning on 
the arm of the Envoy of Bagdad. 

'' Valiant leaders," said Alroy to the 
astonished chieftains. '' In this noble 
stranger, you see one like yourselves en- 
trusted with my unbounded confidence. 
Jabaster, behold thy brother !" 

" Honain ! Art thou Honain V' ex- 
claimed the Pontiff", starting from his 
seat. '^ I have a thousand messengers 
after thee." With a countenance alter- 
nately pallid with surprise and burning 
with affection, Jabaster embraced his bro- 
ther, and, overpowered with emotion, hid 
his face on his shoulder. 

" Sire," at length exclaimed the High 
Priest in a low and tremulous voice, '' I 
must pray your pardon that for an in- 
stant in this character I have indulged in 



OF ALROY. 125 

any other thoughts but those that may 
concern your welfare. 'Tis past ; and 
you, who know all, will forgive me." 

'' All that respects Jabaster must con- 
cern my welfare. He is the pillar of my 
empire ;" and holding forth his hand, 
Alroy placed the High Priest on his 
right. " Scherirah, you depart this eve." 

The rough captain bowed in silence. 

'' What is this ?" continued Alroy, as 
Jabaster offered him a scroll. '' Ah ! your 
report. ' Order of the Tribes' — ' Service 
of the Levites' — ' Princes of the People' — 
' Elders of Israel!' The day may come 
when this may be effected. At present, 
Jabaster, we must be moderate, and con- 
tent ourselves with arrangements that 
may ensure that order shall be main- 
tained, property respected, and justice 
administered. Is it true, a gang has rifled 
a mosque V 



126 THE WONDROUS TALE 

''Sire! of that I would speak. They 
are no plunderers, but men, perhaps too 
zealous, who have read and who have 
remembered that ' ye shall utterly de- 
stroy all the places, wherein the nations 
which ye shall possess, served their gods 
upon the high mountains, and upon the 
hill, and under every green tree. And 
ye shall overthrow their altars, and' " 

" Jabaster, is this a synagogue ? Come 
I to a council of valiant statesmen or 
dreaming Rabbis ? For a thousand cen- 
turies we have been quoting the laws we 
dared not practice. Is it with such aid 
we captured Nishabur, and crossed the 
Tigris ? Valiant, wise Jabaster, thou art 
worthy of better things, and capable of 
all. I entreat thee urge such matters for 
the last time. Are these fellows in 
custody ?" 



OF ALROY. 127 

" They were in custody. I have freed 
them/^ 

'' Freed them ! Hang them ! Hang 
them on the most public grove. Is this 
the way to make the Moslemin a duteous 
subject ? Jabaster, Israel honours thee ; 
and I, its chief, know that one more true, 
more valiant, or more learned, crowds 
not around our standard ; but I see, the 
caverns of the Caucasus are not a school 
for empire." 

'' Sire, I had humbly deemed the school 
for empire was the law of Moses." 
'' Ay ! adapted to these times." 
'' Can aught divine be changed ?" 
'' Am I as tall as Adam ? If man, the 
crown, the rose of all this fair creation, 
the most divine of all divine inventions, 
if time have altered even this choicest of 
all godlike works, why shall it spare a 



128 THE WONDROUS TALE 

law made but to rule his conduct ? Good 
Jabaster, we must establish the throne of 
Israel — that is my mission, and for the 
means no matter how — or where. Asriel, 
what news of Medad ?" 

'' All is quiet between the Tigris and 
Euphrates. It would be better to recall 
his division, which has been much ha- 
rassed. I thought of relieving him by 
Abidan." 

'' I think so, too. We may as well 
keep Abidan out of the city. If the 
truth were known, I'll wager some of his 
company plundered the mosque. We 
must issue a proclamation on that sub- 
ject. My good Jabaster, we'll talk over 
these matters alone. At present I will 
leave you with your brother. Scherirah, 
sup with me to-night, before you quit 
us. Asriel, come with me to my cabinet." 



OF ALROY. 129 



VI. 



" I must see the King !** 

'' Holy Priest, his Highness has re- 
tired. It is impossible." 

'' I must see the King. Worthy Pha- 
rez, I take all peril on myself." 

'' Indeed his Highness's orders are im- 
perative. You cannot see him." 

'' Knowest thou who I am ?'* 

" One whom all pious Hebrews reve- 



rence." 



'' I say I must see the King." 

" Indeed, indeed, holy Jabaster, it can- 
not be." 

" Shall Israel perish for a menial's 
place ? Go to ; I'll see him." 

'' Nay ! if you will. I'll struggle for 
my duty." 

G 5 



ISO THE WONDROUS TALE 

'* Touch not the Lord's anointed. Dog, 
you shall suffer for this !" 

So saying, Jabaster threw aside Pharez, 
and, with the attendant clinging to his 
robes, rushed into the royal chamber. 

'' What is all this ?" exclaimed Alroy, 
starting from the Divan. '' Jabaster ! 
Pharez, withdraw ! How now, is Bag- 
dad in insurrection ?" 

'' Worse, much worse, Israel soon will 
be." 

-Ay!- 

'' My fatal brother has told me all, nor 
would T sleep, until I lifted up my voice 
to save thee." 

'' Am I in danger ?'' 

'' In the wilderness, when the broad 
desart quivered beneath thy trembling 
feet, and the dark heavens poured down 
their burning torrents, thou wert less so. 



OF ALROY. 181 

In that hour of death, one guarded thee, 
who ne'er forgets his fond and faithful 
offspring, and now, when he has brought 
thee out of the house of bondage ; now, 
when thy fortunes, like a noble cedar, 
swell in the air, and shadow all the land, 
thou, the very leader of his people, his 
chosen one, for whom he hath worked 
such marvels — thy heart is turned from 
thy father's God, and hankers after strange 
abominations/' 

Through the broad arch that led into 
the gardens of the Serail, the moonlight 
fell upon the tall figure, and the upraised 
arm of the Priest ; Alroy stood with 
folded arms at some distance, watching 
Jabaster as he spoke, with a calm, but 
searching glance. Suddenly he advanced 
with a quick step, and, placing his hand 
upon Jabaster's arm, said in a low, in- 



132 THE WONDROUS TALE 

quiring* tone, '' You are speaking of this 
marriage ?" 

'' Of that which ruined Solomon." 
" Listen to me, Jabaster," said Alroy, 
interrupting him, in a calm, but pe- 
remptory, tone. " I cannot forget that 
I am speaking to my master, as well as 
to my friend. The Lord, who knoweth 
all things, hath deemed me worthy of 
his mission. My fitness for this high 
and holy office, was not admitted without 
proof. A lineage, which none else could 
offer, mystic studies, shared by few, a 
mind that dared encounter all things, 
and a frame that could endure most, — 
these were my claims ; — but no more of 
this. I have passed the great ordeal, 
the Lord of Hosts hath found me not un- 
worthy of his charge, I have established 
his ancient people, his altars blaze with 



OF ALROY. 133 

sacrifices, his priests are honoured — bear 
witness thou, Jabaster — his omnipotent 
unity is declared. What wouldst thou 
more ?" 

" All !" 

'' Then Moses knew ye well. It is a 
stiff-necked people.'' 

''Sire, bear with me. If I speak in 
heat, I speak in zeal. You ask me what 
I wish : my answer is, a national exis- 
tence, which we have not. You ask me 
what I wish : my answer is, the Land of 
Promise. You ask me what I wish : my 
answer is, Jerusalem. You ask me what 
I wish : my answer is, the Temple — all 
we have forfeited, all we have yearned 
after, all for which we have fought — our 
beauteous country, our holy creed, our 
simple manners, and our ancient cus- 
toms/' 



134 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Manners change with time and cir- 
cumstances ; customs may be observed 
every where. The ephod on thy breast 
proves our faith ; and for a country, is 
the Tigris less than Siloah, or the Eu- 
phrates inferior to the Jordan ?" 

" Alas ! alas ! there was a glorious 
prime when Israel stood aloof from other 
nations, a fair and holy thing that God 
had hallowed. We were then a chosen 
family, a most peculiar people, set apart 
for God's entire enjoyment. All about 
us was solemn, deep, and holy. We 
shunned the stranger as an unclean thing 
that must defile our solitary sanctity, and 
keeping to ourselves, and to our God, 
our lives flowed on in one great solemn 
tide of deep religion, making the meanest 
of our multitude feel greater than the 
Kings of other lands. It was a glorious 



OF ALROY. 135 

time: I thought it had returned— but I 
awake from this, as other dreams." 

'' We must leave off dreaming-, good 
Jabaster, — we must act. Were I, by any 
chance, to fall into one of those reveries, 
with which I have often lost the golden 
hours at Hamadan, or in our old cave, I 
should hear, some fine morning, his Sul- 
tanship of Roum rattling at my gates." 
Alroy smiled as he spoke ; he would wil- 
lingly have introduced a lighter tone 
into the dialogue, but the solemn counte- 
nance of the Priest was not sympathetic 
with his levity. 

'' My heart is full, and yet I cannot 
speak: the memory of the past over- 
powers my thought. I had vainly deemed 
my voice, inspired by the soul of truth, 
might yet preserve him ; and now I stand 
here in his presence, silent and trembling, 



136 THE WONDROUS TALE ' 



like a guilty thing. Oh, my Prince ! my 
pupil !" said the Priest, advancing, fall- 
ing on his knee, and seizing the robe of 
Alroy, " by thy sacred lineage, by the 
sweet memory of thy ardent youth, and 
our united studies — by all thy zealous 
thoughts, and solemn musings, and glo- 
rious aspirations after fame — by all thy 
sufferings, and by all thy triumph, and 
chiefly by the name of that great God, 
who hath elected thee his favoured child 
— by all the marvels of thy mighty mis- 
sion, — I do adjure thee ! Arise, Alroy, 
arise and rouse thyself. The lure that 
snared thy fathers may trap thee — this 
Dalilah may shear thy mystic lock. Spi- 
rits like thee act not by halves. Once 
fall out from the straight course before 
tliee, and though thou deemest 'tis but to 
saunter mid the summer trees, soon thou 



OF ALROY. 137 

wilt find thyself in the dark depths of 
some infernal forest, where none may res- 
cue thee !'* 

" What if I do inherit the eager blood 
of my great ancestor, at least I hold his 
sceptre. Shall aught of earthly power 
prevail against the supernatural sway of 
Heaven and Hades ?" 

'' Sire, Sire, the legend that came from 
Sinai is full of high instruction. But 
shape thy conduct by its oracles, and all 
were well. It says our people only can 
be established by him who rules them 
with the virge of Solomon. Sire, when 
the Lord offered his pleasure to that 
mighty king, thou knowest his deep dis- 
cretion. Riches, and length of days, 
empire, and vengeance — these were not 
the choice of one to whom all accidents 
were proffered. The legend bears an in- 



138 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ward spirit, as well as outward meaning. 
The capture of the prize was a wise test 
of thy imperial fitness. Thou hast 
his sceptre, but without his wisdom — 'tis 
but a staff of cedar." 

'' Hah ! Art thou there ? I am glad 
to see Jabaster politic. Hear me, my 
friend. What my feelings be unto this 
royal lady, but little matters. Let them 
pass, and let us view this question by the 
light wherein you have placed it, the 
flame of policy and not of passion. I 
am no traitor to the God of Israel, in 
whose name I have conquered, and in 
whose name I shall rule ; but thou art a 
learned Doctor, thou canst inform us. 
I have heard no mandate to yield my 
glorious empire for my meanest province. 
I am Lord of Asia, so would I have my 
long posterity. Our people are but a 



OF ALROY. 139 

remnant, a feeble fraction of the teeming 
millions that own my sway. What I 
hold I can defend ; but my children may 
not inherit the spirit of their sire. The 
Moslemin will recognize their rule with 
readier hearts, when they remember a 
daughter of their Caliphs gave them life. 
You see I too am politic, my good Jabas- 
ter ?" 

'^The policy of the son of Kareah- 
'twas fatal. He preferred Egypt to Ju- 
dah, and he suffered. Sire, the Lord 
hath blessed Judah: it is his land. He 
would have it filled by his peculiar peo- 
ple, so that his worship might ever flou- 
rish. For this he has, by many curious 
rites and customs, marked us out from 
all other nations, so that we cannot, at 
the same time, mingle with them and yet 
be true to him. We must exist alone. 



140 THE WONDROUS TALE 

To preserve that loneliness, is the great 
end and essence of our law. What have 
we to do with Bagdad, or its people, 
where every instant we must witness 
some violation of our statutes ? Can we 
pray with them ? Can we eat with them ? 
In the highest duties, and the lowest oc- 
cupations of existence, alike we cannot 
mingle. From the altar of our God, to 
our own domestic boards, we are alike 
separated from them. Sire, you may be 
King of Bagdad, but you cannot, at the 
same time, be a Jew." 

" I am what I am. I worship the Lord 
of Hosts. Perhaps, in his mercy, he will 
accept the days of Nishabur and the 
Tigris, as a compensation for some slight 
relaxation in the ritual of the baker and 
the bath." 

'' And mark my words : it was by the 



OF ALROY. 141 

ritual of the baker and the bath, that 
Alroy rose, and without it he will fall. 
The genius of the people raised him, 
which he shared, and that genius has been 
formed by the law of Moses. Based on 
that law, he might indeed have handed 
down an empire to his long posterity ; 
and now, though the tree of his fortunes 
seems springing up by the water side, 
fed by a thousand springs, and its 
branches covered with dew, there is a 
gangrene in the sap, and to-morrow he 
may sink like a shrivelled gourd. Alas ! 
alas ! for Israel ! We have long fed on 
mallows ; but to lose the vintage in the 
very day of fruition, 'tis very bitter. 
Ah ! when I raised thy exhausted form 
in the cavern of Genthesma, and the star 
of David beamed brightly in the glowing 
heavens upon thy high fulfilment, who 



142 THE WONDROUS TALE 

could have dreamed of a night like this ? 
Farewell, Sire/' 

'' Stop, Jabaster ! earliest, dearest friend, 
pr'ythee, pr'ythee stop !" 

The Priest slowly turned, the Prince 
hesitated. 

'' Part not in anger, good Jabas- 
ter." 

'' In sorrow. Sire, only in sorrow ; but 
deep and terrible." 

''Israel is Lord of Asia, my Jabaster. 
Why should we fear?'" 

''Solomon built Tadmor in the wil- 
derness, and his fleet brought gold from 
Ophir ; and yet Alroy was born a slave." 

*' But did not die one. The Sultans 
of the world have fallen before me. I 
have no fear. Nay, do not go. At least 
you'll place some credence in the stars, 
my learned Cabalist. See, my planet 



OF ALROY. 143 

shines as brightly as my fortunes/' Al- 
roy withdrew the curtain, himself and 
Jabaster stepped on to the terrace. A 
beautiful star glittered on high. As 
they gazed, its colour changed, and a 
blood-red meteor burst from its circle, 
and fell into space. The Conqueror and 
the Priest looked at each other at the 
same time. Their countenances were 
pale, inquiring, and agitated. 

" Sire," said Jabaster, ''march to Ju- 
dah." 

'' It portends war," replied Alroy, en- 
deavouring to recover himself. ''Per- 
chance some troubles in Persia.'* 

" Troubles at home, no other. The 
danger is nigh. Look to thyself." 

A wild scream was heard in the gar- 
dens. It sounded thrice. 

" What is all this ?" exclaimed Alroy, 



144 THE WONDROUS TALE 

really agitated. '^ Rouse the guard, Ja- 
baster, search the gardens." 

'' Tis useless, and may do harm. It 
was a spirit that shrieked." 

'' What said it ?" 

'* Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin !" 



VII. 

" The old story, the Priest against the 
King," said Honain to Alroy, when, at 
his morrow's interview, he had listened 
to the events of the preceding night. 
'' My pious brother wishes to lead you 
back to the Theocracy, and is fearful that 
if he pray at Bagdad, instead of Sion, he 
may chance to become only the head of 
an inferior sect, instead of revelling in 
the universal tithes of a whole nation. 



OF ALROY. 145 

As for the meteor, Scherirah must have 
crossed the river about the same time, 
and the Sultan of Roum may explain the 
bloody portent. For the shriek, as I 
really have no acquaintance with spirits, 
I must leave the miraculous communica- 
tion to the favoured ears and initiated 
intelligences of your Highness and my 
brother. It seems it differed from ' the 
Daughter of the Voice ' in more respects 
than one, since it was not only extremely 
noisy, buty as it would appear, quite un- 
intelligible except to the individual who 
had an interest in the interpretation — an 
ingenious one, I confess. When I enter 
upon my functions as your Highnesses 
Chamberlain, I will at least guarantee 
that your slumbers shall not be disturbed 
either by spirits or more unwelcome 
visitors." 

VOL. II. H 



146 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Enter upon them at once, good Ho- 
nain. How fares my Persian rose to 
clay, my sweet Schirene ?" 

'' Feeding on your image in your ab- 
sence. She spares no word to me, I do 
assure your Highness." 

" Nay, nay, we know you are a ge- 
neral favourite with the sex, Honain. 
riaith I'm jealous." 

" I would your Highness had cause," 
said Honain, very demurely. 



vm. 

The approaching marriage between the 
King of the Hebrews and the Princess 
of Bagdad was published throughout 
Asia. Preparations were made on the 
plain of the Tigris for the great rejoicing. 



OF ALROY. 147 

Whole forests were felled to provide 
materials for the buildings and fuel for 
the banquetting-. All the governors of 
provinces and cities, all the chief officers 
and nobility of both nations, were spe- 
cially invited, and daily arrived in state 
at Bagdad. Among them the Viceroy 
of the Medes and Persians, and his recent 
bride, the Princess Miriam, were con- 
spicuous, followed by a train of nearly 
ten thousand persons. 

A throne, ascended by one hundred 
steps covered with crimson cloth, and 
crowned by a golden canopy, was raised 
in the middle of the plain : on each side 
two thrones less elevated, but equally 
gorgeous. In the front of these thrones 
an immense circus was described, formed 
by one hundred chartaks or amphithea- 
tres, ample room for the admittance 

H 2 



148 THE WONDROUS TALE 

of the multitude being left between the 
buildings. These chartaks were covered 
with bright brocades and showy carpets, 
on each was hoisted a bright and brilliant 
banner. In some of them were bands of 
choice musicians, in others companies of 
jugglers, buffoons, and storiers. Five 
chartaks on each side of the thrones were 
allotted for the convenience of the court, 
the rest were filled by the different trades 
of the city. In one the fruiterers had 
formed a beautiful garden, glowing with 
pomegranates, and gourds, and water- 
melons, oranges, almonds and pistachio 
nuts ; — in another the butchers exhibited 
their meats carved in the most fanciful 
shapes, and the skins of animals dressed 
up in very ludicrous figures. Here as- 
sembled the furriers, all dressed in mas- 
querade, like leopards, lions, tigers, and 



OF ALROY. 149 

foxes, and in another booth mustered the 
upholsterers, proud of a camel made of 
wood, and reeds, and cord, and painted 
linen, a camel which walked about as if 
alive, though ever and anon the interior 
man drawing aside a curtain, discovered 
to the marvelling multitude the work- 
man in his own piece. Further on 
might be perceived the cotton manufac- 
turers, whose chartak was full of birds of 
all shapes and plumage, yet nevertheless 
formed of their curious plant, and of the 
same material, with the help of reeds, 
although every one imagined it to be 
built with bricks and mortar, rose in 
the centre a lofty minaret. It was 
covered with embroidered work, and on 
the top was placed a stork so cunningly 
devised, that the children pelted it with 
pistachio nuts. The saddlers showed 



150 THE WONDROUS TALE 

their skill in two litters, open at top, 
each carried on a dromedary, and in each 
a beautiful woman, who diverted the 
spectators with light balls of gilt leather, 
throwing them up both with their hands 
and feet. Nor were the mat-makers 
backward in the proof of their dexterity, 
since instead of a common banner, they 
exhibited a large standard of reeds work- 
ed with two lines of writing in Kufic, 
proclaiming the happy names of Alroy 
and Schirene. But indeed in every 
chartak might be witnessed some won- 
drous specimens of the wealth of Bagdad, 
and of the ingenuity of its unrivalled 
artisans. 

Around this mighty circus, on every 
side, for the space of many miles, the 
plain was studded with innumerable pa- 
vilions. At measured intervals were 



OF ALROY. 1,51 

tables furnished with every species of 
provision, and attended by appointed 
servants, flagons of wine and jars of 
sherbets mingled with infinite baskets of 
delicious fruits and trays of refreshing 
confectionary. Although open to all 
comers, so great and rapid was the sup- 
ply, that these banquetting tables seemed 
ever laden, and that the joys of the peo- 
ple might be complete, they were allowed 
to pursue whatever pleasures they thought 
fit without any restraint, by proclama- 
tion, in these terms. 

" This is the time of feasting, 

PLEASURE, AND REJOICING. LeT NO 
PERSON REPRIMAND OR COMPLAIN OF 
ANOTHER: LET NOT THE RICH INSULT 
THE POOR, OR THE STRONG THE WEAK : 
LET NO ONE ASK ANOTHER, ' WhY HAVE 
YOU DONE THIS ?* " 



152 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Millions of people were collected in 
this Paradise. They rejoiced, they feast- 
ed, they frolicked, they danced, they 
sang. They listened to the tales of the 
Arabian storier, at once enchanted and 
enchanting, or melted to the strain of the 
Persian poet, as he painted the moon-lit 
forehead of his heroine, and the wasting 
and shadowy form of his love sick hero : 
they beheld with amazement the feats of 
the juggler of the Ganges, or giggled at 
the practised wit and the practical buf- 
foonery of the Syrian mime. And the 
most delighted could still spare a fasci- 
nated glance to the inviting gestures and 
the voluptuous grace of the dancing girls 
of Egypt. Every where were melody 
and merriment, rarity and beauty. For 
once mankind forgot their cares, and de- 
livered themselves up to infinite enjoy- 
ment. 



OF ALROY. 153 

'* I grow courteous," said Kisloch the 
Kourd, assisting a party into one of the 
shows. 

'' And I humane," said Calidas the In- 
dian. '' Fellow, how dare you violate 
the proclamation, by thrashing that 
child ?" He turned to one of the stew- 
ards of the tables who was belabouring' 
the unfortunate driver of a camel which 
had stumbled, and in its fall, had shiver- 
ed its burthen, two panniers of porcelain. 

" Mind your own business, fellow," 
replied the steward, " and be thankful 
that for once in your life you can dine." 

'' Is this the way to speak to an offi- 
cer," said Calidas the Indian ; '' I have 
half a mind to cut your tongue out." 

'' Never mind, little fellow," said the 
Guebre, '' here is adirhem for you. Run 
away and be merry." 

H 5 



154t THE WONDROUS TALE 

''A miracle," grinned the Negro, "he 
giveth alms/' 

'' And you are witty,'* rejoined the 
Guebre. -^ Tis a wondrous day." 

" What shall we do," said Kisloch. 

'' Let us dine,'* proposed the Negro. 

'' Ay ! under this plane-tree," said Ca- 
lidas, '' 'Tis pleasant to be alone. I hate 
everybody but ourselves." 

*' Here stop, you rascal," said the 
Guebre. '^ What's your name ?" 

'^ I am a Hadgee," said our old friend 
Abdallah, the servant of the charitable 
merchant Ali, and who was this day one 
of the officiating stewards. 

'' Are you a Jew, you scoundrel }" said 
the Guebre, '' that is the only thing 
worth being. Bring some wine, you ac- 
cursed Giaour !*' 

'' Instantly," said Kisloch, '' and a 
pilau.'' 



OF ALROY. 155 

'^ And a gazelle stuffed with almonds/' 
said Calidas. 

" And some sugar-plums," said the 
Negro. 

''Quick, you infernal Gentile, or Til 
send this javelin in your back/' halloed 
the Guebre. 

The servile Abdallah hastened away, 
and soon bustled back, carrying two fla- 
gons of wine, and followed by four ser- 
vants, each with a tray covered with 
dainties. 

'* Where are you going, you accursed 
scoundrels," grumbled Kisloch, " wait 
upon the true believers." 

" We shall be more free alone," whis- 
pered Calidas. 
• '' Away, then, dogs," growled Kisloch. 

Abdallah and his attendants hurried 
off, but were soon summoned back. 



1 



156 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Why did not you bring Schiraz 
wine ?'' asked Calidas, with an eye of 
fire. 

" The pilau is overdone," thundered 
Kisloch. 

" You have brought a lamb stuffed 
with pistachio nuts, instead of a gazelle 
with almonds," said the Guebre. 

^' Not half sugar-plums enough," said 
the Negro. 

''Every thing is wrong," said Kisloch. 
" Go, and get us a kabob."'" 

In time, however, even this unmanage- 
able crew were satisfied, and seated under 
their plane-tree, and stuffing themselves 
with all the dainties of the East, they 
became more amiable as their appetites 
decreased. 

" A bumper, Calidas, and a song/' said 
Kisloch. 



OF ALROY. 157 

'' Tis rare stuff," said the Guebre, 
" come, Cally, it should inspire you/' 
'' Here goes, then ; mind the chorus." 

THE SONG OF CALIDAS. 

Drink, drink, deeply drink, 

Never feel, and never think. 
What's love ? vs^hat's fame ? a sigh, a 
smile. 
Friendship, but a hollovs^ w^ile. 
If you've any thought or woe, 
Drown them in the goblet's flow. 
Yes ! dash them ia this brimming cup, 
Dash them in, and drink them up. 
Drink, drink, deeply drink. 
Never feel, and never think. 

'' Hark, the trumpets ! The King and 



158 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Queen ! The procession is coming. Let's 
away." 

'' Again ! they must be near. Hurry, 
hurry, for good places." 

'' Break all the cups and dishes. Come 
along !" 

The multitude from all quarters hurried 
to the great circus amid the clash of ten 
thousand cymbals, and the blast of innu- 
merable trumpets. In the distance, issu- 
ing from the gates of Bagdad might be 
detected a brilliant crowd, the advance 
company of the bridal procession. 

There came five hundred maidens 
crowned with flowers, and beauteous as 
the buds that girt their hair. Their flow- 
ing robes were whiter than the swan, and 
each within her hand a palm branch 
held. 

Followed these a band of bright mu- 



OF ALROY. 159 

sicians, clothed in golden robes, and 
sounding silver trumpets. 

Then five hundred youths, brilliant as 
stars, clad in jackets of white fox-skin, 
and alternately bearing baskets of fruit 
or flowers. 

Followed these a band of bright musi- 
ciaas, clothed in silver robes, and sound- 
ing golden trumpets. 

Six choice steeds, sumptuously capari- 
soned, each led by an Arab groom/^ 

The household of Medad, in robes of 
crimson, lined with sable. 

The standard of Medad. 

Medad, on a coal-black Arab, followed 
by three hundred officers of his division, 
all mounted on steeds of a pure race. 

Slaves, bearing the bridal present of 
Medad, six Damascus sabres of unrivalled 
temper. ^^ 



160 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Twelve choice steeds, sumptuously ca- 
parisoned, each led by an Anatolian 
groom. 

The household of Ithamar, in robes of 
violet, lined with ermine. 

The standard of Ithamar. 

Ithamar, on a snow-white Anatolian 
charger ,^^ followed by six hundred officers 
of his division, all mounted on steeds of a 
pure race. 

Slaves bearing the marriage present of 
Ithamar. A golden vase of rubies, borne 
on a violet throne. 

One hundred Negroes, their noses 
bored, and hung with rings of brilliants, 
playing upon wind instruments and ket- 
tle drums. 

The standard of tlie City of Bagdad. 

The deputation from the citizens of 
Bagdad. 



OF ALROY. 161 

Two hundred mules, with caparisons 
of satin, embroidered with gold, and 
adorned with small golden bells. These 
bore the sumptuous wardrobe, presented 
by the city, to their Princess. Each 
mule was attended by a girl, dressed like 
a Peri, with starry wings, and a man, 
masqued as a hideous Dive. 

The standard of Egypt. 

The deputation from the Hebrews of 
Egypt, mounted on dromedaries, with 
silver furniture. 

Fifty slaves, bearing their present to 
the Princess, with golden cords, a mighty 
bath of Jasper, beautifully carved, the 
sarcophagus of some ancient temple, and 
purchased for an immense sum. 

The standard of Syria. 

The deputation from the Hebrews of 
the Holy Land, headed by Rabbi Zimri 
himself, each carrying in his hand his of- 



162 THE WONDROUS TALE | 

fering to the nuptial pair, a precious vase, 
containing earth from the Mount of Sion. 

The standard of Hamadan. 

The deputation from the citizens of Ha- 
madan, headed by the venerable Bostenay 
himself, whose sumptuous charger was led 
by Caleb. 

The present of the city of Hamadan, to 
David Alroy , offered, at his own suggestion , 
the cup in which the Prince of the Captivity 
carried his tribute, now borne full of sand. 

Fifty choice steeds, sumptuously capa- 
risoned, each led by a Median, or Persian 
groom. 

The household of Abner and Miriam, 
in number twelve hundred, clad in chain 
armour of ivory and gold. 

The standard of the Medes and Per- 
sians. 

Two white elephants, with golden lit- 
ters, bearing the Viceroy and his Princess. 



OF ALROY. 163 

The offering of Abner to Alroy, twelve 
elephants of state, with furniture em- 
broidered with jewels, each tended by an 
Indian clad in chain armour of ivory and 
gold. 

The offering of Miriam to Schirene. 
Fifty plants of roses from Rocnabad,^"* a 
white shawl of Kashmere fifty feet in 
length, which folded into the handle of a 
fan ; fifty screens each made of a feather 
of the roc ;'^ and fifty vases of chrystal 
full of exquisite perfumes, and each sealed 
with a tahsman of precious stones. 

After these followed the Eunuch guard. 

Then came the band of the Serail, con- 
sisting of three hundred dwarfs, hideous 
indeed to behold, but the most complete 
musicians in the world. 

The steeds of Solomon, in number one 
hundred, each with a natural star upon 



164 THE WONDROUS TALE 

its front, uncaparisoned, and led only by 
a bridle of diamonds. 

The household of Alroy and Schirene. 
Foremost, the Lord Honain riding upon 
a chesnut charger shod with silver ; the 
dress of the rider pink with silver stars. 
From his rosy turban depended a tremu- 
lous aigrette of brilliants,^^ blazing with a 
thousand shifting tints. 

Two hundred pages followed him ; and 
then servants of both sexes, gorgeously 
habited, amounting to nearly two thou- 
sand, carrying rich vases, magnificent 
caskets, and costly robes. The Treasurer 
and two hundred of his underlings, came 
after, showering golden dirhems on all 
sides. 

The sceptre of Solomon borne by As- 
riel himself. 

A magnificent and lofty car, formed of 



OF ALROY. 165 

blue enamel with golden wheels, and axle- 
trees of turquoises and brilliants, and 
drawn by twelve snow-white and sacred 
horses, four abreast ; in the car, Alroy 
and Schirene. 

Five thousand of the sacred guard closed 
the procession. 

Amid the exclamations of the people, 
this gorgeous procession crossed the plain, 
and moved around the mighty circus. 
The conqueror and his bride ascended 
their throne ; its steps were covered by 
the youths and maidens. On the throne, 
upon their right, sat the venerable Boste- 
nay ; on the left, the gallant Viceroy and 
his Princess. The chartaks on each side 
were crowded with the court. 

The deputations made their offerings, 
the chiefs and captains paid their ho- 
mage, the trades of the city moved before 



166 THE WONDROUS TALE 

the throne in order, and exhibited their 
various ingenuity. Thrice was the pro- 
clamation made- amid the sound of trum- 
pets, and then began the games. 

A thousand horsemen dashed into the 
arena and threw the jerreed. They gal- 
loped at full speed, they arrested their 
fiery chargers in mid course, and flung 
their long javelins at the minute but 
sparkling target, the imitative form of a 
rare and brilliant bird. The conquerors 
received their prizes from the hand of the 
princess herself, bright shawls, and jew- 
elled daggers, and rosaries of gems. 
Sometimes the trumpets announced a 
prize from the Vice-queen, sometimes 
from the venerable Bostenay, sometimes 
from the victorious generals, or the loyal 
deputations, sometimes from the united 
trades, sometimes from the city of Bag- 



OF ALROY. 167 

dad, sometimes from the city of Hama- 
dan. The hours flew away in gorgeous 
and ceaseless variety. 

*' I would we were alone, my own 
Schirene," said Alroy to his bride. 

'' I. would so too ; and yet 1 love to 
see all Asia prostrate at the feet of Alroy." 

" Will the sun ne'er set ! Give me 
thy hand to play with." 

" Hush ! See Miriam smiles." 

" Lovest thou my sister, my own Schi- 
rene ?" 

'' None dearer but thyself." 

" Talk not of my sister, but ourselves. 
Thinkest thou the Sun is nearer setting, 
love ?" 

'' I cannot see ; thine eyes they dazzle 
me — they are so brilliant, sweet !" 

" Oh ! my soul, I could pour out my 
passion on thy breast." 



168 THE WONDROUS TALE 



( 



'' Thou art very serious/' 

'' Love is ever so." 

'' Nay, sweet ! It makes me wild and 
fanciful. Now I could do such things, 
but what I know not. I would we had 
wings, and then we would fly away." 

*' See, I must salute this victor in the 
games. Must I unloose thy hand ! Dear 
hand, farewell ! Think of me while I 
speak, my precious life. 'Tis done. Give 
back thy hand, or else methinks Til die. 
What's this!" 

A horseman in no holiday dress, but 
covered with dust, rushed into the circus, 
bearing in his hand a tall lance, on which 
was fixed a scroll. The Marshals of the 
Games endeavoured to prevent his ad- 
vance, but he would not be stayed. His 
message was to the King alone. A ru- 
mour of news from the army circulated 



OF ALROY. 169 

throughout the crowd. And news from 
the army it was. Another victory ! 
Scherirah had defeated the Sultan of 
Koum, who was now a suppliant for 
peace and alliance. Sooth to say, the 
intelligence had arrived at dawn of day, 
but the courtly Honain had contrived 
that it should be communicated at a later 
and a more effective moment. 

There scarcely needed this additional 
excitement to this glorious day. But 
the people cheered, the golden dirhems 
were scattered with renewed profusion, 
and the intelligence was received by all 
parties as a solemn ratification by Jeho- 
vah, or by Allah, of the morning cere- 
mony. 

The Sun set, the Court arose, and re- 
turned in the same pomp to the Serail. 
The twilight died away, a beacon fired 

VOL. II. I 



170 THE WONDROUS TALE 

on a distant eminence announced the en- 
trance of Alroy and Schirene into the 
nuptial chamber, and suddenly, as by 
magic, the mighty city, every mosque, 
and minaret, and tower, and terrace, and 
the universal plain, and the numberless 
pavilions, and the immense circus, and 
the vast and winding river, blazed with 
light. From every spot a lamp, a torch, 
a lanthorn, tinted with every hue, burst 
forth, enormous cressets of silver radiancy 
beamed on the top of each chartak, and 
huge bonfires of ruddy flame started up 
along the whole horizon. 

For seven days, and seven nights, this 
unparalleled scene of rejoicing, though 
ever various, never ceased. Long, long 
was remembered the bridal feast of the 
Hebrew Prince and the Caliph's daughter; 
long, long did the peasantry on the plains 



OF ALROY. 



171 



of Tigris sit down by the side of that 
starry river, and tell the wondrous tale 
to their marvelling posterity? 

Now what a glorious man was David 
Alroy, lord of the mightiest empire in the 
world, and wedded to the most beautiful 
Princess, surrounded by a prosperous and 
obedient people, guarded by invincible 
armies, one on whom Earth showered all 
its fortune, and Heaven all its favour — 
I and all by the power of his own genius ! 



I 2 



172 THE WONDROUS TALE 



PART IX. 

I. 

'TwAS midnight, and the storm still 
raged : mid the roar of the thunder and the 
shrieks of the wind, the floods of forky 
lightning each instant revealed the broad 
and billowy breast of the troubled Tigris. 

Jabaster stood gazing upon the wild 
scene from the gallery of his palace. Hisj 
countenance was solemn, but disquieted. 

'' I would that he were here V* ex- 
claimed the High Priest. "Yet why 
should I desire his presence, who heralds 



OF ALROY. 



173 



only gloom } Yet in his absence am I 
gay ? I am nothing. This Bagdad 
weighs upon me like a cloak of lead : 
my spirit is dull and broken. 

'' They say Alroy gives a grand ban- 
quet in the Serail to-night, and toasts his 
harlot mid the thunderbolts. Is there 
no hand to write upon the wall ? He is 
found wanting, he is weighed, and is in- 
deed found wanting. The parting of his 

kingdom soon will come, and then 

I could weep, oh ! I could weep, and 
down these stern and seldom yielding 
cheeks, pour the wild anguish of my 
desperate woe. So young, so great, so 
favoured ! But one more step a God, 
and now a foul Belshazzar ! 

'' Was it for this his gentle youth was 
past in musing solitude and mystic stu- 
dies ? Was it for this the holy messenger 



174 THE WONDROUS TALE 

summoned his most religious spirit ? 
Was it for this he crossed the fiery de- 
sart, and communed with his fathers in 
their tombs ? Is this the end of all his 
victories, and all his vast achievement ? 
To banquet with a wanton ! 

*^ A year ago, this very night, it was 
the eve of battle, I stood within his tent 
to wait his final word. He mused awhile, 
and then he said, ' Good night, Jabaster '/ 
I believed myself the nearest to his heart, 
as he has ever been nearest to mine, but 
that's all over. He never says, ' Good 
night, Jabaster,' now. Why, what's all 
this ? Methinks I am a child. 

'* The Lord's anointed is a prisoner 
now in the light grating of a bright 
kiosk, and never gazes on the world 
he conquered. Egypt and Syria, even 
farthest Ind, send forth their messengers 



OF ALROY. 175 

to greet Alroy, the great, the proud, the 
invincible. And where is he ? In a soft 
Paradise of girls and eunuchs, crowned 
with flowers, listening to melting lays, 
and the wild trilling of the amorous lute. 
He spares no hours to council, all is left 
to his prime favourites, of whom the 
leader is that juggling fiend I sometime 
called my brother. 

'' Why rest I here ? Where should I 
fly ? Methinks my presence is still a 
link to decency. Should I tear off the 
ephod, I scarcely fancy 'twould blaze 
upon another's breast. He goes not to 
the sacrifice ; they say he keeps no fast, 
observes no ritual, and that their festive 
fantasies will not be baulked, even by the 
Sabbath. I have not seen him thrice 
since the marriage. Honain has told her 
I did oppose it, and she bears to me a 



176 THE WONDROUS TALE 

hatred that only women feel. Our strong 
passions break into a thousand purposes : 
women have one. Their love is dan- 
gerous, but their hate is fatal. 

" See ! a boat bounding on the waters. 
On such a night,— but one would dare to 
venture." 

Now visible, now in darkness, a single 
lanthorn at the prow, Jabaster watched 
with some anxiety the slight barque buf- 
fetting the waves. A tremendous flash 
of lightning illumined the whole river, 
and tipped with a spectral light even the 
distant piles of building. The boat, and 
the toiling figure of the single rower, 
were distinctly perceptible. Now all 
again was darkness, the wind suddenly 
subsided, in a few minutes the plash of 
the oars was audible, and the boat appa- 
rently stopped beneath the palace. 



OF ALROY. 177 

There was a knocking at the private 
portal. 

'' Who knocks ?" enquired Jabaster. 

'' A friend to Israel." 

" Abidan, by his voice. Art thou 
alone ?" 

'* The prophetess is with me ; only she." 

'' A moment. Til open the gate. Draw 
the boat within the arch." 

Jabaster descended from the gallery, 
and in a few moments returned with two 
visitors : the youthful prophetess Esther, 
and her companion, a man short in sta- 
ture, but with a very powerful and well- 
knit frame. His countenance was very 
melancholy, and with much harshness in 
the lower part, not without a degree of 
pensive beauty in the broad clear brow, 
and sunken eyes, unusual in Oriental 
visages. 

I 5 



178 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'^ A rough night," said Jabaster. 

" To those who fear it," replied Abi- 
dan. " The Sua has brought so little 
joy to me, I care not for the storm." 

" What news ?" 

" Woe ! woe ! woe !" 

'' Thy usual note, my sister. Will 
the day ne'er come when we may change 
it?" 

'' Woe ! woe ! woe ! unutterable woe !" 

'' Abidan, how fares it ? 

" Very well." 

" Indeed !*' 

'' As it may turn out." 

" You are brief." 

'^ Bitter." 

" Have you been to court, that you 
have learnt to be so wary in your words, 
my friend ?" 

" I know not what may happen. In 



OF ALROY. 179 

time we may become all courtiers, though 
I fear, Jabaster, we have done too much 
to be rewarded. I gave him my blood, 
and you something more, and now we are 
at Bagdad. 'Tis a fine city. I wish to 
heaven the shower of Sodom would rain 
upon its terraces." 

•' I know thou hast something terrible 
to tell. I know it by that gloomy brow 
of thine, that lowers like the tempest. 
Speak out, man. I can bear the worst, 
for which I am prepared." 

'' Take it, then. Alroy has proclaimed 
himself Caliph. Abner is made Sultan 
of Persia. Asriel, Ithamar, Medad, and 
the chief captains. Viziers ; Honain, their 
chief. Four Moslemin nobles are sworn 
into the council. The Princess goes to 
mosque in state next Friday ; 'tis said 
thy pupil doth accompany her." 



180 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' 111 not believe it ! By the God of 
Sinai, I'll not believe it ! Were my own 
eye the accursed witness of the dead, Td 
not believe it. Go to mosque ! They 
play with thee, my good Abidan, they 
play with thee." 

'' As it may be. 'Tis a rumour, but 
rumours herald deeds. The rest of my 
intelligence is true. I had it from my 
kinsman, stdut Zalmunna, He left the 
banquet." 

" Shall I go to him ? Methinks one 
single word — To mosque ! only a rumour 
and a false one. I'll never believe it ; no, 
no, no, never, never ! Is he not the 
Lord's anointed ? The ineffable curse 
upon this daughter of the Moabite ! No 
marvel that it thunders ! By heavens, 
I'll go and beard him in his orgies !" 

" You know your power better than 



OF ALROY. 181 

Abidan. You bearded him before his 
marriage, yet " 

'' He married. 'Tis true. Honain, 
their chief. And I kept his ring ! Ho- 
nain is my brother. Have I ne'er a 
dagger to cut the bond of brother- 
hood ?^^ 

" We have all daggers, Jabaster, if we 
knew but how to use them." 

" Tis strange — we met after twenty 
years of severance. You were not in the 
chamber, Abidan. 'Twas at council. We 
met after twenty years of severance. He 
is my brother. 'Tis strange, I say ; I felt 
that man shrink from my embrace." 

''Honain is a philosopher, and believes 
in sympathy. 'Twould appear there was 
none between you. His system, then, 
absolves you from all ties." 

''You are sure the rest of the intelli- 



182 THE WONDROUS TALE 

gence is true ? I'll not believe the 
mosque — the rest is bad enough/' 

'' Zalmunna left the banquet. Hassan 
Subah's brother, sat above him." 

" Subah's brother ! Tis all over, then. 
Is he of the council ?" 

''Ay, and others." 

'' Where now is Israel ?" 

" She should be in her tents.'' 

"Woe ! woe ! woe ! unutterable woe !" 
exclaimed the prophetess, who, standing 
motionless in the back of the chamber, 
seemed inattentive to their conversation. 

Jabaster paced the gallery with agi- 
tated steps. Suddenly he stopped, and, 
walking up to Abidan, seized his arm, 
and looked him sternly in the face. " I 
know thy thought, Abidan," exclaimed 
the Priest ; " but it cannot be. I have 
dismissed, —henceforth and for ever I 



OF ALROY. 183 

have dismissed all feeling from my mind ; 
now I have no brother, no friend, no 
pupil, and, I fear, no Saviour. Israel is 
all and all to me. I have no other life — 
'tis not compunction, then, that stays my 
arm. My heart 's as hard as thine.'* 

" Why stays it, then ?" 

'' Because with him we fall. He is the 
last of all his sacred line. There is no 
other hand to grasp our sceptre." 

" Our sceptre ! — what sceptre ?" 

" The sceptre of our Kings." 

'' Kings !" 

'' Ay, why dost thou look so dark T' 

" How looked the prophet when the 
stiff-necked populace forsooth must have 
a King ? Did he smile ? Did he shout, 
and clap his hands, and cry, God save his 
Majesty ! Oh, Jabaster ! honoured, rare 
Jabaster ! thou second Samuel of our 



841 THE WONDROUS TALE 

light-headed people ! there was a time 
when Israel had no King except their 
God. Were we viler then ? Did Kings 
conquer Canaan ? Who was Moses, who 
was Aaron, who was mighty Joshua ? Was 
the sword of Gideon a kingly sword ? 
Did the locks of Sampson shade royal 
temples ? Would a King have kept his 
awful covenant like solemn Jephtha ? 
Royal words are light as air, when, to 
maintain them, you injure any other than 
a subject ! 

" Kings ! why what s a King ? Why 
should one man break the equal sanctity 
of our chosen race ? Is their blood purer 
than our own ? We are all the seed of 
Abraham. Who was Saul, and who was 
David ? I never heard they were a dif- 
ferent breed unto our fathers. Grant 
them devout, which they were not ; and 



OF ALROY. 185 

brave and wise, which other men were ; 
have their posterity a patent for all vir- 
tues ? No, Jabaster ! thou ne'er didst 
err, but when thou placed a crown upon 
this haughty stripling. What he did, a 
thousand might have done. Twas thy 
mind inspired the deed. And now he 
is a King ; and now, Jabaster, the very 
soul of Israel, who should be our Judge 
and leader — Jabaster trembles in disgrace, 
while our unhallowed Sanhedrim is filled 
with Ammonites !" 

'' Oh, Abidan ! thou hast touched me 
to the quick; thou hast stirred up thoughts 
that ever and anon, like strong and fatal 
vapours, have risen from the dark abyss 
of thought, and I have quelled them." 

" Let them rise, I say — let them drown 
the beams of that all-scorching Sun we 
suffer under, that drinks all vegetation 



186 THE WONDROUS TALE 

up, and makes us languish with a dull 
exhaustion/' 

''Joy ! joy ! unutterable joy !" 

'' Hark ! the prophetess has changed 
her note ; and yet she hears us not. The 
spirit of the Lord is truly with her. Come, 
Jabaster, I see thy heart is opening to thy 
people's sufferings : thy people, my Ja- 
baster, for art not thou our Judge ? at 
least, thou shalt be." 

'' Can we call back the Theocracy ? — 
Is 't possible?" 

''But say the word, and it is done, 
Jabaster. Nay, stare not. Dost thou 
think there are no true ears in Israel ? 
Dost thou suppose thy children have be- 
held, without a thought, the foul insults 
poured on thee — thee, their Priest, their 
adored High Priest, one who recalls the 
best days of the past — the days of their 



OF ALROY. 187 

great Judges. But one word, one single 

movement of that mitred head, and 

But I speak unto a mind that feels more 
than I can express. Be silent, tongue, 
thou art a babbling counsellor. Jabas- 
ter's patriot soul needs not the idle 
schooling of a child. If he be silent, 
*tis that his wisdom deems the hour 's not 
ripe ; but when her leader speaks, Israel 
will not be slack/' 

" The Moslemin in council ! We know 
what must come next. Our national ex- 
istence is in its last agony. Methinks 
the time is very ripe, Abidan/' 

«« Why so we think, great Sir ; and 
say the word, and twenty thousand spears 
will guard the Ark. 1 11 answer for my 
men. Stout Scherirah looks grimly on 
the Moabites. A word from thee, and 
the whole Syrian army will join our ban- 



188 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ner— the lion of Judah, that shall be our 
flag. The tyrant and his satraps let 
them die, and then the rest must join us. 
We 11 proclaim the covenant, and, leav- 
ing Babylon to a bloody fate, march on 
toSionr 

'' Sion, his youthful dream, Sion !" 

'' You muse ?*' 

^' King or no King, he is the Lord's 
anointed. Shall this hand that poured 
the oil on his hallowed head, wash out 
the balmy signet with his blood ! Must I 
slay him ? Shall this kid be seethed 
even in its mother^'s milk ?" 

" His voice is low, and yet his face is 
troubled. How now. Sir ?" 

'' What art thou ? Ah ! Abidan, trusty, 
staunch Abidan ! You see, Abidan, I 
was thinking, my good Abidan, all this 
may be the frenzy of a revel. To-mor- 



OF ALROY. 189 

row's dawn may summon cooler councils. 
The tattle of the table, it is sacred. Let 
us forget^ it; let us pass it over. The 
Lord may turn his heart. Who knows, 
who knows, Abidan ?" 

'^ Noble Sir, a moment since your mind 
was like your faith, firm and resolved, 
and now '' 

^' School me not, school me not, good 
Abidan. There is that within my mind 
you cannot fathom ; some secret sorrows 
which are all my own. Leave me, good 
friend, leave me awhile. When Israel 
calls me I shall not be wanting. Be sure 
of that, Abidan, be sure of that. Nay, 
do not go ; the night is very rough, and 
the fair prophetess should not stem again 
the swelling river. Til to my closet, and 
will soon return." 

Jabaster quitted the gallery, and en- 



190 THE WONDROUS TALE 

tered a small apartment. Several large 
volumes, unclasped and open, were lying 
on various parts of the divan. Before 
them stood his brazen cabalistic table. 
He closed the chamber with a cautious 
air. He advanced into the centre of the 
apartment. He lifted up his hands to 
Heaven, and clasped them with an expres- 
sion almost of agony. 

'' Is it come to this ?'" he muttered in 
a tone of deep oppression. " Is it come 
to this ? What is't I have heard ? what 
done ? Down, tempting devil, down ! 
Oh ! life, oh ! glory, oh ! my country, 
my chosen people, and my sacred creed ! — 
why do we live, why act, why have we 
feeling for aught that's famous, or for 
aught that's holy ? Let me die, let — let 
me die. The torture of existence is too 
great." 



OF ALROY. 191 

He flung himself upon the couch, he 
buried his awful countenance in his robes. 
His mighty heart was convulsed with 
passion. There did he lie, that great and 
solemn man, prostrate and woe-begone. 



n. 



'^ The noisy banquet lingers in my ear ; 
I love to be alone."' 

" With me ?" 

" Thou art myself; I have no other 
life." 

" Sweet bird ! It is now a Caliph." 

" I am what thou wiliest, soul of my 
sweet existence ! Pomp and dominion, 
fame and victory, seem now but flawed 
and dimly-shaded gems compared with 
thy bright smile !*' 



192 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" My plaintive nightingale, shall we 
hunt to-day ?" 

'' Alas ! my rose, I'd sooner lie upon 
this lazy couch, and gaze upon thy 
beauty !" 

^' Or sail upon the cool and azure lake, 
in some bright barque, like to a sea- 
nymph's shell, and followed by the 
swans ?" 

" There is no lake so blue as thy deep 
eye ; there is no swan so white as thy 
round arm !" 

'' Or shall we lance our falcons in the 
air, and bring the golden pheasant to our 
feet ?^' 

'' I am the golden pheasant at thy feet, 
why wouldest thou richer prey ?" 

'' Eememberest thou thy earliest visit 
to this dear kiosk, my gentle mute ? 
There thou stoodest with folded arms, and 



OF ALROY. 193 

looks demure as day, and ever and anon 
with those dark eyes, stealing a glance 
which made my cheek quite pale. Me- 
thinks I see thee even yet, shy bird. 
Dost know, I was so foolish when it 
quitted me, dost know I cried ?" 
'' Ah, no ! thou didst not cry ?" 
'' Indeed, I think I did.'' 
'' Tell me again, my own Schirene, in- 
deed didst cry ?" 

'' Indeed I did, my soul !" 
'' I would those tears were in some 
crystal vase, I'd give a province for the 
costly urn." 

She threw her arms around his neck 
and covered his face with kisses. 

Sunset sounded from the minarets. 
They arose and wandered together in the 
surrounding Paradise. The sky was tint- 
ed with a pale violet flush, a single star 

VOL. II. K 



\ 



194 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Heating by the side of the white moon, 
that beamed with a dim lustre, soft and 
shapely as a pearl. 

'' Beautiful !" exclaimed the pensive 
Schirene, as she gazed upon the star. 
'* Oh ! my Alroy, why cannot we ever 
live alone, and ever in a Paradise !" 

'' I am wearied of empire," replied 
Alroy with a smile, '' let us fly !" 

" Is there no island with all that can 
make life charming, and yet impervious 
to man ? How little do we require ! Ah ! 
if these gardens, instead of being sur- 
rounded by hateful Bagdad, were only 
encompassed by some beautiful ocean !" 

'' My heart, we live in a Paradise, and 
are seldom disturbed, thanks to Ho- 
nain !*' 

'' But the very consciousness that there 
are any other persons existing but our- 



1 



OF ALROY. 195 

selves is to me painful. Every one who 
even thinks of you seems to rob me of a 
part of your being. Besides, I am weary 
of pomp and palaces. I should like to 
hve in a sparry grot, and sleep upon a 
couch of sweet leaves !" 

This interesting discussion w^as dis- 
turbed by a dwarf who, in addition to 
being very small and very ugly, was 
dumb. He bowed before the Princess, 
and then had recourse to a great deal of 
pantomimic action, by which she, at 
length, discovered that it was dinner- 
time. No other person could have ven- 
tured to disturb the royal pair, but this 
little being was a privileged favourite. 

So Alroy and Schirene entered the 
Serail. An immense cresset-lamp, fed 
with perfumed oil, threw a soft light 
round the sumptuous chamber. At the 

k2 



196 THE WONDROUS TALE 

end stood a row of eunuchs in scarlet 
dresses, and each holding a tall silver 
staff. The Caliph and the Sultana threw 
themselves upon a couch covered with a 
hundred cushions ; on one side stood a 
group consisting of the captain of the 
guard and other officers of the household, 
on the other, of beautiful female slaves 
magnificently attired. 

The line of domestics at the end of the 
apartment opened, and a body of slaves 
advanced, carrying trays of ivory and 
gold, and ebony and silver, covered with 
the choicest dainties, most curiously pre- 
pared. These were in turn offered to 
the Caliph and the Sultana by their sur- 
rounding attendants. The Princess ac- 
cepted a spoon made of a single pearl, 
the long, thin golden handle of which 
was studded with rubies, and condescended 



OF ALROY. 197 

to partake of some saffron soup, of which 
she was very fond. Afterwards she re- 
galed herself with the breast of a cygnet 
stuffed with almonds, and stewed with 
violets and cream. Having now a little 
satisfied her appetite, and wishing to show 
a mark of her favour to a particular in- 
dividual, she ordered the captain of the 
guard instantly to send him the whole of 
the next course ^'^ with her compliments. 
Her attention was then engaged with a 
dish of those delicate ortolans that feed 
upon the vine-leaves of Schiraz, and with 
which the Governor of Nishabur took es- 
pecial care that she should be well pro- 
vided. Tearing their delicate forms to 
pieces with her still more delicate fingers, 
she insisted upon feeding Alroy, who of 
course yielded to her solicitations. In 
the meantime, they refreshed themselves 



198 THE WONDROUS TALE 

with their favourite sherbet of pomegra- 
nates, and the golden wine of Mount Le- 
banon.^® The Caliph, who could eat no 
more ortolans, although fed by such deli- 
cate fingers, was at length obliged to call 
for '^ rice,'' which was synonymous to 
commanding the banquet to disappear. 
The attendants now brought, to each, 
basins of gold, and ewers of rock 
crystal filled with rose-water, with 
towels of that rare Egyptian linen, which 
can only be made of the cotton that grows 
upon the banks of the Nile. While they 
amused themselves with eating sugar- 
plums, and drinking coffee flavoured with 
cinnamon, the female slaves danced be- 
fore them in the most graceful attitudes 
to the melody of invisible musicians. 

'' My enchanting Schirene/* said the 
Caliph, . " I have dined, thanks to your 



OF ALROY. 199 

attention, very well. These slaves of 
yours dance admirably, and are exceed- 
ingly beautiful. Your music, too, is be- 
yond all praise ; but, for my own part, 
I would sooner be quite alone, and lis- 
tening to one of your songs." 

" I have written a new one to-day. 
You shall hear it." So saying, she clap- 
ped her little white hands, and the whole 
of the retinue immediately withdrew. 



Ill 



''The stars are stealing forth, and so 
will I. Sorry sight ! to view Jabaster, 
with a stealthy step, skulk like a thing 
dishonoured ! Oh ! may the purpose 
consecrate the deed — the die is cast.'^ 



200 THE WONDROUS TALE 

So saying, the High Priest, muffled 
up in his robe, emerged from his palace 
into the busy streets. It is at night that 
the vitaUty of Oriental life is most im- 
pressive. The narrow winding streets, 
crowded with population breathing the 
now sufferable air, the illuminated coffee- 
houses, the groups of gay, yet sober re- 
vellers, the music, and the dancing, and 
the animated recitals of the poet and the 
storier, all combine to invest the starry 
hours with a beguiling, and even fasci- 
nating, character of enjoyment and ad- 
venture. 

It was the night after the visit of Abi- 
dan and the prophetess. Jabaster had 
agreed to meet Abidan in the square of 
the great mosque two hours after sunset, 
and thither he now repaired. 

" I am somewhat before my time," he 



OF ALROY. 201 

said, as he entered the great square, over 
which the rising moon threw a full flood 
of light. A few dark shadows of human 
beings alone moved in the distance. The 
world was in the streets and coffee-houses. 
'' I am somewhat before my time/' said 
Jabaster. ''Conspirators are watchful. I 
am anxious for the meeting, and yet I 
dread it. Since he broke this business, I 
have never slept. My mind is a chaos. 
Ill not think. If 'tis to be done, let it 
be done at once. I am more tempted to 
sheathe this dagger in Jabaster's breast 
than in Alroy's. If life or empire were 
the paltry stake, Td end a life that now 
can bring no joy, and yield authority 
that hath no charm ; but Israel, Israel, 
thou for whom I have endured so 
much — let me forget Jabaster had a mo- 
ther. 

K 5 



20^ THE WONDROUS TALE 

*' But for this thought that links me 
with my God, and leads my temper to a 
higher state, how vain and sad, how 
wearisome and void, were this said world 
they think of ! But for this thought I 
could sit down and die. Yea ! my great 
heart could crack, worn out, worn out : 
my mighty passions, with their fierce 
but flickering flame, sink down and die, 
and the strong brain that e'er hath urged 
my course, and pricked me onward with 
perpetual thought, desert the rudder it so 
long hath held, like some baffled pilot in 
blank discomfiture, in the far centre of 
an unknown sea. 

'' Study and toil, anxiety and sorrow, 
mighty action, perchance Time, and dis- 
appointment, which is woi-se than all, 
have done their work, and not in vain. 
I am no longer the same Jabaster that 



OF ALROY. 208 

gazed upon the stars of Caucasus. Me- 
thinks even they look dimmer than of 
yore. The glory of my life is fading*. 
My leaves are sear, tinged, but not 
tainted. I am still the same in one re- 
spect — I have not left my God, in deed 
or thought. Ah ! who art thou ?" 

'' A friend to Israel." 

" I am glad that Israel hath a friend. 
Noble Abidan, I have well considered all 
that hath passed between us. Sooth to 
say, you touched upon a string I've 
played before, but kept it for my loneli- 
ness ; a jarring tune, indeed a jarring 
tune, but so it is, and being so, let me at 
once unto your friends, Abidan.'' 

'' Noble Jabaster, thou art what I 
deemed thee." 

" Abidan, they say the consciousness 
of doing justly is the best basis of a happy 
mind." 



204 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" Even so/' 

" And thou believest it Y' 
" Without doubt." 
'^ We are doing very justly ?" 
'' Tis a weak word for such a holy 
purpose." 

'' I am most wretched !" 



IV. 



The High Priest and his companion 
entered the house of Abidan. Jabaster 
addressed the already assembled guests. 

'' Brave Scherirah, it joys me to find 
thee here. In Israel's cause when was 
Scherirah wanting ? Stout Zalmunna, 
we have not seen enough of each other : 
the blame is mine. Gentle prophetess, 
thy blessing ! 



41 

OF ALROY. 205 

'' Good friends, why we meet here is 
known to all. Little did we dream of 
such a meeting when we crossed the 
Tigris. But that is nothing. We come 
to act, and not to argue. Our great 
minds, they are resolved : our solemn 
purpose requires no demonstration. If 
there be one among us who would have 
Israel a slave to Ishmael, who would lose 
all we have prayed for, all we have 
fought for, all which we have won, and 
all for which we are prepared to die — if 
there be one among us who would have 
the ark polluted, and Jehovah's altar 
stained with a Gentile sacrifice — if there 
be one among us who does not sigh for 
Sion, who would not yield his breath to 
build the Temple and gain the heritage 
his fathers lost, why let him go ! There 
is none such among us : then stay and 
free your country 1" 



206 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'^ We are prepared, great Jabaster; 
we are prepared, all, all !" 

" I know it; you are like myself. 
Necessity hath taught decision. Now 
for our plans. Speak, Zalmunna." 

" Noble Jabaster, I see much diffi- 
culty . Alroy no longer quits his palace. 
Our entrance un watched is, you well 
know, impossible. What say you, 
Scherirah ?" 

" I doubt not of my men, but war 
against Alroy is, to say nought of danger, 
a doubtful issue.'* 

" I am prepared to die, but not to fail," 
said Abidan. '' We must be certain. 
Open war 1 fear. The mass of the army 
will side with their leaders, and they are 
with the tyrant. Let us do the deed, and 
they must join us." 

'' Is it impossible to gain his presence 



OF ALROY. g07 

to some sacrifice in honour of some by- 
gone victory — what think ye ?" 

" I doubt much, Jabaster. At this 
moment he httle wishes to sanction our 
national ceremonies with his royal per- 
son. The woman assuredly will stay 
him. And even if he come, success is 
difficult, and therefore doubtful." 

" Noble warriors, list to a woman's 
voice," exclaimed the Prophetess, coming 
forward. '' 'Tis weak, but with such in- 
struments, even the aspirations of a child, 
the Lord will commune with his chosen 
people. There is a secret way by which 
I can gain the gardens of the palace. 
To-morrow night, just as the moon is in 
her midnight bower, behold the accursed 
pile shall blaze. Let Abidan s troop be 
all prepared, and at the moment the 
flames first mount, march to the Seraglio 



208 THE WONDROUS TALE 

gate as if with aid. The afFrightened 
guard will offer no opposition. While 
the troops secure the portals, you your- 
selves, Zalmunna, Abidan, and Jabaster, 
rush to the royal chamber and do the 
deed. In the meantime, let brave Sche- 
rirah, with his whole division, surround 
the palace, as if unconscious of the mighty 
work. Then come you forward, show, if 
it need, with tears, the fated body to 
the soldiery, and announce the The- 
ocracy.'' 

" It is the Lord who speaks," said 
Abidan, who was doubtless prepared for 
the proposition ; " He has delivered them 
into our hands." 

" A bold plan," said Jabaster, musing, 
" and yet I like it. Tis quick, and that 
is something. 1 think 'tis sure." 

" It cannot fail," exclaimed Zalmunna, 



OF ALROY. 209 

*' for if the flame ascend not, still we are 
but where we were." 

'' I am for it," said Scherirah. 

'' Well then," said Jabaster, " so let it 
be. To-morrow's eve will see us here 
again, prepared. Good night." 

'' Good night, holy Priest. How seem 
the stars, Jabaster ?" 

'' Very troubled ; so have they been 
some days. What they portend I know 
not." 

" Health to Israel." 

'^ Let us hope so. Good night, sweet 
friends." 

" Good night, holy Jabaster. Thou 
art our corner-stone." 

" Israel hath no other hope but in Ja- 
baster." 

" My Lord," said Abidan, '' remain, I 
pray, one moment." 



eiO THE WONDROUS TALE 

" What is't ? I fain would go." 

" Alroy must die, my Lord, but dost 
thou think a single death will seal the 
covenant V 

'' The woman ?" 

'' Ay ! the woman ! I was not think- 
ing of the woman. Asriel, Ithamar, 
Medad ?" 

" Valiant soldiers ! doubt not we shall 
find them useful instruments. I do not 
fear such loose companions. They follow 
their leaders, like other things born to 
obey. Having no head themselves, they 
must follow us who have." 

" I think so too. There is no other 
man who might be dangerous ?" 

Zalmunna and Scherirah cast their 
eyes upon the ground. There was a 
dead silence broken by the Pro- 
phetess. 



. -4 

OF ALROY, 211 

'' A judgment hath gone forth against 
Honain !" 

" Nay ! he is Lord Jabaster's brother/' 
said Abidan. " It is enough to save a 
more inveterate foe to Israel, if such 
there be." 

" I have no brother, Sir. The man 
you speak of I will not slay, since there 
are others who may do that deed. And 
so again, good night." 



It was the dead of night, a single lamp 
burned in the chamber, which opened 
into an arched gallery, that descended 
by a flight of steps into the gardens of 
the Serail. 

A female figure ascended the flight 



SI 2 THE WONDROUS TALE 

with slow and cautious steps. She 
paused on thegallery, she looked around, 
one foot was in the chamber. 

She entered. She entered a chamber 
of small dimensions, but richly adorned. 
In the farthest corner was a couch of 
ivory, hung with a gauzy curtain of 
silver tissue, which, without impeding 
respiration, protected the slumberer from 
the fell insects of an Oriental night. Lean- 
ing against an ottoman was a large brazen 
shield of ancient fashion, and near it some 
helmets and curious weapons. 

'' An irresistible impulse hath carried 
me into this chamber !" exclaimed the 
prophetess. '' The light haunted me like 
a spectre ; and wheresoever I moved, it 
seemed to summon me. 

" A couch and a slumberer !'* 

She approached the object, she softly 



OF ALROY. 213 

withdrew the curtain. Pale and panting, 
she rushed back, yet with a light step. 
She beheld Alroy ! 

For a moment she leant against the 
wall, overpowered by her emotions. 
Again she advanced, and gazed on her 
unconscious victim. 

'' Can the guilty sleep like the inno- 
cent ? Who would deem this gentle 
slumberer had betrayed the highest trust 
that ever Heaven vouchsafed to favoured 
man ? He looks not like a tyrant and a 
traitor : calm his brow, and mild his 
placid breath ! His long dark hair, dark 
as the raven's wing, hath broken from its 
fillet, and courses, like a wild and stormy 
night, over his pale and moon-lit brow. 
His cheek is delicate, and yet repose hath 
brought a flush ; and on his lip there 
seems some word of love, that will not 



214 THE WONDROUS TALE 

quit it. It is the same Alroy that blessed 
our vision when, like the fresh and glit- 
tering star of morn, he rose up in the 
desart, and, bringing joy to others, 
brought to me only 

" Oh ! hush my heart, and let thy 
secret lie hid in the charnel-house of 
crushed affections. Hard is the lot of 
woman : to love and to conceal is our 
sharp doom ! Oh bitter life ! oh most 
unnatural lot I Man made society, and 
made us slaves. And so we droop and 
die, or else take refuge in idle fanta- 
sies, to which we bring the fervor that 
is meant for nobler ends. 

" Beauteous hero ! whether I bear thee 
most hatred or most love, I cannot tell. 
Die thou must ; yet I feel I should die 
with thee. Oh ! that to-night could lead 
at the same time unto our marriage bed 



OF ALROY. 215 

and funeral pyre. Must that white bo- 
soni bleed ? and must those delicate limbs 
be hacked and handled by these bloody 
butchers ? Is that justice ? They lie, the 
traitors, when they call thee false to our 
God. Thou art thyself a God, and I 
could worship thee ! See those beau- 
teous lips — they move. Hark to the 
music !" 

'' Schirene, Schirene !" 

'' There wanted but that word to sum- 
mon back my senses. Oh ! fool, fool ! 
where is thy fancy wandering ? Ill not 
wait for tardy justice. PU do the deed 
myself. Shall I not kill my Sisera?" 
She seized a dagger from the ottoman, a 
rare and highly-tempered blade. Up she 
raised it in the air, and dashed it to his 
heart, with superhuman force. It struck 
against the talisman which Jabaster had 



^16 THE WONDROUS TALE 

given Alroy, and which, from a lingering 
superstition he still wore ; it struck, and 
shivered into a thousand pieces. The 
Caliph sprang from his couch, his eyes 
met the Prophetess, standing over him in 
blank despair, with the hilt of the dagger 
in her hand. 

" What is all this! Schirene! Who 
art thou ? Esther !" He jumped from 
the couch, called to Pharez, and seized 
her by both hands. '' Speak !" he con- 
tinued. '' Art thou Esther ? What dost 
thou here ?" 

She broke into a wild laugh ; she 
wrestled with his grasp, and pulled him 
towards the gallery. He beheld the chief 
tower of the Serail in flames. Joining 
her hands together, grasping them both 
in one of his, and dragging her towards 
the ottoman, he seized a helmet, and 



OF ALROY. 2|y 

flung it upon the mighty shield. It 
sounded like a gong. Pharez started 
from his slumbers, and rushed into the 
chamber. 

'' Pharez ! Treason ! treason ! Send 
instant orders that the palace gates are 
open on no pretence whatever. Go, fly ! 
See the captain himself. Summon the 
household. Order all to arms. Speed 
for our lives !" 

The whole palace was now roused. 
Alroy delivered Esther, exhausted, and 
apparently senseless, to a guard of 
eunuchs. Slaves and attendants poured 
in from all directions. Soon arrived 
Schirene, with dishevelled hair and hur- 
ried robes, attended by a hundred mai- 
dens, each bearing a torch. 

'' My soul, what ails thee?" 

" Nothing, sweetest; all will soon be 

VOL. II. L 



218 THE WONDROUS TALE 

well/' replied Alroy, picking up, and ex- 
amining the fragments of the shivered 
dagger, which he had just discovered. 

'' My life has been attempted ; the 
palace is in flames ; I suspect the city is 
in insurrection. Look to your mistress, 
maidens !" Schirene fell into their arms. 
" 111 soon be back.'* So saying, he 
rushed to the grand court. 

Several thousand persons, for the po- 
pulation of the Serail and its liberties was 
very considerable, were assembled in the 
grand court ; eunuchs, women, pages, 
slaves, and servants, and a few soldiers. 
All in confusion and alarm, fire raging 
within, and mysterious and terrible out- 
cries without. A cry of '' the Caliph ! 
the Caliph !" announced the arrival of 
Alroy, and produced a degree of compa- 
rative silence. 



OF ALROY. 219 

" Where's the captain of the guard ?" 
he exclaimed. " That's well. Open the 
gates to none. Who will leap the wall, 
and bear a message to Asriel ? You ? 
That's well too. To-morrow, you shall 
yourself command. Where s Mesrour ? 
Take the eunuch guard and the company 
of gardeners,^^ and suppress the flames 
at all cost. Pull down the intervening 
buildings. Abidan's troop arrived with 
succour, eh ! I doubt it not. I expected 
them. Open to none. They force an 
entrance — eh ? I thought so. So that 
javelin has killed a traitor. Feed me 
with arms. Ill keep the gate. Send 
again to Asriel. Where's Pharez ?" 

'' By your side, my Lord." 

'^ Run to the Queen, my faithful Pha- 
rez, and tell her that all's well. I wish 
it were ! Didst ever hear a din so 

l2 



220 THE WONDROUS TALE 

awful ? Methinks all the tambours and 
the cymbals of the city are in full chorus. 
Foul play, I gTiess. Oh ! for Asriel ! 
Has Pharez returned ?" 

'' I am by your side, my Lord/' 

'' How's the Queen ?" 

" She would gladly join your side/' 

" No, no ! Keep the gates there. Who 

says they are making fires before them? 

Tis true. We must sally, if the worst 

come to the worst, and die at least like 

soldiers. Oh Asriel ! Asriel !" 

'' May it please your Highness, the 
troops are pouring in from all quar- 
ters/' 

" ^Tis Asriel." 

" No ! your Highness, 'tis not the 
guard. Methinks they are Scherirah's 



men." 



Hum I What it all is, I know not ; 



j^ OF ALROY. 021 

but very foul play, I do not doubt. 

Where's Honain ?" 

" With the Queen, Sire." 

" Tis well. What is that shout ?" 

'^ Here's the messenger from Asriel. 

Make way ! way !" 

'^ Well ! how is't, Sir ?" 

'' Please your Highness, I could not 

reach the guard." 

" Could not reach the guard ! God of 

my fathers ! who should lett thee ?" 
" Sire, I was taken prisoner." 
" Prisoner ! By the thunder of Sinai, 

are we at war? Who made thee pri- 
soner ?" 

'' Sire, they have proclaimed thy 

death." 

'' Who r 

" The Council of the Elders. So I 
heard. Abidan, Zalmunna " 



222 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Rebels and dogs ! Who else ?" 

" The High Priest." 

'' Hah ! Is it there ? Pharez, fetch 
me some drink. Is it true Scherirah has 
joined them ?" 

'' His force surrounds the Serail. No 
aid can reach us without cutting through 
his ranks." 

'' Oh ! that I were there with my good 
guard! Are we to die here like rats, 
fairly murdered ? Cowardly knaves ! 
Hold out, hold out, my men ! Tis sharp 
work, but some of us will smile at this 
hereafter. Who stands by Alroy to-night 
bravely and truly, shall have his heart's 
content to-morrow. Fear not, fear not : 
I was not born to die in a civic broil. I 
bear a charmed life. So to it." 



OF ALROY. 223 



VI. 



'* Go to the Caliph, good Honain, I 
pray thee go. I can support myself, he 
needs thy council. Bid him not expose 
his precious life. The wicked men ! As- 
riel must soon be here. What sayest 
thou r 

'' There is no fear. Their plans are ill- 
devised. I have long expected this 
stormy night, and feel even now more 
anxious than alarmed." 

'' 'Tis I they aim at — it is I they hate. 
The High Priest, too ! A.j, ay ! Thy 
proud brother, good Honain, I have ever 
felt he would not rest until he drove me 
from this throne, my right ; or washed 
my hated name from out our annals in 
my life's blood. Wicked, wicked Jabas- 



224 THE WONDROUS TALE 

ter ! He frowned upon me from the 
first, Honain. Is he indeed thy bro- 
ther ?" 

^' I care not to remember. He aims at 
something further than thy life ; but Time 
will teach us more than all our thoughts." 



VH. 

The fortifications of the Serail resisted 
all the efforts of the rebels. Scherirah 
remained in his quarters with his troops 
under arms, and recalled the small force 
that he had originally sent out as much 
to watch the course of events as to assist 
Abidan. Asriel and Ithamar poured 
down their columns in the rear of that 
chieftain, and by dawn a division of the 
guard had crossed the river, the care of 



^ 



OF ALROY. 225 

which had been entrusted to Scherirah, 
and had thrown themselves into the 
palace. Alroy sallied forth at the head 
of these fresh troops. His presence de- 
cided a result which was perhaps never 
doubtful. The division of Abidan fought 
with the desperation that became their 
fortunes. The carnage was dreadful, but 
their discomfiture complete. They no 
longer acted in masses, or with any gene- 
ral system. They thought only of self- 
preservation, or of selling their lives at 
the dearest cost. Some dispersed, some 
escaped. Others entrenched themselves 
in houses, others fortified the bazaar. All 
the horrors of war in the streets were now 
experienced. The houses were in flames, 
the thoroughfares flowed with blood. 

At the head of a band of faithful fol- 
lowers Abidan proved himself by his 

L 5 



226 THE WONDROUS TALE 

courage and resources worthy of success. 
At length, he was alone, or only sur- 
rounded by his enemies. With his back 
against a building in a narrow street, 
where the number of his opponents only 
embarrassed them, the three foremost of 
his foes fell before his irresistible scimitar. 
The barricadoed door yielded to the pres- 
sure of the multitude. Abidan rushed 
up the narrow stairs, and gaining a land- 
ing-place, turned suddenly round, and 
cleaved the skull of his nearest pursuer. 
He hurled the mighty body at his fol- 
lowers, and retarding their advance, him- 
self dashed onward, and gained the terrace 
of the mansion. Three soldiers of the 
guard followed him as he bounded from 
terrace to terrace. One armed with a 
dart, hurled the javelin at the chieftain. 
The weapon slightly wounded Abidan, 



OF ALROY. 227 

who, drawing it from his arm, sent it 
back to the heart of its owner The two 
other soldiers, armed only with swords, 
gained upon him. He arrived at the last 
terrace in the cluster of buildings. He 
stood at bay on the brink of the preci- 
pice. He regained his breath. They ap- 
proached him. He dodged them in their 
course. Suddenly, with admirable skill, 
he flung his scimitar edgewise at the legs 
of his farthest foe, who stopped short, 
roaring with pain. The chieftain sprang 
at the foremost, and hurled him down 
into the street below, where he was dashed 
into atoms. A trap-door offered itself to 
the despairing eye of the rebel. He de- 
scended and found himself in a room 
filled with women. They screamed, he 
rushed through them, and descending a 
staircase, entered a chamber tenanted by 



228 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a bed-ridden old man. The ancient in- 
valid inquired the cause of the uproar, 
and died of fright before he could re- 
ceive an answer, at the sight of the awful 
being before him, covered with streaming 
blood. Abidan secured the door, washed 
his blood-stained face, and disguising 
himself in the dusty robes of the deceased 
Armenian, sallied forth to watch the fray. 
The obscure street was silent. The chief- 
tain proceeded unmolested. At the cor- 
ner he found a soldier holding a charger 
for his captain. Abidan unarmed, seized 
a poignard from the soldier's belt, and 
stabbed him to the heart, and vaulting 
on the steed, galloped towards the river. 
No boat was to be found ; he breasted the 
stream upon the stout courser. He reach- 
ed the opposite bank. A company of 
camels were reposing by the side of a 



OF ALROY. 229 

fountain. Alarm had dispersed their 
drivers. He mounted the fleetest in ap- 
pearance ; he dashed to the nearest gate 
of the city. The guard at the gate re- 
fused him a passage. He concealed his 
agitation. A marriage procession arrived 
returning from the country. He rushed 
into their centre, and overset the bride in 
her gilded waggon. In the midst of the 
confusion, the shrieks, the oaths, and the 
scuffle, he forced his way through the 
gate, scoured over the country, and never 
stopped until he had gained the desart. 



vni. 

The uproar died away. The shouts of 
warriors, the shrieks of women, the wild 



230 THE WONDROUS TALE 

clang of warfare, all were silent. The 
flames were extinguished, the carnage 
ceased. The insurrection was suppressed, 
and order restored. The city, all the 
houses of which were closed, was patrolled 
by the conquering troops, and by sunset 
the conqueror himself, in his hall of state, 
received the reports and the congratula- 
tions of his chieftains. The escape of 
Abidan seemed counterbalanced by the 
capture of Jabaster. After performing 
prodigies of valour, the High Priest had 
been overpowered, and was now a pri- 
soner in the Serail. The conduct of 
Scherirah was not too curiouslv criti- 
cized ; a commission was appointed to 
inquire into the mysterious affair, and 
Alroy retired to the Bath^*^ to refresh him- 
self after the fatigues of the first victory 
which he could not consider a triumph. 



OF ALROY. 231 

As he reposed upon his couch, melan- 
choly and exhausted, Schirene was an- 
nounced. The Princess threw herself 
upon his neck, and covered him with 
embraces. His heart yielded to her fond- 
ness, his spirit became lighter, his de- 
pression melted away. 

" My ruby !" said Schirene, and she 
spoke in a low smothered voice, her face 
hidden and nestled in his breasts '' My 
ruby ! dost thou love me ?" 

He smiled in fondness as he pressed her 
to his heart. 

" My ruby, thy pearl is so frightened, 
it dare not look upon thee. Wicked 
men ! 'tis I they hate, 'tis I they would 
destroy." 

'' There is no danger, sweet. Tis 
over now. Speak not — nay, do not think 
of it." 



232 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'^ Ah ! wicked men ! There is no joy 
on earth while such things live. Slay 
Alroy, their mighty master, who from 
vile slaves, hath made them princes ! 
Ungrateful churls ! I am so alarmed — I 
ne'er shall sleep again. What ! slay my 
innocent bird, my pretty bird, my very 
heart ! FU not believe it. It is I they 
hate. 1 am sure they'll kill me. You 
shall never leave me, no, no, no, no ! You 
shall not leave me, love, never, never ! 
Didst hear a noise ? Methinks they are 
ever here, ready to plunge their daggers 
in our hearts — our soft, soft hearts ! 1 
think you love me, child ; indeed, I 
think you do !" 

'' Take courage, heart ! There is no 
fear, my soul ; I cannot love thee more, 
or else I would." 

" All joy is gone ! I ne'er shall sleep 



OF ALROY. 233 

again. Oh my soul ! art thou indeed 
alive? Do I indeed embrace my own 
Alroy, or is it all a wild and troubled 
dream, and are my arms clasped round 
a shadowy ghost, myself a spectre in 
a sepulchre ? Wicked, wicked men ! 
Can it indeed be true? What, slay 
Alroy ! my joy, my only life 1 Ah ! 
woe is me ; our bright felicity hath fled 
for ever !" 

"^ Not so, sweet child; we are but as 
we were. A few quick hours, and all 
will be as bright, as if no storm had 
crossed our sunny days." 

'' Hast seen Asriel ? He says such 
fearful things \" 

'' How now ?" 

'' Ah me ! I am desolate. I have no 
friend.^^ 

*' Schirene !" 



234 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' They'll have my blood; I know 
they'll have my blood." 

" Indeed, an idle fancy." .f 

" Idle ! Ask Asriel, question Ithamar. 
Idle ! 'tis written in their tablets, their 
bloody scroll of rapine and of murder. 
Thy death led only to mine, and had they 
hoped my bird would but have yielded 
his gentle mate, they would have spared 
him. Ay ! ay ! 'tis I they hate, 'tis I 
they would destroy. This form, I fear it 
has lost its lustre, but still 'tis thine, and 
once thou saidst thou loved it ; this form 
was to have been hacked and mangled, 
this ivory bosom was to have been ripped 
up and tortured, and this warm blood, 
that flows alone for thee, that fell Ja- 
baster was to pour its tide upon the altar 
of his ancient vengeance. He ever hated 
me !" 



OF ALROY. 235 

'' Jabaster ! Schirene ! Where are we, 
and what are we? Life, life, they lie, 
that call thee Nature! Nature never 
sent these gusts of agony. Oh ! my heart 
will break. I drove him from my 
thought, and now she calls him up, 
and now must I remember he is my — 
prisoner ! God of Heaven, God of my 
fathers, is it come to this ? Why did he 
not escape ? why must Abidan, a com- 
mon cut-throat, save his graceless life, 
and this great soul, this stern and mighty 
being — Ah me ! 1 have lived long enough . 
Would they had not failed, would — '' 

'' Stop, stop, Alroy 1 I pray thee, love, 
be calm. I came to soothe thee, not 
to raise thy passions. I did not say Ja- 
baster willed thy death, though Asriel says 
so ; 'tis I he wars against ; and if indeed 
Jabaster be a man so near thy heart — if 



236 THE WONDROUS TALE 

he indeed be one so necessary to thy 
prosperity, and cannot live in decent 
order with thy slave that's here, I know 
my duty. Sir. I would not have thy for- 
tunes marred to save my single heart, 
although I think 'twill break. I'll go, 
I'll die, and deem the hardest accident 
of life but sheer prosperity if it profit 
thee. " 

'' Oh Schirene ! what wouldst thou ? 
This — this is torture." 

" To see thee safe and happy ; nothing 
more." 

'•' I am both, if thou art.'' 

'' Care not for me, I am nothing." 

'' Thou art all — to me." 

''Calm thyself, my soul. It grieves 
me much that when I came to soothe I 
have only galled thee. All's well, all's 
well. Say that Jabaster lives. What 



OF ALROY. 237 

then ? He lives, and may he prove more 
duteous than before ; that's all." 

" He lives, he is my prisoner, he 
awaits his doom. It must be given." 

" Yes, yes \" 

'' Shall we pardon ?'' 

'• My Lord will do that which it pleases 
him." 

" Nay, nay, Schirene, I pray thee be 
more kind. I am most wretched. Speak, 
what wouldst thou ?" 

'' If I must speak, I say at once — his 
life.'' 

"Ah me!" 

'' If our past loves have any charm, if 
the hope of future joy, not less supreme, 
be that which binds thee to this sha- 
dowy world, as it does me, and does 
alone, I say his life, his very carnal life. 
He stands between us and our loves. 



238 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Alroy, and ever has. There is no happi- 
ness if Jabaster breathe ; nor can I be 
the same Schirene to thee as I have been, 
if this proud rebel Uve to spy my con- 
duct." 

" Banish him, banish him !" 

'' To herd with rebels. Is this thy 
policy .>'' 

'' Oh Schirene! I love not this man, 
although methinks I should ; yet didst 
thou know but all ?" 

'' I know too much, Alroy. From the 
first he has been to me a hateful thought. 
Come, come, sweet bird, a boon, a boon 
unto thy own Schirene, who was so 
frightened by these wicked men ! I fear 
it has done more mischief than thou 
deemest. Ay ! robbed us of our hopes. 
It may be so. A boon, a boon ! it is not 
much I ask — a traitor's head. Come, 



OF ALROY. 239 

give me thy signet ring. It will not ; 
nay, then, Til take it. What, resist ! 1 
know a kiss thou hast often told me. Sir, 
could vanquish all denial. There it is. 
Is't sweet ? Shalt have another, and 
another too. I've got the ring ! Farewell, 
my lovely bird, I'll soon return to pillow 
in thy nest " 

IX. 

'' She has got the ring ! What's this ? 
what's this ? Schirene ! art gone ? Nay, 
surely not. She jests. Jabasterl A trai- 
tor's head! What ho! there. Pharez, 
Pharez !' 

'' My Lord." 

'' Passed the Queen that way ?" 

'' She did, my Lord." 

'' In tears ?" 



240 THE WONDROUS TALE 

"Nay! very joyful/' 

'' Call Honain — quick as my thought, 
HonainI Honain! He waits without. 
1 have seen the best of life, that's very 
sure. My heart is cracking. She surely 
jests. Hah ! Honain. Pardon these 
distracted looks. Fly to the armoury ! 

fly, fly !" 

" For what, my Lord ?" 

'^ Ay ! for what — for what ! My brain 
it wanders. Thy brother — thy great 
brother — the Queen — the Queen has 
stolen my signet ring, that is, I gave it 
her. Fly, fly ! or in a word, Jabaster is 
no more. He is gone. Pharez! your 
arm — I swoon !" 



OF ALROY. 241 



IX, 



'' His Highness is sorely indisposed 
to-day." 

'' They say he swooned this morn/' 

" Ay, in the bath/' 

*' No, not in the bath. 'Twas when he 
heard Jabaster's death.'" 

'' How died he, Sir ?" 

" Self-strangled. His mighty heart 
could not endure disgrace, and thus he 
ended all his glorious deeds. "" 

'' A great man !*' 

" We shall not soon see his match. 
The Queen had gained his pardon, and 
herself flew to the armoury to bear the 
news — alas 1 too late/' 

" These are strange times. Jabaster 
dead I" 

VOL. II. M 



242 THE WONDROUS TALE 



'' A very great event/' 

'^Who will be High Priest?" 

''I doubt the appointment will be filled 



up." 

" Sup you with the Lord Ithamar to- 
night?" 

- 1 do." 

'' I also. Well go together. The 
Queen had gained his pardon. Hum ! 
'tis strange." 

'' Passing so. They say Abidan has 
escaped. '' 

" I hear it. Shall we meet Medad to- 
night ?" 

'' Tis likely." i 



OF ALROY. 243 



PART X. 



" She comes not yet! her cheerful form, 
not yet it sparkles in our mournful sky. 
She comes not yet! the shadowy stars 
seem sad and lustreless without their 
Queen. She comes not yet !" 

" We are the watchers of the 
Moon, and live in loneliness to 
herald lights 
'' She comes not yet ! her sacred form, 
not yet it summons to our holy feast. 
She comes not yet ! our brethren far wait 

M 2 



244 THE WONDROUS TALE 

mute and motionless the saintly beam. 
She comes not yet !" 

" We are the watchers of the 
Moon, and live in loneliness to 
herald light!' 
'' She comes, she comes ! her beauteous 
form sails with soft splendour in the glit- 
tering air. She comes, she comes ! The 
beacons fire, and tell the nation that the 
month begins ! She comes, she comes !" 
'^ We are the watchers of the 
Moon,^^ to tell the nation that the 
month begins" 
Instantly the holy watchers fired the 
beacons on the mountain top, and anon J 
a thousand flames blaze round the land. ^ 
From Caucasus to Lebanon, on every 
peak a crown of light 1 



OF ALROY. 245 



II 



'' Sire ! a Tatar has arrived from 
Hamadan, who will see none but thyself. 
I have told him your Highness was en- 
gaged, and sent him to the Lord Honain ; 
but all denial is lost upon him. And, 
as I thought perhaps the Lady Miriam — " 

" From Hamadan ? You did well, 
Pharez. Admit him." 

The Tatar entered. 

'' Well, Sir ; good news I hope !" 

'' Sire, pardon me, the worst. I come 
from the Lord Abner, with orders to see 
the Caliph, and none else." 

" Well, Sir, you see the Caliph. Your 
mission ? What of the Viceroy ?" 

'' Sire, he bid me tell thee, that the 



246 THE WONDROUS TALE 

moment the beacon that announced the 
Feast of the New Moon was fired on Cau- 
casus, the dreaded monarch of Karasme, 
the great Alp Arslan, entered thy king- 
dom, and now overruns all Persia." 

" Hah ! and Abner ?" 

'' Is in the field, and prays for aid." 

" He shall have it. This is indeed 
great news ! When left you Hamadan ?" 

" Night and day I have journeyed 
upon the swiftest dromedary. The third 
morn sees me at Bagdad.'* 

'' You have done your duty. See this 
faithful courier be well tended, Pharez. 
Summon the Lord Honain." 

''Alp Arslanl Hah! a very famous 
warrior. The moment the beacon was 
fired. No sudden impulse then, but long 
matured. I like it not." 

''Sire/' said Pharez, re-entering, "a 



OF ALROY. 247 

Tatar has arrived from the frontiers 
of the province, who will see none but 
thyself. I have told him your Highness 
was deeply busied, and as methinks he 
brings but the same news, I — " 

'' 'Tis very likely; yet never think, 
good Pharez. I'll see the man/' 

The Tatar entered. 

" Well, Sir, how now ! — from whom ?" 

'' From Mozul. The Governor bid 
me see the Caliph and none else, and tell 
your Highness, that the moment the 
beacon that announced the Feast of the 
New Moon was fired on the mountains, 
the fell rebel Abidan raised the standard 
of Judah in the province, and proclaimed 
war against your Majesty." 

" In any force ?" 

'' The royal power keeps within their 
walls." 



248 THE WONDROUS TALE 

*^ Sufficient answer. Part of the same 
movement. We shall have some trouble. 
Hast summoned Honain ?" 

" I have. Sir/' 

^'Go, see this messenger be duly served, 

and, Pharez come hither : let none 

converse with them. You understand ?" 

" Your Highness may assure yourself." 

*^ Abidan come to life ! He shall not 
escape so well this time. 1 must see 

Scherirah. I much suspect whats 

this ? More news !" 

A third Tatar entered. 

" May it please your Highness, this 
Tatar has arrived from the Syrian fron- 
tier." 

'' Mischief in the wind, I doubt not. 
Speak out, knave." 

'' Sire ! pardon me, I bear but sad in- 
telligence." 



OF ALROY. 249 

'' Out with the worst !" 
'' I come from the Lord Medad.*' 
'' Well ! has he rebelled ? It seems 
a catching fever." 

'' Ah ! no, dread Sire, Lord Medad has 
no thought but for thy glory. Alas ! 
alas ! he has now to guard it 'gainst fear- 
ful odds. Lord Medad bid me see the 
Caliph and none else, and tell your 
Highness, that the moment the beacon 
that announced the Feast of the New 
Moon was fired on Lebanon, the Sultan 
of Roum and the old Arabian Caliph un- 
furled the standard of their Prophet in 
great array, and are now marching to- 
wards Bagdad.'' 

'' A clear conspiracy ! Has Honain 
arrived ? Summon a Council of the 
Viziers instantly. The world is up 

]>! 5 



250 THE WONDROUS TALE 

against me. Well ! rm sick of Peace. 
They shall not find me napping !" 



III. 



'' You see, my Lords," said Alroy, ere 
the council broke up, '^we must attack 
them singly. There can be no doubt of 
that. If they join, we must combat at 
great odds. 'Tis in detail that we must 
rout them. I will myself to Persia. 
Ithamar must throw himself between the 
Sultan and Abidan : Medad fall back on 
Ithamar. Scherirah must guard the ca- 
pital. Honain, you are Regent. And 
so farewell. I shall set off to-night. 
Courage, brave companions. 'Tis a storm, 
but many a cedar survives the thunder- 
bolt.'' 



OF ALROY. 251 

The council broke up. 

" My own Scherirah !" said the Ca- 
liph, as they retired, '' stay awhile. I 
would speak with you alone. Honain/' 
continued Alroy, following the Grand 
Vizier out of the chamber, and leaving 
Scherirah alone ; '' Honain, I have not 
yet interchanged a word with you in pri- 
vate. What think you of all this ?" 

'' Sire, I am prepared for the worst, 
but hope the best.'' 

'' Tis wise. If Abner could only keep 
that Karasmian in check ! I am about 
to speak with Scherirah alone. I do 
suspect him much." 

'' ril answer for- — his treason." 

" Hah ! I do suspect him. Therefore 
I give him no command. I would not 
have him too near his old companion, 
eh ? We '11 garrison the city with his 
rebels.'" 



252 THE WONDROUS TALE 

'' Sire, these are not moments to be 
nice. Scherirah is a valiant captain, a 

very valiant captain, but lend me thy 

signet ring, I pray thee. Sire." 

Alroy turned pale. '' No, Sir, it has left 
me once, and never shall again. You 
have touched upon a string that makes 
me sad. There is a burthen on my con- 
science—why, or what, I know not. I 
am innocent, you know I am innocent, 
Honain ?" 

'' I'll answer for your Highness. He 
who has enough of the milk of human 
kindness to spare a thing like Scherirah 
when he stands in his way, may well be 
credited for the nobler mercy that spared 
his better." 

" Ah me ! there's madness in the 
thought. Why is he not here ? Had I 
but followed — tush ! tush ! Go see the 



OF ALROY. 253 

Queen, and tell her all that has happened, 
ril to Scherirah." 

The Caliph returned. 

" Thy pardon, brave Scherirah ; in 
these moments my friends will pardon 
courtesy." 

'' Your Highness is too considerate." 

'' You see, Scherirah, how the wind 
blows, brave heart. There's much to do, 
no doubt. I am in sad want of some 
right trusty friend, on whose devoted 
bosom I can pillow all my necessities. I 
was thinking of sending you against this 
Arslan, but perhaps 'tis better that I 
should go myself. These are moments 
one should not seem to shrink, and yet 
we know not how affairs may run — no, 
we know not. The capital, the sur- 
rounding province —one disaster and these 
false Moslemin may rise against us. I 



254 THE WONDROUS TALE 

should stay here, but if I leave Scherirah, 
I leave myself. I feel that deeply — 'tis 
a consolation. It may be that I must 
fall back upon the city. Be prepared, 
Scherirah. Let me fall back upon sup- 
porting friends. You have a great trust. 
Oh ! use it wisely ! Worthily I am sure 
you must do." 

" Your Highness may rest assured I 
have no other thought but for your weal 
and glory. Doubl not my devotion. 
Sire. I am not one of those mealy- 
mouthed youths, full of their own deeds 
and lip-worship. Sire, but I have a life 
devoted to your service, and ready at all 
times to peril all things." 

'' I know that, Scherirah, I know it, I 
feel it deeply. What think you of these 
movements ?" 

" They are not ill combined, and yet 



OF ALROY. Q55 

I doubt not your Majesty will prove your 
fortunes most triumphant." 

" Think you the soldiery are in good 
cue ?" 

" I'll answer for my own. They are 
rough fellows, like myself, a little too 
blunt, perhaps, your Highness. We are 
not holiday guards, but we know our 
duty, and we will do it." 

" That's well, that's all I want. I 
shall review the troops before I go. Let 
a donative be distributed among them ; 
and, by-the-bye, I have always forgotten 
it, your legion should be called the Le- 
gion of Syria. We owe our fairest pro- 
vince to their arms." 

'' I shall convey to them your High- 
ness's wish. Were it possible, 'twould 
add to their devotion." 

'' I do not wish it. They are my very 



^56 THE WONDROUS TALE 

children. Sup at the Serail to-night, 
Scherirah. We shall be very private. 
Yet let us drink together ere we part. 
We are old friends, you know. Hast not 
forgotten our ruined city ?'' 



IV. 



Alroy entered the apartment of Schi- 
rene. '' My soul ! thou knowest all ?" 

She sprang forward and threw her 
arms around his neck. 

'' Fear not, my life, we'll not disgrace 
our Queen. Twill be quick work. Two- 
thirds of them have been beaten before, 
and for the new champion, our laurels 
must not fade, and his blood shall nourish 
fresh ones.'' 

'' Dearest, dearest Alroy, go not thy- 



OF ALROY. 257 

self, I pray thee. May not Asriel con- 
quer ?*' 

" I hope so in my company. For 

a time we part — a short one. 'Tis our 
first parting : may it be our last !" 

" Oh ! no, no, no : oh ! say not we 
must part." 

" The troops are under arms ; to-mor- 
row's dawn will hear my trumpet." 

'' I will not quit thee, no ! I will not 
quit thee. What business has Schirene 
without Alroy ? Hast thou not often 
told me I am thy inspiration ? In the 
hour of danger shall I be wanting ? 
Never ! I will not quit thee ; no, I will 
not quit thee." 

*' Thou art ever present in my thoughts, 
my soul. In the battle I shall think of 
her for whom alone I conquer." 

'' Nay, nay, TU go, indeed I must. 



258 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Alroy. I'll be no hindrance, trust me, 
sweet boy, I will not. Til have no train, 
no, not a single maid. Credit me, I 
know how a true soldier's wife should 
bear herself. Ill watch thee sleeping, 
and I'll tend thee wounded, and when 
thou goest forth to combat I'll gird thy 
sabre round thy martial side, and whisper 
triumph with victorious kisses. "" 

^^ My own Schirene, there's victory in 
thine eyes. We'll beat them, girl." 

" Abidan, doubly false Abidan ! would 
he were doubly hanged ! Ere she died, 
the fatal Prophetess foretold this time, 
and gloated on his future treachery." 

'' Think not of him." 

'' And the Karasmian think you he 

is very strong ?" 

" Enough, love, for our glory. He is 
a potent warrior : I trust that Abner will 
not rob us of our intended victory." 



OF ALROY. 259 

" So you triumph, I care not by whose 
sword. Dost go indeed to-morrow ?" 

'* At the break of dawn. I pray thee 
stay, my sweet I" 

" Never !— I will not quit thee. I am 
quite prepared. At the break of dawn ? 
'Tis near on midnight now. I'll lay me 
down upon this couch awhile, and travel 
in my litter. Art sure Alp Arslan is 
himself in the field ?" 

'^ Quite sure, my sweet.'* 

" Confusion on his crown ! We'll con- 
quer. Goes Asriel with us ?" 

'' Ay !" 

'^ That's well ; at break of dawn. I'm 
somewhat drowsy. Methinks I'll sleep 
awhile." 

'' Do, my best heart ; I'll to my cabi- 
net, and at break of dawn 111 wake thee 
with a kiss.'' 



260 THE WONDROUS TALE 



V. 



The Caliph repaired to his cabinet, 
where his secretaries were occupied in 
writing. As he paced the chamber, he 
dictated to them the necessary instruc- 
tions. 

'' Who is the officer on guard }" 

'^ Benaiah, Sire." 

^' I remember him. He saved me a 
broken skull upon the Tigris. This is 
for him. The Queen accompanies us. 
She is his charge. These papers for the 
Vizier. Let the troops be under arms by 
day-break. This order of the day for the 
Lord Asriel. Send this instantly to Ha- 
madan. Is the Tatar despatched to Me- 
dad ? Tis well. You have done your 
duty. Now to rest. Pharez !" 



OF ALROY. 261 

^^ My Lord!" 

'' I shall not sleep to-night. Give me 
my drink. Go rest, good boy. I have 
no wants. Good night." 

'' Good night, my gracious Lord V* 

'' Let me ponder ! I am alone. I am 
calm, and yet my spirit is not quick. I 
am not what I was. Four-and- twenty 
hours ago who would have dreamed of 
this ? All at stake again ! Once more 
in the field, and struggling at once for 
empire and existence ! I do lack the 
mighty spirit of my former days. I am 
not what I was. I have little faith. All 
about me seems changed and dull and 
grown mechanical. Where are those 
flashing eyes and conquering visages that 
clustered round me on the battle eve, 
round me, the Lord's anointed! I 
see none such. They are changed, as 



262 THE WONDROUS TALE 

I am. Why ! this Abidan was a host, 
and now he fights against me. She spoke 
of the Prophetess ; I remember that wo- 
man was the stirring trumpet of our 
ranks, and now where is she ? The vic- 
tim of my justice ! And where is he the 
mightier far, the friend, the counsellor, 
the constant guide, the master of my 
boyhood ; the firm, the fond, the faithful 
guardian of all my bright career, whose 
days and nights were one unbroken study 
to make me glorious ! Alas ! I feel more 
like a doomed and desperate renegade 
than a young hero on the eve of battle, 
flushed with the memory of unbroken 
triumphs ! 

'' Hah ! what awful form art thou that 
rises from the dusky earth before me ? 
Thou shouldst be one I dare not name, 
yet will — the likeness of Jabaster. Away ! 



OF ALROY. 263 

why frownest thou upon me ? I did not 
slay thee. Do I live, or dream, or what ? 
I see him, ay ! I see thee. I fear thee 
not, I fear nothing. I am Alroy. 

" Speak, oh ! speak ! I do conjure 
thee, mighty spectre, speak. By all the 
memory of the past, although 'tis mad- 
ness, I do conjure thee, let me hear again 
the accents of my boyhood.'' 

"Alroy, Alroy, Alroy f' 

'^ I listen, as to the last trump." 

'^ Meet me on the plain of Nehauend" 

'^ Tis gone! As it spoke, it vanished. 

It was Jabaster ! God of my fathers, it 

was Jabaster! Life is growing too wild. 

My courage is broken ! I could lie down 

and die. It was Jabaster ! The voice 

sounds in my ear like distant thunder : 

' Meet me on the plain ofNehauend* Til 

not fail thee, noble ghost, although I meet 



246 THE WONDROUS TALE 

my doom. Jabaster! Have I seen Ja- 
baster I Indeed, indeed ! Methinks I'm 
mad. Hah! what's that?" 

An awful clap of thunder broke over 
the palace, followed by a strange clashing 
sound that seemed to come from one of 
the chambers. The walls of the Serail 
rocked. 

'' An earthquake!" exclaimed Alroy. 
'* Would the earth would open and swal- 
low all. Hah ! Pharez, has it roused thee, 
too ! Pharez ! Pharez ! we live in strange 
times." 

" Your highness is very pale/' 

" And so art thou, lad ! Wouldst have 
me merry ? Pale I we may well be pale, 
didst thou know all. Hah I that awful 
sound again ! I cannot bear it, Pharez, 
I cannot bear it. I have borne many 
things, but this I cannot." 



OF ALROY. 265 

" My Lord, 'tis in the Armory/' 

'' Run, see No, 111 not be alone, Til 
not be alone. Where's Benaiah ? Let 
him go. Stay with me, Pharez, stay with 
me. I pray thee stay, my child." 

Pharez led the Caliph to a couch, on 
which Alroy lay pale and trembling*. In 
a few minutes he inquired whether Be- 
naiah had returned. 

" Even now he comes, Sir." 

'' Well, how is it ?" 

^' Sire ! a most awful incident. As the 
thunder broke over the palace, the sacred 
standard fell from its resting-place, and 
has shivered into a thousand pieces. 
Strange to say, the sceptre of Solomon 
can neither be found nor traced." 

''Say nothing of the past as ye love 
me, lads. Let none enter the Armory. 
Leave me, Benaiah, leave me, Pharez." 

VOL. II. N 



266 THE WONDROUS TALE 

They retired. Alroy watched their 
departure with a glance of inexpressible 
anguish. The moment that they had 
disappeared, he flew to the couch, and 
throwing himself upon his knees, and 
covering his face with his hands, burst 
into passionate tears, and exclaimed : — 
'* Oh ! my God, I have deserted thee, 
and now thou hast deserted me !" 



VI. 



Exhausted and desperate, sleep crept 
over the senses of the Caliph. He threw 
himself upon the divan, and was soon 
buried in profound repose. He might 
have slept an hour ; he awoke suddenly. 
From the cabinet in which he slept, you 
entered through a lofty and spacious 



OF ALROY. 267 

arcli, generally covered with drapery, 
which was now withdrawn, into an im- 
mense hall. To the astonishment of Al- 
roy, this presence-chamber apparently at 
this moment blazed with light. He rose 
suddenly from his couch, he advanced — 
he perceived, with feelings of curiosity 
and fear, that the hall was filled with 
beings, terrible indeed to behold, but to 
his sight more terrible than strange. In 
the colossal and mysterious forms that 
lined the walls of the mighty chamber, 
and each of which held in its extended 
arm a streaming torch, he I'ecognized the 
awful Afrits. At the end of the hall, 
upon a sumptuous throne, surrounded by 
priests and courtiers, there was seated a 
monarch, on whom Alroy had before 
gazed, Solomon the Great ! Alroy beheld 
him in state and semblance, the same 

N 2 



268 THE WONDROUS TALE 

Solomon, whose sceptre the Prince of 
the Captivity had seized in the royal 
tombs of Judah. 

The strange assembly seemed perfectly 
unconscious of the presence of the child 
of Earth, who, with a desperate courage, 
leant against a column of the arch, and 
watched, with wonder, their mute and 
motionless society. Nothing was said, 
nothing done. No one moved, no one, 
even by gesture, seemed sensible of tlie 
presence of any other apparition save 
himself 

Suddenly there advanced from the bot- 
tom of the hall, near unto Alroy, a pro- 
cession. Pages and dancing girls, with 
eyes of fire, and voluptuous gestures, 
warriors with mighty arms, and vene- 
rable forms, with ample robes and flowing 
beards. And as they passed, even with 



OF ALROY. 269 

all the activity of their gestures, they 
made no sound ; neither did the musi- 
cians, whereof there was a great band 
playing upon harps and psalteries, and 
timbrels and cornets, break, in the slight- 
est degree, the almighty silence. 

This great crowd poured on in beau- 
tiful order, the procession never termi- 
nating, yet passing thrice round the hall, 
bowing to him that was upon the throne, 
and ranging themselves in ranks before 
the Afrits. 

And there came in twelve forms, bear- 
ing a great seal. The stone green, and 
the engraven characters of living flame, 
and the characters were those on the 
talisman of Jabaster, which Alroy still 
wore next to his heart. And the twelve 
forms placed the great seal before Solo- 
mon, and humbled themselves, and the 



270 THE WONDROUS TALE 

King bowed. At the same moment, Al- 
roy was sensible of a pang next to his 
heart. He instantly put his hand to the 
suffering spot, and lo ! the talisman 
crumbled into dust. 

The procession ceased, a single form 
advanced. Recent experience alone pre- 
vented Alroy from sinking before the 
spectre of Jabaster. Such was the single 
form. It advanced, bearing the sceptre. 
It advanced, it knelt before the throne, 
it offered the sceptre to the crowned and 
solemn vision. And the form of Solomon 
extended its arm, and took the sceptre, 
and instantly the mighty assembly va- 
nished ! 

Alroy advanced immediately into the 
chamber, but all was dark and silent. 
A trumpet sounded. He recognized the 
note of his own soldiery. He groped his 



OF ALROY. 271 

way to a curtain, and, pulling it aside, 
beheld the first streak of dawn. 



VIL 

Once more upon his charger, once 
more surrounded by his legions, once 
more his senses dazzled and inflamed by 
the waving banners and the inspiring 
trumpets, once more conscious of the 
power still at his command, and the 
mighty stake for which he was about to 
play, Alroy in a great degree recovered 
his usual spirit and self-possession. His 
energy returned with his excited pulse, 
and the vastness of the impending danger 
seemed only to stimulate the fertility of 
his genius. 

He pushed on with forced marches to- 



272 THE WONDROUS TALE 

wards Media, at the head of fifty thousand 
men. At the end of the second day's 
march, fresh couriers arrived from Abner, 
informing him that, unable to resist the 
valiant and almost innumerable host of 
the King of Karasme, he had entirly eva- 
cuated Persia, and had concentrated his 
forces in Louristan. Alroy, in conse- 
quence of this information, dispatched 
orders to Scherirah, to join him with his 
division instantly, and leave the capital 
to its fate. 

They passed again the mountains of 
Kerrund, and joined Abner and the army 
of Media thirty thousand strong, on the 
river Abzah. Here Alroy rested one 
night, to refresh his men, and on the en- 
suing morn pushed on to the Persian 
frontier, unexpectedly attacked the ad- 
vanced posts of Alp Arslan, and beat them 



OF ALROY. 273 

back, with great loss into the Province. 
But the force of the King* of Karasme 
was so considerable, that the Caliph did 
not venture on a general engagement, and 
therefore he fell back, and formed in bat- 
tle array upon the neighbouring plain of 
Nehauend, the theatre of one of his ear- 
liest and most brilliant victories, where 
he awaited the hourly expected arrival of 
Scherirah. 

The King of Karasme, who was desirous 
of bringing affairs to an issue, and felt 
confident in his superior force, instantly 
advanced. In two or three days at far- 
thest, it was evident that a battle must be 
fought that would decide the fate of the 
East. 

On the morn ensuing their arrival at 
Nehauend, while the Caliph was out 
hunting, attended only by a few officers, 

N 5 



^74 THE WONDROUS TALE 

he was suddenly attacked by an am- 
bushed band of Karasmians. Alroy and 
his companions defended themselves with 
such desperation that they at length suc- 
ceeded in beating off their assailants, al- 
though triple their amount in number. 
The leader of the Karasmians, as he re- 
treated, hurled a dart at the Caliph, which 
must have been fatal, had not a young 
officer of the guard interposed his own 
breast, and received the deadly wound. 
The party, in confusion, returned with all 
speed to the camp, Alroy himself bearing 
the expiring victim of desperate loyalty 
and military enthusiasm. 

The bleeding officer was borne to the 
royal pavilion, and placed upon the im-. 
perial couch. The most skilful leech was 
summoned ; but he examined the wound, 
and shook his head. The dying warrior 



OF ALROY. 275 

was himself sensible of his desperate con- 
dition. His agony could only be allevi- 
ated by withdrawing the javelin, which 
would occasion his immediate decease. 
He desired to be left alone with his 
Sovereign. 

'' Sire !'* said the officer, " I must die ; 
and I die without a pang. To die in 
your service, I have ever considered the 
most glorious end. Destiny has awarded 
it to me ; and if I have not met my fate 
upon the field of battle, it is some conso- 
lation that my death has preserved the 
most valuable of lives. Sire ! I have a 
sister." 

'' Waste not thy strength, dear friend, 
in naming her. Rest assured I shall ever 
deem thy relatives my own." 

'' I doubt it not. Would I had a 
thousand lives for such a master ! I have 



276 THE WONDROUS TALE 

a burthen on my conscience. Sire, nor 
can I die in peace unless I name it." 

'' Speak, speak freely. If thou hast 
injured any one, and the power or wealth 
of Alroy can redeem thy oppressed spirit, 
he'll not spare — he'll not spare, be assured 
of that." 

'' Noble, noble master, I must be 
brief; for although while this javelin 
rests within my body, I yet may live, 
the agony is great. Sire, the deed of 
which I speak doth concern thee.*' 

'' Ay !" 

'' I was on guard the day Jabaster died." 

''Powers of heaven! I am all ears. 
Speak on, speak on !" 

" He died self-strangled, so they say ?" 

" So they ever told me.'' 

" Thou art innocent, thou art innocent. 
1 thank my God, my King is innocent." 



OF ALROY. 277 

" Rest assured of that, as there^ is 
hope in Israel. I pray thee tell me 
all/' 

" The Queen came with the signet ring. 
To such authority I yielded way. She 
entered, and after her, the Lord Honain. I 
heard high words, IheardJabaster's voice. 
He struggled, yes ! he struggled ; but 
his mighty form, wounded and fettered, 
could not long resist. Foul play, foul 
play. Sire! What could I do against 
such adversaries ? They left the chamber 
with a stealthy step. Her eyes met 
mine. I never could forget that fell and 
glittering visage." 

" Thou ne'er hast spoken of this awful 
end ?" 

" To none but thee. And why I speak 
it now I cannot tell, save that it seems 
some inspiration urges me ; and methinks 



278 THE WONDROUS TALE 

they, who did this, may do even feller 
works, if such there be." 

'' Thou hast robbed me of all peace and 
hope of peace — — and yet I thank thee. 
Now I know the worth of life. I have 
never loved to think of that sad day, and 
yet, though I have sometimes dreamed of 
villainous work, the worst were innocence 
to thy dread tale." 

" 'Tis told ; and now I pray thee secure 
thy secret, by drawing from my agonized 
frame this javelin." 

'' Trusty heart, 'tis a sad office.'^ 

" I shall die with joy if thou performest 
it.'' 

" 'Tis done.'' 

*' God save Alroy !" 



OF ALROY. 279 



VIII. 

While Alroy , plunged in thought, stood 
over the body of the officer, there arose a 
flourish of triumphant music, and an eu- 
nuch, entering the pavilion, announced 
the arrival of Schirene from Kerrund. 
Almost immediately afterwards the Prin- 
cess, descending from her litter, entered 
the tent ; Alroy tore off his robe, and 
threw it over the corpse. 

" My own," exclaimed the Princess, as 
she ran up to the Caliph, *' I have heard 
all. Be not alarmed for me. I dare look 
upon a corpse. You know I am a soldier's 
bride. I am used to blood.'' 

*' Alas ! Alas !" 

" Why art thou so pale ? Thou dost 



280 THE WONDROUS TALE 

not kiss me ! Has this unhinged thee so ? 
'Tis a sad deed ; and yet to-morrow's 
dawn may light up thousands to as grim 
a fate. Why ! thou tremblest ! Alas ! 
kind soul! The single death of this 
fond, faithful heart hath quite upset my 
love. Yet art thou used to battle. Why ! 
this is foolishness. Art not glad to see 
me ? What, not one smile ! And I 
have come to fight for thee ! I will be 
kissed !" 

She flung herself upon his neck. Al- 
roy faintly returned her embrace, and 
bore her to a couch. He clapped his 
hands, and two soldiers entered and bore 
away the corpse. 

" The pavilion, Schirene, is now fitter 
for thy presence. Rest thyself; I shall 
soon return." Thus speaking, he quitted 
her. 



OF ALROY. 281 

He quitted her ; but her humbled look 
of sorrowful mortification pierced to his 
heart. He thought of all her love, and 
all her loveliness, he called to mind all 
the marvellous story of their united for- 
tunes. He felt that for her, and her 
alone he cared to live, that without her 
quick sympathy, even success seemed 
unendurable. His judgment fluctuated 
in an eddy of passion and reason. Pas- 
sion conquered. He dismissed from his 
intelligence all cognizance of good and 
evil ; he determined, under all circum- 
stances, to cling ever to her ; he tore from 
his mind all memory of the late dis- 
closure. He returned to the pavilion 
with a countenance beaming with affec- 
tion; he found her weeping, he folded 
her in his arms, he kissed her with a 
thousand kisses, and whispered between 
each kiss, his ardent love. 



282 THE WONDROUS TALE 



IX. 



'Twas midnight. Schirene reposed in 
the arms of Alroy. The Caliph, who 
was restless and anxious for the arrival of 
Scherirah, was scarcely slumbering, when 
the sound of a voice perfectly aroused 
him. He looked around ; he beheld the 
spectre of Jabaster. His hair stood on 
end, his limbs seemed to loosen, a cold 
dew crept over his frame, as he gazed 
upon the awful form within a yard of his 
couch. Unconsciously he disembarrassed 
his arms of their fair burthen, and rising 
on the couch, leant forward. 

'' Alroy, Alroy, Alroy !^ 

" I am here." 

" To-morrow Israel is avenged /** 



OF ALROY. 283 

" Who is that ?" exclaimed the Prin- 
cess, wakening. 

In a frenzy of fear, Alroy quite for- 
getting the spectre, turned and pressed 
his hand to her sight. When he again 
looked round the apparition was invisible. 

'' What wouldst thou, Alroy ?'' 

" Nothing, sweet ! A soldier's wife 
must bear strange sights, yet I would 
save you some. One of my men, forget- 
ful you were here, burst into my tent in 
such a guise, as scarce would suit a 
female eye. I must away, my child. 1*11 
call thy slaves. One kiss ! Farewell ! but 
for a time." 



284 THE WONDROUS TALE 



X 



" To-morrow Israel will be avenged. 
What, in Karasmian blood ! I have no 
faith. No matter. x\ll is now beyond 
my influence. A rushing destiny carries 
me onward. I cannot stem the course, 
nor guide the vessel. How now ! Who 
is the officer on guard ?" 

'^ Benomi, Sire, thy servant." 

'' Send to the Viceroy. Bid him meet 
me here. Who is this ?" 

'' A courier from the Lord Scherirah, 
Sire, but just arrived. He passed last 
night the Kerrund mountains. Sire, and 
will be with you by the break of day.*' 

'' Good news, good news. Go fetch 
Abner. Haste ! He'll find me here anon. 



OF ALROY. 285 

rU visit the camp awhile. Well, my 
brave fellows, you have hither come to 
conquer again with Alroy. You have 
fought before, I warrant, on the plain of 
Nehauend. 'Tis a rich soil, and shall be 
richer with Karasmian gore/' 

'' God save your Majesty ! Our lives 
are thine." 

*^ Please you, my little ruler,'' said a 
single soldier, addressing iVlroy ; ^' pardon 
my bluntness, but I knew you before 
you were a Caliph.'' 

'' Stout heart, I like thy freedom. 
Pr'ythee say on." 

'^ I was a saying, I hope you'll lead us 
in the charge to-morrow. Some say you 
will not." 

'' They say falsely.** 

" I thought so. ril ever answer for 
my little ruler— but then the Queen V' 



286 THE WONDROUS TALE 

''Is a true soldiers wife, and lives in 
the camp/' 

'' That's brave ! There, I told you so, 
comrades ; you would not believe me, 
but I knew our little i-uler before you 
did. I lived near the gate at Hamadan, 
please your Highness — old Shelomi's 
son ." 

'' Give me thy hand — ^a real friend. 
\Vhat is't ye eat here, boys ? Let me 
taste your mess. I' faith I would my 
cook could dress me such a pilau ! 'Tis 
admirable !" 

The soldiers gathered round their 
chieftain with eyes beaming with adora- 
tion. Twas a fine picture — the hero in 
the centre, the various groups around, 
some convemng with him, some cooking, 
some making coffee, all offering him by 
word or deed some testimonial of their 



OF ALROY. 287 

devotion, and blending with that devo- 
tion the most perfect frankness. 

" We shall beat them, lads !" 

'' There is no fear with you, you al- 
ways beat." 

'' I do my best, and so do you. A 
good general without good troops is little 
worth." 

"1' faith that's true. One must have 
good troops. What think you of Alp 
Arslan ?" 

^' I think he may give us as much 
trouble as all our other enemies together, 
and that's not much." 

" Brave, brave ! God save Alroy !" 

Benomi approached, and announced 
that the Viceroy was in attendance. 

" I must quit you, my children," said 
Alroy. '' We'll sup once more together 
when we have conquered." 



g88 THE WONDROUS TALE 

^' God save you, Sire ; and we will 
confound your enemies." 

'' Good night, my lads. Ere the dawn 
break we may have hot work." 

" We are ready, we are ready. God 
save Alroy !" 

'' They are in good cue, and yet 'twas 
a different spirit that inspired our early 
days. That I strongly feel. These are 
men true to a leader, who has never failed 
them, and confident in a cause that leads 
to — plunder. They are but splendid 
mercenaries. No more. Oh ! where are 
now the fighting men of Judah ! Where 
are the men who, when they drew their 
scimitars, joined in a conquering psalm 
of holy triumph ! Last eve of battle you 
would have thought the field a mighty 
synagogue. Priests and altars, flaming 
sacrifices, and smoking censers, groups of 



OF ALROY. 289 

fiery zealots hanging with frenzy on pro- 
phetic lips, and sealing with their blood 
and holiest vows, a solemn covenant to 
conquer Canaan. All is changed, as I 
am. How now, Abner ? You are well 
muffled !" 

" Is it true Scherirah is at hand ? 

'' I doubt not all is right. Would that 
the dawn would break !" 

" The enemy is advancing. Some of 
their columns are in sight. My scouts 
have dodged them. They intend doubt- 
less to form upon the plain." 

'' They are in sight, eh ! Then we 
will attack them at once, ere they are 
formed. Rare, rare! We'll beat them 
yet. Courage, dear brother. Scherirah 
will be here at dawn in good time, very 
good time — very, very good time." 

VOL. II. o 



290 THE WONDROUS TALE 

" I like the thought." 

'^ The men are in good heart. At 
break of dawn charge with thirty thou- 
sand cavalry upon their forming ranks. 
I'll take the right, Asriel the left. It 
shall be a family affair, dear Abner. 
How is Miriam ?'* 

'' I heard this morn, quite well. She 
sends you her love and prayers. The 
Queen is here ?'' 

^' She came this eve. Quite well." 

'' She must excuse all courtesy." 

" Say nothing. She is a soldier's wife. 
She loves thee well, dear Abner." 

'^ I know that. I hope my sword may 
guard her children's throne." 

" Well, give thy orders. Instant bat- 
tle, eh ?" 

'' Indeed, I think so." 

'^ ril send couriers to hurry Sche- 





OF ALROY. 




291 


rirah. All 


looks 


well. 


Reserve the 


guard." 










" Ay, ay ! 


Farewell, dear Sire. 


When 


we meet again, I 


trust 


your 


enemies 


rriRy be your 


slaves 


r* 







NOTES. 



o 3 



NOTES 
