STANDARD 
NOVELS. 

N LXXXVI. 



" No kind ofliterature is so generally attractive as Fiction. Pictures of 
life and manners, and Stories of adventure, are more eagerly received by 
the many than graver productions, however important these latter may be. 
APULEIUS is better remembered by his fable of Cupid and Psyche than by 
his abstruser Platonic writings ; and the Decameron of BOCCACCIO has out- 
lived the Latin Treatises, and other learned works of that author." 



GILBERT GURNEY. 



COMPLETE IV ONE VOLUME. 



LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH; 
J. CUMMING, DUBLIN. 

1841. 



The NEXT VOLUME will contain 
MR. THEODORE HOOK'S NOVEL 

ENTITLED 

THE WIDOW AND THE MARQUESS: 

OR, 

LOVE AND PRIDE. 

COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME. 

LONDON : 

Printed by A. SPOTTISWOODE, 
New-Street- Square. 

;/ && -Ca^na^i^tf^ <?f ' 

' 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

BY 

THEODORE E. HOOK, 

AUTHOR OF 

" MAXWELL," " SAYINGS AND DOINGS," " PARSON'S 
DAUGHTER," " JAC BRAG," 

LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH; 
J. GUMMING, DUBLIN. 

1841. 

ADVERTISEMENT. 

Two of the incidents contained in the following story 
have been dramatised ; one on the French, and the other 
on the English stage'. 

This circumstance, which has been noticed by one of 
the ablest and most impartial of our periodicals (the 
Athenceum), has arisen from the fact of the Editor's 
having, in society, frequently described the events which 
actually occurred many years since. He does not, how- 
ever, think this a sufficient reason for omitting them in 
his bundle of gleanings from the late lamented Mr. Gur- 
ney's papers, in which they stand originally recorded. 

T. E. HOOK. 

A 3 

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 

THEODORE EDWARD HOOK, ESQ. 

THEODORE HOOK (the author of the following clever novel) 
was born in Charlotte Street, Bedford Square, September 
22. 1788, and seemed from his earliest youth destined to 
be a cultivator of polite letters. He was the son of James 
Hook, the popular composer, whose pleasing strains de- 
lighted the preceding generation (when Vauxhall Gardens 
were a fashionable resort), by his wife, formerly Miss 
Madden, a lady of singular accomplishments. She was the 
author of " The Double Disguise," published in 1784; and 
died at South Lambeth, in 1 805, just as her youngest son 
had begun to exhibit his precocious talents. Their elder son, 
the Rev. James (afterwards Dean) Hook, twenty years older 
than their youngest, Theodore, was also an author, and dis- 
covered a predilection for the drama before the church put 
forth its higher claims , upon his zeal and talent. He wrote 
"Jack of Newbury," an opera, 1795; and " Diamond cut 
Diamond," in 1797; and has always been considered the 
author of two novels, very effective and celebrated in their 
day, " Pen Owen," and " Percy Mallory." We need scarcely 
add that Dean Hook was the father of the Rev. Dr. Walter 
Hook, one of her Majesty's Chaplains, and Vicar of St. Peter's, 
Leeds. 

Thus cradled and nursed in the home of varied talent, it is 
no wonder that Theodore, on leaving Harrow, and having 
matriculated at St. Mary's Hall, Oxford where he did not 
remain long enough to take a degree should have thrown 

Till BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OP 

himself into the arms of the Muse. The indications of his 
genius were early and remarkable. At the premature age 
of seventeen he produced his first drama, " The Soldier's 
Return," a comic opera, which was acted in 1805, and for 
which he received 501. This was his first reward ; and, with 
the prospect of an exhaustless treasure before him the gold 
to be coined from his own mind he rushed, with all the ardour 
of that juvenile period of life, into the pleasures to which 
society in London courted the debutant who had so early 
distinguished himself in the arena of dramatic competition. 

Handsome, witty, and happy, Hook entered upon his gay 
career with every advantage. The associations of the stage, 
with all their attractions, were open to him on his father's 
account and his own ; and he speedily formed intimacies 
with many of the pleasantest of pleasant men and women, 
who at that time were the soul of society in London. Their 
tricks, and jokes, and masqueradings, for the next few years, 
replete, as they were, with frolic and drollery, would fill a 
volume of whim, such, indeed, as he has sometimes introduced 
into his later novels. But, though playing in the bright 
stream of enjoyment, he did not allow luxury or idleness to 
interfere with graver pursuits. He continued to write with 
prolific industry, and with increasing popularity. 

In 1806, he produced "Catch him who can," a farce; 
" The Invisible Girl," a drama, or monologue, written to 
exhibit the peculiar talent of his friend Jack Bannister ; and 
" Tekeli," a melodrame, which was excellently acted, and 
caused a great sensation in the dramatic world. " The For- 
tress," another melodrame, followed in 1 807 ; " Music 
Mad;" " The Siege of St. Quintin;" " Killing no Murder;" 
" Safe and Sound ; " " Ass-ass-ination," and " The Will and 
the Widow." The last was produced in 1810, making in all 
not fewer than eleven dramatic compositions in three years. 

Of these, "Killing no Murder" created the most sen- 
sation, the licence being denied to it by Mr. Larpent, then 

THEODORE EDWARD HOOK, ESQ. IX 

deputy licenser, in consequence of his alleging that it turned 
a Methodist parson into ridicule. Hook defended his pro- 
duction, and flagellated the licenser in a clever preface, which 
created much amusement, and ultimately obtained the victory 
for wit and satire over dulness and dogmatism. In repre- 
sentation, however, the character was of necessity changed 
into that of a dancing-master (Apollo Belvi), so inimitably 
given by his friend Listen. 

Soon after this, Mr. Hook was appointed to an office of con- 
siderable value and responsibility in the Mauritius, whither he 
proceeded, with every prospect of fortune before him. But, 
alas ! poets, dramatists, and literati, are in general but ill 
adapted to become accurate accomptants-general, or clear 
plodding treasurers. It is no impeachment of intellect or 
honour to confess that the concerns of business, the cares and 
pains-taking, the constant attention to details, and a thorough 
knowledge of figures, (as applied not to verse but to money,) 
are seldom consistent with the devotion of the mind to the 
cultivation of letters. The realities of the one consort but ill 
with the imagination of the other ; and, from the perplexities 
of the former, men are but too apt to seek a dreamy and 
delightful refuge in the castle-building world of the latter. 
Mr. Hook held the place of treasurer of the Mauritius from 
the gth of October, 1813, to the 28th of February, 1818, 
when the confused state of the accounts entrusted to his charge, 
and by him too readily left to the management of others, led 
to his being sent home by the Governor under a charge of 
defalcation. The extreme hostility and severity of this mea- 
sure were strongly animadverted upon at the time, and have 
been assigned to other than public reasons. 

Conscious of integrity, though legally answerable for his 
trust, Mr. Hook made the best of his position, brought on, as 
he said, " by a disorder in his chest" His friends rallied 
round him in his adversity ; and perhaps no palace ever rung 
with louder bursts of laughter, as jest, and pun, and witticism 

X BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OP 

followed in quick succession, among the merry souls who came 
to solace him, than did the abode in which he was temporarily 
confined. 

Liberated, at length, he began again to write. Ever a 
stanch Tory in principle, the establishment of the "John Bull" 
newspaper formed a very important event in his life. He was 
selected to be its editor ; and, besides holding a share in the 
property, he received a handsome salary for this duty. "With- 
out going into a discussion either upon the politics or person- 
alities which marked the opening of this party battery, it may 
be truly said that the eclat given to its early numbers by his 
lavish talent raised the publication at once into a high degree 
of popularity and profit. Like the " An ti- Jacobin " of a pre- 
ceding period, there were numerous poems, essays, and jeux 
d 'esprit in the " Bull, " from his pen, which will, no doubt, be 
collected, as they deserve to be, and published in a separate 
form.* 

Mr. Hook's writings cover a space of twenty years, charm- 
ing the public in many a way, whilst their gifted author was 
enjoying all the pleasures of the best society in the metropolis, 
all its gaieties and humours himself the most gay and hu- 
morous of its merry sons. His company was sought by the 
luxurious and by the intelligent ; by the mirthful and by the 
wise ; by the fair and by the learned. Wherever he came 
he was a welcome guest ; and his arrival was the signal for 
hilarity and festivity. The dining-room and the drawing- 
room were alike his theatres : the former was enlivened by 
the jest and song ; the latter by music and improvisation, of 
which he was master beyond any man that perhaps England 
ever beheld. 

Our untractable language was to him as easy as the facile 
Italian ; and whether seated at the genial board, with a few 
choice companions, or at the pianoforte, surrounded by admir- 

* These, we believe, were collected and arranged by Mr. Hook for publication, 
and placed in the hands of Mr. Bentley for that purpose. 

THEODORE EDWARD HOOK, ESQ. XI 

ing beauty, his performances in this way were the delight and 
admiration of all who heard them. They were, indeed, very 
extraordinary. Some of them might have been printed as 
finished ballads ; and others, though not so perfect in parts as 
metrical compositions, were so studded with bright conceits, 
and often so touched with exquisite sentiment and pathos, that 
their effect upon the audience was evinced by shouts of laugh- 
ter, or starting tears. 

We remember one beautiful example of the latter. It was 
an early hour of morning, and the sun was rising on the 
banks of the Thames another extempore song had been 
begged by a bevy of lovely dames, and granted to their re- 
quest and the subject given was " Good Night." Hook 
had proceeded through a few verses, and at length uttered a 
happy thought, which excited a hearty laugh in a beautiful 
boy standing by him ; on which he turned to the child, and, 
apostrophising the mounting orb of day, alluded in plaintive 
lines to his elders, to whom he was obliged to say " Good 
night;" then, striking a gayer strain, he wished him a, bright- 
ened morning and a prosperous day. It is not easy to describe 
such things ; but stern as well as soft hearts were deeply af- 
fected by the touching appeal. 

Of Mr. Hook's works of fiction, biography, &c. we cannot 
undertake to supply any correct list. His " Sayings and 
Doings," his " Gilbert Gurney," and " Love and Pride," his 
" Parson's Daughter," his "Maxwell," his "Jack Brag," his 
" Births, Deaths, and Marriages," have all been pre-eminently 
successful. His " Memoirs of Kelly," and his more important 
" Biography of Sir David Baird," have also been highly es- 
teemed among contemporary works of a similar nature. In ad- 
dition to a handsome sum paid for writing the latter, a magni- 
ficent diamond snuff-box was presented to him by Lady Baird, 
in token of her approbation of the manner in which he had 
executed the task. This box, which had been given by the 
Pasha of Egypt to Sir David Baird, Mr. Hook was justly 

Xll BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OP T. E. HOOK, ESQ. 

proud of. We have also before us a prospectus of a contem- 
plated History of the House of Hanover, which he had un- 
dertaken, but never lived to complete. 

His last alas ! his last work is a novel, called " Pere- 
grine Bunce ; or, Settled at Last," the MS. of which is in 
the possession of Mr. Bentley. 

Mr. Hook departed this life at his cottage at Fulham on the 
24th of August last, after a short, but severe illness, which, 
though the state of his health had been for some time a source 
of uneasiness to his friends, did not assume an alarming cha- 
racter till within a very few days of his decease. To him the 
well-known epithet on Quin, 

" That tongue which set the table in a roar," &c. 

might be even more appropriately applied ; and his loss has 
caused a vacuum in society which the present generation may 
scarcely hope to see filled up. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

CHAPTER I. 

WHEN I resolved upon committing to paper sundry passages 
of my life, I determined most carefully to abstain from the 
perpetration of a piece of autobiography not because the 
public has been somewhat surfeited with that kind of litera- 
ture ; since, if I have my will, my memoranda of the scenes 
and circumstances which I have witnessed, and which have 
occurred to me, will never meet the public eye but because, 
for the most part, " Reminiscences," and " Lives and 
Times," and the like, are extremely tiresome to read, seeing 
that the matters and events, incidents and occurrences, which 
are, or were at the time at which they were set down, all of 
great importance to the recording individual, have (as all those 
books savour sadly of senility) lost all interest for the reader, 
long before they reach his eye. 

Nevertheless and notwithstanding, such is the force of 
habit, and such the dominion of principle, that, for the life of 
me, I cannot prevail upon myself to leave my notes huddled 
together without something like arrangement, nor without just 
so much notice of myself and my family as may serve to 
account for my curious wanderings over the face of the earth, 
and for many of the transactions in which I have been doomed 
to bear a principal part. 

Begin we, therefore, with the beginning. " A fig for your 
dates," says the Smyrna man to the Tunisian. Nevertheless, 
in this place, dates are really essential, as marking the pro- 
gress of the writer through his chequered career. Be 
patient, reader, whomsoever thou mayst chance to be, and I 
will be brief. 

I was born in the same year, and in the same month of the 
same year, as Lord Byron but eight days later on the 
30th of January a memorable day, too. I always felt a 

B 

2 GILBERT GURNEY. 

sort of sympathetic self-satisfaction as Byron advanced in age 
and reputation, in the recollection that although, with my 
inherent respect for his rank and talents, I could not possibly 
take the liberty of coming into the world before him I began 
my life so nearly about the same period. 

There was, nevertheless, something very disheartening to 
me in the sombre seriousness of my jour de fete. I would 
rather have been born on the anniversary of a victory or a 
coronation. Let me be ever so good a boy, I could enjoy no 
holiday on my birth-day never could be taken to a play 
seeing that the theatres were all closed ; and moreover, and 
above this, I lost twelve thousand pounds which my god- 
father, the late Sir Charles Smith, would have left me, if I 
had been christened after him, as he had proposed, and my 
parents had intended : but, happening to be bora upon the 
anniversary of the martyrdom of our too conceding king, my 
sire, somewhat superstitious, would not hear of my bearing 
the same name as the unfortunate monarch ; so I was 
christened Gilbert, and lost my legacy, Sir Charles having 
taken huff at my not being named after him, as our old friend 
Pepys did at Mrs. Brown's, where he and Sir William Penn 
were godfathers, and Mrs. Jordan ad Shipman godmothers 
to her boy that being the king's birth-day, upon which 
Pepys rose early and put six spoons and a silver porringer 
into his pocket to give away ; but in the sequel did give the 
midwife ten shillings, and the nurse five shillings, and the 
maid of the house two shillings ; " yet forasmuch as he 
expected to give his name to the child, but did not (it being 
called John), he forbore, then, to give his plate." Thus, by 
similar mishaps, did Gilbert Gurney lose twelve thousand 
pounds, and John Browne a porringer and six spoons. 

The saying goes that it is " a wise child who knows his 
own father." For myself it is a disparagement neither to my 
own personal wisdom nor to my mother's unquestionable 
character, to admit that I knew very little of mine. A faint 
vision of a large red face, a white head, a black tail, and a 
brown walking-stick, floats in my mind, the possessor of 
which I was taught in infancy to respect as my parent. He 
died, however, before I was three years old, in the house in 
which he had lived for upwards of twenty years, and in which 
I was born ; it stood in Bolsover Street, Cavendish Square, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

a street which no longer exists, thanks to the extraordinary 
improvements which have taken place in that part of the 
metropolis; it having, several years since, subsided into a 
chaos of old materials, whence has arisen one of the most 
magnificent promenades in Europe. Like the Dragon's teeth, 
the buried bricks of former houses have given birth to a legion 
of palaces. 

I remember our particular house perfectly ; the front par- 
lour had two windows looking to the street, over the blinds of 
which I recollect my father had a strange propensity for look- 
ing out at the passengers ; and so earnestly did he indulge in 
the pursuit (if standing still may be so called), that in its 
enjoyment he would remain intently watching the most 
trifling occurrence which came under his observation, with his 
nose flattened against the pane, as little aware of the circum- 
stance as the anxious hero who stuck his spear through his 
foot without knowing it, while leaning his chin on the re- 
versed end of it watching the fate of a battle. I remember, 
too, that opposite to the windows, one of which, that nearest 
the fire-place, was the solace of my parent's leisure, there was 
a recess in which stood a sideboard, perpetually decorated with 
cruets, beakers, and glasses, and three mahogany cases, two 
for smart-handled knives, and one in the centre for spoons, 
over which sideboard was affixed to the panel (for the room 
was wainscoted), a round mirror, encircled with gilt boluses, 
supporting two branches for candles ; and over the mantel- 
piece hung a portrait of my father himself, when a smart 
young man, by an artist of the name of Abbot, who obtained 
a reputation for painting Lord Nelson more than once, and 
who, I recollect, lost his life by swallowing, as a draught, 
a mixture sent him from an apothecary to be used as a 
gargle. 

The drawing-room had three windows in it ; over the-'fire- 
place there hung a picture of my mother, by Wheatley, and 
in one panel at the side was a portrait of my sister Jane, who 
died before I was born ; and in the other a likeness of my 
brother Cuthbert, who was seventeen years my senior, and in 
India at the time of which I now speak. 

My grandfather I never saw ; he was a physician in the 
West of England, or rather, as I suspect, an apothecary, &c., 
for I never could find his name in any old list of the college. 
B 2 

GCRXET. 

He set my father to stody Ac law, who, being deficient either 
in talent or industry, soon found, to use a colloquial phrase 
in a double sense, that "he could make nothing of it;" be, 
it as a professMXi, and, marrying soon 

afterwards, the aid gentleman contribated liberally daring his 
lifetime to suppoU the estabtishment of the young couple, and 
at his death bequeathed them a fortune perfectly adequate to 

My mother's maiAn name was Gataker, and my father, 
who hist bee* represented to me as a proud man, was very 
Tain of the I'oauuliuu. The earliest of her ancestors married 
a Miss Joeosa Barley ; bat the one from which, it seemed, she 
darned to dfscrod, was a clergyman who had been married 
tour times. Certain it is that I hare at this moment a seal of 
my father's arms impaled with those of his wife ; and there I 
find the lion rampant per fess, sable and gules, and the cross 
pattee Henry with blue tips. 

My father never was known so snioutly and suddenly to 
lose his temper as when he was thought to be dfscradfd from 
the Norfolk Guroeys (not that a more honourable or respect- 
able family exists ; and quite sure am I that a monarch might 
be proud of a connection with one of its members, whose 
Boole heart asd charitable dispOBticu would ^** honour to a 
throne) ; because be fended bis to be an elder branch of the 
bouse, ami that he sprang from the De Goumeys, while they 
were yet resident at Le Brai, before the conquest ; and so 
rttkitd of this fact was he, that nothing but a request from 
my mother to the contrary prevented his christening, or rather 
naming, my eldest brother Cuthbert, odes, after his pet 
ancestor, who assumed the name of Gournay, when Rollo, at 
the division of Nenstria, *mang*t his adherents, bestowed upon 
him the fortress so called. 

All this was a question of time and history, but hence 
arose his firm conviction that, instead of the junior, it was 
the elder branch of the family that settled in 
and that the Gurneys of Barew Gurney and Ii 
with all the accumulation of the Harpetree properly, had of 
right the precedence of the Gurneys of Keswkk. 

Of the plain blue cross OB hi* shield, my father was justly 
proud ; and his gurnet capsiaed upon his chapeau gules, was 
to him a point of no little importance ; and having not only 

great respect for Us laumai, but strong faith m 

I hare continued to use die i 

the present moment, without doubt, 

of mind. 

I pass over die first i 
at a dash per jufivss. My school fife was not a happy one, 
I was idle and careless of my tasks I had no aptitude for 
leaning languages I hated Greek, and absolutely sfcaridend 
at Hebrew I fancied myself a genius, and any thing that 
cotdd be done in a hurry, and widi little trouble, I did toler- 
ably weQ bat application I had not; and when my < 
mother (who survived her husband eighteen yean) 
to me, on die advice of Mr. Graham, a most worthy man and 
excellent magUlialr, to enter myself of Lincoln's Ism, and 
commence die study of die kw, I could not help calling to 
her mind die history she had herself told me of my fanWs 

Till ii ii uilhiiit; iM"""*lj *"* in die 
for die bar in uiieu cases out of ten it 
dung, under a gendemanry pretence ; in mine nodting could 
be more unlike what it professed to be; I paid my entrance- 
money, gave my caution, and diencefiudt proceeded to "mine 
Inn" for four or five days in each term, dtrew on my gown, 
walked into hall, and dreading die fatigue of even 
professionally, wrote down my 

It was necessary, howewu, to satisfy my kind and 
mudiei, who, with something more like certainty don 

to either the Woolsack or the King's Beach the 
far the more probable that I should put myself 
somebody who might do me die favuui of permitting me to 
copy his papers frati*, while be did her the iisahwm of 
taking three hundred pounds per mmmmm oat of her pocket in 
reUun for his good nature: and accordingly I was 
under the inspection and direction of the worthy 
:t whose name I have already mentioned, and confided to the 

care of a mj If ai md gentleman of the professaon, who, at 
die time of my writing this, is fiffing a situation not very far 
below one of those which my too fond parent in die ardour of 
her afteetioB had destined for my occupation. Wbatuught 
hare been die result of my serious application to die dry 
B 3 

GILBERT GCKNEY. 

drudgery of this learned man's office it is impossible for me 
to surmise. It so happened that the experiment was destined 
never to be tried, for, among my fellow-pupils at his cham- 
bers, there was one whose society and conversation I found so 
much more agreeable than the elaborated tautology over which 

1 had to pore from ten o'clock in the morning till ten at night 
dinner alone intervening that I gradually relaxed from 
a regukr attendance upon my work, first, to a gentle indiffer- 
ence, and then to an absolute aversion and distaste for the 
whole pursuit. 

My young companion was a bit of a poet, a bit of an 
artist, a bit of a musician, and above all, to me at the 
period delightful, a bit of an actor. He knew several of 
the regular actors they visited at his father's house I was 
invited by my young friend, and met Charles Kemble and 
Mathews. The latter at that period was new to London . 
his merits were not yet appreciated he wanted that nerve 
and confidence which subsequent patronage and ultimate sue 
cess inspired. I well remember the evening. Charles Kemble 
was grave and gentlemanly; but Mathews, although quite 
gentlemanly enough for all earthly purposes, was gay as a lark. 
He gave us imitations and personifications. There, yet un- 
seen by metropolitan eyes, his old Frenchman, his old Scots- 
woman, all the bright and vivid pictures, now grown familiar 
to the public, were exhibited to us fresh in all the charms of 
novelty. 

That night decided me as to Lincoln's Inn not that I 
intended to mount the stage myself, but after seeing that ex- 
quisite mimic, the best actor off the stage that ever lived, I 
resolved to put into execution a design which I had previously 
imparted to my young friend a design no other than that of 
writing a farce for one of the theatres. 

The moment this notable scheme took possession of what I 
fancied my brain, law was at an end ; I had no patience with 
the parchments. As that witty (now veteran) George Col- 
man the younger says, in his " Reckoning with Time," 
which, by the by, he wrote when he was five and forty, and 
fancied himself old, 

" Congreve beat Blackstone hollow, 

And in my crown no pleas had Hale 
To supersede Apollo." 

GILBERT GURNEY. 7 

It is quite clear that when a man takes what is called a 
fancy, the one pursuit is paramount. A geologist will tell 
you that there is nothing in the world so interesting, so en- 
grossing, so captivating, as perambulating a dull and miser- 
able country, chipping off bits of rock, and scooping out 
lumps of clay. He sees no beauty in Richmond Hill his 
only delight is in dicovering and telling you of what it is 
composed. The finest mountain in the world has no charm 
for his eye in the mass. No ; to be agreeable to him, he must 
go and knock a little bit of it off, and wrap up that little bit 
of dirt in a little bit of paper, and carry it to Somerset House, 
and then take another little bit of paper, and write a history 
of it. 

To ordinary folks nothing can be much more dull than such 
a course of proceeding; to the geologist it is delight upon 
me the particular taste for dramatic writing had a similar 
effect: Act 1. Scene 1. "Enter Sir Jeremy Bootjack;" de- 
lightful thought ! there I saw him dressed as nobody ever 
was dressed in his life he, the said Sir Jeremy, appearing 
in a sort of mongrel full dress, with jockey tops and a pig- 
tail : whilst all the lovers and their ladies were to be flirting 
and torn-fooling about in the costume of the then present day. 
But what was all that to me ? Munden and Dowton, and all 
those men, wore court suits, and jack boots, and cocked hats, 
and pigtails ; and I was sure it was right, and so to work I 
went ; bought three or four French vaudevilles (which, it 
being then war-time, were not quite so easy of access as they 
became after the Duke of Wellington had set Europe to rest 
and raised England to the pinnacle of glory, whence smaller 
people than his Grace have been every day dragging her 
down), and, filching an incident from each, made up my very 
effective drama. 

Young as I was at that time, and inexperienced in such 
matters, a little observation assured me that the English au- 
diences, who are, in point of fact, as undramatic in their 
notions as Methodists, would not be satisfied with a single in- 
cident, which, on the foreign stage, amply serves to amuse and 
delight. The French go to a play prepared to view the affair 
theatrically, and are ready to eaten the slightest allusion, and 
enter into the spirit of the author. With the English, it is 
necessary to thump in your meaning, to make every effect 
B 4 

8 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

clear <f to the meanest comprehension," or else you fail ; and 
as to incidents, there must be a dozen in a farce, one after 
the other, if you mean that people should laugh or be pleased. 
This being clearly the case, I set to work, and, as I have just 
said, crammed the materials of some four or five light French 
pieces into my maiden drama (as an Indian cook sticks ka- 
bobs upon a skewer), and was, when I had finished it, con- 
vinced that I had at least equalled Foote ; emulating therein 
the exultation which a dramatist of our own day expressed at 
having given "Billy the go-by" Billy meaning Shakspeare! 
I recollect so well the anxiety with which I copied out my 
MS., the infinite pains which I took to dash and underline the 
points which I felt quite confident would set the house in a 
roar, and the nervous solicitude with which I read my first 
effort to my young friend, who had promised, when it was 
finished, to present it to the manager. 

My exemplary mother, who had a sort of instinctive horror 
of actors and actresses, was not slow to find out the enormity 
(as she thought it) of which I had been guilty. Something 
fell from my young friend, during a visit which we were pay- 
ing her, which developed the important secret for such I in- 
tended it to be ; and the result of the discovery was the fol- 
lowing letter. Upon recording which, it may be as well to 
observe that my surviving parent had, shortly after my ad- 
mission into Lincoln's Inn, given up her house in Bolsover 
Street, and retired to the neighbourhood of Teddington, leav- 
ing me in possession of some ready-furnished lodgings in 
Great Suffolk Street, Haymarket. 

But for the letter here it is : 

" TedUington, May 8, 18. 

" MY PEAREST GILBERT, I take up my pen with regret 
to address yOu upon a subject to which I once before slightly 
alluded, and upon which I am quite aware our opinions are at 
variance. 

" I think I may assure myself of your readiness to give me 
credit for an anxious desire for your happiness as well as your 
respectability, and for having no wish either to curtail the en- 
joyments which your income justifies, or to restrain the 
amusements which are congenial to your age and inclinations ; 
but there is one point upon which I feel it my duty to speak 

GILBERT GURNET. 9 

out, to warn you of dangers by which what appears a most 
innocent pursuit is environed, and to endeavour, if possible, to 
check you in a career which I know you are on the point of 
beginning, or, perhaps, have actually begun I mean that of 
a dramatic author. 

" I dare say you will laugh at me for my apprehensions, 
and even ridicule the partiality which, in the midst of my 
fears, magnifies my son into a ( dramatic author,' because, as 
I happen to know, he has written a farce. Everything has a 
beginning ; and if this farce be produced and succeeds, it will 
only be the first of a lengthened race ; if it fail, you will be 
exposed to the ridicule of the newspapers and the green-room. 
Why adopt such an alternative ? 

" Now, understand me, my dear Gilbert. Do not imagine 
that I feel any of those blind and determined prejudices against 
actors and actresses which you have, more than once, half 
playfully and half in earnest accused me of maintaining. I 
have no doubt that they may be extremely worthy persons in 
their way. What I contend for is, that, while pursuing your 
studies for a serious avocation, in which no success can be 
hoped for without sedulous attention, it will be ruinous to as- 
sociate with a class of men and women whose whole existence 
is one tissue of artificiality ; who see Nature not in her proper 
colours, but through the darkened medium of theatrical lamp- 
light ; and who, from the constant mechanical repetition of ex- 
alted sentiments, the personification of conflicting passions, and 
the assumption of a diversity of characters, are rendered callous 
to the realities of life, except when they may personally affect 
their own interests, and are imbued with a contempt for those 
principles and qualities which they habitually treat as mere 
matters of acting. 

" It is curious to observe, although the effect may be ex- 
tremely natural, how the force of habit weakens the value and 
importance of the most serious objects in our existence. How 
different are the feelings of the man who administers an oath 
to a witness in a court of justice from those of the individual 
to whom it is tended ! The undertaker's man at a funeral, if 
he be serious at all, is sad only in the way of business. No cere- 
mony of that nature or character could be made either solemn 
or affecting to him. The butcher never could be brought to 
pity the struggles of a dying lamb. The dramatic performer, 

10 GILBERT GL'RNEY. 

in the same way, talks of honour, and virtue, and the best 
affections of the heart, like a parrot; and although, here and 
there, there may be one whose taste for literature induces him 
to dwell upon some splendid passages of our great dramatic 
poets, he speaks and thinks even of those professionally, and 
considers them relatively to the ' effect ' they will produce in 
the delivery, and not with reference to the principles they in- 
culcate, or the virtues they applaud. 

" But it is not with the individuals I quarrel ; nor is it just 
that a universal censure should be applied to a community in 
which there are, no doubt, many exceptions to the general 
rule. It is to the art, or calling, and to the pursuits connected 
with it, I object, as affecting the study of the law. I hate 
lecturing, and, indeed, am not well qualified for it ; but ex- 
perience convinces me that the avocations of the lawyer and 
the dramatist are incompatible. You need not tell me that there 
are many attractions in the prospect of success as a dramatist, 
which, to a very young man, are in a high degree alluring 
the facility which it affords to an introduction to the gay and 
lively, the entree to the playhouses, the society of wits, 
the association with talent and beauty. But ask yourself, my 
dear child, whether these enticements are to be admitted or 
rejected. Look round, and see whether any instance exists of 
high professional success in any other pursuit where the equi- 
vocal avocation of play-writing has been adopted." 

I recollect perfectly well throwing down my mother's letter 
when I came to this passage, absolutely indignant at the sup- 
position of the incompatibility of my two pursuits. But when 
I came to the examination of facts, I found myself unable to 
make out a case. Sheridan was my strong hold : but that 
failed me ; for although his genius placed him in the first 
ranks of society (and he was then yet in full strength and 
vigour), he had never established himself in a profession. 
Murphy was a barrister ; but, although he was a good dra- 
matic author, he never shone at the bar. Our own George 
Colman, with talent equal to any thing, began with the law : 
he became an admirable dramatist, but no lawyer. 

Then I bethought me of Addison, whose one great play 
established him in the highest class of dramatic authors, but I 
found myself little better off; for he, like Sheridan, made no 

GILBERT GURNET. 11 

figure in any learned profession : but having been for many 
years avowedly " a man of letters/' married Lady Warwick, 
got into parliament, and was made secretary of state. Now, 
said I, I have my triumph. I'll quote Addison upon my exem- 
plary parent. But no : what his biographer says of him 
.settled that question: "In 171? he rose to his highest 
elevation, being made secretary of state ; but it is universally 
confessed that he was unequal to the duties of the place." 
This, considering the secretaries of state we have since seen 
flourishing in office, was rather a damper to my ardour in his 
behalf. " In the House of Commons he could not speak, and 
therefore was useless to the government. In the office he 
could not issue an order without losing his time in quest of 
fine expressions. What he gained in rank he lost in credit, 
and finding by experience his own inability, was forced to 
solicit his dismission with a pension of 1500/. a year. His 
friends palliated this relinquishment, of which both friends and 
enemies knew the true reason, with an account of declining 
health, and the necessity of recess and quiet. He now returned 
to his vocation, and began to plan literary occupations for his 
future life. He prepared a tragedy on the death of Socrates, 
and " 

Here I threw down the book in despair. The author, in- 
competent to the fulfilment of high office in real life, returns 
from the station to which he had ascended, and, resuming his 
vocation, prepares a tragedy. This vexed me. 

Congreve was my next attempt. He died in honour and in 
affluence, and his body lay in state in the Jerusalem Chamber, 
and the Duke of Bridgewater, and Lord Godolphin, and 
Lord Wilmington, and the Lord knows whom besides, were 
pall-bearers. What could my exemplary parent say to that ? 
When I asked the " authorities," they answered me, that 
" Congreve was sent to school at Kilkenny, and thence to the 
University of Dublin, where he acquired a perfect skill in all 
the branches of polite literature ; a little after the revolution 
in 1688, he was sent over to London, and placed in the 
Middle Temple, but " What did I see ? " the law 
proving too dry for him, he troubled himself little with it, and 
continued to pursue his former studies." He brought out his 
" Old Bachelor" in 1693, and 

" Well," said I, " here is another break-down ; but still 

12 GILBERT OURNEY. 

his admirable plays have procured for him an immortal reput- 
ation. What signified the law to him ? He must have been 
as proud of his place in society as any Lord Chief Justice in 
Christendom." There again was I wrong, for Voltaire has 
recorded of him quite the contrary. 

" He raised the glory of comedy/' says Voltaire, " to a 
greater height than any English writer before or since our 
time he wrote only a few plays, but they were excellent in 
their kind the laws of the drama are strictly observed in 
them." This praise elated and delighted me : what imme- 
diately follows I confess surprised me " They abound with 
characters which are shadowed with the utmost delicacy, and 
we meet with not so much as one low or coarse jest." 

What can more strongly mark the difference which exists 
between the manners and conversation of Congreve's day and 
our own ? In order to render Congreve's comedies endurable 
on the modern stage, more than one third of the dialogue is 
now either omitted or greatly modified a circumstance 
which gave rise to that witty observation of Sheridan's, who, 
after witnessing the representation of " Love for Love," pu- 
rified for the refined modern public, said, " This is not 
Congreve's play the popular fastidiousness has ruined it 
such prunings for propriety's sake are like the emasculation of 
animals; you eradicate their vice, but you destroy their vigour." 

Still, however, I dwelt upon Voltaire's praises. " He was 
infirm," says Voltaire, " and come to the verge of life when I 
knew him. Mr. Congreve had one defect, which was his en- 
tertaining too mean an idea of his profession, that of a writer" 

What, said I, was even Congreve ashamed of play-writing 
he who (as his French friend says) owed to it both fame 
and fortune ? This, thought I, is as bad an answer to my 
mother as any of the former ones which I had prepared. 

I then bethought me of Massinger, a man universally es- 
teemed, as I had always heard, but he served me no better 
than the others ; for having been entered of St. Alban's Hall, 
Oxford, he applied his mind to poetry and romance for four 
years or more, and not to logic or philosophy, as he ought to 
have done, and for which alone he was patronised by the Earl 
of Pembroke. He left the university without a degree, became 
a play-writer, and died in his house near the theatre to be 
sure he was a good play-writer, but he was nothing else. 

GILBERT GURNET. 13 

Otway, like Massinger, had, or might have had, the ad- 
vantages of an university education but leaving college 
without a degree, took to writing plays for his livelihood 
they were good plays popular plays, and he was a successful 
author, but he died of starvation, or rather in the act of 
hastily satisfying the hunger under which he had been suffer- 
ing, through the charity of a stranger in a coffee-house. I 
did not think it prudent to let Otway loose upon my mother, 
neither could I venture to quote Farquhar, whose career began 
under equally auspicious circumstances, and ended nearly as 
ill. 

Rowe, who was the son of a sergeant-at-law, was by his 
father entered of the Middle Temple at an early age ; and 
being extremely clever, could have made himself a highly dis- 
tinguished member of the profession but at twenty-four 
he wrote a tragedy, and, although he lived respectably, and 
received the honours of a grave in poet's corner, he never made 
a figure at the bar. 

Ben Jonson was a bricklayer, and then a soldier, but the 
" said Ben " neither built houses nor reaped laurels. Beau- 
mont was the son of a judge, and entered of the Inner 
Temple ; but, says his biographer, " it does not appear that he 
made any proficiency in the law, his passion for the Muses 
being such as made him devote himself entirely to the Muses." 
Foote was educated at Oxford, and thence removed to the 
Temple, as designed for the law. " The dryness and gravity 
of this study, however, not suiting the vivacity and volubility 
of Foote's spirit, and his fortune, whatever it was, being dis- 
sipated, he took to the stage." I then began to despair ; I 
looked round me, but found no more justification in the suc- 
cesses of my contemporaries than in those of my predecessors; 
and accordingly, instead of replying with the pertness of self- 
sufficiency to my mother, upon a point where, as it seemed to 
me, she was unassailable, I fell to calculating, since there must 
be a choice, and since it was clear that the " two trades could 
never agree," which was likely to be the pleasanter and more 
profitable of the two. 

The result of these deliberations was a resolution for the 
present to temporise to finish my one farce, if I never 
wrote another, and then to judge, by its reception and success, 
whether I should entirely renounce or decidedly embrace the 

14- GILBERT GURNEY. 

craft of play-writing, for which, as every dunce who spoiled 
paper thought before me, I fancied I had a " wonderful 
talent." 

It was to the effect of procrastinating my final decision 
upon these points that I wrote to my excellent mother, im- 
ploring her to believe that I duly appreciated all her care and 
kindness, and assuring her that, let me take what course I 
might, she might be perfectly certain that I should do nothing 
to disgrace the family of the Gurneys, or its alliance with that 
of Gataker. 

I had, however, accidentally placed myself in a situation 
full of temptation. I could not obtain chambers in Lincoln's 
Inn, which I was anxious to secure, and, as I have already 
mentioned, took a first floor in Suffolk Street, Charing Cross, 
then extremely unlike what it afterwards became, in the 
course of the improvements in that neighbourhood. At that 
period it consisted for the most part of tailors' houses, the 
upper floors of which were tenanted in their different degrees 
by gentlemen loose upon town, visitors to the metropolis, and 
officers on half-pay, of which ii appeared the greater proportion 
were considered to be " frae the North," inasmuch as Suffolk 
Street was nicknamed in that day "The Scotch Barracks." 

I had been settled in my apartments a few days only, when 
I perceived from my windows, during the morning, a constant 
passing and repassing of pretty-looking women, with a certain 
perking, jerking pace, gaily drest, particularly smart about the 
feet and ankles, with parasols over their heads, and little rolls 
of paper in their hands ; and men with their hats on one 
side, and frills, and chains, and frogged coats with fur collars, 
although it was May ! and I heard them hum songs and 
quaver out cantabiles as they swaggered down the street and 
up the street. I thought I could not be mistaken in their 
vocation, and thrust my head out of the window to watch 
where they went, for the street was a cul-de-sac, and the only 
place to which I fancied they could resort was a sort of 
tavern, which I one day explored, in the right-hand corner. 
To my surprise I saw them all enter a house exactly opposite 
that tavern then I saw a smart chariot drive up and stop at 
the same place then I saw come out of it two well-known 
London performers. I was delighted I was in the middle 
of Attica in the region of Thespis. I rang the bell, and 

GILBERT GURNEY. 15 

inquired of the rosy- cheeked maid of the house, what place 
" that was ? " pointing to the spot whence the stars disappeared 
from my sight. 

" La ! sir," said the girl, " don't you know ? that's the 
stage-door of the Little Theatre." 

What charm had Lincoln's Inn for me after I made this 
discovery ? Here, in the plenitude of my devotion to the 
drama, could I see all the wit and beauty of the stage and the 
age in constant motion here could I hear them talk in 
" common parlance " and here I resolved I would renew, or 
rather improve, my acquaintance with the agreeable Mathews, 
and endeavour by his means to procure the representation of 
my farce, and the consequent entree of the coulisses. 

It sounds indicative of either grievous affectation or woeful 
ignorance that I, professing myself theatrical, should not know 
where the stage-door of the Little Haymarket was located ; 
it is, however, true that I did not till the housemaid en- 
lightened me. No sooner had I obtained the information, 
than my intuitive and instinctive love of the " art" induced 
me to prowl up the street and look into the dark dirty passage, 
progress through which was checked by a well-spiked gate ; 
there, however, my heart lingered ; and when my fellow 
pupil, who had just returned from playing truant, called upon 
me, we partook together the delights of this peep into Tartarus, 
and joined in a sympathetic anticipation of the privileges and 
pleasures we should enjoy when my admirable two-act piece 
had been received with.unbounded applause by an " overflow- 
ing and delighted audience." 

How childish do all these anxieties and expectations now 
seem ! How wonderful does it now appear to me, that a 
mind which has since been destined to bear with mighty evils, 
and endure the saddest reverses without shrinking or flinching, 
should have been so acted upon by hopes and fears, and 
doubts and wishes, the overthrow or fulfilment of which was, 
after all for that was the great object the power of smell- 
ing "lamp-oil, orange-peel, and sawdust," behind the scenes 
of a playhouse ! 

The Fates seemed propitious; for availing myself of my 
previous introduction to the modern Aristophanes, I addressed 
him in the street the very first day I met him. There was a 
frankness and plainness of manner about him which quite de- 

16 GILBERT GURNEY. 

lighted me ; and after having conversed with him touching my 
" farce/' he told me that he would not only read it, if I 
wished it, but that he would himself present it to Mr. Colman, 
with whom he was in habits of intimacy. This was the very 
point I had been longing to gain ; and when my new friend 
invited me to dine with him, at a cottage which he then inha- 
bited at Colney Hatch, on the following Sunday, and bade me 
put my maiden production into my pocket, I felt extremely 
happy. 

There must be constant alternations in this world of vicis- 
situdes. I left my friend full of present gratification and 
future hope ; I went to my rooms, and there found a letter, 
of which the following is a copy : 

" Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, 
" May 26, 180 

' ' DEAR SIR, I feel very great pain in writing to you upon 
the subject of this letter ; but I think it my duty to do so on ac- 
count of your exemplary mother, whose anxiety for your welfare 
is incessant and unqualified. I have received a communication 
from the gentleman under whose care I placed you in Lin- 
coln's Inn, representing to me, for her information, the abso- 
lute uselessness of your prosecuting your studies under him in 
the manner in which they are at present conducted. He says 
that he cannot consider himself justified in receiving a stipend, 
while your utter want of attention renders it impossible that 
you should benefit by his instructions, or that you should 
acquire either knowledge or experience from the practice of his 
office. 

" Unwilling, however, to take any decided step likely to 
wound the feelings of Mrs. Gurney, he begs me to offer you 
the alternative in the first instance, assuring me that, if you 
decide upon a sedulous application and constant attendance at 
his chambers, he shall be most happy to devote himself par- 
ticularly to your interests ; but that, if you do not feel your- 
self able to come to such a determination, he must beg to 
decline any further professional connection with you. I assure 
you this is extremely painful to me ; but as I said in the 
outset, I consider I am only doing my duty to all parties con- 
cerned. Believe me, dear sir, 

" Yours, faithfully, 

" A. G." 

GILBERT GURNEY. ] 7 

This was awkward it was unpleasant. I felt I had acted 
wrongly, I was sure that my mother would be vexed and mor- 
tified ; but I could not feel sufficient confidence in myself to 
promise such amendment as my task-master required. It 
appeared to me the wisest plan to go down to Teddington 
and see my mother, and explain to her my aversion from the 
profession for which she had destined me. The truth is, that 
I had no absolute necessity for any profession. I had a gen- 
tlemanly allowance (for I was yet a minor), and at my mo- 
ther's death I should become possessed of an income more 
than treble in amount to that which I at present enjoyed ; 
yet I could not say to her dear, kind, excellent being ! that 
I anticipated any event which was to result from the loss of 
her. I was quite certain that I never should make a lawyer ; 
and I resolved to take my ground upon her own history, often 
repeated to me, of my father's entire failure in the same pur- 
suit. But when could I go to her ? Here was Friday after- 
noon : I wanted to devote a few hours to my farce, I could 
not spare time on Saturday, and on Sunday it was to be 
conveyed to Colney Hatch to be read by a competent judge. 

I remember when I was at school, two of the boys pro- 
ceeded to a pond, for the purpose of swimming a gallipot, 
which was the property of the bigger boy of the two. It 
chanced that, in the eagerness incidental to this exciting 
amusement, the smaller boy tipped into the water, and, after 
a good deal of struggling, sank, and was drowned. After the 
melancholy catastrophe, the bigger boy was questioned as to 
what efforts he had made to rescue his companion, and his 
answers made it evident that he had by no means exerted 
himself to the utmost. This conviction produced a severe re- 
buke from the tutor ; upon which Master Simpson burst into a 
flood of tears, and said (< I do think that I could have saved 
Green but if I had tried, I should have lost my gallipot." 

My infernal farce was my gallipot ; and, to advance the 
success of that parcel of trash, I made up my mind to post- 
pone my answer to my kind friend upon a vital question, 
affecting my future prospects, and delay my visit to my 
mother, whose heart and soul were devoted to my interests. I 
need not say, that, having come to this resolution, I passed 
the whole of the following morning in revising my work ; 
nor need I add, that, immediately after morning service on 

c 

18 GILBERT GUKNEY. 

Sunday, I mounted my horse, and proceeded to the villa of 
my fostering patron. I reached it in good time ; was pre- 
sented to his amiable lady ; and, shortly after, walked with 
mine host to a small summer-house, which commanded a most 
agreeable view of the country, where I began, with faltering 
tongue, to read my production. 

I saw that the effect it produced was not disheartening. 
My auditor smiled, and sometimes laughed ; but it struck me 
that his attention was somewhat too exclusively fixed upon the 
part which, in case the piece should be accepted, was in- 
tended for himself : indeed, my apprehensions of his peculiar 
partiality for this character were completely realised when, after 
a little hesitation, he suggested the introduction of two or three 
jokes " hits," I recollect he called them into the speeches 
of that personage, the said " hits " being to be taken out of 
the parts which were intended for other actors. 

Suffice it here to say, that I was quite satisfied with the 
reception of my bantling, not only from the manner of my 
host, but from what he said upon the subject to his better 
half, and still more from the announcement of his determina- 
tion to take it over the very next day to Melina Place, where 
Mr. Colman then resided. 

To me this was perfect happiness. I enjoyed the air and 
the sunshine, and the dinner, and the wine, and the conversa- 
tion, which, as the party was subsequently increased to six, 
became extremely agreeable and animated ; and the favourable 
impression which had been made upon me at my first meet- 
ing with my new friend was even yet more improved as I 
became better acquainted with him, and found, in his observ- 
ations and remarks, not only all the wit and drollery for 
which the world so justly gave him credit, but a depth and 
shrewdness to which much of the success with which he has 
been subsequently rewarded is unquestionably owing. 

Having brought myself to what I call the first halting- 
place of my career, I shall reserve for to-morrow's task the 
record of occurrences which immediately followed this very 
agreeable beginning of my literary life for so it must be 
considered. Lincoln's Inn was fast disappearing in the dis- 
tance ; and I resolved that, next day, while my drama was 
undergoing the Colmanic ordeal in St. George's Fields, I would 
make such an appeal to my mother as might terminate my 
suspense, and cut the Gordian knot of all my difficulties. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 19 

CHAPTER II. 

WITH my head full of bright visions I returned to my lodg- 
ings, and having retired to bed, passed a feverish, restless 
night. I had heard conversations on subjects which were 
new to me ; I had been admitted into the secrets of what, to 
a young and ill-regulated mind, is a very striking profession ; 
I had been told stories and anecdotes of the private lives of 
public characters ; and madder than ever with pleasure at the 
anticipation of the enjoyments I should reap from the accept- 
ance of my farce, and my consequent familiarity with the 
wits and the geniuses and the players, I could not settle 
myself to sleep. 

In the morning I arose unrefreshed, ate a tasteless break- 
fast, and mingled the azure milk with the almost colourless 
tea, without caring, or even thinking, what I did. Still, how- 
ever, there was a clog of deeper anxiety hanging over my 
mind than this fitful, feverish kind of irritation. I had to 
make a visit to my mother ; I had to express my regret as to 
the unconquerable difficulties which I thought interposed in 
my path towards the Bench, or even the Bar, and to decide the 
question so deeply interesting to my respected parent as to my 
future career ; yet, somehow, my one day's association with 
wags and worldlings had very much altered the tone and 
character of my sentiments towards the old lady. I felt 
rather ashamed of my dutiful anxiety about her, and won- 
dered what had hitherto made me so diffident in speaking out 
my mind, which, in the end, I resolved to do, cost what it 
might. 

But a circumstance occurred the next day, which, at any 
other time, would have been regarded by me as most im- 
portant and exciting ; as it was, it made but little effect. My 
mother had received a letter from my brother Cuthbert (at 
that period more than thirty years old), informing her that he 
had been admitted as partner into the great commercial firm 
in Calcutta, in the service of which he had passed several 
years of probation, and that he felt it would be greatly advan- 
tageous to me, and, in short, open the road to a splendid 
fortune, if I were to be placed for some time in some banking 
c 2 

20 GILBERT GURNEY. 

or mercantile establishment in London, to ground myself in 
all the arcana of the counting-house ; and, after a certain 
period of education in that school, proceed to join him in 
India. 

At that time the amusing pursuit of " shaking the pagoda- 
tree," once so popular in our Oriental possessions, had not 
been entirely exploded : and, it must be confessed, the way in 
which he wrote was extremely tempting to a young gentle- 
man endowed with a strong disposition to extravagance. Lacs 
and crores of rupees maunds of cotton pelculs of indigo 
and a thousand things of which I had never heard before 
sounded magnificently; and, to a young and sanguine mind, 
perhaps the novelty itself was even more attractive than the 
vastitude of the expressions contained in his despatch ; but 
more than all, when he described the women the ladies of 
the City of Palaces, their sway, their charms, their 
interesting indolence, their lovely listlessness, the amiable 
manner in which they passed their mornings, playing with 
their lank ringlets before looking-glasses till tiffin-time, 
and then the amiability with vhich they performed the cere- 
monies of that peculiarly-named Eastern repast. This com- 
bination of beauty, grace, languor, and tenderness, with a 
detail of the vestibules, varhandahs, kitmaygars, hurkarahs, 
peons, palanquins, and punkahs, influenced my mind for a 
moment, until I recollected that the scenery of " Blue- 
Beard " was infinitely more beautiful than that of Bengal ; 
and that Mrs. Senior Merchant Mackirkincroft, or Mrs. 
Secretary Macnab, was, after all, like the ale she imbibed, of 
home manufacture, or rather, as the old joke goes, like a pack 
of playing-cards made in England for exportation, with a 
penalty marked upon it if re-landed. 

No, thought I, there can be no attraction that way from 
England ; yet I must own the prospect of great wealth had a 
dazzling effect for a moment. It was but for a moment. A 
laugh in the street attracted me to the window, and I saw two 
of the dram. pers. (female) walking to rehearsal, with a fresh 
breeze blowing in their pretty faces, and pekuls, pagodas, 
peons, palanquins, and punkahs were instantly banished for 
ever from my thoughts. Nevertheless, the letter required 
attention. The proposition was one submitted to me by my 
mother, and must be attended to ; so I resolved, coute qui 
coutc, to make my visit to Teddington the very next day. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 21 

Still I could not quite abandon my "gallipot;" and so to 
work I went upon my precious drama, in order to write two 
comic songs, in a style which was then somewhat popular. 
Indeed, that of " Miss Bailey," which then continued in 
fashion, afforded the strongest proof of the effect produced by 
Colman in the narrative style. It has been translated into 
Greek, Latin, French, and German ; and I am not quite sure 
that it is not completely the rage at this moment in the best 
circles of Spitzbergen and Kamtschatka. As proofs of what a 
young author fancies good, I have preserved from the wreck 
of my papers these two " poetical" efforts; and I am sure 
that, at the time I wrote them, I fancied them quite equal to 
O'Keefe, or Dibdin, or even Colman himself. Nothing is 
more extraordinary than a reference to such records, in order 
to prove what were the feelings and opinions by which we 
have been acted upon at some former period of our lives. 

The first was to be sung in the character of Sir Jeffery 
Boot-top, by Mathews, founded upon an incident in real 
life ; and thus it ran : 

The plump Lady Tott to her husband one day 
Said, " Let us go driving this evening, I pray." 

(Lady Tott was an alderman's daughter.) 
" Well, where shall we go ? " said Sir Tilbury Tott. 
" Why, my love," said my lady, " the weather is hot, 

Suppose we drive round by the water, 
The water, 

Suppose we drive round by the water." 

The dinner was ended, the claret was " done," 

The knight getting up, getting down was the sun, 

And my lady agog for heart-slaughter ; 
When Sir Tilbury, lazy, like cows after grains, 
Said, " The weather is low'ring, my love ; see, it rains - 

Only look at the drops in the water, 
The water, 

Only look at the drops in the water." 

Lady Tott, who, when earnestly fixed on a drive, 
Overcame all excuses Sir Til might contrive, 

Had her bonnet and parasol brought her : 
Says she, " Dear Sir Til, don't let me ask in vain ; 
The dots in the pond which you take to be rain 

Are nothing but flies in the water, 
The water, 

Are nothing but flies in the water." 

Sir Tilbury saw that he could not escape ; 

So he put on his coat, with a three-doubled cape, 

And then by the hand gently caught her ; 
And lifting her up to his high'one-horse " shay," 
She settled her " things," and the pair drove away, 

And skirted the edge of the water, 
The water, 

And skirted the edge of the water. 

c 3 

22 GILBERT GUHNEY. 

Sir Til was quite right ; on the top of his crown, 
Like small shot in volleys, the rain peppered down, 

Only small shot would do much more slaughter, 
Till the gay Lady Tott, who was getting quite wet, 
Said, " My dear Sir T. T.," in a kind of half pet, 

" Turn back, for I'm drench 'd with rain-water, 
Rain-water, 

Turn back, for I'm drench'd with rain-water." 

" Oh, dear Lady T.," said Til, winking his eye, 
" You every thing know so much better than I ; " 

(For, when angry, with kindness he fought her). 
" You may fancy this rain, as I did before ; 
But you show'd me my folly; ' tis really no more 

Than the skimming of flies in the water, 
The water, 

The skimming of flies in the water." 

He drove her about for an hour or two. 

Till her ladyship's clothes were completely soak'd through, 

Then home to Tott Cottage he brought her, 
And said, " Now, Lady T., by the joke of to-night, 
I'll reign over you ; for you'll own that I'm right, 

And know rain, ma'am, from flies in the water, 
The water, 

Know rain, ma'am, from flies In the water." 

This was one of the effusions for the sake of which I aban- 
doned my studies, neglected my parent, and expended two 
hours ; yet I confess, when it was finished, I thought I had 
" done it." But I had another to do ; for it had been hinted 
to me, during the time that my maiden production was under- 
going the process of examination by the manager, that it wanted 
enlivening ; and, moreover, that if Mr. Mathews had a song, 
Mr. Listen would expect to have one also ; that these were little 
points of professional etiquette which were as rigidly observed as 
the rules and ceremonies of other services ; and that there would 
be as great an impropriety in offering a secondary part to a 
first-rate actor, or putting a secondary actor into a first-rate part, 
as there would be in giving a lieutenant a field-officer's com- 
mand, or sending a commander to commission a seventy-four. 

I was somewhat puzzled for a subject, fancying that the 
songs of a drama should have some reference to the plot and 
dialogue of the piece ; but upon this point I was very speedily 
enlightened. Instead of following the example of Gay, in the 
" Beggar's Opera," Bickerstaff, in " Love in a Village," or 
Sheridan, in the " Duenna," in which operas the music seems 
but an adjunct to the dialogue, and the songs, the natural 
sentiments arising out of it, only versified, I was told that, 
much after the fashion of the man who introduced his story 
of a gun, d propos to nothing, a song, no matter what its sub- 
ject or purport, might be cleverly and properly introduced by 
three lines of preparatory prose. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 23 

This principle established, I had no hesitation in proceed- 
ing to ray task. At that period it was the rage to parodise 
tragedies. Horace Smith wrote a parody on " George Barn- 
well ;" Horace Twiss did another ; and Theodore Hook in- 
dulged the town with one upon " Othello," and, I believe, an 
extremely facetious ridicule of " Hamlet." The good taste of 
such proceedings 1 do not mean to discuss ; that these things 
had been successful was enough for me, and I determined to 
follow in the wake, and accordingly produced the following tra- 
vestie of " Venice Preserved," which was to receive additional 
point and piquancy by being sung with an Irish brogue : 

Tune The Sprig of Shillelagh. 
Och tell me the truth now, and did you ne'er hear 
Of a pair of big traitors, called Jaffier and Pierre, 

Who thought that their country was shockingly served ? 
Who met in the dark, and the night, and the fogs, 
Who " howl'd at the moon," and call'd themselves " dogs," 
Till Jaffier to Pierre pledged his honour and life, 
And into the bargain his iligant wife, 

By which very means was ould Venice preserved. 
The ringleaders held a snug club in the town, 
The object of which was to knock the Doge down, 

Because from his duty they thought he had swerved. 
They met every evening, and more was their fault, 
At the house of a gentleman, Mr. Renault, 
Who och, the spalpeen ! when they all went away, 
Stayed at home, and made love to the sweet Mrs. J., 

By which, in the end, was ould Venice preserved. 
When Jaffier came back, his most delicate belle 
Belvidera they call'd her determined to tell 

How she by old Renault that night had been served. 
This blew up a breeze, and made Jaffier repent 
Of the plots he had laid : to the Senate he went. 
He got safe home by twelve : his wife bade him not fail ; 
And by half-after-one he was snug in the gaol, 

By which, as we'll see, was ould Venice preserved. 
The Doge and the Court, when J.'s story they'd heard, 
Thought it good for the country to forfeit their word, 

And break the conditions they should have observed. 
So they sent the police out to clear every street, 
And seize whomsoever by chance they might meet ; 
And before the bright sun was aloft in the sky, 
Twenty-two of the party were sentenced to die, 

And that was the way was ould Venice preserved. 
Mr. Jaffier, who 'peach'd, was let off at the time ; 
But that wouldn't do, he committed a crime, 

Which punishment more than his others deserved ; 
So when Pierre was condemn'd, to the scaffold he went. 
Pierre whisper'd and nodded, and J. said " Content." 
They mounted together, till kind Mr. J., 
Having stabb'd Mr. P., served himself the same way, 

And so was their honour in Venice preserved. 
But och ! what a scene, when the beautiful Bell, 
At her father's, found out how her dear husband fell .' 

The sight would the stoutest of hearts have unnerved. 
She did nothing but tumble, and squabble, and rave. 
And try to scratch J., with her nails from the grave. 
This lasted three months, when cur'd of her pain, 
She chuck'd off her weeds, and got married again, 

By which very means was this Venus preserved. 

o 4 

24 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

In this piece of torn-foolery I trace the first fruits of that 
disposition to treat high and serious subjects farcically, which 
is engendered and fostered in the society of those who, as my 
poor mother said in her letter, from which I have already made 
an extract, are habituated to judge of real events histrionically. 
The effect the thing produced at the time remains to be told. 

Having done my task, I enclosed my effusions to my Me- 
caenas, and prepared for my departure on the next morning to 
Teddington, endeavouring if possible to fix my thoughts upon 
the proposition contained in my brother's letter, and upon the 
solicitude which I well knew my excellent parent would feel 
as to my decision ; but I found this a much more difficult 
task than the grave and sober minded may suppose. The 
moment I had settled myself, some trivial accident would 
scatter my thoughts ; and while I was pondering upon my 
future destiny, I found myself singing the most important 
passages of Cuthbert's despatch to the tune of the *' Sprig of 
Shillelagh," to which I had written my ridiculous parody. 

I was still in the agonies of suspense eight-and-forty 
hours had elapsed, and no tidings of my drama. Every man 
fancies his own affairs of paramount importance. Dennis the 
critic came away from the sea-side because he imagined the 
king of France was sending a ship to carry him off, in con- 
sequence of his having written a severe squib against him in 
the shape of a pamphlet ; and I once knew a young ensign, 
who, expressing to me his anxiety that a leave of absence 
which was about to be granted him should be correct to the 
letter, told me that he was the more solicitous, as he had only 
entered the service three days before, and the eyes of the 
whole army were upon him. 

It never occurred to me, while I earnestly watched every 
knock or ring at the door in expectation of Mr. Colman's fiat, 
that Mr. Colman had fifty other things to do besides reading 
my farce that perhaps he had never even opened it. I did 
not then know the story of Sheridan and the playwright, 
which is vouched for upon good authority. The playwright 
had sent a comedy to Mr. Sheridan for perusal, and of course 
approval, and of course heard nothing more of his comedy. 
He waited six months patiently the season was then over, 
and he therefore resolved to wait on till the next season 
began : he did so he then called at Mr. Sheridan's, who at 

GILBERT GURNEY. 25 

that time lived in George Street, Hanover Square not at 
home, of course he then despatched a note no answer 
another ditto another call still the same result. At 
last, however, the author hit upon the expedient of posting 
himself in the hall, on a day in the evening of which there 
was to be an important debate in the House of Commons. 
This was a blockade which even the ingenuity of the wit 
could not evade ; the author was therefore admitted. 

His inquiries were respectful, but earnest. " My comedy, 
Mr. Sheridan I " 

Yes to be sure clearly the ? " 

" Fashionable Involvements, in five acts," said the author, 
helping his great friend to the name of his work, which he 
hoped might recal the work itself to his recollection a hope 
most vain. 

" Upon my word," said Sheridan, " I I'm in a great 
hurry I really don't remember I am afraid your play 
has been somehow mislaid." 

" Mislaid!" exclaimed the anxious parent of the lost 
bantling. " My dear sir, if it is, I am ruined I have no 
copy of it." 

" It is very unfortunate," said Mr. Sheridan, " very 
I'm sure I regret I " 

" But what can I do, sir ?" saidHhe author. 

" I tell you what, my dear friend," replied Mr. Sheridan, 
" I cannot promise you your own play back, because I don't 
know where any of the last year's pieces are j but if you will 
open that table- drawer, you will find a great number that have 
been sent me this year : you may take any three of those in 
exchange, and do what you like with them." 

Had I at the time when I was so sensitively alive to the 
fate of my farce known this historiette, I should perhaps have 
been better able to regulate my expectations. 

On the following morning, however, I proceeded to Ted- 
dington, and found my mother and her friend and companion 
Miss Crab, at home. My reception was every thing that 
ought to have been delightful to a fond and dutiful son : 
somehow it was unsatisfactory, and Miss Crab was so plain, 
and the place was so quiet, and they began to talk so seriously 
to me, and when I heard them both expressing themselves 
sentimentally, I could scarcely hold my tongue to listen to them. 

26 GILBERT GURNEY; 

" Gilbert," said my mother, " after what you have said 
with regard to making the law your profession, I think I 
should not be justified in endeavouring to force your in- 
clinations ; but, painful as it would be to me when the time 
came to part with you, I do think this proposal of Cuthbert's 
merits your best attention ; you see he is well established, his 
prospects are bright, and he holds out his hand to lift his 
brother into the same station." 

" Why yes/' said I ; " but after all what is the station ? 
He is only a merchant now the law leads to the highest 
honours, and " 

" So it does," replied my mother ; " but as you have your- 
self decided against striving for those honours, why try back 
upon what you have rejected, in order to draw a comparison 
unfavourable to that which now presents itself? " 

" I should never make a lawyer," said I ; " and I do 
not think I should like to be a merchant there is something 
in the words shop and counting-house discordant to my ear." 

" I think," said Miss Crab, and what she said was true 
enough, " Gilbert prefers being a gentleman to any other 
occupation." 

" He has not sufficient means to maintain himself in that 
character/' said my mother ; " and I apprehend, that if he 
rely upon his talents for Dramatic literature to make up the 
deficiency, he will only reap what alone grow in abundance in 
that field regrets and disappointments." 

My mother had touched the right chord. 

" Well, for my part," said Miss Crab, " I wish there was 
not such a thing as a playhouse or a player ; they are the ruin 
of more young people than any thing else in the world." 

I thought I never saw Crab look so frightful as she did at 
the moment she uttered that little speech. 

" I do not quite agree with you there," said my admirable 
parent : " I believe a well-regulated stage, speaking both 
morally and politically, might be rendered highly serviceable 
to the people, not more for amusement than for instruction 
for when is instruction so gladly received as through the means 
of rational amusement ? it has the same effect upon the 
mind as indirect taxation has upon the purse no sudden 
and abrupt demand is made, which at once enforces a claim, 
and proclaims a superiority. If, through the medium of the 

GILBERT GURNET. 27 

theatre, morality and virtue were exhibited in all their beauty, 
and vice and dissipation held up in all their deformity, great 
good might ensue." 

" Ay," said Miss Crab, " but they are not ; all the things 
the people run after, now-a-days, are either gingerbread pan- 
tomimes, culled from Mother Bunch, or stupid farces trans- 
lated from the French." 

Miss Crab looked more hideous than she did before ; but 
what could I say ? Had I defended the stage and farces, it 
would have led to endless controversies. Had I discarded 
them, I should instantly have been doomed to a pair of canvass 
sleeves, and perhaps an apron ; posted behind a counter, or 
stuck up on a high stool from nine till six, with a pen behind 
my ear, in some wretched hole of an office in a dark lane in 
the city. 

The great difficulty I had to contend with, in these contro- 
versial conversations, as they threatened to be, and which I 
have before noticed, arose from the fact that, although I cer- 
tainly had not at that time an income sufficient for the indul- 
gence of my favourite pursuits, and the enjoyment of my 
natural amusements, as I held them to be, I should be quite 
rich enough to please myself at the death of my mother. If 
she had lived to this hour, and I remained poor, I should have 
been but too happy ; and I felt it impossible to explain to her 
the real grounds of my apparent carelessness of my future 
prospects. It was clear, too, that she was fast declining ; 
and this very circumstance rendered it utterly out of the ques- 
tion to allude to an event which seemed to me too probably not 
far distant. I therefore resolved to temporise, and at last hit 
upon an expedient which, before I had turned my mind thea- 
trically, perhaps, would not have occurred to me, in order to 
gain time. 

I suggested to my 'mother what I considered the inexpe- 
diency of plunging at once into mercantile life without some 
more distinct and explicit statement from Cuthbert. All that he 
said, tempting as I admit it to have been, was said generally, 
and, for the most part, hypothetically. " I do not think it 
would be a bad plan for Gilbert to do so and so ; " and " if " 
he did, he " might perhaps ; " and " if he might perhaps," 
why then, perhaps, " I might be able," and so on. I argued 
that this was an invitation hardly strong enough to adopt as 

28 GILBERT GURNET. 

credentials for the total alteration of my pursuits and prospects, 
and what I considered my immolation in a counting-house. 

My mother listened attentively to what I said, and appeared 
rather struck by my reasoning, although she did not see that 
Cuthbert could have said more, being, as he was, ignorant of 
what course I had shaped for myself in England. 

" I am sure," said Miss Crab, " it is as plain as the nose on 
my face " 

I looked at her, and thought, whatever it is, nothing can be 
plainer. 

" that Cuthbert wishes Gilbert to go to him ; that 

there are bright prospects, the realisation of which depends 
only upon his preparatory attention and assiduity here. If I 
were you, my dear Mrs. Gurney, I would not hesitate a 
moment." 

I could have strangled her. 

" There," continued she, " is that highly respectable In- 
dian house, Curry, Raikes, Yellowly, Lefevre, and Company." 

" Mercy on us, Miss Crab," said I, " have you made that 
firm, with all their orientally-bilious names, to terrify me?" 

" Not a bit, Mr. Gurney, ' said Miss Crab. " I know 
them intimately well; and, if your mother chooses, I will 
write to Mr. Yellowly, who is my particular friend, such a 
letter as will ensure you." 

" the highest stool in the darkest corner of their counting- 
house," interrupted I, forgetting at once my notions of tem- 
porising. 

" Oh ! sir," said Miss Crab, " if I am to be subjected to 
such farcical remarks as these, and you are determined to 
throw cold water upon the scheme, I have done." 

" I think, Miss Crab," said my mother, " Gilbert's idea is 
not a bad one. He is yet young. A few months' postpone- 
ment can do no harm." 

" There I differ with you entirely, Mrs. Gurney," said 
Miss Crab. " At his time of life, and in the society and 
habits into which he has fallen, six or eight months will make 
all the difference in the world." 

" I fancy," said my mother, " that I know Gilbert pretty 
well ; and I believe that, although idle, and gay, and thought- 
less, he will never suffer himself to be led into conduct or cir- 
cumstances likely to affect me or dishonour himself. If we 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 2Q 

were immediately to avail ourselves of your kind offer of 
writing to the gentleman you have named, and he were ad- 
mitted to a participation in the duties of his office, and, after 
a severe probation of eight or ten months, Cuthhert's offer 
should turn out of less importance than we at first imagined 
it, we should have lost so much time." 

" Not a bit of it," said Miss Crab ; " wouldn't Gilbert be 
much better employed posting ledgers and copying letters all 
the day, than lounging about the streets and writing farces ? 
There is no disgrace in a mercantile life ; and supposing he 
never went to India at all, what would he be the worse for 
knowing what he would learn in the city ? " 

I could scarcely listen complacently to the odious interrup- 
tions and interference of my mother's most excellent and dis- 
agreeable friend. 1 could not endure the woman for talking 
so sensibly ; yet I saw that, with a parent's partiality, my 
mother leant very much to my views ; and I found, not with- 
out reason, that her readiness to acquiesce with me in the 
proposal of giving time for consideration arose from a latent 
unwillingness to lose my society altogether, and doom me to a 
transportation for life, for such, a residence in India seems 
to those who have never quitted their " fatherland," and who 
believe, with great reason, at all events where England is 
concerned, that " there is no place like home." 

It was somewhat past ten o'clock at night when I mounted 
my horse at my mother's gate to return to London, and I 
must confess that I felt as if I had achieved a great deal in 
the course of my visit, in spite of fate and Miss Crab. I had, 
in fact, left my affairs, as far as regarded India, Cuthbert, 
and the partnership, much as I had begun upon them, with 
this signal advantage in my favour, that they had been under 
discussion and nothing had been decided upon ; so that I felt 
myself quite at liberty to go on with a snaffle until my excel- 
lent mother thought proper to apply the curb. 

There was one point upon which the old gentlewoman was 
particularly susceptible and tenacious, but upon which, as it 
happened, I had not yet seen reason to give her any uneasiness. 
She had next to the playhouses and the actresses a most 
sensitive and matronly horror of the designing wiles of the 
young woman creatures who enliven and illuminate the 
world ; and proportionally fearful that I should fall a prey to 

30 GILBERT GURNET. 

some young adventuress, which, considering what I possessed 
in the way of prize-money, was really not ground for serious 
alarm ; for it was clear that nobody who had any thing would 
think of making a good speculation by catching a youth who 
had nothing. She never went the length of cautioning me 
against the artillery of bright eyes, or the music of soft words, 
because being a woman, although my mother, she perhaps was 
aware that the surest method of setting a young heart on, is 
by warning it off. " I'm driving the pig to Cork," says 
Paddy, " but don't you let him hear that he thinks he is 
going to Bandon." Prohibit, prevent, and warn, and what 
nine times in ten are the consequences ? 

What happened to the ostler and the priest ? I believe it 
is an old story, but never mind it is in point. An ostler of 
the Popish persuasion annually paid two shillings and three- 
pence halfpenny to his priest to confess and whitewash him at 
Easter. Down on his knees did he lay open his heart to the 
padre, and tell every thing he had done amiss during the pre- 
ceding year. " Father," says Paddy, " I water the whisky, I 
take half a quartern out of eveiy peck of oats, and I charge four- 
pence for horsekeeping and give my master but threepence." 

" Tell me," says the padre, "do you never grease the 
horses' teeth to prevent their eating the beans ? " " Never, 
your reverence, never ! " cries Paddy, with tears in his eyes. 

" Good boy, get up wid ye then," says the padre ; " tip 
us the thirteeners, and you are as clean as a whistle for the 
next twelve months." 

Those twelve months over, back comes the priest. The 
same mummery goes on ; the same kneeling down and con- 
fessing to the absolving padre, whose infallible power of ab- 
solution is best tested by the fact, that the infallible head of 
the church himself, who can excommunicate and absolve 
every Roman Catholic in the world, confesses to his own par- 
ticular chaplain, and there we have the ostler at it again; 
the same questions are repeated, the same admissions made 
till at last dominie reiterates his inquiry, " Have you not 
greased the horses' teeth to prevent their eating the beans ?" 
Different from that of the preceding year was the answer to 
this " Yes, your reverence, I have." " How !" exclaims 
Doctor O'Doddipole ; "what! an accession of crime as you 
draw nearer the grave ? How comes this ? Last year, you 

GILBERT GUBNEV. 31 

told me you had never done such a thing in your life ; how 
happens it that this year you have?" " Plase your rever- 
ence," says the ostler, " I'd never have had sich a thought in 
my head if your reverence hadn't been kind enough to put it 
there." 

Upon this principle, I suppose, my excellent mother never 
directly cautioned me about the sparkling eyes, the downy 
cheeks, the pouting lips, and all the rest of the charms so 
likely to catch such a person as I then was, lest "her rever- 
ence should put strange thoughts into my head." However, 
thoughts had been there, without her putting; and I verily 
believe if my new and absorbing passion for Thespian pur- 
suits had not unluckily intervened, I should have engaged my- 
self to one of the very prettiest girls in the world, who shall be 
nameless. However, the sequel will show how that affair termi- 
nated, and in what manner I escaped matrimony. In the 
sequel, too, it will be seen that if I were only singed in my 
coup d'essai, I got considerably more damaged in my subse- 
quent career. 

The one great point of delay having been gained, I felt my- 
self more at ease than I had been for the previous week or 
fortnight. A sanguine mind always sees daylight through the 
darkness ; and upon the principle, and in the hope, which all 
through life have sustained me, I fancied that " something 
would turn up" before the possible return of letters from 
Cuthbert, which might favourably decide the question now in 
abeyance. 

On my return home, I found, much to my delight, that my 
farce had been read, ay, and approved; for a note which I 
discovered lying upon my table, from my Mecaenas, informed 
me that he would call upon me the next day at five o'clock, if 
I happened to be disengaged, take me over to Melina Place, 
and introduce me to Mr. Colman, who wished us to dine with 
him. This, it may be easily imagined, was to me as decided 
a " command" as if it had come from George, King of Eng- 
land, instead of George, King of the Dramatists ; and I did 
not allow a moment to elapse before I answered my friend in 
the affirmative. 

I scarcely recollect how the intervening hours were passed ; 
my friend and ci-devant fellow-pupil (who continued to 
" make believe " in Lincoln's Inn) was of course apprised of 

32 GILBERT GURNEY. 

my premier pas, and I received his warm congratulations upon 
my initiatory success. The mere routine of eating, drinking, 
and sleeping, had in it nothing of interest, except as the per- 
formance of those ordinary functions served for points by 
which to reckon time, until the hour of my introduction to the 
Haymarket proprietor was to take place. 

That hour at length arrived : punctual to the minute, my 
friend knocked at my door, and we proceeded together to the 
scene of action. I there found mine host every thing that was 
agreeable. I met four or five " ladies and gentlemen," all 
delightful in their way. Mr. Colman suggested one or two 
alterations, which it would be needless to say were improve- 
ments, in my drama ; and having dispatched what I fancied 
our important business, we sat down to dinner somewhere 
about six. How delightful the party was, may perhaps best be 
imagined from the fact, that we did not separate for the even- 
ing until five in the morning, when I returned home enchanted 
with the amusements of the day and night. 

Every thing was now en train. The following Friday a 
day from which, for the commencement of any undertaking, 
I have a great and unconquerable aversion was fixed for 
the reading of my farce, and my eyes were gladdened the 
very next morning, by seeing in the playbills an announce- 
ment, technically (as I afterwards discovered) called "under- 
lined," that a new farce was in rehearsal and would speedily 
be produced. 

The Friday came : and for the first time in my life I found 
myself in the green-room of a theatre it was literally a 
green room into which light was admitted by a thing like a 
cucumber-frame at one end of it. It was matted, and round 
the walls ran a bench covered with faded green stuff, where- 
upon the dramatis persona deposited themselves until called 
to go on the stage ; a looking-glass under the skylight, and a 
large bottle of water and a tumbler on the chimney-piece, 
completed the furniture of this classic apartment. 

Upon the special occasion of reading my farce, a table, with 
pens, ink, and paper, was introduced, and deposited in one 
corner of the room under the cucumber-frame, and at which 
the reader was to preside. The actors and actresses began to 
assemble. I was introduced to such of them as were concerned 
in the performance of my hopeful work ; and having declined 

GILBERT GURNEY. 33 

to undertake the reading myself, the manager proceeded to 
execute that task. 

A dead silence prevailed as he delivered, in a hurried, mo- 
notonous tone, all the pointed and witty dialogues of the first 
scene, upon which I had spent so much time, and to which I 
had devoted so much attention. Not a smile did I see ; Listen, 
from whom I had expected all the compliments of excessive 
laughter at the jokes introduced into his part, sat still and 
mute, the very picture of gravity, until the reader came to a 
bit which I had intended to be marvellously comic, when he 
made a face of so grotesque a character of extreme disappro- 
bation, that Mrs. Gibbs burst into a loud fit of merriment, 
which was only moderated by a sort of admonitory look from 
Mathews, who had the best part in the piece, to spare 
the feelings of the young author. 

For nearly an hour and a quarter did I endure this pur- 
gatorial process ; and I must admit, that, during that period, 
my feelings of self-complacency had undergone a very im- 
portant change. Just as I had anticipated a positive cheer, 
at a denouement which I was quite sure must be unexpected, 
I looked round, and saw Mrs. Davenport, the main-stay of my 
plot, fast asleep, with her head in a corner ; and the aforesaid 
Listen, another of my props, tickling her nose with the end 
of her parasol. It then occurred to me, that it would have 
been better that I should not have been present, inasmuch as, 
in my absence, those ladies and gentlemen, who, regardless of 
my agonies and sensitiveness, thus practically exhibited their 
perfect indifference to my " work," might have expressed 
their opinions in cabinet, and while they disapproved some 
portion of the performance, might have suggested improve- 
ments in others. When the reading was over, nobody said 
capital, or even good, or even tolerable. One of the gentlemen 
asked " When is this thing to be put in rehearsal ? " " To- 
morrow," was the reply, " and it must be out to-morrow 
week." 

" To-morrow week ! " said one, " how am I to study this 
infernal part, nine lengths and a half, by to-morrow week, 
besides all the stock business ?" 

" I think," said Mrs. Davenport, " that 7 should be better 
out of the farce than in it. Mrs. Kendall, or Mrs. Wall, 
would do just as well for all there is to do." 

34 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Anybody would do as well as me," whispered Liston ; 
and then Mrs. Gibbs made her joyous, handsome face look 
hideous in my eyes for the moment, by giving a sign of per- 
fect acquiescence in Mr. Liston's opinion. 

I felt that I could not endure their comments any longer, 
so sought safety in flight, and got out of the regions, into 
which at length, after many years' working, I had obtained 
admission, not, however, without attracting the notice of my 
good-natured Mecaenas, who walked down the street with me, 
and gave me his opinion, that I must reconcile myself to lose 
one or two of the principal performer ; adding, that it was 
always the wisest plan to let a discontented actor give up the 
part of which he complained ; for your leaders of the pro- 
fession, if they say they can make nothing of a character, 
generally back their opinions by their acting on the first 
night. 

Here began those difficulties and annoyances by which the 
progress of a dramatic author is impeded : the operation of 
small jealousies which the uninitiated cannot comprehend; 
the great vanities which the unenlightened are unable to ap- 
preciate ; and the combinations for and against certain persons 
and purposes, the intricacies of which are hidden from the 
common eye, but the workings of which, more or less, affect 
every individual brought into contact with the dramatic de- 
partment of English literature. The thing, however, was too 
far gone to retract, and I resolved to bear with fortitude evils 
which I then was foolish enough to think great, and submit 
myself to the guidance of those who, of course much better 
than I could be supposed to do, understood the nature of 
such proceedings. 

The next morning was our first rehearsal. The cool at- 
mosphere of the theatre in a hot summer's day, blended with 
the peculiar smell which all theatres have, was to me quite 
refreshing and invigorating ; and when I found myself re- 
ferred to by such of the performers as were present, for my 
views and opinions how this should be said, and how that should 
be done, I felt tolerably reconciled to the absence of two or 
three of the " stars" by whom I had hoped to see my work 
adorned and illuminated. 

The efforts of five days perfected the work of rehearsal. 
My " Venice Preserved" song the idol of my heart was 

GILBERT GtlRNEY. 35 

omitted, because the gentleman who was Mr. Listen's substi- 
tute could not sing a failing which I the less deplored, inas- 
much as Mr. Liston, even if he had acted the part, had de- 
clined singing the song. My misfortunes, however, did not 
end here ; for as it had been resolved to omit that song, and 
as the young lady who was to enact my heroine sang no more 
than Mr. Listen's successor, it was considered not usual to have 
one song in a piece not musical, and so out they cut my 
" Flies in the Water." I own these two sacrifices cost me a 
pang, but it was decreed by better judges than myself, and 
away they went. 

The time now drew near when my fate was to be decided, 
and no rational person can possibly believe how much I was 
agitated on the morning of performance. The sight of my 
title, flaring in huge red letters in the play-bills, was in the 
highest degree gratifying to my eye. I stopped and perused 
the affiche, as if it had been a document of the highest public 
interest. I fancied I was known in the streets as the author 
of the new piece I walked upon air. But as the evening 
drew nigh, 1 felt that aching pain of anxiety, which in other 
days such interests could excite ; and when it was time to go 
to the theatre, I scarcely knew whether I should be able to 
endure the trial. 

After the opera of " Inkle and Yarico " came my drama. 
I was placed in the manager's box, allotted the seat of honour 
behind the treillage, favoured by the presence of two of the 
handsomest and most agreeable ladies in London, and treated 
in the kindest possible manner. Overture over curtain up 
I listened to my own words fearfully and tremblingly ; not 
that I heard quite so many of them as I had confidently ex- 
pected, seeing that most of the low comedians substituted, for 
what they had not learned, speeches and dialogues, not one 
word of which I had written ; indeed, during the greater part 
of the first act, the voice of the prompter was more generally 
audible than those of the actors. Still, however, we went on 
smoothly, but not with that spirit which I had anticipated ; 
and when the curtain fell, at the close of the first act, the 
audience gave no signs of approbation or dissent, and the only 
sound which I heard in any degree indicative of popular 
opinion, was the loud twanging of an elderly gentleman's nose, 
D 2 

36 GILBERT GUKNEY. 

who was fast asleep, with his head reclined against the parti- 
tion of the box in which we sat. 

The second act began, and in the middle of the second scene 
of it, several parties removed themselves from the lower boxes, 
evidently tired with what was going on. Would that the gods 
in the galleries had been equally well-bred ! their patience, 
however, was not proof against my drollery one point of 
which, a cant phrase by my hero, Sir Jeffery Boot-top, of 
" How d'ye know don't you think so?" appeared, after 
innumerable repetitions, to make the first seat in the pit angry 
they began to groan, and then to answer Sir Jeffery's ques- 
tions, with shouts of " No, no, no " these, by a natural 
transition, were converted in to 1 cries of "Off, off, off!" and at 
a quarter after eleven o'clock, tne green curtain of the Theatre 
Royal, Haymarket, descended upon my condemned farce, and 
concluded my career as a dramatic writer. 

I had anticipated a triumph I had encountered a defeat. 
It was in vain I cracked the joke of " laudatur ab hiss," in 
vain affected to laugh at my own disaster. I rejected the gay 
supper which had been prepared to await the successful young 
author, and returned to my lodgings ashamed to look even the 
servants in the face ; I hurried to bed, in the full consciousness 
of my failure, and the certain malevolence of the accounts of 
that failure, as they would appear the next day in the criticisms 
of the newspapers. I slept little I made a hundred different 
resolves I hoped at least my name would be kept secret I 
anticipated the misery of my poor mother at the publicity of my 
overthrow, in which she, of course, would find ample ground 
for congratulating herself upon her unheeded efforts to save 
me from such an exposure. I at length determined to fly the 
scene of my mortification as soon as possible, and by nine 
o'clock I had quitted my lodgings, and was on my road to the 
maternal roof at Teddington. 

CHAPTER III. 

As I cantered down towards Teddington, all the events of the 
preceding evening passed in review before me. I almost 
hoped that I had only had a frightful dream, and that the 

GILBERT GURNEY. 37 

scene and proceedings at the playhouse were all images of a 
disordered brain but the hope was vain; and already in the 
streets the playbills of the day had negatively declared ray de- 
feat by announcing " Peeping Tom," or " The Village Law- 
yer/' or some such ancient favourite, instead of a repetition 
of ray doomed drama. 

Breakfast appears to me to have been destined for a soli- 
tary meal nothing to me is less endurable than a breakfast 
party. I love the lengthened lounging meal made up of 
eating, drinking, and reading ; but there is nothing social or 
sociable in its attributes ; one cannot " hob-nob " in tea or 
coffee. Moreover it is an ungraceful meal. Egg-eating and 
prawn-picking are not delicate performances : and, besides, a 
man when he is first up and just down, if he tries his mind 
and temper by a moral " spirit-level," will find that breakfast- 
time is not the time for company or conversation. Most es- 
pecially, then, was I disqualified for a public breakfast at my 
mother's on this particular day, with Miss Crab for a com- 
panion. I therefore resolved to call a halt at Richmond, and 
take my morning meal at the Castle, an inn full of delightful 
associations in my mind, and where the coolness of the breeze 
and the fragrance of the flowers promised to moderate the 
fever into which I had fidgetted myself. 

I was, however, mistaken; for just as one of the waiters 
had arranged my table, and the huge urn, hissing and sputter- 
ing forth its steam and smoke, was put down, another officious 
varlet, with a smirk and bow, laid upon the cloth the "Morn- 
ing Chronicle." Little could he conceive the dread and ap- 
prehension with which I regarded the fatal sheet. New to 
the world, and as thin-skinned as a Whig, I could not venture 
even to unfold the paper. I waited till the servants had re- 
tired, and then respectfully and fearfully lifted the front page 
and peeped into that part of the journal usually appropriated 
to " theatricals." I saw the great word <f Theatricals " stare 
me in the face, and I hastily left my hold and closed the leaf 
with the haste and trepidation with which, in after years, I 
might have started back from the hiss of a snake or the growl 
of a tiger. 

At length, having fortified my courage by a sip of coffee, I 
again approached the dreaded page, and having, with fingers 
as cold as ice, opened the paper, read as follows : 
D 3 

38 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" THEATRICALS. Last night a new farce was acted at the 
Haymarket Theatre; as it was finally and decidedly con- 
demned, any further notice of the absurd abortion would ba 
superfluous." 

After reading this short, pithy paragraph, I felt that sort of 
gratitude to the writer, which a culprit may be supposed to 
feel for an executioner who puts him speedily out of pain : 
there was no tedious process of strangulation in this no 
roasting before a slow fire the bolt was drawn and the spine 
of my vanity broken without any lingering preparation. I 
thought " absurd abortion " rather a strong term : but I was 
glad to find that my name had escaped either the knowledge 
or the notice of the critic. I felt comparatively calm and 
easy, not at the moment reflecting that there were more news- 
papers than one published in London. 

It was in this temper of mind that I heard it was then 
past eleven o'clock merry peals of laughter ringing by a 
company which, unperceived by me, had taken possession of 
the pavilion which opens on the terrace at the back of the 
house, and which appeared to be excited by some waggeries of 
which I could not exactly comprehend the nature or character. 
I never was a listener nor an eaves-dropper ; but the most in- 
curious person in the world will admit, that nothing is so 
tantalising as to hear laughter in an adjoining room without 
being aware of its cause, and nothing so worrying as to be 
treated with conversation through a wainscot which never rises 
above a sort of mumbling, grumbling noise, in sound some- 
thing like what Colman, in his preface to the " Iron Chest," 
describes as the distinguishing characteristics of a great tragic 
actor's voice " Flies in a bottle frogs in a marsh wind 
in a crevice and the drone of a bagpipe." I could not 
fond as I then was of laughing endure to hear mirth going 
on, and not somehow contrive to be a partaker and participator. 
I admit, therefore, that I protruded my head from the break- 
fast-room window to catch some clue to the gaiety of my 
noisy neighbours. 

" I wonder," said one, whose voice sounded peculiarly fami- 
liar to me, " I wonder where the poor devil is to-day ?" 

" Dangling on a beam in his garret by a silk pocket-hand- 
kerchief," replied somebody, whose tone and accent I also 
thought I recognised. 

GILBERT GURNET. 39 

" So," rejoined a third ; " his suspense was over last night 
to be sure, my dear friend, the idea of bringing out that 
infernal farce !" 

<f I did it to please the boy," answered somebody. te I 
liked the fellow and could not say no to the goose ; but as for 
his farce, I admit it deserved to be condemned as much as 
any thing I ever saw. The only hits in it I put in myself, 
but they were so overlaid by his own original twaddle that they 
were lost to the million." 

I felt the blood tingling in my ears and cheeks : the 
people were talking of me I thought I could not be mis- 
taken. 

" Well," said one of the amiable ladies, who acted as my 
bottle smelling-bottle holder the night before, " poor 
fellow, I pity him very much ; he may be foolish, and I think 
he is, but he is remarkably good-natured." 

" Perhaps," said some odious person, " you will presently 
find out that he is good-looking." A roar of laughter fol- 
lowed this, which had nearly killed me. 

" Saracen's Head ! " said one. 

" Buckhurst ! " cried another. 

" I suppose," said a third, " he is gone to tell his mamma 
the history of his misfortunes." 

" I believe she wrote the farce herself," said a fourth. 

" Well, poor devil," exclaimed the first speaker, " let us 
leave him alone his business is done I flatter myself the 
shine was taken out of him last night, and there's an end : so, 
what's to be done till dinner-time Patience in a punt, or a 
drive to Hampton Court ? " 

This speech, so surely indicative of a move, induced me 
suddenly to withdraw my head and make a retreat towards 
the front door, where I desired the waiter to bring my bill and 
order my servant to bring the horses to the door. 

Here, however, I was foiled, for scarcely had I made two 
knight's moves over the chequered pavement of the hall, 
before I found myself surrounded by the gay party from the 
pavilion. Nothing could exceed their expressions of delight 
at finding me there ; the poor devil hanging in his silk hand- 
kerchief, whom they had been abusing five minutes before, 
was suddenly converted into their dear friend and delightful 
D 4 

40 GILBERT GUUNEY. 

Mr. Gurney. The group consisted of several of my theatrical 
friends, and, to my utter horror, they began condoling with 
me on the annihilation of my farce before the waiters and 
chambermaids, all of them declaring unanimously that it had 
been unfairly treated, and that it possessed the most unques- 
tionable marks of great dramatic genius. 

I then did not know the world quite so well as I afterwards 
did ; and when I saw the smile of friendship upon the coun- 
tenances of these ladies and gentlemen, and felt the kind pres- 
sure of their proffered hands, I also felt assured that I had 
not been the subject of their conversation in the next room, 
but that some other man and some other drama had been so 
generally anathematised ; and, perhaps, my ignorance was 
bliss, for seeing how extremely happy they were to meet me, 
and hearing how earnestly they pressed me to join their party, 
I countermanded my horses till the evening, and passed what, 
in the sequel, turned out to be a very entertaining day. 

It was agreed and what would I not at that period of 
my life have agreed to ? that some of the party should fish, 
some walk, some row about, according to their several fancies, 
and that all should dine at the early hour of three ; the reason 
for the adoption of a period so Gothic for such a meal being, 
that one or two of the party had to present themselves in the 
evening to the eyes of the admiring audience of the Hay- 
market Theatre. 

Among the group was a man whose name was Daly 
who, of all the people accounted sane and permitted to range 
the world keeperless, I hold to have been the most decidedly 
mad. His conversation was full of droll conceits, mixed with 
a considerable degree of superior talent, and the strongest 
evidence of general acquirements and accomplishments. He 
appeared to be on terms of familiar intimacy with all the 
members of our little community, and, by his observations and 
anecdotes, equally well known to persons of much higher 
consideration ; but his description of himself to me, shortly 
after our introduction, savoured so very strongly of insanity 
peculiar in its character, I admit that I almost repented 
having, previously to hearing his autobiography, consented 
to send on my horses to Teddington, in order to accompany 
him to that village after the departure of the rest of the party 

GILBERT GURNET. 41 

to London, in a boat in which he proposed to row himself up 
to Hampton Court, where, it appeared, he had, a few days 
before, fixed his temporary residence. 

" I hope," said he, " that we shall be better acquainted. 
I dare say you think me an odd fish I know I am one. 
My father, who is no more, was a most respectable man in his 
way a sugar-baker in St. Mary Axe. I was destined to 
follow in his wake and succeed to the business ; however, I 
cut the treacle tubs at an early age I saw no fun in firkins, 
and could not manage conviviality in canvass sleeves. D'ye 
ever read the ' London Gazette ? ' " 

" Sometimes," said I. 

" In that interesting paper," said Daly, " I used to look 
twice a week to see the price of Muscovados. One hapless 
Saturday I saw my father's name along with the crush : the 
affair was done settled ; dad went through the usual cere- 
mony, and came out of Guildhall as white as one of his own 
superfine lumps. Refreshed by his ruin, my exemplary 
parent soon afterwards bought a house in Berkeley Square, 
stood a contest for a county, and died rather richer than he 
started." 
. " And you, I suppose, his heir ? " said 1. 

" He had not much to leave," replied my new friend. 
" He ran it rather fine towards the close of his career. My 
two sisters got their fortunes paid, but I came off with what 
we technically called the scrapings four hundred a year, 
sir, is the whole of my income ; all my personal property I 
carry under my hat. Timber I have none save my walk- 
ing-stick ; and as to land, except the mould in three geranium 
pots, which stand in my sitting-room window, I haven't an 
inch. Still, Mr. Gurney, although I have not a ducat in my 
purse, 

' Yet I'm in love, and pleased with ruin.' " 

" I envy your philosophy and spirits," said I. 

" You are right," replied Daly ; " fun is to me what ale 
was to Boniface ; I sleep upon fun I drink for fun I 
talk for fun I live for fun ; hence my addiction to our dear 
funny friends of to-day. They just suit me they do no- 
thing but laugh ; they laugh with one when present, and at 
one when absent but to me that is the fun." 

42 GILBERT GURXEY. 

I immediately thought of the " funny" observations upon 
myself, which I had overheard earlier in the day, pretty well 
assured that the voice of my new laughter-loving acquaint- 
ance had not been the least loud in the debate. 

ie I admit myself fond of practical joking," continued my 
friend. " I don't mean in one's own particular circle ; there 
it is dangerous ; people are not always in the same humour 
what they think uncommonly good fun one day, they will 
seriously resent as an insult the next. There's no judging 
with certainty a man's temper of mind, and it is not easy to 
ascertain how much melted butter a gentleman would like to 
have poured into his coat-pocket without kicking ; I avoid 
that sort of thing, but on the great scale I confess my addic- 
tion. Coming here yesterday evening, I stopped the chaise 
at the corner of Egham, to turn the finger-post at the corner 
half round sent all the people bound for London to Chert- 
sey, all the people destined for Egham to Windsor, and all 
the people destined for Windsor, to London that's my way." 

" Probably," said I, " but not theirs. And do you often 
indulge yourself in these freaks ? " 

" Perpetually," replied Daly ; " I've whipped off every 
knocker in Sloane Street three nights running a hundred 
and ninety-four, exclusive of shops ; and if ever the project 
of lighting London with smoke should be brought to bear, I 
flatter myself you will hear of my darkening the whole parish 
of Pancras, by grinding a gimlet through a gas-pipe." 

" These frolics must cost something," said I. 

" Occasionally," said my friend ; " but what of that ? 
Every man has his pursuits I have mine." 

" I should think," replied I, " if you perform such tricks 
often, your pursuits must be innumerable." 

" What ! " exclaimed Daly ; " pursuits after me, you 
mean ? I'm obliged to you for that I see we shall be better 
acquainted of that I am now quite certain. One thing I must 
tell you of myself, because, although there is something equi- 
vocal in the outset of the adventure, I set it all to rights after- 
wards, and will prove to you that in fact all I did, was done 
for fun pure fun." 

I foresaw an awkward discovery of some sort by the pre- 
fatory deprecation of criticism ; however, I listened to my 
slight acquaintance with complacency and confidence. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

43 

" You must know," said Daly, " that I once had a brother, 

long since dead, and you must know that he was my 
elder brother, and he went abroad ; I remained at home, and 
was my father's darling he fancied nothing on earth was 
like me. I was the wittiest, if not the wisest fellow breathing ; 
and I have seen my respectable parent shake his fat sides with 
laughing at my jokes and antics, till the tears ran down 
his rosy cheeks. Nevertheless I had a fault, I cannot dis- 
tinctly aver that I have even yet overcome it, I was extra- 
vagant extravagant in everything extravagant in mirth 

extravagant in love extravagant in money-matters. After 
my respected parent's death, I lodged at an upholsterer's 
excellent man ! occupied his first floor but paid him no 
rent ; on the contrary, borrowed money of him." 

" Indeed ! " said I, " I " 

" Don't frown, Mr. Gurney," interrupted Daly, " you will 
find that it all comes right in the end. I'm as honest as a 
Parsee don't be alarmed I was then much younger than 
I am now ; and, although the world unjustly, ungenerously, 
and invariably judge a man's character in after life by the 
foibles of his youth, don't be prejudiced, but hear me. I bor- 
rowed money of him I consulted him upon all occasions 
he was delighted with me, I with him reciprocity of feeling, 
you know, and all that sort of thing. My upholsterer was 
my cabinet-minister who better ? who fitter to be consulted 
when any new measure was on the tapis ? So things went on 
for a year, at the end of which, I owed him fourteen hundred 
and seventy-two pounds, thirteen shillings, and nine pence 
halfpenny, without the interest." 

" That was no joke, Mr. Daly," said I. 

"No, but what followed was," continued my equivocal 
friend. " My cabinet-minister applied for funds I had 
none on hand. I therefore quitted London, and retired to the 
blest shades of Holyrood not that this sort of constraint 
was at all necessary, for my friend, the sofa-maker, never 
troubled himself to inquire after me." 

" Why, then, did you go ? " said I. 

" Why, you see I thought he might," replied Daly. " After 
I had hovered about Scotland, seen the sights, visited the 
Highlands, shot some grouse, and a pretty job I made of 
that, umph ! I returned to Edinburgh, and began to be 

44- GILBERT GURNET. 

anxious to get back to London. I therefore took the resolu- 
tion of killing myself forthwith." 

" Horrible ! " said I. 

" Most horrible ! " replied he ; " nevertheless I put that re- 
solve into immediate execution." 

" How ? " I inquired. 

" By transmitting an account of my death to the metro- 
politan newspapers in these words ' Died, at Antigua, on 
the 15th March, in the 28th year of his age, Robert Fergus- 
son Daly, Esq., son of the late Thomas Fergusson Daly, Esq., 
of St. Mary Axe, London.' " 

" What earthly purpose could that have answered ? " 

" You shall hear," said Daly. " About ten days after this 
announcement, having ' incurred ' for a suit of mourning, I 
proceeded to my friend the upholsterer. Dear man, I recol- 
lect his little white bald head peering over his desk in the 
counting-house as well as if it were but yesterday in I went 
made a bow up jumped my creditor. 

" ' Ah, Mr. Daly,' cried he, ' then what I have read in the 
newspaper is not true ! you are alive and merry.' 

" Upon which I, looking as grave as a judge, said with a 
long-drawn sigh, ' Sir, I see you have fallen into the common 
mistake.' 

" ( Mistake, sir,' said he, ' no mistake in the world ! Why, 
I read in the newspapers that you were dead. How those 
fellows do fib ! ' 

" ' In this instance/ I replied, ' they are as true as the tides 
to the moon or the needle to the Pole.' 

" ' Why,' cried he, ' you are not dead, for here you are ! ' 

" ' So I am,' said I ; ' but I am not the Mr. Daly who died 
in Antigua.' 

" ' That's very clear,' said the old cabinet-maker ; ' for, as 
I said before, here you are.' 

" ' Still,' said I, ' sir,' I thought the sir good ' you do 
not understand; I am the brother the twin brother of poor 
Bob Daly who lived here with yon, and who has died, as I 
unfortunately know, deep in your debt.' 

' ' ' What ! ' exclaimed the upholsterer, f you his brother ! 
Impossible ridiculous ! Why, I should know you from a 
thousand by that little knob on your nose.' 

" ' That may be, sir,' said I ; ' but I was born with a 

GILBERT GUKNEV. 45 

knob on my nose as well as my brother. I assure you he is 
in his grave at Antigua.' 

" This astounded him, and he was proceeding to ring the 
bell in order to call up the housemaid, who had made herself 
particularly familiar with my knob, in order to identify me, 
when I pacified him by fresh assurances that he was mistaken, 
and that I was come to settle the account due from my late 
brother to himself." 

"This," saidl," was all very funny, no doubt; Imtcuibono ?" 

<s Nous verrons," said Daly. " The moment I talked of 
paying, all doubt ended ; he felt convinced that it could not 
be me ; for he was quite of opinion that at that time I had 
no notion of muddling away my income in paying bills. So 
he listened, looking all the while at my knob you see the 
thing I mean, Mr. Gurney," said Daly, pointing to a pimple ; 
" till at last I begged to see his account he produced it 
I sighed so did he. 

" ' Sir,' said he, ' this is dear me, is it possible two 
people should be so much alike ? your brother's last account 
before he went.' 

" I could not help saying, ' He is gone to his last account 
now, sir.' If it had been to save my life, I could never 
check my fun. 

" ' Lord, how like Mr. Robert that is ! ' said the upholsterer. 

" ' What is the amount?' said I. 

" ' Fourteen hundred and seventy-two pounds, thirteen 
shillings and ninepence halfpenny. As for interest, Mr. Daly, 
I don't want it.' 

" ' Sir,' said I, drawing out of my pocket a handkerchief 
whiter than unsunned snow, ' I honour and reverence you. I 
can now account for the high respect and veneration with 
which my poor brother Bob used to speak of you and write 
about you. You shall judge what he has done; he has 
died worth three thousand five hundred pounds ; the claims 
upon him are numerous and heavy ; in his letter, the last I 
ever received from him, he directs me to make an equitable 
division of his property.' 

" ' Poor fellow ! ' said the cabinet-maker. 

" ' An innocent young creature, with three children,' said 
I, ' first claims his care.' 

" 'Dear me !' said the man. ' Rely upon it I won't in- 

46 GILBERT GUHNEY. 

terfere there. No, no. I gave him credit farther than he 
asked it. I won't visit his sins upon those who, perhaps, are 
helpless, and certainly blameless in this affair.' 

" There was something'so kind in this, that I was near be- 
traying myself; but I should have spoiled the joke. 

" ' After those,' continued I, ' you come next ; and, having 
divided his assets fairly, he decided that he could, acting con- 
scientiously towards others, afford to pay you five shillings in 
the pound upon the amount due ; and, accordingly, I have 
brought you to-day a sum calculated at that rate that is to 
say, three hundred and sixty-eight pounds thirteen shillings 
and sixpence, for I don't descend to fractions.' 

" ' Well, now,' said the honest old man, ' I love and honour 
him for that. He needn't have paid me a farthing. I knew 
not where he was ; and to think of me on his death-bed ! 
that, sir, shows good principle ; and as you are so like him in 
every thing else, and how like him you are, to be sure ! 
I hope and trust don't be angry, sir that you will follow 
the example he has set you in the last act of his life.' 

" ' Then,' said I, ' you accept the proposal ? ' 

<f ' Most happily, sir,' said he. ' I tell you I honour his 
feelings. I had given the whole thing up as lost : I thought 
he was a hard-hearted and a practised taker-in of credulous 
men * 

" ' Sir,' said I, bowing, ' you little knew my poor brother 
Bob if you thought that. Here, sir, is the money ; all I ask, 
as a satisfaction to the interesting young creature who sur- 
vives him, is a receipt in full of all demands as against him.' 

" ' In course, Mr. Daly/ said the upholsterer, taking the 
notes I proffered. ' Why, la ! ' exclaimed he, ' I declare you 
have got the very ring on, that I have seen a hundred times, 
with a leetel patent key twisted into the inside, that he used 
to wear.' 

" ' Yes,' said I, rather taken aback at this ; for with all my 
cunning I had forgotten to disring my finger for the occasion. 
f Yes, it was the only thing he left me ; and I wear it for his 
sake.' 

" ' And how well it fits !' said the cabinet-maker. 

t( 'Often the case with twins,' said I, ' There are two 
hundred, three hundred, and fifty, a ten pound note, eight 
guineas, and five shillings and sixpence ; count it yourself.' 

GILBERT GURNET. 47 

" ' And now/ said he, ' I am to give you a receipt in full ; 
to be sure I will. But I do wish you would do me one favour, 
sir/ continued he ; 'I wish you would let my housemaid 
Becky see you ; she was very fond of your poor brother, and 
very attentive to him, and I should I know it is taking a 
great liberty I should like her to see you.' 

ff ' I should be too happy/ said I, trembling at the appre- 
hension that the girl, who was more than usually civil to me 
while I lived in the lodgings, should make her appearance, 
convinced that she would not be deceived as to the identity, 
or believe in the story of two brothers having the same knobs 
on their noses ; ' but don't you think it might shock the poor 
young woman ? ' 

" c No, no, sir/ said he looking over a black leather book 
for a proper stamp ; ' Becky isn't frightened at trifles; shall I 
ring ? ' 

" I could not help myself, and Becky was summoned. 
Luckily, however, she had just stepped out to get something, 
and satisfied, by the way in which the other servant conveyed 
the intelligence to her master, that it was not very probable 
she would soon return, I screwed my courage to the sticking- 
place, and remained until he had written, signed, and deli- 
vered my entire acquittance from my whole debt, in consider- 
ation of the receipt of three hundred and sixty-eight pounds 
thirteen shillings and sixpence ; having secured which, I made 
my bow and left my upholsterer, not ill pleased with the ad- 
venture of the day." 

" Yes, sir," said I, after I had heard this narrative, " but I 
see no joke in all this : it appears to me that a person less 
favourably disposed than myself, would find a very different 
name for such a proceeding." 

" So would anybody," said my valuable friend, " if it were 
not for the sequel. A short time after, I had the means to set 
all right, and lost no time in doing so ; I confessed my ruse to 
my worthy friend, made him laugh heartily at his own cre- 
dulity, paid him the difference, and gave Becky a guinea or 
two." 

I honestly confess, that although my new friend polished 
off the end of his story with a few retributive facts, the ac- 
count of his adventure with the cabinet-maker did not very 
much elevate him in my opinion, and I began again to repent 

48 GILBERT GURNEY. 

of having hastily engaged myself as a passenger in his boat, so 
appropriately, as he himself said, called a " funny." The only 
consolation I could afford myself arose from the consideration 
that our connection would not be of long duration that it 
need never be renewed that few people, if any, would see 
me in my way up the river and that, from all I had heard 
of him from himself, he did not appear likely to die a watery 
death, so that my personal safety was rather guaranteed than 
not, by my having placed myself under his command in our 
aquatic excursion. 

I had never seen such a man before, nor have I ever seen 
such a one since : from the time he sat down to dinner till all 
was done, his tongue never ceased he was au fait at every 
thing played billiards better than anybody I ever saw 
jumped higher imitated birds and beasts, including men, 
women, and children, more correctly caught more fish in an 
hour than all the rest of the punters did in three sang all 
sorts of songs made speeches and told stories of himself 
which would have made my poor mother's hair stand on end. 
One of his practical jokes, played off upon one of the ladies 
of our party, I must set down. She had never been at Rich- 
mond before, or if she had, knew none of the little peculiarities 
attached to it. He desired the waiter to bring some " maids 
of honour" those cheesecakes for which the place has been 
time out of mind so celebrated. The lady stared and then 
laughed ; Daly saw her surprise, and elicited all he wanted 
her innocent question of " What do you mean by maids of 
honour ? " ' ' Dear me," said he, " don't you know that this 
is so courtly a place, and so completely under the influence of 
state etiquette, that every thing in Richmond is called after 
the functionaries of the palace ? What are called cheesecakes 
elsewhere, are here called maids of honour ; a capon is a lord 
chamberlain ; a goose, a lord steward ; a roast pig is a master 
of the horse ; a pair of ducks, grooms of the bedchamber ; 
and a gooseberry tart, a gentleman usher of the black rod ; and 
so on." 

The unsophisticated lady was taken in ; and with all the 
confidence which Daly's gravity inspired, when she actually 
saw the maids of honour make their appearance in the shape 
of cheesecakes, convulsed the whole party, by turning to the 
waiter and desiring him, in a sweet but decided tone, to bring 

GILBERT GURNEY. 49 

her a gentleman usher of the black rod, if they had one in 
the house, quite cold. 

These were the sort of plaisanteries (mauvaises, if you 
will) in which this most extraordinary person indulged. Ir. 
the sequel, I had occasion to see his versatile powers more 
profitably engaged, and which led me to reflect somewhat 
more seriously upon the adventure of the upholsterer and the 
receipt in full of all demands. 

The dinner was rather inconveniently despatched, in order 
to suit the convenience of the engaged performers, and by 
seven o'clock my new friend and myself were left to commence 
our voyage up the river. His spirits appeared even higher 
than they had been before, and I felt myself, when consigned 
to his care, something in the same situation as Mr. O'Rourke 
on the eagle's back : whither I was to be carried by his in- 
fluence, or how to be dashed down when he got tired of me, 
I could not clearly comprehend ; nor were my apprehension 
of consequences in any satisfactory degree diminished when 
my perilous companion commenced a violent wordy attack 
upon a very respectable round-bodied gentleman who was 
sitting squeezed into the stern-sheets of a skiff, floating most 
agreeably to himself adown the stream, the gentle south-west 
breeze giving the sail of his boat a shape very similar to that 
of his equally well-filled white dimity waistcoat. 

" Hollo!" cried my friend Daly; " I say, you sir, what 
are you doing in that boat ? " 

The suburban Josh maintained a dignified silence. 

" I say, you sir," continued the undaunted joker, " what 
are you doing there ? you have no business in that boat, and 
you know it ! " 

A slight yaw of the skiff into the wind's eye was the only 
proof of the stout navigator's agitation. 

Still Daly was inexorable, and he again called to the un- 
happy mariner to get out of the boat. " I tell you, my fat 
friend," cried he, " you have no business in that boat !" 

Flesh and blood could not endure this reiterated declaration. 
The ire of the cockney was roused. " No business in this 
boat, sir ! " cried he, " what d'ye mean ? " 

" I mean what I say," said Daly ; " you have no business 
in it, and I'll prove it." 

" I think, sir, you will prove no such thing," said the 

50 GILBERT GURNEY. 

navigator, whose progress through the water was none of the 
quickest ; " perhaps you don't know, sir, that this is my own 
pleasure-boat ? " 

" That's it," said Daly, " now you have it no man can 
have any business in a pleasure-boat. Good day, sir. That's 
all." 

I confess I was a good deal shocked at this mode of termi- 
nating the colloquy. However, no ill consequences arose ; 
the fat man went his way, and so did we, and in a few 
minutes more embarked in Daly's " pleasure"-boat, in which 
I felt, according to his dictum, that I had no business what- 
ever. 

Richmond, which seems, every time one sees it, as if it 
were dressed to look lovely for that particular day, was smiling 
in all its radiance and gaiety ; the velvet meadows of Twick- 
enham, studded with noble trees, looked cooler and greener 
than ever ; and my friend began to perform that incompre- 
hensibly agreeable exercise of pulling up against the stream, 
when all at once a thought seemed to flash across his mind, 
and a look of regret sadden his countenance ; the expression 
was too distinct to be mistaken or disregarded. 

" What," said I, " what is the matter ? have you left 
anything behind?" 

" No," said he, laughing ; " but if I had thought of it, 
we would not have come away so soon from Richmond ; and 
I would have shown you some sport in Cockney-catching." 

" What do you mean ? " asked innocent I. 

<f A trick specially my own," replied Daly, IC to be played 
with the greatest success between the grounds of Sion and 
Kew Gardens. Thus: In the dusk of the evening I 
prescribe scientifically take a strong line, fix him to a peg 
in the bank of Sion, carry him across the river, and fix him 
to another peg in the bank of Kew ; strain him tight, and 
then retire to watch the effect. Tide running down, presently 
comes a Cockney-couple, the man flirting and pulling, the 
lady sitting and smiling : when they reach the chosen spot, 
the tight line catches the Cockney Corydon on the back of his 
head, and tumbles him forward at the feet of his Phyllis ; in 
a twinkling, the same effect is produced on the lady, with this 
single simple difference, that the cord catches her under the 
chin, and tumbles her backwards. In the confusion of the 

GILBERT GURNET. 51 

moment^ tide ebbing fast, the happy pair are swept down the 
stream ; and having, after the lapse of a few minutes, set 
themselves to rights again, begin to wonder what has hap- 
pened, and of course never think of trying back against tide 
to ascertain the cause j which, however, if they did would 
assist them little, for the moment you have caught your 
Cockneys you cast off the line from the peg, and the cause of 
the mischief disappears from the sight probatum est." 

" That seems rather a serious joke," said I. 

" Umph!" replied Daly; " perhaps you would prefer keep- 
ing the line, but for my part I am not particular." 

This he certainly need not have mentioned. Every mo- 
ment added fresh evidence to the fearful fact ; I was yet un- 
prepared for what was to come. 

" I wish," said my friend, as he plied the oar, " that we 
had stayed a little longer at Richmond. I think one more 
bottle of claret, tete-a-tete, would have been vastly agreeable." 

" I should not have disliked it myself," said I. " Is it 
impossible to repair the mischief ? is there no agreeable 
retreat on these shores, in which we may solace ourselves for 
our imprudence ? " 

" No," said my 'friend : " the Eel-pie House is a wretched 
hole the inns at Twickenham are all inland there is 
nothing marine short of the Toy, and we are to part long 
before I reach that much-loved spot." 

" Then," said I, " we must make up our minds to the 
evil, and bear it as well as we can." 

At this moment we were under the bank of a beautiful 
garden, upon which opened a spacious bow-windowed dinner- 
room, flanked by an extensive conservatory. Within the 
circle of the window was placed a table, whereon stood bottles 
and decanters, rising, as it were, from amidst a cornucopia of 
the choicest fruits. Around this table were seated a highly 
respectable family ; a portly gentleman, whose cheeks and 
chin gave ample evidence that such refections were " his 
custom always in the afternoon," and near him a lady, evi- 
dently his better, if not his larger half on either side bloomed 
two young creatures, unquestionably the daughters of the 
well-fed pair. Our appearance, although the lawn was some 
twenty or thirty yards in depth, had caught their attention, as 
their respective forms and figures had attracted our notice. 
E 2 

52 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" There/' said I, " this scene is exhibited to us by our 
evil genius, to tantalise us with the prospect we may not 
enjoy." 

" You are wrong/' said Daly, " quite wrong be quiet 
beautiful girls, cool wine, and agreeable society, are worth 
making a dash for. Those girls will we become acquainted 
with that society will we join those wines will we im- 
bibe." 

' ' Do you know them ? " said I. 

" Never saw them by any chance in my life," said Daly ; 
" but here goes the thing is settled arranged done. 
Have you a pocket-book and a pencil about you ? if you have, 
lend them to me ; say nothing, and I will manage the rest. 
Assent to all I assert, and stay in the boat till we are invited 
to partake of the collation." 

" But, my dear sir," said I 

" Mum," said Daly, at the same moment pulling the head 
of his funny " chock block," as the sailors say, into the bank 
of the garden, upon whose velvet surface he jumped with the 
activity of an opera-dancer. I sat in amazement, doubting 
what he was about to do, and what I should do myself. The 
first thing I saw, was my friend pacing in measured steps 
along the front of the terrace. He then affected to write down 
something in my book then he stopped raised his hand 
to his eyes, as if to make an horizon in order to obtain a 
level then noted something more and then began to pace 
the ground afresh. 

" Bring the staff out of the boat," said he to me, with an 
air of command, which was so extremely well assumed, that I 
scarcely knew whether he were in joke or in earnest. I 
obeyed, and landed with the staff. Without any further 
ceremony, he stuck the pole into the lawn, a measure which, 
as he whispered to me, while in the act of taking it, he felt 
assured would bring things to a crisis. 

Sure enough, after a certain ringing of the dinner-room 
bell, which we heard, and which conveyed to Daly's mind a 
conviction that he had created a sensation, a butler, bien 
poudre, in a blue coat, white waistcoat, and black et ceteras, 
followed at a properly-graduated distance by a strapping foot- 
man, in a blue and scarlet livery, were seen approaching. I 
thought the next step would be our sudden and unceremonious 

GILBERT GURNEY. 53 

expulsion from the Eden we had trespassed upon not so 
my friend, who continued pacing, and measuring, and " jot- 
ting down," until the minister for the home department was 
at his elbow. 

" I beg your pardon, gentlemen/' said the butler, " but 
my master's compliments, begs to know what your pleasure 

here is it is not usual for strangers to land and" 

" Exactly like the man in the boat, sir," said Daly, " only 
quite the reverse. I am not here for pleasure business calls 
me here duty, sir duty. Here, Mr. Higgins, carry the 
staff to that stump." 

These words were addressed to me, and I, completely in- 
fatuated fascinated, like the bird by the rattle-snake did 
as I was told, not daring to rebel, lest a denouement might 
ensue, which would eclater in our being jointly and severally 
kicked into the river, in which case, from the very little, or 
rather the very great deal, which I had seen of my companion 
during our short acquaintance, I felt perfectly certain that / 
should sink, and he would swim ; and that while I was floun- 
dering in all the agonies of ignominy and disgrace, he would 
be capering and flourishing with the two pretty girls in the 
dining-room, laying all the blame of the affair upon my most 
incompetent shoulders, and cracking his jokes upon the tyro 
who had so blunderingly botched the business. 

The butler, who found that he made very little impression 
upon Daly, seemed inclined to come at me, which, as I had 
not the slightest idea of the game my companion was playing, 
nor the faintest notion what he expected to be the result, 
alarmed me considerably. Daly was too much on the alert, 
however, to permit me to be cross-questioned. 

" Sir," said he to the butler, " present my compliments to 
your master, and make my humble apologies for the liberty I 
am obliged to take. I am the acting deputy assistant sur- 
veyor of the Grand Junction Paddington Canal Company, and an 
act of parliament is just about to be applied for, to construct 
and cut a branch from the basin at Brentford, into the river 
Thames, near this point. A great deal depends upon my de- 
cision as to the line it will take, and I should not have ven- 
tured to land without apprising your master of my business, 
but that no time is to be lost, inasmuch as my plan for the cut 
must be ready for the committee to-morrow." 
E 3 

54 GILBERT GURNET. 

" Cut a canal through my master's grounds, sir ? " said the 
butler. 

" Right through," said Daly, poking the fore-finger of his 
right hand very nearly into the butler's left eye ; " and what I 
am now so particular about is, I am most anxious that the line 
should not take down the corner of the conservatory." 

" Dear me, sir," said the man, " my mistress would go 
mad at the very thought of such a thing. Will you just wait, 
sir, while I speak to Sir Timothy ? " 

" Certainly," said he ; " and assure him assure Sir 
Timothy that I will do all I can to preserve the elevation 
of his mansion ; for, as it all depends upon my opinion, I 
shall, of course, be extremely scrupulous how I decide." 

" I am sure, sir," said the astounded and mollified butler, 
" Sir Timothy will be greatly obliged to you. I'll be back 
directly, sir." 

Saying which, the butler returned to the house, and giving 
a significant look to the strapping footman, with the grenadier 
shoulders and balustrade legs, which seemed to imply that he 
need not kick us into the water till he had consulted his 
master, the fellow followed him, which afforded me an op- 
portunity of asking my volatile friend what the deuce he 
was at. 

" Leave me alone/' said he 

" ' Women and wine compare so well, 
They run in a perfect parallel." 

I am the company's acting deputy assistant surveyor, and 
having surveyed this company, I mean to be made a partici- 
pator in those good things of which they seem to be in. full 
possession. Yes, Mr. Gurney, as King Arthur says 

" ' It is our royal will and pleasure to be drunk ; 
And this, our friend, shall be us drunk as we.' 

Who knows but we may make an agreeable and permanent 
acquaintance with this interesting family ! " 

" But," said I, " you don't even know their name." 

" You are in error," replied Daly ; " the man's name is 
known to me." 

" Then perhaps you are known to him," said I. 

" That is a non sequitur," said Daly ; " I knew nothing of 
him before I landed here now I am au fait my friend 

GILBERT GUKNEY. 55 

in the powder and sticking-plasters calls his master Sir Timothy. 
There are hundreds of Sir Timothies ; but what do I do upon 
hearing this little distinctive appellation, but glance my eye to 
the livery button of the lacquey and what do I see there ? 
a serpent issuing from and piercing a garb or gerb. The crest 
is unique ergo, my new acquaintance is neither more nor 
less than Sir Timothy Dod." 

" Why/' said I, " you are, like myself, a bit of a herald, 
too ! " 

" Exactly," replied Daly ; " in my composition are 

" ' Arts with arms contending ; ' 

I am a bit of every thing ; but somehow all my accomplish- 
ments are so jumbled, and each is so minute in itself, that 
they are patched together in my mind like the squares of a 
harlequin's jacket, only to make their master ridiculous. 
Here, however, comes Sir Timothy himself. You are my 
clerk keep the staff and the joke up, and you shall be repaid 
with some of Tim's very best Lafitte, or I'm an ass." 

" Good day, sir," said Sir Timothy, somewhat warmed with 
the intelligence given him by the butler, and the exertion of 
trotting himself across his lawn. " My servant tells me that 
you are here for the purpose of deciding upon the line of some 
new branch of the Paddington Canal ; it is very extraordi- 
nary I never should have heard of it ! " 

" You ought, Sir Timothy," said Daly, " to have been ap- 
prised of it. Do you understand much of ground-plans, Sir 
Timothy ? " 

" No, sir; very little indeed," replied the worthy knight. 

" So much the better," I heard Daly distinctly say, for he 
could not resist an impulse. " If you will just cast your eye 
over this paper, I will endeavour to explain, sir. A, there 
you see ; A is your house, Sir Timothy ; B is the conser- 
vatory; C is the river, that perhaps you will think strange? " 

" No, sir," said Sir Timothy, " not at all." 

" Then, sir, D, E, F, and G are the points, from which I 
take the direct line from the bridge at Brentford ; and thus 
you perceive, by continuing that line to the corner of Twick- 
enham churchyard, where the embouchure is to be " 

'' The what, sir ? " said Sir Timothy. 

'' The mouth, sir, the entrance to the new branch, the 

E 4 

56 

GILBERT GURNET. 

canal will clip your conservatory diagonally to the extent of 
about eighteen feet six inches, and leave it deprived of its 
original dimensions somewhat in the shape of a cocked-hat 
box. You see so, sir, H, I, K." 

" I give you my honour, sir," said Sir Timothy, <e such a 
thing would drive Lady Dod mad ! " 

" I admit it would be a dreadful cut," said Daly ; " and 
then the noise of the bargemen and the barge-horses close 
under the windows, clanking chains, horrible oaths 
disgusting language " 

'' My daughters' bed-rooms are at that end of the house," 
said Sir Timothy. " What am I to do, sir ? What interest 
can I make ? Are the magistrates are the " 

" No, sir," said Daly, with a face of the most imperturb- 
able gravity ; " all that would be perfectly unavailing. The 
decision as to the line rests entirely with me ; and, as I said 
to Mr. Higgins, my assistant, Higgins," continued he, 
calling me to him, " let me present you to Sir Timothy Dod, 
I said to Higgins, what a pity it would be to disturb the 
Dods, what a cut at their comforts ; it goes against my 
heart to send in the plan, but the line is so decidedly the 
shortest. ' Ah, sir ! ' says Higgins to me, with a deep sigh, 
I assure you, ' but do consider the conservatory.' " 

" I'm sure, sir," said Sir Timothy, extending his hand to 
me, " I feel very grateful for your kindness. It would in- 
deed be a sad thing ; and must the decision be made so soon ? " 

" Immediately, sir," said Daly : " but we are keeping you 
out here in the open air without your hat. I am afraid, sir, 
you may catch cold." 

" Oh, no, sir,'' said Sir Timothy ; " don't mind that. 
Perhaps, gentlemen, you will do me the kindness to walk in. 
The servants shall take care of your boat. I will introduce 
you to Lady Dod, she must try what her influence can effect, 
and I am sure you have the disposition to serve us. Here, 
Philip, James, George, some of you, come and make this 
boat fast, and stay down by her while the gentlemen stop. 
Let me show you the way, gentlemen." 

I never shall forget the look which Daly gave me as we fol- 
lowed the respectable knight to his lady and family, the 
triumphant chuckle of his countenance, the daring laugh in 
his eyes ; while I, who only saw in the success of the design 

GILBERT GURNEY. 57 

the beginning of a signal defeat, scarce knew whether I was 
walking on my head or my heels : resistance or remonstrance 
was equally vain under the circumstances, and in a few minutes 
we found ourselves in the presence of Lady Dod and her 
daughters, breathing an atmosphere redolent with the fumes 
of the departed dinner, and the still remaining fruit and wine. 
I never was so abashed in my life. My friend, on the con- 
trary, seemed perfectly at home ; and, placing himself beside 
her ladyship, made a sign for me to occupy a vacant seat be- 
tween the young ladies. Never did I see two more lovely 
girls. 

It has frequently been a serious matter of deliberation with 
me, whether it is more advantageous to be next neighbour, or 
vis-d-vis, to an object of attraction, such as either of these 
charming creatures was. I sat between them, as Garrick 
stands between Tragedy and Comedy, in the profane theatri- 
cal monument which some superannuated or careless Dean of 
other days has permitted to disgrace and desecrate the walls 
of Westminster Abbey. Augusta Dod was a brunette, with a 
countenance full of expression and intelligence. Fanny Dod 
a blonde, with melting blue eyes, and a pair of lips that, spite 
of my feigned occupation, I could not help gazing at in a 
manner of which I believe I ought to have been very much 
ashamed. The young witches soon saw the effect of their 
fascination, and I could perceive in the sparkle of Augusta's 
brilliant orbs, and the intellectual but saucy expression of her 
playful mouth, that they triumphed in " astonishing a na- 
tive," even in the shape of an acting deputy assistant sur- 
veyor's clerk. 

The courtesy of Sir Timothy, the sweetness of my lady, 
and the constrained fun of the girls, were, I admit, when I 
recovered my composure in some degree, a good treat ; while 
Daly, " helping himself and passing the bottle" tome, kept 
up a fire of conversation, which, if the senior Dods had known 
anything of the world, would have convinced them in ten 
minutes that the part of acting deputy assistant measurer was 
an assumed one. It certainly was a sight to see the respect- 
able lady of the house pleading the cause of her conservatory, 
and piling the choicest fruits upon the plate of the arbiter of 
her destinies, while Fanny's civilities to me were displayed 
with equal zeal and far superior grace. I would have given 

58 GILBERT GURNEY. 

the world to have owned the truth ; and I am sure, if we had 
done so, we should not have been the worse received ; for, in- 
dependently of the excellence of the joke and the impudence 
of the proceeding, the relief which would have been afforded 
to the minds of the whole Doddery would have ensured us 
their eternal favour and affection. 

Daly having finished the claret, and taken a last " stopper 
over all" (as the sailors say) of sherry, gave me the signal 
for departure. I, too gladly, took the hint, and drew back my 
chair. Fanny looked as if she thought we were in a hurry ; 
however, it was getting late, and my master had some distance 
to pull. We accordingly rose and prepared to take leave. I 
bowed my adieu to the girls, and shook hands with Fanny, at 
which I saw Augusta toss back her head and throw up her 
sparkling eyes, as much as to say, " Well, Fanny," meaning 
exactly the reverse. I bowed low to my Lady Dod, and Sir 
Timothy attended us to our boat. I stepped in ; Daly was at 
the bow ; Sir Timothy desired the man who had been left in 
charge of the funny to go away ; and then I saw, with doubt 
and trepidation, the respectable dupe of Daly's consummate 
impudence shake him by the hand with a peculiarity of man- 
ner which particularly attracted my attention. I saw him in 
the execution of this manoeuvre press upon his palm a bank- 
note, with a flourish in the corner like the top of a raspberry 
tartlet. 

I never was more agitated. If Daly took this bribe for 
saving the corner of the conservatory, it was an act of swind- 
ling. The strawberries, grapes, and claret, were fit matters of 
joke, although I admit it was carrying the joke a little too 
far ; but money, if he took that, I was resolved to avow the 
whole affair to Sir Timothy, show up my companion, and leave 
him to the fate he deserved. Judge my mingled delight and 

horror when I heard him say, 

" Sir ! what I have done in your house or in your society to 
induce you to believe me capable of taking a bribe to compromise 
my duty, I really don 't know. Mr. Higgins, I call you to wit- 
ness that this person has had the insolence to put a fifty-pound 
bank-note into my hand. Witness, too, the manner in which 
I throw it back to him." Here he suited the word to the ac- 
tion. " Learn, old gentleman," continued he, with an anger 
so well feigned that I almost believed him in earnest, " that 

GILBERT GURNEY. 59 

neither fifty nor fifty thousand pounds will warp an honest 
man from the duty he owes to his employers ; and so, sir, good 
night, and rely upon it, your conservatory goes, rely upon 
it, Sir Timothy; it comes in the right line, and the short 
line, and down it goes and I feel it incumbent on me not 
only to tell the history of your petty bribe, but to prove my 
unimpeachable integrity by running the canal right under your 
dining-room windows ; and so, sir, good night." 

Saying which he jumped into the boat, and, pulling away 
manfully, left his unfortunate victim in all the horrors of de- 
feated corruption, and the certainty of the destruction of his 
most favourite object, for the preservation of which he had 
actually crammed his betrayers, and committed himself to a 
perfect stranger. 

I confess I regretted the termination of this adventure as 
much as I had apprehended its consequences in the beginning ; 
however, Daly swore that it was right to leave the old gentle- 
man in an agony of suspense for having entertained so mean 
an idea of his honour and honesty. 

The thing seemed all like a dream, but I found myself 
awake when Daly ran the narrow nose of his boat into the 
nook at Teddington church, where I landed ; and having 
shaken my extraordinary friend by the hand, proceeded to my 
mother's villa, while he continued his pull up to Hampton 
Court, at which place, as he told me, he had been staying a 
few days, and intended to remain two or three more. 

CHAPTER IV. 

THE voyager long pent up within the " wooden walls " of a 
ship, feels a sensation upon once again walking the " lean 
earth," which cannot be adequately described to one who has 
not experienced it. I confess, although the nature of the 
effect produced upon me when I stepped from Mr. Daly's 
" funny " was of course perfectly different in its character, 
yet, as far as the relief afforded me, it was almost equally 
pleasurable. It seemed to me that I had escaped from some 
incarnate fiend, whose whole existence was devoted to what 

60 

GILBERT GUHXEY. 

he called fun, but which I could not but consider absolute and 
unqualified mischief; and as I walked onwards to my mother's 
villa, I seriously revolved the events of the day in my mind, 
at the same time forming a resolution never again to subject 
myself to the domination of a practical joker, although my 
new friend had given me a pressing invitation to visit him at 
Hampton Court, where he had so recently established himself, 
and of which sedate and aristocratic neighbourhood he would, 
as I suspected, soon become, even by his own showing, the 
terror and affright. 

It was a beautiful evening when I reached the gate of Mrs. 
Gurney's cottage, the mere sight of which recalled all the mis- 
fortunes of the previous night to my mind. The striking contrast 
afforded by the quiet aspect of the villa, the well-mown lawn, 
the gently waving trees, and the gay beds of flowers, to that 
of the house in which I had been but twenty -four hours before 
eternally disgraced as a dramatist, went to my heart ; while 
the parterre, full of roses, and pinks, and geraniums, gently 
bowing their heads and smelling sweetly, exhibited so refresh- 
ing a " reverse " to the parterre of the Haymarket, with its 
" greasy citizens," and yelling apprentices, that all my regrets 
burst upon me in a flood of remorse and sorrow, and found 
utterance in one exclamation of " how could I be such a 
fool ! " 

It was however necessary that I should summon all my 
resolution to bear the reproaches with which I knew I was 
destined to be assailed, if the news of my exposure had pre- 
ceded me. In vain I hoped that my respectable parent might 
not have seen a newspaper, for I recollected that my servant, 
although not entirely informed of my share in the entertain- 
ment of the preceding evening, had made himself master of so 
much of my secret as would serve to enlighten Mrs. Sadler, my 
mother's maid, of whose disposition to find out whatever he 
was unable to explain, I had no doubt ; once the clue given, 
and the train lighted, the explosion was a matter of certainty. 

Full of contending feelings, somewhat excited by the rapid 
consumption of Sir Timothy's claret and sherry, I entered the 
cottage, and found, as I had anticipated, my excellent parent 
seated at tea, opposite to her never-failing friend and com- 
panion, Crab. 

" Dear child," said my excellent parent, and she would 

GILBERT GURNEY. 01 

have called me child had she lived till I was forty, " what 
on earth has kept you at Richmond so late ? Have you 
dined ? or " 

" Dined ? hours ago," replied I, rather too hastily, consi- 
dering it to have been my intention not to confess the company 
in which I had passed the day. 

" Theatricals again, Gilbert ! " said my mother, with a sigh. 

How the deuce did she know that ? 

" You were coming here to pass the day, hut the fascination 
of those syrens of the stage was irresistible we waited dinner 
nearly an hour for you." 

" More, ma'am," said Miss Crab : <c the lamb was stone 
cold, and the fish boiled to pieces." 

" I am extremely sorry," said I ; " but I told William 
that I should not be here until the evening." 

" He misunderstood you, then," said my mother ; " not 
that I should have waited at all if I had known who were 
your associates. I am quite aware of the attractions of such 
society." 

My mother was evidently vexed, and knowing as little of 
the qualities or accomplishments of my fair friends at Rich- 
mond, as she did of the syrens to whom she likened them, 
imagined them, as I believe, to be something quite as extra- 
ordinary as the well-fledged daughters of Achelous ; and no 
doubt transformed the ayte opposite Mrs. Forty's excellent inn 
into the little Sicilian island which the classical leash of orni- 
thological beauties occupied in other times. If I could have 
explained the real cause of my late arrival it would have all 
been extremely well ; but I would not for the world have ven- 
tured to confess to my most exemplary parent, more especially 
in the presence of the fair vinaigrette " she loved so much," 
the adventure at Twickenham. I therefore resolved upon 
bowing my head, to the coming storm, and, without attempting 
to vindicate the character or qualities of my merry-hearted 
companions at the Castle, endeavouring to soothe the ladies 
with an humble apology. 

As for my mother, with great shrewdness and knowledge 
of the world she blended a remarkably sweet temper; but her 
constant association with Miss Crab appeared to me latterly to 
have somewhat acidulated her character. This officious aide- 
de-camp was always ready to throw in the sours ; and from 

62 GILBERT GURNEY. 

having arrived at the unmentionable age of fifty-six, without 
having changed her state of single-unblessedness, all the kind- 
ness of her nature had curdled, and, as people say, every thing 
went wrong with her couleur de rose was a tint unknown 
to her eyes every thing was jaundiced she was full of 
jealousy, without one grain of love to compensate for her failing; 
and to her influence, more than anything else, I attributed 
my mother's apparent ill-humour upon the present occasion. 

' Will you have some coffee, Gilbert ? " said my mother. 

' None, I thank you," said I. 

' Some tea ? " 

f None." 

' Oh dear, no," said Miss Crab, " dissipated people never 
drink such weak liquors as tea or coffee." 

" You seem," said I, " to have formed a very unfavourable 
and somewhat erroneous opinion of my character, Miss Crab ; 
I am not conscious of having deserved to be called dissipated, 
nor do I know that I have either denounced tea or renounced 
coffee." 

" I am sure I don't know," said the lady ; " but this I do 
know, that actors, and actrebses too, are invariably drunkards, 
profaners, and Sabbath-breakers. When I was a few years 
younger, and secretary to a very well-conducted Vice-suppres- 
sion Society at Peckham, we actually ascertained that a man 
of the name of Pluggs, the husband of an exemplary and ill- 
treated laundress of that place, was known to have gone on 
the evening of the Sabbath to Covent Garden playhouse, to 
which he belonged, and put on a pair of feather trowsers and 
a wooden nose, in order to rehearse the part of a goose which 
he had to act in a pantomime the next night." 

" Well," said I, " at all events he had the excuse of his 
poverty for making himself a goose, which the coterie who 
criticised him had not." 

" Oh, I quite agree with Miss Crab," said my mother ; 
" there is no defending the thing ; and joking with serious 
subjects is extremely offensive." 

I found the odds were against me. I therefore made no 
reply, satisfied, at all events, that the intelligence of my defeat 
as a dramatist had not yet reached Teddington. 

" I hope," said my mother, " that you are come to stay 
with us for two or three days?" 

GILBERT GURNEY. 4 63 

" Not he, ma'am," said Miss Crab. 

I could almost have found it in my heart to declare my 
intention of stopping a fortnight, merely to vex her. 

" I have no engagement in town," said I. 

" Well, then, Miss Crab," said my mother, " I think we 
may let him into our scheme." 

" Probably." 

" What," said I, " a plot against me ? " 

" A plot for your happiness," said my mother. ft If you 
will but attend to us " 

" I have no hope of that," said Miss Crab. 

" What is it ? " said I ; "an immediate voyage to India, 
or a fresh touch at the law ? " 

" Neither, Gilbert," said my mother ; " but much more 
agreeable than either. Miss Crab and I have seen have n't 
we, Miss Crab ? " 

" I think we have," replied Miss Crab. 

" Such a charming girl ! " said my mother. 

" Two," cried her friend. 

" Yes, but the younger one is my favourite," said Mrs. 
Gurney ; "she is so gentle, so mild, so amiable, so pretty, and 
so good!" 

" Well," said I, " and what then ? " 

" Oh, ma'am," said Miss Crab, " it's all of no use talking to 
Gilbert about such sort of people. A young gentleman who 
spends his time with actresses has no taste can have no 
taste for the gentler attributes of women, nor appreciate the 
qualities which, in well-regulated society, render their influ- 
ence so powerful and beneficial." 

" I don't know that, Miss Crab," said my mother ; " I 
don't think he is yet irredeemable, and I am quite sure if any- 
thing could draw him back into the right path the charms of 
our dear Fanny " 

" Oh ! " said I, " a pretty girl is what you prescribe as 
a sedative." 

" As an alterative, Mr. Gilbert," said Miss Crab. 

" But you don't seriously mean," said I, " that I should 
turn Benedick before I have arrived at years of discretion ? " 

" I am an advocate of early marriages," said my mother. 

" So am I," said Miss Crab (cetat. 56), drawing a sigh as 
long as the thread with which she was working. 

64 ^, GILBERT GURNEY. 

" And who may this paragon of perfection be ? " said I. 

" A neighbour of ours/' said my mother ; " there are two 
sisters, both delightful persons ; but Fanny is to me quite 
charming." 

" We must not say too much about them," said Miss Crab, 
" or Gilbert will be disappointed ; nor will we tell him which 
is Fanny, and which her sister he shall judge for himself. 
All we have to observe, Mr. Gilbert," continued Miss CraV, 
" is that they have fifty thousand pounds apiece." 

" Equal, then, in that respect," said I ; " and when shall 
I see these fair creatures ? " 

" They are coming to me to-morrow," said my mother ; 
" so that you will not have long to wait before you may gratify 
your curiosity." 

" And what may their name be ? " I inquired. 

" The name is not euphonic," answered my mother. 

" The stronger the reason for changing it," said I. 

" Try that scheme," said my anxious parent ; " at present 
they rejoice in the monosyllabic patronymic of Dod." 

" Dod ! " exclaimed I. 

" Dod," said my mother. 

" Dod," said Miss Crab. 

" What," said I, " daughters of Sir Timothy Dod, of 
Twickenham ? " 

" The same," said Mrs. Gurney ; " do you know them ? " 

What was I to say ? I did know them, and I did not 
know them I had sat between them an hour before drank 
wine with them shaken hands with one of them but under 
what circumstances ? I felt justified in saying " No." It 
was truth to a certain extent ; and if I had attempted to give 
the entire truth, and nothing but the truth, it would have 
involved me in the confession of an adventure, of which, 
though I had escaped with a whole skin, I was by no means 
proud. 

" They live," said my mother, " in that large house on the 
banks of the river, with the fine conservatory." 

Yes, thought I, that conservatory which is to come down, to 
make room for a branch of the Paddington Canal. 

" Lady Dod is a great botanist," continued my dear uncon- 
scious mother ; " and Fanny " 

"' Is a great beauty," interrupted Miss Crab ; " a luetel on 

GILBERT OURNEY. 

65 

one side I think, but that's not to be wondered at ; I remember 
hearing Sir Everanl Home say that nine women out of ten 
were more or less so." 

" Well," said my mother, "let Gilbert judge for himself; 
Fanny seems to me to be the most likeable and loveable person 
I ever saw." 

" Is Fanny the one with the beautiful hair ? " said I, like a 
fool. 

" Yes," said my mother. 

" Why, la," said Miss Crab, laying down her work, and 
looking me full in the face over the candle ; " how do you 
know anything about her beautiful hair, if you know nothing 
of the girls ? " 

" Me," said I ; " why you talked about her beautiful hair 
yourself;" not that she had, but, luckily for me, the confident 
manner in which I made the assertion, induced her to believe 
she had, and she was for the moment satisfied. 

To me this affair was in the highest degree perplexing. 
The girls were charming the opportunity of making their 
acquaintance favourable and inviting. Although my heart 
even then was, perhaps, not mine to give, and love altogether 
out of the question, still their society would have made the 
shades of Teddington Elysium ; and here was I, driven by the 
rash imprudence of my slight acquaintance, Daly, to fly them, 
to shun them, and to decamp on their approach, not only to 
the detriment of my own happiness, but to the vexation of my 
anxious parent, whose whole heart was ardently set upon 
making a partle, and who would attribute my flight from the 
maternal roof to a distaste for the pleasing calm of retirement, 
or to an addiction to grosser pleasures and less refined pursuits ; 
and yet, what was to be done ? The moment they saw me 
they would, of course, recognise in the son of their much- 
respected neighbour, the obsequious Higgins, measuring clerk 
to the deputy assistant surveyor of the Paddington Canal 
Company. If our expedition and invasion of Sir Timothy's 
lawn and house had er/ded civilly, I should have had little 
scruple in admitting the joke, deprecating the anger of the 
young ladies, and trusting to their love of fun for pardon ; 
but as the catastrophe was anything but agreeable to their 
venerable papa, and as that worthy gentleman had fallen 
under the lash of Mr. Daly's practical satire, I did not see the 

F 

DO GILBERT GURNEY. 

possibility of patching up anything like peace. The ddnoue- 
ment was not to be risked ; I therefore contented myself with 
listening to the praises of the beautiful sisters, and expressing 
the great pleasure I should have in making their acquaintance, 
at the same time resolving in my own mind to be up with the 
lark, and in London to breakfast. 

In those days of ingenuousness, I was not able, even though 
I might have wished it, to conceal the real feelings by which 
I was affected, although, as in this instance, their workings 
might be frequently misinterpreted. My mother exchanged a 
look with Miss Crab, which I perfectly understood : it con- 
veyed to me at once the certainty that my excellent parent was 
satisfied that something was wrong ; and as, by the perpetual 
counsellings of her companion, she had made up her mind that 
I was going in a hand-canter or, perhaps, I should rather 
say by the stage on the road to ruin, it was evident that the 
dear soul attributed to some prior engagement the cold and 
uncomfortable manner in which I responded to the beautiful 
inspirations about a lovely girl and fifty thousand pounds. 
Little did they think what my real feelings were how much 
shame I felt at Daly's pranks, and what regret I experienced 
that I could not venture to meet the two dear victims of his 
most unjustifiable frolic. However, my miseries were only 
beginning ; for just as I had listened my companions into a 
calm, and heard a detail of all the perfections of the two Miss 
Dods, in walked the footman, and going up to my mother 
said, 

" Miss Marshall's compliments, ma'am, she has sent you 
the newspaper;" at the same moment placing in her hands 
the " Morning Post" of the day. 

My mother made her acknowledgments, and I endeavoured 
to avail myself of the opportunity of being very civil, and 
offered to read it to her. I saw it was not the paper I had 
seen in the morning, and anticipated some more dreadful criti- 
cisms upon my unhappy farce. But no my mother declared 
that she could not endure to hear the newspaper read, and 
that she would look at it herself ; saying which, she forth- 
with proceeded to read the births, deaths, and marriages, 
and one or two advertisements about bonnets and caps, 
and then, having turned with cordial and candid disgust from 
some long article upon the state of affairs in general, she 

GILBERT GURNEY* 67 

threw the popular journal upon the table, and resumed her 
work. 

Miss Crab always active immediately took it up, and 
began in an audible voice to do that which my respected 
parent had just declared she disliked so much, and doled out, 
with a sort of melancholy twang, sundry pieces of much im- 
portant intelligence : e. g. 

" Captain and Mrs. Hobkirk arrived on Tuesday at the 
Bath Hotel, Piccadilly, from Cheltenham. 

" We understand that Sir Robert Hitchcock is expected 
next Tuesday at his house in Curzon Street, May Fair. 

" We are requested to contradict the report of Miss Hall's 
approaching marriage with Mr. Wetherspoon. It originated 
in the malicious contrivance of a person who will not long 
remain concealed. 

" The wind in Hyde Park yesterday was uncommonly high; 
the equestrians, however, mustered strongly. Amongst the 
most striking equipages we noticed the new carriage of Lady 
Ann Stiffkey, built by Chamberlain and Co., Liquorpoml 
Street, Gray's Inn Lane. 

" Mrs. Huffy Buggins entertained a select party at dinner 
yesterday, at her house in Portman Square ; among the com- 
pany we noticed Lord Daudle, the Right Honourable John 
Gumdum and Mrs. Gumdum, Sir Anthony Bumpus and lady, 
Mr. Gardner, Mr. Hogg, and Mr. Dilbury Maggenton. 

" Pink is the prevailing colour for the season ; we observed 
in Kensington Gardens last Sunday a bonnet peculiarly be- 
coming ; it did not require a second glance to know that 
it was of ihefabrique of Madame Boss Tickner, of Hanover 
Street. 

" An event has occurred in a certain noble family, not a 
hundred miles from Berkeley Square, which will cause some 
employment for the gentlemen of the long robe. 

It seems as if nature had curiously plann'd, 
That men's names with their trades should agree ; 

There's Twining the Tea-man, who lives in the Strand, 
Would be whining if robb'd of his T. 

" ON THE LATIN GERUNDS. 

" When Dido's spouse to Dido would not come, 
She mourn'U in silence, and was Di, Do, DUMB ! " 

F 2 

68 GILBERT GUHNEY. 

All these witticisms, and truisms, and follies, and platitudes, 
I patiently bore ; they fell upon my tympanum, from Miss 
Crab's lips, as might the sound of wind down the chimney, 
for I was completely absorbed in the regret I felt at the 
absolute necessity which existed for my avoiding the girls, 
with whom an acquaintance would have been so particularly 
agreeable; but my abstraction was very speedily ended, and 
my heart set beating, by hearing Miss Crab, in a somewhat 
louder tone than usual, twang out the following : 

" THEATRE. 

" Last night afforded us the opportunity of witnessing the 
justly-merited condemnation of one of the most contemptible 
attempts at a farce, with which the manager of a play-house 
ever ventured to insult the public. From the moment the 
curtain rose, until it fell amidst the yells of a disgusted 
audience, we could not detect one line or word calculated to 
moderate the disapprobation with which the thing was received. 
The incidents if incidents they may be called are stolen 
from the French, and the dialogue from the oldest editions of 
Joe Miller. It was, indeed, painful to see good actors and 
actresses doomed to repeat such absurdities. The audience 
were wonderfully patient, but everything in this world must 
wear out ; and accordingly the second act proving, if possible, 
worse than the first, forbearance was at an end, and the whole 
house rose to hoot the nuisance from the stage. 

" This most beautiful example of modern authorship is, 
we are told, from the pen of a young gentleman of the name 
of Gurney, a law-student. If he should ever come to be a 
judge, it must be of something else than literature ; for, 
without one redeeming point, his farce combined dulness, 
indelicacy, ignorance of society, a total want of knowledge of 
character, and what may, perhaps, be worse in the present 
state of the drama, entire ignorance of the peculiar qualities 
of the actors. We trust that the dunce will drive his quill 
in some other direction than that of the stage, and that we 
shall never again be kept from a comfortable party at home, 
to witness the representation of a second effort from the same 
quarter." 

" What do you mean, Miss Crab ? " said my mother. " Mr. 
Gurney, a law-student you are joking ? " 

GILBERT GURNEY. 69 

" I never joke, ma'am," said Miss Crab. 

"Now, Gilbert, explain," said my parent, with highly 
erected eyebrows, " are you the person meant in this odious 
newspaper have you really disgraced yourself by putting 
into execution the crude and absurd ideas you admitted you 
had formed of writing a farce tell me without evasion 
or equivocation ? " 

I saw that the blood of the Gatakers had mounted to her 
cheeks, and, recollecting the precautionary letter she had 
written me on the subjeet, I felt that I wished Miss Marshall 
at Jericho for sending in the newspaper, Miss Crab at 
Botany Bay for having read it, and myself anywhere but 
where I was. 

" My dear mother," said I, " when you were good enough 
to express your opinions upon the subject of my dramatic 
authorship, I made no promise I was guilty of no evasion 
or equivocation. I told you then that, let me take what 
course I might, I never would do anything to disgrace myself 
or my family." 

" And how have you kept that promise ? " exclaimed my 
mother ; " by directly flying in the face of my wishes and 
entreaties, and bringing out a farce at the summer theatre, 
which " 

" Has been damned, ma'am," exclaimed Miss Crab, with a 
force and energy which made me feel that if she were to ex- 
perience a similar fate I should not very much care. 

" Exactly so," rejoined my mother ; " if it had suc- 
ceeded " 

" The fault," interrupted I, " would have been just the 
same." 

" As far as regards your disobedience to me," said my 
mother, " Yes ; as far as regards your own reputation 
No." 

" To be sure not," chimed in Miss Crab, pursing herself 
up and chuckling and turning her head round first one way 
and then another. 

" And then," exclaimed my distressed parent. 

" I know what you are going to say, Mrs. Gurney," 
screamed her dear companion. 

" One at a time," cried I, and the noise at this time was 
prodigious ; both ladies had opened on me at once, which 
F 3 

70 pILBEBT GUHNEY. 

aroused the two little dogs on the carpet, who began barking, 
upon which the three cock canary birds immediately began 
singing with all their might and main. " One would think 
that I had committed some heinous offence," bawled I, at 
the top of my voice ; " I have only done what hundreds of 
gentlemen have done before me ; and as for the failure, that 
cannot be helped many a better farce has been cut short in 
its career in a similar manner nipped in the bud." 

" Only to burst out again next spring, I fear," said Mrs. 
Gurney. 

" You may be sure of that, ma'am," said Miss Crab ; 
" once the propensity gets hold of a man, his pen never keeps 
still scribble scribble scribble." 

" There you are mistaken," said I. " I have committed a 
fault that I admit ; but it is not ever likely to be repeated. 
If I had met with the success, the absence of which you so 
much regret, I might have been tempted to try again ; but 
the first round of the ladder to fame having snapped under 
my feet, I shall give it up, and turn to something else." 

" Fame, indeed ! " said my mother ; " the idea of the fame 
of a farce- writer while, with common application, the 
Bench or the Woolsack is open to you the notion of wast- 
ing your time in composing folly for fools to repeat, for the 
amusement of fools greater than themselves." 

" Upon this occasion, ma'am," said Miss Crab, with a 
diabolical smile of self-satisfaction, " the audience were not 
such great fools as to listen." 

" Thank you, Miss Crab," said I, " you are adding pepper 
to the seasoning of the newspaper critic. I tell you all 
preachings and lectures are useless " 

" That I truly believe," said Miss Crab. 

" For this reason, that I am as firmly resolved never to 
attempt another dramatic work, as I am not to study the law, 
for which I have neither turn nor ability, and my devotion to 
which would be a much more ridiculous farce in real life, than 
that of the mimic world which was last night so uncere- 
moniously driven from the stage." 

" I see how it is," said my respected parent, " you want 
to break my heart." 

" My dear mother .' " said I. 

" No matter," said my mother, " I shall not be here to 

.GILBERT GURNET. 7l 

trouble you long : surely the little time I have to live, I might 
see you pursuing a career, the termination of which might 
render you happy and honourable ! " 

" I thought, my dear mother/' said I, " that, let what 
might happen to either of us, you had so far reconciled your- 
self to losing me, that you were actually waiting only to learn 
a little more of my brother Cuthbert's plans, to ship me off to 
Calcutta." 

" Ship you off, my child," said my mother, whose earnest- 
ness for my respectability, and my preservation from all the 
evils of dissipation into which she feared my present pursuits 
and connections would lead me, induced her to propose what 
she sincerely felt to be a great sacrifice, ei you do me an in- 
justice by using such an expression. I would rather do any- 
thing than part with you." 

" Rely upon it," said Miss Crab, " it is the best thing you 
can do save him from destruction, and make him a rich 
man into the bargain." 

" And lose his society for ever," said my kind parent. 

" You have not much of it as it is, ma'am, I think," said 
Miss Crab. 

" While my mother is so happy to have you as a com- 
panion," said I, " my presence can be little needed here ; in- 
deed," continued I, " it seems to me as if my appearance 
under this roof was the signal for discord and confusion. I 
am perfectly content to hear the advice, and even bear the re- 
proaches, of a parent when I merit them, but I really do not 
see what right " 

" Come, come, dear Gilbert," said my mother, " d6 not 
speak angrily we all mean for the best." 

" Yes, I'm sure / do," said Miss Crab ; " but advice to 
young folks who will have their own way is not always agree- 
able medicine, however salutary, is seldom palatable/' 

" What I mean to say, then, is this," said I : "I have no 
turn for the law I know it would be folly in me to attempt 
it I am quite satisfied to live upon my allowance I owe 
no debts I am not likely to incur any but if my mother 
is of opinion that a life of idle independence is not desirable, 
then, I repeat, I am ready to start whenever she pleases to 
my brother, according to her desire." 
p 4 

72 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Having previously prepared yourself in a mercantile 
house in the city," said Aliss Crab. 

I confess I had a great mind to quarrel with the matured 
virgin for her constant interference in my schemes and ar- 
rangements, not only because I was really irritated at what 
appeared to me to be her vast presumption on my mother's 
kindness, but because it was absolutely necessary I should 
somehow " get up " a grievance in the course of the evening, 
upon the strength of which I might retire in dudgeon early in 
the morning, so as to avoid the presence of the two fair Dods, 
whom, of all girls in the world, my anxious mother most par- 
ticularly wished me to meet. 

I was a good deal worried about this little contretemps, 
which went a great way to impress upon my mind the truth 
of the saying, which since has become indelibly stamped there, 
that " wrong never comes right." As I have already said, 
the foolish trick in which I had been involved that evening 
had rendered it impossible for me to look the gentle victims of 
our hoax in the face, or permit them to look in mine. I was 
quite sure my absence would be attributed by my parent if 
not in the first instance, certainly at the suggestion of her 
most unamiable companion to a resolute opposition to her 
wishes, and, in all probability, to the existence of some ten- 
dresse in another quarter, or some clandestine connection of a 
less respectable character ; but what could I do ? I asked 
myself this question once or twice during what the sailors call 
a " lull " in the storm of discussion, and I should have been 
glad either to have answered it satisfactorily, or to have found 
it the only one I had to put ; unluckily, there was another 
which cut me even deeper than the first. How came I in- 
volved in the surveying affair ? by an association with one 
of those agreeable vauriens of whom my excellent parent had 
such a violent, and, as I used to think, needless dread. 

Here, however, in this one instance, I could neither impugn 
nor gainsay her apprehensions. If I had not written the 
farce I should not have known the actors, if I had not 
known the actors I could not have joined them at Richmond, 
if I had not joined them at Richmond I should not have 
made the acquaintance of Mr. Daly, and if I had not have 
made his acquaintance I should have ridden quietly home to 
my mother's cottage, have enjoyed her society without rebuke 

GILBERT GURNET. 73 

or reproach, and the next morning have been presented to two 
lovely and amiable young women, with one of whom, even 
situated as I was, I might have formed,' at some future period, 
a happy and honourable alliance. 

" After all," thought I, " my mother is right ;" but, as if 
Old Nick had set his hoof in it, it was the only occasion I 
could recollect upon which I was unable to admit her to be so; 
and thus, adding hypocrisy to undutifulness, I combated her 
arguments, which, in fact, convinced me ; opposed sugges- 
tions which I was satisfied were admirable, and closed an un- 
comfortable evening by going to bed in an unamiable fit of 
assumed anger. 

After I had retired to my room I heard the two ladies 
holding converse rather long than gentle. It struck me that 
my mother was taking my part against the vindictive malignity 
of her ill-conditioned friend, whose anxious desire for my 
departure for India I was base enough to attribute to a desire 
on her part to get entire possession of my excellent mother 
during her life, and of her property after her death ; and more 
than once I had resolved to open my heart to my mother and 
communicate my thoughts and suspicions. However, for the 
present, the " evil of the day " was sufficient to encounter, 
and the only question which remained unsettled in my mind 
was whether I should get away as I first proposed to myself 
before breakfast, or breakfast with the ladies, pretend an en- 
gagement in town, and so depart about eleven. 

Upon mature deliberation, I determined upon an early 
flight; there could then be no remonstrances, no explanations, 
no pressings or insistings, no demurrings or evasions. I 
therefore wrote a note before I went to bed, and ordered my 
servant to have the horses at the stable gate by eight o'clock. 
The note, too, was unworthy of me. I pleaded the unpleasant- 
ness of useless discussions as the cause of my sudden departure, 
and expressed a perfect readiness to return and accommodate 
myself to my mother's wishes whenever she was prepared to 
receive me with less harshness than she had exhibited that 
evening. Thus evil upon evil seemed to accumulate. It would 
vex her gentle nature to think she had wounded my feelings, 
and she would worry herself at my absence. Yet without 
some cause I could not have gone ; and thus, as one falsehood 
invariably begets another, one meanness produced more, and 

7* GILBERT GURNEY. 

I condescended to sneak out of my mother's house under false 
pretences, in order to avoid being detected in an unwarrantable 
proceeding, contrived and carried into effect by one of my new 
theatrical connections. 

I did not feel satisfied with these results, and I think I slept 
worse than I otherwise should, considering that I had under- 
gone much fatigue, mentally and bodily, during the day, and 
that I had scarcely closed my eyes the night before, while my 
heart was full of the martyrdom of my favourite Sir Jeffery. 
I rose stealthily and noiselessly before my note could be 
conveyed to my mother's room by her maid, and by half 
past eight found myself journeying back to town, less com- 
posed and more unsettled than I ever recollected to have been 
before. 

For a narrative of the events which occurred after my de- 
parture I am indebted to a letter from my excellent parent, 
upon whose mind they were impressed with an almost in- 
delible severity ; a letter which, as will hereafter be seen, 
was rendered by circumstances deeply and painfully interest- 
ing. 

Breakfast ready, and Miss Crab waiting ; down came my 
mother with my note in her hand. 

" Good morning," said Miss Crab. " I was down before 
you, waiting to take a turn round the shrubbery with Gilbert, 
and prepare his mind for the beauties he is to see at luncheon." 

" You would have lost your labour had you waited till 
luncheon time itself," said my mother. " Gilbert is gone to 
town." 

" To town ! " exclaimed Miss Crab. " Umph ! That is 
strange. What reason does he give for running away from 
the treat we have proposed for him ? " 

" I don't know," said Mrs. Gurney, ' ' that he is altogether 
wrong in his feelings ; but I am quite sure I know what those 
feelings are. He thinks that whatever right / may have to 
question and even censure his conduct when I think it faulty, 
a second person not a relation, and having no legitimate 
control over him has none; in fact, my belief is, that he 
is worried and vexed by your interference." 

" Mine, ma'am ! " said Miss Crab ; " really I did not ex- 
pect this. You have been most candid and confidential in all 
your communications about your son to me ; and I thought, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 75 

after the observations you had made, that I was supporting 
you in your endeavours to keep him right, at your own special 
desire." 

" I do not, in the slightest degree," said my mother, " im- 
pugn your intentions or doubt your anxiety, Miss Crab ; but 
he feels that your support generally has the effect of heighten- 
ing whatever fault of his is under discussion, and of urging 
me to a severity which he does not believe to be natural to 
my character." 

" Oh ! well, ma'am," said Miss Crab, " I have done. Let 
him follow his own inclinations, let him go upon the stage 
or upon the highway, which, in my mind, is little worse ; 
rely upon it, ma'am, I will never say another syllable." 

" My dear Miss Crab," said my mother, who was, with 
respect to our quarrels, something like what a wife is to a 
husband, she did not care how much she scolded me herself, 
but was very tetchy if any third person attempted to assail me 
" My dear Miss Crab, what extraordinary ideas, and how 
strangely expressed ! Gilbert is wild and thoughtless, and idle, 
and giddy, and, unfortunately, addicted to pursuits which 
perhaps may be unprofitable, but certainly not dishonourable. 
He dislikes the law, and shrinks from trade." 

'' Oh, to be sure he does !" said Miss Crab ; "and of course 
it is all quite right. If I had known what his determinations 
were, and how he was to be upheld in them, I certainly should not 
have made a very considerable effort to speak to Mr. Yellowly, 
of the firm of Curry, Raikes, Yellowly, Lefevre, and Co., in 
his behalf. Now, that I understand how my advice and sug- 
gestions are received, I shall venture them no longer. As for 
this morning, my belief is, that his reason for going away is 
the coming hither of the two Miss Dods : rely upon it, living 
as he is, and has been for some time past, he has formed some 
Haixon, which, if it does not definitively prevent his forming a 
respectable matrimonial connection, gives him, at least for the 
present, a distaste for any other society. I saw his restlessness 
and agitation the moment you mentioned that your young and 
virtuous visitors were expected." 

" We must not be too fastidious : no, nor too inquisitive," 
said my mother. " Recollect that our conversation about our 
fair neighbours and the probability of the result of this inter- 
view were jokes ; that nothing upon earth could be much 

76 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

more improbable than that a casual visit here should lead to an 
union between one of the young ladies and my son." 

" Improbable !" said Miss Crab, " nothing more probable ! 
Everything must have a beginning, and my creed is, that young 
ladies who are over-fastidious are not over-wise." 

This was what Daly would have called a " bad shot," for 
either Miss Crab had, by her own showing, been extremely 
unwise, or had never been asked. My mother perceived the 
slip, but was too amiable and too well-bred to take advantage 
of it. 

" What I mean to say, my dear Miss Crab," said my mo- 
ther, " is, that, in spite of all the follies and indiscretions of 
which Gilbert, at twenty years of age, may be guilty, I am 
quite sure that he would neither sacrifice himself in a mer- 
cenary marriage, nor form an acquaintance or connection 
likely to turn out disgracefully." 

" Well, ma'am," said Miss Crab, "enjoy your own opinion. 
I know the difficulty of persuading parents upon particular 
points ; however, you may rely upon it that your son's ab- 
sence this morning is not owing to anything that I have 
either said or done to annoy him time, perhaps, will show 
who is right." 

" I am content to let it rest there," said my mother ; and, 
having thus made peace, she proceeded to make tea, not, 
however, without an observation from Miss Crab as to the 
water being quite cold in consequence of having stood so long 
upon the table, the flame under the urn having been, in con- 
sequence of the carelessness of the servant, out for the last 
ten minutes. 

Poor Miss Crab, let the subject be what it might, always 
contrived to drop her little contribution of acid into the cup ; 
and yet my mother had become so used to her, and so con- 
vinced which I was not of her disinterested attachment 
to her, that although, when I was the object of her varying 
attacks, she would rally all her energies in my defence, I really 
believe she liked the excitement produced by her friend's per- 
petual and unvarying fault-finding. 

The breakfast went on as usual ; there was of course a 
little too much cream, and much too little sugar, in Miss 
Crab's tea ; and the butter was extremely bad for the time of 
year, when there was plenty of grass for the cows to eat, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 77 

and the raspberries were not ripe, and the eggs were not 
so fresh as they might have been, and so, in all other mat- 
ters, something was wrong. Yet time and patience conquered 
these little ills ; and a stroll in the grounds, succeeded by 
writing little notes and doing a little "work," brought the 
domesticated couple to within half an hour of the time at 
which luncheon would be served, and the Misses Dodd arrive 
to partake of it. 

At this juncture a smartish ringing at the gate-bell aroused 
the attention of the ladies, who began putting their faces into 
the most amiable shape, expecting their sylph-like visitors ; 
but they were somewhat disappointed, and perhaps more sur- 
prised, when the servant, throwing open the door, announced 
" Mr. Daly." 

" Mr. Daly ! " said my mother. " Who ? " 

" Daly ! " said Miss Crab. " What ?" 

" A friend of Mr. Gilbert's, ma'am," said the servant. 

" Oh ! " said my excellent parent ; " pray desire Mr. Daly 
to walk in." 

The invitation was superfluous, for he had " followed the 
heels " of the footman so closely, as to be actually in the room 
before it was completed. 

" I beg ten thousand pardons, ma'am," said Daly ; " I 
believe I have the honour of addressing the mother of my 
friend Gilbert ? " He hit that off, happily, by a glance at the 
mystic badge which my amiable parent exhibited on the third 
finger of her left hand. 

" I am afraid I am intruding upon your delightful seclusion, 
but knowing that our dear Gilbert was here last night, it oc- 
curred to me that, in all probability, he would also be here 
this morning; so, as I am domesticated at Hampton Court, 
I did hope to persuade him to come over and take a cutlet 
with me, and meet two or three of the 18th, who, as of 
course you know, are quartered there." 

" My son," said Mrs. Gurney, " was here last night, but 
went unexpectedly to town this morning before breakfast." 

" What a delightful person he is, ma'am ! " said Daly ; 
" so full of kindness and ingenuousness, and so clever ! The 
worst of these geniuses is, they seldom have any application 
sorry about his farce, poor fellow, however, he does not 
seem to take it much to heart, met him yesterday at Rich- 

78 GILBERT GURNEY. 

mond, pleasant day pleasant place pleasant people 
do you visit much at Hampton Court, ma'am ? " 

My mother, who was perfectly astounded at the ease and 
volubility of my " slight acquaintance," said " that her visiting 
list was a very small one, and that she rarely ventured so 
far." 

" I find it uncommon pleasant," said Daly, " because the 
18th are there deuced fine fellows, you know, and all that 
else it seems dullish. I confess I like having all the 
parties of Palace people under the same roof the long pas- 
sages and the steep staircases not to speak of ringing Lady 
Niddynod's hell, and stuffing a cork into the jet of the foun- 
tain, and then to see the Cockneys come to look at the car- 
toons, and then to watch them at the Toy capital fun I 
have there sometimes, ma'am, locking a whole family of 
fowls into a bed-room cupboard the sleeping sight- seers 
tumble into their beds, and all is hushed and calm as my own 
conscience just about daylight, ma'am, the cock in the 
closet begins to crow, which sets Mrs. Cock and all the Miss 
Cockses into a charm of cackling, which the affrighted inno- 
cents from Finsbury Square or Saint Mary Axe are as unable 
to account for as to check ; and so from daylight, till they 
can rouse the servants to their assistance, the inhabitants of 
the hen-roost, like so many minor Macbeths, ' murder sleep.' 
I call that very good fun, ma'am." 

" Mischief / call it," said Miss Crab. " And pray, sir, 
does Mr. Gilbert Gurney participate in such amusements as 
these ? " 

" I never tell tales out of school," said Daly. " For my- 
self, I confess I love fun ; and only the night before last, 
being considerably annoyed by a loud snoring in the next 
room, proceeded to see who was the monster that caused it ; 
there I found a venerable lady, who incautiously slept with 
her door unfastened, snoring away ' discoursing,' as Shak- 
speare has it most discordant music with her nose. What 
d'ye think I did, ma'am ? Ran to my room, burnt the cork 
of an eau de Cologne bottle in the candle, returned to the 
apartment of the sleeping hyena, and gave her a pair of coal- 
black mustachios, which, when she presented her grim visage 
to her daughter, who came the first thing in the morning to 
beg her blessing, threw the young lady into a fit of convul- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 79 

sions, which took Griffinhoof of Hampton three hours and a 
half to get rid of that's fun, or the deuce is in it." 

" And is it," said my mother who sat petrified at the 
indomitable manner of the wag " is it to enjoy such jokes 
as these that you wish my son to join you ? " 

" Oh, by no means," said Daly ; ' ' I never involve a friend 

never, if I can possibly help it no, I should like to in- 
troduce him to the 18th ; and then there are Lord and Lady 
Griggs, and the Miss Cranbournes, and dear Lady Venerable, 
the charming Miss Fizzgiggle, and her very agreeable mother ; 
the delightful Lady Katherine Mango, and her very charm- 
ing daughter ; and the best of all excellent men, a kind- 
hearted, hospitable, East India captain, the very double of 
the lord chancellor, who has got a pet bird fifteen feet high, 
with legs like stilts, and a body like a goose. I promise you 
I will skim the cream of the court for Gilbert if he will but 
come canter to Kingston migrate to Molesy saunter 
to Sunbury drop in at Ditton make him acquainted 
with all the news of the neighbourhood, and place him only 
second to myself in the estimation of our enlightened and 
select circle of society." 

It must have been a curious sight to see Daly running on 
in this free and easy manner, and the two ladies sitting, one 
beside, and the other opposite to him, perfectly thunder- 
struck by his proceedings, and evidently uncertain what he 
would next say or do. 

" I like Hampton Court, ma'am," continued Daly, without 
paying the least attention to the astonished countenances of 
his companions ; " it's such a nice distance from town out 
of the smoke, and among nice people Toy, bad inn 
landlord smart; servants not only one waiter, and he a 
Goth. I had three friends to dine with me on Tuesday, and 
what d'ye think happened, ma'am ? If you recollect, it was 
vastly hot on Tuesday glass 82 in the shade asked if 
there was any ice not an ounce in the house where was 
the waiter ? only conceive, ma'am, the singularity of the 
sound, ' the waiter,' in an inn half as big as a county hospital 

Lawrence was gone to Chertsey I had no resource 
could not wait till he came back wanted to cool my wine 

ordered the maid to get a pail of pump-water, put it in 
the shade on the leads at the back of the house, and pop into 

80 GILBERT GURNEY. 

it two bottles of Grave, two of Hock, and two of Champagne 

what d'ye think occurred, ma'am ? " 

" I have no idea," said Miss Crab, who was, at last, abso- 
lutely provoked into conversation. " Most likely the girl 
forgot it," 

" Not she, ma'am," said Daly ; " I'm sure I wish she had. 
No ; she did as she was bid most punctually. Dinner-time 
came ; soup served. My friends, Tootle, Bootle, and Sims, 
of the 18th, all seated. I turned to Lawrence, who had just 
returned from Chertsey, and was standing at the back of my 
chair ; ' Get a bottle of Hock and a bottle of Grave,' said I. 

" ' Where are they, sir ? ' said he. 

" ' Oh,' said I, ' you'll find them cooling in a pail of 
water, in a shady draught of air on the leads.' 

" ' Very well, sir,' says he, and away he goes, and quickly 
enough he comes back. ' Pretty job, sir,' says Lawrence, 
with a face like the ghost of Gaffer Thumb ' Who did this 
for you, sir ? ' 

" ' What ? ' said I. 

" ' Put the Grave and the Hock to cool.' 

" ' Who ? ' said I. ' Why, Fanny Lanshawe, the cham- 
bermaid.' 

" ( Fanny be ! ' You'll excuse my not repeating 

what he said, ma'am. ' She has served you a nice trick, sir. 
Look here.' And sure enough, ma'am, suiting the action to 
the word, in he brings the pail, into which the simple crea- 
ture had emptied the six bottles of enlivening liquor, and 
exhibits, to our utter amazement and confusion, three gallons 
and a half of very weak mixed wine-and- water ! These are 
drawbacks, ma'am, you'll admit ; but there must be alloys to 
everything. For my part, nothing damps me nothing 
shakes me ; I go on laughing along my flowery course, and 
care for nothing upon earth." 

At this moment, in which Daly was boasting of his imper- 
turbable serenity and joyousness, the drawing-room door was 
again flung open ; the servant announced, in an audible voice 

" Miss Dod, and Miss Fanny Dod ; " and there, before 
Daly's astonished eyes, stood, in all their native loveliness 
arrayed, the two accomplished daughters of his last night's 
victim. They approached, but started back for an instant on 
recognising their persecutor of the preceding evening so 

GILBERT QURNEY. 81 

snugly and comfortably domesticated with their new acquaint- 
ance at the cottage. The ladies rose to receive their guests, 
and were just shaking hands, when Daly, in a tone of exqui- 
site torture, exclaimed, " Oh, my nose ! my nose ! " and 
instantly enveloped his whole countenance in a full-sized silk 
handkerchief. 

" Dear me ! " exclaimed my mother, " what is the matter, 
sir ? " 

" A trifle, ma'ara," said Daly, with his face buried in the 
bandana. " A trifle light as air : it's only my nose, ma'am 
subject to periodical fits of bleeding after a dreadful 
fall over a five-barred gate, near Grantham. Don't mind me, 
ma'am. I'll run away ; perhaps it mayn't stop for a fort- 
night. I won't worry you any longer I'm off I'll plunge 
my head into the river. Just remember me to Gilbert ; say 
I called, and O dear, dear, how unlucky ! Adieu good 
morning : " saying which, without removing the handker- 
chief, he bustled out, and hurried from the room. Mrs. 
Gurney, to say truth, was not very sorry to perform the office 
of ringing the bell, in order that he might have free egress 
from her peaceful home. 

" What an extraordinary man ! " said my mother. 

" Is he mad ? " said Miss Crab. 

" Do you know him well ? " said Fanny Dod. 

" No ; he is an intimate friend of my son's, I " 

" Indeed ! " interrupted Miss Dod. 

" Why," said my mother, " do you know anything of him, 
Miss Dod ? " 

" No good, I am sure," said Miss Crab. 

" Why," said Fanny, " we know no great harm of him ; 
only he came to our house last night with his clerk a much 
better behaved person than himself and frightened us all 
out of our wits, by threatening to pull down mamma's dear 
conservatory." 

" Pull down a conservatory ! " said my mother. 

" Yes, officially," said Miss Dod. 

" Why, what is he ? " said my mother. 

" A painter and glazier, ma'am, I dare say," said Miss 
Crab. 

" No," continued Miss Dod. " You of course know who 
he is." 

82 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Not I," said my mother, " He said he was an intimate 
friend of my son's, and came to invite him to meet some of 
the 18th at Hampton Court at dinner to-day." 

" Yes," said Miss Crab ; " Tootle, Bootle, and Sims were 
their names." 

" There are such men in the 18th," said Fanny Dod. 
" The ourang-outang's name is Tootle, Gussy, isn't it ?" 

"Yes," said Augusta; "hut I cannot believe that this 
man can be giving dinners to officers of the 18th." 

"Why, who and what upon earth is he?" said my 
mother, getting very anxious to know what her Gilbert's great 
crony really was. 

" Oh," said Fanny, " there's no harm in him that we 
know of; only he was very rude to papa, at last. He came 
measuring our lawn, in order to ascertain the shortest cut for 
a canal to Brentford." 

" And," said Augusta, " we behaved as well as possible 
both to him and his clerk ; and yet he vowed vengeance on 
the corner of the conservatory, and threatened to bring the 
barge-road close under our bedroom windows." 

" Still, you don't say how he could do this, Miss Dod," 
said my mother. 

" Why, I believe he is the acting deputy assistant surveyor 
to the Grand Junction Canal Company," said Augusta ; 
c! and a very forward, presuming, rude gentleman into the 
bargain." 

" And Gilbert's particular friend !" exclaimed my mother. 

" Yes, ma'am,'' said Miss Crab, in her glory ; " and yet 
you are quite sure that he never will form an acquaintance or 
connection likely to turn out disgracefully." 

Luckily at that moment luncheon was announced, and the 
party proceeded to the breakfast-parlour to partake of it. 

Dissatisfied and unsettled as I felt on my way to town, I 
confess if I could have looked, Asmodeus-like, into the peace- 
ful residence of my respected parent, during this and the 
preceding scene as I should have called them my sensa- 
tions would have been of a much more serious and disagree- 
able character. I never anticipated a visit from Daly at 
Teddington, and consoled myself by the escape I had made 
from an interview with the ladies, whose growing intimacy 
at the cottage must, I foresaw, nevertheless produce an ex- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

83 

planation ere long, or act as a prohibition to my visits to my 
mother. I confess I was perfectly astonished when I heard 
the details. I had never given him the slightest encourage- 
ment to come to the cottage, where I must have been certain 
his manners, principles, and pursuits would throw its gentle 
occupants into the highest state of perturbation. My regret 
when, under the most melancholy circumstances, I ascertained 
what had occurred was serious indeed; and my resolution 
never again to make acquaintances extempore, was coupled 
with the conviction that a practical joke is, in fact, no joke 
at all, and yet, such is the influence of agreeable manners 
and lively conversation, that Daly subsequently became my 
greatest friend, at least in the worldly acceptation of that most 
equivocal word. 

CHAPTER V. 

IT is said that a certain place not mentionable to " ears 
polite " is paved with " good intentions." Whether it will 
ever be Macadamized (for that I believe is the term for 
" unstoning," now fast gaining ground as I am looking over 
my papers, which, in all probability, everybody else will over- 
look) I cannot pretend to say ; but certain it is, that although 
I was beyond measure mortified by the results of the Twick- 
enham prank, my exclusion from the society of the Miss 
Dods, and my absolutely necessary escape from an association 
with them ; I was very soon reconciled to my fate after the 
arrival of Devil Daly (as I used subsequently to call him) at 
my lodgings in Suffolk Street. 

The instant he had been dislodged from the cottage by the 
appearance of the young ladies whose family he had so se- 
riously outraged on the previous evening, instead of walking 
his horse back to Smart's, at the Toy, at Hampton Court, he 
cantered up to visit me in London ; not so much from any 
particular affection for me, but because, although himself the 
victim, there was something so exciting and delightful to him 
in a joke, that he could not deny himself the pleasure of 
narrating to me the history of the arrival of the sylphs, and 
o 2 

84 GILBERT GURNEY. 

his extraordinary ruse of the bleeding nose. I never saw him 
in higher spirits, and, quoad my resolutions, I could not, for 
the life of me, refuse to join him in a stroll about town, 
which, although the season was somewhat advanced, was yet 
agreeably full, with a pledge to dine with him somewhere 
afterwards. 

In those days clubs were scarce, although then hearts were 
plenty ; there were no clubs of note at that period but 
White's, Brookes's, and Boodle's. To be sure, there was the 
Cocoa Tree, and there was Graham's, but the number of 
members was small, the system confined, and therefore, al- 
though Daly and I were as proud as Lucifer, and as " fine as 
fine could be," men had no resource when they wished to 
enjoy the " feast of reason and the flow of soul" the one 
in the shape of a cutlet, and the other in the tapering form of 
a bottle of claret but to repair to a coffee-house, a place 
which, I find, is now (I speak while I am arranging my 
papers) obsolete a dear nice uncomfortable room, with a 
bar opening into it, a sanded floor, an argand lamp smoking a 
tin tray in the middle of its ceiling, boxes along its sides, with 
hard carpet-covered benches, schoolboy tables, and partitions, 
with rods, and rings, and curtains, like those of a church- 
warden's pew in a country church. 

I selected Dejex's, at the corner of Leicester Place. At- 
tention and civility, a good cuisine, and good wine, formed its 
particular attractions, and the courteous attention of " mine 
host " gave a new zest to his cookery and his claret. I own 
I love attention and civility not that which seems to be 
extracted by dint of money, or by force of the relative situ- 
ations of guest and landlord, but that anxious desire to 
please that consideration of one's little peculiarities and 
that cheerfulness of greeting which, even if it be assumed, is 
always satisfactory. To Dejex's we resolved to go, and 
having " secured our box " and taken our stroll, we found 
ourselves seated and served by a little after six o'clock. 

There was something irresistibly, practically, engaging about 
Daly, and I never felt more completely assured of the influ- 
ence over me of a man with whom I had been so short a 
time acquainted, than I was when I found myself again in 
the course of eight and forty hours associated with him in 
a place which, of all others, was the most likely to afford him 

GILBERT GURNEY. 85 

some opportunity of exhibiting his eccentricities ; for the 
company consisted in a great degree of emigres of the ancient 
regime, who, until the master hand of Wellington was raised 
to cut the Gordian knot of their difficulties, which negociation 
had for years in vain attempted to untwist, " had made Eng- 
land the asylum for their persecuted race." Yet, however much 
their misfortunes the natural results of anarchy and revolution 
might excite our sympathies and demand our assistance, some 
of them, it must be admitted, were, to our then unaccustomed 
eyes, extremely strange specimens of humanity ; they were 
what Mr. Daly, in his peculiar phraseology, called ''uncom- 
mon gigs ; " and one very venerable ci-devant marquis, who 
wore spectacles, the said Daly, as he advanced up the room, 
somewhat too loudly I thought, pronounced to be " a gig with 
lamps." 

However, we got through dinner, and had safely demolished 
our admirable omelette soujflee without any outbreaking on the 
part of my mercurial companion ; the coffee-room began to 
thin, and I began to be more at my ease than before, when 
Daly proceeded to recount some of his adventures, which 
proved to me that, however deeply the scene of the preceding 
day at Twickenham might have impressed itself on me, it was 
to him a " trifle light as air." 

" But how," said I, " shall I ever reconcile the Dods ? I 
am destined to meet those people ; you are not." 

" I was destined to meet them this morning," replied Daly, 
<f and if it had not been for this ' bleeding piece of earth,' " 
laying hold of his nose, " I could not well have escaped ; but 
for you, rely upon it, it will all turn out right. In a week 
they will have utterly forgotten you." 

" What," said I, " will Fanny so soon lose all recollection 
of me ? " 

" To be sure she will," said Daly. " As somebody says, 

" ' Fancy's visions, like the sand, 

Every idle mark receive ; 
Lines are traced by every hand, 
Which no lasting impress leave.'" 

" But her hand," said I. 

" You took and shook," replied he, " and very wisely too ; 
but recollect it was nearly dark when we made our exit." 

" And you insulted the father " 

" who first affronted me" said Daly ; " and even if 

G 3 

80 

the girls </<</ know me this morning, and recognise me as as- 
sistant clerk to the deputy assistant surveyor of the Paild ing- 
ton (."anal Company, the douce is in it if the whole family 
must not respect me as a high-minded, honourable, and con- 
scientious assistant clerk." 

" Yes, but it was quite light enough when we arrived," 
said I, " to see them and their beauties ; why not light enough 
for them to see our deformities ? " 

" Deformities ! ". said Daly ; " speak for yourself, Mr. 
Gurney ; women don't care so much for men's beauty as you 
may suppose. Here am I plain, but genteel, like a Wedg- 
wood teapot I make my way, and whatever you may think 
of yourself and Miss Fanny, I flatter myself Gussy, as her 
ma' called her, was equally well pleased with your humble 
errant." 

" And yet we may never see either of them again," said I. 

" I am not so sure of that," said Daly ; " I have done 
worse to a father than I did to Dod in the course of my life, 
and yet have come to be domesticated in the family after- 
wards." 

" As how? " said I. 

" Some three years since," said Daly, " I was down at my 
friend's Sir Marmaduke Wrigglesworth's, in Surrey charm- 
ing place nice wife excellent shooting capital cook 
and inexhaustable cellars. ' Marmaduke,' said I, ' I hate 
battues ; here you have a party staying for the wholesale 
slaughter of pheasants eleven double barrels all of a row 
more chance of homicide than sport ; do me the kindness to 
let me off, and permit me to '' range the fields " by myself, 
and I will consent to be laughed at for my small gains when 
the card comes in before dinner/ ' Do as you like," said 
Wrigglesworth ; ' this is Liberty Hall shoot alone or in 
company with dogs or without have the keeper or not 
comme il row* plaira.' Accordingly away I went, more eager 
for the sport as having to render an account of my single ex- 
ploits, young enough to do my day's work well, and strong 
enough to bring my day's work home. I admit I was not 
quite so well pleased with what I saw, or rather what I did 
not see, as I went on birds were scarce, wild, and shy, and 
I did not get a shot for the first hour, except at a venerable 
rabbit, who had retired from public life, but who had some- 

GILBERT GLB.VET. 87 

what incautiously left bis tail out of the burrow which he had 
selected for his final retreat ; at him I went, and be died 
first tenant of my bag." 

'' A tenant in tail/' taid I, punning professionally. 

" Well, sir," continued Daly, who never stopped for any 
body, " on I went, until at last, after three hours' ploughing 
and plodding, I fell in with one of the nicest little snug copses 
you ever set your eyes on. In I went whnrr went the 
pheasants bang went the barrels down came the birds 
and by the time I had crossed the copse, three cocks and 
keu m&i ! two hens graced my store." 

tf Pretty sport for the time," said L 

" No sooner, however," said Daly, "had I emerged from 
the thicket, than I found myself upon a sort of parkish-look- 
ing lawn, on the rise of which stood a very respectable house, 
at the door of which I could distinguish a group of persons 
standing, and from the court-yard of which I saw some sort 
of servant leading forth a stout short-legged pony, with a 
thick neck and a stumpy tail evidently master's favourite 
equal to fourteen stone, warranted never to shy, trip, or 
stumble. Upon its back did I see a portly gentleman bestride 
himself, and forthwith begin to canter towards me, followed 
at a somewhat splitting pace by two keepers on foot, each 
armed either with guns or sticks, which, I could not easily 
distinguish." 

" I foresee," said I. 

'' So did I," said Daly; "the moment I saw the governor 
coming fuU tilt, I knew I had been trespassing, and the mo- 
ment I stepped upon his infernal lawn, felt that I had put 
my foot into it." 
'' Well," said I, what happened ?" 

'' Why," continued Daly, " I standing still, and be moving 
somewhat rapidly, the elder of the two had the best of it, and 
I was very soon within six inches of his cob's nose, and within 
about half a yard of his own. ' You are a pretty fellow, sir/ 
said the irate gentleman, ' to come poaching and killing the 
birds in my preserves, close to my house why what the 
devil are you thinking of, you rascal ? Here, Stephens 
Thomson ' 

" ' Sir,' said I, ' I am extremely sorry ' 

" ' Sorry,' interrupted Mr. Bagswash (for such was the 
G 4 

88 GILBERT GUHNEY. 

gentleman's name) ' sorry, yes, and well you may be sorry ; 
Botany Bay is too good for a fellow like you, sir. Lay 
hands on him.' 

" * One moment, sir/ said I, ' I am a gentleman.' Where- 
upon Squire Bagswash and his keepers burst into an unseemly 
fit of laughing. 

" ' A pretty gentleman too/ said Bagswash. 

" ' I thank you, sir/ said I, ' I don't want compliments, I 
only want a hearing. I am staying on a visit at Sir Marma- 
duke Wrigglesworth's, and here is my card.' Saying which 
I produced from what I happened by the merest but 
luckiest accident in the world to have about me, my card-case 
my visiting ticket. 

" ' Young man,' said my opponent, having read it, ' is 
this genuine ? My name, sir, is Bagswash ; I am per- 
sonally known to Sir Marmaduke. Is what you are saying 
true? ' 

" ' Sir/ said I, ' I am not accustomed to have my word 
doubted. I admit, that not being perfectly acquainted with 
the boundaries of the Wrigglesworth property, I have trans- 
gressed and trespassed. I am sorry for it ; and sorry that 
you should have so far forgotten yourself as to use language 
which, I am quite sure, in a more temperate mood you would 
regret.' 

" ' Sir/ said Bagswash, half doubting, and certainly more 
than half fearing me, ' I don't know that I have used any 
strong expressions, I ' 

" ' Rascal, I think/ said I, bowing profoundly. 

" ' If I did, I really/ said Bagswash, ' I might 
but I was irritated sir, this is my manor.' 

" ' Why, sir/ said I, ' as to your manner, I do think it 
might have been a little more courteous I ' 

" ' Yes, sir/ said my antagonist, who evidently was anxious 
to justify his coarseness and vulgarity, ' but the manor, I 
mean for I can't pun, sir, and I hate puns, sir ; the manor 
I mean, costs me a very large sum annually a very large 
sum indeed, sir, to preserve ; and therefore when I see what I 
conceive to be a poacher immediately under my nose, actually 
in my homestead upon my lawn, I may say shooting 
right and left, it does put me in a passion, and I own I was 
warm, and perhaps hasty ; but it is a provocation, and I 

GILBERT GURNEY. 89 

should like to know, under all the circumstances, what you 
yourself would say if you were me at this moment ? ' 

" ' Say, sir ! ' said I, ' I haven't the smallest hesitation 
about that, sir. If I were you at this moment, I should say, 
" Mr. Daly, I beg your pardon for the hasty way in which 
I spoke when I thought you a poacher ; and in order to show 
that although passionate I am not vindictive, I hope, as it is 
just luncheon-time, and you must have walked a long way 
and haven't had very good sport, that you will do me and 
Mrs. Bagswash the favour to come in and take a cutlet, or a 
little cold meat, as the case may be, and make up our dif- 
ferences with a glass or two of wine." ' 

" ' By Jove,' cried Bagswash, ' you are a queer fellow 
the very spit of your father, whom I knew before I retired to 
these parts.' 

" ' Oh,' whispered one of the keepers to the other. ' Master 
does know him he had a father.' 

" ' Oh,' said the other ; and they both immediately lowered 
their sticks to the ground. 

" ' And,' continued the squire, ' you have only just anti- 
cipated me in an invitation, except that I apprehended some 
more serious requisition on your part.' 

" ' Not a bit, sir/ said I ; ' there are a vast many gentle- 
men in the world who don't look like gentlemen, and the 
shooting jacket and gaiters equalise appearances so much, that 
Nature must have done a vast deal to give a man an aristo- 
cratic appearance under so rough a husk but as to any 
meeting, except at your hospitable table, I have not the 
slightest wish for it. In my opinion, sir, one luncheon is pre- 
ferable to two balls.' 

" ' Ah ! ' said Bagswash, ' I am glad o' that, in spite of 
your pun. Run up, Stephens, and tell them to get luncheon 
as soon as possible. Mr. Daly, a friend of Sir Marmaduke 
Wrigglesworth, is coming to join our family party.' " 

" Well, Daly," said I, " there your presence of mind served 
you well." 

" Hear the sequel," said Daly. " Encouraged by the ac- 
quiescence of Bagswash, as I was yesterday by the invitation 
of Dod, I proceeded towards the house, placing, ever and anon, 
my hand on the neck of his cob, or the pummel of the saddle, 
in order to mark to the distant group the familiar nature of our 

90 GILBERT GURNEY. 

acquaintance ; and in this fashion we reached the mansion, 
upon the steps of which a bevy of graces, in number more 
like the muses, welcomed us. I had a reputation even then, 
and the moment the girls had heard who was coming, they 
made up their minds to mirth even the big Mrs. Bagswash 
rolled herself into the hall, like a fillet of veal upon castors, to 
do me honour. 

" Bating the parents," continued Daly, " I never saw a 
more prepossessing family. I forget all their names, but one 
was slim and sylph-like, another plump and pleasant, a third 
a wicked-looking brunette, a fourth a demure and bashful 
blonde : all I felt as I entered the house was, that if I had 
brought eight friends with me, I might, by giving each his 
choice, have had some one of the ' tuneful nine ' left entirely 
to myself." 

" And," said I, <c were you the only man ? " 

' c No," replied Daly, " there were two yahoos, in white 
cord breeches and leather gaiters, and a boy with a frill and a 
frock, upon which a favourable eruption of brass sugar-loaf 
buttons had taken place ; a Dr. Somebody, who turned out to 
be the nearest apothecary ; and a very pale, long-legged youth, 
the curate of the parish.' ' 

" A largish luncheon party," said I. 

" Well," said Daly, " I sat down, having first very much 
ingratiated myself with old Bagswash, who was as chary of 
his pheasants as if they had been of the golden breed, by in- 
sisting upon it that his man Stephens should disencumber my 
bag of the birds which I had shot on his land, retaining my 
solitary rabbit, in order to grace my tale when I reached 
Wrigglesworth ; and there I found myself placed between 
mine hostess, and number one of the daughters very nice, 
pretty thing not what one should call well set up, but 
Nature, as I said about gentlemen to her papa, had done a 
great deal for her ; poor thing, how I pitied her ! and pity 
is akin to love. So, after luncheon, and some wine, do you 
know, Gurney, I almost began to subside into a tenderer feel- 
ing. But then, one of nine ! " 

" Well, and how did it end ? " said I. 

" Why," replied Daly, " it would have ended, I have no 
doubt, as prosperously as it begun, had not my new friend, 
Bagswash, committed himself by begging me to drink some 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 91 

London Particular Madeira Duff, Murphy, Gordon, or 
something of that sort. The moment I tasted it I knew what 
it was, and, rather elated by circumstances, and my other pre- 
vious libations, I had the temerity to address the dear, in- 
teresting, white-necked creature next me, and, in a tone of con- 
fidential condolence, begged her not to be deceived, for that 
although her amiable papa might be a judge of other things, 
he evidently knew nothing of wine, and that the stuff he 
called ' London Particular ' was neither more nor less than 
infernally bad Teneriffe. 

" The male Bagswash was unconscious of the imputation, 
but the queen B. overheard me, and, looking towards what 
might literally be called her open countenance, I saw symptoms 
of fire breaking out, and in less than a minute afterwards the 
domestic Proserpine exclaimed, ' Come, girls, let us go too 
much of your pa's Tenreefe will do you a mischief." Up she 
got, and out she wheeled herself, and the moment she set the 
example, away went the nine she Bagswashes, like so many 
goslings after the maternal goose. 

" I," continued Daly, " regretted the retreat, for I had had 
an opportunity to insinuate myself, and never saw an audience 
more thoroughly prepared to be gratified ; indeed so convinced 
were they, from what they had heard of me, that I was a 
vastly agreeable person, and talked epigrams, that when, while 
they were all sitting with their ears open to catch my facetiae, 
I happened to observe (the first observation I had made, too, 
and that, in reply to a question of the big Bagswash) that I 
thought mustard went remarkably well with cold boiled beef, 
they all burst out into an immoderate fit of laughter ; and the 
doctor, who had been tutored into a belief in my superlative 
wit, exclaimed, ' Oh, oh, that's too bad!' which every fool 
cries out, either when he thinks a thing remarkably good, or 
does not comprehend it in the least, which last was the case 
as indeed it was with all the rest of the party with my new- 
found medical friend." 

" Did you contrive," said I, " to affront the rest of the 
company before you quitted it ? " 

" Not all of them," said Daly ; " no ; I believe I got off 
pretty well, but evidently the worse for wear ; for, Teneriffe 
or not Teneriffe, it is my maxim to stick to the wreck as long 
as she floats, and as long as I could get anybody to sit, I 

<)" Mid i-v. 

*t.id ; tli" Mu.ite and the h-.y with tin- frill went wil.li the 
I. M|,' , I, MI I', i;- :/,.i li .UK! th parifth I'iirareUu* remained. 
I!', //ever, ftt lf, weiny, iill the l.ottlev. emjity, and no di- 
poftition on tin- |..ni ol llaggy to replenish, 1 made a n. 

i,. / r <li>l I !.< .. man morn h.ij'i-/ . having <".(. out. of 
a rra|ie lli.in mine hoi-.t.. 11' -''.I In-, lni'fe I, ("i^inl--. lo tin- 
\Vn;vli i-.worlhr. ho|. /! to M;<r me aoori Again did I know 

"I lioHii-i* hi xliort, I Mfinol < -nimn-raii- tli<- <'ivililif 

rinj< l,i . re -.(. ' I. (or iny 

! l ,ir Miiiiriii'lnkf, ntul the fact of hi* driving nine mi- 
ni,irii"l 'litil^hUTW, 1 (Illly U|,|IM M,il-(l, ami foilliMilli lent, my 
Wtty fioincwJirrlH." 

" <;M, I -.i.oui'i tiiink," cui'i I, " to be wfc out." 

"(Mi (lie contrary," R;iid D;ily, " I >,lionM like lo have fe 

il wli'l' I WHH J if it ll!lll not. lee|| for the an^rr of the 

rMpPt'Uihlt! cat-of-iiiiK-.tfiiN (iliont ilx- 'I i, ndi-, it. would have 

IMVH it Very H'/i' > >\>l'- iloinicile. However -,' 

onw/irda I went, i- p hn /. m-li ;-M mlly, the offer ol 

to (M!ll(l in. i" l' .liow in- Ihe v/.iy . ii'.lliiii;- I I,, 

li ; HN if >t in.iu who hud followed In; IIOKC into a place 
could not follow IIJH now- out of it." 

" I friiNt," Wild I, " thfit your n.li j.idity WH crowncil 

With NIICM'NN ? " 

" M,ntlir i c n|,|,|i -I," rejilied )ly, " m you Khali JMH : 

-vrr, there r two cudn to my Htory, or, rttln-i, .1 .tmy 

and a Merjii' I." 

" I'ruy |'o on," Mttid f, knowing that <> \<>n^ a : hin \>n ;iili 
I, ''d, In 1 ; tongue would wa;% mi a cherry rla|i|n i d-,e. ; while 
the wind IdoWM. 

" (iud, ir," miid lie. " I wiilh-d rilf, - - I ndinil the 'I'. M 
iill< l,o linvc he. n |,dii ut, and I ihoii;dil of one tiling, and 

aiixlle i Iliin;.. and I helleve I lh'.u;'hl. ol all the llniii"i in the 

world, ev.,,|ii ili, way wlnrh I wan Koiu^. TlicyNiiy, you 
know, won, ' I, nt ,innioii KCIIHC ; my 

r.i'i loahuii. ( nnniMin " n;,- e: lil.e (loin ; I he ol In i i o; I of 
i.rn ,e i . I.,' 'II ihe ri'Nl "I ihotie (Jiiii^M, 

hniiililnl In adulll ft Cako Olid i ml,' III '.li the ////.../;//, hill, 
wil'ii.ul the II', 111. irieie "i n ,nie nt . now, v. illioul. the orilll- 
nr ni ., Ili, lloni will in,, I ,- luead. I never had (In- (lour 
'II have. Ho, yon perceive, Hi.il tin- MIIMI and llie 
fluininery I- in , on I went . nnd wenl, until I I 

HI M 11 ' !>.' 

In M.n.i I hii.l iniHHcil my :<>. .mil .jn-,l thru I liMinil Miynclf 

Ht()|i|inl liy :i ;..''<' n|ii-hill|', III! , uillliT, KllllHillg tin- mil nl' 

a rcmarkiilily wrll-Nlorknl Cunnyiinl ; ml i... I i.il.li .. 

IMIM , \, i \ linn--, rmnlm lnli|<- ami rim \ .-in. n I ; \MI!I liill .. 

million cuckii ,'iiul ln-ir , u .ill in ..limn hi. 1. 1. In , .inl , nllc 
men. .ill .is li.i|.|.\ us h.i|.|iy nl.l li.-. ( l\,-i lln gftfe I ' ! |'|" ''. 
\\.i.l.-.l my w.iy llni.n;-li llir r.l i nw, .m. I. Iriinillf/ ovi'i tin- li.id li 
n| mil' nl' ln:i i Ml 1 1 in 1 1 . ., \\ In i ;. I H il I III I lirr lull lllr I'.n IIM I linn 

Hi- If. AM I :iilv!ini-ril, lir I hnl In. ll:il, :nii| cmll\ 

\\li.-lliri I li .nl li.nl mm li .|MH| ' 

" ' Not miirll,' K.llil I, li-i-.illrcllllj', lli.ll Illf \vlli.lr 

ol' my IIIIK now :iimiimli<| l.i mir rldcrly i.ililnl, will) ;i < .i|n- 

i. ni i ..m on my wj in Wriggletworth, and out of it, too, 

;i . I lln:il . I low I. u IIJIM- I III g() ? ' 

"'Seven inil.-u, I count,' r ml lln- I'iinilt-r. ' YflU WO 

romiii^ rifj[llt v:iy I I It, lr. WrlgglcKWm I li h,-. <IM r 

lln ir. mi yiiii I. II. 

" 'I'h. ml jTOU/Wiil I. ' Iliiinl, yo". 1 1' you will JllUt glv 
mr.i'jMl i,| rmirj ,c ilnri-lion, I Bin B itllb ttt tO|Hl^ril|iliy. 

iMiniy ; ivo me the pi'ini , :imi I'll go MTOM oou&tty I naver 

:;:iw m my lid- lirlmi ' 

" \\ . il. in.' i,:u<l tin- Kin.l f. N..W, If 10 be that U the 

I'll I. II you. \Vln'li yon [-,. I mil ol lli- ;/:ili- down lll<-lr, 

in. n I- \'>m I. ! i,; mil keep on utrniglit till you como to 1'unny'n 

Null ; then :i\v:iy ID ill.- lii'.lll. over Sumptor'H (il-.n, :m.l 
you'll KIM. n in -i- III.- ( Y.Mi|,r.| Hill. -I. Dnn'l co ni:n lli:.l. l.nl 

1 liml imiiiil liy \\'ln-iilli'y'n ( lojmr ; lu . | , till you 

to tin- hi, ,,,, ynin I, |'i ; go over ili.ii, ilnmi^li ' 

Latic, .11 nl l'i:il v. ill In in;- yon 01 1 1 liy I lie Tin.-.- M;n I . i , I . .1 n.l 
lln -I.- lln-y'll In- MIL- In |iul yon in th. i i ; -lii i, ,.,,!.' 

" ' Tliunk yon.' Niiiil I i . ill. l.nm.i, I v.ill (..How your 

ICtioill ItHIHl MH|,li,illy, linl I ;o|i|ior,r I -kill II.IM- no 

(li.inr. <,r (rriiinjj; u Mlioi, now, m ill.. i ilu. .lion even at M 

|.lir.i .ml i.iu-.lin;-. . li ' ' 

" ' No, MI,' c.aiil tin' r:iiniri ; ' Cttn't My M liow I lliml. 
ymi will j-.-l m;.ny mm.- ihotl llliM ('Vfllil)g.' 

" ' \\'< II,' .ml I, ' now lioili my IIMIH I , nir |.,.nl,-,|. I'vi- 

I'" 1 imlliiti" in my I...", lull ;m nl.l I, ml i.ilil.H vvilli : lil.nl; 

lilnl :. I I liunir \villi no |nool\ nl my IpOftj ^m'l file 

>ni- Ill-nil- iir l:nl lli.il I Iliivc li;i;- . rl l.il.u llicili.m 

I i. wli:.l !,li;.ll I glv| J.MI l.i li;.v -i li-.i with liolh 

94 GILBERT GURNEY. 

barrels at all those ducks in the pond, and the fowls on the 
side of it, standing here, and to carry away what I kill ? ' 

" ' You'll kill a woundy sight on 'em, I think, at that dis- 
tance/ said the considerate farmer. 

" ' Perhaps yes perhaps no,' said I. 

1 ' ' And to have all you kill ? ' said he, doubtingly. 

" e Yes ; all I kill fairly out-and-out,' said I. 

" ' Why, you shall give me half-a-guinea,' said the man. 

" ' Half-a-guinea ! ' echoed I. ' No, no ; if I kill three or 
four of them it will be the outside. No ; I'll tell you what 
I'll do. I'll stand here won't move an inch ; and you shall 
have a seven-shilling piece for the slaughter.' 

" Well, sir,' said the farmer, hitching up his lower gar- 
ments, ' a bargain's a bargain. Hand over the twine.' 

" Whereupon," said Daly, " I tipped him that beautiful 
miniature portrait of half-a-guinea, and told him I was ready 
to take my shots. He nodded assent ; and, having pocketed 
the money, bade me proceed. I did so. Crack went one 
barrel bang! slap went the other bang! and such a 
fluttering, and cackling, and squashing, and squabbling you 
never heard. I ran forward, and secured, as my spoil, four 
hens in high condition, a very respectable cock, fit companion 
for my rabbit ; and from the pond fished, with the butt-end 
of my Man ton, two extremely corpulent ducks, who had paid 
the debt of nature in the most decided manner ; these I got 
out, the others I got up, and stuffed them all incontinently 
into my bag, delighted to think what a display I should make 
at Wrigglesworth, where it was quite clear I could, by no 
possibility, arrive in time for dinner. However, that was my 
joke, and it seemed to be the farmer's ; he laughed quite as 
much as I did." 

" Inherent good humour, I suppose," said I. 
" Why, as for that," said Daly, " you shall judge. I 
bagged my birds in the first instance ; and then, having 
secured my booty, began to rally my victim ; and having 
acknowledged his civility in giving me my travelling directions, 
said to him, with a low bow, ' Thank you for the game, 
sir.' 

" ' Yes, sir/ said the farmer, f you are a deuced sight better 
shot than I counted upon, considering what you had in your 
bag afore.' 

GILBERT GURNEY. 95 

" ' Yes/ said I, ' I think you are what you may call 
" done." Seven shillings won't pay for the poultry in my 
pouch, I guess.' 

" ' No/ said the farmer, ' nor three times the money, I count.' 

" ' Well, then/ replied I, ' I think I have the best of the 
bargain.' 

" ' Not much/ said the man. 

" ' Not much ! ' cried I ; ' why, a guinea's worth of fowls 
for a seven-shilling piece ' 

" ' Yees, sir, that's true/ said the fellow, turning slowly 
away from the hatch, and grinning as he turned ; ' but they are 
none on 'em mine.' 

" I could have killed him for his roguery ; but there was 
so much fun in it " 

" So much in your own way," cried I. 

" Exactly so," said Daly ; " that, instead of breaking 
his head, which he most righteously deserved, I joined in his 
infernal horse-laugh, and made the best of my way out of the 
farm-yard, lest I should be immediately apprehended by the 
right owner as a robber of hen-roosts." 

" And," said I, " you carried home your spoils." 

" Not I," exclaimed my unstoppable companion. " Take 
some wine help yourself and listen; for the sequel is 
most terrible. I had such a night of it ! " 

"How?" said I. 

" Why," said Daly, " out of the gate I went, turned to 
my left, and got to Pussy's Nob ; but it began to get dusk, and 
very soon afterwards dark ; and when I began veering away over 
Sumpter's Green, I found myself on a wide common, without 
path, guide, or guide-post. As the darkness increased so did 
the declivity ; and when I had lost all power of seeing, I was 
gratified by feeling myself in a sort of quagmire, which, for 
all 1 knew, might get softer and thicker every step I took. I 
looked out for the stars, and saw a few : but they were of no 
kind of use to me ; for I had not the slightest idea what 
direction, even under their guidance, I ought to take. I re- 
solved to avoid the bogs ; and kept edging away, until I at 
length reached a gap, which, as it led off the infernal common, 
I hoped might lead to some habitation." 

" Where spring-guns and steel-traps were set every night," 
said I. 

96 GILBERT GURXEY. 

" Not a bit of it," said Daly. " I went on, following my 
nose, until I found myself at the edge of a copse, which I 
began to think looked extremely like Squire Bagswash's pre- 
serve. However, it was not that ; but I heard people talking 
at no great distance, and a call of ' Halloo ! ' How to act I 
did not exactly know, with a gun, and a bag full of cocks and 
hens, and a venerable rabbit to boot. What could I do ? To 
have answered the call would have been to be detected as a 
poacher in the dark. I resolved, at all events, on getting rid 
of my poultry in the first instance, and accordingly emptied 
my store, rabbit, tail and all, and proceeded somewhat more 
gaily after having thrown out my ballast ; yet not without some 
apprehension, either of being shot by the keepers for a poacher, 
or by the poachers for a keeper ; so I got clear of the whist- 
ling firs and moaning larches as fast as I could, still utterly 
ignorant of my course." 

" And getting late," said I. 

" It must then have been past eight," said Daly. " On I 
trudged ; scrambled over the furrows of one field, and through 
the turnips in another ; and so on and on, until at last I was 
forced to sit myself down on a gate and rest ; and, I give you 
my word, although I have known a great deal of the world, I 
never was so dead beat in my life as I was then. Not a 
house could I see. The glimmering of a rushlight in a cot- 
tage window would, in my eyes, have been thrice more bril- 
liant than the whole regalia of JSngland collected. But no : 
there were no cottages no rushlights ; and I do believe I 
went the length of swearing at my own stupidity in under- 
taking my solitary excursion. Only one set-off was there to 
the whole thing ; I had seen the Bagswashes, male and 
female, and laid in materials for an historiette for the next 
evening that is, if I really survived the present one ; but I 
began to feel cold, and hungry, and thirsty. However, it 
appeared pretty certain that out of the fields I must get, if I 
went straight on end, and could not well fail of fetching up in 
a road somewhere at last." 

" Which, as you are here alive to tell the tale," said I, " of 
course you did." 

" Why, yes," said Daly, " I did ; but it was not for a 
long time ; and then I had come to a full stop ; and, striking 
the butt of my Manton on the ground, I swore, by stock and 

GILBERT GURNEY. 97 

barrel, that I would not budge from under a huge tree which 
overshadowed me till daylight came to my aid. I was ravenous 
I was chilled I was wretched I was tired to death ; 
but why tire myself more ? and accordingly, feeling, and I 
dare say looking, very like the dear Don of La Mancha, I sat 
myself down with my back against the trunk, and, if you'll 
believe me, fell fast asleep." 

" Asleep ! " said I. 

" Fast as a church," said Daly, " and dreamt dreamt, 
first, that I was starving, that, I think, must have been a 
sort of waking vision ; then, that I was at a ball ; and then I 
dreamt of being safe back at mine host's hospitable mansion ; 
and then I had a confused, hurly-burly kind of a dream, 
either that I was Sir Marmaduke Wrigglesworth, or that Lady 
Wriggles worth was Mrs. Daly, or something of that sort, and 
that I tumbled out of bed, which tumble was to me a ' dying 
fall ; ' for I rolled over on my side, and woke in no bed 
in no house, but where I had lain me down, under the tree 
before-mentioned." 

" You must have caught your death of cold ? " said I. 

" No, Dalys and cats are very tenacious/' said my jocular 
friend ; " I roused myself sat up and listened recollected 
where I was, and heard at the same moment what was really 
* sweet music to mine ear,' the sound of a bell-team. Ho ! ho ! 
says I you are there, are you where there are bells there 
are horses where there's a team there's a waggon where 
there's a waggon there's a road up I jumped, and as fast as 
I could, just roused from my slumbers, scrambled over bram- 
bles and clambered over fences, until I caught sight of the 
waggoner's lantern waggling on the side of the tilt like a bright 
pendulum to regulate the wheels ; the moment I saw that 1 
knew I was landed, and, after encountering a few of those 
thumps and bumps which ' flesh is heir to,' found myself on a 
high road. Waggons, even those called ' flies,' may be over- 
taken, and although dead beat, and sore of foot, I soon came 
up with the eight plaited-tailed animals which were dragging 
the mountain, second only in size to the Juggernaut idol. 

" My first object was to ascertain where I was, and what 
the direction of the vast pile before me. I found, to my par- 
ticular satisfaction, that I was within two miles of Ripley, and 
that the edifice was moving towards London the result was, 

98 GILBERT GURNEY. 

an involuntary spring upon the shafts of the vehicle, and a 
look at the waggoner, which, by the light of his revolver, was 
perfectly intelligible. The gun, the gaiters, the grace, and the 
gentility, spoke the gentleman, and he gave me leave to assume 
the post which he himself was prevented by act of Parliament 
from occupying. All my sorrows fled the moment I felt my- 
self moved along without any personal exertion, and the smiles 
which had nearly been exhausted during my toil and trouble, 
returned, as Moore sings, to ' gild my brow.' ' I have had 
walking enough,' said I to myself, ' and grieving enough 
nunc est ridendum.' " 

" Excellent wag !" said I. 

" Excellent waggon rather," said Daly, " for so it proved ; 
and after three quarters of an hour's hard tugging by the ' bell 
assemblee ' before me, I was dropped, gun, gaiters, bag and 
all, at the door of the Talbot facing the green. I tipped 
my driver bade adieu to the tilt and began knocking 
loudly at the door of mine ostlery." 

" And a nice enough inn it is," said I. 

" It turned out to be past midnight," said Daly ; " and, by 
the merest luck in the world, the exemplary widow who then 
occupied it had not gone to her rest, or roost. She personally 
answered my call, and replied to my knock. After a few 
preliminary ' Who's there's,' she opened the door ; and the 
moment she recognised me for I was well known upon 
the road her delight, as you may conceive, was unspeak- 
able. 

" ' Bless my heart, Mr. Daly,' said the widow, ' what a 
time o' night to be strolling about with your gun ! Why, 
where do you come from ? ' 

" ' That ' said I, ' is about the last question in the world 
I can answer satisfactorily. I have been wandering across a 
country with which I am not particularly well acquainted 
have tired myself to death, and fallen asleep.' 

" ' Fallen indeed,' said mine hostess, 'into a ditch, Mr. Daly, 
I should think. Why, dear me, what a condition you are in!' 

" ' Exactly,' said I ; ' recumbent repose in October under 
an oak, is not particularly delicate ; however, my darling, give 
me some supper, some hot brandy and water, and order me 
the most comfortable bed in the house, for I am a-tired.' 

" ' Why, sir/ asked the dear woman, ' where is your servant 

GILBERT GUBNEY. P9 

with your clothes you cannot think of sleeping here in that 
condition ? ' 

" ' Not exactly/ said I ; ' I shall take off my clothes when 
I go to bed and as for my servant, he is snug and happy at 
Sir Marraaduke Wrigglesworth's (where I ought to be too), 
unless they have sent him out with a rake and a lantern to 
search for me and drag all the horse ponds in the neighbour- 
hood. I tell you I am hungry and tired and shall be 
very sleepy ; out with your tit-bits and delicacies some- 
thing piquant nice savoury, eh and after that, a com- 
fortable nest.' 

" ' You shall have something to eat,' said the widow, ' and 
something to drink, for those I can give you myself; but as 
for a bed, I havn't one in the house crammed full from top 
to bottom.' 

" ' I'm very tired,' said I; 'I can sleep compact like a dog 
on a hearth rug half a bed will do for me.' 

" ' Come, Mr. Daly,' said the landlady, ' none of your non- 
sense I have no bed whatever to-night, and here it is almost 
one o'clock you had better let me ring up the next turn-out, 
and get back to Wrigglesworth.' 

" ( Thank you, Fanny,' said I ; I used to call her Fanny in 
her husband's time, and he was killed, switching a rasper, 
three years before ; ' not I I should not get there till nearly 
four all the family " in a deep sleep buried." no, no 
none of your nonsense where am I to rest ? ' 

" ' I told you the truth,' said the widow ; 'there's not a bed 
disengaged.' 

" ' Not one ? ' said I looking, as I fancied, most insinu- 
atingly, and helping myself to a glass of brandy from a bottle 
covered with a gilt bunch of grapes, at the same time gently 
pressing the tip of mine hostess's little finger. 

" ' Not one, upon my life, Mr. Daly,' replied she ; ' indeed 
we are so full, that my sister Jane, who is here, is obliged to 
sleep with me.' 

" ' That's very unfortunate, indeed,' said I ; ' however, I 
rejoice that you have so much custom all's good for trade 
at all events let me eat let me warm myself both in the 
sunshine of those bright eyes, and in the blaze of the parlour 
fire.' 

" Mine hostess proceeded to make me exceedingly com- 
H 2 

100 GILBERT GURNEY. 

fortable I ate cold fowl and ham, and drank hot brandy and 
water, and eventually punch. Mine hostess sipped shrub a 
liquor which, if it were liqueur, would rank fathoms above 
either Cura9oa or Marischino till at last the clock striking 
two, reminded her it was time to go to bed. 

" ' Ah,' said I, f that is extremely just and proper. But, 
alas ! I am like my melancholy little friend who was " very 
gentil, but whose hair came a leetle through the top of his 
hat," I have no bed to go to.' 

" ' It's very provoking,' said the landlady, ' so tired as you 
are too.' 

" ' It is, indeed,' replied I seeing a proposition of some 
sort or other on the tip of her tongue. 

" f Now,' said she, looking remarkably serious, ' can I trust 
you will you promise me, if I give you a bed, to do as I 
bid you, Mr. Daly ? ' 

" ' Your commands,' said I, ' shall be obeyed to the letter 
only let me rest myself quietly and comfortably it is all 
I ask for never was poor devil so tired in his life as I.' 

" ' Take a drop more punch, Mr. Daly,' said my landlady, 
' it will make you sleep the sounder.' 

" ' No fear of that,' said I; but what do you propose ? ' 

" ' Why,' said mine hostess, ' I have one bed unoccupied.' 

" ' Why didn't you say so before ? ' cried I. 

" ' I'll tell you why,' said my fair friend ; ' it's a double- 
bedded room, and the other bed is occupied by a ' 

" ' snoring farmer, from Farnham,' said I ; ' or per- 
haps a tight-skinned sailor walking his way to town from 
Portsmouth.' 

" f No,' said she, looking very pathetic and very pretty 
by the way ' by a lady.' 

" ' A lady,' said I, ' oh, charming thought ! ' 

" ' There it is,' interrupted the lady, ' that's just what 1 
expected, you are all fire and tow alight in a moment 
now I shall not say another word, and you must sleep, if you 
will sleep here, in the arm-chair by the fire.' 

" ' No,' said I, 'no don't be angry I didn't know 
I thought ' 

" ' Yes, Mr. Daly, that's what you are always thinking, I 
believe,' said mine hostess, ( but that won't do the lady who 
occupies the other bed in the double-bedded room is a sad 

GILBERT GURNEY. 101 

invalid ; she has been stopping here for some time, and the 
only rest she gets is by dint of laudanum, which the doctor 
gives her in large doses, and she sleeps soundly during the 
night, which makes up for the sufferings she endures by day. 
If you choose to behave well and, tired as you are, I don't 
like to turn you out or leave you here you shall have the 
other bed. You must go gently into the room, and when you 
are in bed I will come and take away your candle ; and as I 
sleep in the next room, if you don't remain perfectly quiet I 
shall insist upon your getting up and coming down again here 
into the bar.' 

" ' Agreed/ said I, ' I only ask for a bed all I want is 
rest I am scarcely able to walk or stand, therefore I agree 
to your condition ; let me finish my punch, and " marshal me 
the way I should go." ' 

" After looking at me suspiciously and hesitatingly for a 
minute or two, my dear landlady agreed to trust me ; and 
accordingly having seen that my bed was properly prepared 
she returned, and, lighting a candle, preceded me up stairs, 
and opening the door of the room put her ringer to her lips to 
enforce silence, whispering me, that when I was in bed I should 
knock against the wainscot which separated her room from 
that in which I was to repose, and that she would come and 
fetch my candle. 

" I promised to obey all her injunctions. The curtains 
of the other bed were closely drawn I never felt so awkward 
in my life but I had promised ; yet one peep before the 
light vanished no perhaps the lady would wake and 
scream, and I should be forthwith ejected. I resolved to keep 
my faith, at all events till mine hostess was herself asleep, and 
then see as far as utter darkness would permit how the 
affair would terminate. 

" Accordingly I hurried off my clothes washed my face, 
hands, and mouth as gently and quietly as possible, and having 
concluded my brief preparations for depositing myself in my 
much longed-for couch, gave the concerted signal, and scarcely 
was well in my place before my dear landlady entered the 
room on tip-toe, and, corning up close to the bed-side and 
having whispered ' Now remember your promise ' took the 
glimmering light away, and left me in the dark with my fair 
and slumbering companion. 

H 3 

102 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" There was something very strange in my position/' said 
Daly ; " I was tired to death, but somehow I could not sleep. 
I lay and listened to hear whether my fair incognita would 
sneeze or cough or cry ' hem ' or play off any little 
coquettish trick which, under the circumstances, I thought 
probable enough. I durst not move, for /knew I was watched; 
however, I sat up in the bed and began to wonder Is it, 
thought I, an old woman or a young woman? an invalid is 
interesting, and bless her, she must be uncommonly genteel, 
for she does not snore in the least a few minutes served to 
convince me that my landlady did and I rather rejoiced in 
the sound of her slumbers, since I thought I might perhaps 
succeed in attracting the attention of my sleeping partner; and 
the fact that a gentleman of my very respectable pretensions 
was so whimsically associated with her knowing mine 
hostess's archness induced me to attribute her readiness to 
quarter me upon the slumbering beauty, to a foreknowledge 
on her part that my introduction would not be considered 
altogether an intrusion. 

" After I had satisfied myself that my landlady was really 
safe, I had recourse to some slight coughs, which do occa- 
sionally infest one ; but no, my signals were not answered : 
the dose of laudanum had been particularly strong that night. 
At last I thought I heard a slight movement. I began to 
listen, till I heard the beating of my own heart, and felt a sort 
of drumming palpitation in my ears. I held my breath : 
psha, thought I, this woman has been cheating me, the other 
bed is tenantless, a trick to try me, and for what a stupid 
dolt she will set me down if I don't convince her that I had 
at least curiosity enough in my composition to ascertain what 
was in it. 

" My feelings fired at the thought. Up I got, groped 
my way across the room, the white dimity drapery being 
just visible amidst the ' palpable obscure.' I reached the bed, 
I paused, I heard nothing ; I partly opened the cur- 
tains at the side, and said in a soft, very soft voice, ' Hem !' 
No answer. ' Ma'am, Ma'am,' still silent ; 'are you 
there ! ' said I ; and, placing my hand on the pillow, found 
she was. Dear, unconscious creature, there she lay, comfort- 
ably cuddled up in the clothes, and sleeping, or seeming to 
sleep, soundly. I was, I admit, on the point of proceeding 

GILBERT GUKNEY. 103 

to awaken her, in order to announce my presence, when, in 
stepping towards the head of the bed, my foot came in contact 
with a chair which stood on its right-hand side, which was 
overthrown with a crash that, in an instant, roused not my 
dear opium-drinker but my lynx-like landlady. I heard 
her jump out of bed. 1 jumped into mine, but, in less than 
two minutes, there she was, like Margaret's ' grimly ghost/ 
standing before me, loading me with reproaches, and ordering 
me, in the most peremptory terms, to take the candle, descend 
the stairs, and dress myself in the parlour behind the bar, and 
wait until she came down to eject me from the house ; seeing 
that she could have no kind of confidence in a gentleman who 
had so much confidence in himself. 

" Vain were my pantony'mic supplications : she would listen 
to nothing but immediate abdication ; and I could not well be 
angry with her, for she had put faith in me, and perhaps run 
the risk of losing a valuable customer by indulging me with 
the luxuries of ease and rest which, under no other circum- 
stances, she could have afforded me. I implicitly obeyed her 
commands ; and, as soon as she had retired to dress herself, 
collected my wearing apparel, and slunk down stairs to prepare 
for my departure, which seemed inevitable. As I passed along 
the passages, I heard multifarious snorings in all directions, 
which convinced me of the truth of my landlady's assertions 
as to the influx of company, and made me repent more sorely 
than before, that I could not for once in my life act with dis- 
cretion and decorum. 

" I had scarcely finished dressing myself when my landlady 
made her appearance in the parlour. 

" ' I really am surprised, sir,' said she, ' at your conduct. 
I thought, as a gentleman, you might have been trusted, con- 
sidering the circumstances under which I ventured to put you 
into that room.' 

" ' Really,' said I, ' I thought you were playing me a trick, 
and I could not bear your having the laugh against me, and so 
I certainly did venture just to ascertain ' 

" ' Ascertain ! ' cried the landlady, ' that's just the very 
thing you ought upon no consideration whatever to have done. 
Did not I tell you the lady was an invalid ? Oh ! Mr. Daly, 

Mr. Daly ! I believe you are the d ' 

H 4 

104" GILBERT GURNEY. 

" ' evil be, ma'am,' said I, interrupting her, * to him 

who evil thinks. I meant no harm, and ' 

" ' You might have ruined me, sir,' said mine hostess. 

" ' Might I ? ' said I, ' when ?' 

" ' This very night, sir,' said she ; ' this very hour. Why, 
what would have been thought of me and my house, if it had 
been known that I had allowed you to sleep in that room ? 
Nobody would have believed that I did it out of pure regard 
for your comfort, tired and knocked up as you were, and be- 
cause I had not a hole or corner besides into which you could 
have poked yourself: however, it will be a lesson for me an- 
other time ; and now, Mr. Daly, if you will take my advice, 
the lads are getting up in the yard, you will let me order 
out a chaise and pair, and go on to Guildford, where, I have 
no doubt, they have plenty of beds, and where you may get 
some comfortable rest ; and as the brother of the lady in No. 3. 
is sleeping here to-night, something unpleasant to all parties 
might happen in the morning, and you would do me a very 
great favour if you would go.' 

" I felt considerably inclined, for many reasons, to accede 
to what appeared the very reasonable desire of mine hostess : 
first of all, I might do her a mischief by staying ; in the 
second place, the lady might complain to her brother ; in the 
third place, the White Hart at Guildford was a remarkably 
good inn ; and a well-made bed, and a well- warmed bed-room, 
would be extremely comfortable by comparison with the chilly 
atmosphere and the chair-slumber of the parlour behind the 
bar at Ripley. To Guildford I must eventually proceed, 
and why not now? So, with the best possible grace, I told 
mine hostess that I was at her command, and begged of her 
to dispose of me as she thought fit. 

" I paid her liberally for the horses, the repast, and the 
portion of my night's rest which I ought to have had; and 
when I stepped into the ' yellow and two,' I shook hands with 
her, and she gave me a look as much as to say, again and again, 
' Daly, Daly ! you are not to be trusted.' 

" Well, sir," continued Daly, " away I went, glasses 
rattling, and wind whistling; (a short stage, you know ;) and, 
before four we reached the White Hart. I had forestalled my 
Guildford sleep in the chaise ; however, we soon made them 
hear at the inn, and in less than three quarters of an hour I 

GILBERT GURNEY. 105 

was again rolled up in the sheets, having, before I went to 
bed, written a note to my servant at Wrigglesworth, which I 
desired might be sent off early in the morning, directing him, 
after leaving word with Sir Marmaduke's man that I was alive, 
if not merry, to come to me with my clothes and other requi- 
sites for dressing by ten o'clock ; and certainly, I must say, I 
never did enjoy rest and quietness so entirely and completely 
as upon that particular occasion. Instead of ten o'clock 
having desired that I might not be disturbed I did not wake 
until past noon, and then regretted that my balmy comfort had 
been broken in upon. 

" From my servant, when I saw him, I learned that my 
friends at Wrigglesworth had really expressed great anxiety 
on my account, which did not displease me, I rather like to 
create an effect, but I did not hear that my dear Lady 
Wrigglesworth had either absented herself from dinner or dis- 
appeared for the evening in consequence of my absence, which 
I confess mortified my vanity a little. I dressed, and having 
ensconced myself in the drawing-room of the White Hart, the 
walls of which apartment were most constitutionally decorated 
with loyal and orthodox prints, and which immediately faces 
the Gothic House, I delighted myself by watching the move- 
ments of two uncommonly pretty girls in the said antiquated 
edifice, who appeared to be in full possession, in the absence, 
as I surmised, of some greater, and probably graver, per- 
sonages. 

" After breakfast I strolled out. I like Guildford ; it is a 
nice, clean, handsome, healthy town ; the hill in the street I 
admit to be a nuisance ; the alternation between climbing up 
and sliding down is tiresome, and even dangerous. These 
little objections did not affect me nothing affects me when I 
am on the hunt for subjects so away I went smack bang 
into a quaker's shop to buy myself a pair of gloves and 
there there I saw what I had never before seen two 
quaker children playing about the place, thee'ing and thou'ing 
each other, with perfect French familiarity. Now, do you 
know," continued Daly, " it is quite worthy of remark, that 
nobody always, I presume, excepting quakers themselves 
has ever seen a quaker baby in arms, a quaker lady enceinte, 
or a quaker gentleman with a wooden leg eh ? I like these 
statistical speculations. So, having bought my gloves I re- 

106 GILBERT GURNET. 

turned to f mine inn ' about one, intending forthwith to pro- 
ceed to Wrigglesworth. 

" Just as I reached the door of the White Hart, and just as 
my man was bringing out my horses, my eye was attracted by 
a funeral procession, consisting merely of a hearse, one mourn- 
ing coach, and a private carriage, which had halted before the 
door ; two persons who had occupied the coach having entered 
the house while fresh horses were put to the three vehicles. 
A natural and not very blameable curiosity prompted me to 
ask a jolly, merry-looking undertaker, whose funeral it was, 
whither they were going, and whence they had come ? 

" ' Why, sir,' said the man, ' what you see here isn't the 
regular job as I hopes to turn it out at Chichester next Tues- 
day, which is the day fixed for the interment of the corpse. 
Short notice, you see, sir ; could not do everything in a minute, 
sir.' 

" ' What is the name of the ? ' I hesitatingly asked. 

" ' Miss Barmingfield, sir,' said the man, ' is the name of 
the corpse. Poor young lady, it was as well as you and me 
three days ago, and was a coming down to Chichester to spend 
a month with its mother ; when, just in a minute, it was taken 
ill at Ripley, and out it went for all the world like the snuff 
of a candle.' 

" ' At Ripley ! ' said I : ' did she live at Ripley ? ' 

" e No, sir, she didn't,' said the undertaker ; ' you'll excuse 
me she died there.' 

" ' But she must have lived there first, I presume,' said I 
rather angrily ; for a joker hates to be joked upon. 

te ( A very short time indeed,' said the jolly undertaker. 
' She arrived at the Talbot the day before yesterday, about 
twelve o'clock, in high health, and by six at night, as I said 
afore, she was a corpse.' 

'" At the Talbot!' said I. 'And are you bringing the 
body from the Talbot now ? ' 

tc ' Yes, sir,' said the man ; ' on our way to Chichester. We 
could not move her, poor dear young lady, afore, because I 
couldn't get things ready till this morning.' 

" ' Pray,' said I, with a degree of agitation which evidently 
astonished my companion in the crape, ' where in what part 
of the Talbot at Ripley did the young lady die ? ' 

tc ' In Number 3. ; that 'ere double-bedded room right over 

GILBERT GURNEY. 107 

the gateway/ said the man. ' We only packed her up this 
morning.' 

" My dear Gurney," said Daly, " you may easily imagine 
what my feelings were. Only conceive the idea of having 
been turned into a double-bedded room in the dark with a 
dead woman ! It was lucky that the horses were pronounced 
ready, and that Major Barmingfield, whose residence at Ripley 
mine hostess so truly had announced, made his appearance 
just at the moment that the undertaker had enlightened me on 
the subject. I felt a mingled sensation of horror at the event, 
of joy at my escape from the place where it occurred, and of 
repentance for my misconduct towards my landlady, who had 
so good-naturedly strained a point for my accommodation, 
which nearly overset me ; and I have not a notion what I 
should have done, had it not been that the coldness of the 
weather afforded me an excuse for drinking off a glass of 
brandy, and the lateness of the hour forced me to mount my 
nag and begin my canter to Wrigglesworth forthwith." 

When Daly had finished this little episode in his eccentric 
and eventful life, I felt particularly sick I might say sym- 
pathetically sick. He perceived the effect his story had pro- 
duced, and, calling for Dejex himself, prescribed a glass of 
Garus, at that time the popular liqueur ; and then whispering 
some directions about egged-wine, desired me to finish the 
claret, and commence a new course of drinking. 

The subsequent events of that evening require a new 
chapter. 

CHAPTER VI. 

So much has been said and written from the days of Shakspeare 
to our own degenerate times about the vice of drinking, that I 
have no intention of dilating upon its folly and disgraceful- 
ness ; but in confessing that I drank a great deal too much of 
everything exciting and intoxicating upon this particular occa- 
sion, I may, perhaps, be permitted to say, that although, under 
the influence of agreeable conversation and a bad example, I 
might be induced now and then to exceed, I was not habitually 

108 GILBERT GURNEY. 

addicted to what are called Bacchanalian pleasures ; and that 
one bout similar to that to which I now refer, generally pro- 
duced at least a six weeks' course of repentance. So it was 
upon this memorable night for memorable indeed it proved 
to me ; and so rapidly did our potations affect my faculties, 
that in the plenitude of our mutual confidence by which, be 
it understood, I mean the confidence of Daly in inquiring, 
and my own confidence in answering, I imparted to him the 
secret of my attachment to an amiable, dear, unsophisticated 
creature, who was living in the romantic and beautiful sea-port 
of Tenby, in South Wales, whither she had been conveyed, as 
it had been hinted to me, to get her out of my reach, by her 
mother, whose designs for her were of the Corinthian order, 
and who had no notion of allowing her lily to waste its sweet- 
ness upon a desert " heir " to four or five hundred a-year. 

I just recollect the enthusiasm with which I described my 
Emma's beauties as the lamps twinkled before my eyes, and 
the various " drinks" which Daly had ordered passed over 
my senseless palate ; but I was diffuse in my eulogiums, and 
candid in the extreme as to the certainty of my failure in ob- 
taining the golden apple of the Cambrian Hesperides, watched 
as it was by the matronly dragon, who, as I firmly believed, 
detested me. 

In those days there really existed something like sentiment 
and affection, devoted and unqualified by worldly grovellings. 
Now, these exist no longer ; nobody ever hears of an unmar- 
ried woman's being seriously attached; the highly accom- 
plished and double-refined beauty of the period at which I 
write would be shocked to death if she were thought to be 
what, in other times, was called being in love. Girls like 
dandies, and with the dandies whom they like they flirt, and 
they waltz, and, if it happens to be quite convenient to all 
parties, eventually marry them. Wit and accomplishments 
have taken place of that sober serious devotion, which " looked 
unutterable things;" and a man, in these times, convicted of 
having been upon his knees, would be as much damaged in 
the estimation of the sporting world, as a horse would be for 
the same reason. 

But when I was sitting sipping and sighing at Dejex's it 
was not so. I remember treasuring a fan of Emma's, as I 
would the relic of a saint, ay and worshipping it too. To a 

GILBERT GURNEY. 109 

white kid glove ripped at the thumb, I have bowed as pil- 
grims would at a shrine ; and a rose which once had graced 
her bosom has been deposited in the leaf of some favoured 
book to dry, a botanical memorandum of her beauties and my 
own devotion. 

I have a faint recollection of Daly's strong encouragement 
in my pursuit, and a most earnest protestation of assistance in 
any of the manoeuvres of the postchaise and rope-ladder 
school, to which, if I ever possessed my Emma, I must be 
indebted for that happiness. I remember, too, I loved to hear 
him talk of the possibility of my success, and the facility with 
which all our machinations were to be carried into effect, till 
at last I had dreamt myself into a certainty of obtaining the 
hand of one whose heart I was quite sure I had already 
gained, and only awoke from the semi-slumberings of happi- 
ness to pay the bill, Daly having most unfortunately left 
his purse at home, and having no change whatever in his 
pocket. 

I do not recollect our further proceedings with any degree 
of distinctness. I knew we were to walk to St. James's 
Street, where Daly proposed introducing me to a participation 
in the noble game of hazard ; and I have a faint remembrance 
of stopping to pay an evening visit to some relations of his on 
our way thither ; but it seemed all like a bright vision of 
some very lovely good-natured ladies, and vastly pleasant men, 
who appeared to make me entirely welcome to the party, and 
who drank punch with unaffected delight. All sublunary 
pleasures must have an end, and however agreeable this " drop 
in" might have been, we at length " dropped out" and pur- 
sued our journey to the gaming-house in which I was to make 
my sporting debut, and which I recollect stood on the left- 
hand of the street, near the Thatched House Tavern, and had 
a white bow window projecting over the trottoir, somewhat 
resembling a well-fed alderman's white waistcoat. 

There is always something awkward and embarrassing in 
the premier pas. The first speech of the politician the 
first sermon of the parson the first cause of the lawyer, by 
necessarily putting the performer in a novel position, agitates, 
and in some degree unnerves him ; and although I had some- 
what recklessly presented myself to a most respectable and 
accomplished party of Daly's female friends, before we reached 

110 GILBERT GURNET. 

our present destination, I felt nothing very awful in my posi- 
tion there ; one party is so very much like another, and con- 
versation and manners, in modern times, so very much assi- 
milate in all circles, that whether in the neighbourhood of 
Grosvenor Square or Leicester Fields, a man, knowing a little 
of the world, will, as a matter of course, find himself equally 
at home. But when we stepped up two or three stairs, and 
our progress was impeded by a stout door made of three inch 
plank, and covered with green-baize, in the middle of the 
upper part of which appeared a small sort of wicket or hatch, 
through which the Cerberus of the inner regions eyed us, in 
order to ascertain whether we were admissible or suspicious, I 
felt a sort of qualm, and a kind of wish to return ; but my 
nervousness was entirely dissipated when I heard Daly tell the 
man, whose eye glanced out of the hole like that in the sign- 
board of the " Observer" newspaper, or in the puffing bill of 
Dr. Smellome's nostrum, that I was a friend of his; upon 
which " Open, Sesame ! " of my hopeful conductor, I found 
the door thrown back in order to admit us. Up stairs I went, 
and half way farther up we encountered another door simi- 
larly contrived and pierced ; but, at this barrier, Daly's face 
was sufficient for passport without a word, and in a minute 
afterwards we were ushered into the room, where the game 
was in full play. 

I confess the smell of the lamps which overhung the round 
table for in those days refined French hazard was unknown 
to us and of the company was rather oppressive ; the noise 
of the dice, the cry of the groom-porter, and the bawling of 
the betters, somewhat astounded me ; but I admit such is 
the influence of sensuality that the appetite which my 
copious libations at Dejex's had fictitiously produced, received 
an additional stimulus, not unaccompanied by the hope of 
gratification, when I beheld, in the recess of the bow- window 
before mentioned, a table plentifully covered with an excellent 
cold supper, at which divers and sundry of the company were 
indulging themselves con amove. I began to think my simile, 
on first sight of the window, was now perfectly borne out, and 
whatever might be the sporting character of the assembly 
generally, the comestibles were most judiciously and naturally 
placed in what I had likened to an alderman's waistcoat. 

I was not soon induced to join in the game, although a 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

Ill 

gentleman, whose hat was not of the newest, and who was 
buttoned up to the very chin in a sort of military great coat, 
offered me his seat the moment I approached the table ; but I 
whispered to my fidus Achates, that, whatever interest the 
game might have for others, the cold meat and pickles offered 
a more attractive subject for my present contemplation. There, 
however, he checked my eagerness for the attraction, by hint- 
ing that, as the supper was furnished gratis, I could not, with 
anything like propriety or gentlemanly feeling, undertake to 
play with my knife and fork at a table where the keepers of 
the establishment must be sure to lose, unless I also per- 
formed at the other, where the chances were considerably in 
favour of their winning. In order to exemplify the absolute 
necessity of this probation, he told me that, although he was 
quite as hungry as myself, he should entirely abstain from 
eating, because (as I knew) he had no money to play with ; 
he therefore could not qualify for the refreshment, which, as 
in masonry, seemed only to be afforded after labour. 

Of course I did not allow my free-hearted friend to starve 
for such a paltry consideration as that, but instantly handed 
him out of my purse a five-pound note, with which he said 
he would play for both of us, so that he might at once in- 
crease the store, and give me a proper insight into what he 
represented to be a most pleasing and profitable pursuit. 

I must confess that, after ten minutes' sojourn in the 
midst of the motley group, all those alarms and prejudices 
which my grave friend the justice, and my exemplary mother, 
had so prudently instilled into my mind as to the horrors of 
gaming houses, which, in the earnestness of their zeal for my 
safety, they constantly designated by a word wholly " unfit 
for ears polite," had utterly and entirely subsided ; I saw 
nothing but good humour and good fellowship. Some won 
their tens, and twenties, and fifties with perfect good nature, 
and others lost them with equal complacency. Daly made 
me sit down beside him the box came he called a main. 
I did not even know the term seven's the main, said Daly 
he threw again, and out came eleven, upon which the 
gentleman in the chair, with a rake in his hand, cried out, 
" Eleven's a nick," and immediately I saw my five-pound 
note converted into a ten, by a process which appeared to me 
not only extremely simple, but remarkably pleasant. Daly 

112 GILBERT GURNEY. 

threw again, again called seven, and threw nine ; a loud cry 
of " Five to four," rang through the room ; " Fifty to forty," 
cried one, " Done," bawled another. " Do it in fives, colonel," 
screamed a little man, very like a frog in the face, upon whose 
back an Irish gentleman was sitting or leaning, pushed for- 
ward by half a dozen eager spectators behind him. I heard 
nothing but " Five to four " for a minute or two, varied with 
a counter- cry of " Nine to seven ; " then a pause, broken only 
by the rattling of the dice, and then a call of " Nine the 
caster wins; " whereupon notes and guineas changed hands all 
round the outside rim of the table, and Daly swept up ten 
pounds as a stake, and five for his single bet. 

I Avas then as much pleased with the practice of the game 
as I had just been with the principle, and although Daly 
" threw out," as they called it, next time, and lost five pounds, 
it was clear he had realised fifteen ; so that, having myself 
been a winner of seven before, on our partnership account, I 
took the box, and covered five sets of one pound each, omitting 
the more important ones, which I could not afford to touch. 
I called my main, seven and threw it raked up my 
money, and called again, seven ; threw deuce-ace ; upon which 
the monster in the chair bellowed out " Crabs," and made no 
more ado, but swept away all my stakes, and whisked the 
dice out of my reach with a kind of rat-trap which was stuck 
to the end of his stick. 

Having, however, now done my duly by playing, although 
I had neither lost nor won, I nudged Daly as to the eatables ; 
he assented to my practical proposition, and we quitted the 
round table for the long one, where I admit I felt myself 
more of an adept than at the other. During my repast, which 
I enjoyed, Daly was particularly assiduous in disabusing my 
mind with respect to the illiberal prejudices by which sporting 
men were so regularly assailed. He pointed out to me many 
men of high distinction, fathers of families, men holding high 
ostensible situations, who were actively engaged in the fasci- 
nating pursuit, and dwelt particularly upon the misapplica- 
tion of the gross term universally applied to houses of that 
description. 

" So far," said Daly, tc from hazard being considered a 
wrong or disreputable game, you know, of course, that the 
kings of England, till the reign of George III., used annually, 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 113 

on Twelfth-night, to play hazard in an open room in St. 
James's Palace, which ceremony the public were admitted to 
witness. Hence the name given to these places of amusement. 
The room in which the king publicly exhibited himself to his 
people, doing exactly what all our sporting friends are doing 
here, was called as those houses are now called on account of 
its darkness by day, and hence the opprobrium which has 
fallen upon us players in modern times, who congregate in 
places which, to the delicate imaginations of little masters and 
misses, deserve the same horrible appellation on account of 
their infamy, instead of having received it from the court 
itself: hence, too, the title of my worthy friend in the chair 
with the rake he is called groom-porter why, nobody on 
earth could possibly surmise, who did not know that, in the 
royal hazard-playing, which I have just mentioned, it was the 
duty of the groom-porter of the palace to call the odds." 

" That I did not know," said I, excessively pleased to find 
that the temple of chance did not deserve the hard name which, 
from mingled ignorance of its honest joys, and the derivation 
of the name itself, my parent and guardian had thought proper 
to give it. I believe I appeared sceptical as to my friend's 
facts, which, however, made him more earnest in his assever- 
ations ; and when I ventured to express a doubt that any 
room in a palace could be called by such a name, he convinced 
me of his correctness by telling me that it was the room in 
which the birth-day odes were always performed, which odes 
it was customary to rehearse previously at the concert room 
in the Devil Tavern, Fleet Street, a circumstance which, I 
then saw, gave the only point they possess, to the well-known 
lines on the poet laureate of the day. 

Somehow, Daly succeeded in soothing all my alarms, and 
quieting all my scruples, and I found myself almost insensibly 
swallowing large jorums of cold brandy and water, thereby 
merely following the example of my surrounding neighbours, 
who evidently were friends of the concern, if not of the house, 
and who appeared taking in provision enough to serve them for 
the next three days ; and in this calm state of amusement, in 
the midst of the din and rattle, which, at first, I could scarcely 
endure, I went on until, tempted by the good fortune of Daly, 
I began to feel an unaccountable desire to resume my place at 
the board. In making the effort, I found myself more un- 

i 

114 GILBERT GUKNEY. 

steady than I had expected ; however, the distance was not 
great, and, aided by Daly, I seated myself again at the table. 
I did not like to mention to Daly the promised division of 
spoils, because I thought he might go on and win, as he 
seemed extremely lucky, and that it would be better to let him 
take his own way. Accordingly, I drew forth my only ten 
pound note, last resident of my purse, and began my career. 
A most assiduous friend, whose face I had never seen before, 
brought me a new edition of brandy and water, which I 
drank, and then took the box, and played with small and 
varying success ; but the heat and excitement very soon pro- 
duced a sensible alteration in my deportment. I began to 
wish to find Daly and to retire, but my eyes in vain wandered 
over the group ; I inquired of a man with whom he had 
been conversing, and found that he had taken his departure. 
I was surprised that he should have left me in the hands of 
the Philistines, but much less alarmed or mortified than I 
should have been under any other circumstances. I drank 
more, and played on and on and on. Nor did conscious- 
ness come to my aid until I was awakened by my servant 
coming into my room to fetch my clothes, at about nine 
o'clock in the morning. 

His address to me was somewhat astounding, " Where 
shall I put all this money, sir ? " said he. I looked up, and 
saw him in the act of withdrawing from my coat pocket a 
handful of bank notes, ones, twos, fives, tens, and so on. 

" Oh," said I, affecting a perfect composure, " leave it on 
the table." 

So he did ; but out of the room he had not gone one minute 
before I jumped out of bed to ascertain, not how the sum 
before my eyes came there, but to what it amounted. I con- 
cluded I had won largely ; but who had brought me home 
how did I get to bed did I open the house door with my 
own pocket-key ? I had no recollection of any incident in- 
tervening between the last jorum of St. James's Street nectar, 
and my first start from the slumbers of Suffolk Street ; there, 
however, lay some clean, some dirty, some torn bank notes, of 
all sorts, amounting, in all, to three hundred and seventy-five 
pounds. 

How these notes had become mine I could not recollect ; 
that they had remained mine while I was in a state of such 

GILBERT GURNEY. 115 

perfect unconsciousness convinced me that the men who are 
unceremoniously denounced as villains, universal and unde- 
niable, were not quite so black as they are painted, else how 
could I have been suffered not only to win when fortune 
favoured me, but permitted to carry off the produce of my 
success ? This act of highly creditable integrity, done towards 
me in youth, I admit has had a very powerful effect in regu- 
lating my subsequent opinions of the characters of men like 
those by whom I had been, on the preceding night, at once 
surrounded and protected.* 

Having cast a hurried glance over my newly-acquired 
treasure, I returned to bed, taking with me two letters which 
I found on my table, one I knew to be from my mother, 
the other was in a strange hand. Anxious to have the lecture 
of my excellent parent over, and to hear how she bore Daly's 
visit, upon the subject of which I was quite sure she would 
write, I opened hers first, and therein perused the details of 
the affair very much as Daly himself had described them, but 
with a sequel least agreeable of all, informing me of the re- 
cognition which the Miss Dods had made of the " rude and 
forward " deputy assistant clerk, and her extreme sorrow and 
vexation that it could be no longer concealed, since his ac- 
quaintance with me had been admitted, that I was the com- 
panion of his most unjustifiable frolic. As far as that went, 
as I had secretly resolved to marry nobody but Emma Haines, 
it was a matter of no great importance to me, although the 
acquaintance with the young ladies would have very agreeably 
enlivened the circle at Teddington, had I intended to make 
the cottage a place of frequent resort. Matters had now en- 
tirely changed as far as my means and inclinations were con- 
cerned ; the previous night's conversation with Daly had quite 
determined me on my course. He had overcome, with argu- 
ments which I considered full of sound reason and judgment, 
all the boyish scruples I had hitherto felt with regard to filial 
obedience upon points where the heart was concerned, and was 
completely convinced that love love of that peculiar sort 
which Daly had made me sensible I felt for Miss Haines 
was paramount to all other sentiments, duties, or affections. 

* It was some months after this occurrence that I ascertained to whom I had 
been indebted for the care and trouble not only of preserving my winnings, but of 
conveying me to my very room. 

i 2 

116 GILBERT GUHNEY. 

It is extraordinary to see with what facility a shrewd and 
clever person can win over a less-experienced man to the prin- 
ciples he advocates, provided their character and tendency are 
in unison with the less-experienced man's feelings ! I could 
not understand what it was that had hitherto kept me tongue- 
tied with respect to Emma, a being I loved by stealth, as far 
as my own parent was concerned. I owed my mother the 
allegiance of a son, it was true, but I had a right to an opinion 
of my own, and Emma Haines had a fortune of five and twenty 
thousand pounds, and the match would be a good match, and 
she was fond of me and I was fond of her ; what then was 
the objection ? her mother's positive refusal to hear of such 
a thing as a proposal from a pennyless boy ; and this refusal, 
I knew, if I mentioned any thing on the subject to my parent, 
would heat up the Gataker blood to boiling, and I should be 
as solemnly warned by my own mother to desist from any 
further attempts upon the heart of Miss Haines as I had 
already been by hers. 

However, rope-ladders, post-chaises, and all the rest of it, 
were dancing in my imagination ; and for an instant I believed 
that Fortune had at last withdrawn the fillet from her eyes, 
and already displayed her favourable intentions for the future 
by putting in my possession, by her own means, a sum adequate 
to defray all the necessary expenses of my juvenile matrimonial 
expedition. With these bright visions in my mind's eye, it 
may be supposed I did not read my poor mother's details of 
Daly's visit with any profound attention ; but, hastily scanning 
the letter, I threw it down in order to make myself acquainted 
with the contents of the other epistle. I broke open the seal 
and read as follows : 

" 6 o'clock, Friday. 

" DEAR SIR, I despatch this to you the moment I reach 
town. I was called into your mother a little after three, 
whom I found in a very afflicting state, from an attack of 
apoplexy. Having taken the most effective measures at the 
moment, I set off to town as fast as I could in order to find 
and carry down Dr. Baillie to her. I arrived just now, and 
while he is getting ready to return with me I write this. Let 
me entreat of you not to lose a moment in going to her ; for, 
although I would not excite unnecessary apprehensions, her 

GILBERT GURNEY. 117 

case is a serious one, and may prove very dangerous. Nothing 
I can add will express the urgency of your visit more strongly 
than the simple fact that having restored her to consciousness 
before I quitted her, the first words your mother uttered were 
your name, and an entreaty to see you." 

* # * * 

When I read thus far, the letter fell from my hand, my 
eyes swam, my head turned round. I felt that mad im- 
patience that necessity for immediate action that wildness 
of purpose, which are the instant results of intelligence like 
this, my mother dying and calling for me, dead, perhaps, 
without seeing me, and I revelling in heartless pleasure, in 
sensual dissipation, in moral turpitude, and actually planning 
future disobedience to her wishes, and revolts from her just 
and affectionate control. She who had borne me, nursed me, 
loved me better than herself, to be neglected and forgotten ! 
yet I was not so base so vile. I could not have anticipated 
the awful visitation ; I had seen her well the previous evening, 

had parted from her, had received the fond, maternal 
kiss, perhaps the last. There were no symptoms, no warning 
of this thunder-stroke which was so soon to fall and sever, 
perhaps, the ties of affection and love ; yet how could I reflect 
that I might have been home early, that I might have re- 
ceived the letter from the village apothecary, which I had just 
read, in time to have seen her, even to have received her last 
blessing, and to have closed those mild blue eyes which for 
years and years had beamed so tenderly on me ! 

I struck my forehead with my clenched fist I hid my 
burning cheek in the pillow tears relieved the agony of my 
heart. I rang the bell my servant came. I ordered him 
to get the horses instantly. He evidently thought me mad 
I think I was so. I had, never since I could remember, been 
so near a great calamity, such as the loss of a beloved parent 

a neglected parent now seemed to be : neglected indeed she 
was ; for while I knew that she was within my reach, 1 was 
careless as to visiting her ; her house was made unpleasant to 
me by her ungracious companion, and, as I have said before, 
my mother's temper itself had been unfavourably changed by 
the influence and irritation of that odious person ; yet now 
that there was a chance that she was gone, that I should never 
see her smile, never hear her voice again ! . . . . 

118 GILBERT GURNET. 

In this temper of mind, I need hardly say that I flew 
rather than rode from London. I was insensible to every 
object, to every feeling to every impression but the one 
and the idea that my poor mother was, perhaps, on the verge 
of another world, and that an increased rate of travelling might 
yet bring me to her fond embrace, made me urge the willing 
animal upon which I was mounted to the top of his speed. 
In less than an hour I reached Twickenham. As I entered 
the road leading to Teddington, a fatal sound struck my ear. 
I pulled up my horse and listened with a dread beyond 
imagination I heard it again. I turned sick my heart 
seemed to cease its pulsation ; it was too surely the death- 
bell tolling for my poor lost, lost mother ! 

The blow had fallen no more was there need of hastening 
to the house of mourning. Not all the prayers of all the 
world could give me now that which of all things most I 
craved that mother's blessing. No; mute was the tongue 
which had taught me truths I heeded not cold were those 
lips from which a parting kiss would have been some con- 
solation in the hour of separation ; I had lost them all all 
by my own heartless folly and dissipation by my addiction 
to the society of those against whom her affection and ex- 
perience had so often cautioned me ; while yet my sainted 
parent lay on the bed of death, I was revelling and gambling 
in the house of sin ! 

I dismounted, and bade the servant go on with the horses. 
I could scarcely stand, and I could not bear the man to see 
how little of a man his master was. He trotted forward, but 
I could not stir. I leaned against a tree by the road-side, 
and cried like a child. 

Ought I to be ashamed of this confession ? No ; the 
loss of such a parent was of itself calamity sufficient to un- 
nerve a son at my time of life, who knew the devotion of that 
parent to her child ; but the aggravating circumstances, my 
absence from her bed-side ; the reasons for that absence ; the 
thousand, thousand recollections which flashed across my mind 
I would gladly have died myself upon the very instant. 

I walked on ; and as I approached our little church, the 
sound of the bell, tolling louder and louder as I came nearer to 
it, cut to my very heart's core ; for its hollow clang had to 
my ear even less of sorrow in it, than of reproach ; it 

GILBKRT GURNEY. 119 

seemed to upbraid me for my absence, and chide me for delay. 
Oh ! how true it is that when those we have adored are gone 

when those lips we have loved are sealed in silence, and 
can no longer speak a pardon for our indiscretions or omissions 

we reproach ourselves with inattentions and unkindnesses, 
which, at the time we then fancied them committed, would 
perhaps have been matters of indifference or even jest. 

Overwhelmed by my feelings, I pursued my way to the 
well-known entrance of my poor mother's pretty once 
cheerful residence. 

I reached the gate the windows of the cottage were 
closed and my mother's favourite dog lay whining on the 
outside of the door it ran to me, and barked its welcome 
as I walked across the lawn. The door was opened, as I ap- 
proached it, by my mother's maid. I never shall forget the 
expression of mingled grief and censure which her counte- 
nance exhibited as her eye met mine ; the faithful woman's 
look conveyed at once to me the extent of my misconduct 
it told me I had been sought for asked for prayed for 
but I was absent. My conscience added a thousand pangs to 
those which that absence alone could not fail to inflict. 

1 passed into the drawing-room, where I found Miss Crab. 
I threw myself into the chair in which I had last seen my 
poor mother sitting, and, hiding my face in my hands, gave 
vent to my sorrow in another flood of tears. Miss Crab came 
to me and took my hand, and pressed it. I felt grateful for 
this show of kindness, for I was alone in the world and I 
wept the more. 

" I know," said Miss Crab, " that arguments are useless 

I will not attempt to check the course of natural affection. 
Your excellent mother, Gilbert, is gone ; but, sudden as was 
the summons, she died without pain, and departed repeating 
your name, arid blessing you." 

" And I not here," sobbed I, " to hear that blessing ! " 
" That was unfortunate," said my companion ; " you must 
have been o\it very late, because any time in the evening you 
could have come ; your poor mother, when she became con- 
scious of her danger, watched the hours, and every noise she 
heard fancied it announced your arrival." 

" And when " said I, " when ? " I could ask no 

more. 

i 4 

120 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Between four and five this morning," was the answer. 

The hour, then, at which I was unconsciously returning 
from the gaming-table, was the period at which the pure 
spirit of my exemplary parent was taking its flight ; at that 
moment Oh mercy, mercy on me ! my mother was in 
the last agony of death. 

Miss Crab saw the convulsive heavings of my breast ; the 
half-choked utterance of my words alarmed her, and, with a 
kindness foreign to her nature, she left me for a moment, and 
returned with a tumbler of water, of which she made me 
swallow a portion. 

" I am not surprised," said she, " to see you thus affected ; 
if you had been with her at the last, it would have been a 
source of consolation whenever the thought of her recurred ; 
but now you will never be able to forget that, anxious as she 
was to take a last farewell of you, you were out of the way ! 
However, what's done cannot be undone, and I suppose at 
your time of life pleasure is paramount." 

" Pleasure ! " said I ; " do, for Heaven's sake, spare me 
this reproachful language ; years ages of repentance will 
not compensate for this one fault." 

" I always told you, Gilbert," said the odious woman, 
" that you would be sorry some time or another, but not till 
it was too late ; I'm sure I would not say a word to aggravate 
the bitterness of your feelings just now, but I do think that if 
you had been more attentive to your poor mother's wishes, 
and been more with us, and gone on more steadily, she might 
have been here now " 

" Merciful Heavens, madam," exclaimed I, " do you wish 
to drive me raving mad ? Is it not enough that I have lost 
the being who bore me, nurtured me, and loved me better 
than herself? am I to be reproached not only for faults I 
admit, but for conduct for which she herself never blamed 
me ? " 

" Not in your presence, Gilbert," said Miss Crab, "and 
that was the misfortune ; she was too fond of you ; and when 
you were here, she could not endure to see you pained by her 
remarks ; it was when we were alone that her anxiety and 
sorrow evinced themselves, and preyed upon her spirits and 
constitution." 

" Do you mean," said I, angry, in the midst of my wretch- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 121 

edness, at such insinuations, " do you mean to infer that I 
have contributed by any conduct of mine to shorten the life of 
my excellent parent ? " 

" / mean no such thing," said Miss Crab ; " all I know is, 
that Dr. Baillie said last night that he considered the attack to 
be the result of mental agitation, and certainly she was very 
much excited yesterday by the discovery of your connection 
with that surveyor's clerk, who behaved so rudely to her great 
friends the Dods." 

" Surveyor's clerk !" said I, spurning with disgust the idea 
of entering into any explanation of the affair with my fiend- 
like companion at a moment when she was pronouncing the 
greatest calamity of my life the result of my own indiscretion 
and irregularities. What a heart this woman must have had ! 
I have often, on looking back upon these scenes, wondered how 
anything in female form could be so bitter and so malevolent. 

" I cannot talk," said I ; " I will not listen ; all my omis- 
sions and negligences are magnified in my own eyes ten 
thousand fold I see them all in the most vivid colours I 
need no friend, however kind, to point them out but even I 
cannot consent to admit the justice of the charges you so un- 
seasonably bring against me, or acknowledge myself an ac- 
cessary to my poor mother's death." 

I rose from the chair and paced the room in an agony of 
grief. " I suppose," said my friend, after a pause, " you 
will go up and see her, Gilbert ? you will be more com- 
posed afterwards." 

See ! see my beloved mother she whom I had left in 
health and happiness but a few hours before see her 
stretched in the sleep of death ? to be sure to be sure I 
would. It was all like a dream a dream from which, when 
I had beheld her dead, I must awake. I mechanically 
answered " Yes," and as mechanically followed my friend to 
the door of the bedchamber the door at which a thousand 
times my lost parent had parted from me with a blessing and 
a kiss. We entered the apartment ; every thing was as I had 
last seen it the flowers which my mother had gathered the 
day before, were blooming in their stands her work lay on 
the table all seemed as usual. My companion took my 
hand in one of hers, and led me to the bedside : with the 
other she drew back the curtain, and there I saw her my 

122 GILBERT GUKNEV. 

mother cold, pale, inanimate dead. The world's sup- 
plication could not have obtained me one single look from 
those closed eyes there was a smile on her lips, but they 
were mute for ever I had never seen death before the 
thousand feelings of awe, of devotion, of sorrow, of repentance, 
conflicting in my heart and mind, were too much for me ; and, 
overcome by the contest, I sank insensible on the bed. 

Oh ! that week that wretched, miserable week the 
hateful preparations for the funeral the absolute necessity 
for action ! perhaps it was better that such arrangements re- 
quired attention. For myself I resolved that the hour at 
which my mother's dear remains were removed from the house 
should be the last of my residence in it ; I could never have 
borne to see it after she was gone. This resolution produced 
new occupation. Miss Crab, whose fine feelings were never 
likely to interfere with her worldly interests, appeared disposed 
to stay where she was. My mother had made a will, in 
which she had left everything to me, excepting the lease and 
furniture of the cottage, which, if Miss Crab chose to continue 
resident there, were bequeathed to her for her life ; this be- 
quest, and one of a ring to Cuthbert, were the only two. In 
consequence of Miss Crab's announcement of her wish to re- 
main at the cottage, and of my determination never to disturb 
her quiet possession by even a solitary visit to the scene of my 
former happiness, it became necessary that certain inventories 
should be made, and other forms gone through, to carry the 
intentions of my poor mother into effect. In those arrange- 
ments I was aided and assisted by the worthy magistrate whom 
I have already mentioned, and who came down to Teddington 
the moment the melancholy intelligence reached him. 

He too accompanied me to the funeral. That day will never 
be forgotten by me ; till the moment I saw the black coffin 
borne from the door, I did not feel that I really had lost my 
beloved parent the link was not quite broken; but then 
then all my sorrow burst upon me, and I was scarcely con- 
scious of what afterwards occurred, until the drawing up of the 
ropes by which the body had been lowered into the grave, 
awakened me again to a sense of all my miseries. Years, years 
have rolled on, and yet that hour is still vividly fresh in my 
mind the smell of the soldered coffin is still in my nostrils 
the falling earth upon its lid still rings in my ears. 

GILBERT GUKNEY. 123 

CHAPTER VII. 

TURN we from this melancholy passage in my life suffice 
it to say, that I never passed through Teddington since the 
event with which the last portion of my memoranda concluded. 
Perhaps I need not add, that I equally avoided Miss Crab, who, 
(for the reader's satisfaction I, perhaps, might mention it,) in 
about a year after my mother's death, married one of the 
neighbouring apothecaries, who, she wrote me word to say, 
made her a very kind and comfortable husband. He had two 
daughters by a former wife a blonde and a brunette. Kitty, 
a tigress Jenny, a lamb. The one a black dose, the other a 
mild emulsion. How they made it out with their acidulated 
mother-in-law, I never troubled my head to inquire ; with the 
death of my exemplary parent my care and consideration about 
the Crabs and their connections departed. 

I wrote of course to my brother Cuthbert, at Calcutta, giving 
him information of the event that had occurred, and I took 
counsel of my worthy friend the justice of peace. But taking 
counsel and taking physic are different things his worship 
prescribed what I could not swallow, and therefore, although I 
took the advice earwise, I did not act upon it. He suggested 
my immediate departure for India in order to avail myself of 
the advantages which the great success of my nearest relative 
would secure me, and offered to introduce me to a Captain 
Pillau, or some such person, whose twelve hundred ton ship 
was a floating London Tavern, with cows in the launch, salad 
in the windows, fresh rolls three times a week, and champagne 
on Thursdays and Sundays but what were these to me ? I 
was in full possession of four hundred and eighty-seven 
pounds nineteen shillings and eleven pence per annum, besides 
the interest of four thousand pounds, three per cent, consols. 
Why should I send myself out in a huge packing-case, to look 
for a fortune which I should not be able to realise until my 
powers of enjoying it were gone ? Pale nankeens, with 
bilious-looking silk stockings, cotton shirts, and calico waist- 
coats, were, to my eyes, objects quite familiar in the north- 
western regions of the metropolis. Why should I waste my 
youth and manhood in Qui-hi-ing one half the day, and 

124 GILBERT GURNEY. 

salaaming the other,, with the glass at ninety-five in the shade, 
until I, at fifty, should look as if I were on the shady side of 
ninety-five ? No. With my pretensions and accomplish- 
ments for, like Daly, I did a little of everything nothing 
so well as he but still I thought I might make my way, 
and even achieve the great object of my ambition, Emma 
Haines, whose twenty thousand pounds would come in re- 
markably well. 

Emma was the point in which all my hopes and wishes 
centered, so soon as I had recovered from the shock which, 
especially under its peculiar circumstances, my mother's death 
had occasioned. The heart, robbed of what it has been cor- 
dially and warmly attached to, naturally yearns for some new 
object to claim and engross its affection. I certainly was de- 
votedly fond of Emma ; she was so graceful so lady-like 

so gentle so mild there was a meekness in her eye 
while the mind was reposing, which lighted into brightness 
and brilliancy the moment her feelings were excited or her 
genius roused ; she played she sang she drew she 
talked in short, she was a most bewitching person; and 
there was a swan-like swimmingness about her air and gait 
a sort of sylphy something that riveted the attention and 
charmed the heart. I do believe at first she encouraged my 
attentions out of pure good nature. She was older than I was ; 
or rather, perhaps, I should say, about my own age ; but as 
a girl of seventeen is a woman, when a man of seventeen is a 
boy, she saw how much I loved her before I was myself con- 
scious of it. 

Her mother had certainly incautious, I believe, through 
kindness encouraged my acquaintance ; and I used to be 
constantly at their house : my mother knew nothing of 
them ; but my young theatrical friend in Lincoln's Inn had 
carried me there, and so I went on, like a silly moth, buzzing 
about the vestal flame until at last my wings were thoroughly 
scorched, and then, as I told Daly on that horrible night, I 
avowed my feelings and was rejected not by Emma herself 

but by her mother, who, having written me a letter which 
would have driven a stoic mad, set off for South Wales, where, 
as the reader already knows, my lovely girl was immured, as 
I fancied against her will, at the period of my mother's 
decease. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 125 

I have already expressed my feelings with respect to Daly, 
whose acquaintance I had so strangely made ; and certainly 
for some time my sensitive regrets as to the employment of 
that evening, which I have felt it my duty to record at length, 
operated as a prevention to our future association however, 
as time wore on, I naturally, and perhaps justly, argued, that 
although the things we did, and the course we took that 
evening, were, seriously and morally speaking, indefensible; 
still, whatever might be the blame due to my companion for 
introducing me to such scenes, the melancholy fact of my 
mother's sudden attack and death could not be adduced in 
aggravation of his faults like myself, he was, of course, 
ignorant of the crisis of her fate ; and therefore, although 
powerfully connected in my imagination in the outset; as those 
sad circumstances were, I began to dismiss from my mind the 
combination which had made me so incalculably miserable 
at first, and, in proportion as this needless horror was dissi- 
pated, I began to exonerate my friend, and even seek his 
society ; for having and I was conscious of that confided 
to him the history of my Emma, I was most anxious, now 
that I felt more than ever the necessity of having something 
to love and esteem, to consult him upon the plan best to be 
adopted to carry my wishes into execution. 

I was quite delighted with his frankness, his friendship, 
and his zeal ; he told me what I believed, because I wished 
it true, that it was impossible to doubt, after what I had told 
him, that Emma was devoted to me that my expectations 
that she would write to me were extravagant ; that girls were 
extremely averse from corresponding; first, because they pro- 
perly considered such clandestine communications indelicate 
and undutiful ; and secondly, because very young men are 
apt to be vain of female confidence, and perhaps, might, in 
some unguarded moment, be induced to boast, or even show 
the letters of their unguarded mistresses. Daly was right. 
Emma was quite well enough aware of the ways of the world 
not to trust a giddy thoughtless fellow such as I then was ; 
but, nevertheless, she might be prevailed upon to grant me 
an interview, if I went to Tenby, and by some means not 

literary solicited it " Action, my dear friend," saidDaly, 

" action is the thing ; you may sigh and swear away four 
sides of foolscap most appropriate paper and what then? 

126 GILBERT GURNEY. 

you have done nothing but record sentiments which the cir- 
cumstances of a few years may entirely alter, and pledged 
yourself to a constancy which events may try, and even over- 
throw. No ; put yourself into the mail coach start for 
Tenby hide yourself up find out her house walk 
under her window, and whistle some favourite air ; if she 
loves, she will instantly recognise it she will be delighted 
to find you so active and zealous ; and, ten to one, if her 
respectable parent can be by any means disposed of, the very 
next evening will find you strolling by moonlight if there 
should be a moon or in the dark, if there should not 
either along the beach or on the cliff, breathing out all those de- 
licious protestations upon which lovers live, ' as larks on leeks.'" 

"Out!" said I, indignantly "do you suppose that it 
would be possible for Emma to ' come out,' as you call it, ' to 
take a walk ? ' Why, she is watched and guarded as if she 
were ' one chrysoli te ; ' her mother would as soon die as hear 
of her ' taking a walk ' by moonlight." 

" Never mind," said Daly ; " faint heart you know, &c. 
where there's a will there's a way ; and, if you choose to 
follow my advice, ' I'll back the caster in.' " 

" The deuce take that phrase," said I ; " no no ; Miss 
Haines is not to be so proceeded with ; and yet, I admit, I 
think a visit to Tenby would be advisable, because I might 
plead with her mother." 

" Plead ! no," said Daly, " practice before preaching 
any clay. All I can say is, if you are in need of an ally 
if you want an assistant a Leporello in short, I am your 
man my whole delight is doing good. I have no object 
but to serve my friends ; and if you think that I can be of 
the least use in securing you Miss Emma Haines and her 
twenty thousand pounds, you have only to say, ' Daly, do/ 
and Daly will." 

It was impossible for me not to feel grateful for this kindly 
burst of feeling, and the offer which my companion made ; 
and I confess it affected me more powerfully, because during 
the time at which my grief completely unmanned me, and 
absorbed all my faculties, he was, whenever he could obtain 
admittance to me, the most sympathising of human beings. 
He regretted, in such an amiable manner, the absurdity of his 
self-introduction to the cottage, and spoke of my mother's 

GILBERT GURNEY. 127 

manners and conversation in such terras of admiration and 
esteem, that I felt convinced, whatever might be his eccen- 
tricities, his heart was in the right place ; and, having esta- 
blished this opinion in my mind, I resolved to trust him with 
the management of my Tenby scheme, for the success of 
which he himself appeared most unaffectedly anxious. 

The conversations of my enthusiastic friend had very con- 
siderably elevated my hopes. He extracted from me every 
particular of Emma's person and character ; the one, after 
my report, he pronounced angelic, and the other perfect ; but 
I must say, in the midst of his warmth and energy, and in 
the full flow of exalted sentiment, he did come out, as the 
people say, with something that astonished me. 

" Are you sure now, Gurney," said he, " that she has this 
money ? because we hear of fortunes, and of hundreds of 
thousands of pounds, and so much a year, and such and such 
estates, and West Indian property, and Irish property, and 
all the rest of it, which, at last, turn out to be nothing 
sometimes worse than nothing." 

" 1 declare, Daly," replied I, " that I know nothing more 
of her fortune than common report affords ; and, moreover, 
that I consider it quite unimportant, whether it amount to the 
specified sum or not." 

" Have you never ascertained ? " asked he. 

" No," I replied ; " how should I ? could I ask Emma 
such a question, or her mother? " 

" No, my dear friend, certainly not," said Daly ; "but, if 
you will take the trouble to walk with me, to-morrow morn- 
ing, to Saint Paul's Churchyard turn to your right, through 
the court, across Carter Lane, thence through court number 
two, into Knight Rider Street you will see opposite to you, 
the Prerogative Office ; there, my dear friend, for the trifling 
and inconsiderable charge of one shilling, we will read the 
last will and testament of the late respectable father of your 
amiable Emma., and discover whether ' all is gold that glitters.'" 

" Is that to be done ? " said I. 

" To be sure," said Daly ; " it is the just prerogative of an 
Englishman to know what his neighbour does with his pro- 
perty, if he have any ; and, as I have already told you, that, 
in love, where there's a will there's a way, so you will see 
that, in law, where there's a will there's a way to find it out; 

128 GILBERT GURNEY. 

therefore, to-morrow we start le premier pas to the Pre- 
rogative Office ; and although it may cost us something, it is 
but a shilling, and anything like confirmation about other 
people's affairs is ' dirt cheap at the money/ " 

I really was not sufficiently well-informed as to the privi- 
leges of the people at that moment, to know that Daly was 
right in his statement ; and even when he told me the sim- 
plicity of the process by which all his doubts as to Emma's 
fortune could be set at rest, I felt a disinclination to adopt it ; 
for, really and truly, I had often before wished that she had 
had nothing, inasmuch as I fancied that, if it were not for the 
difference in our circumstances, I might not be personally 
objectionable to her mother. 

When the morning came, and I called upon Daly, according 
to appointment, to proceed to the Prerogative Office, of which 
he had talked, I felt as if I was about to do something under- 
handed and ungentlemanlike. Why should I pry into the 
private affairs of a family ? Why gratify my curiosity at the 
expense of the independence of feeling in which I used to 
glory ? For all these questions Daly found ready answers ; 
and, as usual, the ice of my prudery was thawed by the 
warmth of his manner, and the energy of his protestations ; 
and, accordingly, off we went searched the office paid 
our shilling got our little slip of paper showed it had 
down the volume which contained the desired document 
spread him upon a desk, and began to read the contents. 

I admit myself to have been nearly as ignorant of the pur- 
port of the last will and testament of Joseph William Haines, 
Esq., after I had perused it, as I was before I had seen it. 
Not so Daly. He was a bit of a lawyer, and he explained 
and expounded the whole mystery of the affair, and informed 
me that the ie upshot " of the matter was most satisfactory, 
inasmuch as it appeared that twenty thousand pounds were 
irrevocably and unconditionally Emma's, but if her mother 
married again that sum was to be doubled ; and the mother's 
jointure, which was two thousand five hundred pounds a-year, 
was to be reduced one half, and, in addition to the rest, revert 
to her daughter at her death. The estates, themselves, upon 
which the jointure was a charge, were also to become Emma's 
after the decease of her parent, if she married with her con- 
sent, during her lifetime ; but if not, they were to be otherwise 

GILBERT GURNEY. 12f) 

disposed of, with a variety of contingencies and consequences 
Hebraically obscure to my comprehension." 

" I see the thing in a moment," said Daly. " Come along 
the affair is settled we shall make ourselves extremely 
comfortable " 

" We !" said I. " How do you mean ?" 

" Thus," said Daly ; " the mother has two thousand five 
hundred a-year, untouchable by fate, so long as she lives a 
widow; the daughter's twenty thousand is equally secure. But 
you perceive, that if the mother marries, the daughter's for- 
tune is to be doubled, and the widow's jointure to be diminished 
by half. Mark me I have a strong disposition for settling 

twelve hundred and fifty pounds a year will do for me. I'll 
marry the mother, which will produce a splendid increase of 
fortune to the daughter, with whom you shall afterwards have 
the felicity of eloping, if you think proper.; or, if not, receive 
her hand with the full and entire sanction of her respectable 
father-in-law, your most obedient humble servant, to command." 

" Visions ! visions ! " said I. " Mrs. Haines will never 
marry again." 

" Is that the doubt ? ". said Daly ; " if that be all, let not 
that embarrass you." 

" But would you ? " said I, staring with amazement 

" Would I ! " exclaimed he ; " trust me for that ; a well- 
jointured widow against the world for settling with. It's 
a fine sight, Gurney quite refreshing, as the cocknies say, 
to see the comfortable ease and independence of a dowager 
the lozenged panels of the luxurious carriage the fat black 
nags, with their long tails and kicking-straps, the curly-wigged 
coachman with his three-cornered hat on his head, and a 
bouncing bouquet stuck in his button-hole." 

" But," said I, " Mrs Haines is not likely to " 

" Leave me alone for that," interrupted my voluble friend. 
" If you think the scheme a good one, I am your man." 

"And would you," said I, " as I was just going to ask 

would you marry a woman so much older than yourself ? " 
" Age is now like air, my dear fellow," said Daly ; " felt by 

all, but seen by none. I'll marry her take her down to 
Dullmusty Hall, or whatever the name of her place may be 
twaddle about with her for a month, in a broad-brimmed straw 
hat, with a spud in my hand do the domestic for the first 

K 

130 GILBERT GURNET. 

four weeks then put dowwy out to grass at one of her own 
farms allow her three hundred a-year out of her own 
jointure, and expend the residuum in the purchase of cross- 
bows, pop-guns, magic-lanterns, fire-balloons, and sky- 
rockets." 

" A profitable outlay for yourself," said I, " and a pleasing 
prospect for Mrs. Haines." 

" Rely upon it, the scheme is practicable," said Daly ; 
" however, we may confer upon it, and consider ; this evening 
you are engaged at Lady Wolverhampton's, where, I flatter 
myself, you will be pleased. She gives a fete after a new 
fashion live fish in the drawing-room, and a cow on the 
staircase fact fact, my dear Gurney ; and if I don't con- 
trive to make some fun, my name is not Daly." 

" Remember the Dods," said I, " recollect I will not 
consent to be made a party to any more practical jokes." 

" But," said Daly, " Lady Wolverhampton's parties are 
nothing but practical jokes themselves. Her fete of to-night 
is a masquerade at least to as many people as like to assume 
characters so that a vast many respectable persons who 
don't choose to go to her house without concealment, will be 
there incog., much to their hearts' delight. I mean to make 
my appearance, in the early part of the evening, as a Jew- 
boy, selling macaroon cakes come in with my basket full of 
tempting delicacies, which the eager company will snatch 
away in order to devour, like so many dragons mum ! 
there's fun in that, depend on't." 

" The fun of paying for the cakes, and seeing other people 
eat them," said I. 

" True " replied Daly ; " but the results the after- 
wards, as I say. Macaroon cakes, ordinarily manufactured, 
would afford no sport. My man, under proper medical 
superintendence, sprinkles in with his sugar certain powders 
of a peculiar quality, which, however salutary taken now and 
then, are not usually administered in a ball room. You'll see 
a scattering ! poor devils ! the gormandisers will be 
nicely served the endemic of a Margate hoy will be but a 
trifle to the indisposition of her ladyship's visitors first one 
ill, then another ' si sick omnes.' " 

" My dear Daly," said I, in a dissuasive tone 

" Soyez tranquille, man chcr Gilbert," interrupted Daly ; 

GILBERT GURNEY. 131 

11 there's nothing like fun. What else made the effect in 
Berners Street ? I am the man / did it ; sent a lord 
mayor in state to release impressed seamen philosophers 
and sages to look at children with two heads a-piece piano 
fortes by dozens, and coal waggons by scores two thousand 
five hundred raspberry tarts from half a hundred pastry- 
cooks a squad of surgeons a battalion of physicians, and 
a legion of apothecaries lovers to see sweethearts, ladies to 
find lovers upholsterers to furnish houses, and architects to 
build them gigs, dog-carts, and glass-coaches enough to 
convey half the freeholders of Middlesex to Brentford. Nay, 
I despatched even royalty itself on an errand to a respectable 
widow lady, whose concourse of visitors, by my special in- 
vitation, choked up the great avenues of London, and found 
employment for half the police of the metropolis." 

" Is it possible that you " 

" I," said Daly, triumphantly; "copy the joke, and it 
ceases to be one ; any fool can imitate an example once set ; 
but for originality of thought and design, I do think that was 
perfect. However, to-night shall transcend even that effort, 
and to-morrow we start for Tenby." 

" Let me ask you," said I, '" now if you can be serious 
have you really any intention as to Mrs. Haines? be- 
cause " 

" Serious, to be sure," said Daly ; " I never joke but 

when I am in earnest like a Frenchman, who is never grave 
but when he is dancing. I think my arrangement capital, 
and so will you. We will go to Tenby together ; or, if you 
prefer it, I will start alone, and appear to know no more of 
you, than one of the cads of the thimble-rig knows of the 
pea-holder. I will make my play, and, the moment I am in 
possession, make signals for you eh? We'll settle all that 
in the course of the forenoon ; but, for the present, let us 
return to the habitable part of town, and make our mas- 
querading preparations for the soiree at Wolverhampton 
House." 

There was something about Daly that I cannot describe ; 
but he had only to suggest, and I implicitly obeyed. I had 
never ventured to inquire as to his means or fortune ; and al- 
though the unbroken and unmitigated silence he had observed 
as to our joint winnings on the odious night at the gaming- 
H. 2 

132 GILBERT GURNEY. 

house, raised a suspicion in my mind that he was not rolling 
in riches, as they say, I thought that his abstinence from any 
allusion to that adventure arose very probably from a delicate 
disinclination to awaken in my mind the recollections inse- 
parable from the occurrences of that evening. As we walked 
along the Strand, Daly did, however, what he had never yet 
done invited me to dine with him at his lodgings. " Let 
us," said he, " dine late, and we can go together to the Wol- 
verhampton affair you must put up with what you can get 
I live small, according to my means ; but after I have 
married my duck in weeds, the amiable mother of your angelic 
Emma, I will give you emblematic of our affection and 
constancy turtle, whenever you dutifully come and see us." 

I, of course, could not object to dine with my friend ; and 
accordingly settled the engagement for seven, and we parted 
after a somewhat protracted walk, " to meet again." 

I confess, the readiness with which he fell into my views, 
and the quickness with which he seized the abstruse points of 
the testamentary document of the late respected head of the 
Haineses, mixed with the sudden resolution which he appeared 
to have formed of marrying the dowager, gave me an idea 
that, although there was something like method in it, madness 
was the particular and reigning malady under which poor Daly 
laboured ! yet there was so much plausibility in his manner, 
and so much real friendship in his professions, that I could 
not doubt his earnestness and good-will towards me. 

At or about seven, therefore, I proceeded to his lodgings, 
where I found covers for three laid in his sole sitting-room, 
into which his bed-room opened ; in which latter apartment 
he was occupied, when I reached the scene of action, dressing. 
Having heard my arrival, he begged pardon, from the next 
room, for being so late at his toilette, and told me to amuse 
myself with the evening newspaper until he should have com- 
pleted it. I implicitly obeyed the injunctions of my yet 
invisible friend, who shortly after joined me, finished for the 
evening, with the exception of his neckcloth, the tying on of 
which he reserved for the last moment, lest the indulgence of 
home feelings might in any way disturb the symmetrical 
arrangement of his favourite folds. Well do I remember the 
nervous anxiety with which men, in those days, studied the 
art of tying the cravat ; and I recollect a friend of mine who 

GILBERT GURNEY. 133 

had provided himself with no less than four to experimentalise 
upon, who spoiled them all in the putting on, and was actually 
obliged to wait at an inn on the Portsmouth road, in the 
neighbourhood of the house to which he was going, when 
dressed, while his servant travelled to town in a post-chaise 
and four, and returned with a fresh supply. 

" I expect a man to meet you," said Daly, " who will go 
with us to Lady Wolverhampton's where you know I have 
the entree. I am her pet-plaything a sort of Jonkanoo 
general for her dignity balls and you will see me in my 
element there. As Dr. Cauliflower, the putty -headed physician, 
says, I ought always to have my jacket ready to tumble in 
thank my stars, Gurney, I can tumble without one I admit 
I lead my Dow Wolf a deuce of a life, but she loves me. I 
catch lions for her which is a prodigious merit in her eyes." 

" Catch lions !" said I, staring like a fool. 

" Exactly," replied Daly. " One of them feeds here to-day 
a Count Stickinmeyer, a very distinguished person in his 
way." 

" And what way is that ? " said I. 

" Why, faith, I hardly know," said Daly ; " he has had one 
empress and two queens desperately in love with him has 
killed divers and sundry of his friends in duels, and by these 
traits endearing to the female heart has worked his name 
into a glorious notoriety. In these warlike times, a foreigner, 
not an emigre, is a great catch, and he is here on some diplo- 
matic business ; ergo, the Dow Wolf would have him. I 
have seen a good deal of. him during his stay here ; and so I 
am to be the leader of the bear. He has one peculiarity 
he cannot speak six words of English but he talks it as 
fluently as either of us ; you'll see how, in a moment after he 
arrives ; upon the principle of living from hand to mouth, 
he makes his words as he wants them ; the consequence is, a 
jargon of the most extraordinary character, which he firmly 
believes to be English ; and which, more extraordinary still, 
answers every purpose of the most refined study of our em- 
barrassing language." 

Scarcely had Daly finished his description of his friend, 
when he arrived ; and having introduced him to me, Daly 
proceeded to order dinner forthwith. 
K 3 

134 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Well, my dear count," said Daly, " what news ? any 
more conquests ? " 

The moment I had time to contemplate the count's features, 
I recognised, with no pleasurable feelings, one of the faces 
which, some months before, had flitted before my half-seeing, 
double-seeing eyes at the gaming-house. This did not preju- 
dice me much in his favour, I admit. 

" No news," said the count ; " none de unneusability of 
de week is quite observationable dat is, by de stoppupishness 
of de communications from de controversialness of de conti- 
nental postability." 

Daly looked at me after this curious specimen of our native 
language, aiding the expressiveness of his countenance by a 
wink I acknowledged the attention by a slight nod, appre- 
hensive lest the count should observe his by-play, and add 
him to the number of victims who, according to his account, 
had suffered by his sword, like so many larks on a spit 
however, the count's vanity as a linguist of the proficiency he 
had made in our language, secured him, as I afterwards found, 
from any chance of discovery. 

" You have been some time in England ? " said I, en- 
quiringly. 

fc Ah, ah," said the count, " so you guess from de perfecti- 
bility of my tongs ; I declare, I haf qvite lost my own tongs 
in de acquisitionness of Angleish, and my coutrymen to whom 
I give rencounterance in de assemblations stare to find what a 
impetuousness of perfectation I have to spike a foreign tong, 
so as to be always miscomprehended for natifs." 

" I declare," said Daly, " I should have fancied, if not an 
Englishman, that you had spent the greatest part of your life 
amongst us." 

" You are too flattersome, Dally," replied the count ; 
" some people haf an aptiverousness to de possession of tongs 
far excellecising ; others whose condensability of faculty is 
diversified into a ramificationness of stoddy to generalise, 
what you call de universality of accomplicesment." 

" Clearly," said Daly. 

" Yes," said the count, " a sort of pollyglottability which 
is foreign to de desiration of dose who have some diversa- 
tionising of mind regardful to objects quite antipodistical to 
de oders." 

GILBERT GURNEY. 135 

I confess, I was very much relieved from the difficulty I 
had of preserving my gravity, by the appearance of Daly's 
servant with the dinner which, in the first instance, con- 
sisted of two dishes, one larger than the other, which were 
put down ; Daly seating himself on one side of the table, and 
placing us at either end of it. The covers removed, we found 
before us a remarkably delicate-looking roasted leg of lamb in 
the larger dish, and some exquisitely verdant spinach in the 
other. 

"' What, no fish, Redmond ? " said Daly to his servant. 

" No, sir," said the man. 

" Well," said Daly, " no matter I told you, Gurney, you 
must take what you could get and as for Stickenmeyer, he 
is used to my way of living, so I make no apology." 

" Apology," said the count, " de simplitude of pranda- 
tioness, is most favourised by me both in pint of pallatati- 
bility and of salubriment de stomach of de beings of 
humanity is not conformable to de digestation of de objects, 
to which admissiveness is exercised at great dinings." 

The count's principle was quite in accordance with my own, 
and we certainly made sad havoc with our " innocent lamb ;" 
the wine circulated freely, and we were all in good spirits. 
The dishes were removed, and a second dish, attended as 
before by a smaller one, made its appearance. Redmond with 
his usual dexterity raised the covers, when my astonished eyes 
beheld a boiled leg of lamb in one dish, and a fresh supply of 
spinach in the other. 

Daly's astonishment, however, did not seem to be excited ; 
for he inquired if we would take some boiled lamb, with as 
much composure as if he had expected the dish, which it 
seemed quite clear to me he did not. The sight, however, 
reminded me of a circumstance which occurred to me once in 
the west of England, at a house where I paid an unexpected 
visit, and where as one always is in the west of England 
I was kindly and hospitably received. The family was a 
large one, and I the only stranger. I arrived within a few 
minutes of dinner, was ushered to my room, hurried my 
dressing, and was speedily seated at table. 

The soup was served. It was a remarkably nice sort of 
broth, made of veal, with rice and vegetables I applauded 
K 4 

136 GILBERT GURNEY. 

it much ; at the bottom of the table was a roast loin 
of veal ; at the top, half a calf's head ; there were four 
entrees, yet uncovered. " What will you eat, Gurney ?" said 
the master of the house ; " some of my dish or Maria's ? " 
I doubted. " Hand round the entrees," said the lady ; two 
were forthwith put in motion one dish contained veal 
patties, and the other some veal collops I declined both, 
for I hated veal ; next came the other two one a calf's 
brains, and the other a calf's tongue I declined those, and 
took some of the joint, determining to wait for the second 
course. 

I saw, however, dish after dish vanish, and I yet remained 
unsatisfied ; when my fair hostess, with one of her sweetest 
smiles, said, " We have no second course for you, Mr. Gurney; 
the fact is, we killed a calf the day before yesterday, and we 
are such prudent managers that we make a point of eating it 
up while it is good, and nice, and fresh, before we begin upon 
anything else." Having had this experience, and having 
heard before dinner that Daly wished particularly to see "the 
butcher," I concluded that my eccentric host in London, like 
my more economical one in the country, had purchased a lamb 
" for fun," and was now employing us to eat it up, while it 
was " good, and nice, and fresh." 

Daly seemed to enjoy the boiled leg quite as much as he 
had enjoyed the roast one : and when he had satisfied his 
appetite, he desired Redmond to take it away, " and if there 
was any second course, to bring it." " Come," thought I, 
" unlike my precedent of the veal, we are to have a second 
course to-day, and all will be well." 

In a few minutes, Redmond made his appearance with an- 
other couple of dishes ; one, as usual, large ; the other small ; 
they, like their predecessors, were put down and the covers 
removed, when, to my utter astonishment, I beheld a third leg 
of lamb and spinach, the only variation consisting in the fact 
that the lamb was roasted, like the first. I could not help ex- 
claiming, on the appearance of this, because it put an end to 
my speculation of Daly's purchase, seeing that no lamb ex- 
cept, indeed, occasionally as a freak of nature has three 
legs ; but Daly did not seem either surprised or discomposed 
at the exhibition, and the count which surprised me most 
seemed equally at his ease with Daly. 

GILBERT GUHNEY. 137 

" Perhaps you don't like lamb/' said mine host, " shall I 
send you some ? " 

" If you please," said I, resolved, if it were done in fun 

for it is impossible to ascertain when a practial joker is 
serious to keep up my good temper ; and as it seemed a 
conceded point, on the part of both my companions, that no- 
thing more was to be served, I washed down the third division 
of innocence with some remarkably good Champagne. 

To this third edition of lamb, succeeded three gooseberry 
tarts all nearly of equal size, the dishes alone differing in 
shape and fashion ; and when these were discussed, three de- 
tachments of cheese, and three plates of radishes, there was 
something quaint and odd in the evident affection for the tri- 
une number, which Daly exhibited. However, as we were 
three at table, I imagined he had prepared his dinner on the 
principle of every man his own dish, something like the 
proud Welsh boy at school, who, hearing that an English duke 
employed six men cooks, during the period that he kept open 
house, or rather open castle, in the north, sneered at the al- 
leged magnificence. " My father does better than that," said 
Griffith ap Jones ; " at our very last party before I left Cmy- 
drdlmnynddr, we had twenty-four men cooks all employed in 
dressing the supper " and this would have gone down easily, 
and Griffith ap Jones would have established his paternal 
magnificence for ever, had not a " Daly of his day " discovered 
the real state of the case, and announced to his school-fellows, 
that although the Welshman had spoken truly, the company 
at the supper to which he alluded, consisted of twenty-four 
of his near relations, and that every man toasted his own 
cheese ! 

I noticed the continued imperturbability of mine host's 
countenance, and an occasional look passing between him and 
the count convinced me that the circumstance was not acci- 
dental ; but while Redmond, the servant, was still in the room, 
I did not like to make any inquiry into the particulars. 

" Dis claret," said the count, li is butiful dere is a re- 
freshiness in de coolth of him, which is gracious to the mouse 

Lafitte, I considere." 

" The wine," said Daly, " is good enough in its way 
but, Gurney, what did you think of the dinner ? did it 
puzzle you ? " 

138 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Why," said I, " it did puzzle me a little, I suppose you 
like lamb ? " 

" Not I," said Daly, " but the count knows the truth so 
shall you. I have lost a good deal of money lately with very 
little to lose from ; and although my large creditors are full of 
faith, the lesser ones are suspicious of my resources ; I 
therefore deal with many folks, each in a small way, and the 
tavern-keeper from whom 1 always get my little dinners at 
home, suggested that, as I was a good deal in arrear, he should 
be obliged to confine his confidence in me to the extent of one 
dish per diem, when I wanted it. Now, one dish not being 
sufficient for three persons, I immediately entered into a simi- 
lar treaty with two other tavern-keepers in the neighbourhood, 
who are equally willing to trust me to a similar amount they 
were all three put in requisition to-day ; and as legs of lamb, 
roast or boiled, are just now in season, each of the fellows 
sent me the popular dish ; thinking, I suppose, that as I was 
to have but one, I ought to have, as well as a fashionable, a 
somewhat substantial one." 

A new light burst in upon me ; and although it was impos- 
sible not to join in the laugh in which mine host and his friend 
were indulging, the fact which had been elicited accounted to 
me for the readiness with which Daly had enlisted in my ser- 
vice in the Tenby expedition, and his willingness to undertake 
the widow, at half price, whose reduced jointure would afford 
him a very snug retirement. During the time we remained 
drinking our wine, several circumstances occurred to induce 
me to believe that the count's diplomatic character at our court 
was, at best, but an equivocal one ; and others in connection 
with this, led me, in some degree, to regret that I had per- 
mitted Daly's agreeable manners to give him the ascendancy 
over me which I felt conscious he possessed, and to extract 
from me the secret of my attachment to Emma. I anticipated 
the mischief which his introduction into her family might 
eventually produce, when it should be known that it was at 
my suggestion he presented himself there ; and, moreover, I 
felt that it would be extremely unfair in me to aid and abet an 
alliance between him and the widow, for entering into which, 
he could have none but interested views, the realisation of 
which would probably entail upon the elder lady a roue hus- 
band, and upon the younger one, a giddy father-in-law. But 

GILBERT GURNEY. 139 

what was to be done ? The plan had been mentioned ; we had 
discussed it during the early part of the day ; the horses, I 
knew, were ordered, or, at least, a place in the coach was taken ; 
and if I hesitated or interposed at this period, so shortly before 
the opening of the campaign, and so soon after the disclosure 
of the real state of mine host's finances, I should in all pro- 
bability have been handed over to the tender mercies of the 
noble count, who before noon the next day would have ex- 
hibited, at my personal expense, " the perfectability of his 
completiveness in the art of pistolisation." 

It was, I admit, with no little uneasiness that I heard Daly 
give directions to Redmond to have all his luggage ready for 
in early start in the morning ; yet how could I check the im- 
pulse of a genuine and generous friendship ? his want of 
wealth arose from no fault of his, or even if it did, it might 
esult from the faults of liberality, and a carelessness of worldly 
iffairs ; I therefore said nothing, although I would have given 
le world to delay his departure for a day or two. 

It was growing late, when Daly suggested the necessity of 
preparing for action, the count was to appear in a splendid 
military uniform, upon which glittered several decorations, 
and in which he was to attire himself after Daly had finished 
his neckcloth, which, in the latter part of the evening, was to 
adorn his proper person. I was accommodated with a fancy 
domino, and thus we were to proceed to Wolverhampton 
House, where, as I understood, Daly had been before dinner, 
aiding and assisting the countess in various proceedings for the 
evening's display. 

I concluded, after I received this intelligence, that he had 
abandoned his design of physicking her ladyship's friends with 
his macaroon cakes ; and when he sallied forth from the ad- 
joining apartment, in a sort of foreign dress, extremely well 
disguised, I imagined him prepared to enchant the misses as a 
minstrel, and win their willing ears with melodies such as he 
was fully capable of warbling an idea which was strength- 
ened when Redmond gave him, carefully enveloped in green 
baize, what I fondly imagined to be a guitar. 

The count, who looked very magnificently, wore no mask, 
but trusted to his natural personal appearance to make his 
way, and, although somewhat upon too large a scale for a lady- 
killer, I fancied him a likely enough man to delight the dow- 

140 GILBERT GCRXEY. 

agers. It was considerably past twelve before we were fairly 
under way ; we were each armed with a ticket of admission, 
which Daly informed me her ladyship very much preferred to 
any other mode of invitation, upon such an occasion as that 
of to-night the great merit of a masquerade being the mys- 
tery, which would of course be utterly destroyed if the guests 
were compelled to show themselves in order to obtain the 
entree. Redmond, I observed, put into the coach two or three 
bundles, which I presumed contained changes of dress for his 
volatile versatile master ; and thus buttoned up, away we drove 
to the temple of gaiety, of beauty, and fashion. 

When we approached the mansion, a string of carriages 
checked our advance, noise and confusion were heard on 
every side the lashing of coachmen's whips the loud 
bawling of constables and Bow Street officers the laughs of 
the congregated groups, as some grotesque character stepped 
across the trottoir into the house, the distant clang of cymbals, 
and the beat of drums, which came wafted on the air from her 
ladyship's hall, all combined to whet the appetite for action, 
and it seemed an hour before we found our worthy Xo. -2-25 
opposite the entrance to the mad scene of brilliancy and fun. 
Out I stepped I created no visible sensation amongst the 
throng die Baron's red morocco boots, and gold-seamed 
pantaloons, his much embroidered jacket, and his dangling 
crosses, seemed to excite a reverential awe ; but when Daly 
stepped forth with his beard and bundle, which much to my 
horror developed itself, not, as I expected, in the shape of a 
guitar, but in the more dreaded form of a basket full of 
" macaroon cakes," the surrounding crowd cried out, " Moses, 
give us a cake," "I say, Mosey," and indeed diverted them- 
selves so much at his expense, that I almost wondered he did 
net favour them with a taste of his stock. 

If the confusion outside the house were great, inconceivably 
greater was that within little did I then suspect the immediate 
causeof it. Dalyhad told me(Ithought as a joke)that our noble 
hostess proposed having a cow deposited in a sort of arbour at 
the top of the first flight of stairs, in which one of the sweetest 
girls that ever lived was to be discovered, in the costume of a 
milkmaid, supposed to be employed in her rustic vocation, 
while the company were to be perpetually refreshed with 
syllabubs, imaginatively concocted from the produce of her toil. 

GILBERT GCRXET. 141 

When we reached the hal], we might as well have had no 
tickets ; we found all the servants and several of the male 
visitors engaged in one general action screams above were 
responded to by shouts below, in the midst of which I observed 
two butchers, in their ordinary costume, assiduously employed 
in the divided task of coaxing and kicking a huge bullock 
down the flight of stairs, at the top of which was the dairy- 
maid's bower the more they roared, the more they coaxed, 
and the more they kicked, the less would the bullock stir, and 
it was not until the greatest skill, judgment, and magnanimity 
had been displayed, that the vast monster was got out of the 
street-door ; when, as if angry at being expelled a scene where 
everything else was in character, and therefore out of it, he 
made a sudden dash amongst the horses and carriages, to the 
infinite peril of panes, panels, poles, perches, and platforms. 

" Isn't that good fun ? " said Daly to me : " Now come 
along this is the time for the macaroons ' the labour we 
delight in physics pain ; ' see watch and mark the 
sequel." 

I followed my friend up the staircase, the count having 
already fallen into conversation with a very beautiful but im- 
mense lady, to whom I was afterwards introduced, and had 
much occasion to admire and pity ; we proceeded to the 
drawing-room, where a circle was formed round Lady Wol- 
verhampton, who was expatiating in no measured terms upon 
the infamous conduct of the man who had promised to send 
her a nice elegant lady-like cow to stand Hermione-like in the 
glass-case by the side of the lovely milk-maid, but who, in- 
stead, had with great labour and difficulty squeezed a huge 
overfed bullock into the place. The moment I heard the dear 
countess telling her story, a thought flashed across me the 
butcher, to see whom Daly had been so anxious before dinner, 
was no doubt the traitorous cause of the mishap under the 
malign influence of the practical joker. 

The scene was beautiful and gay ; the variety of masks 
the diversity of costume the boisterous mirth of the Moll 
Flaggons, and Irish haymakers, flirting with delicate die-away 
nuns and aristocratic flower girls fat monks, dancing with 
Swiss peasants knights in armour, lounging on sofas with 
Indian queens Doctor Ollapod, in close conversation with 
Alexander the Great and Caleb Quotem, seriously arguing a 

142 GILBERT GUKNEY. 

point of etiquette with Henry the Fourth of France. It was 
all exceedingly fascinating and intoxicating ; and, the bull 
having been disposed of, harmony was restored disturbed 
only by a shrill cry of " macaroons cakes cakes ma- 
caroons who'll buy ? who'll buy ? " I saw the fiend of 
fun approach. In an instant, as he had anticipated, an attack 
was made upon his basket and every body who wore a 
mask, in which eating was practicable, began consuming the 
fruits of their impetuosity. I dreaded the consequences, not 
only to the sufferers, but to Daly himself, who, if discovered, 
would of course be subject to all the serious penalties which 
such a trick must naturally entail upon him. Scarcely, how- 
ever, had the distribution taken place, (long before the sicken- 
ing effects could show themselves,) when I felt a sudden twitch 
at my elbow I looked round, and saw a Spanish grandee 
close at my side. I was startled ! I had never visited a 
masquerade before. " Who are you ? " said I. " Ah 1 the 
cakes are gone," whispered the mask ; " so is the basket and 
cloak I'm here : " it was of course Daly. " Come with 
roe," said he; " I will introduce you to Lady Wolverhampton; 
it is quite prudent to do so. She will see my dress and 
yours, and then she can't suspect either of us of being the 
macaroon cake-seller; take care and ingratiate yourself 
make yourself amiable she's as hospitable as an Arab, and 
not very unlike one hem ! " I followed him, and found 
myself in a moment at the side of the countess. 

" Countess," said he 

' ' Who are you ? " said her ladyship. 

" Mufti," whispered Daly. 

" What, so smart, Daly ! " said she : (Mufti being the mystic 
word by which he made himself known) " a grandee ? " 

" Yes," said Daly. " This is my friend Gurney, of whom I 
have spoken agreeable creature sings like a syren talks 
like a magpie quite delightful." 

" And I am delighted to make his acquaintance," said her 
ladyship 

I bowed. 

" Unmask for a moment," said Daly ; " let the countess 
see the 'human face divine,' else when her ladyship invites 
you to meet me at dinner here next Tuesday week, at seven 
o'clock, she may perhaps be disappointed." 

GILBERT GURNEY. 143 

" Don't mind him, Mr. Gurney," said her ladyship ; " I 
shall be very glad to see you whenever you will do me the 
kindness to call. But, Daly, now tell me had you no hand 
in the business of the bullock ? " 

" Bullock !" said Daly. " I ! My dear lady." 

Hereabouts, the room began to thin the dancers seemed 
particularly anxious to get fresh air several persons were 
seen evidently much disordered, and the whole corps appeared 
in confusion. 

" What's the matter now ?" said Lady Wolverhampton. 

" I don't know, my dear countess," said a very respectable 
old body, with a turban on her head ; " but Kate and Fanny 
are both taken unaccountably ill, and so is Lieutenant Griggs 
of the Life Guards, who was dancing with one of them ; and 
as for poor Lady Elizabeth Grogan, I believe she is dying." 

A new confusion here arose the macaroons were evidently 
disagreeing with the company ; however, only a small portion 
had been poisoned, and, to my delight, I found that although 
a good many of both sexes were considerably damaged by their 
own anxiety to eat the things, there was still a magnificent 
crowd to carry on the affairs of the evening. In the midst of 
the embarras, which to the hostess was of course inexplicable, 
the arrival of a prince of the blood royal, who came unmasked, 
gave a new zest to the scene, and the delight which the countess 
experienced at his appearance rendered her wholly insensible 
to the indisposition of her numerous guests, who were labour- 
ing under the effects of her pet's performances. 

Almost immediately after the countess had entered into 
conversation with his royal highness, who had seated himself 
on an ottoman in a small circular room, and while he was 
graciously complimenting the beauty of the scene, the candles 
by which it was lighted began almost simultaneously to per- 
form of themselves an operation called " guttering down," and 
then go out, with a sort of unsatisfactory splash of wax. The 
result was, a nearly total eclipse, attended by an extremely 
unpleasant smell. Poor Lady Wolverhampton, who confided 
in Daly, called him to her, and, mourning this new calamity, 
begged him to order fresh lights, which, with an air of sub- 
servient activity, he immediately did ; but as he went, he 
whispered me to suggest to her ladyship the expediency of 
burning some sort of perfume in the room. The idea was 

144 GILBERT GURNET. 

instantly adopted by her ladyship, who, directing me to a 
beautiful filigree box which lay on one of the tables, requested 
me to put three or four of the pastilles, which it contained, 
into a burner on the chimney-piece. I obeyed her ladyship's 
orders, and the instant I set light to them they exploded, and 
continued flashing and snapping and blazing till they were 
entirely burned out, being neither more nor less than four 
" devils " or " wild-fires," such as we were in the habit of 
making at school, and which, looking precisely like pastilles, 
some mischievous elf had deposited there instead of the real 
article. The result was, considerable alarm an abominable 
smell, and a smoke so thick that his royal highness was seized 
with a desperate fit of coughing, and all the windows were 
thrown open to dissipate the obscurity. 

The moment the devils took fire, I was convinced that Daly 
was the author of this affair, as well as of all the others that 
he had made the exchange, and set me upon making the pro- 
position in order to bring his scheme into play. However, 
the rooms were refreshed new candles were brought, things 
resumed their wonted gaiety, and Daly made his re-ap- 
pearance. 

I ought, perhaps, here to observe, that along the principal 
drawing room, a canal, some two or three feet deep, had been 
constructed, with an embankment of moss, and coral, and 
shells, in which the much talked-of fish were destined to dis- 
port themselves ; but by the time we got there, their swim- 
ming had entirely ceased Daly had dosed them with Coculus 
Indicus just before he left the house in the afternoon, and 
when we arrived at night they were all floating on their backs, 
dead drunk from the effects of the deleterious drug. 

It was now nearly two; and I strange to say felt very 
much disposed for supper. I asked my Mentor whether such 
a meal was probable. 

" Supper!" said Daly ; " to be sure it is the point of the 
epigram; the sugar after the physic all regular sit down; hot 
soups snug flirtations and fun! none of your stand-up ab- 
surdities, tables against the wall, covered with cold negus and 
warm ice ; where men, women, and children take perpendicular 
refreshment, like so many horses with their noses in the manger 
no ! trust to me we shall unmask at supper. I'll in- 
troduce you to something very charming ; only do me the 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 145 

favour not to forget Emma, and the twenty thousand pounds 
eh?" 

One of the bands here struck up, " the Roast Beef of Old 
England," as a signal that the much desired banquet was 
ready ; and accordingly every eye sparkled, every heart beat, 
every body rushed forward, regardless of order, decorum, or 
decency, in the grand attack upon the countess's refection. 
The countess, however, having made proper arrangements, 
and knowing the eagerness of the best- bred people upon this 
particular subject, had desired her house-steward to complete 
all the preparations for the supper destined for his royal 
highness and his select party, in the circular tent-room, im- 
mediately under the one in which he had been sitting, and 
where covers were laid for twenty ; and, as soon as all was 
ready, to bring her the key of the door, so that when she led 
the prince to the tent, she might open the little paradise to his 
view, and be sure that nobody else could make an attack upon 
the sanctum. According to order, every thing was arranged, 
the tent lighted, and the key brought, the soups alone being to 
be served after the elite had taken their places. 

The rush and squeeze began and just in the whirlpool of 
beauty and grace and elegance, I saw a lady, whose laughing 
eyes and sweet expression of countenance delighted me, while 
she and another, somewhat younger than herself, were tossed 
to and fro in the eddying crowd they had unmasked, and 
their dresses were exceedingly becoming to their pretty and 
animated countenances, and I asked Daly who the elder of the 
two was ? 

"Just the woman for you to know!" said he. "She is 
perfectly delightful, gives the most agreeable parties in Lon- 
don ; amiable, clever, agreeable, with a hundred thousand 
pounds of her own : make her acquaintance by all means !" 
saying which, we squeezed towards them. " Mrs. Fletcher 
Green," said he, " permit me to present my friend Mr. Gur- 
ney, who is anxious to become your cavalier in this dreadful 
onset." 

" A thousand thanks," said Mrs. Fletcher Green. 

" I will take care of Lady John," added he ; and in one 
instant a wave of humanity separated us, and I found myself 
obliged, in self-preservation, and for the preservation of Mrs. 
Fletcher Green, to take an opposite course, by which we 

L 

146 GILBERT GURNEY. 

secured our places at a table, whence we could not even see 
my new friend's late companion, or Daly. It did not seem to 
signify much. Mrs. Fletcher Green appeared perfectly happy 
where she was so was I and we began a conversation of 
the most agreeable character, which grew livelier as the cham- 
pagne circulated, and commenced, on that night, an acquaint- 
ance, the termination of which I most assuredly did not 
contemplate at the time. 

Another dreadful mishap had occurred since we quitted the 
drawing-rooms, of which intelligence was brought us by com- 
mon report ; by which it really seemed as if Lady Wolver- 
hampton had been that night marked out for the sport of 
fortune. The countess, as it had been arranged, conducted 
the prince to the tent room his royal highness giving her 
ladyship his arm, and leading the noble guests who had been 
favoured with a command to join the royal party. Arrived at 
the door of the pavilion, her ladyship applied the key, the lock 
willingly obeyed the appeal, the battants flew open, and dis- 
closed the splendid supper service of the late earl, making the 
circular table groan with its weight, and dazzling the eye with 
its magnificence ; but what were the countess's feelings, when 
she beheld nothing in the golden dishes and vases but the 
remnants of a devoured feast fragments of dissected fowls 
ends of well notched tongues creams half demolished 
jellies in trembling lumps glasses scarce emptied, and bottles 
emptied quite crusts of bread, with heads and tails of prawns 
scattered about upon the snowy" cloth, and plates well used 
piled upon each other in the middle of the once festive board ! 

The confusion of the countess was beyond description the 
laughter of the prince beyond belief ; to him it was a capital 
joke to her ladyship a serious evil. How it had occurred 
nobody could guess, for the door had been locked the moment 
every thing was ready, and the key taken to her ladyship. 
Consternation reigned, and his royal highness had to re-ascend 
the stairs, and wait until the whole affair was re-arranged. Of 
course, I was as ignorant as my neighbours of the cause of 
this calamity, and should have remained so until now, had not 
Daly told me, in our way home, that having gone out into 
the garden, in order to get rid of his Jw's dress and basket, 
where he deposited them, he found a band of Pandean min- 
strels, puffing their hearts out into their pipes, to which no- 

GILBERT GUHNEY. 147 

body listened, and being resolved, if possible, to destroy the 
royal monopoly in the tent-room, to which he had not been 
invited, and which, although locked towards the lobby, opened 
on to the lawn, he directed the weary performers to go in at 
the window, which he set wide for the purpose, and get their 
supper ; advising them by no means to call for any thing that 
was not there already to eat and drink what they could, and 
to make as much haste as possible, and when they had done, 
to lock the window on the outside, and throw the key into the 
four yards square pond, which in rainy weather served as a 
wet dock for the countess's pet swan. All of which instructions, 
it appeared, the said Pandeans followed to the very letter ; 
and thus, to his infinite delight, caused that confusion, in 
which his heart so wonderfully rejoiced. 

It was nearly five when I handed Mrs. Fletcher Green into 
her dark brown chariot. I ventured to express some solicitude 
about her companion at the supper-room door, till she assured 
me that she was quite safe ; " because," said she, " she has a 
husband here to take care of her. I am quite independent 
a thousand thanks I hope we shall be better acquainted." 

Away she drove I turned into the house to look for Daly 
but I confess that Mrs. Fletcher Green had made an im- 
pression upon me. There was such a charming mixture of 
worldliness and nature about her I mean such a perfect 
knowledge of every body in society, and of every thing that was 
going on, mixed with a genuine kind-heartedness a love of 
fun and an artless hearty good- nature, all of which combined 
with talent of a high order, and accomplishments which even 
my short intercourse with her had convinced me were of the 
first class, rendered her engaging interesting captivating. 

When I went up stairs to look for my friend, the sun had 
superseded the lamps and candles the decorations of the 
preceding night had lost their freshness; even the flowers 
seemed to droop the lovely girls looked haggard, and the 
elderly ladies horrid the rouge burnt blue on their cheeks, 
and there was not a curl in the whole community. Masks 
and character-dresses lay heaped in corners, disregarded ; and 
people, in their own proper persons, were languidly praising 
the humours and delights of the party, listening, listlessly, for 
the announcement of the carriages which were to take them 
away. The vapour of tea and coffee, which were served, were 
L 2 

148 GILBERT GORNEY. 

the only refreshments of the fletri scene, if I except the morn- 
ing air, which some of the most venturous of the girls dared 
to admit through the open windows, malgre the warning of 
their prudent mothers. 

I soon found Daly, and we retired together my head 
aching my heart not easy tired worn out and as much 
fatigued as if I had travelled a journey of two hundred miles. 
All the consolation I derived from my own sensations was, the 
hope that my friend would be equally knocked up with my- 
self, and would, therefore, delay his departure for Tenby, for 
at least another day. 

END OP THE FIRST VOLUME. 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 149 

VOLUME THE SECOND. 

CHAPTER I. 

WHEN I awoke in the morning or I should say afternoon, 
since it was considerably past twelve before I opened my eyes 
all the proceedings at Wolverhampton House appeared like 
a dream. The audacity of Daly the mischief he had com- 
mitted upon a kind and confiding friend who apparently did 
all she could to make him welcome and happy, seemed too 
gross and glaring to be real ; and it was not until I saw on 
the table by my bed-side, a rose which had graced the bosom 
of the charming Mrs. Fletcher Green, that I was assured that 
I had really seen a bull on a staircase, and heard of the Pan- 
dean mistrels eating the prince's supper in the pavilion. I 
had carefully placed the half-faded flower in a glass of water, 
and greatly rejoiced to see it look refreshed by my delicate 
attention. 

I admit, however, that a reproachful feeling diffused itself 
over my mind, when I recollected under what very peculiar 
circumstances I had half taken and half received this precious 
bud from my charming new acquaintance. I had treasured 
the gift if gift it had been and placed it at my bed-side 
on the very morning that my kind and active friend had un- 
dertaken to work my eternal happiness by a marriage with my 
dear unsophisticated Emma Haines. But what then? Mrs. 
Fletcher Green was only an acquaintance a very delightful 
one much Emma's senior. I thought her indeed rather ad- 
vanced in life I being just one and twenty ; and she, as I 
afterwards had occasion to know, three years under thirty. 
But so completely are our judgments and opinions, especially 
in that particular, regulated by comparison, that I felt a kind 
of respect for her age mingled with my admiration of her 
accomplishments. 

L 3 

150 GILBERT GURNEY. 

Mrs. Fletcher Green was evidently pleased with me, and 
that, as every hody must admit, was a very powerful reason 
for my being charmed with her. I was determined to call 
upon her, and improve the acquaintance ; and, strange to say, 
I almost hoped that Daly had not got so far the start of me 
in rising, as to be on his way to Tenby to open the nego- 
tiations with the Haineses. It was not that Mrs. Fletcher 
Green had entirely superseded Emma in so short a time, or 
that she had carried my heart by a coup de main, but she was 
so graceful, so polished, so agreeable, knew every body, and 
every thing about every body ; and was so exquisitely good- 
tempered, and had such eyes ! I believe a heart just of age 
was never proverbial for constancy ; yet there was a striking 
difference between my feelings towards the fair widow and 
those which bound me to my first love I cannot conveniently 
describe the dissimilitude, but I was conscious of it, and yet 
equally conscious that I ought not to be so much interested 
about one lady, when on the very point of concluding a nego- 
tiation, if possible, with another. 

When I called at Daly's lodgings, I found the bird flown. 
He had indeed afforded me a new and remarkable proof of the 
activity of his friendship. He had started, as his servant told 
me, before eight, after little more than an hour's sleep. He 
had left a note, in which he desired me to confide in his 
judgment and discretion, and informed me that he would 
write to report progress the moment any progress had been 
made. His servant appeared particularly solicitous to know 
when I expected his master back ; and his anxiety seemed to 
me scarcely equal to that of a half gentlemanly looking man 
whom I found at the door in conversation with Redmond, 
who held a longish slip of paper in his hand, which after my 
sincere declaration that I had no notion how long he would 
be out of town, he returned to a long black book which he 
had previously carried under his arm, and which now that 
the paper was replaced within its folds, he deposited in a 
pocket made in the inside of one of the lapels of his coat. 

I had become so accustomed to the society and conversation 
of my volatile friend, that when I turned from his lodgings I 
felt as if I had lost part of myself now that I was left alone. 
I strolled along the streets as far as Wolverhampton House, 
where I left my ticket, and afterwards sauntered down what 

GILBERT GURNEY. 151 

was then imagined to be the promenade of London, Bond 
Street the utter destruction of which as a fashionable lounge 
by the splendid creation of Regent Street, or any other possible 
cause, none of the beaux of those days even remotely antici- 
pated. Still I felt dull and distrait ; and when after having 
descended the hill of St. James's Street, and passed half way 
along Pall Mall, I recognised a friend of my theatrical Mae- 
cenas, coming out of an auction room, where an extensive 
book sale was going on, I was quite delighted ! I scarcely 
expected, as I had abandoned dramatic literature, and absented 
myself from the Thespian votaries, that he would recognise 
me ! On the contrary, his plump rosy cheeks, purpled with 
warmth and kindness, as he held out his hand to take mine, 
and protested that I was the very man he wanted most par- 
ticularly to see. 

Hull* for so was my warm-hearted friend called was 
a very extraordinary person. He knew the business of every 
body in London better than the people themselves. He hap- 
pened to know every thing that was going forward in all circles 
mercantile, political, fashionable, literary or theatrical ; in 
addition to all matters connected with military and naval 
affairs, agriculture, finance, art, and science every thing 
came alike to him to his inquiring eye no mystery continued 
undiscovered ; from his attentive ear no secret remained 
concealed. He was plump short with an intelligent 
countenance, and near-sighted with a constitution and com- 
plexion fresh enough to look forty, at a time when 7 believed 
him to be at least four times the age. We had a joke 
against him, in those days, as to his antiquity, in which he 
heartily and good-naturedly joined, until at last we got him 
to admit and, I almost think, believe that he had sold 
gunpowder to King Charles the Second, and dined more than 
once with the witty Lord Rochester. 

" Wanted to see me ? " said I "as how ? " 
" Wanted you to come and meet a few friends at my cot- 
tage at Mitcham," said Hull " all plain and simple good 
wine, I promise you, and pleasant company ; but you are 
such a fellow, my dear friend. Pooh, pooh ! don't tell me 
there' s^no catching you eh, I say I have heard all about 

* The character of Hull will be immediately recognised by all who knew the late 
Thomas Hill. 

L 4 

152 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

the cakes, the cow and the countess, the Pandeans in the 
pavilion, and the dead dace in the drawing-room." 

" What do you mean?" said I not imagining it possible 
that events which had so recently occurred should have already 
obtained such publicity. 

" Oh, you dog," said Hull. ei /happen to know my dear 
Gurney, it's no use trying to hoax me 1 say Daly did 
it he, he ! you know it, eh ? " 

" Not I, upon my honour," said I which was true 
" do you know Daly ? " 

" Know him !" exclaimed my friend f know Daly ! 
why, my dear sir, I have known him these forty years ! " 

" Daly !" said 1, " why he is not thirty years old !" 

" Perhaps not forty," said Hull ; " but I knew his father 
more than forty years ago lived in St. Mary Axe in the 
sugar line dead now Daly, your friend, is a deuce of a 
fellow you dined with him yesterday at his lodgings ? " 

" I did," said I, staring " but how did you find that 
out?" 

' ' Find it out, my dear friend ! " replied Hull ; " I do no- 
thing in the world but find out I saw the boiled leg of 
lamb and spinach which you had for dinner eh wasn't it 
so?" 

I knew that unless he had been in three places at once, he 
could not have seen all our legs of lamb ; so I contented my- 
self with admitting what I had no desire to deny. 

" Splendid fellow, Daly/' said Hull " capital hock he has 
got." 

" Do you dine with him frequently ? '' said I. 

" Never, my dear friend ; never dined with him in my 
life," said Hull ; " but I know where he gets his hock six 
guineas and a half the dozen come down to Mitcham, you 
shall taste some of the very same batch. Great creature, Daly 
magnificent style, I'm told splendid service of plate, and 
all that." 

"Plate!" said I. 

" Superb," said Hull "I happen to know the fact." 

" My dear sir," said I, " I should say, a dozen spoons and 
forks were the extent of his service, as you call it." 

" Well," said Hull, " what does he want with more ? Too 
bad the cakes eh and the cow all over town. How- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 153 

ever, now to business, as I have done work for to-day when 
will you come to Mitcham name your time ? " 

" I shall be very happy," said I " but what do you mean 
by having done work ? " 

" Here," said he, drawing from one of his pockets a very 
small dirty black-letter book, " this is all I shall do to-day 
my pursuit, you know eh old books rare books I 
don't care what I give so as I can secure them this is a 
tract of I486 seventeen pages originally five only want- 
ing two damaged got it for seventy-two pounds ten shil- 
lings Caxton only one other copy extant that in the 
British Museum." 

" Seventy-two pounds for that /" said I. 

"To be sure," replied Hull ; " why, my dear sir, it is not 
worth my while to come out of the city unless I spend seventy 
or eighty pounds in the morning I cannot afford the time 
for less." 

" And what is it about ? " said I, innocently. 

" Why, I do not happen to know that," said Hull ; " it is 
an essay, I believe, to prove that Edward the Fourth never 
had the toothach ; but it is, as you see, in Latin, and I don't 
read Latin." 

" Then why buy it ? " said I. 

"Buy!" exclaimed he, looking at me through his glass 
with an expression of astonishment " I buy thousands of 
books ! pooh, pooh ! millions, my dear sir, in the course of 
a year, but I never think of reading them my dear friend, I 
have no time to read." 

I confess I did not exactly comprehend the character of the 
bibliomania which appeared to engross my friend, nor the par- 
ticular gratification which the purchase of the unreadable 
works seemed to afford him. But he only curled up his mouth, 
as much as to say that I was a dunce, and that there was a 
sort of delight felt in common with magpies, I presume 
of picking up objects and hiding them away in dark holes and 
corners. As for his hospitable invitation, I resolved to accept 
it, and fix an early day it would kill some of the time I was 
destined to pass in suspense until I heard from Tenby ; and 
give me an opportunity of cultivating the acquaintance of one 
who, with certain little peculiarities, evidently possessed a 

154 GILBERT GURNEY. 

sound judgment, and therefore a cheerful and liberal disposi- 
tion, and above all, a kind heart. 

" Mine is but a box," said Hull ; IC all humble and lowly 

there will be a bed for you at the inn, and a garden full of 
gooseberries and currants to stroll about." 

" And pleasant pastime, too," said I. " I, for one, think 
the despised fruits of our country are amongst the most deli- 
cious." 

" Despised ! " said Hull " pooh, pooh ! nobody can de- 
spise gooseberries and currants like mine I have thousands 
of them ! pooh, pooh ! currants as big as marbles ! and 
gooseberries larger than hens' eggs ! " 

" I'll try them, depend upon it," said I "what say you 
to to-morrow?" 

" My dear friend, the very day I was going to fix," said 
Hull ; " I knew your friend Daly was gone went out of 
town by eight this morning eh come down to Mitcham 

you'll meet one of your Haymarket friends " 

" Ah," said I, " Mr. Hull, that's a sore point that in- 
fernal farce of mine I shall never get over it." 

" Infernal ! " said Hull " what d'ye mean by infernal 

I wish we had more people who could write such farces 
infernal indeed ! " 

" Yet," said I, " it was condemned." 

" Umph," said Hull, lowering his voice, and whispering in 
my ear, " I could tell you something about that I happen 
to know and so do you " 

" Indeed I don't," said I. 

" Don't you know something about the ' Wag in the 
Windmill,' " said Hull, " coming out the week after next?" 

"Not I " 

" Pooh ! pooh ! don't tell me," said Hull "I happen to 
know the author." 

" Do you ? " said I, " I don't." 

" Come, come, you dog, that wo'n't do," said he ; " what 
does the Chronicle mean the day before yesterday did you 
see the allusion ? " 

" No," said I, " I never see the Chronicle." 

" Never see the Chronicle ! " exclaimed Hull ; " don't tell 
me that wo'n't do you see ALL the papers. My dear 
friend, the allusion to you is plain as a pikestaff." 

GILBERT GURNEY. 155 

" I give you my word," said I, " that I have written not 
one line since my failure, nor ever will write again." 

" How could they have got hold of it, I wonder ? " said 
Hull, archly. " I'll find out before I go into the city. 
However, to-morrow you come to me dine punctually at 
five early folks in the country none of your supper-time 
dinners there remember, a bed for yourself capital stables 
for your horses at the inn civil people very, attentive to 
all my guests know it would not do if they were not 
hundreds of people go there in the course of the summer from 
my cottage. Good day good day you won't come any 
farther with me, I know you won't city work don't suit 
you God bless you pooh ! pooh ! remember five ! " 

And away he went, leaving me amazed at the activity of 
his mind and the' universality of his information. I was 
vexed to find that I was coupled with a new authorship, and 
turned into the first coffee-house I came near in order to read 
the paragraph of which, according to Hull's declaration, I 
was the object. In doing this, I had a double purpose 
first, to see how I was pointed out to the public ; and, se- 
condly, if the identification were very complete, to write a 
letter to the Morning Chronicle, contradicting the statement ; 
being at that period of my life perfectly ignorant of the utter 
carelessness of society about such affairs in general, and about 
me or any of my concerns more particularly ; and also then 
unconvinced that a reply to a newspaper attack resembles very 
much the attempt of Hercules to crop the Hydra, without the 
slightest chance of his ultimate success ; or to descend rapidly 
from the sublime, like the task of the tinker, who, in trying to 
stop one hole, invariably makes two. 

I accordingly turned to the paper, and found that the para- 
graph was one of those " we understands," which so fre- 
quently crowd the columns of the daily journals, and hinting 
more ambiguously than even I had expected, that the author 
of the forthcoming " Wag in the Windmill," although un- 
successful in his first attempt, had every chance of making 
ample amends for his early defeat, in his new production. It 
was evidently meant good-naturedly, and I laid down the 
Chronicle, wondering who in the world could have taken the 
trouble to vindicate my presumed effort ; little suspecting that 
my omniscient friend Hull was himself the author of the 

156 GILBERT QUKNEY. 

paragraph, which he had no doubt believed would greatly 
please me, and contribute to heal the wounds which a public 
verdict had inflicted upon my personal vanity. As my ac- 
quaintance with Hull increased in age, I had many opportu- 
nities of convincing myself of the inherent kindness of his 
disposition, and his readiness to do what he imagined to be a 
service to his friends whenever it lay in his power. 

I confess. I was very glad I had met him, and made an 
engagement to visit him for my mind was distracted, and 
my heart almost ached with anxiety as to the result of Daly's 
expedition ; and those who have felt as I did then, will 
readily admit that new scenes and new acquaintances are, of 
all things in the world, most desirable under circumstances, 
where there exists a wish or even a hope of distancing thoughts 
and reflections which are inevitably associated with persons 
whom we have known and places which we have visited, 
while in the society of the loved and lamented one, absent 
only from the sight, but present always to the imagination. 

Strange to say, after quitting Hull, I almost immediately 
encountered my con-disciple of Lincoln's Inn on his return 
homewards from plodding, to which it appeared he had be- 
come infinitely more reconciled since he had lost his sym- 
pathetic friend myself. 

To a man really mixing in the world, in the habit of con- 
stant intercourse with the principal actors on the stage not 
of the theatre but of real life : men who, by their position 
in society, their personal rank, or official importance, are in 
fact the objects of daily contemplation and discussion to the 
eyes of those not so circumstanced, nothing in the world can 
be so dull and ridiculous as the speculative conversations of 
the respectable portion of society, who, blending with personal 
importance in their own sphere, great acuteness of mind, per- 
tinacity of opinion, and inquisitiveness of research, discuss 
the reported movements, and probable intentions of people 
whom they know only by hearsay call it fame if you will 
and of whose actual proceedings they have no idea but what 
they glean from the misinformed collectors of fashionable in- 
telligence for the newspapers, and of whose real characters or 
domestic pursuits they understand infinitely less than they do 
of the cabinet secrets of the King of Ava, or the proceedings 
of the Privy Council at Tooramoorotatewangy. 

OILBEBT GURNEY. 15? 

If I have since felt lassitude and weariness at the com- 
mon place suppositions of these white-waistcoated wise-acres, 
relieved only by a sort of indignation at the doltish stupidity 
of their fancies and calculations, I doubt very much whether 
I was ever so much worried in after-life by their elaborated 
nonsense as I was by Tom Hickson's conversation on the day 
to which I now refer. It was now some time since I had 
emerged from the cellar of Stone Buildings, led as it were up 
A .he Glacis, by his suggestion and at his invitation. It was to 
him I owed my introduction to the actors, and to his genius 
and addiction to theatrical pursuits was I indebted for having 
forsaken the study to which he now appeared devoted. He 
had however subsided into the jog-trot routine which at his 
instigation I had abandoned, and in consequence of the start- 
a-head which I had taken, rendered more effective, perhaps, 
by his retrograde movement, I felt myself, as the people call 
it " bored to death," by his platitudes his suppositions 
his inquiries in short his nonsense. 

Thus it is what delights, enchants, and enchains us at 
one period of life, becomes, by comparison with other things, 
when we return to it, flat, stale, and unprofitable. I remem- 
ber when I was at school days to which, as I have already 
said, I never recur with any superabundant pleasure, I had 
established in my mind that a certain Mrs. Burgoyne we 
called her Mother Burgoyne had a character for making 
apple tarts, which stood high in my estimation, and in that 
of all my school-fellows ; she had, moreover, the reputation 
of being a witch, but that, whether it were true or not, did 
not, in any important degree, interfere with her management 
of the pies, and certes, never did the finest patisserie of the 
unrivalled Jenkins, of Burlington House celebrity in those 
times, delight me more than the Tourte a la Bourgoine of my 
early days. 

Passing through the town in which I had received no 
education but where my exemplary mother had deposited 
sundry quarterly payments of cash as the quid pro quo for 
my instruction (baffled by my own idleness and stupidity), 
and having a friend with me, who had accompanied me in a 
visit to the school-house, play- ground, and all the rest of it, I 
desired the waiter at the inn to be sure to have some of Mrs. 
Burgoyne's tarts in the second course of our inn dinner. The 

158 GILBERT GURNEY. 

man stared I concluded that my fair sorceress was defunct 
no she was alive and merry ; but to my surprise the 
man, who knew the " fascinating creature " by name, declared 
that however unjustifiable the imputation of witchery might 
be, her tarts were things not eatable. Still I insisted, and the 
tarts were produced and any thing more detestably filthy 
never were seen. I taxed the waiter, who seemed to enjoy 
the joke against me excessively, with a falling off in the ma- 
nufacture, perhaps attributable to the increased age of the 
manufacturer but, no, he assured me that the tarts were 
the same as ever, and it was only I that was changed. I be- 
lieve in the sequel I was obliged to admit the justice of his 
decision ; and in the course of my after-life I have had a 
thousand occasions to justify it. Return to a place which you 
have fancied a paradise, after some ten or fifteen years' ramble 
over the world ; it remains the same, but the ideas have 
expanded, the eye has rested upon flood and field, upon lake 
and mountain, and upon sea and torrent : when you reach the 
desired haven, after your voyage, although hearts may beat 
as kindly, and eyes beam as brightly as ever, still the locale 
invariably disappoints you. A man born in Lincoln, or in 
Norwich, or in Nottingham, comes to London, and passes 
some ten or twelve years of his life he left his birth-place 
at fifteen or sixteen rely upon it, although he may admire 
St. Paul's, and be pleased with Guildhall, or even admit the 
length of the metropolitan streets, the recollection of High 
Street, or the Market- Place, or the Castle Hill, or something 
peculiar to his own native town, is permanently fixed in his 
imagination as infinitely superior to them all ; nor is it till he 
returns to his favourite spot that he finds how entirely first 
impressions have possessed him, and how egregiously mistaken 
he has been in the institution of his comparisons. 

My friend Tom Hickson was my Castle Hill, my Market- 
place my High-street I thought I never heard any man 
say such silly things he seemed to me to talk " Morning 
Post " all his observations were copied nearly verbatim from 
that fashionable paper. He announced to me the arrival in Lon- 
don of some man, of whose departure from town three days be- 
fore, I was perfectly aware ; hinted at a marriage in high life 
as likely to take place during the following week, which 1 knew 
had gone off altogether during the last fortnight; and gave 

GILBERT GURNEY. 159 

me a confidential account of a faux pas between Lord L 

and Lady M , in which there was not one word of truth, the 

whole history of which, as Daly had told it me, I, like my 
friend Hull, " happened to know," was furnished to the news- 
papers by the aforesaid lord, under the impression that the 
object of his pursuit would, by the paragraph, be either 
frightened or induced into committing the very peccadillo 
which he announced to the public by anticipation. 

I declare I rejoiced excessively when he apologised for leav- 
ing me so early, inasmuch as he was engaged to dine at some 
extremely convivial club of which he was an honorary member, 
in order to initiate two novices into the arcana of the society, 
by blinding their eyes, daubing their faces with mustard, and 
then making them smoke pipes, into the bowls of which gun- 
powder had been previously introduced sufficient to blow the 
said pipe to atoms ; a joke which, although some preceding 
dunce had suffered the loss of an eye by the explosion, was 
still considered extremely good, and to which all the aspirants 
for admission into the very comical community were obliged 
to submit. 

Many things, I admit, combined to excite this distaste to 
my early acquaintance I knew him best when I knew 
Emma Haines first that was an association, and one which 
I wished especially to avoid. I could not hear from Daly 
for some days. I dreaded to think the time which must 
necessarily elapse. Then that Mrs. Fletcher Green worried 
me, what to do 1 did not know, dinner was to be eaten 
or at least the ceremony to be gone through and the 
evening to be disposed of afterwards ! After some self- 
debating, I determined to go to the Opera I knew Mrs. 
Fletcher Green had a box there I would find it out, and 
even if I dared not approach it for I really, where self was 
concerned, was very shy I at least could watch her from 
afar, and judge by what I saw the general tenour of her 
conduct, and whether she seemed to be as agreeable to every 
body else as she most assuredly had been to me. 

This scheme I put into execution. In those days ladies 
wore fans, upon which the plot of the whole house was de- 
veloped each circle, each box, with its owner's name, was 
printed and published ; but in these later and more degenerate 
days, so many great ladies only hire other peoples' boxes for 

160 GILBERT GURNEY. 

the night, and so many great gentlemen let theirs the same 
way, that such directions would be of no more use than the 
Court Guide is, in giving us the addresses of people who take 
ready-furnished houses from people who are ready to part 
with them during their convenient absence in the country or 
on the Continent. From one of these, then useful directories, 
I gained the wished-for intelligence, and accordingly posted 
myself in the alley of the pit, where I could command a perfect 
view of the fascinating widow, who was on this special night ac- 
companied by a fair creature, something younger than herself, 
and not quite so handsome. The difference of age is so well 
managed in large assemblies, that I was not quite prepared to 
decide whether the junior lady might not be daughter of the 
senior one I hardly thought it probable, even if it were 
possible, and Daly, in all he had said about Mrs. Fletcher 
Green, and her agreeable house, and her agreeable parties, 
and her agreeable fortune, had never once mentioned that 
there was such a thing as a Miss F. G. in existence. 

I watched her very attentively during the evening her 
vivacity seemed continuous and unweariable. A rapid suc- 
cession of young men, middle-aged men, and old men, ap- 
peared in her box ; and I could hear the joyous tones of her 
voice frequently, louder than the meanings of a wretched 
captive, in green crape, with tin fetters, who was growling 
out her grief on the stage ; indeed, although she had professed 
herself to me the most devoted admirer of Italian music, it 
did not appear to me that she took the slightest notice, or paid 
the smallest attention to the business of the stage. Still I 
saw she was the " admired of all," and I fancied I was the 
" admired of her" laudari a laudatd. Ten times at least 
I resolved to go boldly to the box, and share her favours with 
her other visiters ; but ten times my heart sank within me. 
Whenever I felt a want of confidence in myself, my thoughts 
reverted to Emma Haines, and I asked myself if I should 
like to see her going on so gaily, and noisily, and happily, 
and carelessly, as Mrs. Fletcher Green was? But then the 
case was different she was a widow, and had no husband to 
control her, no partner of domestic happiness to share her 
pleasures and (if she ever could have any) her sorrows. 
However, I thought, perhaps, it was better matters should 
remain as they were : what possible good could I do by in- 

GILBERT GORNEY. ll 

creasing my intimacy with this gay woman of fortune, when, 
if Daly's kind and zealous exertions brought about the other 
affair, she might not, after all, be the sort of person I should 
choose as the intimate friend of Emma, and if I judged Emma 
aright, not the sort of person Emma would choose for her- 
self? 

For that night I contented myself with watching the 
evanishment of my bright star from the sphere which she 
adorned and illuminated. I felt afraid of encountering her. 
I went to the fire-place in the hall, although the " fire was 
fled," and half fearful of being seen, beheld her tripping like 
a sylph down the little staircase from the pit tier, in which 
her box was situated. I heard loud calls for " Mrs. Fletcher 
Green's carriage" I saw her looking all round and round 
at length her eye caught mine, she instantly dragged a huge 
grenadier looking fellow, upon whose arm she was leaning, 
across the lobby, in order to shake hands with me, and scold 
me for not having called in the morning. I made a sort of 
stammering apology, and felt wonderfully relieved when I 
heard one of the stentors of the outer lobby proclaiming that 
" Mrs. Fletcher Green's carnage stopped the way." The man 
who was with her was particularly odious to me he had 
curly black hair, and a high white forehead, great sparkling 
eyes, and a row of teeth like ivory, which he incessantly ex- 
hibited by a sort of perpetual grin over the heads of all the 
surrounding crowd. The attendant sylph was escorted by a 
more reasonable person, of the middle age of life, from whom 
she appeared to divert all her attention in order to look at me, 
while Mrs. Green was talking to me ; and the moment the 
carriage was announced, and they passed on, I saw her pull 
my fair widow back to inquire who I was, and then I saw 
the odious grenadier laugh. 

" Ah," thought I, as the group vanished among the 
cocked hats of the footmen, and the torches of the link boys, 
" it wo'n't do." Nevertheless, I resolved upon calling the 
next day, before I took my departure for Hull's house, at 
Mitcham. 

The morning came, and I put my scheme into execution, 
and proceeded to her residence, which was near Park Lane, 
and while going, I could not entirely divest myself of a con- 
sciousness that, admitting the feeling which the widow's 

162 GILBERT GURNEY. 

smiles and conversation had excited, I was behaving ill 
shamefully ill to somebody ; either to Mrs. Fletcher Green, 
or to Miss Emma Haines and yet recollect I was young, 
and ardent, and thoughtless. I knocked at the door the 
fair tenant of the mansion was out at least she was not " at 
home." But I was perfectly convinced, from the manner of 
her porter, that I was denied the privilege of the entree, only 
because my person was not known, and my name had not yet 
been inscribed in her visiting list. I left my card, and 
strolled into the Park, meaning to return in time to mount 
my gig and drive down to the Tusculum of my hospitable 
friend. 

When I reached my lodgings I found a dear delicate three- 
cornered note, written in the most delightfully unintelligible 
hand, by dear Mrs. Fletcher Green herself, confirming my 
suspicion as to the cause of my non-admission when I'called, 
and begging me to come sans fafon, to meet Lady Wolver- 
hampton at dinner a very small party, and very agreeable 
people I was engaged, and could therefore do nothing but 
send an apology. I confess I regretted it, and I believe, for 
a moment, entertained a thought of throwing over my Mit- 
chamites, and accepting the invitation to the widow's but 
if such an idea did flash into my mind, it was only to be re- 
jected with disdain Hull's kindness and hospitality did not 
merit such a slur. So I wrote my answer, despatched it 
jumped into my carriage, and drove off for the country. 

In those days men drove " gigs " as they since have driven 
stanhopes, tilburys, dennets, and cabriolets, and I rather 
piqued myself upon my " turn out;" my chestnut horse was 
a fast trotter, and in little more than three quarters of an hour, 
from Westminster Bridge, I reached mine host's retreat, the 
locality of which was specially distinguished by its facing the 
common, and looking infinitely neater and more rural than the 
neighbouring houses, whose London loving owners had de- 
corated their hermitages, villas, cots, and cottages with knockers, 
lamps, and brass-plates, one of which specially indicated not 
only that the red-brick edifice before me was " Belle vue 
Lodge," but that its respectable owner's name was " Mr. 
Blutch." 

When I drove up to the gate of Hull's house, I saw his 
good-natured face peering over the hedge which separated his 

GILBERT GURNEY. 163 

garden from the road, like " a rose in June/' flowering on its 
native stem in a moment he was at his gate, and in another 
I had set my foot in his domain, a little bijou of neatness, 
niceness, prettiness, and sweetness. I saw company in the 
garden, heard laughter in the bowers, and, casting my eyes 
through two French windows which opened on the lawn, be- 
held a table covered for eight. The roses, the mignionette, 
the heliotropes, all combined their fragrance to refresh the air, 
and, although from its proximity to the high-way, Hull's ser- 
vant had to brush the plants as he did his coat, every morning, 
to get rid of the dust, it was what the most fastidious critic 
must have pronounced a delightful little place. 

Some of the assembled party were unknown to me, although 
none of them were unknown to fame ; an enthusiastic poet, a 
witty and agreeable barrister, the editor of a weekly newspaper, 
a fashionable preacher, and an opulent city merchant, then 
one of the sheriffs of London, added to one of the popular 
actors with whom I was previously acquainted, formed a so- 
ciety, which, from its miscellaneous character, promised a great 
treat to one who like myself, at that time of my life, professed 
to be only a listener. The sequel, however, was a disappoint- 
ment. Every one of the guests was celebrated for something, 
and each one was jealous of his neighbour. Hull, who pooh 
poohed them about in his best style, endeavoured to draw 
them out, and force every man to say or do something to con- 
tribute to the general amusement ; but it was evidently an 
effort ; the poet had a sovereign contempt for the barrister, 
and whenever he fired a pun, preserved the most imperturb- 
able gravity. The barrister, who was moreover a critic, 
irritated the actor, who hated the newspaper editor, for the 
tone he had adopted in his theatrical reviews. The clergyman 
kept aloof from any controversy with the Thespian ; and the 
sheriff, who was worth a couple of hundred thousand pounds, 
despised the whole party, and set them down as a parcel 
of paupers, who were obliged to get their bread by the exer- 
cise of their talents. 

" Any mackerel, Mr. Sheriff? " said the barrister (who was 
acting croupier) to the citizen placed at Hull's right hand. 

" Pooh, Dubs ! " exclaimed mine host, why do you ask 
such a question eat mackerel ! I don't suppose Mr. Buck- 
lesbury ever tasted a mackerel in his life. Here's turbot, Mr. 
M 2 

164 GILBERT GURNEY. 

Bucklesbury fresh from Billingsgate this morning Sunday 
makes no difference with me I happen to know the most 
eminent salesman in the market Bless your soul he wouldn't 
mind sending a boat express to Torbay for a turbot for me" 

" Very fine fish indeed," said, or rather snorted, Bucklesbury. 

" Fine," exclaimed Hull;^" nothing at all, my dear sir, to 
what you have at home eh I happen to kiiow there's 
no man so particular about his fish as you." 

" I like it good when I has it," said Bucklesbury ; " is 
there any lobster sauce ? " 

" Any ! " cried Hull ; " my dear friend, there are loads of 
lobsters thousands ; here, you stupid dog, bring some of 
those sauce tureens to the sheriff." 

The conversation at dinner consisted of little more than a 
repetition of pressings and refusings, and of challenges to 
drink wine, and observations upon the wine itself. A very 
fine haunch of venison made its appearance, which somewhat 
varied the letter, but not the spirit of the discussion ; and to 
hear Mr. Bucklesbury lecture upon fat and lean, the alder- 
man's walk, and currant jelly, (of which, Hull told us, he had 
millions of pots, and which Bucklesbury was good enough to 
inform us went remarkably well svith venison,) illustrated as 
it was with plates, was enough to make any human being as 
sick as I certainly thought he must himself have been long 
before the close of the entertainment. 

It was evident, however, that good digestion waited upon 
appetite, for after his display of activity as regarded the first 
course, he performed upon a couple of young ducks in a man- 
ner which astonished one half of the company, and disgusted 
the other. " 'S'bud !" said the barrister, "a joke's a joke, 
but this is too much for friendship an Eton man eh 
civic what, eh," all of which running commentary upon 
the exhibition of the overgrown citizen, kept Hull, who wor- 
shipped the Josh, in a state of fever, by no means rendered 
intermittent by the imitative powers of my friend the actor, 
who contrived to swell himself like the frog in the fable, and 
make himself, thin as he was, the very fac simile of the 
mountainous millionnaire. 

The dessert after Hull's description of his fruit was 
rather a disappointment : the currants had been gathered, the 
gooseberries stolen, but there were still " busshcls" of apples ; 

GILBERT GURNET. 

165 

and the cellar afforded the juice of the grape in its best possi- 
ble state ; " hundreds " of bottles graced the board, and every 
disposition to do ample justice to the profusion of our Am- 
phytrion was manifested by his much delighted guests. 

The conversation, so long as "reason maintained her seat/' 
was not much more cordial or vivacious, than it had been 
earlier in the day. Bucklesbury, the feted of our host, was 
marked by his visiters as the general butt for their shafts, and 
the wags were most assuredly united, if in nothing else, in the 
determination to make him ridiculous. To say truth, he gave 
them but little trouble: as the wine mounted, however, the feel- 
ings and passions of the party began to develope themselves; the 
claret acted as varnish to the picture, and brought out all the 
lights and shadows of their minds. What struck me par- 
ticularly, who drank less, or at least less rapidly than my com- 
panions, was, that exactly in proportion as their animosity 
towards each other became more evident, they affected an 
additional degree of candour, prefacing the bitterest and most 
sarcastic observations, with declarations such as " Not that / 
think so, it is only what I hear ! " " Of course I don't allude 
to any particular person!" "1 hope nobody will think!" 
and so on, until from "gentle converse and communings 
sweet," the dinner-room assumed the tone and character of a 
miniature Babel, a fact of which the neighbourhood appeared 
to be pretty well aware, since groups of Mitchamites were 
seen looking and listening over the neat trimmed hedge, which, 
in the earnestness of argument, every body had forgotten was 
all that separated us from the public road. As the clergyman 
had left the party some time before it had arrived at its acme, 
we had few scruples about our audience, and Hull, who was 
quite a triton amongst the minnows of Mitcham, " liked it." 
" Pooh, pooh ! my clear friend, let them hear they may 
go a long way before they hear so many clever people talking 
again ! My dear sir, Mr. Bucklesbury, it is not worth my 
while to have dull people here I value wit I appreciate it 
I have lived all my life with wits 

From Rochester downwards," said the barrister. 

" Thank my stars," said Bucklesbury, " I know very little 
about wits." 

" Yet," said Duberly, " you seem always to have your wits 
about you." 

M 3 

166 

GILBERT GURNEV. 

" Dubs, Dubs," said Hull, checking the vivacity of the 
lawyer, perfectly aware that his opulent and corpulent friend 
had as faint a notion of taking as of making a joke. 

" Yes, sir," said the citizen, " the man must get up very 
early who hopes to master me. I've raised myself to my pre- 
sent high station (Duberly's mouth curled, and the actor 
made a face) by plain, plodding, industry ; many a little 
makes a mickle and you may rely upon it there are more 
fortunes saved than gained." 

" But how the deuce," said Duberly, " is a man to begin 
saving, who has nothing to begin with ? " 

" Industry will always furnish the means, and economy will 
do the rest," said Bucklesbury. " Sir, I walked my way up 
to London with half-a-crown in my pocket, and I am now 
worth a couple of hundred thousand pounds, and no man can 
say black's the white of my eye. I had a friend who left our 
native town the same day as I did he travelled by the wag- 
. gon " 

" Like the Thespians," said Duberly. 

" Be quiet, Dubs," said Hull, giving the barrister a wink, 
by way of caution not to irritate the actor. 

" And what became of him ? " said Duberly. 

" Him !" exclaimed Hull ; " pooh, pooh, Dubs, you know 
him very well so do you, Tim I think we all happen to 
know him an excellent man too and an alderman eh 
Mr. Sheriff eh I'm right eh, you dog ?" 

" You are quite right," said the sheriff. 

" Oh !" said Duberly, "our friend Firkins? " 

" To be sure," said Hull. 

" Yes, but he's pretty well to do, as a body may say," said 
the barrister. 

" Say ! " exclaimed Hull " what do you mean by ' a body 
may say ? ' he is a beggar that's the consequence of his 
extravagance." 

" A beggar !" said Duberly, " why, he is an alderman." 

" What has that to do with it?" said Hull. 

" I can't exactly say as he is a beggar," said the sheriff; 
"he has made his hundred thousand snug, I'll be sworn." 

" Well, but my dear friend," said Hull, " that's being a 
beggar compared with you. My dear sir, I don't mean to say 
he begs about the streets I mean to say he has not much 
more than a hundred thousand pounds." 

GILBERT GURNEY. l67 

<c Riches, like everything else," said the 'poet, who was 
somewhat tired of the subject, and rather anxious to talk, " are 
comparative : I confess that the value of wealth appears to 
me to be exactly proportioned to the extent of benefits it 
enables one to confer " 

" Whose benefit is fixed ? " said the actor, who hated sen- 
timentality, stretching his head and his hand forward, after 
the fashion of Sylvester Daggerwood. 

" I don't mean theatrical benefits, sir," said the poet ; " I 
mean those solid benefits which exalted benevolence confers 
on suffering genius there are Maecenases even in these 
days." 

" That there is," said the sheriff: " asses of all sorts, I 
can be sworn, but none much greater than what are called 
geniusses." 

u Or Jenny asses," interrupted Duberly. 

" Dubs, Dubs," said Hull, " pray don't interrupt the 
sheriff." 

" I never knew but one genius in my life," said Buckles- 
bury ; " and a queer genius he was. He belonged to the town 
I came from ; he used to write verses, and play the fiddle, 
and sing the drollest songs I ever heard : he was a genius and 
a poet and he was hanged for sheep-stealing afterwards." 

" Clever fellow that," said Hull : " I happened to kn\v 
him Jem Fulcher pooh ! pooh ! I've got some of his 
poetry now in my library extraordinary character. Tim 
knew him eh, did not you, Tim ? " 

" Knew him ! to be sure I did ! " said the actor " I 
gave an imitation of him after his death very effective 
capital hit." 

" You came in second," said Duberly ; " the hangman 
had taken him off first." 

" I have often," said the newspaper editor, who had 
hitherto said nothing, " considered rendering the crime of 
sheep-stealing a capital offence somewhat a stretch of severity." 

" Good ! " interrupted Duberly " a very serious stretch 
too." 

" I am not jesting, sir," said the editor ; " a person in 
my station, appointed I perhaps ought to say self-ap- 
pointed censor of public morals, and arbiter of public 
opinion, feels himself bound to consider maturely and gravely 
M 4 

168 GILBERT GURNEY. 

every subject by which the great mass of the people are likely 
to be more or less affected." 

" S'bud," said the barrister, " but the great mass of the 
people are not likely to turn sheep-stealers ; so perhaps you 
might spare yourself the pain of undertaking so grave a task 
upon this particular subject." 

" I have had a respect for sheep-stealers, dead or alive/' 
said the poet (the sheriff here drew his chair at least three 
feet from the inspired bard, who was evidently beginning an 
oration) " ever since the days of Jason ; the " 

" Well," said Bucklesbury, " I cannot agree with you 
there, sir." 

" I speak of the Argonauts," continued the poet. 

" Ah, sir," said Bucklesbury, " I don't mean to say a 
word against the family of the Arbuthnots. But I lived in 
the country as a boy, and I cannot justify to myself sheep- 
stealing in any shape whatsoever." 

The expression of despair which the countenance of the 
poet exhibited was admirably imitated by his opposite neigh- 
bour of the " sock and buskin ;" and Duberly, who could no 
longer maintain his equivocal gravity, burst into an immo- 
derate fit of laughter. 

" Sir," continued the poet, who was very drunk, and get- 
ting rather angry, " trace the career of Jason from the mo- 
ment he left the dragon " 

" Oh, sir," interrupted the sheriff, " if your friend goes to 
the Dragon, I don't say any thing about it I always use 
the Swan." 

" Pray, sir," said the actor, with a look of imperturbable 
gravity, " how do you use a swan ? " 

" Like a goose," said Duberly, " I suppose." 

" Mr. Hull," said the sheriff, who did not understand the 
turn of the conversation, and did not know whether to be 
angry or pleased, " have you got any coffee for us ? " 

" Coffee ! " said Hull, blushing blue with exultation up to 
the roots of his hair " my dear friend, I have three thou- 
sand weight of coffee in the house to be sure there is 
coffee and, eh something after chasse ! I happen to 
know splendid dogs you in the city but I think I have 
some Maraschino that never was equalled." 

" Have him out," said the barrister. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

169 

" Pooh, pooh ! my dear Dubs," said Hull, " you have had 
him out, as you call it, often enough ; you and Tim there 
have drank enough of it to know its quality." 

" How, sir," said the newspaper editor, " is the import- 
ation of those liqueurs managed ? isn't there something like 
a case to be made out against the government for permitting 
the introduction of foreign spirits ? " 

" Yes," said Duberly, " a liqueur-case." 

" I am not joking," Mr. Duberly, said the editor, with a 
gravity more than proportioned to the occasion, " I speak, 
sir, for information I act not for myself but the world at 
large ; men who devote themselves to the service of their 
country, as I do, do so because they hope it will be profit- 
able " 

" To themselves," interrupted Duberly. 

te Dubs, Dubs," said Hull, raising his glass to his eye, and 
frowning as severely as the kind, good-natured expression of 
his countenance would permit him, " you let nobody speak 
but yourself." 

" I beg your pardon," said Dubs, sipping his wine with a 
provoking coolness, which seemed to indicate a determination 
to go on for some time, " everybody speaks except myself 
I only observe." 

" I remain firm," said the editor, " to my question." 

" I can't answer it," said the sheriff " for I am not in 
that line ; I know nothing of the spirit business but I'll 
be hanged, as far as taste goes, if I don't think good cherry- 
bounce flogs all the foreign trash in the world." 

" You are joking, Mr. Bucklesbury," said Hull, who, 
whenever anybody candidly spoke in approbation of some- 
thing of a secondary nature, according to price, fancied he was 
quizzing him for Hull, with all his good-nature, was ten- 
derly susceptible of being made ridiculous. 

" Not I," said the sheriff; " I have often said to Mrs. B. 
when we have been dining out and when in course one 
always eats and drinks a considerable sight more than one does 
at home that 1, for one, prefer rum shrub or cherry brandy 
to all the garuses, and mallyskinos, and curasores in the 
world. However, here, I suppose, you are too fine to have 
such a thing as cherry bounce ? " 

" Bounce ! " exclaimed Hull, " cherry bounce, my dear 

170 GILBERT GURNEY. 

friend ! there's Dubs can tell you I have gallons of it 
make it by hogsheads I have seven hundred pints of it in 
the next room." 

Upon saying which, he rang the bell, and ordered the servant 
first giving him a key and a caution to bring forth sundry 
bottles of the boasted beverage for let it always be remem- 
bered, that Hull's cases of what might be thought bounce were 
all as genuine as this of the cherry bounce he had all the 
things he talked of. His magnificence in the way of provision, 
however, was what one certainly was not prepared for ; and 
therefore until a certain number of cherry-brandy bottles had 
been produced by way of ratification, it seemed almost impos- 
sible to believe the extent of his preparations for conviviality. 

Just as we were going to coffee, Hull gave a sort of sup- 
plicatory, hinting look to the actor, indicating a desire that he 
would sing a song which, since it grew very near to Monday, 
and the clergyman had long before departed, seemed not very 
sinful. Of course, he had a headach and a cold, and " never 
did," and so on ; however, at last he complied, and gave us 
one of the most entertaining descriptions of a fair, or a fight, 
or a race (I now forget which), I ever heard in my life, 
interspersed with sundry imitations of men, women, and chil- 
dren, not to speak of animals, ornithological and mammalial, 
the effect of which was wound up to a screaming power of 
laughter, by his introducing the most perfect imitation of the 
sheriff himself, who, about two minutes after the exhibition 
began to be beyond measure comical, had dropped his dewlap 
on his frill, and fallen fast asleep. 

Duberly was very much inclined to blacken the sheriff's 
face with burnt cork, after the fashion of my friend Daly at 
Richmond. But Hull, who was the very pink, I might say 
the crimson, of propriety, would not hear of such a thing ; and 
accordingly we waited until the actor, less scrupulous than 
Dubs, prepared secundum artem, a pellet of bread, which well 
and properly directed against the left eye of Mr. Bucklesbury, 
caused him to awake from his slumbers, which he did, grunting 
out, as he raised his head from his waistcoat, clapping his 
hands on the table, " Bravo! very good! thank you very 
good indeed ! " 

Up stairs we went the sheriff, of course, taking precedence 
and there we had our coffee, our chasse, and a little Iran- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

quillity ; and during this pause, the sheriff, next whom I was 
placed, began to talk to me. He had heard that I was neither 
poet, dramatist, editor, painter, nor player in short, that I 
had no intellectual qualities by which 1 could possibly earn a 
shilling ; but that, on the contrary, I had an income derivable 
from property which became hereditarily mine : he therefore 
felt a becoming respect for me. Besides, I had never attempted 
a joke, indeed scarcely had spoken, and I therefore imagine I 
came up to what, in his fat mind, was a " quiet, gentlemanly 
man : " he patronised, he fostered me, and I was grateful ; and 
after having looked at me with his fishy eyes for a minute or 
two, he asked me, with a gravity which I confess was more 
than adequate to the occasion, " whether I had ever eaten 
marrow pudding." 

I was somewhat astounded, but I was quite sure it meant 
something kind, and would lead to something else ; so I an- 
swered, as indeed I could not fail to do, if truth were to be 
my guide, that I had not, nor could 1 imagine how such a 
composition could be prepared. 

" Dine with me to-morrow at the Old Bailey," said the 
sheriff. 

I said I was very much obliged, but 

" But me no buts," said the sheriff, " except a butt of 
sherry. I say, that's a joke, isn't it don't say nothing to 
them as is here but you come to the Sessions' House to- 
morrow about four it's the last day we shall dine at six 
Common Serjeant dines at three Recorder goes down to 
try, and I shall be glad of your company. Sentences and all 
that fine sight shows what I call human nature eh 
come ask for Mr. Sheriff Bucklesbury, the divil himself 
can't prevent you coming in you understand mum not 
a word. I don't half like these chaps that editor, and the 
poet I don't understand 'em and the actor is a deuced sight 
too funny for me; but, you'll excuse me, I like you, and 
I say so I never make two words of a straw, you come 
hear the sentences, and eat marrow pudding and don't say 
a word to nobody about it." 

The combination was curious, " to hear sentences and eat 
marrow pudding;" to me it was indeed a treat; I had an 
anxious time to pass until I could hear from Daly, and was 
justified, as I felt, in diverting my thoughts from the one 

172 GILBERT GURNEY. 

object, thinking of which could do me no good. I felt flattered, 
too, that this great civic authority should have selected me for 
his particular notice and civility, and besides, I had never seen 
a criminal court; my experience has been limited to occa- 
sional visits on the bench at Bow Street to my worthy friend, 
whose advice I had slighted, and whose tutelage I had spurned ; 
and altogether it was new, it was something to excite, and to 
those who recollect what a man of twenty-one is when he is 
in love, it must be quite clear that excitement, oustre the one 
subject, is indeed rarely to be produced : I therefore agreed to 
accept the invitation of Mr. Sheriff Bucklesbury, who squeezed 
my hand, in confirmation of the engagement, in a manner 
which I have never forgotten. If it were possible to imagine 
a pair of walnut- crackers made to the same size as that of his 
worship's thumb and fingers, I am quite sure their pressure 
would be a trifle compared to the grip which I received from 
my new and extensive friend I was certain it was done in 
kindness, but at least a week elapsed before I recovered from 
the effects of it. 

Our tete-a-tete was interrupted by the facetious Duberly, 
who believing that the sheriff was a saint, asked him whether 
he had any objection to a rubber ; before his answer was given, 
Hull, who watched his worship with an almost Koo-too-ing 
kindness, came up, and drawing off the barrister, said to him, 
" Dubs, Dubs, don't be childish no cards here on a Sunday." 

" No," said Duberly, " I am sure we shall have none 
for you have none in the house." 

" None ! " exclaimed Hull, as usual " no cards come, 
come, Tim, you know better than that I have got two 
hundred and fifty packs in this very room ! " 

A sort of doubtful murmur ran through the party, and the 
poet said something of " speaking by the card ; " when Hull, 
getting rather angry at being doubted, proceeded to unlock a 
closet in the room, and the moment the door was opened at 
least twenty packs of entirely new cards tumbled out upon the 
floor : the astonishment was general. 

" My dear friend," said Hull, " you ought to know me 
better I never say what isn't true I bought these cards 
two years ago best cards you ever played with I never 
buy inferior articles got them in a lump two hundred 
and fifty packs told you so you may count 'em Dubs 

GILBERT GURNEY. 173 

1 see you laughing, Tim you may laugh count 'em as 
you would benefit tickets eh Tim pooh, pooh don't 
tell me." 

"Whether we did or did not play cards, I really do not now 
recollect ; I remember laughing until I almost cried at some 
delightful imitations of the actor. We had anchovy toasts and 
broiled bones, and all the incentives to dissipation, in which 
we speedily engaged ; punch, and all other destructive and 
delightful drinks, were introduced j the actor became more 
and more agreeable, for he was not only the most agreeable of 
actors, but the most intellectual of all comedians I ever met 
with ; the editor seemed pacified ; Dubs was delightful ; and 
the poet concluded the sports of the evening by pulling off' his 
wig, and throwing it at the inimitable favourite of-the theatre. 
Then all became noise, confusion, mirth, and mystification ; 
and when I opened my eyes in the morning, 1 found myself 
as thirsty as a crocodile, with a tremendous headach, and 
pains in all my joints, the sure result of excess committed in 
my early life. 

When I woke I could not for some time recollect where I 
was, or where I had dined. I could by no means remember 
how I got to the bed in which I found myself it was the 
scene of St. James's Street acted over again, only there had 
been no gambling, and there were no visible results. I began 
to consider whether I had said or done anything either parti- 
cularly ridiculous or offensive ; but vain were my efforts at 
reflection, until the chambermaid coming into the room, at 
once, by an association not to be questioned, convinced me that 
when I came to the inn from Hull's, the night before, I had 

" Fancied she was a goddess. 
Who thought me a fool ; " 

and oh, how abashed, and dissatisfied does a fellow feel, when 
he awakes, in his sober senses, to a faint recollection of the 
absurdities he has committed while degraded and debased by 
wine, or what the very genteel may think even worse, punch, 
and I too the devoted to Emma. I never shall forget 
the feverish, heated, mawkish, wretched state in which I was. 
However it seemed an understood thing that I was to appear 
at breakfast, and (for I recollected my engagement) subse- 
quently dine at the Old Bailey to eat marrow pudding, by in- 
vitation from one of the sheriffs of London and Middlesex. 

174 GILBERT GURNEY. 

There is no meal so odious as breakfast, in company. I had 
been excellent friends with all the mad devils of the preceding 
night, but when I came, sick and uncomfortable, into the 
breakfast room, I had to begin it all again, to recommence 
my acquaintance, and to hear, by way of comfort, innumerable 
allusions to what I had said and done, in the latter part of the 
preceding evening, of which I was myself perfectly uncon- 
scious. Then the wretched effort at eating, the tasteless tea, 
the dreadful egg the pithy fowl the briny ham I was 
nearly dying of it, and sorely repented that I had so far in- 
vaded Hull's most unquestionable hospitality as to remain for 
the night at Mitcham. 

Hull, however, was off to business early his gig and horse 
were at the door by ten, and he and Duberly dashed away, the 
one to the city, the other to the Temple. The poet lodged near 
at hand, and the editor walked off to town, intending as he said 
to loiter about the neighbourhood of Lower Tooting, for the 
purpose of collecting some information upon the actual state of 
the population of the agricultural districts. The actor was not 
up, and did not come down to breakfast he saw no fun in 
early hours, and therefore him I did not meet, but else by 
eleven o'clock we were all on the wing, and I left the cottage 
impressed with the kindness and hospitality of my new old 
friend Hull, who had completely vindicated himself from what 
I really did, before I had witnessed the proofs of his veracity, 
think was a little in the line of our venerable friend the Baron 
Munchausen. Having taken my departure, I drove to town, 
in order, if possible, by some means to refresh and re-invigo- 
rate myself sufficiently to appear before the judge and jury, at 
the hour mentioned by my worshipful friend, Mr. Sheriff 
Bucklesbury. 

It may seem singular even extraordinary having in my 
earlier days, as I have already said, frequently visited my 
worthy friend the magistrate at Bow Street ; and later in my 
career attended the courts in Westminster Hall, that I had 
never been in a court of criminal justice ; and as I have also 

sa j(j perhaps superfluously there is something extremely 

embarrassing in the anticipation of entering upon an entirely 
new scene of action in society. My directions from my new 
and important friend the sheriff, were, however, plain and 
explicit ; and accordingly, at a little before three, I presented 

GILBERT G1TRNEY. 1?5 

myself at a door under the colonnade at the back of the sessions 
house, and was speedily ushered on to the bench, where I had 
no sooner taken my seat, than with a feeling hardly explicable, 
but which I positively declare originated in diffidence, I fan- 
cied myself the object of general attention ; the fact being that 
no human creature in the court (which was crowded to excess) 
was conscious whether I had come into it or not. 

My friend Bucklesbury, who was seated in full costume at 
the left hand of the semicircular tribune, in a box of his own, 
his wand of office erect at his side, and a bouquet upon the 
desk before him, beckoned me in a kind and condescending 
manner to approximate ; and I accordingly shifted my posi- 
tion so as to come more immediately under his wing, or rather 
nearly over his head, in which position I much rejoiced, as 
he was kind enough to enlighten me upon many points with 
respect to proceedings in criminal law with which I was before 
by no means familiar. 

As I entered the court, a case of some importance had just 
terminated, and the judge just concluded his summing up, 
when the clerk of the arraigns put the customary question to 
the jury, "How say ye, gentlemen is the prisoner at the 
bar guilty or not guilty ? " Upon which the jurymen laid 
their heads together, and I heard something in a whisper from 
their foreman, who immediately pronounced the agreeable 
verdict, " not guilty." The prisoner bowed gracefully he 
was a pick-pocket and retired. 

The prompt decision of the jury convinced me that it must 
have been a clear case ; and I rejoiced at the departure of the 
now exonerated sufferer. 

" That's a reg'lar rascal," said the sheriff to me in a whisper; 
(e never was such a case heard on, to be sure seventeen 
watches, thirty-two pocket handkerchiefs, four pair of spec- 
tacles, and five snuff-boxes, all found upon his person ! " 

" Yet," said I, " the evidence could not have been very 
strong against him the jury acquitted him after a minute's 
consultation." 

" Evidence, Mr. Gurney !" said the sheriff, "how little do 
you know of the Old Bailey ! why if these London juries 
were to wait to consider evidence, we never should get through 
the business the way we do here is to make a zig-zag of it." 

I did not exactly comprehend the term as it was now ap- 

176 GILBERT GURNET. 

plied, although Daly had often used it in my society with 
reference to a pin and a card universally employed at the in- 
teresting game of rouge et noir ; and I therefore made no 
scruple of expressing my ignorance. 

" Don't you understand, sir?" said the sheriff " why the 
next prisoner will be found guilty the last was acquitted 
the one after the next will be acquitted too it comes alter- 
nate like save half, convict half that's what we call a 
zig-zag ; and taking the haggregate, it comes to the same pint, 
and I think justice is done as fair here as in any court in 
Christendom." 

This explanation rendered the next prisoner who made his 
appearance, an object of considerable interest to me. He was 
a little dirty boy, who stood charged with having stolen a 
pound of bacon and a peg-top from a boy somewhat his junior. 
The young prosecutor produced a witness, who, as far as ap- 
pearances went, might, without any great injustice, have taken 
the place of the prisoner, and who gave his evidence with con- 
siderable fluency and flippancy. His manner attracted the 
notice of one of the leading barristers of the court, Mr. Flap- 
pertrap, who, in cross-examining him, inquired whether he 
knew the nature of an oath. 

" Yes, I does," said the boy. 

" Explain it," said Flappertrap. 

" You may be d d," replied the lad, " that's a hoath, 

arn't it ? " 

" What does he say?" said the judge who, as I about 
this period discovered, was as deaf as a post. 

" He says, ' you may be d -d/ my lord," said Flapper- 
trap, who appeared particularly glad of an opportunity to bor- 
row a phrase, which he might use for the occasion. 

<c What does he mean by that ? " said the judge. 

" That is the way, my lord, he exhibits his knowledge of 
the nature of an oath." 

" Pah ! pah !" said the judge " Boy, d'ye hear me ? " 

" Yes," said the boy, " I hears." 

" Have you ever been to school ?" 

" Yes," said the boy, " in St. Giles's parish for three years." 

" Do you know your catechism ? " 

The boy muttered something which was not audible to the 
court generally, and was utterly lost upon the judge personally. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 177 

" What does he say ? " said his lordship. 

" Speak up, sir," said Mr. Flappertrap. 

The boy muttered again, looking down and seeming embar- 
rassed. 

" Speak louder, sir/' said another barrister,, whose name I 
did not know, but who was remarkable for a most unequivocal 
obliquity of vision "speak to his lordship look at him 
look as 7 do, sir." 

" I can't," said the boy, " you squints ! " 

A laugh followed this bit of na'ivett, which greatly abashed 
the counsellor, and somewhat puzzled the judge. 

" What does he say ? " said his lordship. 

" He says he knows his catechism, my lord." 

"Oh does not know his catechism why then what " 

" Does know, my lord," whispered the lord mayor, who was 
in the chair. 

" Oh ah does know I know here, boy," said his 
lordship, " you know your catechism, do you ? " 

" Yes," replied he sullenly. 

<c We'll see, then what is your name ?" said his lordship. 

" My name," said the intelligent lad " what, in the 
catechism ? " 

" Yes, what is your name ? " 

" M. or N. as the case may be," said the boy. 

" Go down, go down," said the judge, angrily, and down 
he went. 

" Gentlemen of the jury," said his lordship, " this case 
will require very little of your attention the only evidence 
against the prisoner at the bar which goes to fasten the crime 
upon him, is that which has been offered by the last witness, 
who evidently is ignorant of the nature and obligation of an 
oath. With respect to the pig's toes which the prisoner stands 
charged with stealing " 

" A peg-top, my lord ! " said Flappertrap, standing up, 
turning round, and speaking over the bench into the judge's 
ears. 

" Peg-top," said his lordship " oh ah I see very 
bad pen it looks in my notes like pig's toes. Well peg- 
top of the peg-top which it is alleged he took from the pro- 
secutor, there has not been one syllable mentioned by the 
prosecutor himself; nor do I see that the charge of taking 

N 

178 GILBERT GURNEY. 

the bacon is by any means proved. There is no point for me 
to direct your attention to, and you will say whether the pri- 
soner at the bar is guilty or not ; and a very trumpery case it 
is altogether, that I must admit." 

His lordship ceased, and the jury again laid their heads 
together; again the foreman gave the little "hem" of con- 
scious readiness for decision ; again did the clerk of the 
arraigns ask the important question, " How say ye, gentlemen, 
is the prisoner at the bar guilty or not guilty ?" " Guilty," 
said the foreman to the clerk of the arraigns ; and ' ' I told 
you so," said the sheriff to me. 

The next case was a short one. The prisoner a woman, 
the evidence clear and straightforward ; but no great interest 
was excited, because it was known that the case, for the trial 
of which in point of fact the learned judge had, for particular 
reasons, given his attendance, and which accounted for his 
lordship's presence at the close of the session, was very 
speedily to come on. This extraordinary combination of cir- 
cumstances afforded me the most favourable opportunity of 
seeing all the sights of this half awful, half amusing scene, 
even to the discharge of the grand jury, who had been spe- 
cially kept together for the purpose of finding or ignoring 
the bill preferred against the eminent culprit, who was evi- 
dently the great attraction of the day having found which, 
they had but three more to decide upon. 

It was in the middle of the defence of the female prisoner, 
now " coram nobis," and just as she was making a beautiful 
but useless appeal to the " gentlemen of the jury," that a 
bustle in the court announced some coming event. 

< f I am," said the weeping prisoner, " an orphan I lest 
my mother while I was yet a child my father married 
again, and I was driven from what had been before a happy 
home I have only to pray " 

Bang went a door the scuffle of feet were heard down 
went some benches " Make way make way !" cried some 
of the officers. " Stand back, sir, stand back the gentlemen 
of the grand jury are coming into court." To what the 
moaning prisoner at the bar might have limited her suppli- 
cations, I never had an opportunity of ascertaining, for the 
noise I have mentioned was succeeded by the appearance of 
eighteen or nineteen men, dressed up in something like the 

GILBERT GURNEY. 179 

shabbiest dominos I had seen at Lady Wolverhampton's mas- 
querade, trimmed with very dirty fur the leader, or foreman, 
carrying in his hand three bits of parchment. As these gen- 
tlemen advanced to a space reserved for them in the centre of 
the court, the judge kept exchanging bows with them until 
they had all reached their destination the foreman then 
delivered to the clerk of arraigns the three bits of parch- 
ment, who, putting his glasses on his nose, read James 
Hickson, larceny not found. John Hogg, felony true 
bill. Mary Ann Hodges, felony not found. The clerk 
then informed his lordship, partly by words, and partly by 
signs, the result of the deliberations of the grand jury, and the 
fact that there were no more bills to set before them. Having 
thus far proceeded, that officer inquired if the gentlemen of 
the grand jury had any presentment to make ; whereupon the 
foreman, one of the largest and dirtiest-looking persons ima- 
ginable, but whose countenance was indicative of love of power 
and command, and who appeared, at the moment he prepared 
himself to unburthen his great soul of a grievance, to feel as if 
the whole world were a football, made for him to play with, 

" My lord," said he, drawing himself up into an attitude, 
" I am sure I need not, at this time of day, enter into any 
discussion with your lordship on the vast importance of the 
rights and privileges of Englishmen of the original esta- 
blishment of the trial by jury in this country. It would be 
worse than idle to occupy your valuable time and that of this 
court, by dilating upon the merits of our constitution the 
chiefest of which has, I may say been always and I will 
say wisely, considerately, and prudently held to be that 
peculiar mode of administering justice between man and man. 
But, my lord, if in civil cases the deliberation and decision of 
a jury are considered adequate safeguards to the rights and 
property of the people, the law, still more careful of their 
lives and liberties, has interposed in criminal cases another 
and a higher tribunal, in the nature of a grand jury." 

Hereabouts the judge having bowed his head more gra- 
ciously, omitted to raise it again, having dropped into a sound 
slumber. 

*' That tribunal of mediation in the first instance, is full of 
importance ; and whatever subsequent proceedings may be 
taken in a case, I do say, for myself and my fellows, that 
N 2 

180 GILBERT GURNEY. 

the decision upon ex-parte evidence requires more circum- 
spection^ more care, and more consideration than a verdict 
delivered after a case has been argued, and after witnesses 
have been heard on both sides. 

" If, my lord, your lordship concedes this point, I will 
merely say, generally, that when the mind is occupied by any 
important object, more especially in matters of jurisprudence, 
it is absolutely necessary that nothing, if possible, should 
occur to irritate or exacerbate the feelings all should be 
calm, and at rest." 

Several people turned their eyes towards his lordship, and 
some smiled. 

" No incidental annoyance should be permitted to interpose 
itself; nothing which could divert the judge from the point 
to which his intellectual faculties ought to be directed, and to 
which, my lord, under suitable circumstances, they would, as 
they should, naturally converge. But, my lord, we are finite 
beings creatures of habit subject to all the weaknesses of 
our nature, and liable to be acted upon by impulses almost un- 
accountable to ourselves. For myself, and my fellows, I may, 
perhaps, hope for a favourable interpretation of our intentions, 
and a lenient judgment of our conduct. We have, my lord, 
struggled hard to do our duty, and I hope we have done it 
serviceably and effectually conscientiously and faithfully, I 
am sure we have. But, my lord, we do think it necessary to 
call your lordship's most serious attention to a fact which is 
embodied in the presentment I hold in my hand. It is one 
which occurs to us to be of paramount importance, as far as 
the tempering of justice with mercy is involved: we have suf- 
fered grievously from the existence of the evil to which we 
point ; and although at this time of the year its effects are of 
course not so heavily felt as in the winter season, we have con- 
sidered it a duty we owe to this court, to our fellow country- 
men, and, we may say, to every man intimately or remotely 
connected with the administration of criminal justice, spread 
as they may be over the whole surface of the globe, to state 
that the chimney in the grand jury room smokes so much 
and so continually, that it is impossible to endure its effects 
calmly or patiently ; and we therefore think it right to bring 
the matter thus formally before your lordship, and to desire 
that measures may be taken to abate a nuisance which, by its 

GILBERT GURNET. 181 

effects, is calculated to thwart, impede, and even distort the 
course of justice, and produce evils, the magnitude of which 
it is scarcely possible to imagine, and certainly not to express." 

A buzz of approbation from the gentlemen of the grand jury, 
who had been undergoing the process of smoke-drying for 
several days, created a stir in the court, in the midst of which 
the learned judge awoke ; and the lord mayor having whispered 
into his lordship's wig, his lordship bowed, and the clerk took 
the parchment. 

" Mr. Foreman, and gentlemen of the grand jury," said 
his lordship, " I am happy to say that your labours for the 
present are concluded ; there are no more bills for your con- 
sideration. Your presentment shall be attended to, and I 
have to acknowledge your great zeal and attention, and to give 
you thanks for your services : gentlemen, you are now dis- 
charged." 

The bows, and scufflings, and cries of <e Make way there for 
the gentlemen of the grand jury, who are coming out of court," 
were resumed, and the orator and his peers retired, leaving the 
poor girl at the bar, wondering what had happened, and what 
could be the reason that the worshipful community with the 
cat-skin tippets should have interposed themselves in the middle 
of her pathetic defence, in order to discuss the irritating cha- 
racteristics of a smoky chimney. 

I admit that the pompous oratory of the foreman, the 
" mons parturiens " a splendid exhibition, and the " ridi- 
culus mus," which eventually presented itself, were to me treats 
of no common order, and 1 regretted that Daly was not with 
me to participate with me in devouring the grave absurdities 
which we should have had before us. 

The trial of the girl was concluded, and I had no doubt as 
to her fate, now that I became acquainted with the principle, 
she was acquitted, and never shall I forget the effect which 
this result of her trial produced upon her manners and features. 
The moment my friend Zig-zag had pronounced the words, 
" Not guilty," the pathetic expression which had characterised 
her countenance turned into the most humorous, and having 
winked her eye at the learned judge, who, poor man, had 
summed up decidedly against her, she proceeded to place her 
two hands extended in a right line from the tip of her nose, 
in the direction of his lordship's seat, after the fashion of 
N 3 

182 GILBERT GURNEY. 

what is called " taking a double sight/' and then, making a 
noise which, if not indescribable by imitation, is certainly irre- 
ducible to writing, something between that which a hackney- 
coachman utters to encourage his tired horses, and that which 
a duck makes when it sees either a ditch or a drake in dry 
weather, she turned herself suddenly round with the least 
graceful pirouette I ever saw, leaving one of the hands which 
she had previously elevated for observation the last part of her 
person visible. 

A short case of pot-stealing followed the prisoner was 
found guilty in ten minutes ; and then came the case. It was 
a curious and intricate one, and I felt quite assured, when I 
saw the prisoner, a genteel-looking young man, take his place 
under the inverted mirror, contrived with an almost diabolical 
ingenuity, so as to refract and reflect the light upon his face 
from the huge window at his back ; I said to myself, having 
got both hardened and hungry during my short probation in 
court, " We shall not dine at six to-day." 

It might, perhaps, injure the feelings of the individual 
himself, or, if he be dead, those of his friends and relations, to 
detail the particular case, the more especially as nothing could 
be clearer than that the crime laid to his charge was amply 
and satisfactorily to everybody except himself proved 
and substantiated. 

Just as the last witness for the defence was under cross- 
examination, I saw one of the lord mayor's servants put his 
powdered head in at a little hole, and whisper something to 
the ordinary of Newgate, a remarkably pious-looking man, in 
full canonicals, with a bag-wig, which, to use Foote's phrase- 
ology, speaking of Dr. Simony (by whom, as of course every- 
body knows, he meant the unfortunate Dr. Dodd), " looked as 
white as a curd, and as close as a cauliflower." It struck me 
that either the pretty wanton who had just been acquitted 
desired some serious conversation with the clergyman, or that 
the last convicted pot-stealer felt some qualms of conscience, 
and had sent for spiritual assistance ; but no, my friend 
Mr. Sheriff Bucklesbury relieved my mind from any such ap- 
prehensions, by inviting me to a whisper, with an expression 
of countenance which convinced me that it was nothing of so 
serious a character which had suddenly summoned the reve- 
rend divine from the court. 

GILBERT GURNET. 183 

" Good news !" said the sheriff; " land is in sight." 

" What ? " said I, not exactly ' catching the idea.' 

" Dinner is not far distant/' said the sheriff, " the ordinary 
has been sent for to dress the salad." 

Well, thought I, that ever a man so dressed, and so ad- 
dressed, as the reverend divine opposite, should quit the seat 
of justice tempered with mercy, to mix oil and vinegar in a 
salad bowl does seem strange. It was evident to me, from 
the manner in which my friend spoke of the chaplain's secular 
vocations, that his respect for the table was infinitely greater 
than that which he entertained for the cloth, and never from 
that day have I seen painted over suburban inns, " an ordinary 
on Sundays at two o'clock," without thinking of the reverend 
functionary so styled in the Old Bailey, and the probable 
duties he would be called upon to perform. 

The evidence having terminated, and the clock pointing to 
fifteen minutes after six, his lordship began summing up. I 
have already mentioned that his lordship was deaf, and the 
strange blunders which I noticed in his early charges will per- 
haps serve to inform the reader of these papers, whoever he 
may be, that his lordship's handwriting was utterly unintelli- 
gible, even to himself; indeed so completely illegible were his 
notes, that the only resource his lordship had, if ever they 
were called for upon motions for new trials (which perhaps 
I need not here add, was in his lordship's case by no means 
an unfrequent occurrence), was to send them to be printed 
printers being proverbially the best decypherers in the world. 

His lordship's charge barring the inevitable blunders and 
hesitations, rendered absolutely necessary by this almost hope- 
less illegibility was exceedingly minute and elaborated. He 
recapitulated the evidence of the three first witnesses verbatim, 
and continued thus of the fourth : 

" Now, gentlemen of the jury, here is Amos Hardy 
Handy no, not Handy Harding Amos Harding tells 
you, that on Tuesday no, not Tuesday I see Friday, 
the 14th that is, the 24th he was going along Liverpool 
no Liquorpond Street near Guy's Island Guy's 
no Gray's Inn Lane yes going along Liquorpond Street, 
Gray's Inn Lane at about eight o'clock in the morning 
and saw the fire break out of Mr. Stephenson's windows. 
This, gentlemen of the jury, is a very remarkable fact and 
N 4 

181 GILBERT GURNEY. 

in connection with some other circumstances to which we shall 
presently come, is quite worthy of your particular attention 
you perceive that he swears to eight o'clock in the morning." 

" Evening, my lord," said Mr. Flappertrap, standing up 
and whispering his Lordship audibly. 

"Evening, is it?" said his lordship "ay, so it is 
evening no matter he swears to the time at which he saw 
the fire break out and hence will naturally arise in your 
minds a chain of circumstances which it will be my duty to 
endeavour to unravel. In the first place " 

Hereabouts one of the servants of the court put his head in 
at one of the doors at the back of the bench, and whispered 
the lord mayor much after the manner in which Mr. Flapper- 
trap had just before whispered the judge. His lordship im- 
mediately pulled out his watch then looked at the clock 
and then wrote a few words upon a slip of paper, and laid that 
slip of paper upon his lordship's notes. The judge took up 
the memorandum, and tore it in pieces as I thought indig- 
nantly. 

" You know what that means ? " said my friend, the sheriff. 

" No," said I. 

" Dinner's waiting," replied my friend an announcement 
which startled me, as it seemed impossible but that it would 
be kept waiting for some time. This little scene, however, 
was followed by the arrival of the recorder, who after bowing 
to the lord mayor, took his seat on the bench. 

" I told you so," said the sheriff, " Mr. Recorder is come 
to try the remaining cases " A cry of " Silence pray, 
silence," indicated that Mr. Sheriff Bucklesbury and I were 
speaking somewhat too loudly. 

" The circumstances to which I allude," continued his 
lordship, after he had torn up the note, " are in fact so clearly 
detailed in the evidence you have heard, that to men of intel- 
ligence and experience, like those I am now addressing, any 
attempt at explanation on my part would be superfluous. 
The case appears a very clear one you have to decide upon 
the value of the evidence, and return your verdict accordingly, 
giving the prisoner the benefit of any doubts you may enter- 
tain on the question." 

Never was I more surprised than at finding the promised 
explanations and comparisons of facts and testimony so sud- 
denly cut short, after the manner of " the story of the Bear 

GILBERT GURNEY. 185 

and Fiddle," and I could not help, while the clerk of the ar- 
raigns was putting his accustomed question to the jury, no- 
ticing the circumstance to my worshipful friend. 

'' To be sure," said the sheriff, " don't you see the time 
is up he smells the marrow puddings." 

The jury, emulating the expedition of the judge, in one 
minute, according to the zig-zag system, acquitted the pri- 
soner ; whereupon, his lordship rising to depart, addressed that 
individual in words to this effect : 

" Prisoner at the bar, you have been tried by an able, 
patient, and conscientious jury of your countrymen, who, 
convinced like myself of the enormity of your crime, and of 
the wicked intentions by which you were actuated in its com- 
mission, have returned the only verdict which they could 
justly and honestly return they have well discharged their 
duty. And although it is not my province in this place to 
pronounce the awful sentence of the law upon you, I shall 
take care " 

Here Mr. Flappertrap whispered his lordship that the jury 
had acquitted the prisoner. 

" By and by, sir," said his lordship, angry at being in- 
terrupted "I shall take care, young man, that an example 
shall be made in your person, of the " 

The lord mayor here ventured to suggest that the " young 
man" was found not guilty. 

" Very well, my lord presently, presently," said his 
lordship " even-handedness of justice ; and that an enor- 
mous offender of your class may not be suffered to escape the 
just vengeance of the laws which he has outraged." 

Here Mr. Flappertrap whipped a bit of paper over the 
desk of the bench, into the very place which the announce- 
ment of dinner had so recently occupied. His lordship looked 
at it, and exclaimed, unconsciously " Oh ! ah ! umph ! " 
and then continued " It is true that upon the present occa- 
sion the mercy and forbearance of the jury have been exer- 
cised in a signal manner ; and I trust their benevolence and 
indulgence will not be thrown away upon you. I maintain 
my own opinion still yet they have decided, and I have 
only to receive that decision you are discharged, sir, and 
may go about your business ; but I can tell you this, young 
man, you have had a very narrow escape indeed." 

There was not a man in court who did not tacitly admit 

186 GILBERT GURNEY. 

the truth and justice of at least the concluding passage of his 
lordship's address to the acquitted prisoner ; nor was that 
individual himself the least astonished of his lordship's au- 
ditors. The incident, however, was worthy of its place in 
the day's proceedings, as producing a climax to the judicial 
operations of the learned lord, and leaving upon the minds of 
all his majesty's liege subjects then and there present, a con- 
viction that however classical it may be to picture Justice 
blind, it is not, as a matter of convenience and utility, at all 
desirable that she should also be deaf. 

The signal for our departure having been given, I pro- 
ceeded with my friend the sheriff to ascend the stairs which 
led to the dining-room. When we reached the apartment, 
which was at the top of the building, we found several per- 
sons already assembled, and in conversation with the ordinary, 
who were come to partake of the dinner, but whose taste did 
not lead them to listen to the trials in court. Four or five 
barristers soon joined the group, and in a few minutes we sat 
down to the repast, which was more plentiful than splendid, 
and in which the much-vaunted marrow puddings displayed 
themselves conspicuously. The lord mayor took the head of 
the table, and the chaplain placed himself at the foot of it. I 
sat between my friend and patron, the sheriff, and Mr. Flap- 
pertrap, whose proceedings below stairs had attracted a very 
considerable share of my attention. I found him pleasant and 
full of anecdote the chaplain cut jokes innumerable the 
lord mayor was absolutely droll and the venerable judge 
himself laughed at some anecdotes which were told him, till 
tears ran down his venerable cheeks. 

Strange contrast ! five minutes before, these people had 
been below dispensing the law to the people, deciding the fates 
and fortunes of their fellow-men, raising or destroying the 
hopes of the doubting trembling friends and relatives of those 
arraigned before them ; and now their spirits having risen 
progressively with themselves to the top of the same building 
there they were, eating, drinking, and laughing, as if the 
dinner, of which they were partaking, was, in point of fact, 
the only cause or reason for their assembling. 

The feast went on some of the barristers departed for 
the court the chaplain " passed the wine," and the con- 
versation became general as the party diminished, when one 

GILBERT GURNEY. 187 

of the servants announced to his reverence that the " yeoman 
of the halter " had just arrived from Wales. The style and 
title of this officer was new to me ; and when a stout beetle- 
browed man entered the room, and made a low bow, I in- 
quired of my friend the sheriff what part in the play he 
performed ? 

" That's Mr. Scraggs," said the sheriff. 

" Yes," said I " but what is yeoman of the halter?" 

" A joke," said the sheriff " what you and the un- 
learned call Jack Ketch !" 

I felt a mingled sensation of surprise, and I must admit 
horror, at being in the same room with this most dreadful 
functionary. That feeling wore off when I found the sheriff, 
the under-sheriff, and even the lord mayor himself, recognise 
him. The chaplain, who was always destined to participate 
with him in the performance of the last scene upon the scaf- 
fold, filled a glass of wine and handed it to him. 

" Well, Mr. Yeoman," said his reverence ; " you have 
been out of town some time ? " 

" Five veeks altogether, doctor," said Scraggs ; " I vent 
down, you know, into Vales, for the first job ; but there vas 
a respit which kept me back a fortnight." 

" It is a curious fact," said the chaplain, addressing him- 
self to me, " but in the case to which the yeoman refers, he 
was obliged to go down to Carmarthen to hang a horse-stealer, 
because not a native of the principality could be found to per- 
form that duty on a Welshman." 

" Quite true, sir," said Scraggs : " howsomever, I had two 
executions besides that, durin' the time I was out ; one at 
Hereford, and another at Gloucester, they both vent off un- 
common veil : it has been beautiful weather the whole time, 
and I don't think I ever spent so pleasant a five veeks in all 
my life." 

The yeoman having finished his wine, put his glass upon a 
side table, made a bow to the company, and retired, about 
which time arrived the recorder, and two or three barristers ; 
this seemed to be the signal for a general move, and I sug- 
gested to my friend, the sheriff, a return to the court. This, 
however, was a vain proposition, for it was almost imme- 
diately announced that the last trial was on, and that the 
common serjeant had relieved the learned recorder, who was 

188 GILBERT GURNEY. 

to arrange the various sentences of the prisoners, which yet 
remained undecided, after which ceremony we should all go 
into court and hear the sentences pronounced. 

It was by a peculiarly happy concatenation of circumstances 
that I was enabled to see all these features of civic justice com- 
bined. The judge, however, as soon as the recorder made 
his appearance, rose from table we all did the same they 
remained in conversation for some time, when his lordship 
bowed to the company, and retired, accompanied by the lord 
mayor and one or two of the guests. The recorder then as- 
sumed the presidental chair, and we began the afternoon afresh. 
The chaplain pushed round the wine the butler placed 
glasses before the recorder, together with pens and ink, and 
a long book-like paper, which I found to be the calendar. At 
his right hand sat one of the city pleaders, and on his left the 
clerk of arraigns, who had joined our party at the same period 
with his lordship. 

The learned judge having placed his spectacles on his nose, 
began to peruse the names and crimes which this book of fate 
contained, and to apportion to each culprit tried that day such 
quantum of punishment as he might seem to deserve. 

" No. 174," read his lordship. "Martha Hickman 
stealing pewter pots what shall we say, Mr. Drawley ? Gen- 
tlemen, I have the pleasure to drink all your very good healths. 
Why, Mr. Butler " 

My lord." 

" What wine is this ? " 

te The same wine your lordship always drinks," said Mr. 
Butler ; for every office in the city, which is not dignified 
with a lordly title, is designated at once by its name, to which 
is prefixed mister for instance, the lord mayor's mace- 
bearer, and sword-bearer, are uniformly called, as indeed they 
call each other, ' Mr. Mace,' and 'Mr. Sword,' so Mr. Butler. 

" Not a bit of it, sir," said his lordship ; " this is sour, 
bad, wishy-washy stuff not fit to be drunk." 

" I am very sorry, my lord " 

" Sorry ! " said his lordship ; " what signifies being sorry, 
sir you should take care in the first instance to have proper 
wine put down." 

" I will change it, my lord, I " 

" Change it ! " said the recorder ; " to be sure, sir change 

GILBERT GURNEY. 18 % Q 

it directly ! It won't do, sir. This sort of thing has happened 
before get some other wine, sir, directly ! " 

This command was delivered in a tone of thunder, preceded 
by a flash of lightning from the eye of the irritated judge, who 
then fell to work upon the calendar. 

" Martha Hickman, stealing three pewter pots seven 

years' transportation. Robert Hayes, stealing three fowls, one 

duck, and a doe rabbit fourteen years, I think, eh, Mr. 

Drawley yes fourteen years have you marked him ? " 

" Yes, my lord." 

" Harriet Richards, stealing four yards of linen Richards 
was not that the woman with the cap and ribands?" 
" Yes, my lord." 

" That was a hanging cap," said his lordship ; "hardened 
woman two years' imprisonment." 

" Walter Cutts, stealing two loaves seven years for him, 
I think. Did you ever taste such stuff as that wine, Mr. 
Ordinary ?" 
" My lord." 

" You have not been drinking any of that bottle, have you? " 

" No, my lord," said the chaplain ; " it is corked." 

" It never should have been uncorked here, Mr. Ordinary," 

said the judge ; " it is an absolute insult. Well Stephen 

Robinson, for stealing two pewter pots upon my honour it 

is enough to bring on a cholera morbus Robinson, seven 

years' transportation. Vinegar would be just as palatable. 

Rachel Marsh, fourteen years abominable woman. Simon 

Warner, pair of boots, umph oh, I recollect that case 

transportation for life. Well, sir " 

" Will your lordship please to try this," said Mr. Butler, 
proffering a new bottle. His lordship, still muttering indig- 
nation, filled his glass, and after smelling its bouquet, and 
looking at its brightness, swallowed the contents. " Ah." said 
his lordship, " this is something like wine why did not you 
give us this at first, Mr. Butler ? Fill my glass again hand 
it round you'll find that, Mr. Ordinary, quite another sort 
of thing excellent, excellent wine indeed. Well, let us finish 
our business. Robert Holland, stealing fourteen gold watches, 
thirty-four gold chains, six timekeepers, and sundry loose 
diamonds, oh in a dwelling-house well, let's say three 
months for him capital wine, isn't it, Mr. Clerk capital. 

1QO GILBERT GURNEY, 

Roger Perkins, three mares and a foal six weeks' imprison- 
ment. Anne Griffiths, administering poison to her mother, 
aunt, and two sisters poor girl case of mistake, eh pass 
that bottle, Mr. Ordinary what shall we say childish care- 
lessness one month. Simmons, cow oh fine one shilling 
and discharge that's the last the last." 

Never was I more convinced of a man's wisdom than I 
was at this moment of that of the foreman of the grand jury, 
who had expatiated so elaborately on the effect of irritating 
circumstances acting upon the mind while it is employed in 
the dispensation of justice. As a sequel to the decisions of 
the jury, it appeared to me that the apportionment of punish-? 
ment was incomparable ; however, for the scene that was 
immediately to follow, I own I was not prepared. 

Just as the judge had concluded the " catalogue of crime," 
it was announced that the last trial was over, and that the 
Court was waiting for his lordship to pronounce sentence upon 
the convicted prisoners. The company rose and followed his 
lordship down stairs to the court I resumed my seat upon 
the bench, wholly unconscious of the nature of the spectacle 
which was so soon to absorb my attention. 

The whole place had assumed a different aspect since I 
had left it it was now night, and the lights were burning 
dimly in their sockets a profound silence reigned, and every 
eye was directed towards the door by which the prisoners, 
classified before their arrival, were to enter the dock. After 
the lapse of some minutes of suspense, a motley crowd pressed 
forward towards the bar sobs and groans were heard and 
faint cries, which evidently proceeded from those relations of 
the culprits, to whom, fallen and debased as they were, they 
were yet devoted in affection. 

" Who are these ? " said I to Bucklesbury. 

" These are the capital convicts you'll hear in a moment," 
was the reply. 

And I did hear one of the most awful addresses ever 
made to guilty creatures, delivered by the judge, who but a 
few moments before had seemed to me to be of the world, 
worldly. It appeared as if he had become suddenly inspired 
with an almost unearthly dignity and power. His voice deep 
and impressive, his language forcible and eloquent; the pur- 
port of his dread appeal, and its termination, never will be 

GILBERT GURNET. 191 

effaced from my memory. And when, in conclusion, amidst 
their wailings and supplications, he passed the awful sentence 
of the law upon his fellow- creatures, and in dooming them to 
death, prayed for mercy on their souls, 1 fell back in a state 
of insensibility, wholly overcome by my feelings, much, as I 
subsequently perceived, to the amusement of one of the under- 
sheriffs (a small attorney), who, at a later period of the even- 
ing, whether in order to enjoy a joke at my expense, or to 
affect the hospitable, I do not know, told me that he sup- 
posed, as I had heard the sentences, I might like to witness 
the execution of those who were to die, in which case he 
should be glad to see me whenever the day was fixed ; adding, 
with an expression of peculiar bonhommie, " we hang at eight, 
and breakfast at nine." 

There can be no question that a constant familiarisation 
with such scenes blunts the feelings, if it does not harden the 
heart. The butcher's wife, who bribed her baby to take 
physic by promising, if it were a good child, that it should 
stick a lamb the next morning, saw nothing revolting in the 
idea of killing that by the death of which she lived. To show 
to what an extent experience in horrors deprives them of their 
effect, I may mention the following fact related to me many 
years after this period, by a friend. 

When the traitor Thistlewood and his murderous gang of 
accomplices were to be executed before Newgate, my friend, 
whose taste lay that way, secured a window to witness the 
catastrophe. The sentence included decapitation after death ; 
and when the executioner commenced his work by cutting off 
the head of Thistlewood, and holding it up to the people as 
the head of a traitor, a shudder of horror thrilled through the 
crowd. The second similar operation upon the next culprit pro- 
duced a similar effect, but in a slighter degree; and so completely 
did that feeling wear off as the performance of duty proceeded, 
that when, in the executioner lifting the head of the seventh 
traitor, as the preceding six had been lifted to the public gaze, 
he happened to let it fall, cries of -"Ah, clumsy" " halloo, 
butter fingers," were heard from various quarters of the 
assembly. 

The awful denunciation of offended justice from the lips 
of the judge certainly did not produce upon the habitues the 
effect it had upon me. To the passing of the minor sentences 

]92 GILBERT GURNEY. 

I listened with composure, and I confess that when I heard 
Robert Hayes sentenced to fourteen years' transportation for 
stealing two ducks and a doe rabbit, and Anne Griffiths sad- 
dled with a month's imprisonment for endeavouring to poison 
all her existing relatives, I could not help thinking of the 
butler's corked bottle and the foreman's smoky chimney. 

When the court rose, I shook hands with my new friend 
the sheriff; and having taken a glass of hot brandy and water 
with the ordinary, which he recommended as a corrective for 
the indisposition produced by my sensibility, I quitted the 
Sessions House, amused and amazed by what I had seen and 
heard ; and most of all astonished that I had actually existed 
eight hours without once thinking of my beloved Emma ! * 

CHAPTER II. 

MY anxiety about Daly, and his proceedings in my behalf, 
began greatly to increase. He had been now gone a week, and 
I had heard nothing, although according to his own vivid an- 
ticipations I was to be actually affianced to Emma in three 
days after his arrival at Tenby ; at least, I might have 
been apprized of his arrival, and of the posture of affairs at 
the opening of the campaign. I went to his lodgings, but 
Redmond had heard no more than I. I returned thence, 
therefore, as ignorant and dispirited as when I went ; and as 
usual whiled away half an hour at the door of Mrs. Fletcher 
Green's carriage, which I met in Piccadilly, and which she 
caused to be drawn up close to the trottoir, in order to accom- 
plish our little tete-a-tete. She kindly renewed her invitation, 
but I was living in a sort of perpetual worry, and felt unable 
to mix in society any longer. I excused myself, therefore, by 
a plea of going into the. country, which I palliated with a 
hope that I should have the pleasure of seeing her on my 
return, and a promise that hers should be the first door I 
knocked at upon my arrival in London. 

* It is but just to observe, that this picture of the Old Bailey, sketched by my 
late friend, and not intended for the public eye, although essentially correct, bears 
evident marks of caricature. Mr. Gurney was at the time a young man, and ready 
enough to catch the ludicrous wherever it was to be found. Certainly, at the 
present time, the Court in question presents a very different appearance, and pos- 
sesses a very different character, ED. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 1Q3 

When I parted from her, I felt that it was quite impossible 
any longer to mistake the nature of the sentiment she enter- 
tained towards me ; and this very conviction increased my dif- 
ficulties and embarrassments. Nobody who has not been 
placed in circumstances similar to those in which I then found 
myself but I suppose almost everybody has can at all un- 
derstand the sort of misty maze which life appeared at that 
period. The sameness and tastelessness of everything dis- 
connected with the one great object of my life were, I must 
own, mixed with self-reproach to a very considerable extent, 
for having committed my affairs to the hands of so volatile a 
minister as Daly. 

It was not until the morning of the eighth day from his 
departure that I received a letter from my ambassador, not 
from Tenby, but from Malvern Wells, whither it appears he 
had followed my charming dulcinea. However, the shortest 
way of connecting my adventures and proceedings with a his- 
tory of my own time, will be to insert his various communi- 
cations upon this interesting subject in their proper places. 
No. 1. of the correspondence immediately follows: 

" Malvern. 

" MY DEAR GURNEY, By the date of this you will see 
that I have had a sharp chase after your fair friends. My 
proceedings since we parted would make a valuable addition 
to the classical stories of Mr. Lane, of the Minerva Press, 
Leadenhall Street. They have been varied and curious ; but 
I fear to you, who have but one object in view, will not be 
particularly interesting. 

" I slept at Oxford the night I left town, supped with some 
old friends at the Mitre, sallied forth and met the Vice- 
Chancellor returning from supper over Magdalen Bridge ; we, 
who were all somewhat elevated, thought it quite right to ele- 
vate him, and accordingly we hoisted him on our shoulders, 
and having crowned him with a lamp-cover, carried him home 
to Baliol, at the gate of which we deposited him, having 
luckily met with interruption neither from proctor nor bull- 
dog. I ought perhaps to premise, that having arrived at about 
five, I went to wine at Brasenose, with a most admirable 
person, called in these parts Sober Tom ; and while in his 
rooms, a fancy came into my head, that the blowing up of 
Cain and Abel, who stand cheek by jowl in the middle of the 

o 

194 GILBERT GURNEY. 

quadrangle, would be excellent fun. Accordingly, having the 
quoi faire in my coat-pocket, as soon as it grew dark, and before 
we adjourned to our episcopal inn, I deposited one of my ex- 
ploding grenades in a luckily discovered crack in the pedestal, 
gave him three quarters of an hour's fuse, and just as we were 
clear of the rose, bang he went, and the unnatural brothers 
were regularly floored upon the grass-plot, much to the edifi- 
cation of four unhappy devils who were locked up in a room 
over the gateway fagging for a fellowship. 

" To me these freaks are admirable jests; for, not belong- 
ing to the University, I care nothing for taking the active 
direction of exploits for the performance of which I am not 
amenable to the heads or tails here ; while my intimacy with 
some score of the hardiest young fellows in Oxford gives me, 
at least as far as mischief goes, an esprit du corps highly to be 
commended. 

" Do not for a moment imagine that these parenthetical 
pranks were permitted for a moment to interfere with your in- 
terests. A man must sleep somewhere ; and after Dow 
Wolf 's exhausting receiver of Friday, I assure you I felt a halt 
at the end of the first fifty miles absolutely necessary to my 
comfort, although I could not endure the idea of being a night 
in Oxford without exercising my native ingenuity during the 
course of the evening. 

" Our supper was excellent nine of us all as sober as 
judges when we broke up ; which circumstance, however, 
did not hinder me from performing one feat with unqua- 
lified dexterity. An elderly gentleman, in a shovel hat, with 
a fat wife and a fair daughter, was toddling up by easy stages 
from Wales for advice from the London doctors, and was lodged 
in the room on the first floor immediately under us. The 
worthy shovel sent at least a dozen messages up to implore 
and entreat we would make less noise an imprudence on his 
part not to be altogether overlooked. About eleven he went 
to bed in dismay, in the back room, with the bed-room within 
it, in which the bright-eyed damsel of a daughter was herself 
duly deposited out of harm's way. As we came down from 
our sitting-room, 1 heard the invalid shovel snoring a duet 
with his exemplary and obese partner. Up I ran into the 
room immediately over bis head, and in the twinkling of an 
eye turned up three half-tester beds right on end, in which 

GILBERT GURNEY. 195 

were sleeping two strapping chambermaids and a kitchen- 
wench, and having poised them thus, banged to the bed-room 
door, which instantly awakened the reversed damsels, who, 
startled at the noise, jumped, as they thought, tip in their beds, 
which had precisely the reverse effect, namely, that of bringing 
the three bedsteads simultaneously to the floor, with a noise 
which would have roused Somnus himself, if he had con- 
descended to take up his lodging under the hospitable roof of 
our friend Peake. 

" A dreadful peal of laughter, which succeeded the explo- 
sion, must at once have satisfied the disturbed travellers 
whence the uproar proceeded, and of course quieted their ap- 
prehensions, that as Macbeth's friend says, ' where they lay 
last night, the chimneys were blown down.' 

" The next day I pursued my journey, rattled through 
Cheltenham_ to me the most odious place in England what 
it may be twenty years hence, I don't pretend to say now it 
is a bad edition of Hammersmith reached Gloucester by half 
past three, and found myself housed at the Angel at Aberga- 
venny a little before nine, having done my ninety-three miles 
in eleven hours and a half, which, in these parts, I call going. 
Those who live to see steam coaches, and steam boats, and air 
balloons in general use, may perhaps sneer at the pace ; but as 
neither you nor I are likely to endure till the age of hot 
water and hydrogen gas, it is as well to be contented with 
what we have in the way of speed. 

" Would that I could have kept up at the same rate ; but no, 
the roads grew bad, the horses worse, and I had a heavy 
day's work of it to get to Caermarthen by half past one o'clock 
on Sunday morning. At Caermarthen 1 resolved to pitch my 
tent, and roosted, as owls are said to do, in the Ivy Bush. 
Nothing particular occurred there ; and about half-past eleven 
in the day I proceeded to the pretty little town which we 
fancied contained your jewel beyond price. I reached the 
White Lion, and began my inquiries amidst the ringing of 
bells, which distracted me, but of which I subsequently found 
myself the unconscious cause. Remember, I don't mean house- 
bells, for the White Lion boasts no such luxury I mean the 
church-bells, which were set going in their merriest peals to 
do me honour, for which, in the sequel, I found one pound 
one shilling set down in the bill under the head of ' ring- 
o 2 

196 GILBERT GURNEY. 

ers;' but a little eclat is worth paying for, if one have but the 
money. 

" Well, my dear friend, having brought you" to the White 
Lion, or rather, having brought myself there, 1 sallied forth 
in quest of our family feasted my eyes on the beauties of 
the place, admired the elegance of Sir William Paxton's baths 
detected an old naval friend of mine patiently playing bil- 
liards with a very sensible-looking gentleman, at a table which 
stood on an inclined plane ; so that the skill of the game con- 
sisted rather in keeping the balls out of the left-hand corner 
bottom pocket than putting them into any of the others 
Began my inquiries with him ' place full many families 
there who were the leaders ? ' He was as innocent as a 
sheet of white paper knew nothing except a report of Mil- 
ford Haven being about to be adopted by government as a 
naval station. I pitied and left him, and proceeded to the 
apology for a library, which I entered. In a subscription- 
book lying on the counter, I read over a list of the fashionables 
who graced the place Mr. and Mrs. and three Misses Evans, 
Mr. Hugh Jones, Mr. David Jones, and Miss Jones, Mr., 
Mrs., and Master and Miss Morgan, Captain and Mrs. Rice, 
Mr. and Mrs. Leek, and Miss Leek, Mr. and Mrs. Griffiths, 
Dr. Roderick Jones, Colonel and Mrs. Williams, Mr. Jenkins 
Jones, of Cwmdblrowmgytty, and family ; Mrs. Price Price 
Morgan Rees of Mmllabyth, and a vast many other similar 
names filled the pages but no Haineses. I thought this 
odd, and therefore ventured to push my inquiries to the li- 
brarian. He put his finger, first on his forehead, then on his 
nose, and then on his lip ; and, turning to a very pretty rosy- 
cheeked girl, said, ' Wern't those people's name Haines who 
had Evan Thomas's house ? ' ' Indeed to God it was/ said 
the girl. ' That's it, sir,' said the librarian, ' 'deed is it ; 
they have been gone away these three weeks, sir a lady and 
daughter.' 

" 'Exactly so,' said I ; 'now, can you tell me whither 
they went ? ' 

" 'That I can't indeed,' said the librarian; f but if you 
will let me send over to Evan Thomas, I have no doubt he 
will know.' 

" My permission was soon granted, and the information soon 
gained the Haineses had gone to Malvern ; where, for all 

GILBERT GURN'EY. 197 

Mr. Evan Thomas knew, they were still sojourning. Of 
course, I made every preparation for pursuing them to that 
lovely spot in the morning ; taking, however, the opportunity 
of a delightful evening to abstract the linchpins from all the 
bathing-machines which were ranged under the cliff; for 
which little mental and bodily exertion I was amply repaid 
before my departure, by beholding the actual overthrow of 
three of the said machines during their progress to the sea, 
and the consequent ejectment of three fair tenants in a state of 
inconceivable distress ; not to speak of two others of the ve- 
hicles, which when I first opened my window at the White 
Lion were lying on their sides on the beach, looking like a 
brace of dead elephants. 

e( Refreshed by breakfast and the success of my exploit, I 
started from Tenby ; but as I met with no adventure of any 
importance, and more especially as I am quite convinced that 
you are more anxious to hear of my arrival at Malvern than 
any thing else, I shall say not a word as to my journey thither 
or rather, hither which I safely concluded about five 
o'clock in the afternoon of my second day. 

" I was driven to the Well House, where I determined to fix 
my head-quarters at all events ; and in less than ten minutes 
had ascertained that Mrs. Haines and her fair daughter were 
actually inmates of that delightful tenement. Nothing could 
so charmingly facilitate plans like those which I had laid 
in the mornings, noons, breakfasts, afternoons, and evenings, 
we should be associated domesticated together at breakfasts, 
luncheons, dinners, and suppers, in walks and in drives, in 
loungings and in lollings, in talkings and singings ; in short, 
in every amusement, pursuit, or recreation, occupiers of the 
same tenement, members of the same family. 

" It must be evident, that nothing can so entirely conduce to 
the accomplishment of my project, as the fortunate circum- 
stance of their having settled here. Except at Harrowgate, 
I know of no other watering-place where the whole population 
are cooped up together ; all the difficulties of introduction are 
overcome, and you will, I am sure, be delighted to hear that, 
although I lose no time in reporting progress, having been 
here not more than twelve hours, I am already on speaking 
terms with the Haineses, mere etfilk. 

" At the table, where all the company meet at meals, the pro- 
o 3 

198 GILBERT GURNEY. 

motion is progressive the last comer sits lowest, and thus 
upon a Tontine principle, the longest survivor gets the highest 
place a shaky admiral and his rigid wife are the monarchs 
at present ; opposite to them, and of the same standing, are a 
deaf lord and his pretty niece ; and next to the admiral on the 
right hand side, come Mrs. Haines and her daughter. The 
company below the salt are chiefly old and invalids ; but there 
are some gay rollicking folks who appear to annoy the sicklies 
by their liveliness and laughter, the old hands seeming to 
think, because Malvern air and Malvern water have been re- 
commended for ' their ' complaints, that Malvern Well House 
is to be converted into a sort of hospital. Here is one sweet 
girl under the tutelage of her aunt. They are more recent 
arrivals, and are therefore nearer me at table ; in the evening of 
yesterday we got very sociable, and she sang that exquisite 
song of Moore's, c Dearest love, I'll not forget thee,' like a 
syren Aunty looked suspicious at me why, I cannot un- 
derstand I am all innocence, if people would but trust me. 

" I carefully watched your Emma she appears pale, and 
I think out of spirits. I must approach with care and caution 
nothing ruins an affair like flurrying a gentle creature such 
as she seems to be a sudden surprise sometimes excites them 
into an exclamation ; one scream would upset all my opera- 
tions, and perhaps produce my expulsion from the community ; 
for Mrs. Steer, mine hostess, is a very dragon in the way of 
prudence and propriety. There is a Captain Meriden, who 
seems to talk to Emma more than anybody else, but she is shy 
and retiring in her manner, and from the ease with which she 
converses with, evidently cares nothing about him. 

" Major M'Gurfin, of the grenadier school, is, however, 
more attentive to your future mother-in-law. The style and 
manner of their living the gay servants the smart carriage 
the glossy horses the well-dressed maid all bespeak the 
snug and comfortable ; and although as the gallant gentleman 
has not, in all probability, had the advantages which we have 
derived from Doctors' Commons, he may imagine that he 
might console the widow for the loss of her late Mr. Haines, 
and at the same time render himself, as the husband of Mrs. 
M'Guffin, extremely comfortable for the rest of his days 
rely upon it he will be disappointed. Another week will see 
me on terms of the most entire confidence with the ladies, and 

GILBERT GURNEY. 199 

I will stake my existence that before a fortnight is over, our 
affair will be concluded. 

" We have some extraordinary characters here, but I know 
too well the nature of your complaint to fancy that I could 
interest or even divert you for a moment by a description of 
them. It is curious to see, for English people, how sociable 
they get in this Well House. It is the constant association, 
the necessity, as it were, of making society, that produces this 
the elders play whist in a room on one side the hall, while 
the juniors play the piano-forte and the fool on the other: I 
ought, however, just to tell you, that, on the night of my 
arrival, I discovered that the bed-room candles belonging to all 
the guests are placed upon a table behind a screen in one 
corner of the saloon, so that each person after supper for as 
we dine at three, that conciliating meal is considered absolutely 
essential to our existence each person can depart at pleasure, 
and all 

' Without hurry, or bustle, or care.' 

The moment I made this acquisition of knowledge as to the 
localities, I took the precaution of dipping the ends of every 
candle muttons, I give you my honour into a basin of 
water, which I found in their company on the table, and which 
seemed to have been placed there on purpose to tempt me. The 
result was, that on the departure of the first squad of tabbies 
for like fruit on a tree, in a place, like this, the most matured 
drop off first there arose such a spitting and sputtering be- 
hind the screen, that one would have fancied a magnificent 
display of fireworks had been going on or rather off in 
the distance, during which experiment, accompanied by the 
lamentations of the venerable sisterhood, Major M'Guffin kept 
his great green eyes immoveably fixed upon me, whether he 
only suspected me as the author of the mischief, or, favoured 
by his unusual height, had looked over the screen, and seen 
me at work, I could not then make out, nor have I since dis- 
covered ; nevertheless and notwithstanding, I flatter myself I 
am, upon the whole, popular. 

" As for Emma, your description did not do her half justice 

I think her perfection her eyes are all eloquence, and 

the gracefulness of her manner is incomparable. Mrs. H. is 

not quite what I expected, I dare say of a very domestic turn 

o 4 

200 GILBERT GURNEY. 

of mind, but somehow not that I flinch from my bargain if 
it can in any way contribute to the success of our scheme. I 
have no time for more ; assure yourself of a despatch the 
moment I have made any effective advance ; in the mean 
time, keep up your spirits, and believe me, as I truly am, 
" Yours most faithfully, 

R. F. DALY." 

The receipt of this communication gave me great content- 
ment, inasmuch as it not only dissipated all the apprehensions 
I had formed of my friend's possible neglect of his mission in 
the pursuit of some strange vagary of his own, but because it 
afforded me intelligence of negatively satisfactory character, in 
telling me, that Emma, if torn from me by her anxious 
parent, was at least free from the persecutions of any other 
regularly received suitor ; and as I never entirely believed in 
the seriousness of Daly's intentions with regard to Mrs. 
Haines, it mattered little to me whether Major M'Guffin's 
attentions were in earnest or not, or indeed whether they 
might or might not prove acceptable to her. 

Somewhat composed, therefore, by this communication, I 
accepted an invitation to dine at Lady Wolverhampton's to 
meet Mrs. Fletcher Green and her young companion, whom I 
now discovered to be her sister, Miss Carter Catherine 
Carter, and several extremely agreeable persons. It was 
rather a blue party, but Mrs. Fletcher Green contrived to 
enliven it, and with her honied words overcame the flavour of 
the prussic acid, which otherwise would have predominated. 
Some people sang, some played cards, some recited poetry in 
one room, and others diverted themselves at the more in- 
teresting game of loto, at which, I must confess, the noble 
hostess seemed not only very much amused, but particularly 
successful ; indeed, Mrs. Fletcher Green appeared to have 
such confidence in her ladyship's luck, that she neither would 
join the party herself, nor suffer her sister nor me (for whom 
her manifestations of kindness were unequivocal) to partici- 
pate in its alluring pleasures. 

' Ogni medaglia ha il suo reverso,' says the Italian pro- 
verb, I was this evening destined to appreciate its truth, 
and I am even now almost ashamed to admit how deeply I 
felt, that the next morning was fixed for Mrs. Fletcher 
Green's departure from town on a visit to a lord and lady 

GILBERT GURNBY. 201 

somebody, whose name I have forgotten, somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of Windsor, and where she was to stay for a 
week or eight days, during which period Ascot races, I 
believe, were to occur. I am sorry to say that whatever 
compliments my taste might deserve for my admiration of 
this fascinating woman, my stability of purpose, and con- 
stancy of mind, were not to be highly lauded. However, the 
chances were, that upon her return to town, I should be irre- 
vocably parted from her, as far as any tenderer feeling than 
that of friendship was concerned, although I did not despair 
by the access of fortune which would accompany my union 
with Emma, to establish her and myself in such a position in 
society as would render us the worthy entertainers of my 
agreeable friend and her sister, under what I hoped would 
bs always found, our hospitable roof. 

Well, away went the evening and away went Mrs. 
Fletcher Green and her sister, and at length away went I, 
not knowing what the next day would produce, and living in 
a state of nervousness entirely indescribable. 

Upon my arrival at my lodgings, I found an invitation 
written in the most delicate hand, and in minute characters, 
from my friend Hull, to dine with the Worshipful Company 
of Toothpick Makers, who were to have their annual feast at 
the Crown and Sceptre at Greenwich, to which he, being, I 
suppose, one of the worshipful fraternity, had the privilege of 
taking a friend. I was puzzled whether to struggle against a 
desire to mix in society, with the peculiarities of which I 
could never, without the aid of my civic and mercantile 
friend, become acquainted, or to give up the conflict, and 
abandon myself to the solitude which I was sure would be 
most congenial to my feelings. I thought with Thomson, 

" I want to be alone, to find some shade, 
Some solitary gloom : there to shake off 
These harsh tumultuous cares that vex my life, 
This sick ambition on itself recoiling : 
And there to listen to the gentle voice, 
The sigh of Peace something I know not what, 
That whispers transport to my heart." 

Yet after all, why should I brood and nestle over my sorrow 
I hesitated but then, I had been interested and excited 
at the Old Bailey, why should I not seek solace from the 
Crown and Sceptre at Greenwich. I debated the ' to be or 
not to be,' for half an hour, and at last resolved to see, what 

202 CILBEBT GURNEY. 

I had never seen, a public dinner, and which I little doubted 
had its attractions and its oddities. I accordingly wrote an 
answer to my friend Hull, accepting his kind bidding, 
and promising, as he desired, to be rigidly punctual to six 
o'clock. 

Of all things in the world a ' daylight dinner ' is the most 
detestable of all operations. I remember being so struck with 
its peculiar desagremens, that although my heart was then 
little attuned to the gay school of poetry, I could not help 
venting my spleen, and the detestation which I felt for the 
blaze of sunlight glaring- into the Greenwich tavern windows, 
made more brilliant by reflection from the water, in some 
lines, the entire copy of which I have lost, but of which the 
following are fragments : 

When Summer's smiles rejoice the plains, 

And deck the vale with flow'rs ; 
And blushing nymphs, and gentle swains, 

With love beguile the hours : 
Oh ! then conceive the ills that mock 

The well- dressed London sinner, 
Invited just at seven o'clock 

To join a " daylight dinner." 

The sun, no trees the eye to shade, 

Glares full into the windows, 
And scorches widow, wife, and maid, 

Just as it does the Hindoos ; 
One's shoes look brown, one's black looks grey, 

One's legs if thin, look thinner, 
There's nothing equals, in its way, 

A London daylight dinner. 

The cloth seems blue, the plate's like lead, 

The faded carpet dirty. 
Grey hairs peep out from each dark head, 

And twenty looks like thirty. 
You sit beside an heiress gay, 

And do your best to win her, 
But oh ! what can one do or say, 

If 'tis a daylight dinner. 

A lovely dame just forty-one. 

At night a charming creature, 
My praise unqualified had won, 

In figure, form, and feature. 
That she was born, without a doubt, 

Before the days of Jenner, 
3y sitting next her, I found out, 

Once at a daylight dinner. 

Freckles, and moles, and holes, and spots, 

The envious sun discloses, 
And little bumps, and little dots, 

On chins, and cheeks, and noses. 
Last Monday, Kate, when next me placed, 

(A most determined grinner,) 
Betrayed lour teeth of mineral pnste, 

Eating a daylight dinner. 

GILBERT GtTRNEY. 203 

How much farther I indulged in this poetic strain, or whe- 
ther I did carry the joke any farther, I have now quite for- 
gotten ; however, I accepted the invitation, and although I 
was at the lime perfectly innocent of the scale of dignity and 
antiquity claimed by the Toothpick Makers' Company, I felt 
assured that I should add something to the store of knowledge 
which I have been recently laying in with regard to civic 
matters. I must honestly confess that I had no cause to repent 
the decision at which I had arrived. 

The day was extremely fine ; the windows of the rooms 
opening to the water, the house smelling of fried fish and 
mud, and the little boys with naked legs screaming, " please 
to make a scramble," we having attained this enviable position 
in the building which looked like a race-stand, by treading a 
labyrinth of the dirtiest alleys and stable-yards that ever 
pauper or pony inhabited. It was, however, a joyous scene ; 
and Hull, who was good enough to be my Mentor on the oc- 
casion, pooh-poohed the waiters into allowing us to look at the 
dinner-room, all laid out for the company ; more than a hun- 
dred were expected, partitions had been pulled down, holes 
cut out here, and props poked in there, to afford the required 
accommodation ; in short, every thing gave token of a goodly 
day. 

Hull, who was at home everywhere, and everywhere popu- 
lar, appeared, as soon as he arrived, to supersede everybody 
else. 

" My dear friend," said he, " I happen to know these peo- 
ple the Toothpick Makers are one of the most ancient cor- 
porations of the city. My dear sir, the Mercers were incorpo- 
rated in the 17th of Richard the Second I have a tract that 
will prove it 1393 they were embodied I know the clerk 
of the company at this day so do you." 

"No, I do not," said I. 

" Pooh, pooh," said Hull, " don't tell me Jemmy Hobbs 
everybody knows Jemmy Hobbs married Miss Ball of 
Blackheath splendid fellow. Jemmy. Well ! these Mercers 
are a fine company, so are the Grocers, St. Anthony is 
their patron. My dear sir, I am forced to know all these 
things. Then there are the Drapers, and the Fishmongers 
pooh, pooh Doctors, and Proctors, and Princes of the Blood, 
are all fishmongers Walworth was a fishmonger eh my 

204 GILBERT GURNEY. 

dear friend, you should see their paintings splendid things 
Spiridiona Roma fish in all seasons. Then there are the 
Goldsmiths and the Skinners, and the Merchant Tailors 
Linen Armourers eh queer fellows, some of them ; but I 
do assure you " (this was said in a whisper,) "you will 
see some men here to-day worth seeing." 

" I suppose," said I, " the Toothpick Makers' Company 
was founded by Curius Dentatus whence comes the French 
cure-dent." 

" Pooh, pooh," said Hull, " no such thing much older 
than Curius Dentatus I happen to know founded in the 
reign of Edward the Fifth, my dear friend." 

About this period the company began to arrive ' thicker 
and faster,' and certainly I had never seen any one of them 
before, which gave, at least, an air of novelty to the scene. 
Generally speaking, they ran fat, and wore white waistcoats, 
such as that to which I had likened the bow window of 77, 
St. James's Street : they looked all very hot, and puffed a 
good deal ; however, they kept coming and coming, until 
the drawing-room, as a sort of thing like a bad conservatory, 
well placed to the south-west, was called, was so full that 1 
began to be as hot as my companions. Six o'clock arrived, 
but no dinner ; the master of the house (who, from wearing 
a similar sort of uniform waistcoat, I took to be a Toothpick 
Maker,) came in and spoke to some of the fattest persons of the 
community, evidently intimating that the banquet was ready 
nevertheless no move was made, because it appeared that 
Mr. Hicks had not arrived. 

" You had better," said one of the more important persons 
in the room, ' f let men be placed ready to see when Mr. Hicks 
arrives at the end of the lane by the stables." 

" Yes, sir," was the answer ; and from that time I heard 
nothing but Hicks and Mr. Hicks talked of, until I was 
driven by extreme curiosity to inquire of my omniscient friend 
Hull, who Mr. Hicks was. 

"Hicks!" exclaimed Hull " why, my dear friend, you 
know Mr. Hicks the great Mr. Hicks everybody knows 
Hicks." 

" I for one," said I, " do not " and it turned out that at 
the moment I was not likely to be enlightened, for, just as 
Hull was about to give me an account of this important per- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 205 

sonage, a hubbub and bustle near the door, which speedily 
pervaded the whole assembly, proclaimed his arrival. In a 
moment the buzz of conversation ceased, a sort of circle was 
made round Mr. Hicks, and several of the most distinguished 
members of the community hurried up to take their places 
near him. Hull dragged me towards this sanctum, this magic 
ring, and with a look of the greatest importance assured me, 
that it was right that I should immediately be presented to 
Mr. Hicks. The presentation accordingly took place, and no 
sooner was it over, than one of the grandees came up to me, 
and, in a confidential whisper, informed me that my place at 
dinner was on the left of Mr. Hicks, as being a friend of the 
master. I concluded that the arrangement was attributable to 
Hull, who, I found, was to be my neighbour on the left, and 
although I could have dispensed with the honour of so close 
an approximation to the hero of the day, I rejoiced mightily 
that I was placed so near my friend Hull, who would be as 
useful to me upon such an occasion as is a catalogue of the 
pictures at an exhibition anywhere else. 

In a very short time dinner was announced, and Mr. Hicks, 
having the master on his right hand, led the way to the large 
room upstairs, round the whole of which the table ran, exhi- 
biting, as I entered the apartment, a lengthened line of tin 
covers, looking like a collection of cuirasses, glittering on the 
board ; the heat was tremendous, and the air redolent with 
fried flounders. A few minutes sufficed to arrange us, grace 
was said by the chaplain, and we fell to. As in all similar 
cases, the exercise of eating and drinking superseded convers- 
ation or remark, and I, who did but little in that way my- 
self, and having therefore an opportunity of seeing the modus 
operandi at my leisure, became suddenly enlightened as to the 
extent to which such pleasures may be carried. Of each and 
every dish did each and every man partake, from turtle to 
white-bait, both inclusive ; by comparison with the individuals 
now before and around me, my friend Bucklesbury, whom I 
had a week before considered a prodigy in the way of feeding, 
sank into insignificance ; to the elaborated course of fish 
succeeded a host of fowls, cutlets, hashes, stews, and other 
things of that nature, accompanied by sundry haunches of 
venison, and succeeded again by ducks innumerable, and peas 
immeasurable. The destruction of all these articles was, how- 

206 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

ever, effected with ease in less than an hour and a half, during 
which the attentions paid to Mr. Hicks were most marked 
and gratifying : if the sun shone in upon the tip of his 
nose, the waiters were ordered to pull down the blinds before 
him ; if the gentlest breeze wantoned about the back of his 
neck, the master of the house was called to shut the window 
behind him ; for him the chairman culled the choicest bits ; 
to him the landlord tendered his most particular wines : every 
eye was fixed on his actions, every ear seemed open to his 
words ; he had, however, as yet spoken little, but had ' eaten 
the more.' 

All sublunary pleasures must have an end, so had this 
dinner ; and a call of silence, and the thumping of the pre- 
sident's hammer upon the table, announced that some profes- 
sional gentlemen were about to sing Non nobis, Domine. 
They began we all standing up I with the sun full in my 
eyes, setting over London in all its glory. The voices har- 
monised beautifully, but fine and melodious as they were, I 
felt that the canon, or whatever it is called, very much resem- 
bled a fire which, smouldering and smouldering in the low 
notes, kept perpetually bursting out in a fresh place, when one 
fancied it out. As far as the religious feeling of the thing 
goes, it was misplaced ; and as for its duration, it seemed to 
me more like three graces than one. 

This over, the wine began to pass, and ' beards to wag ; ' 
Hicks grew condescending, and the day began to mend ; the 
King's health was given song, God save the king chorus 
by the company, all standing The Queen The Prince of 
Wales then the Duke of York and the Army the Duke 
of Clarence and the Navy the Memory of Saint Ursula, 
the mother of all Toothpick Makers, with an appropriate 
glee, received with loud cheers. 

The master then rose and begged to propose a toast. No 
sooner had he uttered these words, than the whole room rang 
with applause, the wine-glasses danced hornpipes upon the 
table to the music of the forks and spoons, and the noise was 
tremendous. " I see," continued the worthy president, " that 
you anticipate my intentions ; gentlemen, there could be no 
doubt upon your minds what the toast would be" (mort 
cheering). " I will not occupy your time, nor hinder you 
from the gratification of your feelings upon this topic by d'- 

GILBKRT GURNEY. 20? 

lating upon the merits of the illustrious individual whose 
health I am about to propose ; whether we regard him in 
public life, guiding by his zeal and energy the community 
which he fosters and protects by his influence, or view him in 
private society, the ornament of the circle of which he is the 
centre, our gratitude and admiration are equally excited. 
Gentlemen, I will not trespass upon your time, or wound, what 
I know to be the delicacy of his feelings, by recapitulating 
the deeds which gild his name, and which have, during the 
last year, added so much to his honour and reputation, and to 
the welfare and comfort of his colleagues and associates : 
I beg to propose the health of Benjamin Spooner Hicks, Esq. 

a name dear to every Englishman with all the honours." 
Then came a storm of applause unparalleled, at least in my 

experience. A band of music, which had hitherto been silent, 
struck up " See the Conquering Hero comes," and nine times 
nine cheers were given in a style the most overwhelming. 
During this storm of rapture, I seized the opportunity of once 
again asking Hull who Hicks was, and what he had done, to 
deserve and receive all these extraordinary marks of approba- 
tion and applause, but all I could extract from my rubicund 
friend was, " Pooh, pooh, don't tell me you know Hicks 

my dear friend, everybody knows Hicks there isn't a 
man better known in the universe." There was no time 
amidst the din of glory to assure him once more that I had 
by no possible accident ever heard his name before, so I re- 
sumed my seat as the object of our enthusiasm quitted his, to 
return thanks. His up-rising was hailed by the company with 
an almost Persic adoration : silence at length having been 
obtained, he spake 

" Sir, and Gentlemen, there are certain periods in our 
existence which entirely defy description this, as far as I 
am concerned, is one of them. I have been placed in many 
trying situations, and I think I may say, without fear of con- 
tradiction, I have behaved as became a man (loud cheers) ; 
I am aware that some of my efforts for the benefit of my 
fellow-creatures have been crowned with success (Jiear, hear, 
/tear) ; and I am thankful to Providence that I am possessed 
of the means to do good to them as is not so well off as my- 
self (loud cheers). I say, sir, it would be the height of 
baseness for a man who has been born with a silver spoon in 

208 GILBERT GURXEY. 

his mouth, not now and then to take it out, and feed them as 
has not been so fortunate (great cheering). My political 
feelings and principles I need not touch upon (immense 
cheering) ; they are known to all the world (tumultuous 
applause) ; I shall steadily maintain the course I have here- 
tofore followed, and observe the straight line, neither swerving 
to the right hand, nor to the left, as little awed by the frown 
of power as flattered by its smiles (hear, hear. hear). 

" Gentlemen, I sincerely thank you for the honour you 
have done me, and beg to drink all your good healths in 
return." 

The shoutings were here renewed, but to an extent far 
beyond the former exhibition. Mr. Hicks sat down, but 
still the thunder continued ; and scarcely had it subsided, 
even for a moment, when Mr. Hicks, upon his legs again, 
caused a relapse which nearly drove me mad. 

Hicks waved his hand, and it was a calm you might 
have heard a pin drop he had to propose the health of the 
worshipful chairman > the Master of the Toothpick Makers' 
Company. 

After expressing in almost the same words that Hicks had 
just before used his conviction that this was the " proudest 
moment of his life," the chairman continued to observe, that 
if any thing could possibly add to the gratification of having 
his health drunk by such an assembly, it was the fact of its 
having been proposed by such an individual. He then pro- 
ceeded to say, that he was quite sure in that society, composed 
as it was of men of all parties, all professions, and all politics, 
he need not expatiate upon the merits of the honourable gen- 
tleman to whom he had previously alluded they were known 
all over the world. He, like Hicks, returned the most heart- 
felt acknowledgments for the favour he had received at their 
hands, and sat down amidst very loud acclamations. 

Still I was left in ignorance of all the great deeds which 
' gilt ' my friend Hicks's ' humble name ; ' and .1 found, 
being so near him, that it was quite impossible to get enlight- 
enment. At length, however, I was destined to hear some- 
thing of the character of his achievements ; for shortly after 
the worshipful master had sat down, and just before the 
healths of the wardens of the Toothpicks, or some such 
functionaries, were about to be toasted, a tall, thin, pale man 

GILBERT GURNEY. 209 

a rare specimen in the museum rose and said, as nearly 
as I can recollect, what follows : 

" Sir, I am sure you will forgive me for the intrusion I 
now venture upon ; but I cannot permit this opportunity to 
pass without expressing, ort my own part and on the behalf of 
several of my worthy neighbours, a sense of our obligation 
and, indeed, the sense of obligation under which, like us, the 
rest of civilised Europe, are laid, by the manly, courageous, 
zealous, and indefatigable exertions of the honourable gentle- 
man on the right of the chair, to whom you have so justly 
referred (loud cheers). It may, perhaps, be thought super- 
fluous in me to enlarge upon a subject so familiar to your 
hearts ; but I cannot avoid mentioning a trait which at once 
displays the greatness of that honourable gentleman's mind, 
the prowess of his courage, and his immutable determination 
to do justice to all men " still louder cheers followed this 
point. 

" I think," continued the pale man, " I need not speak 
more distinctly upon the subject to which I allude." Here 
shouts rent the room, and the glasses began to dance again. 
" But, lest there should be any gentleman present, who might 
by accident be unacquainted with the circumstance to which I 
refer " (cries of " no, no ! impossible ! hear, hear ! order, 
order!") "I say, if for it may be so if such a thing 
should be, I think it best at once to explain, that the conduct 
to which I now specifically refer, but which I may truly say 
is of a piece with every action of his honoured life, is that 
which our great benefactor and friend if he will allow me 
so to call him" (Hicks nodded, and said " hear ! ") " ob- 
served upon the occasion of removing the lamp from the corner 
of Black Lion Street to the head of Spittle Court." (Immense 
cheering,} " Sir, I do not wish to go into the question of the 
eleven yards of pavement from the Swan Inn to the boot- 
maker's " roars of laughter burst from part of the company, 
at the evident severity of this remark upon the conduct of 
some other eminent individual, murmurs from others, " hear, 
hear ! " from many, and " oh, oh ! " from a few ! " I strictly 
confine myself to the lamp ; and I do say, without fear of 
contradiction, that the benefit conferred on society by that 
change, and the manly way in which it was effected, without 
truckling to the higher powers, or compromising the character 

p 

210 GILBERT GURNEY. 

and dignity of the Company, has shed immortal lustre upon 
the name and fame of the honourable gentleman to whom I have 
alluded. (Immense cheers.} I have to apologise for this effusion" 
(" no, no ! bravo ! ") "but it is involuntary. I have for 
severkl months laboured under emotions of no ordinary nature ; 
I have now unburdened my mind, and have done my duty to 
myself, my honourable friend, and my country." 

The ogre sat down amidst the loudest possible applause, 
and more shouts were sent forth in honour of Hicks. 

The healths of the Wardens of the Company were then 
drunk they returned thanks : then came alternately songs 
and glees by the professional gentlemen : then they drank 
Mrs. Hicks and family ; and then for be it observed, the 
fervour of the applause increased as the night grew older 
the uproar was tremendous. Nine times nine seemed infinitely 
too small a complement of cheers to compliment the Hicks's, 
and I had become dead tired of the whole affair, when Mr. 
Hicks the great Mr. Hicks, rose to return thanks for that 
honour. He talked of connubial felicity, and spoke of the 
peculiar merits and charms of his daughters with all the elo- 
quence of a tuft-hunting mother. Having done which, he fell 
to moralising upon the lateness cf the hour, and the necessity 
of recollecting that Greenwich was nearly five miles from 
town ; that, happy as we were, prudence pointed to a period at 
which such enchantments should terminate. " Gentlemen," 
said he, " in conclusion, I have obtained permission to pro- 
pose one parting bumper. I believe we are all agreed that the 
constitution of England is a blessing envied by every country 
in the world (loud cheers). We have drank the king, the 
queen, the royal family, the army, the navy, the ministers, and 
indeed every thing that we could be well supposed to drink 
constitutionally. Gentlemen, the place in which we are now 
assembled suggests to me the best, the most loyal, the most 
appropriate, and the most constitutional toast possible as a 
conclusion. I give it you with feelings of mingled loyalty 
and piety I propose to you, ' The Crown and Sceptre,' and 
may they never be separated." 

This unqualified piece of nonsense, delivered seriously by 
Hicks (rather overcome) to about fifty or sixty survivors of 
the original dinner, nearly killed me with laughing : not so the 
company at it they went cheered like mad up-standing 

GILBERT GURNET. 211 

nine times nine rattle went the forks jingle and smash 
went the glasses and in the midst of the uproar. Hicks rose, 
the Master did the same, and, of course, we followed the ex- 
ample. 

Then came all the worry and confusion about carriages 
the little alley was crowded with people seeking for convey- 
ances it had just begun to rain. Hull looked at me, and in- 
quired what vehicle I had? I had none 1 was annihilated 

when, judge my delight and surprise, at finding the illus- 
trious Hicks himself at my side, offering Hull and myself 
places in his coach. I could scarcely believe it ; however, so 
it was, and an advantage was derivable from it for which I 
was scarcely prepared. 

" Come down with me," said Hicks, " directly : this way 

they are preparing a deputation to light me through the 
alley to the carriage I want to avoid it. My boy tells me 
it is all ready if we can but get round the corner, we shall 
be off without being observed they will do these things, but 
incog, for me I hate state and finery eh, Mr. Hull ? " 

" Pooh, pooh ! " said Hull, ef you need no new honours 
to be sure what a day eh never was any thing so 
splendid ! " 

And so Hicks's boy, or as Hull called him, " b'y/' preceding, 
we made our escape into the patriot's carriage ; and never did 
I more rejoice in my life. The quiet of the calm which 
aeronauts experience when they rise in a few minutes from 
the tumultuous shoutings of the populace into the dead still- 
ness of the vast expanse above, cannot be more surprising than 
was the tranquillity of the coach compared with the boisterous- 
ness of the company. 

Mr. Hicks carried us as far as he could, without inconveni- 
encing himself, and set us down at the corner of a small street 
in Cheapside having, just before we parted, mentioned to 
me that if at any time I should be in need of any article in 
the hardware line, I should find every thing he had at whole- 
sale prices and of the very best quality. 

Hull and I walked westward, but whether it arose from the 
length of the way or its width, I cannot exactly state, I was 
uncommonly tired when I reached home. When I fell asleep, 
which I did as soon as I got into bed, I dreamed of the ex- 
traordinary infatuation which possesses men in all classes of 
p 2 

212 GILBERT GUR1S T EY. 

life to believe themselves eminently important, and their affairs 
seriously interesting to all the rest of the world ; and became 
perfectly satisfied that every sphere and circle of society pos- 
sesses its Hicks, and that my friend the hardwareman was 
not one bit a greater fool than his neighbours. 

CHAPTER III. 

IN medicine, I believe for, thanks to a good constitution, I 
know less than my neighbours of the arcana the effects of 
stimulants are generally followed by depression. In love 
as I then was I am quite sure that the system of forcing 
the spirits, and exciting the mind was one which proved ab- 
solute misery to the patient after the excitement was over ; 
and I candidly confess that I never felt myself so much 
"down" in my life as I was when I got "up" the morning 
after the extraordinary developement of vanity and ignorance 
which I have just recorded. 

Lifted but to fall from a greater height, I found myself in 
a state, I cannot say of desponding, but of aching, sickening 
anxiety, for a second letter from Daly ; but no, the day 
passed, and no account of his proceedings arrived. Hull, who 
seemed sincerely interested about me, and really " happened 
to know "a great deal more of my affair with Miss Haines 
than I at first believed it possible he should have found out, 
called upon me and comforted me, and winked, and tittered, 
and put his glass to his eye, and his finger to his nose, and 
pooh, poohed, and did all he could to encourage me "knew 
her father" "excellent man" " prodigious property :" 
all of which I received as it was intended ; being at the same 
time by no means satisfied with the tone of the information 
which I had from my ambassador at Malvern. 

My anxiety was, however, not destined to be relieved until the 
expiration of five more days, during which period it had 
reached such a pitch, that I felt very much inclined to put 
myself into the Worcester mail, and seek an interview with 
my negotiator, making the Hop Poles in that beautiful city 
my head-quarters. I could not, however, make up my mind : 
such a step might prove something like the heedless shake 

GILBERT GURNEY. 213 

which a child, for whom its elder sister has nearly finished 
a house of cards, gives to the table whereon it stands, and, by 
one hasty and incautious movement, levels the delicate fabric 
to its foundation. 

At length, however, Time, in the shape of a general 
postman, 

" The welcome letter brings : " 

and I, in an agony of contending passion, burst the seal. I 
read as follows. 

No. II. 

" Malvern,Tuesday. 

c< DEAR GURNEY, Things go on swimmingly. I have 
become universally popular with all the agreeable people here, 
and the terror and aversion of the superannuated patients of 
our hospital. Emma is delightful; we sing duets after break- 
fast make sketches after luncheon and take walks after 
dinner. She is fond of backgammon we play together 
she beats me, and laughs : I can beat any body else ; but 
somehow her dear little fingers moving amongst the men, and 
the piquant air with which she throws the dice, confuse me, 
and I am invariably vanquished. After tea (which the people 
here drink with as much delight and regularity as if they were 
so many washerwomen) we dance together; while Major 
M'Guffin, who seems very much inclined to anticipate me in 
my pretensions to Mrs. Haines, talks to the not unwilling 
widow romantically of the pleasures of domestic life. 

" We had nearly a serious quarrel three days since : the 
Major thought proper to make me his confidant ; and as I 
was going over to Worcester, was single-minded enough to 
beg me to undertake a commission for him, which he felt dis- 
inclined personally to execute. In order to secure my assist- 
ance, he was induced to inform me that, having a desire to 
look as well and as youthful as possible, he had resolved to 
thicken his hair (which has grown extremely thin), by the 
application of some celebrated vegetable balsam, which, accord- 
ing to the published accounts of it, would produce a luxuriant 
crop of curls in the course of three applications. ' Now,' 
says the major, ' if I go myself with my half-bare pate, the 
folks in the shop will know that I want the balm, or the 

214 GILBEBT GURNEY. 

balsam, or whatever they call it, for myself, d'ye see, and that 
I would not in the least like ; but you, with your scrubbing- 
brush head, never could be suspected of wanting any such aid 
will you buy me a bottle ? ' 

" I need not tell you how readily I undertook the affair ; but 
little did he guess the real cause of my assiduity upon the 
occasion. Off I go to Worcester, buy the bottle of miraculous 
balsam at one shop, and a bottle of strong depilatory, for the 
instant annihilation of superfluous hair, at another. Into the 
Poles I go ; out with the corks ; and having carefully decan- 
tered the depilatory into the balsam bottle, seal it up with the 
most delicate nicety, and return to my anxious friend. 

" The major, grateful beyond measure, cons over, with the 
greatest attention, the directions for using the much longed-for 
balm ; and, according to the instructions specified, saturates 
his small crop of hair with the liquor, and ties on his night- 
.cap as tightly as possible, and goes to bed, anxious for the 
morning, when, like a male Medusa, he might put his head 
out of the window, and exhibit to his sincere friend and mes- 
senger the beautiful result of his experiment. 

" I knew what must inevitably happen ; but was even yet 
scarcely prepared for the entire success of my scheme. I was up 
early it is a fashion here to rise soon. I was leaning over 
the rails in front of the house ; M'Guffin's bed-room window 
was open ; but although I saw him not, I thought I heard the 
thunder of his oaths occasionally rolling about the ceiling of 
his room ; himself still invisible. At length one of the ser- 
vants came to me, and told me that Major M'Guffin wished 
to see me up-stairs ; he was very unwell, and could not come 
down to breakfast I obeyed the summons; and, upon en- 
tering the apartment, beheld him in his dressing-gown, sitting 
before a looking-glass, his head as clean, and as clear of hair 
as a nine-pound shot. 

" ' What's the matter, major ? ' said I. 

" ' Matter!' said the major; ' by the powers I'm a ruined 
man ; Samson's case was nothing to mine ; look at my head.' 

" I did, and did not laugh ; on the contrary, I exclaimed, 
in a tone of horror, ' Mercy on us, what have you done with 
your hair ? ' 

"'Hair is it,' cried the major; 'here look see;' 
saying which, he exhibited to my view his night-cap, the 

GILBERT GURNET. 215 

interior of which, containing the whole stock of the article 
which once had decorated his head, looked exactly like an 
ill-built bird's-nest. So fatally well had the depilatory done 
its work, that when in the morning he anxiously removed the 
cap, away came every vestige of its crinitory covering, and 
the patient was left in the deplorable state in which 1 
found him. 

" It would evidently have been vain to attempt to pun him 
into calmness at the loss of his " hair apparent," or cajole 
him into a good temper by alluding to " the hare and many 
friends," or by speaking of " trifles light as Aair." I saw he 
required as much management as if the operation had been 
prudentially performed by way of preface to a more serious 
course of restraint. I therefore expressed grief and surprise 
at the extraordinary effect produced by the application ; but 
my horror was indescribably great when the gallant officer 
expressed his irrevocable resolution of immediately putting to 
death the innocent perfumer of Worcester, who had sold me 
the article. This expedition, of course, I felt it absolutely 
necessary to stifle in its birth, and therefore painted in my 
best style, without giving offence, the ludicrous appearance he 
would make in Worcester, and the certainty that the wags at 
the Wells would get hold of the story, and make him uncom- 
fortable, if not ridiculous, by disseminating it in all directions. 
I advised him, on the contrary, to allow me to send off for an 
experienced hair-dresser, who would, in the course of four or 
five hours, come down with an assortment of wigs, from which 
he might make a suitable selection in time for dinner ; over- 
ruling his objections to the sudden display which his new 
acquisition would make, by remarking, that if the balsam, for 
which he had sent the preceding day, had adequately fulfilled 
his expectations, founded upon the pretensions it put forth, he 
would have been equally surprising in appearance to the eyes 
of the company. 

"It seems I had luckily hit upon the true scheme of manage- 
ment. The nervous sensibility of the major to any thing like 
ridicule, got the better of his latent feeling of revenge ; and I 
accordingly despatched one of Steers's men for the perruquier, 
promising faithfully to keep his secret from our fellow-lodgers, 
and more especially from Mrs. Haines and Emma. 

" We are to have a little fete on Thursday ; it is Emma's 
p 4 

216 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

birthday I am to be master of the ceremonies. We shall 
have donkey races, and other rural sports, and fire-works in 
the evening. The Great Malvern band banditti are to 
be in attendance, and we purpose being uncommonly gay : 
indeed, Emma does me the honour to say, that I have worked 
a glorious revolution in this once dull place. I chiefly effected 
it by rebelling against the megrims of sundry invalids, who, 
as I told you in my last, set up their ill health as a plea 
against our good spirits. Now I had no idea of sick people 
governing a whole house, and accordingly very soon put them 
down ; and now, poor dears, they have betaken themselves to 
a parlour on the opposite side of the hall, leaving the long 
room free for our gambols and gaiety. 

" I am forced to stop short in the description of our proceed- 
ings, for Mrs. Haines tells me that Emma is waiting for a 
walk ; so for to-day adieu. Every thing looks well ; and I have 
little doubt that another week will establish me in the con- 
fidence of mother and daughter, and our great coup may be 
made ; so keep up your spirits, assure yourself that every 
thing here looks couleurde rose, and that our eventual triumph 
is secure. We talk of going to Ross for a day or two nous 
verrons ; telling you that, puts me in mind of repeating a 
slight accidental joke, which occurred here the evening before 
last. I was talking to a vastly pretty little woman, whose 
face is ' a fortune ' (but which always reminds me of the 
fox-found vizor in the fable), of the refinement which has 
taken place in conversation and manners since those days in 
which, we are told, wit and humour so much more abundantly 
flourished. My pretty doll assented to all my grave remarks 
upon the interesting topic, and concluded by quoting to me 
that oft-repeated couplet : 

' Immodest words admit of no defence ; 
For want of decency is want of sense.' 

" I anxious to let her know that the lines were not, as they 
are very generally thought to be, Pope's said, ( Oh, I see 
you have been looking at Roscommon.' ' Not I,' said the 
dear innocent. ' We went last week to Ross churchyard, to 
admire the view, but we had not time to go upon the Com- 
mon,' Only imagine such exquisite naturalness, or, as our 
friend the poet would call it, such 'viridity of intellect;' such 
incomparable innocence. But I must have done ; so re- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 217 

member, in three days you shall hear again, and in the mean 
time, once more say I, keep up your spirits. 

" Yours always, 

"R. F.DALY." 

I read this letter with a degree of pleasure and anxiety 
which few can appreciate ; and till I came to the end of it, I 
can scarcely say which of the two predominated. But when 
I arrived at its conclusion, and found it one continued history 
of Daly's own proceedings, his own happiness, and, as it ap- 
peared to me, his own flirtations and successes therein, I ho- 
nestly admit, that anxiety most incontestably triumphed. It 
appeared to me that the minister had forgotten the monarch, 
and that he was acting independently, not with the mother, as 
he had first proposed, but with Emma. And then I began to 
reprove myself knowing his extraordinary qualities, as I 
did with having been prevailed upon to send such a man 
upon such a mission. I did not then quite as well know, as I 
have learned since, how madly fond women are of any thing 
very odd, and very notorious. When Lunardi first exhibited 
to the English public the sight of a gentleman, tied in a bas- 
ket, under a silk bag, carried up into the clouds by means of 
hydrogen gas, he became the idol of the women ; they wore 
Lunardi hats, and Lunardi bonnets, and balloon petticoats, and 
parachute caps ; and even went the length of cutting strips 
from his coat, as relics, and making a point of touching him 
as he paraded for that and such-like purposes in the Pantheon 
in Oxford Street. Now, although Daly had never practised 
Icarusism. and had confined his efforts to mother earth, his 
reputation had soared he was known, talked of, praised by 
some, abused by others, and laughed at by many ; but still he 
was talked of. This unquestionable claim to female attention 
and favour he possessed to a considerable extent ; and being 
what is conventionally termed ' a privileged person' (the pre- 
cise meaning of which I do not pretend exactly to understand), 
his life as indeed I have already recorded was one con- 
tinued series of incidents, best calculated to maintain (what, 
I admit, / should have considered) a most unenviable dis- 
tinction from his fellow-men. 

It certainly appeared from whatever cause it might arise 
that he had assumed the character of hero of my romance 

218 GILBERT GXJRNEY. 

in his own person : that there was any thing like acting f in 
the name and on the behalf" of his friend, I could not, from 
any part of his communication, discover ; and I felt very 
much inclined to address him upon the subject, and endea- 
vour, by gently pulling the check-string, to remind him that 
there was such a person as Gilbert Gurney in the world : a 
circumstance which, it seemed to me, had entirely slipped his 
memory. But then we had previously agreed that I was not 
to write to him during his disinterested siege of Miss Haines, 
lest the appearance of a letter from me (the superscription to 
which, in such a community as a watering-place, would, in all 
probability, be seen by more than the one person to whom it 
was directed,) should mar his manoeuvres, and blow up the 
scheme altogether. This circumstance, and the apprehensions 
connected with it, of course prevented me from taking the 
only step which could satisfactorily relieve the doubts, which 
the style of my friend's letter, I confess, began to excite in no 
very inconsiderable degree. 

A few days, however, served to throw a new light upon the 
affair, and leave me in the full blaze of conviction of his skill 
and adroitness, his insincerity and his treachery ; for before 
the expiration of another fortnight, during which he had re- 
ported to me a conversation which he had had with Miss 
Haines, of which, he told me, I formed the leading subject, 
Hull, my omniscient Hull, called upon me for the second 
time, his eyes sparkling with the consciousness of " happening 
to know " something, yet conveying an expression not alto- 
gether free from concern and regret. It is impossible to de- 
scribe the April-like character of his countenance, as he sat 
himself down opposite to me at my breakfast-table. 

" Well," said I, IC what news have you got ? " 

" News, my dear friend," replied Hull, " I have no news ; 
you have plenty eh." 

I looked a negative. 

" Pooh, pooh, don't tell me," continued my companion ; 
" can't hoax me ; you know well enough so do I." 

" I know nothing, I assure you," said I ; " nor can I even 
guess to what you allude." 

" Allude ! " exclaimed Hull, with a sort of crow ; " why, 
my dear sir, it's known every where all over London. Jem 
Burrows knows it so does his wife. Come, come, you are 

GILBERT GUHNEY. 219 

joking it wo'n't do if you are sorry for it, so am / I 
don't believe you care twopence about it." 

" About what ? " asked I. 

" Are you in earnest?" said Hull. " 1 hate to be laughed 
at eh ? you don't mean to say that you have not heard 
about your friend Daly ? " 

" I heard from him a few days since/' said I. 

" Where was he then ? " said Hull. 

" At Malvern," was my reply. 

" You wo'n't hear from him at Malvern again," said Hull 
" left that Monday last." 

11 Are you sure ?" said I. 

" Sure my dear sir," said Hull : " I happen to know it ; 
spoke to a man yesterday who passed him on the road between 
Cheltenham and Oxford." 

" On Monday," said I ; " surely I should have either seen 
or heard from him if that were so." 

" No, you wo'n't either hear or see from him in a hurry," 
said Hull, looking diabolically cunning. 

" I'll go forthwith to his lodgings, and obtain information 
from Redmond." 

" Redmond isn't there," said Hull ; " he is with his master." 

" How do you know that ? " said I. 

" I called at his lodgings before I came here," said Hull. 

" At his lodgings !" said I ; " why, you told me you were 
not in the habit of visiting him." 

" Quite right," said Hull ; " but I happen to know his 
landlady, Mrs. Widdlecum; have known her these two-and- 
thirty years. Pooh, pooh, my dear sir, you can't deceive me ; 
knew her when her husband kept the Caxton's Head, in Bear- 
binder Lane, before you were born. I had heard of Daly's 
movements, so I called upon her to inquire; and I found 
Redmond, Daly's servant gone, and the lodgings given up 
now do you smell a rat ? " 

" I suppose," said I, " that Daly has got into some infernal 
scrape, and has been forced to bolt." 

" Scrape ! " exclaimed Hull ; " now be serious ; you don't 
mean to say that you are ignorant of the truth ? " 

" I mean to say," replied I, " that I know nothing whatever 
of his movements during the last ten days/' 

" Then you have been very ill used," said Hull : " my 
dear sir, he is married." 

220 GILBERT GURNET. 

"You don't mean it," said I: "cunning dog and he 
has really carried his point, and without ever letting me know 
it. And pray, as you know every thing, where is Emma ? " 

"Where?" said Hull; "where should she be but with 
him ? But, my dear friend, what do you mean by carrying 
his point?" 

" It was part of our scheme," said I " only don't betray 
me that he should take this step with regard to one of the 
ladies, in order to leave me the quiet possessor of the other." 

" What other ? " said Hull. 

" Emma," said I. 

" Emma ! " echoed Hull ; " my dear sir, you don't even yet 
comprehend me Daly has eloped from Malvern with Miss 
Haines Emma eh pooh, pooh." 

"With Emma!" said I incredulous in the highest de- 
gree " no, no, Mr. Huh 1 ; you know a great many things, 
but here, for once, you are mistaken." 

" Mistaken ! " said Hull ; "my dear sir, you'll see along 
account of it in the ' Chronicle ' to-morrow." 

" May be so," said I ; " and a strong contradiction of it 
the day after." 

" I'll stake my head on the truth of it," said Hull : " Billy 
Bowles knows Daly as well as you do he told me the fact 
saw him with Miss Haines, on Monday, galloping in a 
chaise and four, from the inn at Northleach, towards Oxford." 

" It is impossible," said I and at the moment I said so, 
my thoughts flew to the tone and character of Daly's last let- 
ter. In the next minute I began to fancy it might be so 
thence my ideas rushed to the consequences of such perfidy, 
and I began to cast about in my mind where I should find a 
fit person to act as friend, and call the traitor to account. 
" It cannot be," said I. 

" But it i* so," said Hull. Cl My dear sir, it is never worth 
my while to state what I don't happen to know to be fact : 
rely upon it, you have been ill-used." 

" And, depend upon it, Mr. Hull," said I, " if I have, I 
will have satisfaction for such conduct." 

"Satisfaction!" said Hull ; "pooh, pooh what satisfac- 
tion is there in shooting at a man %vho is shooting at you at 
the same time ; who is irrevocably united to your sweetheart : 
no, no, take my advice treat the affair with philosophy and 
contempt." 

GILBERT GUBXEY. '221 

" You must permit me," said I, " to be the best judge in 
this case ; no man can appreciate another's feelings under such 
circumstances, and therefore no man can direct or guide his 
conduct : baseness like Mr. Daly's must not go unpunished." 

" His conduct is not to be defended, that's certain," said 
Hull. 

" And where," said I, "is it supposed admitting the ru- 
mour to be well founded that the happy couple are gone ? " 

" Northward," said Hull ; " across from Oxford. She is 
under age, as I happen to know." 

" But now really," said I, feeling as if I were in a dream, 
or but that moment awakened from one, " is this true ? is it 
possible that a man can have behaved in such a manner ? " 

" You'll find it true enough," said Hull ; " and there is one 
great consolation in the affair a girl so easily won is not 
worth having that's my maxim has been through life 
that's the reason I have never married." 

" Fickle, fickle Emma !" said I. 

" Rely upon it," continued Hull, " Daly will give you some 
good reasons for his conduct, and convince you in the end, 
that he has done you a service, instead of an injury." 

" Well," said I and the sensation of stupefaction, which 
the intelligence had caused, made me appear perfectly calm 
and collected " we shall see." 

I saw that my kind-hearted companion, Hull, was greatly 
pleased with the placidity of my manner, and perfectly satisfied 
with the notion that the thing would go no further. He did 
not seem to be aware of the different external effects produced 
by the working of our passions ; and, when he left me, little 
calculated that the first step I was about to take, was to pro- 
ceed to Knightsbridge barracks, in order to secure the good 
offices of a most agreeable friend, who held a lieutenant's com- 
mission in one of the regiments of Life Guards, who in those 
days, and before they had proved their prowess and gallantry 
in the field of glory, were wont to campaign in Hyde Park, or 
at Wormwood Scrubs, dressed in cocked hats, jack-boots, and 
long pig-tails as witness the facetious parodist, who, in 
1812, said 

" God bless their pig-tails, though they're now cut off" 

Which savours a little of the spirit of the celebrated distich on 
the Scotch roads : 

222 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Had you but seen these roads before they were made. 
You'd lift up your hands, and bless MARSHAL WADE." 

N'importe ; so it was : and to the gallant lieutenant with 
the tail I imparted the history of the injury I had received at 
the hands of my pseudo friend. I still confidently hoped 
that the story was groundless ; but, supposing it to he true, I 
rejoiced to find that the gallant officer perfectly coincided in 
my view of the course to be adopted ; and agreed with me, 
that nothing short of shooting my friend, and making his 
enamoured and devoted bride a disconsolate widow on the 
spot, ought to satisfy my injured feelings. Nothing could be 
more acceptable to me than the readiness with which he offered 
his assistance in the arrangement of the result, consequent 
upon his advice, in order to bring the affair to a conclusion the 
moment we heard of Daly's arrival within our reach. We be- 
came mutually interested in each other ; and, having passed the 
forenoon with him, we partook together of an early dinner in 
his room, which was on the highest floor of the building, and 
commanded an agreeable view of Hyde Park. 

The following morning terminated all my doubts as to the 
fact. I read in the Chronicle a clear and distinct account of 
the elopement from Malvern, and the steps taken by Mrs. 
Haines to pursue and recover her fugitive daughter. I was 
satisfied. And it is not unworthy of remark, to those who 
doubt the moral influence of the public press, that although 
Hull had himself foretold the appearance of this detail in the 
newspaper, and had evidently written it himself, I did not 
hesitate to admit its truth the moment I saw it in print, al- 
though I was seriously sceptical when the man himself told 
me the fact, which he subsequently communicated to the 
journal. 

If, however, any lurking doubts could yet remain, the fol- 
lowing letter, dated from Stockport, put an end to all of them. 
It was a sort of prose duet from Emma and Daly united. In 
those punning days of my life, I could not doubt which of 
the performers had taken the base part. It formed No. 5. of 
our correspondence, and I therefore subjoin it. 

" My DEAR GURNEY, For I hope you will still allow me so 
to call and consider you your surprise at the receipt of this 
letter I can easily imagine ; as well can I conceive your anger 
and resentment at what, without explanation, must appear to 

GILBERT GURNEY. 223 

you my treacherous and insidious conduct. It is not impro- 
bable that intelligence of the step we have taken may have 
reached you through the public papers, before this can come 
to your hands. Whether it be so, or not, the fact is, I am 
married and if that were all, I might stop, and entreat you 
to receive me and my bride with sufficient kindness to out- 
weigh the anger of her mother ; but as the individual to whom 
I am united for life is one in whom you have taken a deep 
and tender interest, it becomes necessary that I should farther 
explain myself before we meet. 

" I am married to Emma Haines you now have the truth ; 
and I really think, when you become acquainted with all 
the circumstances of the case, you will neither embitter our 
prospects of happiness by continuing hostile to the match, nor 
permit either of us to suffer in your good opinion in conse- 
quence of what we have done. 

" Were I alone to describe to you the particulars of the 
affair, or to attempt to depict the motives and feelings by 
which Emma has been actuated, you might imagine that I 
was endeavouring to palliate a breach of confidence at the 
expense of sincerity and even truth. She therefore finishes 
this letter, and I conclude here, by earnestly entreating you to 
see the matter in its true light, and accept the olive branch 
which your amiable and sincere friend holds out." 

So far went Daly then comes his better half. 

" DEAR MR. GURNEY, My husband has read me what he 
has written to you upon the subject of our marriage, leaving 
it to me to give an account of my feelings towards you, and a 
justification of conduct, which, while it doubtlessly appears to 
your view almost unjustifiable, involves him, for whom I have 
the warmest affection and the sincerest regard, in circum- 
stances of delicacy and difficulty. 

" The truth, however, will, I trust, exonerate us both from 
any imputation of insincerity. When first we had the plea- 
sure of making your acquaintance, I will not deny that I was 
highly pleased with your manners, talents, and accomplish- 
ments, and the hours I passed in your society were reckoned 
by me amongst the pleasantest of the day. I am not in the 
habit of concealing my feelings or disguising the gratification 
I feel in the enjoyment of conversation with clever and 

224 GILBERT GURNEV. 

agreeable people ; but I felt it necessary in my later interviews 
with you to put a restraint upon myself, and even affect a 
coolness which does not naturally belong to me, because I saw 
too plainly that you began to misconstrue my friendship into 
some tenderer feeling. Gratified as I was in your society, I 
lived in perpetual apprehension that, under a mistaken notion 
of the character of my sentiments towards you, you would 
make a declaration and an offer, which, according to the 
common rules of the world, would necessarily terminate our 
acquaintance. What I dreaded, actually came to pass, and 
you were excluded from our house. In order to render the 
affair less remarkable to our acquaintance, who might have 
been inquisitive as to the cause of your sudden disappearance, 
my mother, at my suggestion, removed to Tenby, nor will I 
deny that a change of scene was rendered more agreeable to 
me from the altered circumstances of our domestic circle. 

" From the time we left Brighton to the present moment I 
never heard of you, never imagined that I occupied the small- 
est share of your care or attention ; and I therefore became 
happy in the belief that whatever prepossession you might 
have entertained in my favour had been overcome, and that in 
a year or two our friendship might possibly be resumed upon 
its original footing, a circumstance to which I assure you I 
looked forward with pleasure, and which even now I an- 
ticipate. 

" It was therefore without the slightest feeling of injustice 
towards you, of whom I never for one moment thought except 
as a friend, that 1 received the attentions of Mr. Daly ; in the 
natural openness of my disposition I did not attempt to con- 
ceal the feeling he had excited, and here it is that I must give 
him the praise which he justly merits at your hands. In a 
conversation induced by our constant association, and in which 
I did not affect to disguise my sentiments towards him, he 
confessed himself your friend, and advocate for my favour 
explained to me the cause of his backwardness in reciprocating 
an affection which he could not but have perceived, and it was 
not until I had most solemnly assured him, not only that 1 
never would unite myself with you, but that I had never enter- 
tained the most distant intention of doing so, that he confessed 
himself, and proposed the only step by which my happiness, 
and I hope his, could possibly be secured ; for much as I 

GILBERT GURNEY. 225 

could have wished to avoid the eclat of an elopement, my mo- 
ther's determination to make me the wife of a venerable peer, 
now staying at Malvern, drove us to the expedient of trying 
to obtain her forgiveness upon the principle of ' what is done 
cannot be undone.' 

" Under these circumstances, I do trust to your goodness of 
heart and kindness of feeling, as well as to the memory of our 
past friendship, to meet and receive us as we most desire upon 
our return to London, to which place we are proceeding by 
easy stages, so as to be there on Thursday next. Assure 
yourself of my continued esteem, as you may of that of Mr. 
Daly's, who is, as I am, and always hope to be, 

" Yours most truly and sincerely, 
" EMMA DALY." 

" In witness of my approval of all this, I hereunto set my 
hand, 

" R. F. DALY." 

I read this joint effusion twice over attentively. It certainly 
altered the character of Daly's conduct towards me, and 
changed that of Emma's apparent frivolity, and fickleness 
yet I found but little consolation in it, for their joint palliation 
was based upon my own vanity, and Emma's original indiffer- 
ence ; and yet, thought I, if girls will talk with their eyes, it 
must require a greater knowledge of the art than I possess, to 
distinguish between the animated sparkle of simple friendship, 
and the devoted gaze of love ; for if I misread the expression 
of Emma's looks at Brighton, I must have been any thing but 
an adept. True it is I never had spoken on the subject, and 
true it is that when I opened my heart to Daly, his opinion 
of my want of energy was pretty strongly expressed. Here 
however I was enlightened upon the point, and left to lament, 
as I thought, the loss of an object which, if it had not been 
seized upon by another, would never have been mine. 

My gallant friend in the jack-boots, cocked-hat, and pig- 
tail, to whom I of course communicated the letter, was of a 
very different opinion : he declared his belief to be that Emma 
had entertained an affection for me, of a more tender and 
warmer character than mere friendship ; that she had been 
induced by her new husband to make the disavowal, in order 
to shield him from the consequences ; and that, in point of 

Q 

226 GILBERT GURNET. 

fact, the stratagem which, with his usual ability, he had con- 
trived, of her writing part of his letter, added to the base- 
ness of his conduct, because it considerably increased his 
meanness. 

" The affair," said Lieutenant O'Brady, " is in my keeping, 
Mr. Gurney that man is a poltroon he hides himself 
behind his lady's fan we must have him out the moment he 
arrives." 

" You think so ? " said I. 

" Think so ! " replied the lieutenant, " by the powers, 
sir, if you don't think so too, we must make the matter per- 
sonal between ourselves." 

" Oh ! " said I, " I am in your hands you alone are to 
regulate my proceedings." 

" Right, Gurney, right," replied O'Brady, " and by the 
powers, right shall be done you, that you may rely upon. I 
hate this fellow for making his wife come forward och 
wo'n't we settle that affair send him home hopping." 

" Any thing you please," said I ; feeling, I confess, a doubt 
whether, under the circumstances, Daly was so very much to 
blame. However, honour is every thing ; and if my Irish 
friend considered it right that I should lame or maim my 
English friend, because he had run away with a girl or, as 
it almost appeared to me, permitted himself to be run away 
with who openly declared that she neither did, would, nor 
could feel any affection for me of course I could not object, 
and therefore begged him to do me the favour to wait upon 
Daly as soon as possible after his arrival in town. 

I never saw a man so ready to oblige another in the whole 
course of my life his activity was quite edifying ; neverthe- 
less, I admit, that the necessary delay of two or three days 
was particularly irksome to me. The constant consideration 
of the subject not a particularly pleasant one combined 
with the natural tendency of my mind to justify and even for- 
give the offender, kept me in a new state of excitement ; and, 
if truth were to be told, I do think that my readiness to be 
reconciled to Daly was not altogether disconnected from the 
lurking affection for Mrs. Fletcher Green. The proceedings 
of Daly and Emma, whatever their genuine character might 
be, had the entire effect of leaving me free to t perfect that 
alliance ; and since the avowal of Miss Haines's indifference, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 227 

it was surprising to find how very much my feelings of admir- 
ation for her had diminished in their force. However, I had 
the affair of honour to settle, and Daly, who was a crack shot, 
might perhaps do me the favour of providing for me in an- 
other way. 

On the third morning after the receipt of the partnership 
letter, to which of course I returned no answer, nor should I 
have done so, even had I been able to despatch it so as to catch 
the travellers, I beheld in the announcement of fashionable 
arrivals at Thomas's Hotel, Berkeley Square, " Mr. and Mrs. 
Daly, from the North." The lynx-eyed champion of my 
fame and respectability had seen it even before I had, and by 
twelve o'clock my active friend, Lieutenant O'Brady, was at 
my lodgings. 

" Well," said he, breathless with haste and delight, " it's 
all settled." 

"What?" said I. 

" That little matter between you and Mr. Daly," said the 
lieutenant. " I have seen him, spoken to him a deuced nice 
clever fellow he seems to be so we have arranged it all 
the thing is done and over." 

" I am extremely glad to hear it," said I, convinced that a 
little explanation and discussion had smoothed all difficulties, 
and terminated the affair. 

' ' I thought you would," said the lieutenant ; " it's a bore 
to have this sort of thing upon one's mind longer than neces- 
sary I have fixed the meeting for four o'clock this after- 
noon." 

" Meeting ! " said I. 

"To be sure," said O'Brady "what did you expect I 
meant ? " 

" Oh, nothing," replied I ; " where is it to be ? " 

" I'll tell you as we go," said the lieutenant, who seemed 
by his cautious mode of giving me the information, to imagine 
that I might be tempted just to drop in at Marlborough Street 
police-office on the way. 

" He behaved quite like a gentleman, that I must say," said 
O'Brady ; " referred me to a friend who happened to be with 
him said he expected as much inquired if you had re- 
ceived his letter I answered in the affirmative so he 
walked out of the room, and leaving the major, as he called 
Q 2 

228 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

him, to settle preliminaries, we have concluded the same, and 
I will call for you at three." 

" But now," said I, " under all the circumstances, what is it 
I am to do ? I mean to say, what am I to require ? " 

" Require !" said the lieutenant ; " you have nothing to do 
but to fire at him, till you have hit him, or he hits you, or until 
his friend and I agree that the thing is gone far enough." 

" Because," said I, really wishing to know the end of the 
meeting, " he cannot make an apology for running away with 
a young lady upon whom I have no claim, and who has declared 
her affection for him, and her indifference towards me." 

" What in the world has that to do with it ? " said O'Brady, 
" you trusted him he betrayed you : why didn't he write, 
and let you into his affairs ? " 

" Because he would have betrayed his plan," said I, " and 
exposed himself to detection by her mother, or at all events 
put himself at my mercy." 

" Och ! that's it," said O'Brady ; " all that might be mighty 
well for his friend to advance you have nothing to do with 
that. The plain fact is this, you have put yourself into my 
hands I have called the man out, and he is coming ; and if 
you thought any thing like what you talk, you ought never to 
have come to me at all." 

" But, my dear O'Brady," said I, " when I came to you I 
had heard only the report, 1 had not received the joint ex- 
planation " 

" Explanation ! " said O'Brady, " the explanation only 
makes the matter worse ; the thing cannot be altered now 
it is all too late ; if he is right, and you think so, you need 
not try to hit him, only I would just advise you not to throw 
away a chance, because you may rely upon it, as he has, in 
my opinion injured, he is not in the least likely to spare you." 

" You are perfectly empowered to take me where you please," 
said I ; " my conduct, when I am out, will be regulated by 
my feelings." 

" I'll trust to you," said O'Brady, "and so I will be here 
at three, with the doctor of our regiment, in case of accidents ; 
and if you have a spare pocket hankerchief or two, you can 
just while away the time till we come, by scraping them up 
into lint ;" saying which, my gallant friend departed, with one 
of his liveliest " au revoirs," leaving me to the enjoyment of 

GILBERT GURNEV. 229 

my own thoughts, and the interesting employment of lint- 
scraping, for my own benefit. 

I certainly felt no disinclination to the coming affair on the 
score of physical apprehension ; but I do candidly admit, that 
the tone and spirit of O'Brady's reasoning upon the matter 
led me to consider the principle upon which such things are 
usually conducted, and their frequent occurrence upon occa- 
sions when, it must be clear, they are perfectly unnecessary. 
Because, under a certain impression, I had suggested to my 
gallant friend my belief that I had been betrayed and injured 
by Daly, now that I was satisfied that Emma had thrown me 
over (as dinners are dressed at suburban taverns " on the 
shortest notice"), and that Daly really was not in fault, I could 
not be permitted to change my line of proceeding with my 
opinion of his demerits. Of course I had now no alternative, 
and accordingly I waited the arrival of my excellent second 
and the regimental surgeon ; 'resolving in my own mind, as 
far as my share of the rencontre was concerned, that he should 
not be called into service. 

Three o'clock at length arrived ; and, punctual to the mo- 
ment, so did my friends. O'Brady stepped out of the coach, 
in which he and the surgeon drove up to the door, and sum- 
moned me. I obeyed his call, and in a few minutes we were 
on our way towards Hampstead. 

" Where are we to meet ? " said I. 

"Under the lee of Primrose Hill," said O'Brady; "a 
sporting spot. The major and I had fixed Wimbledon Com- 
mon ; but as the Old Bailey Sessions are now on, I thought it 
might be more convenient to fight in Middlesex." 

The word Old Bailey sessions brought to my mind all the 
scenes I had so recently witnessed there, and the peril to 
which my antagonist, if he killed me, might be exposed upon 
the zig-zag system of trial. The inviting words, "hang at 
eight and breakfast at nine," rang in my ears ; however, having 
made up my mind, not to fire at Daly, I consoled myself with 
the certainty, that if I escaped the bullet, the halter was alto- 
gether out of the question. 

We proceeded up the hill of Carnden Town, and having 
arrived at the lane leading to Chalk Farm, the coach stopped, 
and we alighted, I being, I confess, a little surprised, at 
seeing no weapons wherewith we were to contend. How- 

230 GILBERT GURNEY. 

ever, O'Brady, who had evidently been there before, whis- 
pered something to the doctor, to which he appeared to assent, 
and the coachman was directed to stop I concluded, for 
the purpose of removing my corpse to my lodgings, if I was 
killed; or my yet living body, if I were only severely 
wounded. 

" Come on," said O'Brady ; " don't let us be last on the 
ground." 

" Where are the pistols ? " said I. 

" Och, put your heart at ease about that," said O'Brady ; 
" my man Sullivan is under the hedge long before this ; and 
has got the Mantons and the doctor's instrument-case, in a 
carpet-bag. Sully may be trusted in such matters, mayn't 
he, doctor ? " 

" He may indeed," said the military Esculapius, who 
appeared to me to be just as much pleased as his companion 
with the deadly-lively adventure in which we were em- 
barked. 

" There they are," said O'Brady, pointing to two persons 
at a considerable distance, who were approaching us in a 
direction nearly opposite to that by which we had reached 
the neighbourhood ; and sure enough there I saw Daly the 
admirable Daly once my friend, and, perhaps, not even 
now my enemy accompanied by a tall, gaunt personage, 
whose name I inquired of the lieutenant. 

" That," said O'Brady, " is Major M'Guffin." 

" M'Guffin ! " said I ; and the history of the depilatory 
and the night-cap flashed into my mind ; and, more than 
that, flashed into my mind the conviction that Daly had 
succeeded in rivetting his fetters with the widow ; and by 
inducing him to undertake the part which, in the earlier 
stage of the proceeding, he had proposed himself to play, 
secured the augmentation of the gentle Emma's fortune. 

My feelings were considerably excited as we approached 
the hostile pair ; it was impossible for me to forget the happy 
and agreeable hours which I had spent in Daly's company, 
nor entirely to obliterate from my recollection the caution of 
my poor mother, with regard to my associates ; for here 
as if she had possessed the gift of prophesying was I, after 
a sort of scape-grace acquaintance with the maddest wag of 
London, destined, perhaps, to terminate my existence pre- 

'GILBERT GURNEY. 231 

maturely, in consequence of his misconduct. My first impulse 
was to walk up to the rogue, and offer him my hand ; but, to 
do O'Brady justice, his anxiety to keep up the quarrel as it 
stood, never relaxed. He desired me to stop where J was, 
while he went forward to speak to the major. I oheyed, and 
entered into a conversation with the surgeon as to the healthi- 
ness of Hampstead, keeping my eye, however, on the watch 
for Daly, who seemed to me to be strongly imbued with 
feelings greatly assimilating to my own. However, his major 
and my lieutenant were the gentlemen to be satisfied ; and as 
it appeared this could not happen unless the principals fought, 
I suppose he, as I had already done, bowed to the necessity 
of asserting his courage, as I had felt it imperative to vin- 
dicate my honour ; and so it was that two lives were jeo- 
pardised. 

Major M'Gufnn having said a few words, Lieutenant 
O'Brady cried, " Halloo ;" and out of a ditch sprang his 
trusty squire, Jem Sullivan, with the carpet-bag, which con- 
tained the weapons ; and no sooner did the surgeon behold 
this manoeuvre, than he turned to the group, and secured 
his case of instruments ; and having redelivered them to the 
man, with some particular instructions to be careful of them, 
walked away to a distance, and never turned his face round 
till the event had come off, lest in case of any accident, he 
should be subpoenaed as a witness. 

Our worthy friends now proceeded to load the pistols, 
during which process I did not in the least know how to act 
with regard to Daly : the time, however, was short, and the 
lieutenant having concluded his part of the business, walked 
up to me, and desired me to stand where he placed me : he 
then stepped out six paces ; at the end of which Major 
M'Guffin stepped out six more : at the end of which he 
placed Daly, to whom he gave one of his pistols ; as the lieu- 
tenant handed me one of his. 

" Gentlemen," said Major M'GufRn, " we have agreed 
that you are to fire together, by signal, one, two, three : 
raise and present at the one, two ; and fire at the three." 

" Now," said Daly, " just one word : we are met here to 
answer the call of Mr. Gurney; no opportunity has been 
afforded me of explaining to him circumstances which " 

" Sir," said Lieutenant O'Brady, " I have no doubt you 
Q 4 

232 GILBERT GURNEY. 

mean extremely well ; but we are here to fight, sir, and not 
to talk." 

" But," said I, " Lieutenant O'Brady " 

" Mr. Gurney," said the Lieutenant, " you are not in a 
position to speak : we are not to be trifled with, sir." 

"Oh, well," said Daly, "no more are we; therefore to 
business, and the sooner the better." 

" Are you ready, gentlemen ? " said the major. 

" Yes," was the reply. 

" One, two ;" and before the gallant officer could get 

any farther, my pistol, which had the hair-trigger set, went 
off; and the ball having grazed the calf of my leg, and ripped 
up the side of my pantaloons, lodged in the ground imme- 
diately at my foot. I was never more mortified in my life 
the thing was so awkward not to speak of a stinging sort of 
feeling, which the scraping off of the flesh inflicted. 

" That comes of hair-triggers," said Daly, coolly. 

" Why don't you fire, Mr. Daly ? " said the major. 

" I ? " said Daly. 

" To be sure," said the major : " the other gentleman has 
had his shot.'' 

" Faith it is so," said the lieutenant ; " go on, sir ; go 
on." 

" Not I, by Jove ! " said Daly ; " unless Mr. Gurney takes 
his other pistol, and fires at me." 

" He can do no such thing," said both the gentlemen. 

" Very well, then," said Daly ; " if I am to fire, T suppose 
I may choose my own direction : " saying which, he raised his 
pistol perpendicularly, and fired in the air. 

" The devil, sir ! " said his major ; " what are you about ? " 

" Do you mean to affront my friend, sir ? " said my lieu- 
tenant. 

" Not I, by heaven ! " said Daly ; " no more than I ever 
meant to injure him. You had better, in the first instance, 
call your surgeon, and see that he is not more hurt than you 
fancy. I came here at his call, and will stay here as long as 
he likes ; but I will not take advantage of an accident." 

" Mighty handsome/' said the lieutenant ; " that I must 
say ; but we want no doctor yet ; so let us proceed ; and now 
mind, Mr. Gurney, mind and be more careful the next time." 

What might have happened had the combat continued, it 

GILBERT GURNET. 233 

is impossible to say ; it was destined to terminate without any 
other bloodshed than that which, by my gaucherie, I had 
caused ; for scarcely had the words " next time " escaped the 
lips of the gallant lieutenant, before five or six men, three or 
four boys, and two or three constables, bounced over a stile, 
which gave, or rather hindered, entrance to the field. Two of 
the fellows rushed at me, and seized me by the collar. The 
doctor took to his heels in the direction of his instrument-case ; 
and Daly, who was a dab at every thing, took a hedge and 
ditch with a run, like that of a Leicestershire hunter equal to 
sixteen stone. Major M'GufEn, in an endeavour to follow his 
leader, stuck in a hawthorn bush ; but was eventually lugged 
out by his principal, who, taking advantage of the peculiar 
care and attention with which the Bow Street patroles as 
they turned out to be favoured me and the lieutenant, was 
" over the hills and far away " before any of the heavy-heeled 
Christians could touch him. Of me they were secure; for 
although my self-inflicted wound was "neither as deep as a 
well, nor as wide as a church-door," it prevented my following 
the example of the gallant fugitives, whose departure, I ho- 
nestly confess, was one of the most agreeable sights I ever 
saw, convinced, as I was, that Daly had no more desire to hit 
me, than I had to touch him. 

The sequel was unpleasant the Philistines would by no 
means let us go ; and the consequence was, that, although 
the gallant Galen declared he would not be answerable for 
what might happen if I were suddenly transported to the 
police office to enter into sureties to keep the peace, they un- 
mercifully bundled me and my gallant second into our own 
hackney-coach, which had been, at their suggestion, brought 
up the lane. The indignation of my fiery friend, O'Brady, 
at this interference of the law with our arrangement, was 
beyond description great ; but whatever this interruption 
might have cost him, it was nothing compared with his fury 
when one of the myrmidons insisted upon keeping his pistols. 
I never saw a man in such a rage in my life : however, as I 
anticipated, I had sufficient influence at Bow Street (the 
smouldering remnant of my early acquaintance with the chief 
magistrate) to get the matter arranged much to his satisfac- 
tion. I entered into the required recognisances ; and by the 
intervention of Mr. Stafford, the chief clerk, who seemed to 
me to manage the whole business of the office. 

234 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

" Ride on the whirlwind, and direct the storm," 

obtained the restoration of O'Brady's " barking irons," as he 
called them ; to the peculiarly delicate touch of whose double 
detente I was specially indebted for a wound in my leg, 
which, although by no means serious, was not by any means 
agreeable. 

When the whole of the business was over, I sincerely re- 
gretted the interruption which had taken place ; because I felt 
convinced, by Daly's manner, that he had plenty of matter of 
justification to adduce for what had occurred ; and because, 
although irritated, and even enraged, at what, upon the first 
blush of the affair, appeared to be his flagrant misconduct, I 
saw by his manner, and by his gallant, yet considerate, bear- 
ing towards me, under our very peculiar circumstances, that I 
should have received explanation sufficient to establish and 
confirm his exculpation from misbehaviour towards me in the 
character of rival. As it was, no such explanation could take 
place we were parted much as we met ; indeed, the only 
consolation O'Brady seemed to experience, even under the 
dread of losing his pistols, was derived from the fact that the 
sureties were only for twelve months, and the certainty that 
upon the three hundred and sixty-sixth day from the date 
thereof, I might have him out again, and shoot at him to my 
heart's content. 

I had no such wish no such intention no such thought ; 
and the first step I took upon my return to my lodgings, was to 
send and inquire whether Daly had succeeded in escaping the 
fangs of the police. I was glad to hear that he had ; but I 
honestly admit, I felt sorry to find that he and Mrs. Daly had, 
almost immediately after his return home, and, as I believe, 
without her being at all aware of the cause of his temporary 
absence, taken their departure for the West of England. I 
ascertained the reality, too, of what I had only suspected 
the reconciliation of the family party had been produced ; and 
the anger, which seemed to have been of the " brevis ira" 
school, soothed by the intended union of Mrs. Haines with 
the major, which was to take place in the course of the en- 
suing week. So that, in fact, Daly had carried every point 
for himself, which he had suggested as worthy of my attention. 
But what then ? Emma had preferred him to me : she de- 
nied ever having cared for me beyond that sort of friendly 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 235 

feeling, which must sometimes exist between men and women ; 
and most certainly, if she ever did entertain any softer or 
warmer feeling, her sudden abandonment of that attachment, 
made it quite clear that I had made no great impression on 
her heart, and had sustained no great loss on the transfer of 
her affections. 

The sudden departure of the Dalys put an end to any fur- 
ther explanation between us ; and circumstances, which sub- 
sequently occurred, rendered them entirely unnecessary, as the 
sequel will show. That they or I should quit London just at 
this period, was what I wished all I lamented was, that I 
had not an opportunity of showing my magnanimity, as well 
as the sense I entertained of his honourable conduct, in not 
taking advantage of my inexperience with regard to hair trig- 
gers. As for O'Brady, his chief anxiety about my wound 
which was in fact scarcely worth talking of seemed to arise 
from the hope that, at the twelvemonth's end, when I had 
Daly out again, I should be more cautious. Before those 
twelve months expired, my poor friend, O'Brady, was himself 
shot dead, in consequence of a quarrel about play. 

My course, however, now seemed clear what the ten 
dency of my feelings was, may be guessed at by the fact, that 
being able, on the third day after the duel, to walk nearly 
as well as ever, I proceeded to the neighbourhood of Park 
Lane, to inquire whether Mrs. Fletcher Green had returned 
to town : the answer was, she was expected that evening at 
home to dinner, and was going to the last opera of the season 
that night. In addition to every other feeling with regard to 
the lady, I was piqued into an attempt to gain her hand at 
this crisis, inasmuch as, besides insuring my lasting happiness 
by my success, its achievement would practically relieve me 
from the imputation of willow-wearing, and vindicate my cha- 
racter as a lady-killer. I therefore secretly rejoiced in the 
information, and took my measures accordingly. 

CHAPTER IV. 

ALTHOUGH I had never yet had an opportunity of making any 
distinct declaration of my sentiments to the amiable widow, I 

236 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

yet flattered myself that I had rendered her sensible of the 
preference she had excited by a thousand little nameless assi- 
duities, and that sort of watchful devotion which women not 
only readily understand, but very particularly approve of. I 
began seriously to revolve in my mind the words which Daly 
had formerly whispered in my ear, and although I never had in 
my whole composition, as I hope and believe, one grain of mer- 
cenary feeling, still I do admit that the fact of Mrs. Fletcher 
Green's having so large a sum as one hundred thousand pounds 
at her own disposal was not calculated to check the affection 
which her beauty, accomplishments, and above all, her agree- 
able conversation, had inspired ; and with a consciousness that, 
had she been penniless, I should have been equally captivated, 
however prudence might in that case have checked a declar- 
ation of my sentiments, I resolved, now that I was entirely at 
liberty, to cultivate with ardour and assiduity the good under- 
standing which I flattered myself existed between us, and lay 
myself out for an invitation to her house, which, upon several 
occasions, under feelings of a different character, I had previ- 
ously refused. 

This manoeuvre, however trifling its object may appear to 
some people, was one which required a certain degree of 
courage as well as skill ; the consciousness that a man has a 
point to gain, always more or less unnerves him ; and many a 
time in my life, when I have been invited to join a party in 
which there has been some one individual with whom I would 
have given the world to pass the day, the very fear of doing 
that, which I most longed to do, has induced me to refuse; 
lest my anxiety to accept the bidding might betray me, per- 
haps to her in whom I felt so deep an interest, or to those 
who, in the character of " lookers on," might have seen more 
of the game than the players. 

Mrs. Fletcher Green, however, was a widow, and that does 
make a difference it would be all idleness to go on shilly- 
ing-shallying with her : this reflection strengthened me in my 
purpose, and accordingly, acting on the intelligence I had 
received, I went that night to the Opera. Her box, now 
become familiar to my eye, was on the pit tier, and therefore 
attackable in its front a most fortunate circumstance for 
me, as, after my continued shyness and repeated refusals of 
invitations, I did not feel my acquaintance with its owner 

GILBERT GURNEY. 237 

sufficiently matured to justify ray calling to the box-keeper to 
open " Mrs. Fletcher Green's box " in the ordinary manner, 
via the lobby. Accordingly I planted myself directly in front 
of the well-known 

" Shady blest retreat " 

almost as soon as the premier coup d'archet had hushed the 
anxious amateurs into silence. 

The overture ended the curtain rose no Mrs. Fletcher 
Green. A group of wretched creatures began the opera, in 
the garb of priests, with grey beards, and green wreaths on 
their heads, led by two more distinguished rarities, who inter- 
changed alternately the softest and most martial sentiments of 
love and glory in the jingle of recitative. The scene ended by 
the history of the murder of a prince and nine illustrious 
scions of his royal house, quavered forth by a very disagree- 
able lady to a " popular air," with variations. "Ah !" said I, 
getting quite impatient with the absence of the widow, " how 
truly has the Italian Opera been likened to the pillory, where 
those who are nailed by the ears expose their heads ! " 

The storm of sorrow and its accompaniments entered, I 
again turned and looked into the box still was the casket 
without the jewel. I began to grow more and more uneasy 
I nodded to three or four friends who were near me, but I 
thought not of them I felt that nervous sinking of heart 
which no man who has not been in a similar situation can 
duly appreciate. The heroes with their tin helmets and 
leathern armour, their painted cheeks, corked whiskers, and 
chalked necks, sickened me to death I began to hate every 
thing near me and round me when, sweeter to me than all 
the harmony of the stage, I suddenly heard the running rattle 
of the rings upon the rods, and turning instinctively to the 
sound, I beheld in the very act of drawing back the curtain 
destined to screen her from the too ardent gaze of the world 
in general, the charming Mrs. Fletcher Green ! 

I caught away my eyes, and affected not to have seen her. 
I thought of the owl and the sun I believe I trembled 
the top of my head was so near her hand that I almost fancied 
it touched me. What should I do turn again and boldly 
face her? or should I wait a little and affect to be surprised at my 
proximity ? why should I ? Dear soul ! true, most true it 
is, that she was every thing that could be amiable, delicate, 

238 GILBERT GURNEY. 

charming, and accomplished yet, after all, she was but a 
woman ; and would she be so angry if she really did find out 
that I had come there before the overture began, to secure that 
particular spot in order to be near her ? 

I asked myself that question, and I answered it thus: " I 
do not think she will ; at all events, if she be, it will termi- 
nate my pursuit of her better be nipped in the bud," thought 
I, " than linger." However, I was still young, and it required 
a considerable exertion to put my look in execution I drew 
a long breath, and fired my glance. 

r Never shall I forget the beautiful expression of her animated 
countenance, when with what I now believe to have been a 
feigned surprise, she exclaimed, " Is that you, Mr. Gurney ? " 
extending at the same moment that hand which, as I now 
began to think, would some day be entirely my own. I felt 
confused and delighed indeed, I am almost ashamed to own 
all that I did feel, for I am sure I must have appeared exceed- 
ingly silly to her searching and experienced eye ; but if the 
condescension which she had in the first instance evinced, 
somewhat unsteadied me, what did I experience when she 
leant her face over the front of the box, and asked me " whe- 
ther I had not better come round to them ? " By Jove, I 
felt her breath upon my cheek her sister was with her I 
could not answer, but I looked my happiness, and in less than 
three minutes, having, with the courage of a lion, called the 
" box-keeper" to open the door, found myself seated close be- 
side her, whom of all women breathing I now the most admired. 

" I am so delighted," said she, ic to have found you here. 
I have sent after you a hundred times, but you have changed 
your house, and I did not know where in the world to send a 
note to beg of you to come to me this evening after the Opera. 
I have a few people coming all pleasant too I can't en- 
dure bores and I was saying to Catherine my sister I 
believe, Mr. Gurney, you know my sister?" 

We both bowed. 

" I was saying to Catherine, I would give the world to know 
how we could get hold of you." 

l( You are too kind," said I, " and I too fortunate." 

" We have heard of all your exploits," said the girl : 
" why you are a perfect knight-errant in these degenerate 
days." 

GILBERT GURNET. 239 

I wished the exploit at old scratch, and dreaded lest the 
description might turn upon the cause of my meeting with 
Daly. I made a sort of acknowledgment for the compliment, 
but said nothing. 

" I think, Catherine," continued my most agreeable friend, 
" we had better keep him, now we have got him ; there's 
plenty of room in the carriage, and we will undertake to carry 
you off with us." 

I was of course beyond measure happy ; and although my 
felicity was occasionally interrupted by visits of sundry very 
fine gentlemen, of the class since called dandies, of different 
ages and sizes, who, as I had seen upon former occasions, 
dropped in and bowed out of the box during the evening, 
upon the whole I was very well satisfied with the state of 
affairs. 

The opera and ballet over, Mrs. Fletcher Green commissioned 
me to get up her carriage. I obeyed, scarcely knowing what 
I was doing, and in due course of time found myself with Mrs. 
Fletcher Green on one arm, and my intended sister-in-law, 
Miss Catherine Carter, on the other. 

How different were my sensations then, to those which I 
endured when restrained by the sense of another engagement, 
and I believe by my own shyness, from joining the same people 
in the same place so short a time before. 

Two such charming creatures I never yet had fallen in with ; 
and whatever impressions had been made upon me while see- 
ing her only like a bright star in other spheres, it was height- 
ened into perfect ecstasy when I saw Mrs. Fletcher Green " at 
home." 

Her house, to which we rapidly drove, at whose door I had 
often been, but whose threshold I had never yet crossed 
often since have I passed it, full of recollections was near 
Hyde Park. A suite of charming rooms, charmingly fitted 
up, received us ; there were flowers, and drawings, and books, 
and lutes, and flutes, pianofortes, harps, guitars, a little fat 
spaniel, and a large parrot, and boxes, and bags, and ottomans, 
and sofas, and low chairs, and long chairs, and easy chairs ; 
and in the middle stood a table affectedly covered with a table- 
cloth, on which were tea-cups, and tea-pots, and fruits, and 
wines, and fowls, and all sorts of things ; for the demolition 
of which some of the party had already arrived. 

240 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Is not mine a dear nice comfortable home ? " said Mrs. 
Fletcher Green, taking my hand kindly and hospitably ; 
" now we have shown you the way here I shall say no 
more people I am fond of, are sure to find me delighted to 
see them." 

" Yes," added Catherine, who was as fresh and as wild as 
a mountain roe, with thick curling hair, and eyes like a 
gazelle, " I'm sure you'll like us when you know us better ; 
there is such a thing as sympathy in the world, and we like 
you." 

" Fascinating creatures ! " thought I. 

The room began to fill with the elite of Mrs. Fletcher 
Green's friends who were still in town; peers, poets, 
painters, a quondam cabinet minister or two, (I believe a 
bishop, but to that, at this distance of time, I will not swear,) 
and some odiously interesting foreigners, who were so ex- 
ceedingly free and easy in their addresses to my admirable 
widow, that they kept rne in a perpetual feveret, formed the 
group, adorned and sanctified by the presence of some lovely 
women, whose names I need not mention ; beautiful mothers 
with lovely daughters ; young wives without their husbands ; 
young husbands without their wives ; in short, it was all fascin- 
ation, and when a few glasses of sillery, bienfrappe the 
night was so hot had overcome the diffidence I felt at my 
sudden augmentation of acquaintance, I became gay and 
happy. How could I be otherwise? Mrs. Fletcher Green 
had placed me next her, and I found my conversation grow 
extremely effective, until I could see, by the expressions of 
various countenances, that I was becoming rather popular ; 
a conclusion to which I was most specially drawn by the 
fact that an old lady the only speck upon the scene 
who had never moved a muscle of her face since her arrival, 
nor opened her mouth except to put some grapes into it, at 
the end of one of my observations upon things in general, 
which created a laugh, lifted her glass to her eye and looked 
towards me. This proved that I was at least worth looking 
at ; nevertheless, it was clear that she did not like what she 
saw, for she dropped the glass she had in her hand after a 
momentary glance, and betook herself to another, and more 
congenial glass which stood beside her. 

Catherine went to the pianoforte, a Lady Caroline some- 

GILBERT GURXEY. 241 

body followed her, and a quiet, gentlemanly man, who, like 
the old lady, had as yet said nothing, followed Lady Caroline. 
I could not make out why my charming widow had asked 
him. I now found out he was good for singing ; and these 
three sang and nothing was more popular in those times 
Moore's " O Lady fair." Moore, too, was present himself, 
and his eyes sparkled with pleasure as the beautiful harmony 
swelled upon his ear ; and he presently exhibited his gratitude 
by singing for the first time he ever sang it, I believe, to 
others, " Love's young dream." I had never heard him be- 
fore. I never heard anything so beautiful. Without much 
voice, he expressed the feelings and sentiments he had him- 
self embodied, with a tenderness and sweetness as indescribable 
now, as they were then incomparable. 

And so wore on the night, until the night at last was quite 
worn out. Mrs. Fletcher Green had been more delightful 
than ever : she talked of love, ay, of widows' love, too, 
in reference, as she professed, to a very beautiful widow who 
was present ; but, inexperienced as I was at that period, I 
could not but comprehend the true bearing of my fair friend's 
hypotheses; indeed, she did not seem very anxious to con- 
ceal her real meaning ; and when eventually the joyous party 
broke up, her last words were, " Remember, Mr. Gurney, 
what I said about the widow ; faint heart never won fair 
lady." 

It was a beautiful morning when I left her door. London 
stood bright and smokeless ; the streets which, in the noon of 
day, crowded with passengers, look long and foggy, now 
cleared of the countless living objects which then throng 
them, seemed shortened to the sight. There was a freshness 
in the air as the breeze blew on my face, which was burning, 
and I felt my young heart beat with satisfaction at the recol- 
lection of the occurrences of the last few hours. It was evi- 
dent that the widow, if I chose it, was my own. I admit 
that her gaiety of manner and liveliness of conversation were 
not observable particularly with regard to myself : she was 
gay, and lively, and kind, and agreeable to all ; yet she se- 
lected me to be next her, she talked, too, to me of love, 
spoke of the happiness of married life, expressed her belief 
that the beautiful widow to whom I have just alluded would 

R 

242 GILBERT GURNEY. 

marry again. Now all this, considering she was a beautiful 
widow herself, seemed something to build my hopes upon. 

Seven thousand pounds per annum in money and estates 
was what Daly said she had brought her husband. There 
were no children left. That sum must, as I fancied, of 
course, still be her own : with seven thousand a year in ad- 
dition to my own four hundred and ninety, I could do some- 
thing. As the joke goes of the naval lieutenant at Portsmouth, 
it was clear that if I had been bred to the law, the law would 
never have been bread to me ; and, as I stood in the world, it 
seemed as if this was a most critical period of my life. 

I had lost Emma Haines if, as I had previously argued, 
it may be called a loss not to possess what one never had 
gained. Here were no contingencies no mother's frowns 
no guardian's suggestions no the thing was all her 
own. 

I would not have married an empress but for herself ; yet, 
as I before argued, the woman is delightful, she would be 
delightful if she were pennyless; the fortune does not de- 
teriorate from her attractions, a gold frame sets off a good 
picture, although it only exposes the faults of a bad one. I'll 
have her. 

I recollect saying these words ay, as well as if it were 
but yesterday, just as I was crossing Bond Street, from 
Bruton Street to Conduit Street. " Faint heart never won fair 
lady." So she said ; and so I say. No clever woman ever 
says any thing without meaning something. " The iron is 
hot, I'll strike, the sun shines, I'll make my hay, to- 
morrow shall decide the question." 

And so it did, as shall be forthwith shown. 

After a restless prostration of body for some hours, I rose 
feverish, and certainly not refreshed, to breakfast. I had not 
slept ; for who can sleep when the heart and mind are so 
actively engaged in anticipations such as those in which I now 
indulged ? I breakfasted, that is, I ate some tasteless toast, 
and drank some equally tasteless tea : every thing of this world, 
worldly, was secondary to the one great object in my view. Ne- 
vertheless, I went to church St. George's, Hanover Square 
and I believe I was as devout as my neighbours ; for, 
strange as it may seem, I think (at least I did then), perhaps 
uncharitably, that one half of the best-bred congregations go 

GILBERT GURNEY. 243 

to church to look at the other half ; and that, while the lips 
are mechanically repeating the responses, the eyes are travelling 
strangely to the right and to the left. If it be not so even 
now, how can we account for the accuracy with which the 
devout church-goer comes home to luncheon full of the mi- 
nutest particulars of the dress, position, and conduct of the 
rest of the " gathered together ? " And yet, such is the ad- 
vantage of external show, and such the value of appearances, 
that being only a regular church-goer gives the hypocritical 
sinner a tenfold advantage in society over the infinitely more 
innocent individual, who is not so constant in his attendance 
on divine service, but whose heart is perhaps more often com- 
muning with his God. 

Upon the occasion to which I refer, I remember perfectly 
well that I was most particularly attentive. I felt that I was 
about to incur a heavy responsibility, and all that I can charge 
myself with in the way of irregularity of proceeding was, as I 
take it, much to my credit. When the psalms were given 
out I did not catch the number, and, not wishing to seem less 
versed in what was going on than my neighbours, I opened 
my prayer-book, not where other people had opened theirs, 
but at the service of matrimony, which, upon that particular 
day, appeared seriously interesting to me; I say seriously, 
for I honestly confess the obligations therein imposed, appear 
to me to be of a much more important and solemn character 
than the generality of people who plight their faith at the altar 
seem to consider them. 

The sermon was at least I thought so a very long one, 
the matter not attractive, the manner of the preacher 
even less so ; and I admit that, when he concluded, 1 felt 
more pleased than I ought to have felt, and that my pleasure 
was not of that particular character which it ought to'have been 
at the conclusion of such an appeal. 

I was again in the street, again my thoughts reverted to 
the great enterprise of the day. " To be, or not to be," that 
was the question. Sunday too, the better day the better 
deed. I felt an impulse. As the Quakers say, " the spirit 
moved me." Such a woman might be snapped up ; oppor- 
tunities like this did not occur every hour. It was decided 
and accordingly I slackened my pace, in order to give her time 
to compose herself after her return from church, and to catch 
R 2 

244 GILBERT GURNEY. 

her, before people dropped in, as seemed to be the custom of 
her house, to luncheon. 

I was embarked on a new venture trying a new style of 
address : I had certainly been lucky in some other cases ; and 
although, in that of Miss Haines, I had laboured under a mis- 
take, as she said, or she had inconsiderately admitted a pre- 
ference, which she had afterwards felt it prudent or agreeable to 
disclaim, still even she was not the only being to whom 1 had 
been devoted. 

In my first and earliest love-affair, although, as in the last, 
I was not entirely successful, inasmuch as circumstances pre- 
vented my reaping the happiness which I might have enjoyed 
under a more favourable conjuncture I had won a heart 
a young, a gentle, timid, beating heart, which, perhaps, had 
never throbbed before I set it in motion in my own opinion it 
never throbbed afterwards in the same way ; but here I was 
to make my advances upon a clever, experienced, worldly 
woman, whose younger sister seemed very much to resemble 
in character and description the amiable girl who first pos- 
sessed my affections ; and I wavered a little even on the edge 
of my coming declaration, as to whether I should adopt the 
younger and discard the elder lady. The consciousness that 
the latter had exhibited infinitely more kindness and con- 
sideration towards me than the former, decided me. Yet, still 
I lingered about the streets, cold, nervous, sick if she re- 
fused me, I should, as Emma very wisely had said about me 
upon the late occasion, be shut out of her agreeable society 
perhaps not friendship might still be left for us. I could 
almost hear my heart beat as I turned up Brook Street in my 
way to her house but then, " faint heart never won fair 
lady " and so, it was to be ; and so I knocked as boldly as 
I could at the door it was opened Mrs. Fletcher Green 
was at home and in five minutes I was in the dear boudoir, 
with the adorable creature herself but Catherine was there 
too : and beside her, a guardsman, whose name I forget, and a 
Count something, whose name ended in Sko, or Sky, as Counts' 
names very often do. 

It was now evident to me that Miss Carter must be a fortune 
as well as her sister, for the count was unremitting in his at- 
tentions to her : the captain rather devoted himself to our 
hostess ; but again she exhibited her preference for me, and 

GILBERT GURNEY. 245 

again made me sit next her during luncheon, which was pro- 
tracted, by agreeable conversation, until nearly four o'clock. I 
began now to be anxious for my opportunity I began, more- 
over, to fear that it would not offer, but at last the assiduous 
count made a move, and, promising to meet the ladies after- 
wards in the Park, retired. 

". Mr. Gurney," said Mrs. Fletcher Green, " if you have 
nothing better to do, dine here to day we shall not be more 
than half-a-dozen.' 1 

" Do," said Catherine. 

What could I say ? 

" Will you, Captain Lark ? " 

" Too happy," said the gallant captain. 

" If you mean to ride, Catherine/' said Mrs. Fletcher Green, 
" it is time to get ready. It takes her at least an hour to pre- 
pare herself for horseback." 

" Ten minutes, you mean," said Catherine : " however, I 
will go, and leave you to the beaux." 

" I must run away," said the captain. 

I wish you would, thought I. 

" Well, then, I shall leave my sister to the special care and 
protection of Mr. Gurney," said Catherine. 

" You are too obliging, Kate," said Mrs. Fletcher Green, 
with a look which convinced me that, although she meant her 
observation to sound ironical, she really felt herself very much 
obliged to her for retiring. 

" Adieu till dinner-time," said the captain, and away went 
he, in company with the fascinating Kate ; she to dress, and 
he to ride. 

The period had now arrived the moment to which I had 
so long looked forward was at hand. Mrs. Fletcher Green 
seemed to me to be instantaneously aware of my awkwardness; 
she seated herself on a sofa, and made a sort of sign which I 
could not but construe into an invitation to sit beside her; 
there was a lurking devil in her eye I saw that she already 
anticipated the course I was about to pursue I felt con- 
scious that I had betrayed myself but I could not imme- 
diately begin a conversation likely to lead directly to the point 
a momentary silence therefore ensued she saved me a 
world of trouble, and relieved me from all my embarrassment. 
B 3 

246 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" Well/' said she, " did you dream of the beautiful widow 
last night ? " 

" 1 should not like to confess my dreams/' said I ; " at 
all events to you." 

" What ! do you think I should turn evidence against 
you, and show you up to Lady Harriet ? " said my fair com- 
panion. 

" I certainly did not dream of her," said I. 

" I am afraid, then/' replied Mrs. Fletcher Green, " that 
you are not very susceptible she is lovely and I could 
tell you something that might please you ; to be sure it might 
spoil you, for men's heads are very easily turned." 

" I admit that/' said I ; " but I do not exactly think your 
house the most favourable sphere for Lady Harriet's display." 

" Why ! " exclaimed she, " what has my poor dear darling 
house done to merit your disapprobation ? " 

" Nothing," said I. " But when you are in it, it seems 
almost as presumptuous, as I am sure it is unwise, for pre- 
tenders to admiration to come within its circle." 

"What!" said my fair friend, "do you really think me so 
very agreeable ? Upon my word, you do me the greatest pos- 
sible honour ; but I am not blind you cannot compare me 
with Lady Harriet she is younger than I am and, as for 
her person, she is lovely." 

u Granted," said I ; " but where is the intellect to illumi- 
nate those regularly-formed features of hers where is the 
mind to animate the eyes where the intellect to captivate 
where, in short, are all those charms ? " 

" Which I," interrupted Mrs. Fletcher Green, " possess in 
such abundance." 

" You have saved me the trouble of finishing my sentence," 
said I. 

" Oh ! you must know," said Mrs. Fletcher Green, " that 
I am quite aware of all my own perfections. It would be 
the height of affectation in me not to feel and to know, that I 
am tolerable enough that I am good-natured, high-spirited, 
and love fun to my heart ; but it would be the extreme of folly 
in me to suppose that I resembled Lady Harriet in any of those 
attractions which place her in the first rank of our leading 
beauties." 

" Undeceive yourself," said I, warming with my subject ; 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 247 

" there is not a human being on the face of the earth, who 
could for a moment hesitate in a decision on that point." 

" How agreeable," said Mrs. Fletcher Green, " it would be 
if a woman could but bring herself to believe all the pretty 
things men say to her ! I dare say, the moment you leave 
this house, you will go to some of your friends, whom I don't 
know, and show up me and Kate for two mad women, full of 
flightiness and folly, and, in the ordinary course of worldly 
proceedings, turn up your hands and eyes, and wonder how 
two silly creatures at our time of life can make such fools of 
ourselves." 

" You do me the greatest injustice," said I. 

" Perhaps I do," said my fair hostess ; " but I do not do 
the world generally injustice. I tell you, mirth and laughing 
are my delight I get together all the pleasant people I can 
I make my house agreeable I select those who like to 
meet each other I never permit any serious discussion or 
grave debate. What you saw last night is a fair specimen of 
our living ; and yet 1 am quite aware that this, which is in- 
nocence itself, and has only the demerit of being a little unlike 
the ordinary run of humdrum society, gives vast umbrage to 
some of the ultra stiff prudes and sages, who, when they see 
other people happy, shake their old empty heads and croak out 
' Ah, something bad will come of it !' " 

" Do not, pray, class me amongst the empty headed," said 
I. " You have opened Elysium to me, and I am but too 
happy ; although, perhaps, that very happiness may lead to 
misery." 

" There," exclaimed Mrs. Green, " that's it. You are like 
the odious frumps I have just been talking of ' something 
bad will come of it.' " 

" Not bad," said I, hesitatingly ; " but to me, perhaps, 
much wretchedness." 

" My dear Mr. Gurney," said Mrs. Fletcher Green, " what 
can you mean wretchedness to you ? " 

" Yes ; to be shown a gleam of such happiness, only to be 
excluded from it eternally." 

" Why/' said the lady, " who is going to exclude you ? 
you are as welcome as flowers in May. Kate and I have made 
up our minds to be extremely fond of you ; and we have re- 
R, 4 

248 GILBERT GURNEY. 

solved to make you one of our most obedient and faithful 
knights." 

" There are circumstances," said I, " which qualify the 
brightest pleasures a dread of something an apprehension 

I feel myself unable to explain my meaning I dare not 

but you will forgive me your manner to me has been 
so kind perhaps, too kind that my whole heart and soul 
are enchained by the fascinations which surround me con- 
scious, too, I am of my own demerits I dare not venture to 
say all I feel." 

Here I was overcome by my feelings, which were ardent 
and sincere. J looked at my Amelia I thought of her at 
that moment by her Christian name there was an inde- 
scribable softness and sweetness in the expression of her coun- 
tenance no frown no pride no resentment it was a 
look 

" More in sorrow than in anger." 

" Good heavens, Mr. Gurney !" said she ; " what can you 
mean ? I have too high an opinion of you to suppose that 
you mean either to insult or laugh at me. Your conduct is a 
most cutting satire upon my behaviour to you. You are like 
the rest of the world, or, at all events, like the rest of man- 
kind. You attribute to motives and principles, unknown to 
innocent and mirthful hearts, actions the result of high 
spirits, and then venture to do that which nothing upon earth 
but the height of imprudence upon my part, or the extreme of 
presumption on yours, could possibly account for." 

" Calm yourself, dearest woman," said I. " You cannot 
so much mistake me. I may have erred I may have pre- 
sumed upon what I had flattered myself was your kind and 
delightful preference ; but do you can you imagine, pre- 
sumptuous as I admit my declaration to be, that I can have 
any but the best and purest and most honourable motives ? " 

" You are a very extraordinary person," replied Mrs. 
Fletcher Green. " You admit a declaration, and talk of ho- 
nourable motives. Why, my dear Mr. Gurney, if I could 
bring myself to believe you serious, I should attribute such 
conduct, coupled with such language, to madness." 

(t Is there," said I, " is there, and pray hear me pa- 
tiently, whatever may be the result, is there anything like 
madness except, perhaps, in having been betrayed into this 

GILBERT OUHNEY. 249 

confession is there anything like madness in a devoted ad- 
miration of qualities, talents, virtues, and accomplishments 
like yours ? My whole heart and soul, I repeat it, are devoted 
to you ; and if the tenderest care and affection if a life 
consecrated to you, can justify the appeal, assure yourself that 
no human being can be more ardent, more sincere, than I 
am in " 

" In what ? " exclaimed the lady, who appeared rather 
alarmed at my earnestness, and who, withdrawing her hand, 
which I had clasped, added, really agitated, " What do you 
mean ? what can you mean ? " 

" Recollect," said I, " dearest woman, your axiom of last 
night as to faint hearts. You have made me bold ; do not 
make me entirely wretched." 

" Good heavens ! are you in your senses ? " said Mrs. 
Fletcher Green. 

" Perfectly," replied I. " All I seek on earth is a return 
of that feeling which you have inspired. To plight my faith 
at the altar to vow eternal fidelity to pledge my soul to 
my affection is the height of my ambition." 

The moment I had uttered these words, the look of asto- 
nishment and dismay which had characterised her countenance 
disappeared ; a totally different expression illumined her fea- 
tures. I saw my advantage. Judge my delight when my 
fair companion took my hand in hers, and said, in a tone of 
exquisite sweetness, " Are you in earnest, Mr. Gurney ? Am 
I to attribute to such an honourable sentiment, and such a 
desperate resolution, the conversation which has just passed 
between us ? " 

" Indeed, indeed, you may," said I. " Only let me have 
the permission to hope from your sweet lips, and my hap- 
piness is complete." 

" My dear Mr. Gurney," said Mrs. Fletcher Green, with 
one of her sweetest.looks, her bright eyes twinkling like stars 
"my dear Mr. Gurney, what can I say ? " 

And at this particular juncture the door opened, and Miss 
Kitty Carter appeared, habited for her ride. 

I never wished a pretty girl at Old Nick till that moment. 

" What ! " said Miss Kate, " you two here all this time ! 
Upon my word, rather a lengthened tete-a-tete. I hope your 
conversation has been interesting." 

250 GILBERT GURNET. 

I hated her still more. 

" It has, my dear Catherine," said Mrs. Green I won- 
dered whether she would tell her before my face what we had 
been talking about, " and it has excited me very much ; 
and, at all events, shown me the necessity of taking one step 
which I had hitherto omitted to take." 

This step I anticipated was ordering me out of the house ; 
but I was mistaken. I confess I thought that my fair 
Amelia appeared to be struggling hard to conceal a laugh, and 
that I considered rather as a display of want of feeling ; yet 
she certainly was struggling. Perhaps I was wrong in my 
judgment. And while I was debating as to what I ought to 
do, having just worked up to the very denouement of my 
affair, she turned to me, after having made a signal to her 
sister, no doubt perfectly understood by her, every family 
has its private code, and said, with as much composure as 
if nothing whatever had occurred, " I must leave you now ; 
but remember you dine with us at seven." 

I bowed blushed up to the eyes she shook hands with 
me the result was evident I was accepted. Upon the 
strength of this encouragement, I shook hands sociably with 
Kate, and bounded rather than walked down the stairs, and 
so forth into the street. 

It is true I would have much rather that the fair rider had 
been quite as long habiting herself as her sister said she would 
be, so that I might have concluded my treaty, and signed and 
sealed it on the lips of my dearest Amelia. I had a strong 
notion] at that time of signing and sealing however, the 
last shake of the hand was enough. The not showing me up 
to her sister, too, was conclusive. She was not angry, no, 
not she ; it was, in fact, a settled thing. Never was man so 
happy, so elated. Wit, beauty, accomplishments, seven thou- 
sand a-year, and a delightful sister-in-law to break the toujours 
perdrixism of a matrimonial tete-a-tete, all this, and a fine 
place in the country, horses, hounds, battues, archeries, races, 
fetes, soirees dansantes, and dejeuners dinatoires ; what a 
vision ! Should not I be popular ? should not I be a star 
of the first magnitude with such a wife, so well known in the 
gay and learned world, without one bit of the prussic acid of 
bluism about herself? Harps, honeysuckles, nectar, love, 
ecstasy, champagne, bowers, flowers, music, painting, all 

GILBERT GURNEY. 251 

everything. Gold cornices, ten guinea boot-jacks, and 
every other necessary of life, could be afforded with seven 
thousand pounds a-year ; at least, so I thought then ; having 
only, at that period of my existence, as I have before ob- 
served, four hundred and ninety pounds per annum just 
enough to find a moderately well-dressing man in shoe-strings. 

How the hours seemed to crawl from four until seven ! 
Absorbed in a dream of delight, I lay on my sofa, and con- 
jured up the events of the evening, Captain Lark dying of 
envy ; G'ount Sko Sky, or whatever it was, in an agony of de- 
spair ; and I, handing my Amelia to table, sitting next her, 
whispering soft things, and looking still softer ones. " Re- 
member seven ! '' said my Amelia, with a witchery more im- 
pressive than the " Remember twelve ! " of the illustrious 
Siddons. I never was quite so near being mad as during those 
three hours : but, as the Italian proverb says, " Non vien di 
che non venga sera ; " and at length seven o'clock came. 

I flattered myself, although no beauty, that I had made the 
best of myself. My neckcloth was a pattern ; my hair assi- 
duously curled ; and my coat, of Stultz's best, displayed, with 
an under- waistcoat of cerulean blue I speak of years in 
which the more recent splendour of the outer waistcoat was un- 
known, and, thus elated, I proceeded to the scene of my 
past triumph and my future glory. The very servants in the 
hall seemed to have obtained information of the result of my 
assault of the forenoon. I was received with marked atten- 
tion, deference, and civility, and ushered into the drawing- 
room, where I found Lark, the count, lord somebody, whose 
name I could not make out, and a learned philosopher, who 
had been invited, not more for his own merits than because it 
was pleasant to a very agreeable lady, who was also present, 
to meet him ; a young, awkward cousin of my Amelia's, just 
from Eton, was the sixth of the party, besides myself; neither 
our fair hostess nor her sister having yet made their appearance. 

We stood about the room, looking at each other, as if we 
could gladly have cut each other's throats; Lark and the count 
remaining aloof and talking apart, the philosopher flirting with 
the blue lady, and the lord and the lout appearing not to be 
conscious that I was made of the same materials as themselves. 
It was a painful quarter of an hour, broken only by the arrival 
of a Mr. Fianneky, a red-faced gentleman from the Sister 

252 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

Island, with powder and brass buttons, looking very much like 
a second or third-rate butler what part of the play he was 
to act I did not exactly know, but I very soon determined, let 
his province be what it might, that he should have his conge 
within ten days of my accession to the throne of that establish- 
ment. 

At length my darling woman appeared, and, with her, Ca- 
therine. Her presence, like that of the sun, diffused a genial 
warmth around everybody seemed animated at her approach, 
and I said to myself, " How delightful it will be, when I call 
this creature my own, to see her adorning and delighting every 
circle of which she will be the centre ! " 

" Well, Mr. Gurney," said the fascinating woman, " how 
is your head ? " 

" Oh," said Miss Carter, " upon my word it is not fair to 
worry him with questions after that long tete-a-tete. What 
do you think, Lord Melancourt ? My sister and Mr. Gurney 
were actually closeted three quarters of an hour to-day ; and, 
do what I will, I cannot get her to tell me what the subject of 
their conversation was, and in general she is the most candid 
creature alive." 

His lordship made a sort of unintelligible noise, without 
moving a muscle of his face, and looked at me as if I had been 
a pickpocket. I felt annoyed and gratified gratified that 
Amelia had not confided our conversation to her sister, and 
annoyed at the playfulness of manner in which she inquired 
after my head. 

Dinner was announced. Of course Lord Melancourt took 
Mrs. Green I wished him anywhere but where he was ; the 
Sko Sky count took the blue lady, who had rank ; the philoso- 
pher took Catherine ; and Lark, the lout, and I brought up 
the rear, Mr. Flanneky bowing to me as I motioned him to 
go forward, with a whispered " Oh, no, I am at home." Are 
you ? thought I then make the most of it, for if you make 
this your home this day three months, I'll eat you. I never saw 
such an odious mulberry-faced animal in my life ; he seemed 
to me as ugly as Lucifer, and as old as Methuselah I be- 
lieve, from what I have since heard, he was then a fine florid 
gentleman of about five-and- forty, and I was four-and-t\venty 
voild la difference! 

Mr. Flanneky took the bottom of the table ; Lord Melan- 

GILBERT GURNET. 253 

court the top, having my Amelia on one side of him, and the 
blue on the other ; Kate was separated from me by Lark, so 
that between him and my aversion, the croupier, was I posted 
seeing Paradise, and feeling something quite unlike it. I 
never passed two more unpleasant hours in my life. I kept 
my eyes fixed on my beloved widow, and once or twice caught 
a responsive glance, but I did not half like her manner to the 
viscount it was clear they were old acquaintances ; they 
used conventional jokes, and made references to other days, 
and to events of which I was ignorant. The blue lady began 
to lecture on chemistry, and the learned professor descanted 
much upon certain affinities and combinations which, with a 
head full of affinities and combinations of a very different na- 
ture, did not in the slightest degree interest me. Indeed, I was 
so tormented by what appeared to me Amelia's inconsiderate 
conduct, that I rejoiced rather than regretted when the ladies 
retired. 

The after-dinner conversation was flat; the count enter- 
tained us with a history of his various houses in different parts 
of Europe the professor drew his chair near Mr. Flanneky's, 
and conversed in an under tone of voice the lout went away, 
and the lord went to sleep ; and much after this fashion did 
we dissipate another hour, when we repaired to the drawing- 
room. Here we found several " refreshers," and the party 
began to assume a liveliness which it did not before possess ; 
but to me its increase was of no avail, for Mrs. Fletcher Green 
was so occupied with her different female visitors, that I could 
not get an opportunity of saying a word to her confidentially ; 
she however rallied my spirits, by coming up to me and bidding 
me stay, for there would be a The and some music, late. This 
was balm to my wounds, and I fell into conversation with 
Captain Lark, who was really an agreeable person, and who 
appeared more amiable to me upon that occasion from not 
having apparently any design either upon Amelia or Catherine. 
Things went on in this way till about eleven o'clock, when 
a gentleman past the middle age made his appearance in the 
drawing-room, whom I had never seen before : he seemed to 
know every body, and every body seemed to know him he was in 
a morning dress, and had evidently just arrived from a journey. 
I did not half like his manner, either to Amelia or Catherine ; 
he had a free and easy way of speaking, which sounded ex- 

254 GILBERT GURNEY. 

tremely unpleasant to my ears, and the sort of swaggering 
command he appeared to assume perfectly disgusted me. He 
made no apology for appearing in boots ; called Miss Carter 
" Kitty," as if he were upon the best terms not only with 
himself but her ; and then, without asking Mrs. Fletcher 
Green's permission, rang the bell, and when a servant appeared, 
told him to order something to eat, to be laid in the dinner- 
room, as he had not dined, and was " infernally hungry." 

I availed myself of the earliest opportunity of making in- 
quiries as to this self-important gentleman at the fountain- 
head ; and indeed I intended to let Amelia see, without dis- 
playing any very violent symptoms either of jealousy or bad 
temper, that I did not quite like this coarse man's familiarity. 
" Pray," said I, stopping her, as she was passing into the 
other room, " who may your free and easy friend in the boots 
be?" 

" Mercy on me ! " said Amelia, " that's just it," this was 
a favourite phrase of her's, " now I can account for it all 

don't you know ? " 

' ' Not I, upon my word," said I. 

" I have been very remiss, then," replied she ; " come, let 
me introduce you to him he is an excellent creature a 
little tired now, and perhaps not in the best humour ; how- 
ever, he will, I am sure, be delighted to make your acquaintance." 
" Yes," said I, " but do you know, I am not quite so sure 
that I am equally anxious to make his ? " 

" Oh, fie, Mr. Gurney !" said Catherine, who was standing 
close by ; " why, Amelia will murder you ! " 

We had sidled forwards to the chair in which the respectable 
gentleman had ensconced himself, and stood before him. 

" Fletcher, dear," said my Amelia, " this is Mr. Gurney, a 
most agreeable acquaintance we have made since you left town. 
Mr. Gurney my husband." 

Now I only put it to any human being just to imagine what 
my feelings were at this moment. It would have been mercy 
in anybody to have killed me instantly. I could have cried 
out as Patkul did in his last agonies " Will nobody cut off 
my head ? " In the morning I had opened my heart to the 
beautiful widow had, as I fancied, been accepted ; and here, 
in the evening, was presented to her great fat living husband. 
The folly, the stupidity of which I had been guilty ! yet I 

GILBERT GURNEY. 255 

had never seen the man I had never heard his name men- 
tioned. I concluded there was no Fletcher Green. Daly 
never told me there was a husband not a soul ever referred 
to him. Mrs. Fletcher always talked of her house, and her 
horses, and said, Will you come and see me ? It seemed they 
were ill matched he lived much in the country his pur- 
suits were diametrically opposite to hers they never inter- 
fered, and very seldom met, although, when they did, they were 
on the best possible terms but how should I know that ? 
and then how singularly applicable were her conversations about 

widows and faint hearts ! I bowed and stammered out 

something the coup de grace was only wanting. Mrs. 
Fletcher Green gave it with one of her sweetest smiles 

" Perhaps you will come here to luncheon to-morrow, Mr. 
Gurney, and improve your acquaintance with Fletcher ? " 

She saw the shot had told the kindness of her heart over- 
came her love of mischief and, withdrawing me for a mo- 
ment, she said 

" Forgive me for not having explained all this before. It 
is somewhat a severe reflection upon me that you should have 
heard so little of my husband as to have fallen into the mistake 
of this morning ; forget it altogether assure yourself I 
appreciate your good opinion. I have not breathed a syllable 
to Catherine, for both our sakes. It is useless talking of what 
might be, and which cannot be. Do, in kindness and sincerity, 
be what you may, and what I am sure you will be, my 
friend. Now let us see if the The is ready ; and mind you 
are in good spirits else I shall think you are offended with 
me, and, what would be still more painful, that you think ill 
of me." 

I could make no.answer to this soothing speech, and suffered 
her to lead me like a child to the table, where some of the 
laughing guests were already seated. All the rest of the affair 
was chaos. I heard sounds, but understood nothing ; andj 
despite of my kind hostess's encouraging speeches, got away 
as soon as I possibly could. Of Mr. Fletcher Green I saw 
no more that night ; and as to Mrs. Fletcher Green, agreeable 
and delightful as she was, I never had courage or spirits to 
see her again after I quitted her charming house, about one 
o'clock in the morning. 

256 GILBERT GURNEY. 

CHAPTER V. 

ANY attempt to describe the sensations under which I laboured, 
when, after a feverish restless night, I arose from my bed the 
morning after this incident, would be utterly vain and useless. 
It seemed to me, that I was destined to become the sport of 
fate, and as if the punishment for all my sins were to be in- 
flicted by the hands of those dear creatures to whom my very 
heart and soul were devoted. 

It is true that Mrs. Fletcher Green not only forgave my 
fault, but extenuated my folly ; and, with all her native 
sweetness, bade me forget my error, seeming really not ill 
pleased with the motive which had led to the indiscretion ; 
but the more I considered the matter, the more thoroughly 
did I consider that I c^uld not meet her again or, if ever 
such an event could by any possibility take place, Time, the 
edax remim, the soother of sorrows, and the polisher off of 
sharp edges which every where present themselves in one's 
career through life, must lend his aid to the re-union ; and 
so, London being thin, and the chance of meeting my imagin- 
ary widow, perhaps with her living husband, determined me 
upon removing myself forthwith from the attenuated metro- 
polis. 

My inclinations pointed to the Isle of Wight, as a fitting 
retreat under my misfortunes. I felt somehow that the in- 
sular character of that terrestrial paradise afforded a fancied 
security from the inroads of London friends. For, although 
I hoped that nobody Hull, perhaps, excepted would 
know anything of my misadventure, it was impossible for me 
to disburthen my mind from the apprehension that something 
might transpire in the course of time, which would render me 
obnoxious to the remarks of what is called society, and that 
I might become the butt of the lampooner, or the original of 
the caricaturist. Off I resolved upon going, and accordingly 
booked myself for Southampton, directing my servant to 
follow with my gig and saddle horse, so that I might range 
at liberty over the ultima thule of Great Britain, and endeavour, 
by change of scene and society, to get rid of the last great 
blunder of my existence. 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 25J 

I chose the Southampton road in preference to that which, 
as I first proposed going to Ryde, would have heen the nearer. 
I liked Ryde for its rurality ; but I apprehend, if an extended 
pier should be built, and a constant communication established 
by steam-boats (a favourite vision just at this time), it will 
in a few years be totally spoiled. New streets will run where 
meadows spread their verdant carpets, and country villas and 
lodging-houses usurp the ground where gardens bloom ; till, 
at last, row will rise above row, and place above place, until 
the now nice quiet village will present to the eye a glare of 
yellow roads and red buildings arrayed on the side of the hill, 
so as to give an effect at a distance very much like that pro- 
duced by the perspective of a china plate. However, as it is 
likely to last my time, I continue my affection for it, and 
should certainly have taken the Portsmouth road, but for an 
incident which occurred to me only a few months before, and 
which induced me to steer clear of tha<"gay and animated sea- 
port, than which, in war time, nothing could be much more 
lively. 

That incident ought not to be omitted in my collection of 
adventures : 

It happened that, some years before the period of which I 
am now treating, I had been staying in the neighbourhood of 
Alverstoke with some delightful people ; indeed, I had so far 
prolonged my stay, that my poor mother, who was then alive, 
was with her usual sensitive anxiety for my matrimonial 
prospects most solicitous to ascertain whether I had not 
been fascinated by the bright eyes of some Hampshire belle. 
But no, our pursuits were infinitely less sentimental ; and 
the earnest entreaties of my kind-hearted excellent host and 
his charming wife to stay, needed nothing more to make them 
successful than the continued round of gaiety and merriment 
which we derived if not from trees and running brooks, 
most certainly from passing events in the neighbourhood. 
The days flew rapidly, and six weeks, I believe, slipped 
through my ringers almost imperceptibly. However, at length, 
I felt it absolutely necessary to tear myself away, and seized 
the opportunity when they had accepted an engagement to a 
neighbouring family ; and having shaken hands with both of 
them, promising speedily to return, I quitted their hospitable 
roof. 

258 GILBERT GUHNEY. 

It was with no small degree of pain I left them, nor were 
the weather and time of the year at all calculated to diminish 
the misery of leaving a snuggery such as theirs. However, my 
time had arrived, and I was to depart ; and as I wished, for 
many reasons, to be perfectly independent in my proceedings, 
I despatched my servant with my heavy luggage per morning 
coach, reserving for myself merely a portmanteau, a sac de 
nuit, and a dressing-case. Having made these arrangements, 
at five o'clock in a misty, windy, wet, and odious November 
afternoon, I stepped into mine host's carriage, which was 
to convey me from his residence to the landing, or rather, 
in my case, the embarking point at Gosport, whence 1, bag, 
cloak, dressing-case, and all, were to be ferried across to 
Portsmouth ; the carriage being to return from the ferry, to 
take him and his amiable wife to a dinner-party in their 
neighbourhood, their engagement at which induced me to ter- 
minate my visit to them that evening, rather than on the morn- 
ing of the following day. 

All that had been projected in the programme was duly put 
into execution, up to my departure per ferry-boat for Ports- 
mouth. A short delay on the part of the boatmen, and a 
delicacy on mine in keeping my friend's carriage so long as 
possibly to delay his subsequent departure for his engagement, 
left me shivering and shaking for some minutes on the Gos- 
port shore, in company with my portmanteau, bag, and dress- 
ing-case. At length, however, (since, according to the ancient 
saw, time and patience overcome all difficulties,) I and my 
accessories were afloat; and after ten minutes' drenching in 
the heaviest rain I ever suffered under, I did, what was ex- 
tremely satisfactory to myself, "come to the Point;" where, 
upon landing, I was assailed by various porters and others, 
who proffered their services to carry my never-to-be-forgotten 
portmanteau, bag, and dressing-case, to any ostelry or lodging 
I might choose to select in the gay, agreeable, and in war time 
crowded, town of Portsmouth. 

In those days the Crown was considered the " crack " inn ; 
and therefore I, who, having been sworn at Highgate, never 
drank small-beer when I could get strong, proceeded forth- 
with to that extensive and well-conducted establishment : 
thither I directed my nautical Mercury to march, and thither 
I followed him. I reached the Crown alive, and perhaps 

GILBERT GURNET. 259 

well ; but, in regard of drapery, dripping like a male Musidora. 
It was nearly dark ; and the wind whistled out of the gaping 
gateway of the inn right in my teeth. I pulled a bell the 
sound seemed lost in the breeze ; but having made a second 
effort, a pale-faced waiter made his appearance. 

" I want dinner, and a bed," said I. 

" This way, sir," said he; and forthwith ushered me into 
what was called a coffee-room : in which, I beg to observe, 
both the chimney and the company were smoking. The floor 
was sanded like the bottom of a bird-cage, and probably for 
the same reason ; and several gentlemen (so I considered 
them by their language) were grouped at narrow tables 
placed in little slips, separated from each other by brown par- 
titions, at the top of which were fixed brass rods and red fus- 
tian curtains, like those by which, in a country church, the 
churchwardens' pew is specially distinguished. 

I was tired, wet, and weary ; and, above all, uncomfortable 
in my mind. I had left a house where comfort and hospi- 
tality reigned with unsubjected sway : six weeks of social in- 
tercourse with a dear friend whom I loved, and his family 
whom I esteemed, had spoiled me for this sudden change to 
boisterous mirth, strange faces, and unsavoury smells. I sought 
to be alone, to live over again in thought the last forty days, 
and recal and record in my mind the pleasures and comforts I 
had experienced, while, as far as external objects were con- 
cerned, I might repose for a few hours, upon my recollections 
of the constant excitement in which my delightful sejour had 
kept me. 

" Can I have no sitting-room ? " said I, drawing myself 
back from the door. 

" This is the coffee-room," said the waiter, somewhat sul- 
kily ; which I conclude, as a matter of technicality, he thought 
a cogent, legal, and constitutional reason for dining in it. " I 
don't think," added he, looking first at my miserably dripping 
hat and cloak, and secondly, in vain for my servant, and the 
proportionate luggage adequate to the wants and wishes of a 
gentleman who had the presumption to demur to dine by him- 
self " I don't think" (as if such a monster had any right 
to think) " that WE have a sitting-room disengaged I'll 
see have you any luggage, sir ? " 

It was quite clear to me, that upon my answer to this evi- 
s 2 

260 GILBERT GURNEY. 

dently leading question very much depended ; and what had I 
to boast ? I have already said a small portmanteau, a 
bag, and a dressing-case. 

" The porter has got my luggage," said I pulling up a 
limp, wet shirt collar, in order to look dignified. 

And the waiter went to the porter, who still stood under 
the gateway and he took my luggage and they whispered 
together and the pallid monster grinned contemptuously ; 
and, when he turned away from the amphibious creature in 
the pea-jacket, and said " Chambermaid, take this gentleman's 
things to a bed-room," the look he gave, and the peculiar em- 
phasis which he placed upon the word gentleman, convinced 
me, that, whatever my own opinion might be of Mr. Gilbert 
Gurney, the waiter at the Crown Inn at Portsmouth did not 
in any degree sympathise with me in my estimation of that 
highly respectable personage. 

Having delivered my moveables to the chambermaid, the 
fellow went into some other room to inquire of the head of the 
establishment, who had not stirred, whether I might, by his 
special grace and favour, be permitted to put five or six shillings 
extra into his pocket, by the enjoyment of fire and candle in 
a room " to myself," as the people say. 

I then had an opportuuity of surveying the chambermaid 
herself Maid ! thought I Gorgon ! It would not be more 
preposterous to call a patriarch, who at seventy-two shakes his 
tongs-like legs over the saddle of a post-horse, post-toy 
than to call thee, maid ! However, it was of no sort of use to 
disagree with her ; like Lord Grizzle, in ' ' Tom Thumb," 
when declining the combat with the giantess, I felt, and al- 
most said, 

" I will not fight with thee!" 

and accordingly threw into my countenance an expression of 
urbanity, mingled with a desire to know what she was going 
to do with me. 

" Sally !" screamed the Brobdignagian, "what bed-rooms 
is disengaged ? a gentleman wants a bed ! " 

A face not less ugly than that of the questioner presented 
itself over the balusters, resembling nothing I had ever seen 
except a full moon in a fog. 

" What gentleman ?" said the creature. 

" Comes by the Gosport ferry," was the reply. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

261 

" Oh ! " and, after a pause, " there's only number two 
hundred and eighteen." 

" Up-stairs, if you please," said my first conductress. 

" I'll stop one moment," said I, "to see if I can have a 
room to dine in." 

" Yes, sir, you can," said the waiter ; " I'll show it you 
now." 

And so he did ; and shall I ever forget it ? it was-a little 
room opening directly under the gate- way, three-cornered, like 
a cocked-hat box, half covered with a dirty carpet, which, as 
it was agitated by the wind drifting under the door, undulated 
like a playhouse sea. 

What was this to me? at my age it mattered little ; and 
all the inns in England put together could not have yielded 
half the comforts I had left behind me on the other side of 
the water ; so I gave an assenting nod, begged to have a fire 
lighted, and ordered a boot-jack ; which being brought, I 
found the task of " unbooting " one of much greater difficulty 
than I had anticipated those excellent and useful coverings 
for the legs had been saturated during my brief yet pelting 
voyage, and required a force to be withdrawn which I had not 
foreseen. The deed, however, was done ; and, having in- 
stalled my feet in a pair of most accommodating slippers, I 
ordered some fish, and a broiled fowl with mushroom sauce, 
for dinner, and proceeded towards my dormitory, my six-feet 
Tha'is " leading the way." 

We began to mount the stairs as the clock was striking six, 
and continued to ascend in nearly a perpendicular direction 
for a considerable time ; we then seemed to take a south- 
westerly direction ; and, shortly after, rose rapidly up a pre- 
cipitous ladder, railed on either side, and reached that which, 
when it was opened, appeared to me to be the lantern of a 
light-house. It was a pentagonal room, three sides of which 
were windows, on the fourth side stood a miserable-looking 
bed, and the fifth was the door-way. This was number two 
hundred and eighteen. 

" Why," said I, " there is no fire-place here." 

" No, sir," said Thai's, surveying me from 

" Head to foot, from top to toe ; " 

" do you want a fire ? this is the only room we have it's 
e 3 

262 GILBERT GURNEY. 

uncommon pleasant in the day-time in clear weather you 
can see from the Nab to the Needles with the naked eye." 

The idea of anything naked in such a room at such a season 
made me shudder : all I said was, " I don't think it parti- 
cularly snug for this time of year." 

" There a'n't no other room, sir," said my patroness : saying 
which, she banged down a rather tarnished tin candlestick upon 
a painted deal table which stood under one of the shutterless 
windows, and having deposited by its side one solitary towel., 
and a little hard lump of yellow soap, looking like a bit of 
bee's wax, she disappeared, banging the door after her with a 
noise which made all the frames and panes of my winter con- 
servatory rattle. 

In this distant and desolate spot I changed my dress, and, 
although the climate was none of the mildest, I soon began to 
feel the comfort of dry clothing; and thus, young in years, 
and buoyant in spirits, notwithstanding my various little dis- 
comfitures, the little ills by which I seemed to be encompassed 
became matters of mirth, and when I sat myself down on the 
ricketty chair which graced my narrow bed's side, I could not 
choose but laugh at my own miseries. 

In some twenty or twenty-five minutes I had completed my 
toilette, and felt an anxious desire to find my refectory. Then 
came a new difficulty : I quitted my observatory, and, to use 
the phrase of Messrs. Lunardi, Sadler, Green, and Co., the 
aeronauts, " began to descend." This was a matter of no great 
intricacy as far as the last topmost ladder was concerned ; but 
when I got into what might fairly be called the house, seeing 
that there was no finger-post in the passages, I was puzzled, 
and compelled to proceed somewhat cautiously ; for nothing is 
more likely to lead a man into a scrape than turning into a 
wrong room at a house open for the reception of a general 
company. 

Guided I suppose by the natural instinct for food with which 
every animal, biped or quadruped, is imbued, rather than by 
any knowledge of the carte du pays, I reached what might be 
considered the habitable part of the inn ; and, at the end of a 
sort of corridor leading to the front rooms on the first floor, I 
encountered a group of pretty faces smiling and when does 
a face look so sweetly as when it smiles on one? and ear- 
nestly and intently looking at me. One particularly seemed to 

GILBERT GURNEY. 203 

regard me with the deepest interest, not unmixed with vene- 
ration, a tribute for which, at my time of life, I was not alto- 
gether prepared. I " kept the even tenour of my way," and 
encountered at the corner of the passage the huge Glumdalca 
who had chaperoned me to the light- house she looked awe- 
struck, and glided by me with a curtsey so profound that she 
seemed to sink at least two feet into the floor as she passed 
me. 

Onward I went, until I reached the head of a staircase, 
which, by the manner in which the breeze was blowing up- 
wards, I knew to be the one which led to the sty in which I was 
destined to be fed. Judge my surprise at being stopped on the 
first step ce nest que le premier pas qui coute by a portly, 
well powdered, gentlemanly-looking man, with a blue coat, 
brass buttons, white waistcoat, and black unmentionables. 

" This way, sir," said the landlord, for it was he who spoke ; 
" this, sir, if you please, is the way to your dinner room." 

" No," said I, " I believe you mistake my room is down 
stairs, I " 

" I beg a thousand pardons," replied mine host, bowing to 
the ground ; " I did mistake, sir ; but that is, I hope, rectified. 
This way lights, here lights this way, sir." 

The door of a handsome apartment flew open, and I dis- 
covered before a blazing fire, such as would have entirely con- 
sumed and devoured my little three-cornered room under the 
gateway, a table covered with plate fit for the infallible bishop 
of Rome to take his solitary dinner at ; a huge couch had been 
dragged from its ordinary anchorage, to a position at right 
angles with the fire-place, and before it stood a sofa-table 
whereon lay sundry books, the day's newspaper from London, 
a silver inkstand, and all the comfortable accessories to reading 
and writing. 

" This is a better room than the other," said I, with the 
confident air of a man who utters an incontrovertible truism. 

" I thought, sir," said the landlord, bowing profoundly, 
" you might have letters to write ; our post does not leave till 
late I hope, sir, you will find every thing as comfortable as 
we can make it." 

" Thank you," said I, " I dare say I shall do extremely 
well let me have dinner as soon as you can." 

" Instantly, sir," was the answer; and mine host disappeared, 
s 4 

264- GILBERT GURNEV. 

True to his word, five minutes had scarcely elapsed ere he 
reappeared, bearing in his hands a massive silver tureen of 
soup, which I had not ordered, but which he deposited upon 
the table, a train of waiters following, one bearing a silver 
soup plate, a second a ladle, a third a lemon, and a fourth 
something else. 

" I ventured, sir," said the landlord, bowing most reve- 
rentially, "to add the soup, his highness the stadtholder 
was pleased to approve of it very much, when his highness 
was here." 

With such authority for its excellence, what could I say ? 
nothing I bowed assent and forgiveness to the landlord, 
who retired to a respectful distance ; and, under the undivided 
surveillance of himself and three most vigilant subalterns, who 
stood with their eyes riveted on me, and all of whom I most 
earnestly wished at old Nick, I swallowed what appeared to 
me some extremely bad broth very unlike anything I had 
ever tasted before, and not at all like any thing I ever wished 
to taste again. However, the assiduities of mine host were 
not so to be repaid, and when I had finished my task, I said, 
" Admirable soup, indeed." 

I ordered some Madeira, mine host himself vanished I 
had scarcely compounded the fish-sauce, before, like Aladdin's 
genius, he stood again before me, holding in his hand a bottle 
of the wished-for wine. I was startled at the quantity, and 
explained that a pint would have been enough. 

" Oh, sir," said my obsequious caterer, " it makes no dif- 
ference how much you drink it would be a pity to divide 
it Gordon's wine, sir, has been twice to the East Indies, 
and has been in my house fifteen years I have but very 
little of it left. Fetch a glass here," said he, in a loud, au- 
thoritative tone to one of the waiters ; " allow me, sir, to pour 
some out." 

I submitted to his overweening kindness, and felt quite re- 
lieved when he again took his departure to fetch with his own 
proper hands my broiled fowl, which I found, to my surprise, 
associated with two entrees, one of cutlets and the other a 
fricandeau, and moreover ushered in with an announcement 
from mine host that the time had been so short it was impos- 
sible to do more, but that he had ventured to add a couple of 
woodcocks by way of second course. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 265 

Thus feted, I nearly sunk under the attentions which were 
proffered, and which natually produced an increased effect 
upon me, as affording so striking a contrast to the reception 
which awaited me on my first arrival. I hurried through the 
ceremonies of dinner as fast as I could, and having got the 
room clear of the main body of my tormentors, a bottle of 
claret placed on the table for in vain had I mentioned port, 
and proposed a pint I began to think how I could dispose 
of the rest of the evening until bedtime, and accordingly in- 
quired of one of the waiters, who was still occupying himself in 
arranging the fire, if there was any play that night. 

The answer was in the affirmative Mr. Pope, of Covent 
Garden Theatre, acted Alexander the Great. 

" At what time does it begin ? " said I. 

" It has begun, sir," said the man. 

" Do you think," said I, " that I should find room if I 
were to go after I have finished my wine ? " 

" Oh, sir ! " said the man, with a look of confident security, 
" my master will of course take care that there shall be a place 
secured for you, sir." 

This I thought particularly civil, because it must be wholly 
disinterested. I thanked him, and said I would avail myself 
of his civility ; and then, restored to a blissful state of repose, 
I sipped my claret, and drank, tacitly but warmly, the healths 
of the excellent friends whom I had left on the opposite shore; 
and thence my thoughts wandered along the chain of circum- 
stances and events with which I had been entangled, until I 
fell into a kind of reverie, whence I was aroused by the en- 
trance of my ever active, always vigilant landlord, who, having 
first informed me that the waiter had mentioned my intention 
of visiting the theatre, added that he had himself been there 
and secured accommodation for me, with which he hoped I 
should be satisfied, and that whenever I should be pleased to 
go he would be in readiness to attend me. 

I begged to assure him that such particular attention was 
by no means necessary, and that I knew Portsmouth suffi- 
ciently well to find my way from one part of High Street to 
another, without giving him so much trouble. This declar- 
ation was received by my genius with " Oh, sir I you are so 
good ; " and a smile, perfectly indescribable. 

" By the way," said I, as he was leaving the room, " will 

266 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

you send somebody with a light I must go to my room ; 
or " continued I, " perhaps you will let them bring me my 
gloves and handkerchief, which I have left on the table in 
number 218, I think." 

" I beg your pardon, sir/' said mine host, " your sleeping 
room adjoins this I believe there are lights already there 
number 2." 

Saying which, he threw open the battants, and I followed 
him into an apartment abundantly stored with comforts and 
luxuries two candles were burning on the dressing table, 
and hot water bubbled in kettles by the fire. Having in- 
quired if I wished for any thing more, and having received a 
negative reply, he retired ; and I, having pulled on my boots, 
took my gloves and handkerchief, rang the bell to announce 
my approach, and walked down stairs. 

At the bar a few persons were assembled, evidently with 
one and the same object to look at me, which they did with 
similar marks of respect and interest to those which had been 
exhibited by the spectators at the top of the staircase, before 
dinner; they seemed to hold their beards as I appeared, with 
the exception of one old lady, whom I distinctly heard say, 
" God bless him!" as I passed her. I still went on, and at 
the door found my landlord again, attended by two persons 
armed with lighted lanthorns, who, as I quitted the threshold, 
moved forwards towards the playhouse, mine host himself 
walking a little in advance of me. 

We reached the unpretending fane, and I found myself 
rapidly transported, by a side door and narrow carpeted pas- 
sage, into a remarkably comfortable private box, where I was 
safely deposited by my landlord ; and a gentleman, to me un- 
known, but who almost instantly returned, and bowing most 
respectfully, presented me with a bill of the play. I esta- 
blished myself snugly behind the trelliage blind, and enjoyed 
the excellent acting of Pope in peace and quietude. There 
were sundry disturbances in the pit, and some junior naval 
officers had located themselves in one of the boxes up stairs 
over the stage with long four-horse whips, with which at 
stated periods they performed certain evolutions perhaps not 
altogether calculated for the interior of a theatre, but which 
were to me particularly agreeable on account of their novelty. 

When the play was over I felt that I had had enough of 

GILBERT GURNEST. 267 

pleasure for once, and did not stay to see the farce. Lucky 
indeed was it that I did not, as far as my lanthorn bearers 
were concerned, for when I quitted the house, there I found 
them at the door ready to light me back again I could not 
choose but avail myself of their services, and in such state I 
reached mine inn. 

As I went into the house I met in the passage two remark- 
ably pretty girls, whose faces I recollected having seen at the 
top of the staircase when I was descending from my sky- 
parlour to dinner. I was much struck by a sort of brilliancy 
of joyous expression in their countenances, although I could 
not help thinking that they had done their good looks some- 
thing hke injustice, by wearing bright orange- coloured silk 
handkerchiefs over their shoulders. A momentary glance of 
mine eye sufficed to suffuse the downy cheeks of one of them 
with blushes, and, dropping a profound curtsey, her eyes cast 
down upon the floor, she looked as if she thought she had 
been too presumptuous, and shrank as it were from the hall 
into the bar, in which movement she was followed by her 
whom I imagined to be her sister. 

In those days I was very abstemious ; however, a play 
always makes one thirsty, and tires one ; besides, I had been 
cold and wet, and I was rather out of spirits, and so I dissi- 
pated in a glass of negus and a biscuit, and again fell into 
one of those waking dreams which are not unfrequently gene- 
rated in the solitude of an inn, where, although the body 
resteth for an hour or so, the mind is all abroad. When I 
rang to announce my retirement to bed, no Glumdalca was to 
be seen ; although from one room to the other was but a step, 
in came a fair, small-featured, blue-eyed personage, with a 
forehead like snow, over which revelled a profusion of light 
hair. She held in her trembling hand a candlestick, the un- 
dulating motion of which betrayed her agitation. She, how- 
ever, like her young mistresses, if mistresses they really were, 
wore in her cap an orange-coloured bow. I set down the 
prevalence of this fashion as the result of some recent election, 
in which orange had been the distinctive badge of one of the 
candidates. I bade the fair young creature good night, but 
she seemed too much alarmed to be capable of enjoying even 
the very smallest show of civility ; and when she retired with 
a curtsey, I retired to rest, wearied by my day's exploits, and 
preeminently satisfied with my treatment at the Crown. 

268 GILBERT GURNET. 

In the morning, breakfast, much of the same school with 
the dinner, was served ; and at eleven I desired the waiter to 
order me a chaise to Chichester. He went, but in a few mo- 
ments the indefatigable landlord himself arrived to say that 
the horses would be out directly, but that he had directed that 
they should be put to a chariot belonging to a gentleman in 
the Isle of Wight, who had left the carriage there, and who 
he was perfectly confident would be too happy that I should 
do him the honour of using it. 

When the current is setting smoothly along, in the very 
direction we wish, it always appears to me to be excessively 
absurd to throw pebbles into it to ruffle its surface, and per- 
haps divert it from its course. I therefore, after the manner 
I had adopted during the preceding evening, merely bowed 
assent, and, naturally preferring a well-stuffed carriage to a 
hard and rattling " yellow," permitted my kind landlord to 
go his own way to work. 

Then came the alloy the bill which I admit disappear 
to me to be of a considerable amount ; but, to be sure, the 
accommodations were excellent the wine so good the 
cuisine perfect, always excepting and never forgetting the 
stadtholder's soup. One charge, however, puzzled me it 
was before Daly had enlightened me as to the customs of 
Wales besides, I was not in Wales and that charge was, 
one pound one shilling for " ringers." I was struck by this, 
and ventured to inquire what it meant. I was informed that 
the bells of the parish church had been rung in honour of my 
arrival and residence within its precincts luckily for my 
comfort, before I was awake. I thought it odd, and foolish ; 
nevertheless, the thing was done, and the bells could not be 
unrung ; so I paid the bill as it was presented to me, to the 
no small deterioration of my property, and stepped into the 
comfortable carriage of the unconscious gentleman in the Isle 
of Wight, amidst a profusion of bows and curtsies, my land- 
lord standing at the door uncovered, the powder of his head 
blowing up High Street like snow drifting before the wind. 

At Chichester I stopped to pay a visit the link between 
me and Portsmouth was broken ; and I amused myself by re- 
citing to my friends the particulars of my adventure at the 
Crown the moral of my tale being the exhibition of the dif- 
ference of accommodation which exists in every inn, regulated 

GILBERT GURNEY. 269 

according to the whim of the master, or the circumstances of 
the guest and there the matter ended. 

The next day I went on to Brighton, where my servant 
had previously arrived, and took up my residence in Dorset 
Gardens a place then the more esteemed by me, for reasons 
which I need not now record ; and felt, I can scarcely describe 
how, because I perceived in the Brightonians none of the de- 
voted civility, or servility, perhaps, which had so distinctly 
distinguished the people of Portsmouth. 

But time unravels most things Junius will be discovered 
at last. The very next morning a friend did me the kindness 
to breakfast with me ; and, having concluded the meal, pro- 
posed a walk until luncheon. I, too lazy to go up stairs to 
my dressing-room, ordered my servant to bring me my boots ; 
he did so but he brought not those which I intended to 
wear. See upon what trifles great events sometimes turn 
he went for another pair, leaving those which he had pre- 
viously brought. 

" Those are good-looking boots," said my friend the colonel 
"Hoby's?" 

" No," said I " they were made by a man of the name 
of O'Shaugnessy Paget Daly O'Shaugnessy, in St. James's 
Street." 

" Very nice boots indeed," said the colonel. 
" Yes," said I ; " and, what is best of all, fit me remarkably 
well, although not made for me. He had faithfully promised 
me a pair of boots for the day I left town ; but, as usual, 
failed me ; and when my man went for them they were yet 
unmade. However, he sent me these, made expressly for the 
Prince of Orange ; and, odd enough to say, they fit me better 
than any he ever made for me purposely." 

" That's curious enough," said the colonel ; " but, if I had 
been you, I should have made my servant scratch out the 
prince's name, which is written on the inside of them, else it 
might appear that you had appropriated his highness's pro- 
perty to your own use." 

" What ! " said I, " is the prince's name there ? " 

" Here," said the colonel, " read." And so I did ; and 

sure enough there were the words " H. S. H. the Prince of 

Orange, 789,465 ; " the figures meaning to imply that Mr. 

Paget Daly O'Shaugnessy had himself made seven hundred 

270 GILBERT GURNEY. 

and eighty-nine thousand four hundred and sixty-five pairs of 
boots, as watchmakers put an infinity of figures upon their 
watches, beginning, as I believe, at twenty or thirty thousand. 
I was prodigiously startled at this discovery, and, I must admit, 
somewhat mortified. 

" Now," said I, " I see it all. Now can I account for my 
retrograde promotion from the conservatory, from the sky- 
light to the drawing-room at the Crown. Now do I know 
why I was looked at with respect and veneration. Now do I 
comprehend why those pretty girls wore orange handkerchiefs, 
and the fairest of chambermaids trembled. Now do I under- 
stand why I was blessed by old ladies, and lighted to the 
play with lanterns ; why the bells were rung in mine honour, 
and why I was drenched with stadtholder's soup. These, my 
dear colonel, are the boots I wore at Portsmouth ; then satu- 
rated, since dried ; from these very boots did the people there 
derive their notions of my character and consequence, and to 
these boots am I indebted for paying the landlord of that ex- 
cellent inn at least four pounds more than I should have paid 
if I had worn anonymous leggings ! " 

" Ah," said the colonel, " as Titus Andronicus says 

" ' If you had gone all bootless to them, 
They would not have heeded you.' " 

" I confess," replied I, " my vanity is a little wounded. 
N 'imports I was well lodged, and the landlord well paid : 
if he is content, so am I ; and I never will use the word 
BOOTS reproachfully again as long as I live." 

Strange as this adventure may appear, it must be quite clear, 
that a visit to the Crown upon the present occasion was by no 
means desirable, because I should have destroyed a beautiful 
vision which the family had conjured up, and been myself 
degraded into a private gentleman, travelling with a gig and 
a couple of horses sad falling off from royalty ! This it was 
that induced me to take to the Dolphins at Southampton ; 
whence, after the arrival of my man, I proceeded in the packet, 
which sailed in the afternoon, to Cowes, there being no other 
mode of proceeding; and, the wind dying away, we were 
fortunate, as we imagined, in landing at the Vine Inn in about 
six hours after our departure from the main land. 

To me a little delay and a little detour were matters rather 
of satisfaction than complaint, I became more at my ease 

GILBERT GURNET. 271 

every hour that increased the distance between me and the 
captivating woman whose independence of manner and frank- 
ness of character had been then, as I fancied it, my ruin ; and 
it was not until I got to the back of the island, that I felt as 
if I had secured myself against the self-reproaches with which 
my exhibition at her house had loaded me. 

In that sweet island did I remain for three whole months, 
in a state of mind scarcely describable. Deceived and defeated 
by Daly thrown over by Mrs. Green and full of anxiety 
to hear from my brother Cuthbert, to whom I began to think 
I should most certainly go I was more like a madman than 
anything else, and so indeed I think I was considered. How- 
ever, time and patience, my old remedies, stood me in good 
stead upon that, as they have upon more recent occasions ; and 
having worn out which is the only word I can find for it 
a period which I fancied sufficient to deaden the feelings of 
regret by which I had been so severely assailed, I resolved 
upon once more visiting London, in order to consult the only 
real friend I had as to the expediency of my oriental voyage. 

CHAPTER VI. 

IN order to carry my prudential scheme into execution, I de- 
spatched my servant with the horses, by the " ferry of the four 
feet " to Portsmouth ; and, directing him to secure me an 
inside place for the following Tuesday, in any coach which 
went from any other inn than the Crown, and to send me back 
word what the name of the conveyance was for which I was 
booked, I proceeded " according to advice " upon that morning 
by Beazley's packet, almost before it was light, and reached 
the motley town in which I had once unconsciously shone in a 
very different character ; where having landed close by the 
baths, I smuggled myself into the stage, most desirous of 
escaping the recognition of any of the self-made dupes of my 
imaginary rank. 

As soon as 1 got into the coach, I found myself in com- 
pany with a middle-aged gentleman, whom I then thought 
old, but in whose countenance I saw some favourable indica- 

272 GILBERT GURNEY. 

tions of " a mind within ; " and although, at that period, 
people of sense had notbe-Deville-d themselves with the solemn 
absurdities of phrenology, I fancied that, without being either 
as civil as Spurzheim, or as bitter as Gall, I might calculate 
upon enjoying what, at that period of my life, I was not 
averse from (in hopes of picking up information and know- 
ledge), some rational and agreeable conversation with my 
companion during our journey to London. 

The ice of English formality was upon this occasion, as 
usual, broken by the English absurdity of a trite remark upon 
the weather. " It is very wet to-day," said by one man to an- 
other, while the rain is pattering down upon the roof of the 
carriage which contains them, and the bubbles in the puddles 
are hopping up like so many fairy water-sprites, is, as every- 
body acknowledges, both superfluous and ridiculous ; but it 
leads to other things, and the assenting " very " to the obvious 
remark sows the seed of future conversation. So it happened 
then, and, in less than half the distance to Horndean, I had 
received from my companion the information that he was an 
army surgeon, who had come home on leave of absence from 
Jamaica, on account of ill health ; but that, although he had 
been sufficiently unwell to justify the permission he had ob- 
tained, his main object in coming to England was to make 
arrangements for carrying out his wife upon his return to the 
West Indies : she having written out to him to represent her 
situation in this country, alone, and, as it were, widowed, be- 
yond measure irksome and distressing to her feelings. 

He accounted to me for not having taken her with him in 
the first instance for he spoke of her in terms of such devo- 
tion and affection that I could not help asking him why 
she had not been the companion of his first voyage - by 
describing her health to have been extremely delicate, and by 
the fact that he had exchanged from the regiment to which he 
then belonged, and which had returned home before the period 
at which we were speaking; so that by the exchange which 
was a favourable one to him, financially and professionally 
his plans had been considerably altered, and his probable re- 
sidence in the colonies very much protracted. 

I liked him extremely, and was almost vexed when, at Lip- 
hook, a rather pertish, forward-looking young man about 
my own age at that time stepped into the coach, and dis- 

GILBERT GURNET. 273 

turbed our tete-a-tete. Upon the accession of our third mem- 
ber, we relapsed into silence ; and, except upon the occasion 
of seeing a man thrown from his horse between Milford and 
Godalming, little occurred worthy of notice, till we reached 
the Crown at Guildford, where we found the cold round of 
beef, the hot leg of mutton, and the pickles and potatoes 
ready for consumption ; the work of devastation having been, 
previous to our entrance, commenced by a gentleman, who 
soon informed us that we were to have the pleasure of his 
company to complete the parti carre in our conveyance. 

There is something extremely socialising in the community 
of interests of a small party on a cold day round a good fire, 
at a luncheon. We drank ale, and port wine, and hot brandy 
and water offered each other snuff cracked jokes, and 
began, as the warmth of the room thawed us, to feel ourselves 
sufficiently at home and comfortable, to regret the call of the 
" Faulkner " of his day, couched in the emphatic words, 
" Now, gentlemen, if you please," which was to remove us 
from the magic semicircle formed round the hearth of mine 
host of the Crown. 

We entered the coach, evidently pleased with each other, 
and in as different a humour from that in which we were when 
three of us got out of it, as can well be conceived. I felt 
quite at my ease, and had no scruple in relating my adventure 
detailed in the preceding chapter, which appeared to my com- 
panions, when they had heard my narrative, nearly as inex- 
plicable as it had been to myself until I reached the denoue- 
ment at Brighton. 

" I," said Mr. Dillington so was our last acquaintance 
named, " 1 have recently been engaged in an adventure ; 
but mine is a more straight-forward, matter of fact affair to 
me of the most agreeable nature, I admit. I came into this 
neighbourhood only the day before yesterday, meaning to re- 
main here some time, but the magical influence of a pair of 
the brightest eyes I ever beheld has upset all my projects, 
and carries me to London, in spite of all the pressing entrea- 
ties of my hospitable friends in Surrey." 

" Yes," said I, " such things are irresistible. I conclude, 
by your outline, that yours is a love-at-first-sight case ? " 

" I flatter myself," said Dillington, who was extremely 
well qualified for a lady-killer, ' f I flatter myself that it is so, 

T 

274 GILBERT GURNET. 

on both sides. All I know is, that I am speeding my way to 
town, to meet my adorable Dulcinea at the Piazza door of 
Covent Garden play-house, where I am to have the happiness 
- at her own suggestion of accompanying her to witness 
the performance of the play, ' blest as the immortal gods,' 
fondly sitting by her side, to 

" ' Hear and see her all the while 
Softly speak, and gently smile.' " 

" Rather an easy conquest," said the army surgeon ; " is it 
to be a tete-a-tete ? " 

" I rather suspect not," said Dillington ; " I think she 
talked of some elderly body, in the shape of an aunt, who was 
to accompany her, and play Propriety ; however I fancied that, 
by way of a premier pas, I had succeeded capitally. She 
positively refused to tell me where she lived, and, I think, has 
made the assignation in order to try the extent of my earnest- 
ness and anxiety about her, before she reposes a more exten- 
sive confidence in me." 

" May I ask," said I, " is she maid, wife, or widow ? " 

" I did not trouble her with any questions on that point," 
said Dillington; " she wore a wedding- ring, which she flourished 
in my face two or three times during our journey together, 
while drawing the whitest of hands over the brightest of eyes. 
I had not more than an hour and three quarters to make my 
play ; I got into the coach this side Petersfield, and was forced, 
malgre moi, to stop at Godalming to fulfil the engagement, 
which was to have lasted ten days ; but which, although I lost 
her at the moment, has been curtailed of its fair proportions in 
order to regain my adorable incognita; and, to tell truth, I 
think I lost little by that, for a robust, healthy-looking female, 
' a nursing mother,' with a baby and a boy of eight or nine 
years old, were crammed into the coach at Milford, booked all 
the way to London, so that all confidential conversation in the 
way of business must of course have ceased at that point. This 
evening I shall see her again, and all will be well." 

" Oh!" sighed my opposite neighbour, a plain pale man, 
with white whiskers and a short nose ; " if you could but guess 
the pain, sir, that your success gives me, you would not speak 
so thoughtlessly of your happiness. I, too, am in pursuit of a 
lady one to whom I am heart and soul devoted who has 
treated me hardly and harshly I never fancied I could be so 

GILBERT GURNEY. 275 

weak and silly ; but, as you say, man is not master of himself, 
and 

" ' When a lady's in the case, 

All other things of course give place.' " 

" Then, sir," said I, " I presume you are actually on your 
road to the Barley Mow ? " 

" Barley Mow ! " said Mr. Lackington ; " no, sir ; I am on 
my way to a village near town, in which my charming, .capri- 
cious devil of a widow lives ; but whether she will be in a 
sunshiny humour or a cloudy one when I arrive there, is to 
me a matter of great uncertainty." 

" But I conclude," said Dillington, " you don't allow your- 
self to weep and wail without some consolation ? " 

" No," said Lackington, " I had the' pleasure of her ex- 
clusive society at Eastbourn for a fortnight last autumn, where 
we were as happy as two turtle-doves, until something 
crossed her mind or perhaps, I may say, her temper and 
she started off for London, leaving a short note behind her, 
telling me my following her would be perfectly useless, since 
she had resolved utterly to cut my acquaintance for the fu- 
ture." 

" The unkindest cut of all," said I. " And yet your lin- 
gering, longing love remains, and you are determined to try 
your fortune at a reconciliation." 

" Even so, sir," said Lackington, heaving a deep-drawn sigh, 
which seemed to come from the very bottom of his heart. 

" Upon my word, gentlemen," said the army surgeon, " I 
have been listening to your conversation, and 1 must say that 
the morals of my countrymen and countrywomen do not ap- 
pear to have improved during my absence from England. As- 
sure yourselves that the pursuits in which you seem both to be 
engaged, however exciting at the moment, bring with them 
any thing but solid gratification independently of their actual 
impropriety, they generally produce causes for repentance and 
sorrow. If a man fail in the object of his heart, he becomes 
miserable himself if he succeed, the chances are he makes 
another more miserable still ; rely upon it, that wrong never 
comes right, and that no man is truly respectable until he 
marries, and devotes his cares, his anxiety, and his attentions to 
a gentle and confiding partner, whose virtues and merits soothe 
him in adversity, and give new brightness to prosperity." 

276 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

" I presume, sir/' said Dillington, " you are yourself a 
Benedict." 

" Thank my lucky stars I am/' said the surgeon ; " and 
am returning to a happy, humble home, to carry with me to 
the sphere of my duty as amiable a being as ever drew the 
breath of life." 

" Perhaps," said Dillington, " your absence has given a 
new zest to your feelings, and if you had not been separated 
from the lady, the sameness " 

" Oh no," interrupted the surgeon ; " rely upon it, habi- 
tual attachments are always the strongest and most permanent : 

" ' True affection lasts the longer 

When its brightest hours are o'er ; 
Parting sorrows bind it stronger, 
Mem'rjr but endears it more.' 

I have been wretched during the year and a half I have been 
absent, and have now, as I was telling this gentleman before 
you joined us," pointing at the same time to me, " made 
my health a plea for getting leave of absence to ssrprise her 
with my arrival, and my resolution of taking her abroad with 
me ; unless I should eventually be able to exchange again 
into some other regiment." 

" I can easily conceive the delight of such a meeting," 
said I. " In every man's life there are a few moments of 
unqualified happiness you, I suspect, are destined to enjoy 
such to-day." 

" Not to-day," said the surgeon, " for I have 'to pass 
through town to my cottage, and must report myself at the 
Horse Guards before I start ; but to-morrow by this time I 
shall again be at home and what a word is home ! " 

Dillington seemed much struck by the earnestness, almost 
amounting to enthusiasm, with which our medical friend eulo- 
gised the ( blissful state,' and I began to think he would give 
up the pursuit in which he was engaged, in deference to the 
opinions and principles of the surgeon. Lackington gazed 
with admiration on the picture our friend painted of connubial 
comfort and domestic happiness, and every now and then I 
am sure his thoughts reverted to his capricious widow, and 
that even he was beginning to think he might as well rivet her 
heart, by making her his wife, provided always, of course, 
that she would accept his offer. 

GILBERT GUBNEY. '2 t , 

The conversation which had taken place had produced an 
increase of confidence amongst us, and, voting ourselves a very 
pleasant party, we agreed, after we had passed Kingston, to 
dine together at some coffee-house in London a proposition 
to which DiJlington most willingly acceded, provided we dined 
early and near the theatre. By this condition I ascertained 
that his intentions as to the fair lady with the bright eyes re- 
mained unaltered ; and as I had no responsible authority over 
his morality, I suggested the Piazza Coffee House as the most 
suitable and convenient scene of action. Nothing could be 
better for all parties ; for the surgeon was to sleep at the 
Hummums, and Mr. Lackington at the Tavistock (corrupted 
by the market-people into Cabbage-stalk) Hotel ; and Dil- 
lington, who was to be set down at the corner of Berkeley 
Street, would, after dressing at his lodgings in Mount Street, 
proceed to the coffee-house, the door of which adjoined the 
door of the theatre, at which, precisely at seven o'clock, in a 
hackney-coach, the lady, or ladies, as the case might be, 
would arrive in fulfilment of their appointment. 

I undertook to order dinner and secure a table a pro- 
ceeding which, in those times of taverns and theatricals, was 
absolutely necessary ; and having done both in the most judi- 
cious manner, I awaited the arrival of my new acquaintance, 
who had agreed upon six puactually Dillington, of course, 
not caring for the shortness of the time allowed him to drink 
to his fair one's health, nor hesitating a moment between the 
allurements of Venus and the attractions of Bacchus. 

I thought while I was waiting for my company that I had 
been somewhat precipitate and incautious in selecting so po- 
pular and populous a place as the Piazza for the exhibition of 
myself in company with three persons of whom, in fact, I 
knew nothing of whom two, by their own confessions, 
were professed libertines, and the third of whom might not be 
what he professed himself: however, in those days, I gene- 
rally acted upon the impulse of the moment, and sought 
amusement without very particularly investigating the source 
whence it was derivable. Nevertheless, upon this particular 
day, I became, I scarcely know why, more scrupulous than 
usual. I saw the coffee-room filling with persons of conse- 
quence and character, who, in those clays, went to see plays 
and dine early in the neighbourhood of the playhouses ; and, 
T 3 

278 GILBERT GURNEY. 

feeling that it might be disadvantageous, at my time of life, 
to incur the responsibility of the manners, conduct, and con- 
versation of my new friends, I called a waiter, and inquired 
if we could have a private room to dine in, to which he gave 
a most civil affirmative, and in less than ten minutes I found 
myself snugly established in the small dining-parlour which 
opens, or then opened, on the right hand of the door into the 
hall. 

Scarcely had the clock struck six when the trio appeared 
nearly together Dillington, dressed evidently to the best 
advantage, and displaying unequivocal confidence in the tie of 
his neckcloth and the curl of his whiskers ; Lackington, in the 
deshabille of desponding affection ; and the surgeon, who was 
married and settled, and whose heart- catching days were over, 
in his morning costume, having only refreshed himself at his 
hotel. 

The luncheon at Guildford had considerably damped our 
anxiety for dinner, which, however, was put down and eaten, 
the wine passing somewhat rapidly, in compliment to the ex- 
pectant lover, who kept his eyes attentively on the dial of the 
clock, in order that he might be punctual to the moment ; 
and Lackington exhibiting a good deal of feverish anxiety to 
tell us something, which modesty, or delicacy, or some doubt 
as to the prudence or propriety of making further confidence 
with strangers, appeared to hinder him from imparting. At 
last, however, after a few glasses of sherry, which Dillington 
denounced for its resemblance to lamp oil, and one or two of 
champagne, which the same unquestionable authority pro- 
claimed to be indubitable gooseberry, he resolved upon com- 
municativeness. 

As far as the affected airs of Dillington about the wine and 
the cookery went, I cannot help saying (par parenthese) that 
they gave me no very favourable opinion of either his taste or 
character. The swaggerer, is invariably an impostor the 
man who calls loudest for the waiter, who treats him worst, 
and who finds more fault than any body else in the room, 
where the company is mixed, will always turn out to be the 
man of all others the least entitled, either by rank or intelli- 
gence, to give himself airs. People who are conscious of what 
is due to themselves, never display irritability or impetuosity; 
their manners ensure civility, their own civility secures re- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 279 

spect ; but the blockhead or the coxcomb, fully aware that 
something more than ordinary is necessary to produce an 
effect, is sure, whether in clubs or coffee-rooms, to be the 
most fastidious and captious of the community, the most over- 
bearing in his manners towards his inferiors the most rest- 
less and irritable among his equals the most cringing and 
subservient before his superiors. 

Poor Mr. Lackington had not an atom of swagger in his 
composition ; he therefore drank his sherry and champagne, 
and as his heart warmed, his lips opened. 

" I am sure," said he, " it must seem very strange in me 
to fancy that my affairs can interest three gentlemen whom I 
never saw till to-day ; but as we have acted hitherto upon the 
give-and-take principle of community in our prospects and 
pursuits, I think I ought to tell you, as a sequel to what 
I said on the journey, that I have received a letter from my 
Fanny " 

" What ! " said I, " your bewitching and bewitched 
widow ! '' 

" Exactly so," said Lackington ; if and if you really do 
care about the denouement, you will be glad to hear that she 
is to be in town the day after to-morrow, and expresses a wish 
to see me, to be reconciled, and to cast into oblivion all that 
has passed between us of a disagreeable character." 

" I rejoice," said I. 

" I echo your congratulation," said Dillington. 

" And so do I,'' said the surgeon, " with this proviso 
that you marry her. Recollect my advice in the earlier part 
of the day the fact that she desires a reconciliation, is a 
proof that she is really attached to you. Put an end to all 
these ungentle and unnecessary agitations of temper and feel- 
ing make her your wife." 

" I would indeed I would," said Lackington, with some- 
thing like tears in his eyes " but I cannot." 

" What is the nature of the impediment ? " said the sur- 
geon. 

" That," said Lackington, " which you so earnestly re- 
commend matrimony !" 

" As how ?" asked I. 

" I am married already," said Lackington. 

" Married, sir ! " said the surgeon ; ' ' married ! and yet 

* 

280 GILBERT GURNEV. 

why, this is worse and worse I That gentleman's libertin- 
ism/' pointing to Dillington, " shocked me, but he is a 
single man, and " 

" I wish with all my heart, sir, I had his excuse," said 
Lackington ; " but I have one for what may seem gross im- 
propriety and immorality. I will explain my story is short, 
but really affecting." 

Saying which, he " called up a look " which he meant to 
be pathetic, but which, owing to the peculiar formation of his 
features, and the particular cast of his countenance, exceeded 
in comicality anything I had ever seen, except Listen when 
melancholic. 

" It must be short," said the triumphant Dillington, " if 
/ am to hear it ; I have but twenty-two minutes and three 
seconds left." 

" It will not occupy half that time," said Lackington ; 
" and I should like to justify myself in Dr. Martingale's eyes 
for what must appear extremely heartless conduct in roaming 
and roving, having a wife of my own." 

tc I shall indeed be glad to listen," said Dr. Martingale (such 
was our surgeon's name) ; " for I have very decided opinions 
upon the particular point of matiimonial obligations." 

" Well, then," said Lackington, " I will be as brief as 
possible, and you shall know all. When I was nineteen years 
old, which is now ten years since, I did what a great many 
indeed I may say most young men do at that age I fell in 
love, and with such a girl as nobody ever saw : her eyes " 

" Never mind her eyes," said Dillington, " don't stop to 
particularise her points. I have but nineteen minutes and a 
half, and if you go into details I must run away." 

" Well," said Lackington, " she was everything a man 
could desire in a wife ; and, above all, she was kind to me, 
reciprocated my feelings, and, after some few weeks of feverish 
anxiety, I proposed, was accepted, but referred to her father, 
who, without hearing me out, ordered me out, and declared 
that his intentions for his daughter were of a character wholly 
incompatible with my means and situation, and desired that I 
never would mention the subject to her or himself again, and 
never make my appearance at his house any more. 

" The consequence of this rebuff was," continued Lacking- 
ton, " as you may suppose, an increased affection on our 

GILBERT GURNEY. 281 

parts, and a determination, coute qui coute, to elope, A 
scheme was planned, which would have been most effectually 
carried into execution, if I had not, by some misfortune or 
other, pounced into the old 'general's room by mistake for his 
daughter's, who was waiting, bundle in hand, with her mind 
made up, and her maid beside her, all on tiptoe, ready to 
bound down stairs to my postchaise, which was in waiting. 
The consequence was, a discovery of the plot ; a severe re- 
monstrance to my father from the general ; and close confine- 
ment for six months to my gentle Adelgitha." 

" Pass the wine," said Dillington. " A thousand pardons. 
Let us call the waiter and get the bill. Pray go on." 

" My father," said Lackington, " entering strongly into the 
general's feelings, sent me abroad, where I remained, pursuing 
my studies, for three years, which I admit I felt to be a terrible 
waste of time." 

Herein I tacitly agreed. 

" At last," continued the unfortunate gentleman, " I re- 
turned home ; and the first act of my life was to discover whe- 
ther my Adelgitha was unmarried. I succeeded in ascertaining 
that she was still Miss Rowbottom. I felt secure of success, 
now that, I thought, all suspicion of my intentions must be 
lulled, and convinced, by her remaining single, that I was still 
dear to her. Of course, my inquiries about her were made 
with great caution and circumspection. I had learned enough 
I sought no more ; but, proceeding to the neighbourhood 
of her father's house, soon contrived to convey a note to her, 
couched in terms of unmitigated affection, and conjuring her 
to let me know the state of her sentiments as regarded me. I 
received her answer : her feelings towards me were the same 
as they had been three years before, so were her cruel father's. 
' Circumstances which had occurred,' she told me, ' as I must 
naturally suppose, had rendered her life more unhappy, and 
her confinement more rigid ; still, if I held in the mind to 
rescue her from thraldom, she was prepared to renew our plan, 
now of three years' standing.' Her note ended by conjuring 
me to weigh well what I was undertaking, as a diminution of 
my affection would break her heart. 

" Every thing was arranged : two notes more settled the 
business ; and on the third night after my arrival in the neigh- 
bourhood. I lifted my gentle Adelgitha from the library win- 

82 GILBERT GURNEY. 

dow of her father's house into rny carriage. She was so 
agitated at our meeting, and at the excitement of the whole 
affair, that she could not stand, and I deposited her myself in 
the vehicle which was to convey us to happiness via Dover, 
whence we were to proceed to Boulogne to be married a 
scheme proposed by me to obviate the necessary delay for re- 
sidence, in order to obtain a licence ; and as Adelgitha was out 
of her nonage, I thought Gretna would be carrying the joke a 
little too far." 

" Despatch," said Dillington, whose eye was as attentive to 
the dial as his ear to the dialogue. 

' l I will," said Lackington ; *' but I know you'll laugh at 
me, although it is, indeed, no laughing matter. As we pro- 
ceeded on our rapid journey towards the coast, I made ten 
thousand inquiries as to the sufferings my dear girl had under- 
gone since my departure, and received every assurance of 
affection and kindness from the dear object of my heart ; but, 
in the midst of my anxieties and endearments, I every now 
and then heard a knocking against the bottom of the carriage, 
which, to a nervous man, sounded very like a growing failure 
in the axle-tree ; but, whenever I attempted to listen, my dear 
Adelgitha diverted my attention from the sound, by fresh pro- 
fessions of affection and esteem. 

" ' I scarcely expected, dear Frederick,' said she, ' that you 
would have remained constant : I thought perhaps the news 
of the dreadful occurrence might have induced you to retract ; 
and that you might have considered it a perfect justification of 
your withdrawal.' 

te ' What accident ? ' said I. ' Tell me, my beloved.' 

" ' Don't you know, Frederick ? ' said my affectionate com- 
panion. 

" ' Indeed I do not,' said I ; and at that moment I heard 
the same noise which had so frequently attracted my attention, 
and interrupted her for a moment by asking her if she did not 
hear the thumping, as I thought, of the chariot on the perch. 

" ' Oh, Frederick ! ' sobbed the agitated girl, ' that's it.' 

" ' It ! ' said I ; ' what, my angel ? Do you really know 
what it is ? ' 

" ' Don't be alarmed, Frederick,' said Adelgitha. ' I wish 
you had known it before.' 

" ' Known what ? ' exclaimed I. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 28,3 

" ' Known IT, dearest,' said she, crying afresh. 

" ' What is the noise ? ' said I ; ' and what has it to do 
with our destinies ? ' 

tc ' T feared it would have a serious effect upon you,' re- 
plied Miss Rowbottom ; ' but no ! your mind and feelings soar 
above it.' 

" ' It !' cried I, impatiently ; f but what is it ? what does 
it mean ? what is the noise ? ' 

" ' My leg, Frederick,' said Adelgitha, dropping her lovely 
face upon my shoulder, which I declare, upon my word, gentle- 
men, was as wet through with her tears as if I had been caught 
in a shower of rain. 

" ' Your leg, dearest !' said I. 

" ' Yes ; the result of that dreadful fall from my horse, of 
which you were, of course, aware,' said Adelgitha. ' The tor- 
ture of amputation was nothing, to the dread I felt lest it 
should alter your affection for me ; but I thought I knew you 
better.' 

" I thought, gentlemen," said Lackington, " I should have 
died. I fancied perhaps she was joking, or trying the strength 
of my affection ; for I know what women will do in that way 
sometimes. However, as it was quite dark, and we were pe- 
culiarly situated, I ventured, with the greatest delicacy and 
decorum imaginable, to ascertain the fact forthwith ; and there, 
sure enough, my hand lighted upon a stumpy stick, of the 
Greenwich Hospital regulation cut, and which, whenever my 
bride elect had become at all animated or energetic, had been 
bumping and knocking itself about against the bottom of the 
chaise. 

" I would have given the world to have known of the ac- 
cident, to which, up to that moment, I was a perfect stranger. 
I should, I dare say, have loved her the more for her misfor- 
tunes ; but the loss of a limb in a man is nothing ; on the 
contrary, it constantly brings to our hearts and minds the gra- 
titude we owe to those who fight our battles by sea and land ; 
and even though Miss Rowbottom might not have claimed my 
sympathy upon that score, I felt quite sure I should have 
overcome all the foolish prejudices which a man has about the 
symmetry of a sylph of seventeen (which she was when I last 
quitted her), in gratitude for her attachment to me. But the 
surprise, the suddenness of the thing, gentlemen, to find, in- 

284 GILBERT GURNEY. 

stead of the beautiful tapering ankle and miniature foot I had 
left, no foot, no ankle, no nothing, but a small black balustrade 
I do declare I was completely taken aback." 

We could scarcely restrain our laughter at this recital, which 
was delivered by our white-faced friend in the most plaintive 
tone of voice, and in the most melancholy manner. Dilling- 
ton himself had not looked at the clock for three minutes, and 
the hand was on the quarter ; but the tale was " wondrous 
moving." 

" Well," said I, " how did you proceed ? " 

" Why, sir/' said Lackington, " I withdrew my hand, of 
whose presence the leg I had indeed touched had not been 
conscious, and turned to my weeping companion for some ex- 
planation of the cause of this unfortunate substitution, to which 
I was yet a stranger. Adelgitha gave a long description of 
the terrible accident which had produced the calamity with 
which I had just been made acquainted, and I felt deeply 
affected by the recital. However, gentlemen, you will perhaps 
imagine my sensations, when she wound up the history by 
telling me that what I had now discovered was a trifle to what 
I should see in the morning. 

" What she meant I could not, for the life of me, compre- 
hend ; and I waited for daylight with all the anxiety of a 
shipwrecked mariner, but without any of his hopes. 

" The excess of Adelgitha's agitation had worn her out ; 
and, some time after the conclusion of her narrative, she fell 
asleep, with her head upon my shoulder, with her hand clasped 
in mine. / could not sleep : I sat and watched the coming 
dawn ; till, at length, the first ray of morning beamed through 
the glasses of the carriage. I won't attempt, gentlemen, to 
describe the dreadful effects which the accident had actually 
produced upon her once beautiful countenance, nor the effects 
those effects produced upon me : nor will I endeavour to dis- 
guise or describe my horror at the discovery. Here was the 
daylight come ; and I should have to hand her out of the 
chariot, and into the packet ; and I should have to attend to 
her, and talk to her, and at last to marry her, and to be her 
constant companion for life. I could not refuse I could 
not hurt her feelings, or practically acknowledge the revulsion 
produced in my own by any exhibition of disinclination to 
fulfil my promise and redeem my pledge. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 285 

The sun was quite up when she awoke ; and opening 
would I could say her eyes ! for when one beamed upon me, 
I found the other was gone. It looked at me, as much as to 
say, ' Well, what do you think of this?' it did, upon my 
word, gentlemen ; and I am afraid I could not conceal my 
agony of mind from Adelgitha herself. She, however, ap- 
peared as all women do to bear the evil with resignation 
and good humour, seemingly careless as to the effects it had 
produced upon herself, and only valuing it with reference to 
that which it might be supposed to have upon me. I could 
not speak. What could I say ? Could I tell her that she 
looked as well with one eye as she had done with two ; or that 
a nose broken across the bridge was more lovely than a delicate 
aquiline ? I could not say that ; so I had recourse to the silent 
eloquence which is all-powerful in love, and caught her to my 
heart with a sensation of affection and compassion. The 
moment I did so, I heard the infernal bumping at the bottom 
of the chaise again ; it destroyed all my sentimentality in a 
moment." 

" Push on," said Dillington ; " I have but five minutes, 
and we have to pay the bill. Well, tell us, what did you do ?" 
" Persuaded her," said Lackington, " to alight at the next 
stage, and get some coffee, and take half an hour's rest a 
proposition to which she readily acceded ; and we were ushered 
into a very comfortable room on the ground floor, selected by 
the considerate waiter no doubt on account of its more con- 
venient position to a lady under Adelgitha's particular cir- 
cumstances. 

" When she had retired with her maid, and I was left alone, 
I began to consider what was best to be done. I knew enough 
of the generosity and disinterestedness of female hearts to be- 
lieve that she would not think of holding me to my bargain, if 
I candidly confessed how deeply I felt the alteration which 
had taken place ; but how could I explain the sensations which 
occupied me, without wounding her almost to the death ? for 
what appeared very singular to me, and which I believe is not 
singular at all, was, that from habit, (the accident had happened 
two years before,) and that happy reconcilement of our minds 
to what must be, and is, she appeared to me, in spite of her 
lamentations, practically to consider herself very much the 
same as she was before the event happened ; for when she 

286 GILBERT GURNEY. 

entered the room into which we were first shown at the inn, 
she stumped up to the looking-glass, and, setting her curls in 
order, exclaimed, ' How hideous this night-travelling makes 
one look ! ' 

" I stared," continued Lackington, " but said nothing ; and 
when she returned from her half-hour's rest, I thought she 
fancied all my surprise was over, and that I saw her now just 
as she was when we parted. This mortified me : she seemed 
to allow me no credit for my efforts to be amiable and honour- 
able ; and I gave orders for ' horses on,' resolved to impress 
upon her mind during the next ten miles, in as delicate a 
manner as possible, the real state of my heart. 

" While we were waiting for the coming steeds, a travelling 
carriage and four drove up to the inn-gate at a slapping pace. 
The noise of the opening door and falling steps attracted my 
eye, when, in an instant, who should appear before us but 
General Rowbottom, and the major, his son the father and 
brother of Mrs. Lackington elect. 

" ' So, Adelgitha,' said the general, bursting into the room, 
' we have caught you.' 

" Adelgitha made no reply ; her surviving eye filled with 
tears, and she sank into her brother's arms. As for myself, I 
felt I can scarcely tell how. I am afraid I rather rejoiced 
than not, that we were overtaken. 

" ' Mr. Lackington,' said the general, turning to me, ' what 
is the meaning of this rash and foolish step ? Three years 
ago I forbade you my house. I believed your attachment to 
my daughter was a pretence to possess yourself of the fortune 
she then expected from her aunt, Lady Swivelscombe, and I 
shut my door upon you. You return three years afterwards, 
and precipitately and unadvisedly enter into a clandestine cor- 
respondence with my child, and eventually carry her off, in a 
state of health, and under circumstances, which require the 
greatest care and attention.' 

" ' General,' said I, ' I admit the fact ; but allow me to be 
heard in my vindication.' 

" ' Certainly, sir,' said the general, calmly and temperately. 

" ' I admit the constancy, and sincerity, and disinterested- 
ness of my attachment to Miss Rowbottom,' said I ; e 1 dis- 
claim all care about her fortune I acted upon the impulse 
of a long-cherished feeling ; but,' added I, with a degree of 

GILBERT GURNEY. 287 

diplomatic dexterity for which, perhaps, gentlemen, you may 
not give me credit, ' sooner than cause her a moment's un- 
happiness, or the entailment of a parent's displeasure, I am 
prepared this instant to give her up. Yes, sir,' said I, in what 
I considered a magnanimous tone of voice, ( 7 can make sacri- 
fices as well as others.' 

" ' Give her up ! ' said the general ; ' by Jove, sir, you shall 
do no such thing. I and Charles have followed you on your 
route in order to stop your needless career. If you had written 
to me if Adelgitha had spoken one word to me now that 
you have proved yourself worthy of her, I should not have 
hesitated for a moment to receive you into my house, and 
welcome you as my son-in-law.' 

" ' Sir,' said I, amazed more, I believe, than delighted, 
' this is very strange ! This total alteration of your sentiments 
towards me I could not have been prepared for I am but 
what I was I am as unworthy as ever.' 

' ' ' Excuse me, my dear Lackington,' said the general ; 
' your affection has been tested not only by time, but by cir- 
cumstances ; you proffered your suit when Adelgitha was 
lovely, and you, I thought, were captivated by her person, 
rather than her mind and qualities you made your offer 
when she was the expectant heiress to a fortune of eighty 
thousand pounds from Lady Swivelscombe an accident has 
marred her beauty, yet you still pursue her Lady Swivels- 
combe's second marriage has deprived her of the fortune she 
expected, and yet you bind yourself to her for ever. What 
can a father desire more of a son-in-law than such convincing 
proofs of honour and affection ? Give me your hand, Lack- 
ington, and assure yourself that you need go no farther on 
your flying tour to matrimony ; my house and my heart alike 
are open to you both.' 

" This was a finisher," said Lackington. 

" You married her ? " asked Dillington.*! 

" I did," replied the other, " and " 

" Stay," cried Dillington, interrupting him ; " the clock is 
striking seven I cannot stop to hear the rest my sweet 
Maria is doubtless at the door let the waiter know what my 
share of the bill is, and I will call and settle it, for I have not 
a moment to lose. If my fair incognita prove faithless, I shall 
be back in five minutes if not, I trust we shall soon meet 
again." 

288 GILBERT GURNEY. 

Saying which, the impatient lover, having shaken hands 
with us all, flew from our presence to keep his engagement, 
leaving the doctor and myself to hear the termination of Lack- 
ington's lament. 

" Conclude, conclude," said Martingale ; tc you married 
her, sir ; that is the point at which to me the interest begins, 
for it is thence I endeavour to trace the value of my principles 
and opinions regarding matrimony." 

" T did, sir," said Lackington ; " but, in the course of the 
negociation (for our correspondence assumed that character), 
my father and my friends so earnestly dissuaded me from ful- 
filling an engagement into which I had been what they called 
forced, that I believe I must admit that I leant a little to their 
way of thinking, and exhibited some symptoms of a desire to 
withdraw. I found it, however, impossible ; both the general 
and the major had made up their minds to the match, and I 
should have been tried by military law if I had declined 
and so we were united." 

" And what," said I, " marred your domestic happiness ? 
I admit that the damages which your lady had received might 
detract from her personal attractions, but her mind " 

" Ay, sir," sighed Lackington, " that's it, as Mrs. L. said 
of her leg. While she was beautiful, I never thought of her 
mind while she was beautiful she never showed her temper 
and moreover, the fact that she was aware that I would 
not have married her if I could possibly have avoided it, set 
her so entirely against me, that for two years she led me such 
a life as compelled me, at the beginning of the third, to seek a 
separation ; but that and I have stated all the circumstances 
to show the fact that does not, as you know, enable me to 
marry where I could really and fondly love." 

" Have you any family, sir ? " said the doctor, evidently 
collecting materials for some new eulogy on the married state. 

" No, sir," said Lackington, in a most lugubrious tone, " I 
have no progeny." 

" I think," said Dr. Martingale, drawing himself up into an 
imposing attitude, " you have made out a case the circum- 
stances are peculiar very peculiar indeed; and yet I also 
think, if you were to make up your mind to it, all might yet 
be well ; the former exacerbation of the lady's feelings might 
be soothed and softened by renewed attentions and a fresh 

GILBERT GURNEY. 289 

iow of kindness. There is, Mr. Lackington/' continued the 
doctor, " and I never can repeat it too often, a sweet commu- 
nity of interests a binding reciprocity of feeling a mutual 
confidence existing in the married state which no other can 
afford. I will instance myself and Mrs. Martingale " 

How much farther the doctor might have proceeded in his 
eulogistic harangue upon matrimony and Mrs. Martingale, T 
cannot pretend to say, for just at that moment a considerable 
scuffling was heard in the hall, and in an instant the door of 
our room was hastily opened by Dillington, who appeared 
before us in a state of the highest excitement. 

" Doctor, doctor," said he, addressing himself to Martin- 
gale, " your professional assistance is wanted an accident 
has occurred the lady I have spoken of, in stepping down 
the infernal iron ladder of a hackney-coach, has sprained her 
ankle, and is suffering so much pain as to have fainted." 

" Bring her in, bring her in," said the doctor, rising from 
his seat. 

"Poor thing! "said Lackington; "pray attend to it , 
think what may be the consequence that's it." 

Accordingly we rose, and forthwith a delicate young crea- 
ture, in a half-fainting state, was brought into the room, and 
by us laid on the tavern-regulation horse-hair sofa, which 
stood opposite the fire-place. A thick veil covered her face, 
but her figure was symmetrical. 

" You had better leave the room," said the doctor to us in 
an under tone ; " she must lose blood." 

" Not without one peep at her face," whispered I, as Dil- 
lington was entering. 

IC No," said Lackington, " one, one peep, and we go." 

The doctor, who was what is called a staid, discreet per- 
sonage, appeared somewhat unwilling to gratify our curiosity. 
I, therefore, who was not quite so particular, effected our 
object by twitching away the veil as if by accident, and dis- 
covered a face fully corresponding in beauty with the grace- 
fulness of the figure. 

Just as I had caught a glimpse of her beauties, the doctor, 
who, after having assisted in depositing his new patient on 
the couch, had proceeded to open, by the light of the candle 
on the chimney-piece, a shagreen case of lancets, directed us, 
while he was adjusting his apparatus, to raise her head. We 

290 GILBERT GURNEY. 

accordingly did so ; and judge my horror, surprise, and asto- 
nishment, the instant after Dillington had addressed her as 
" Maria, my love," to hear Lackington scream out in a voice 
of horror, " What do I see ? is it possible ? my fickle widow, 
by all that's diabolical ! Why, Fanny, Fanny ! " Fanny 
was, or seemed to be, insensible. But this was nothing to 
what was coming all that had yet happened was thrown 
into the shade of utter darkness by the horrible shriek of the 
uxorious, confiding, and sentimental Dr. Martingale, who, the 
moment he set his eyes on the suffering angel, dropped the 
lancet which he held in one hand, and the candlestick and 
tape which were contained in the other, and exclaiming, in a 
tone of grief, terror, and amazement, which I never shall 
forget, " MY WIFE, by all that's devilish ! " rushed out of the 
room, and thence, out of the house into the street. 

Lackington, fearing some mischief either to the doctor or 
himself, dashed out after him ; and Dillington, who saw that 
the denouement had somewhat prematurely arrived, ran after 
him, and I found myself standing by the sofa on which lay, 
quite unconscious of what was passing, the paragon of her 
sex the amiable and devoted lady of Frederick Olinthus 
Martingale, Esq., M.D. and A.S.S. ! 

Under all the circumstances, however moving beauty in 
distress may be, I certainly had no ambition to be the " Last 
of the Pentweazles ; " and however much I might sympathise 
in the pain which she was probably suffering from missing her 
footing on the steps of the hackney-coach, it was evidently not 
the first faux-pas she had made, and I thought the sooner I 
got out of the mess the better. Depositing her Venusian head 
on one of the pillows of the sofa, and gently kissing her 
cheek, in order to deceive her into the belief that she was 
under the care of one of the firm of Martingale, Dillington, 
Lackington, and Co., I stepped quietly out of the room into 
the hall, and told the waiter that strange things had occurred 
since dinner, but that I would myself run round into Russell 
Street and send in surgical assistance, desiring him in the 
mean time to order one of the female servants of the house to 
go to the lady on the sofa. 

" Directly, sir," said the waiter ; "only I beg your par- 
don, sir you'll excuse me the bill, sir. Thomas," con- 
tinued the man, never losing sight of me or his hold of the 

GILBERT GURNEY. 201 

door, " send Sally to number one. The bill, sir," at the same 
moment producing from behind his back a paper as long as 
the city streamer in my Lord Mayor's show ; " seven pounds 
eight shillings and sixpence, sir, besides the broken candle- 
stick." 

" I," said I, " have nothing to do with the bill beyond my 
own share of it ; divide it, and " 

" Beg pardon, sir," said the waiter, " you ordered the din- 
ner you engaged the room, sir we have the pleasure to 
know you as a customer here don't know any of the other 
gentlemen, sir besides, consider, sir a very unpleasant 
affair to have occurred in Mr. Hodgson's house." 

" Well," said I, admitting the justice of the waiter's claim, 
" of course, then, I will settle it j" saying which, I suited 
the action to the word by giving him a ten-pound note. " Pay 
the bill and yourself, and with the rest see that the unhappy 
lady is taken proper care of; and, unless her husband returns 
to claim her, let her be removed to whatever place she chooses. 
I will call here to-morrow, when you can give me an account 
of your proceedings, and I added in an under tone let 
me know where she lives." 

Saying which I quitted the Piazza Coffee House, very much 
enlightened in my ideas of the blessings of matrimony, and 
the advantage of making stage-coach acquaintanceships. 

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 

u 2 

GILBERT GURNEY. 293 

VOLUME THE THIRD. 

CHAPTER I. 

WHEN I quitted the scene of action, I felt annoyed ; not so 
much, perhaps, by what I had seen and heard, as by the re- 
flection, that I was to recommence my London life in a new 
place. My servant one of the best, for the first seven years 
of his servitude, that ever lived had proceeded, upon his 
arrival, to my old lodgings : they were occupied by another 
tenant, but my kind landlady recommended me to an excel- 
lent house, where I should be as comfortable as possible ; at 
all events, until the gentleman who then was in possession of 
my former apartments should be disposed to quit them. 

I hated then, almost as much as I do now, a change of 
domicile ; put me down once comfortably, and there let me 
rest. When I reached my destined resting place, I was dis- 
turbed, because the parlour of the house was to the right of 
the door, instead of the left, as it was in my other domicile ; 
and then the staircase went up the middle of the house/ and 
my sitting-room and bed-room did not communicate, and I 
had to cross from one to the other in my dressing gown, if I 
chose, as I invariably did, to breakfast in that " free and 
easy" vestment ; and when I was lighted to bed, by an elderly 
woman in black my man having retired to rest I thought 
she looked cross, and sour, and strange, and not in the least 
the sort of woman by whom 1 liked to be waited upon. 

However, faute de mieux, I went to my bed, but not to 
sleep ; a thousand things flitted into my mind. First, all the 
extraordinary developements of character, male and female, by 
which I had been instructed and edified during the preceding 
evening ; then, the affair of Emma; then, the bouleverse- 
ment of my agreeable acquaintance with Mrs. Fletcher 
Green ; and then the extraordinary termination of my 
friendship with Daly, whose conduct, in spite of the opinion 
of my friend, the gallant lieutenant of Life Guards, had been, 
u 3 

294 GILBERT GURNEY. 

I thought, blameless in the first instance, and generous in the 
last : and so I concluded my reveries with a decision, that I 
had been led into an affair, with regard to him, which I could 
not but regret, and by a resolution, that of all earthly ab- 
surdities not to speak of its immorality duelling was the 
greatest ; because the injured man is just as likely to be shot 
as the man who has injured him. The third possible case, of 
the injured man shooting himself, I did not take into calcula- 
tion. 

I recollected how strongly the greatest and wisest of men 
had reprobated the custom. How the King (Henry II.) of 
France, after witnessing, in great pomp, the celebrated duel 
between Jarnac and Chasteneraye, at St. Germain en Laye, in 
1547, was so much struck by the barbarity and injustice of 
the system, that he put an end to it. To be sure, his sons, 
Charles IX. and Henry III. restored it ; but they had not 
been witnesses to, or as I had been, a principal in, a work of 
so much folly and injustice. 

I believe my thoughts had taken this turn, not only be- 
cause I wished to put myself sufficiently in the wrong with 
myself, to justify my seeking a reconciliation with my late 
antagonist, but because I had very recently been reading in 
the Isle of Wight, a speech of James I., delivered upon his 
first coming into the Star Chamber to sit as judge upon a 
case of duel, against which he had issued a proclamation. 

" Of all bloodshed," saith the king, " this of the duel is 
the worst : first, because it comes not on revenge of other 
blood, which may stir some compassion, as when a man had 
killed a father or a brother, it was lawful, by the old law, for 
the next of kin to kill the murderer, if he were caught before 
he entered into the city of refuge. But the duel is no revenge 
of former blood, but a sharpening and whetting of swords to 
shed blood, and that, many times, for vain words which may 
be recalled. To revenge that with blood which cannot be re- 
called, how vain a thing is it ! for a man, by God's permis- 
sion, may kill a man, but he cannot bring him to life again. 
A man hastily falls out with another, and so to the lie, and so 
to strokes, and so to murder. This is yet more to be pitied, 
because it is in heat ; but, to do so in cold blood, as the duel 
is performed, casts away all plea of mercy before God and the 
king." 

GILBERT GVRNEY. 295 

Much more did his majesty propound to the court, which 
I have forgotten, except, indeed, his sneer at the degradation 
of the word honour, which his majesty declared could only be 
derived from the king, and was, therefore, inherent in no 
man. " Where," said the English Solomon and it is 
curious enough to quote at a time when without, I trust, any 
serious diminution of loyalty to the sovereign from that which 
the country felt due to the kingly office in the days of the 
Star Chamber, men certainly hold opinions somewhat at va- 
riance with those of his sapient majesty " Where," says 
King James, " will you have honour here amongst us, 
who live in a monarchy, if not from the king ? Men are 
bold to give the title of honour where it is not due. I have 
warned the marshals of it, that the title of honour shall not be 
given to gentlemen worship belongs to them, and not 
honour, which is proper to statesmen and counsellors. For 
what is the reason that a man, never so great in honour, being 
attainted, loseth honour, but because the king resumeth it 
Rex dat et aufert honorem ; and he that grants honour, must 
interpret it. Will you then leave God and the king, and the 
king and the state, the law and the counsel, and get honour in 
an alehouse, from a swordsman, that hath scarce a rag at his 
back a Barmoutho man ! one that dares not go out 
of Milford Lane for debt ? If this be honour, it is a ragged 
honour a base popular honour ; and, to say truth, popular 
honour is but a treasonable honour in a monarchy. If you 
will have such honour, you must go to the Low Countries for 
it ; here you may not have it." 

Poor King James ! little did he think, that in two hundred 
years, or a little more, after his death, titles and distinctions, 
of which he was so jealous, would have been so scattered 
and tossed about, that every member of parliament Bar- 
moutho man or not would come to be designated as 
" honourable ; " that every alderman would be dubbed 
"worthy," every officer pronounced "gallant," every 
barrister be styled " learned," and every attorney called 
" gentleman." 

However, the principle of Solomon struck deep into my 

mind ; and although the authorities of Doctor South, in all 

piety and seriousness, and Lord Chesterfield, in all the force 

of ridicule, might have sufficiently satisfied me, the dictum of 

u 4 

296 GILBERT GURNEY. 

an English monarch, delivered, too, in the Star Chamber, 
outweighed them all. 

As for his wise majesty's disquisition upon the difference 
between hot blood and cold blood, it affected not me, because, 
as I have already noted down, I never had the slightest inten- 
tion of hitting Daly a circumstance which, however, 
judging by what actually did occur, might, perhaps, have 
proved fatal to him. In fact, as I have already said, my heart 
yearned for a reconciliation. I know what it is for a man to 
see a woman the wife of another, whom he had, for many 
years, intended to be his own ; but, as I argued to myself, 
there is no accounting for tastes. Emma preferred Daly, and, 
as she herself says, never thought of me in the light of a 
lover; and certain it is, that I was led to consider myself 
more to blame in the affair than anybody else, since the very 
next step of my life went to prove that I could very easily 
mistake the candid good nature of friendship for an affection 
of a more serious and tender character. 

I admit, that such a disposition to misunderstand or, 
rather, to misconstrue might have had its origin in conceit 
and vanity ; but this I know, that if women would but con- 
sider what powerful, what dangerous, and speaking of man's 
happiness or misery destructive weapons eyes are, they 
might, perhaps, be a little more careful in using them. Car- 
dinal D'Este, in the year 1505, is said to have caused the 
eyes of his natural brother, Jules, to be put out, merely be- 
cause a young lady, to whom his eminence was attached, 
happened one day to praise them. Far be it from me to take 
such a course with any of those bright orbs, which, if I have 
not very much deceived myself, have in the course of my life 
very much betrayed me. So much for my conceit so much 
for my repentance and so much for my desire to be re- 
conciled with the Dalys. 

Three something more than three months had elapsed, 
since my last disappearance from London, and November was 
setting in, with all its agremens of yellow fogs, north-easterly 
winds, and drizzling mists ; the hypochondriacs were getting 
ready their halters, and the demand for arsenic was consider- 
able. After breakfast, however, 1 sallied forth, intending, in 
the first place, to apply myself to Hull, who would be sure to 
give me information about my generous friend. After having 

GILBERT GURNEY. 297 

obtained this intelligence, I proposed continuing my walk as 
far as Broad Street, where I thought, if I did not find a letter 
from Cuthbert, I should, at all events, hear news of him ; 
and, accordingly, I pursued the track to Hull's chambers, to 
which he had frequently invited me, and paddled through the 
mud, with an umbrella over my head, fully prepared to resist 
the influence of the weather. But such are the extraordinary 
occurrences of this life, and such the curious coincidences 
which any man who has a turn for observation or remark is 
sure to perceive, that I had not dabbled along two streets from 
my new lodgings, before I saw the identical object of my 
search Daly himself. 

We were on opposite sides of the way. I saw him, and 
saw that he saw me. The moment was trying and critical ; 
would he break the ice should I ? Our eyes met, and the 
doubt seemed to be mutual the inclination much the same. 
It is quite impossible to describe the sort of feeling by which 
we were both actuated. I saw he wished to cross over and 
speak ; I wished (and thought he saw I did) to cross over and 
speak to him. I cannot explain the affair of the minute 
which followed, but, at the end of it, we had shaken hands, 
and were walking together. 

" Behold, his anger melts he longs to love you, 
To call you friend." 

I never felt more awkwardly in my life. It was a 
question whether I had better or not recur to any thing that 
had passed; we had been friends we were friends. There 
had been a sort of a hitch a hiatus, but the fight had 
set that to rights, and I had been wounded, which was as 
much as a man of honour could expect, and my friend had 
not wounded me, which made the affair of reconciliation 
easier. But, then, Emma I could not screw my courage 
to "the sticking place," as Shakspeare says I could not 
ask after her ; and Daly seemed which was odd enough for 
him rather puzzled whether he should speak of her ; so we 
said nothing for a minute or two. At last, he asked me if I 
was staying in town ? Being November, I did not like to 
commit myself altogether, so I said I had come to town the 
day before, and was going away to-morrow. 

" Deuced strange world this, Gurney," said Daly, who 
began to recover his composure ; " you are a capital fellow 

298 GILBERT GURNEY. 

now be the best of capital fellows you know all my affairs 
by this time. Have you a mind to come and dine with me 
and Emma ? she'll be delighted to see you so shall I." 

I thought Daly showed the greatest possible wisdom in 
sinking all the intermediate events which had occurred between 
our parting and (literally) our meeting. His invitation was 
what I really sought. 

" I am your man/' said I. 

" At six," said Daly " nobody but my wife." 

" Where are you in town ? " said I. 

" In Duke Street, Manchester Square," said Daly ; " but 
you wo'nt come ? " 

" Upon my honour I will," replied I, "provided you think 
that Mrs. Daly will not object to receive me." 

" On the contrary," said Daly, " she is anxious to show 
you that her friendship is unchanged, as ours, my dear fellow, 
I hope will ever remain." 

He again shook hands with me in a manner to convince me 
of the sincerity of his professions ; and, having told me the 
number of his residence, we parted, but to meet again at 
dinner time. 

The moment Daly was cut of sight, I felt, although 
extremely happy at having achieved my scheme of recon- 
ciliation, that I had committed myself to a scene of a particu- 
larly embarrassing character. I had called out Daly for 
all he knew, would have shot him, if I had not, by chance, 
shot myself. I was then actually bound in sureties to keep 
the peace towards him, and we had been separated without 
any opportunity of explanation. That he, a man of the world 
and of spirit, would think no more of this, unless, perhaps, to 
applaud my anxiety to vindicate my honour, I felt quite sure ; 
indeed the manner in which he sought my hand the moment 
our eyes met, and he felt satisfied that I should reciprocate his 
sentiments, convinced me that our difference was for ever at 
rest, and I left any discussion which might arise in the course 
of the evening to chance, because I saw how it would termi- 
nate ; but with respect to Emma, I began to get particularly 
nervous. He assured me of her readiness, even anxiety, to 
receive me as a friend in a new character, and with perfect 
cordiality. But still, could she pardon my sanguinary pro- 
ceedings as regarded her husband ? would she, too, steep in 

GILBERT GURNET. 299 

ivion all the past circumstances of the case ? These ques- 
tions puzzled me, and all I hoped was, that there might be 
some other guests to break the solemnity of the party, or that 
her mother and the major might be yet living with them, to 
add to the hilarity of the evening. 

I pursued my walk into the city, having first ascertained 
that my friend Hull was gone into the north of England, 
where he had an estate which he annually visited. At the 
agent's in Broad Street, I found, as I had expected, a letter 
from my brother Cuthbert, acknowledging mine, in which I 
had recounted the loss of our excellent mother, and informing 
me that his health was still declining, that the climate de- 
cidedly disagreed with him, expressing apprehensions that he 
should be obliged to return to England in a year or two, and 
begging me, in pursuance of his former suggestions, to consider 
the subject of coming out, maturely and deliberately ; not to 
risk my health or my happiness by a voluntary expatriation, 
but if I could reconcile such a proceeding with my views of 
comfort, and medical opinions were favourable as to the effects 
of the change, he strongly recommended me to do so, as the 
opportunity of fixing me in a highly respectable sphere of 
society, and in a most lucrative business, could only be made 
available while he was on the spot, to delegate to me, in case 
of the necessity of his absence, that share of work and profit 
in the concern, which I might eventually retain, supposing 
he should at length find it necessary to relinquish it alto- 
gether. 

I read this letter attentively, and felt affectionately grateful 
for the solicitude Cuthbert expressed for a brother, his interest 
in whom could only arise from the most disinterested feelings ; 
and from Broad Street to the corner of St. Paul's Churchyard, 
I continued firm in the intention of starting immediately for 
eastern climes. The resolution, however, was a good deal 
shaken by the time I reached Charing Cross, and long before 
I got to the bottom of St. James's Street t had made up my 
mind to do nothing hastily, but which was always then, 
and has been ever since, a very favourite system with me 
to wait and see what would turn up. 

I cannot, now, comprehend the feeling of reluctance to quit 
England, which at that time so completely possessed me. It 
was a kind of inverted nostalgia ; and never did Swiss more 

300 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

ardently desire to return to his native land than I not to quit 
mine. I am not the least ashamed of the feeling, as a national 
feeling or as an English feeling, for, to this moment, I cannot, 
unless when health requires it, comprehend the taste which > 
leads the great and wealthy to abandon a country like our 
own, quit the halls of their fathers and the cottages of their 
tenants, the air which they first breathed, and the earth they 
first trod, for the feverish and unsatisfactory life which they 
invariably lead on the Continent. 

At the time of Cuthbert's offer, the Continent was closed ; 
the long war prevented the emigration which, after its conclu- 
sion, became so fashionable. Paris, Vienna, Florence, Naples, 
all were shut against me ; so that, although I might have 
extremely well relished a tour for the summer, it was not 
possible, under existing circumstances. India was all that 
was left for me ; and although some of the English magnets 
which once attracted me had lost their power, Calcutta did 
seem a very long way from Hyde Park Corner, (or, as the 
French general spelled it, in addressing a letter to Apsley 
House, " Hepaquana,") and at the turnpike, which then 
stood there, ended, in my mind, the habitable world. I 
might, perhaps so contradictory are our natures had 
that same turnpike been authoritatively fixed as the boundary 
of my range, have perished of a desire to go to Hammersmith, 
as the old man who had never quitted Milan during a life of 
eighty-four years, died of grief, because, in order to try the 
effect, the grand duke prohibited his departure from it. 

Besides, I will not conceal the fact, there were the dangers 
of the seas to encounter dangers which, to a landsman, and 
especially one of Cockayne, appear terrific. To a man who, 
in a stormy night, while the gusts are rattling his windows, 
and howling down his chimney, has read the adventures of 
Falconer, and Drury, and Ashton, such prospects are not 
particularly agreeable ; not to speak of having dived into 
David Chytreus, the Chronicler of Saxony, and the history of 
the destruction of the Danish Admiral, and nine thousand 
men, in attempting to get to anchor at Wisbo, during the 
war between Denmark and Sweden, nor of having read a list 
of calamities almost interminable, recorded by Osorius in his 
history of Portugal, including all the perils of Captain Capral, 
Captain Aquilaire, and Captain Sodre ; and after that, having 

GILBERT GUBNEY. SOI 

gratified with the following ancient lines, by way of 
to the melancholy tales : 

L'avare marchant 
Les mers va cerchant, 
Qui souvcnt lui font 
Be son avarice 
Tres bonne justice, 
L'abysmant au fond. 

All these trifles combined, I must admit, did not tend 
either to soothe my apprehensions, or excite my desire for so 
protracted an excursion ; I therefore determined, according to 
my ordinary practice, to postpone the consideration of my 
letter till the next day. Whoever has read Miss Edgeworth's 
story of " To-morrow " and who has not ? will perfectly 
comprehend the turn of my mind, and then, perhaps, will be 
less surprised at the way in which my life has been spent. 

One thing is to be done every day, however, which cannot 
conveniently be deferred until the next : I mean eating one's 
dinner ; and therefore it became necessary that I should take 
such steps as might insure my appearance at Daly's mansion 
at six o'clock. As the hour drew nigh, my nervousness in- 
creased. I felt assured that nothing like envy or uncharitable- 
ness would actuate my mind as I ascended the stairs of his 
elegant house ; and that all the ideas I once entertained of 
Emma's fortune being mine were so completely buried in 
oblivion, that I should rather rejoice than not, in seeing their 
happiness, and that display of comfort and splendour, which 
her wealth might justly and properly secure to herself and the 
husband of her choice. 

Still it was something to do, and I began, when I began to 
dress, to wish I had postponed it till " to-morrow." Yet I 
had been desirous of the reconciliation with my friend ; and 
since Emma and he were now one, I could not be reconciled 
by halves ; and so, as the proverb says " In for a penny in 
for a pound," I began dressing for the visit. 

At six I desired my servant to do what I supposed my 
friend Daly would, under his present circumstances, have 
considered a most abominable action call a hackney coach. 

" He lisped in numbers, and the numbers came; " 

and at about ten minutes after the clock of St. George's, 
Hanover Square, had struck the hour, I stepped into the 
litter I mean the litter at the bottom of the " Jarvy " 

302 GILBERT GURNEY. 

with a careful regard to the prevention of the adhesion of any 
of the straws to my black stockings ; loose trousers, or even 
long pantaloons,, being, at that period, articles not considered 
fit to appear in at dinner. 

Right glad am I to observe that the ladies patronesses of 
Almacks', the great marriage-bazar of London, still adhere 
to their predilection for the decencies of dress ; not but that 
a foreigner, reading the implied denunciation of trousers and 
pantaloons, et hoc genus omne, must be a good deal puzzled 
by finding inscribed upon the cards of admission to so high 
and delicate an assembly, these most curious words, " No 
gentlemen admitted without breeches and stockings." 

Away we drove, at least my worthy phaeton, with my 
trusty squire at his side ; but what with the wet, and what 
with the fog, and what with the hill up Wigmore Street, we 1 
did not make quite so much way as I had hoped for. How- j 
ever, my old friends Time and Patience served my turn, and i 
having entered Duke Street, the coach stopped; my man got ./ 
down and inquired, and then confidently directed the coach- 
man, who accordingly drove up to a milliner's shop, a little J 
below Morin's Hotel and Coffee-house. He what he called J 
"rapped" at the door ; upon which I thrust my head out of | 
the window, and asked him, in no very measured terms, what 
the deuce he was at. 

" This is the house, sir," said Peter. 
" This ! " said I. 

" Yes, sir," replied he, " this is number " 

At this moment the door was opened by a tall, fishy-eyed 
maid, with flaxen hair, and a parchment skin, doubtfully dis- 
played by the light of a tallow candle, visibly affected by the 
gusts of wind which, in November afternoons, are in the 
habit of disporting about the streets of London. 
" This must be a mistake," said I. 

" I'll ask," said Peter and he did ; and sure enough the 
maid with the curls and the candle was the domestic servant 
of my excellent friend, Bob Daly ; and the door at which I 
had imagined he had " rapped " by mistake, was the entrance 
to the blissful abode of that vivacious creature, and his amia- 
ble Emma. I was, I confess, somewhat surprised at the ap- 
pearance of Daly's residence and its accessories ; but as I 
always believe there are reasons for every thing, and was equally 
satisfied that it was no business of mine to attempt to account 

GILBERT GURNEY. 303 

for his mode of living, I stepped out of my coach, shook the 
straw from my stockings, and entered the passage, which re- 
minded me not a little of the story so admirably told in Ire- 
land's Illustrations of Hogarth, of the two brothers who 
clubbed their means to buy an elephant, and the sad fate 
thereof. 

" What name, sir," said the fair porteress. 

" Gurney," said I as what else should I have said. 

" What time shall I come for you, sir ? " said Peter. 

"Not at all," said I, feeling my position difficult and 
critical, and not wishing, by any means, to pledge myself to 
any particular duration of stay, but preferring to leave my 
sojourn at Daly's elastic to be contracted or extended at plea- 
sure. 

I followed the broad-backed virgin up the ladder-like stair- 
case, and was ushered into the very neat but very small draw- 
ing room, of evidently a furnished lodging, with a long black 
pole over the three slips of windows, and a deep drapery 
pendant therefrom, with brass stars, from whose centres 
darted rays of bright yellow calico, looking 

" As doth the blushing, discontented sun, 
From out the fiery portal of the East" 

Black-backed chairs, with nobs to match the stars, an abbre- 
viated sofa, and before it a table thereunto proportioned 
stood near the walls, which were decorated with a circular 
mirror, nobbed round, so like that which once belonged to my 
" sainted sire," in Bolsover Street, that I almost loved it for 
its family likeness. The room was filled with an atmosphere 
of mingled fog and smoke, and the house generally pervaded 
with the odour of roasted mutton. 

After a few moments' delay, Daly came in, and greeted me 
as 1 wished to be greeted. I only trembled for the first 
meeting with the lady in she came held out her hand, 
and said, " Well, Mr. Gurney, how do you do ? " 

"Pretty well, I thank you," said I and the embarrass- 
ment was over ; but may I say so ? the disappointment 
had only begun. In spite of all she had said upon the sub- 
ject or rather, in spite of all I had heard from Daly in 
spite of every thing in the world, I did believe that our first 
interview after her marriage would have been productive of 
some greater effect than appeared when the event of our 
meeting really occurred : a sigh a blush a tear, perhaps, 

304 GILBERT GURNEY. 

or, at the very least, a cold and trembling hand ; not a bit of 
it the healthful colour of her cheek fled not, neither did it 
increase ^ her hand was as warm as it ought to be, and did 
not shake at all ; and her " Well, how do you do, Mr. Gur- 
ney ? " was pronounced in the same tone, with the same ease, 
and with as little embarrassment, as if we had met the day 
before, or had never seen each other in the whole course of 
our lives. 

But what do you imagine was the next thing she said ? 
nobody could guess. 

" Mr. Daly," said she Mister, too* ! " how abominably 
this room smokes." 

" Dreadfully ! " said Daly. " We had better open one of 
the windows." 

" What," said Emma, " and let in the fog that would 
be vastly wise a horrid hole you find us in, Mr. Gurney." 

I was puzzled what to say I quite agreed with my fair 
friend, but did not know whether I ought to own jt. 

" I don't think it horrid at all," said Daly ; " however, I 
chose it, and I suppose, my dear, that is quite enough to set 
you against it. I hope, Gurney, you can eat mutton," added 
Daly, turning to me, in hopes, I presume, of turning the 
conversation. 

I was about to say, that nothing on earth is so good as 
mutton, when I was prevented by the lady of the house, who, 
in a tone any thing but gentle, accompanied with a laugh any 
thing but mirthful, exclaimed, " Whether he can eat mutton 
I don't know, I am sure he can smell it." 

" Well, my love," said Daly, " one cannot help smelling 
dinner in a small house." 

" Tfiank you, Mr. Daly," replied the lady. " What clever 
creatures these wits are, ar'n't they, Mr. Gurney ? " 

" Well," said Daly, " never mind, so as we get the dinner, 
for I am hungry." 

" I am never hungry in London," said Mrs. Daly. 

The tone and spirit of the conversation startled my ear 
more than the general appearance of every thing around me, 
and I began most heartily to repent me of having accepted an 
invitation to witness what seemed to me very like a represent- 
ation of Catherine and Petruchio, when the door opened, and 
the maid entered the room with a small piece of paper in her 

GILBERT GURNEY. 305 

d, which she delivered to her master, saying, at the same 
ime, in a tone as little subdued as that of her amiable mistress, 

" The boy, sir, is come from the tallow-chandler's, and 
says, if you please, he has a large bill to pay to-morrow, 
and " 

" Nonsense ! " said Daly ; " why do you bring up sugh 
things as these now ? don't you see I am engaged say I 
will call to-morrow." 

" I told him that, sir," said the girl, rather angry at being 
snubbed before company; "but the boy says that you said 
that three days ago, and " 

"Well, I'll come down and speak to him myself," said 
Daly ; and he quitted the room, gronde-ing the girl at a severe 
rate. 

" Well, Mr. Gurney," said the lady, when her husband 
had left the room ; " great change since we met last. I sup- 
pose you thought me a mad girl to run away. I assure you 
I think so too, now, myself pretty business, isn't it? " 

There was an abruptness, and, as I felt, an indelicacy, in 
Mrs. Daly's thus plunging in medias res, and in half a dozen 
words giving the history of what I felt to be her infidelity, 
of what she proclaimed as her imprudence, and what she 
now appeared to consider her repentance I was staggered. 

" Yes," said I, generally, " strange things do happen." 

" I am sure," said Emma, " I never expected what has 
happened." 

" No," said I, hoping every instant that Daly would 
return. 

" I hope Mrs. Haines is quite well." 

" Mamma," said Emma, whose whole manner and air, and 
even tone of voice, appeared to me to be entirely changed by 
matrimony ; " Mrs. M'Guffin, you mean, 1 suppose ? " 

I hemmed assent. 

" She is pretty well in health, but, as you may suppose, 
not in particularly good spirits. As soon as they can ma- 
nage it, they will go to Ireland oh ! I forgot you saw 
the major that day of the duel ! " 

I positively stared at my fair companion I could not 
comprehend whether the jumble of conversation, involving all 
the most delicate points to which Daly's good taste had spe- 
cially avoided a recurrence, arose from a sort of callous in- 

x 

306 GILBERT GURNET. 

difference to events involving nothing less than what I at one 
time considered my earthly happiness, and probably her hus- 
band's life, or from sheer innocence and simplicity. If it 
were the latter, to be sure, she did dance among the hot 
ploughshares in a manner which our once persecuted queen 
would have envied, could she have lived to see it. 

How much farther my fair companion would have gone, 
I do not pretend to guess ; luckily Daly, having despatched 
the tallow-chandler's boy, returned, anathematising the stu- 
pidity of Charlotte such was the name of the huge wax 
doll who had opened the door to me for pestering him with 
such absurd messages. 

" Emma, love," said the Benedict, " have you got the 
keys ? " 

Keys, thought I Daly with a bunch of keys well ! 

"Not I," replied Emma ; " I dare say you have left them 
about somewhere what do you want ? " 

" I want to get out the wine," said Daly. 

Get out the wine, thought I picturing to myself two 
foggy decanters, half full of the remnants of yesterday's 
libation, with a sort of furry rim just over the surface, of 
which the expression gave me a strong idea. 

" There's none out," replied the lady. 

" Well, then, I must get some," said the subdued husband. 

" You might, I should think," said Emma, " considering 
how long you have been in, have done that before ; isn't 
Robinson in ? " 

" I don't know, love," said Daly, who seemed to me to 
have totally lost the perception of the ridiculous, for which 
he was so particularly and pre-eminently famous, or, if not, 
to have acquired that peculiar sort of blindness which sees no 
personal or family imperfections. / never beheld any thing 
more absurd than the whole scene. 

Away he went and then left again, tete-a-tete, with the 
lady, I had thanks to the convenient thinness of a pair of 
battants, about the size of the doors of a moderately sized 
mahogany wardrobe, by which the back room was separated 
from the front the satisfaction of hearing the creaking of a 
corkscrew, followed by the pop-out of a cork, performed, no 
doubt, by the dexterity of mine host, who, not more than half 
a year before, used to give a capital imitation of that self- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 307 

same operation, which concluded by stuffing his finger into 
his mouth and pulling it out suddenly, with what he facetiously, 
rather than elegantly, called a " flop." 

" Don't you think Mr. Daly altered?" 

" No," said I ; " much as usual." 

" He has grown so slovenly," said his wife ; ee and then he 
eats so much, and drinks so much and he is so dull and 
stupid." 

" Oh," said I, lf that he never can be." 

" Well, I don't know," said Emma. 

I felt I was treading upon mined ground because I cal- 
culated that, as we could hear my excellent friend's perform- 
ance upon the bottles in the next room, even to the gurgling 
sound of the wine as it underwent the process of transfusion 
from the green bottle to the decanter, my excellent friend 
might with equal facility hear the observations of his better- 
half, and whatever rejoinder I might venture to put so I 
hesitated and hemmed and looked, I believe, something 
like what 1 meant. 

Emma was quicker in her comprehension of my thoughts 
and feelings than I had anticipated she evidently read 
telegraphs with the greatest facility, for having looked at me 
for an answer to her last observation, or, perhaps, for an ob- 
servation in return, and finding none come, she said, " Oh, 
he is gone down again." 

Well, said I to myself did I really think it necessary to 
call out my excellent friend Daly for depriving me of this 
perfect piece of excellence ? The blindness of a lover for I 
once was hers became more evident than ever I expected to 
admit. Yet, surely, something must have changed her since 
we last met changed her, too, since Daly had written so 
enthusiastically about her grace and elegance / saw neither ; 
those eyes, on which I loved to gaze, roved about, and rolled, 
in a manner most unpleasant, and the once sylph-like creature 
seemed afflicted with a sort of nervous irritation which pre- 
vented her from even sitting still in her chair. 

I heard a rattling of dishes and plates the back drawing- 
room was the dining-room I heard Daly superintending, 
and the great doll whispering a confused sound of " the 
butterboat there," " mind, the macaroni at top," and a 
sort of hustle-bustle kind of confusion, in the midst of \vhich 
x 2 

308 GILBERT GURNEY. 

Daly, who seemed to me to be a sort of white Mungo in the 
establishment, came in, and, throwing himself down in a 
chair, which he had nearly broken by the shock, exclaimed, 
" I wish they would let us have dinner ! " 

This was a dreadful trial having heard him behind the 
scenes as I should have said a year or two before getting 
the scenery and machinery in order, to see him swagger into 
the stage box and cry, ' ' When does the play begin ? " was 
rather too much ; but if that was a teazer, the look which 
Mrs. Daly gave me who, of course, heard the dialogue 
between her husband and the Dolly was annihilation. 
Open flew the folding doors. 

" Dinner, ma'am," said the attendant sylph. 

" Come, Gurney," said Daly, " take Mrs. Daly." 

Take, thought I considering it was a stride of a yard and 
a half from the sofa where she sat to the seat she was destined 
to occupy at the dinner table, there seemed but little need of 
taking however, I did as I was directed, put out my left 
arm pinion-wise, and, for the first time for several months, 
felt the momentary pressure of Mrs. Daly's right she took 
her seat - I waited till Daly came, who said grace ! and 
then the dinner was displayed to our view. 

" We can offer you but little in this way," said Daly ; 
" here are some mackerel some mutton, and, presently, 
some macaroni." 

" Oh, you don't expect any fine dinners here," said Mrs. 
Daly ; " do you, Mr. Gurney ?" 

I made a bow, and said nothing, but grinned. I cared 
nothing about the dinner; but nevertheless, I felt it im- 
possible to compliment it, quoad banquet. 

" The mackerel are stale," said Mrs. Daly. 

" The mutton is raw ! " exclaimed her husband. 

" We are nicely served," said the lady " Where is 
Robinson ? " continued she, addressing the maid, and looking, 
as I thought, like a fury. 

The maid, who evidently felt that the reply was not suited 
to the public ear, leant over her mistress, and said, " Robin- 
son will be in directly, ma'am ; he was obliged to dress the 
old gentleman's hair, what lodges at No. 16., but the moment 
he has done he will come." 

This speech, though perfectly intelligible as to its import, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 309 

conveyed to my mind, as it did to my fair hostess's ears, the 
fact that the " gentleman usher daily waiter/' (whose ad- 
vent was so proclaimed, and whose appearance was so 
anxiously desired,) was neither more nor less than a hair- 
dresser of the neighbourhood, who enhanced his income by 
waiting at the tables of those whose establishments were de- 
ficient in males. That was clear ; but the evidence of this 
fact, and its unequivocal character, only added to the mystifi- 
cation as to the causes which could produce such effects, and 
puzzled me beyond measure to comprehend why Daly, who, 
when he had nothing, contrived to live like a gentleman 
upon a small scale barring the " tripodial dinner" 
should, now that he actually possessed the toison d'or have 
sunk so very much below his former level. 

I drank wine with Mrs. Daly it was called sherry 
what it really was I have not the smallest idea. Emma, the 
once gentle and genteel, drank porter out of a peAvter pot 
I wondered I looked unintentionally towards Daly he 
seemed totally indifferent to her proceedings. 

The mutton was, as it had been pronounced, ill-done, and 
tough as leather some high-smelling brocoli, and a few 
black-dotted potatoes were the vegetables the macaroni was 
the climax preparations in Dr. Gardner's window, in Long 
Acre, would have been tempting by comparison. I endea- 
voured to swallow eight or ten inches of the " tobacco-pipes 
made easy," and was getting comfortable -. for what are 
serious ills to others are to me agreeable varieties when my 
plate was whisked away in a gale redolent of pomatum. It 
had been snatched from my presence by the hand of Robin- 
son, fresh from the head of the gentleman at No. 16. How- 
ever, I saw a gleam of satisfaction flit over the features of the 
once-placid Emma, when she found the barber at his post 
a frown and a nod following, expelled the waxy-faced maid 
from the apartment, and Robinson remained and officiated 
alone for the rest of the dinner. 

It would be tiresome, and even superfluous, to set down 
the numerous snappings and snarlings which characterised 
the conversation of the happy Dalys. One general rule ap- 
peared to have been established in the family, which might 
have been fairly called, as the old women have it, " the rule 
of contraries;" for neither one of the domestic pair said, 
x 3 

310 GILBERT GURNEY. 

stated, or even suggested any thing which did not produce a 
direct negative from the other. 

" The room is very hot," said one. 

" Hot ! " said the other ; " I am miserably cold." 

" Clever man, that Mr. Wilson," says the lady. 

" The greatest bore in London," rejoins the gentleman. 

" Claret is the only wine fit to drink," declares the master 
of the house. 

" I cannot bear the taste of claret," exclaims the mistress. 

" Dear me," cries the lady, te it is near nine o'clock ; 
oh ! I forgot that clock is half an hour too fast." 

" On the contrary," says the gentleman, " it is ten minutes 
too slow by the Horse Guards." 

Whether the last contradiction was intended to produce an 
effect, I cannot say. A consequence did certainly result from 
it, which I own I did not so much regret as I once fancied I 
should regret a separation from Emma Haines. The lady 
declared she had no idea that it was so late,, and rose to retire. 
That movement was the first she had made, either mentally 
or bodily, to which her loving spouse did not object. I, of 
course, stood up, opened the door, and gave her the exitus. 
Daly never moved ; but the moment the door was closed, drew 
his chair close to the fire, and appeared resolved to do what 
sailors call " making snug for the night." 

" Well," said Daly, as soon as I was seated vis a vis, 
" strange things happen don't they ?" 

I answered in the affirmative. Mrs. Daly had made the 
very same observation to me, while Daly was negotiating with 
the tallow-chandler, and opening the wine before dinner. The 
remark appeared ' somewhat musty,' but, as by a sort of un- 
conscious sympathy, they both sported it, I concluded that 
something very strange had occurred, I waited for further 
enlightenment. 

" You find Emma a good deal altered," said Daly sotto 
voce at the same time pointing to the folding-doors, which 
alone separated her from us, in order to induce me to adopt 
the style pianissimo in my reply. But what could I say in 
reply to such a question ? I did find her altered ; her 
manner, her look, the expression of her countenance, the very 
tone of her voice, was altered ; the milk of her kindness 
seemed curdled by what acidulating process I did not know. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 311 

All I did in answer was to make a sort of little, neutral, ne- 
gative, affirmative grunt, such as I have often before en- 
deavoured to describe. 

" I suppose," said Daly, " you were a good deal surprised 
to find us living here, and in this manner ? " 

" Why," said I, " if you ask me, and wish me to reply 
candidly, I am surprised but, I must also add, agreeably ; 
for I have seen so many instances of the mad precipitancy of 
spending suddenly- acquired wealth, and so much misery follow- 
ing a reckless waste of affluence and happiness, that I am 
more delighted than I can express to you at finding you going 
on in this quiet way, rather reducing than increasing your 
ordinary course of expenditure." 

" My dear fellow," said my friend, " you know me pretty 
well do you think that I, Bob Daly the uncontrollable 
Bob who always proceeded, like Pat in the play, to 

' Spend half-a-crown out of sixpence a day,' 

should be here pent up ' cabined, cribbed, confined,' in a 
first floor in Duke Street, Manchester Square, if I could be 
any where else ? Don't you know our history ? haven't you 
heard, my dear fellow, we are stumped?" 

" Stumped," said I, almost unconsciously repeating the 
quaint, but wofully-expressive word. 

"Positively stumped," said Daly; "don't speak loud. 
I thought, of course, you had heard of it. Blinkinsop has 
bolted." 

" Who is Blinkinsop ? " said I. 

" Who is Blinkinsop," echoed my friend, " the greatest 
villain unhung the solicitor of her father ; " her with 
an emphasis, and an indicatorial point with the forefinger 
of his right hand towards the doors of the drawing- 
room ; "' sole surviving trustee, and entire manager of his 
affairs. Splendid fellow lived like a fighting cock ; 
balls, parties, fetes, horses, carriages, yachts, pictures, books, 
plate, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera; top of the tree pleasant, 
placable, popular. All went smooth ; the old lady was enrap- 
tured with him ; her jointure paid punctually, and whenever 
Emma expressed a wish, pecuniarily, Blinkinsop was too 
happy to meet her wishes. In fact, the Blinkinsops were the 
Lares and Penates of the Haines's." 
x 4 

312 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" And did they receive the adulation ungratefully ?" said I. 

" My marriage," said Daly, " brought matters to a conclu- 
sion. Emma's portion was required; then came delays 
and difficulties. M'Guffin, whose object in marrying her 
mother was as little equivocal as mine was known to have 
been, was exceedingly active and anxious at the crisis ; and, 
as the family affection for the trustee was not transferred, or 
transferable, to the major, he pressed upon the worthy gen- 
tleman, took advice of counsel, proceeded accordingly, and the 
next week found the exemplary Blinkinsop on his way to the 
United States of America having appropriated to his own 
uses and those of his interesting family every farthing of the 
accumulated property of the late highly respectable Joseph 
William Haines, Esq., father to the amiable and lovely wife 
of Robert Fergusson Daly, Esq., your very humble servant to 
command." 

" What/' said I, " are you obliged to live thus ? " 

" At present," said Daly ; " but how long the worthy 
landlady, and the industrious tradesmen in the neighbourhood, 
will oblige us, by permitting us to live at all, I cannot pretend 
to guess. We exist in hopes that something like a dividend 
will restore us perhaps one and ninepence in the pound out 
of the squandered property ; but, till then, we vegetate after 
the fashion of the chameleons." 

" How dreadful ! " said I. 

" It is, upon my life," said Daly. " I, however, lament it 
less from the actual loss and disappointment as to the money, 
than because the misfortune has worked a total revolution in 
that poor girl's character and disposition. She was every 
thing that you described, but the sudden fall from affluence 
and comfort has completely changed her ; her existence is one 
continued fever irritable, contradictory, restless, and jealous 
nothing can be done to please, to soothe, or gratify her." 

" Well," said I, " but surely she should not make you 
suffer in happiness and comfort for evils in the production of 
which you could have had neither share nor participation." 

" That's it," said Daly ; " it is now of no use arguing with 
her upon that point, and I have ceased any thing like discus- 
sion ; but the extraordinary feature of her transformation is, 
that because our elopement and marriage produced the denoue- 
ment, or, rather, catastrophe, she considers it to have been 

GILBERT GURNEY. 313 

the cause of her misfortunes a conclusion founded upon 
false premises, but from which I can neither lead nor drive 
her." 

" I admit/' said I, " the alteration in her character is per- 
ceptible." 

" My dear friend," said Dal}', " like Sir Peter, since she 
made me happy, I have been the miserablest dog alive. I am 
conscious that I have had no share whatever in creating those 
ills which have overwhelmed her, and darkened her prospects 
of happiness ; but that, on the contrary, even if the fact does 
not diminish her burden, I am obliged to share her misfor- 
tunes, and yet nothing I can say is right nothing I can do 
acceptable." 

In the midst of this outpouring, a violent knocking against 
the folding doors announced the proximity of poor Daly's 
tyrant. 

" Well, dear ? " cried he. 

" Not at all well," replied the lady, opening the doors : " it 
is past ten o'clock do you choose to have tea sent there, or 
are you coming here ? " 

" In one moment we will be with you," said Daly. 

" Oh," said Mrs. Daly, " I am in no hurry for your 
society. I thought, perhaps, Mr. Gurney would like his tea 
he used to be very fond of tea." 

It is extraordinary how much a woman even a young 
and inexperienced woman can say in a few words, and how 
admirably she can convey a meaning by her manner of saying 
them, with which the words themselves have nothing in the 
world to do. The tone in which the allusion to me and my 
foregone partiality for the innocent infusion of which she 
spoke, gave poor Daly to understand that, in those times, she 
was very anxious to please me, that she consulted my taste, 
and even remembered, that very moment, my likings and dis- 
likings. All this I saw and saw that it was meant to vex 
him ; while the emphatic manner in which she spoke of what 
/ might like, proclaimed not only her solicitude for my per- 
sonal gratification, but her total carelessness as to her husband's 
society. 

I could not choose but admire the amiable docility of my 
friend under the infliction of his lady wife's sneers. Nor 
could I help calling to mind the words Butler puts into the 

314 GILBERT GURNET. 

lady's answer to Hudibras, as a justification of his quiescence, 
and an illustration of Emma's severity : 

" Nor can the rigouresest course, 
Prevail, unless to make us worse, 
Who still, the harsher we are used, 
Are farther off from being reduced, 
And scorn to abate for any ills 
The least punctilios of our wills. 
Force does but whet us well t'apply 
Arts born with us for remedy ; 
Which all your politics, as yet, 
Have ne'er been able to defeat ; 
For when you've tried all sorts of ways, 
What fools we make of ye in plays ; 
While all the favours we afford, 
Are but to girt you with the sword, 
To fight our battles in our steads. 
And have your brains beat out o' your heads." 

I think, altogether, it was one of the most unpleasant 
afternoons I ever passed. It did not, however, last long ; for, 
just as the clock struck eleven, Mrs. Daly, having looked very 
pale, and rather sleepy for about half an hour, got up and 
lighted one of two candles which stood in two bed-chamber 
candlesticks on a table in the drawing-room, and retired to her 
apartment, having shaken hands with me, and given a look 
to her husband, as much as to say, " Don't let him stay long." 
The truth is, that I felt no inclination to oppose her wishes 
for my departure ; however, when she was gone, Daly, who, 
from the volatile, gay, agreeable rattler of other days had, in 
the course of a few months, ay, weeks, degenerated into the 
most unhappy of hen-pecked husbands, entered more at large 
into the causes of their difficulties, which seemed to have 
arisen from the villany of the once esteemed Blinkinsop, who, 
in order to support himself and family in splendour and ex- 
travagance, had, in his character of trustee, not only dissipated 
the ready money of the deceased and deluded Mr. Haines, 
which Daly told me had been squandered in speculations on 
the stock exchange, and such like commodities, but had mort- 
gaged the estates themselves to an amount which exceeded 
their real value, having, as it was generally supposed, not 
satisfied himself with mortgaging them only once. 

In fact, such a combination of crime, fraud, heartlessness, 
and deception, never had been before exposed to the world, as 
this, when all the particulars should be made known, was 
likely to turn out. 

Mrs. M'Guffin, and her Hibernian major, I found had 
taken their departure for the green island, where the major 

GILBERT GURNEY. 315 

had some property "a mighty pretty estate ; " but Daly, 
whose experience in the world had rendered him somewhat of 
an infidel in regard to Irish estates, merely quoted the major's 
own description, brogue and all, at the same time giving me 
to understand that, except as far as the holy estate of matri- 
mony might benefit her, his exemplary mother-in-law was 
not likely to get much by the major. 

Our separation was very unlike any previous parting ; in- 
stead of the joyous smile, and the hearty invitation to stop 
and pass a jovial hour or two, Daly's countenance indicated 
worry and depression of spirits, and his words were, f< Gurney, 
J am deuced glad we have met there is no need of fine 
speeches let me hope, however, we shall continue friends 
through life. I wo'n't ask you to stop but come again 
soon." 

This I promised to do, and took my departure, fully con- 
vinced of the accuracy of a description of matrimony con- 
tained in one of the proverbs in Ray's collection : 

" The first month is smick-smack, 
The second is hither and thither, 
The third month is th wick-thwack, 

And the fourth, 
The deuce take them that brought thou and me together." 

CHAPTER II. 

As I returned to my lodgings, I could not help consoling I 
believe I might almost say congratulating myself upon the 
turn things had taken with regard to Emma. As for the 
share which Daly had in the transaction, I completely forgave 
him. It seemed to me, from the turn of Emma's mind or 
perhaps, because, not being in love, I saw more clearly 
that the difference of result amounted to little more than 
existed between Daly's running away with her before we were 
married, or some other man's running away with her after. 
Even if she had retained the charms of person and temper, 
which I supposed she once really possessed, and by which I 
had been attracted, I should, in all probability, have soothed 
my regrets upon the principle of M. L'Abbe Regnier, who, in 
his Ode to Acanthe, says 

316 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

" Pour m'assurcr le seul bien 
Que 1'on doit estimer au monde, 
Tout ce que je n'ai pas, je le compte pour rien." 

There was another, although certainly a minor consolation, 
which I felt at the conclusion of my visit not a word had 
been said with reference to Mrs. Fletcher Green, or my strange 
blunder. Every moment I dreaded lest some observation or 
remark should be made by Daly, leading to that most tender 
and delicate subject ; however, it seemed to me, that he was 
totally eclipsed by the planet which had stricken him ; all old 
associations appeared to be discarded ; his interest in all the 
affairs of society deadened, if not destroyed ; and he himself 
a victim to a speculation, by which he was to have triumphed. 
This was moral justice, and yet I could not help pitying 
him. 

As regarded myself, personally, and my own immediate 
pursuits, 1 remained for nearly six months, fancying myself 
making the most active preparations for my voyage to India. 
During this period, I am sure I visited at least eight or nine 
different ships, some in the river, others in the docks, some re- 
gular Indiamen, others country ships, with every one of which 
I had some fault to find. In one, the accommodation was bad ; 
in another, the passage-money was too high ; in a third, I did 
not like the manners and appearance of the captain ; a fourth 
did not carry a surgeon, which, as I never had had a day's 
illness in my life, was, of course, a matter of primary consi- 
deration. So, however, it went on ; every trip I took for the 
purpose of surveying the different craft serving as a business- 
like excuse for a quiet dinner with a friend, at the Artichoke, 
at BlackwaU, or the never-to-be-forgotten Crown and Sceptre, 
at Greenwich. Still I fully believed myself going, and even 
went the length of making out an inventory of a stock of sea- 
clothing, from a shop-bill of Messrs. Favell and Bousfield, of 
St. Mary Axe, a neighbourhood still interesting to me, as being 
the birthplace, and having been in the days of his youth the 
residence, of the once-volatile Daly. 

During a portion of the time, however, I visited Brighton, 
then just becoming popular as a winter watering-place ; there 
I fell into agreeable society, rendered more agreeable still, by 
the fact, that in those days there were no houses large enough 
to accommodate large parties at dinner. The consequence 
was, that our meetings were small and sociable, snug and 

GILBERT GURNEY. 31? 

select. The old Steyne was then the very heart of the place ; 
a few scattered houses were to be seen beyond the battery, on 
the west cliff; and the crescent, which subsequently found 
itself one day in the middle of the town, was an isolated colony 
in the east, equal in rurality and seclusion to Rottendean 
itself. 

It was during this period that, in the month of February, 
I fell in with one of those illustrious citizens, into whose so- 
ciety I had been unworthily admitted during my civic evolu- 
tions, and whom I found established on what was then con- 
sidered a somewhat exposed part of the cliff, near the end of 
Ship Street. He did me the honour, not only to recognise 
me as having been one of his visiters at the Mansion House, 
but rather to hunt me out, or, I might say, hunt me down, 
until at last he made up his mind to the resolution of inviting 
me to dine with him and his family. 

" Mr. Gurney," said he, " 1 have the pleasure to remem- 
ber you in my mayoralty last year, having been presented to me 
by my worthy friend, Alderman Bucklesbury, and I am sure, 
Mrs. Firkins has a strong feeling of your great kindness to us, 
in coming in a friendly way to us when we were at the Man- 
sion House ; perhaps you will do us the favour to eat your 
mutton at number nine to-morrow we dine at five it gets 
dark about five now, and I see no use in wasting one's time 
and appetite for a later hour." 

I bowed assent, and felt extremely obliged by the invitation, 
and accordingly was punctiliously punctual. It blew what 
Mrs. Firkins called a " harrico," and the shining bow win- 
dows of Brighton houses in those days were not particularly 
well calculated to stand a gale ; however, we did remarkably 
well, and had a very pleasant day until the ladies retired, 
when I found myself tete-a-tete with the alderman, who was 
evidently bursting with a grievance. 

The commonest tact in the world puts a man au fait under 
such circumstances : he was actually boiling with indignation 
at something that had occurred, and I felt quite assured, being 
the only stranger present, that my bosom was destined to be 
the depository of his calamity the moment the departure of 
the ladies permitted the exudation of his wretchedness. Sure 
enough, no sooner had the door been closed upon the charmers 
and cheerers of our party, than Firkins, drawing his chair to 

318 GILBERT GUHNEY. 

the fire, and motioning to me to do the same, began the detail 
of his miseries ; which, however, was so beautifully mingled 
with good feeling, that I could not bring myself to smile at 
what in particular parts might have been considered by some 
fanciful persons absolutely ludicrous. 

" Fill your glass, Mr. Gurney," said Alderman Firkins, 
" I want your advice although I do think I have made up 
my mind still I know my brother alderman, Bucklesbury, 
has a very high opinion of your judgment ; and even if you 
do not take upon you to give me council, there is a pleasure 
in just, you know, telling one's sorrows out of one's own fa- 
mily." 

" Sorrows, sir!" said I ; " with such a family as yours, 
with health and wealth, and all the other enjoyments of this 
sublunary world, what sorrows can you have ? " 

" A sort of proud sorrow," said Firkins, " of which I am, 
and am not ashamed : will you listen to me while I tell you 
my history ? You drink claret, / drink port ; whenever you 
find yourself or the narrative dry, help yourself but I should 
like to tell you, if I might, how I am placed." 

" Nothing could give me greater pleasure," said I. 
" You don't care about tea ? " said Firkins. 
' ' Never did ! " said I. 

" Well, then," said Firkins, " we will just send up to the 
women not to wait, which is I take to be the genteelest pos- 
sible way of telling them to go to bed don't you twig ? " 
" I do," said I, and bowed respectfully. 
" That," said Firkins, " is what a gentleman might call 
prime, without being thought vulgar." 

I bowed again, not perhaps duly appreciating my worthy 
friend's notion of " gentility." Having rung the bell, and 
delivered his order, the alderman resumed. 

" What I want, sir," continued mine host, " is just a 
little patience, and you shall judge. Now, fill your glass, 
and don't wait for me to tell you to do so whenever it is 
empty." 

" Your narrative shall not be broken in upon by me," 
said I. 

" You are right, Mr. Gurney," replied mine host ; (< as 
you drink claret and I drink port, we need not interfere with 
each other. You know what the proverb says ? 

GILBERT GURNEY. 3] 9 

' Jack Sprat, loved no fat, 

His wife she loved no lean, 
And so, betwixt them both, 
They licked the platter clean.' 

We'll finish our bottles, I warrant and all without any 
trouble whatsoever so now listen to me." 

I drew my chair close to the fire, and he began. 

" You know, Mr. Gurney, I have been sheriff I have been 
lord mayor ; and the three great eras of my existence were 
the year of my shrievalty, the year of my mayoralty, and 
the present year which is the year after it. Until I had 
passed through this ordeal, I had no conception of the ex- 
tremes of happiness and wretchedness, to which the same 
human being may be carried. Nor did I ever believe that 
society presented to its members an eminence so exalted as that 
which I once touched, or imagine a fall so great as that which 
I have experienced." * 

I bowed, and sipped my wine. 

II I came," continued the worthy alderman, " from that 
place to which persons of bad character are said to be sent ; 
but which, if I know any thing of it, will every year, one after 
another, raise its own character in the estimation of the coun- 
try Coventry, sir ; a place proverbially genteel, Mr. Gurney, 
even in the days of Sir John FalstafF, who would not be seen 
marching through it with a ragged regiment, sir that was 
the place where I was born, and my father, sir, in that place 
many years half a century, I believe, man and boy, 'pren- 
tice and master contributed his share to the success of par- 
liamentary candidates, the happiness of new-married couples, 
and even the gratification of ambition, and wavering courtiers, 
by taking an active part not in politics, sir, but in the 
manufacture of ribands for election cockades, for wedding 
favours, for cordons as they call them you know what 
I mean the things they wear over their shoulders, with the 
Garter, Bath, Thistle, and St. Patrick. But, sir, in spite of 
weddings, elections, and elevations, trade failed, and my poor 
father failed too he became bankrupt, but, unlike his betters, 
without any consequent advantage to himself; and I, at fifteen 

* It ought to be recollected, that Mr. Firkins made' this remark at least five 
years before Buonaparte had been toppled -from his imperial mayoralty in France. 
It is right to mention this, lest an imputation should rest upon the worthy alder- 
man, either of ignorance of history, or a desire to elevate himself above one of the 
most extraordinary adventurers the world ever produced. ED. 

320 GILBERT GURNEY. 

years of age, was thrown upon the world, with nothing but a 
good constitution, a very moderate education, and fifteen shil- 
lings and eleven pence three farthings in my pocket." 

The alderman paused for breath, and I perfectly recollected 
the conversation which had passed at Hull's cottage, with re- 
gard to his social expedition with the friend of his bosom, 
Bucklesbury, and thence deduced his desire to set himself right 
with a man whom he believed to be the favourite of that im- 
portant personage : the difference in their mode of travelling, 
and in the results of their speculations, having been most forci- 
bly explained by my other worthy and worshipful friend. 

" With those qualifications," continued Firkins, " I started 
from my native town, intending to make a pedestrian excur- 
sion ; but my constitution not being so strong, or my feet not 
being so hard as our worthy friend Bucklesbury's, I took to 
the waggon, walking sometimes for recreation, but sleeping 
comfortably under the tilt at nights, and on the fourth evening 
reached the metropolis, thanks to the waggoner's moderation, 
with no less a sum left in my pocket, than nine shillings and 
seven pence." 

I really delighted to hear of this progress it at once in- 
terested and edified me. 

" The bells of one of the churches in the city were merrily 
ringing as I descended the heights of Islington ; and were it 
not that Firkins never could jingle into any thing very har- 
monious, I have no doubt that I, like my great predecessor, 
Whittington you have heard his story, Mr. G. ? " 

J nodded, " Yes." 

" I," continued Firkins, " might have heard in that peal a 
prediction of my future dignity. I did not ; and wearied 
with my journey, took up my lodging at a very humble house 
near Smithfield, to which the waggoner recommended me with 
an assurance of good treatment. Well, sir," said Firkins, " I 
don't want to bore you with my own praises, or make up a 
moral from my own history ; neither shall I dilate upon the 
good policy of honesty, or the advantages of temperance and 
perseverance, by which I worked my way upwards, until after 
meriting the confidence of an excellent master, I found myself 
enjoying it fully. He took me into his house upon my poor 
father's own recommendation ; 1 served him faithfully ; he 
trusted me ; and as I grew into knowledge I did him good. I 

GILBERT GURXEY. 

" Providence, sir," continued the alderman, " blessed my 
efforts, and increased my means ; from a retail dabbler in 
dribblets, I became a merchant a wholesale trafficker 
exactly like our good friend Hull in every thing, from 
barrels of gunpowder down to a pickled herring. Jn the 
civic acceptation of the word, I am a merchant ; amongst 
the vulgar, I am called a drysalter. I accumulated wealth ; 
with my fortune also grew my family, and one male Firkins, 
and four female ditto, as you see, (or may see, if you come 
to us as often as I wish,) grace my board at least once in 
every week. I hold it an article of faith to have a sirloin of 
beef upon my table on Sunday, and when I am in London, 
and within reach of them, all my children round me to partake 
of it. Mr. Gurney, this may be prejudice; no matter, so 
long as the dear old man could afford it, my poor father did 
the same before me. I plead that precedent, Mr. Gurney, 
and am not ashamed of the custom. 

<c Passing over all the little steps of my life removals 
from one house to another the enlargement of this ware- 
house, the rebuilding of that the anxiety of a canvass for 
common-councilman activity in the company of which I 
am a liveryman, inquests, and vestries, and ward meetings, 
and all the other pleasing toils to which an active citizen is 

Y 

322 GILBERT GURNEY. 

subject, let me come, Mr. Gurney, at once to the first marked 
epoch of my life." 

" If you please," said I, filling my glass again. 

" Sir," said the alderman, " the announcement of my 
nomination and election, as one of the sheriffs of London and 
Middlesex, filled Mrs. Firkins with delight ; and when 1 took 
my children to Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields, to 
look at the gay chariot brushing up for me, I do honestly 
confess, that I did feel proud and happy to be able to show 
my dear little ones the arms of the city of London those of 
the Spectacle-makers' Company and those of the Firkins's 
recently found at a comparatively trifling expense all 
figuring upon the same panels. 1 do assure you, Mr. Gur- 
ney, they looked magnificent upon the pea-green ground ; 
and the wheels ' crimson picked out white/ seemed so chaste, 
and the hammer-cloth, and the fringe, and the festoons, and 
the Firkins' crest ' a Firkin, Or,' as they call it, did 
look so rich, and the silk linings, and the white tassels, and 
the squabs, and the yellow cushions, and the crimson carpet, 
looked so comfortable, that, as I stood measuring it all, as it 
were, Avith my eye, I said to myself, what have I done to 
deserve it ? oh, that my dear father were alive to see his 
poor boy Jack going down to Westminster in a carriage like 
this, to see sticks chopped and hob-nails counted. The chil- 
dren were like mad things ; and in the afternoon, when I put 
on my first brown court suit, lined, like my chariot, with 
white silk, and fitted up with cut steel buttons just to see 
the effect by candle-light, it all seemed like a dream. The 
sword, which I tried on every night, for half an hour, after I 
went up to bed, in order to practise walking in it, was very 
inconvenient at first ; but use is second nature, and so by re- 
hearsing, as the players say, I made myself what I call per- 
fectly perfect before the auspicious day, when sheriffs flourish 
and geese prevail the twenty. ninth of September. 

" The next twelve months passed very delightfully ; for, 
independent of the positive honour with which 1 was invested, 
I had the mayoralty in prospectu, having attained my alder- 
manic gown by a vast majority the preceding year ; and as I 
used, during the sessions, to sit in my box at the Old Bailey, 
with my bag at my back, and my bunch of flowers on my 
book, my thoughts were wholly directed to one object of con- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 323 

templation. Culprits stood trembling to hear the verdict of 
a jury ; convicts knelt to receive the sentence of the judge ; 

but, Mr. Gurney, these things passed by me like a breath 
of air, as I sat watching the lord mayor seated in the centre 
of the bench, with the sword of justice stuck up in a goblet, 
over his head. There, thought I, if I live three years, shall 
/sit. 

" Even as it was, I admit it was extremely pleasant. I 
had to go to the House of Commons with a petition, and to 
court with an address trying situations for a Firkins. How- 
ever, the courtesy of the Speaker, and the very little notice 
taken of us by the members, put me quite at ease at West- 
minster, and the urbanity of the monarch on his throne made 
me equally comfortable at St. James's. Still, you see, my 
dear sir, I was but a secondary personage or, rather, one 
of two personages the chief of bailiffs, and principal Jack 
Ketch. There was a step to gain ; and, as I often men- 
tioned in confidence to Mrs. F., I was sure my heart would 
never be still until I was perched upon the pinnacle. 

" Time flies, Mr. Gurney," continued the alderman, " and 
at length the moment came. Guildhall crowded to excess 
the hustings thronged the names of the aldermen are read 

cheers rend the air the worshipful court retire they 
return their choice is announced to the people it has 
fallen upon John Ebenezer Firkins, esquire, citizen and spec- 
tacle-maker a sudden shout is heard ' Firkins for ever ! ' 
resounds. The whole assembly vanishes from my sight 
I perceive nothing but a mighty moving mass. I come for- 
ward am invested with the chain I bow make a 
speech tumble over the train of the Recorder, and tread 
upon the tenderest of the ten toes of Mr. Deputy Pod leave 
the Hall in ecstasy, and am driven home to Mrs. Firkins, in a 
state of mind not to be described. 

" From that moment, sir, it appeared to me that time flew 
no more ; every day until the eighth of November seemed to 
me as long as a week. I existed in a state of perpetual ner- 
vousness, lest something what, I could not even surmise 

should happen, to prevent the consummation of all my 
earthly hopes. At last the moment came in which it did seem 
certain that I should be Lord Mayor of London. Sir, I was 
sworn in the civic insignia were delivered to me I re- 

Y 2 

324 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

turned them to the proper officers my chaplain was near me 

the esquires of my household were behind me : the thing 
was done. Never shall I forget the tingling sensation in my 
ears, when I was first called ' My Lord.' I even doubted if 
it were addressed to me, and hesitated to answer ; but it was 
so. The reign of splendour had begun ; and, after going 
through the usual ceremonies, and eating the accustomed 
dinner, I got home, and retired to bed as early as possible, in 
order to be fresh for the delightful fatigues of the ensuing day. 

" If I said I slept, Mr. Gurney," continued Firkins, " I 
should tell a fib how was it to be expected ? Some part of 
the night I was in consultation with my dear Sarah, upon the 
different arrangements which were to be made ; settling about 
the girls their places at the dinner their partners at the 
ball. The wind whistling down the chimney sounded to my 
ears like the shouts of the people ; the cocks crowing in the 
back yard, I took for trumpets announcing my approach ; and 
the ordinary, incidental noises about the house, 1 fancied the 
pop-guns at Stangate, proclaiming my disembarkation at 
Westminster. Thus, sir, I tossed and tumbled until the long- 
wished-for day dawned j and as soon as the glimmering of 
light, which at eight o'clock, in November, in London, is not 
much, warned me of its arrival, I jumped out of bed, anxious 
to realise the visions of the night. 

" I was not long a-washing : I seldom am. I shaved as 
quick as I could, and proceeded to dress ; but just as I was 
settling myself comfortably into my beautiful brown broad- 
cloth inexpressibles, crack went something, and I discovered 
a seam ripped to the extent of half a foot. Had it been con- 
sistent with the dignity of a Lord Mayor to swear, I should, 
I really believe, at that moment, have anathematised the 
offending tailor ; as it was, what was to be done ? I heard 
trumpets in earnest carriages drawing up, and setting down 

sheriffs and chaplain, and train-bearer, and mace-bearer, 
and sword-bearer Messrs. Mace, Sword, and Train, water- 
bailiffs, remembrancers, Mr. Common Hunt, Mr. Town Clerk, 
Mr. Deputy Town Clerk, and Mr. Town Crier, all bustling 
about, the bells ringing, and / late, with a hole in my in- 
expressibles. My conduct upon that occasion, sir, proved to 
me, more than any event which had previously occurred in 
my life, the extraordinary power of the human mind ; nothing 

GILBERT GURNEY. 325 

but promptitude and decision could have served me in so 
trying a situation. The course to be pursued came into my 
head as if by inspiration. I called my wife's maid a kind, 
intelligent, civil, and obliging creature, as ever drew breath 
lives with us still I explained my misfortune she came 
to my assistance and in less than ten minutes her activity, 
wonderfully exerted in the midst of the confusion, repaired 
the injury, and turned me out, fit to be seen by the whole 
population of the greatest city in the universe. 

" When I was finally dressed, I tapped at Mrs. Firkins's 
door, went in, and asked her if she thought I should do. The 
dear soul, after settling my point lace frill (which she had 
been good enough to pick off her own shrievalty petticoat on 
purpose), and putting my bag straight, gave me the sweetest 
salute imaginable, at the same time saying, ' I wish your lord- 
ship health and happiness.' 

" ' Sally,' said I, ' your ladyship is an angel.' On the 
landing-place were my dear daughters, all in different stages 
of dressing for the procession. I kissed them all in turn, and 
descended the stairs to begin the auspicious day, on which I 
reached the apex of my greatness. I never shall forget the 
bows, the civilities, the congratulations, with which I was 
received as I entered upon the scene of action. The sheriffs 
bending before me the recorder smiling the common 
sergeant at my feet : the pageant was very delightful. And 
then, when all the necessary preliminaries had been performed, 
and I stepped into that glazed and gilded house upon wheels, 
called the state coach, and saw my sword-bearer pop himself 
into one of the boots, with the sword of my state in his hands, 
I was lost in ecstasy. I threw myself back upon the seat of 
the vehicle, with all possible dignity, but not without damage ; 
for, in my efforts at ease and elegance, I snapped off the cut 
steel hilt of my own rapier, by accidentally bumping the 
whole weight of my body right, or rather wrong, directly upon 
the top of it. 

" But, sir," continued Firkins, " what was a sword hilt 
and a bruise to me pride knows no pain I felt none I 
was the lord mayor, the greatest man in the greatest city of 
the greatest nation in the world. The people realised my 
expectation ; and ' Bravo ! Firkins,' and ' Firkins for 
ever I ' resounded again and again, as we proceeded slowly 
Y 3 

326 GILBERT GURNEY. 

and majestically towards the river, through a fog which pre- 
vented our being advantageously seen, and which got down 
the throat of Mr. Sword, who was a little troubled with asthma, 
and who coughed incessantly during our progress, much to 
my annoyance, not to speak of the ungraceful movements, 
which his convulsive barkings gave to the red velvet scabbard 
of the honourable glaive, as it stuck out of the coach window. 

" We reached the water-side we embarked in my barge. 
A new scene of splendour here awaited me : guns, flags, ban- 
ners, in short, every thing that taste and fancy could suggest, 
or a water-bailiff provide, were awaiting me. In the gilded 
bark was a cold collation. I ate, or tried to eat, but I tasted 
nothing. Fowls, pates, game, beef, ham all had the same 
flavour ; champagne, hock, and Madeira, were all alike to me. 
' Lord Mayor' was all I saw, ah 1 I heard, all I swallowed; 
every thing was pervaded and absorbed by the one captivating 
word; and the repeated appeals to 'My Lordship' were 
sweeter than nectar. 

" Well, sir," said the alderman, " at "Westminster I was 
presented and received ; and what do you think I then did 

I, John Ebenezer Firkins, of Coventry? I desired the 
recorder to invite the judges to dine with me at the Guildhall ! 

I, Mr. Gurney, who remember when two of the oldest 
and most innocent of the twelve, came the circuit, trembling 
at the very sight of them, and believing them some extraordi- 
nary creatures, upon whom all the hair and fur, that I saw, 
grew naturally ; I, not only asked these formidable beings 
to dine with me, but, as if I thought it beneath my dignity to 
do so in my own proper person, actually deputed a judge of 
my own to do it for me. I never shall forget their lordships' 
bows in return ; mandarins on a mantel-piece are fools to 
them. 

" Then the return, sir. We re-embarked ; and then, in 
reality, did I hear the guns at Stangate saluting me. I stood 
it like a man, although I have always a fear of accidents from 
the wadding. The tide was with us ; we soon reached Black- 
friars' bridge ; we landed once more in the sphere of my 
greatness. At the corner of Fleet Street was the Lady 
Mayoress, waiting for the procession ; there she was, Sally 
Firkins my own Sally (her maiden name, Mr. Gurney, 
was Snob,) with a plume of feathers that half filled the 

GILBERT GURNEY. 327 

coach, and young Sally, and Jenny, and Maria, all crammed 
in the front seat, with their backs to my horses, which were 
pawing the mud, and snorting, and smoking like steam engines, 
with nostrils like safety-valves ; not to speak of four of my 
footmen hanging behind the carriage, like bees in a swarm. 
There had not been so much riband in my family since my 
poor father's failure at Coventry ; and yet, Mr. Gurney, how 
often, over and over again, although the poor old man had 
been dead more than twenty years, did I during that morning, 
in the midst of my splendour, think of him, and wish to my 
heart that he could see me in my greatness. Even in the 
midst of my triumph, I seemed to defer to my good, kind 
parent in heaven as I hope and trust as if I were anx ; ous 
for his judgment, and his opinion, as to how I should perform 
the manifold arduous duties of the day." 

I saw a tear standing in my friend's eye, as these words 
came from his heart ; and I said to myself, this shall not be a 
bad man, let them say what they may. 

" Well, sir," continued he, after blowing his nose sonorously, 
" up Ludgate Hill we went the fog grew thicker and thicker 
but then the beautiful women at the windows those high 
up could only just see my knees, and the paste buckles in my 
shoes. This I regretted, but every now and then I bowed 
condescendingly to the people, in order to show my courtesy, 
and my chain and collar, which I had discovered during the 
morning shone the brighter for being shaken. But else I 
maintained a proper dignity throughout my progress ; and, 
although I said an occasional word or two to my chaplain, 
and smiled occasionally at Mr. Water-bailiff, I took no more 
notice of Mr. Sword, and Mr. Mace, than I should have taken 
of Gog and Magog. 

" At length we reached Guildhall. As I crossed that beau- 
tiful building, lighted brilliantly, and filled with splendidly 
dressed company, and heard the deafening shouts which pealed 
through its roof as I entered it, I felt a good deal flurried. I 
retired to a private room, adjusted my dress, shook out my 
frill, rubbed up my chain and collar, and prepared to receive 
my guests. They came, and shall I ever forget it ? Dinner 
was announced ; the bands played ' Oh ! the roast beef of 
Old England;' onwards we went; a prince of the blood 
of the blood royal of my own country led out Sally my 
Y 4 

328 GILBERT GURNEY. 

own Sally the lady mayoress; the Lord Chancellor handed 
out young Sally I saw it done I thought I should have 
fainted ; the Prime Minister took Maria ; the Lord Privy Seal 
gave his arm to Jenny ; and Mrs. Snob, my wife's mother 
a wonderful woman at her age, bating her corpulency, 
Mr. Gurney was escorted to table by the Right Honourable 
the Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, in his full robes 
and collar of SS. Oh, if my poor father could have but seen 
that ! 

" At the ball, my eldest girl danced with the Secretary of 
State for Foreign Affairs, and found him very chatty, though a 
bit of a ' swell; ' Maria danced with the Lord Privy Seal ; and 
my youngest with a very handsome man, who wore a riband 
and star, but who he was, we none of us could ever find 
out ; no matter never did I see such a day, although it was 
but the first of three hundred and sixty-five splendid visions. 

" It would take till twelve o'clock at night, Mr. Gurney," 
said Firkins, " to expatiate in detail upon all the pleasures of 
this happy year, thus auspiciously begun. Each month brought 
its fresh pleasures ; each week its new amusements ; each day 
its festival. Public meetings, under the sanction of the Right 
Honourable the Lord Mayor ; concerts and balls, under the 
patronage of the Lady Mayoress. Then came Easter, and its 
dinner Blue-coat boys and buns; then to St. Paul's one 
Sunday, and to some other church another Sunday. And then 
came summer ; and then there was swan-hopping up the river, 
and white-baiting down the river ; Crown and Sceptre below, 
navigation barge above; music, flags, streamers, guns, and 
company. Turtle every day in the week ; peas a pound per 
pint, and grapes a guinea a pound ; not to speak of dabbling 
in rose-water, served in gold, nor the loving cup, nor the 
esquires of my household, all in full dress at my elbow. 

" The days, which before had seemed weeks, were now 
turned to minutes ; scarcely had I swallowed my breakfast, 
when I was in the justice-room ; and before I had mittimused 
half a dozen paupers for begging about the streets, luncheon 
was ready ; this hardly over, in comes a despatch or a de- 
putation ; and so on, till dinner, which was barely ended 
before supper was announced. We all became delighted with 
the Mansion House. My girls grew graceful by the new con- 
fidence their high station gave them ; Maria refused a good 

GILBERT GURNEY. 329 

offer because her lover had an ugly name ; and my dearest 
Sarah was absolutely persecuted by a Sir Patrick O'Donahoo, 
who had what is called the run of the house, and who scarcely 
ever dined out of it during my mayoralty, whether I was at 
home or not. What did it matter ? There was plenty to 
eat and drink ; the money must be spent, and the victuals 
cooked ; and so as we made ourselves happy, it was of no 
great consequence having one or two more or less at table. 
We got used to the place the establishment had got used to 
us ; we became, in fact, easy in our dignity, and happy in our 
state, when oh ! Mr. Gurney, the ninth of another November 
came the anniversary of my exaltation the conclusion 
of my reign. 

" Again, sir, did we go to Guildhall ; again were we toasted 
and addressed ; again we were handed in and led out ; the 
girls again flirted with cabinet ministers, and danced with 
ambassadors ; and at two o'clock in the morning drove home 
from the scene of gaiety to our old residence in Budge Row, 
Walbrook. Never in this world did pickled herrings and 
turpentine smell so powerfully as when we entered the house 
upon that occasion ; and although my wife and the young 
ones stuck to the drinkables at Guildhall as long as was decent, 
in order to keep up their spirits, their natural feelings would 
have way, and a sort of shuddering disgust seemed to fill all 
their minds on their return home. The passage looked so 
narrow, the drawing-room looked so small, the staircase was 
so dark, and the ceilings were so low. However, being tired, 
we all slept well at least, I did ; for I was in no humour to 
talk ; and the only topic I could think upon, before I dropped 
off, was, a calculation of the amount of expenses which I had 
incurred during the just expired year of my magnificence. 

" In the morning we assembled at breakfast ; a note which 
had arrived by the twopenny post lay on the table ; it was 
addressed ( Mrs. Firkins, Budge Row, Walbrook.' The girls, 
one after another, took it up, read the undignified superscrip- 
tion, and laid it down again. My old and excellent friend 
Bucklesbury, called to inquire after us. What were his first 
words? they were the first I had heard from a stranger 
since my change ; ' Well, Firkins, how are you, old boy ? 
done up, eh ? ' 

" Firkins old boy no deference, no respect, no ' My 

330 GILBERT GURNEY. 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 331 

here dipping his daughters, met us on the Steyne, and stopped 
our party to mention ' as how he thought he owed me for two 
barrels of coal tar, for doing over his pig-styes.' Sir, I give 
you my word, when we first came, we drove to the Castle 
Inn : in the passage stood one of his majesty's ministers, 
speaking to his lady, and my girls, Maria and Jane, passed 
as close to him as I am to you ; and although he had handed 
one of them to dinner, and danced with another at night, he 
appeared entirely to have forgotten both, and took no more 
notice of them than if they had been nobody at all." 

" It is quite possible, in the innumerable engagements of a 
man in his station," said I, " that his lordship might really 
have forgotten your daughter." 

"Not a bit of it," said Firkins, who appeared perfectly 
determined not to be consoled : " no, the minute they were 
passed, he whispered something to the lady, who immediately 
exclaimed, ' No, you don't mean you ever did,' and burst into 
an immoderate fit of laughter. And see the consequence of 
all this : Maria, who danced with the Lord Privy Seal, and 
was called an angel by the Secretary of State for Foreign 
Affairs who refused a good match, because the man had 
an ugly name, is going to be married to Lieutenant Stodge, on 
the half-pay of the royal marines. Sir Patrick O'Donahoo is 
gone to join the army in Spain, and has left poor Jenny in 
despair ; and, to crown all, Sally is turning methodist. I 
cannot help it, Mr. Gurney, but the females of my family feel 
it so deeply that it infects me and that's where it is. I 
admit my tumble was unpleasant, but it has broken no bones. 
I have toiled long, and laboured hard. I am conscious of 
having done my duty, and Providence has blessed my ex- 
ertions ; and what I say to the girls is, that if the sudden 
change in our station puts us out so much, they must lay the 
blame upon me, for having aspired to honours above our own 
sphere, which I knew were to be only temporary. However, 
my ambition was not dishonourable, nor did 1 disgrace the 
station while I filled it ; besides which, Mr. Gurney, after 
all, 1 am an alderman. That's the way I argue; but they 
wo'n't hear reason. For the rest, Mr. Gurney, you are a man 
of the world, and will, I am sure, make allowances for the 
frailty of human nature." 

So far from making allowances, I could not but regard my 

332 GILBERT GURNEY. 

friend, the alderman, with respect and almost affection. 
There seemed such a perfect naturalness if I may use the 
word about him ; and as I knew his politics to be consti- 
tutional, and his principles unimpeachable, I could not but 
wonder how he had contrived to remain popular during his 
mayoralty, or have escaped insults and outrages for doing his 
duty honestly, fearlessly, and conscientiously. 

" And now, Mr. Gurney," said Firkins, " what would you 
advise me to do ? " 

" Advise you, sir," said I, " why, if you really mean to take 
council from me, I would say, stay here as long as you like, 
and when you choose to return home, go. A man, with 
your heart and feelings, must insure respect wherever he is 
found. The friends who have always esteemed you, will 
esteem you still. Think no more of the fleeting gaiety, ne- 
cessary to the maintenance of a high office, but perfectly in- 
consistent with the quiet enjoyments of private life ; recollect, 
without soreness, that the great men of whose coldness or for- 
getfulness your family complain, paid their respects rather to 
that office, which it is their duty, as well as interest, to uphold, 
than to the individual, of whom, whatever might be their 
regard for his mercantile character, they personally knew 
nothing but as the chief magistrate of the city. The meanest, 
basest, and most disreputable men, that ever attained, by 
rotation, to the civic honours which so well became you, have 
been equally complimented and caressed, according to the po- 
litical feelings of the government of the time ; laugh at all 
that. The public relations between you and the government 
have ceased forget it all. With a family like yours, I 
would defy sorrow and anxiety, and if your eldest daughter 
love Lieutenant Stodge, why let her marry him ; and don't let 
Jenny waste herself in despair for a runaway Irish knight, or 
Sally die for love of an anonymous youth in a star and riband. 
You have all the materials for happiness in your hands ; 
use them, my dear sir, and believe this to be true, that how- 
ever fickle and evanescent the smiles of rank and greatness 
may be, the fruits of goodness and virtue are permanent and 
lasting." 

Firkins took me by the hand, and seemed quite overpowered 
by his feelings. I could not help marvelling to myself at the 
strange position in which I had been placed giving advice, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 333 

at my age, to an ex-chief magistrate of London, who had 
passed the chair, and stood above the Recorder. I did, how- 
ever, what I thought was right, and spoke the sincere feelings 
of my heart. As usual with me, I found, at the conclusion of 
the narration, the candles short, and the bottles empty. Re 
solved to show no undue preference in favour of the sherry 
and Madeira, Firkins and I concluded by finishing them off, 
and I took my departure, having obtained another strong and 
striking lesson upon the peculiarities of our nature. * 

At Brighton I continued still wavering, until, having re- 
turned to London it was already the beginning of April 
not the first when I received the following letter from 
Cuthbert : 

" Calcutta, Nov. 5. 18 

" MY DEAR BROTHER GILBERT, 

" I have been anxiously watching the arrival of every ship 
from England, in hope of finding you reported as a passenger ; 
an anxiety which was in no small degree augmented, first by 
your expressed resolution to come to me, and latterly by your 
silence. I should be extremely happy if it suited your in- 
clinations to join me in my business, having now the whole 
and sole control of the concern. 

" Mr. Nubley, who takes charge of this, and will forward it 
to you, has been, as you may recollect to have heard, settled 
in India for upwards of thirty years. He was the second 
partner in our house when I first entered it. He has now 
retired from business, to his native country, with a fortune of 
upwards of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds. This 
I mention, in order that you may duly appreciate the offer 
which waits your acceptance. 

" If you choose to come out, I will strain every effort to 
remain here, in order to place you precisely in the situation, 
relatively to myself, in which I have stood for the last nine 
years to Mr. Nubley ; but unwilling as I may be, as it must 
be clear I am, to quit India altogether, I fear I shall be soon 
compelled to do so, on account of my health ; and, in that 
case, the advantages which I contemplate for you, will be 
reaped by others, for whom I have no stronger feeling of re- 
gard than that which binds us together as fellow-men. 

" Mr. Nubley has promised me to give you an insight into 
* See note at the end of the volume. 

334 GILBERT GURNEY.- 

the nature of our traffic here, and to point out, should you 
not have started before his arrival in England, certain acquire- 
ments, which will greatly facilitate your success, and of which, 
during the voyage out, you can make yourself master.^ 

" I know nothing of your habits, except what I could col- 
lect from our dear mother's letters ; but I feel pretty sure, 
that as you grow older, habits of regularity and business will 
become confirmed in you, and that in a very few years you 
will, like my worthy friend, of whom I have just spoken, re- 
turn to England, a happy and wealthy man. 

" Mr. Nubley is an excellent gentleman. He is somewhat 
absent in mind, and has a custom, for which it is as well 
perhaps to prepare you, of thinking aloud ; if you were not 
put upon your guard as to this little peculiarity, you might be 
apt to take offence at some of his observations : they are meant 
for himself, although he unconsciously gives them utterance ; 
and I believe, if every body in the world had the same com- 
plaint (if it may be called one), people would cease to be so 
conceited of their own virtues and perfections as they are at 
present. 

" Theophrastus says, at least I think so, Absence of mind 
may be defined to be a slowness of mind, in speaking or in 
action. The absent man is one who, when he is reckoning up 
a bill, and hath collected the particulars, will ask a by-stander 
what the amount is. When he is engaged in a law-suit, and 
the day of trial comes, he forgets it, and goes into the country. 
He goes to the theatre to see the play, and is left behind, 
asleep upon the benches. He takes any article, and puts it 
away securely ; then he begins to look for it, and is never able 
to find it. If a man comes and tells him of the death of a 
friend, and asks him to the funeral, he says, with a melancholy 
countenance, and tears in his eyes, ' What uncommon good 
luck ! ' When he receives money, he calls men to witness the 
transaction ; when he pays a debt, he does not. He quarrels 
with his servant for not bringing him cucumbers in winter ; 
and forces his children to run and wrestle for their health, till 
they are ready to die of fatigue. When in the country, he 
dresses his dinner of herbs, he salts them until they are unfit 
to eat. And if anybody ask him, ' How many dead have 
been carried through the sacred gate, to be buried ? ' he answers, 
' I wish to my heart you and I had half as many.' 

GILBERT GURNEY. 335 

" Whether this learned piece of fuller's earth (who, at a 
hundred and seven years of age, cried out against the injustice 
of nature, in giving crows longer lives than men,) anticipated 
that such a being as my late excellent master, and more recent 
partner, Nubley, was really to he born, I do not pretend to 
say ; but certain it is, that his hypothetical description is the 
very portraiture of the man ; and this I say, because I feel it 
to be right to prepare you for his oddities. He is the worthiest 
of created men, as I am sure you will find ; and if you are not 
on your voyage hither before his arrival, cultivate his acquaint- 
ance, as I know he will afford you the opportunity of doing, 
and take his advice above all, upon the point of your 
emigration. 

" Mrs. Nubley was a venture girl from England, and a 
beauty, but she was exported nearly thirty years ago. Neither 
the lapse of time, nor, which seems more extraordinary still, 
her looking-glass, appearing to have whispered in her ear 
to be sure she is a little deaf that an awful change has 
taken place in her personal appearance. She was always silly, 
weak, and vain ; but while she had good grounds for vanity, 
the weakness did not appear so silly. Even when 7 first knew 
her, she had some pretensions at present, it is pretension 
altogether. 

" I give you the carte du pays make what use you choose 
of it ; whether it may be of any service, or whether it may 
not, I, of course, cannot judge ; for strange as it seems, true 
it is, that although I am writing to a brother whom I tenderly 
love, I am addressing a gentleman whom I do not know. 
This, however, I do know, that when I was young, I had a 
disposition for every sort of gaiety, and a turn of mind for 
satire and caricature ; and if I had been left do not be angry 
with me for the expression kicking up and down about 
London, a lounger in the streets, an idler in society, and a 
dangler in the playhouse green-rooms, my belief is, that I 
should have ended my career in no very enviable position. I, 
however, was sent forward into the world, to beat and baffle, 
not only with the billows of the ocean, but of life. Trained 
regularly and methodically to business, I became assiduous, 
even by habit ; and having gained a confidence, which, I be- 
lieve, I deserved, I find myself placed in a situation of perfect 
competence and independence, and what is yet more gratify- 

336 GILBERT GURNEY. 

ing, able to make a brother's fortune, if he choose to secure 
one. 

" You were the favourite, and, of course, my dear Gilbert, 
spoiled. I have often ventured to remonstrate, in some of my 
letters to our excellent mother, after I had experimentally ascer- 
tained the advantages of system, order, and regularity, upon 
the loose course of your education, and the manner in which 
you were thrown, much too soon, as I thought, upon society. 
However, my dear Gilbert, I will not frighten you with lec- 
tures, although I will be candid enough to tell you, that I have 
heard of you since our poor mother's death. I received a 
letter, full of affectionate feeling towards you, from Mrs. Pill- 
man, a lady, whom, of course, I never knew, but of whom, as 
Miss Crab, our mother used to write in the warmest terms. 
She, with an almost maternal regard, told me, with regret, of 
sundry little excesses of yours, and of your addiction to a class 
of society, which, however agreeable it may be, does not, in 
the eyes of the world, appear altogether respectable. I honour 
her for her solicitude, and returned her an answer. Such 
friends can have no sinister motive for their attention. 

" All this, I conclude, is now at an end ; and all I beg of 
you is like and love Mr. Nubley. I have told you of his 
peculiarities, but you will find him an invaluable friend, and 
perfectly prepared, for my sake, to do every thing he can for 
you. 

" I will not tire you with any details of our views and 
prospects here. We are continually agitating the question of 
opening the trade with England ; and, as I have no concern 
with the East India Company, but am merely the head of a 
private mercantile house, I sometimes think, that great ad- 
vantages may be derived from such a measure. However, the 
chances are, that I shall be removed from this world or, if 
not, certainly from this part of the world before any such 
experiment is tried. We have had a particularly healthy 
season ; and although war continues in all its vigour, the cap- 
ture of the French islands, with their dependencies, which 
always afforded a certain shelter to the enemy, gives us great 
relief. 

" I will say no more ; but wait either to hear from you or 
see you, as you may judge most expedient. At the same 
time, should you, under the circumstances, choose to remain 

GILBERT GURNEY. 337 

home, I shall be too happy to increase your income to any 
reasonable extent. I am not married, as you know, and per- 
haps shall not now enter into that holy estate ; but make no 
scruole of telling me your wishes always recollecting that 
it would be the greatest possible gratification to me to have 
you here, and to leave in your hands the means of realising an 
ample fortune in a few years, and of eventually establishing 
yourself in England comfortably and respectably. 

" Pray take the earliest opportunity of seeing Mr. Nubley, 
and should you decide upon coming to me, he will give you 
sundry papers, essentially important to our affairs. I say 
ours, for if you come you will be received at once as my 
partner. God bless you, my dear brother Gilbert. In writing 
to you I feel like a man playing blind-man's buff: I should 
not know you, even in the light, and grope my way to your 
heart and feelings, without being in the slightest degree aware 
of the probability of the success of my appeal. At all events 
write ; and write often. In the mean time, believe me, dear 
Gilbert, 

" Your affectionate brother, 

" CUTHBEBT GURNEY." 

This letter was a puzzler. Never was any thing more kind 
or liberal than the offer it contained, and the proposition it 
presented. The suggestion of an increased income at home, I 
could only counterbalance by Cuthbert's desire to have me 
abroad. His lecture I felt to be just ; but I could not stomach 
the active malignity of that odious Mrs. Pillman the Crab 
of my earlier youth who thought it worth her while to 
write and undermine me in the affections of my brother. If 
Daly had been unmarried, and in force, she would have suffered 
for her duplicity. I, however, had no time to spare for 
thinking about her she was beneath my revenge ; and I re- 
solved, notwithstanding the strange description my brother gave 
of the Nubleys, to follow his advice, or, rather, obey his com- 
mand, of familiarising myself with the newly-arrived couple. 
From them I should learn the details of a residence at Cal- 
cutta. I should get a lesson of conduct, and a peep into the 
prospect of futurity. 

Accordingly I proceeded to the house in Broad Street, 
obtained the address of Mr. Nubley (Ibbotson's Hotel, iterum 

z 

538 GILBERT GURNEY. 

iterumque), and the following morning presented myself at 
the door of that popular caravansary of orientalists before eleven 
o'clock. I was not, however, fortunate enough to find the 
curiosity ; like all other persons intrusted with the care of 
letters, he had most naturally for him especially forgotten 
all about mine, and had proceeded into Hampshire, to a Tus- 
culum, which had belonged to his father; whence, at the 
suggestion of his lady wife, he had ejected, at the end of his 
term, a valuable tenant, and which Tusculum had been pre- 
pared for his reception several months before his arrival in 
England. 

I had but one course left to pursue, which was forthwith 
to write to Chittagong Lodge, for so Nubley's house was 
called, to express my regret at his departure from London, and 
offering to pay him a visit in his retirement. This I did ; 
and to my proposition received the following answer : 

" Chittagong Lodge, April 15. 

" DEAR SIR, I have many apologies to make to you. I 
meant to have called on you when in town haven't been in 
town for thirty-five years, I believe. I quite forgot to do so 

and it was only Mrs. Nubley's finding the letter from your 
brother she sent it to the agents. Very cold winds here 
I have got a bad tooth-ache. Country strangely perplexed, 
and I do not like London. Will you come down here, and 
stay with us, for ten years if you like. I always say what I 
think your brother is a capital fellow so are you, I dare 
say come we are close to the high Southampton road 
the house always was in the same place my grandfather 
built it. My wife will be delighted to see you so shall I 

I am sure we shall like you stop till you go to India. 
Come Monday we dine at six coach arrives before five 

anybody will show you the way. 

" Yours truly, 

" PEREGRINE NUBLEY." 

" Ex pede Herculem," said I, when I had read this in- 
vitation. The letter was a transcript of Nubley's mind a 
perfect justification of Cuthbert's description. What upon 
earth could be more agreeable than accepting his invitation 
my heart leaped at the prospect ; it offered something odd, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 339 

something new ; and I lost no time in replying in the affirm- 
ative, and ordering my man to be ready on the next Monday 
morning to take our departure. 

Monday came and as it was proposed, so was it ex- 
ecuted. I travelled by the coach, because my friend had 
alluded to that conveyance ; and without accident or incident, 
having journeyed alone, I was set down within a few hundred 
yards of his gates, at a quarter past five in the afternoon. 

CHAPTER III. 

MY brother's letter had prepared me for an oddity in the 
shape of his valued friend and partner ; but differently from 
what in most cases falls out, the reality by far exceeded my 
anticipations. It is impossible to conceive the appearance of 
Mr. Nubley, I need not, therefore, say it is impossible to de- 
scribe it. I will endeavour to sketch him, but I know the 
effort is vain. 

I had seen Indians of all grades, ages, and classes, I do 
not mean the savage tribes of American Indians ; but Indians, 
so called from having resided in our different settlements in 
the East, although British born. I have seen the yellow- 
cheeked civilian, and the well-bronzed soldier of half a century's 
standing, and these in all their varieties ; but Mr. Nubley, 
who received me at the door of his hospitable house, was unlike 
any thing I had ever seen. In the first place, he was in no 
way connected with the Honourable John Company (as the 
Court of Directors, and the proprietary generally, are corporately 
called in that country). He was merely, purely, and simply 
a merchant, who had accumulated a fortune ; and now, as it 
appeared, was about to instruct me in the " way in which I 
ought to go," to do the same. But, when I beheld him, as 
he was, and murmured to myself must I be that when I 
return, I confess, however gratified I was by the warmth of 
his reception, I began very much to doubt as to my sub- 
sequent proceedings, 

He was in figure short and thin ; his head much too large 
for his body, and bald, with a little fringe of silver hair be- 
z 2 

340 GILBERT GVRNEY. 

hind : his eyes were like those of whitings after three days' 
keeping ; his mouth exceedingly like that of a frog ; the pro- 
foundest melancholy characterised his countenance ; and hi's 
words, in a tone of voice exceedingly inharmonious, drawled 
slowly over his lips, interrupted occasionally by sighs. The 
consequence was, as Cuthbert had stated, that long before he 
had finished the sentence with which he had started, his 
thoughts wandered, and having entirely lost the thread of his 
discourse, a new subject succeeded, which was treated in a 
similar manner : thus producing a confusion of words and 
ideas, that, if I had not been upon my guard, would have set 
me into one of those immoderate fits of laughter, which, at my 
then time of life, were something terrific. 

It was when he had completely mystified himself, and 
entangled his conversation in a hard knot, that he began to 
think, meditate, and soliloquise. Truly enough had Cuthbert 
told me that he " thought aloud ; " in less than three hours 
after my reception, I had plenty of proofs of his correctness. 

Mrs. Nubley it may sound ungallant, coarse, and even 
unfeeling, but really I cannot disguise my feelings was, 
without any exception, the greatest fool I ever encountered in 
all my life, before or since. I am the last man in the world 
to admire a very blue lady. There are in this country 
women of abilities, superior, I am sure, to those of the women 
of any other nation on the earth ; abilities blended not only 
with softness, diffidence, and modesty, but based upon prin- 
ciples of the highest order, and the purest character. Such 
women are to be admired, venerated, and respected ; but, in 
the ordinary run of society, where a very considerable portion 
of imaginary talent and sense consists of flourish and preten- 
sion, I seek nothing beyond the quiet possession of the com- 
mon run of accomplishments. And, although I do not quite 
agree with one of the cleverest men in the country, who says, 
all that is required of a woman is to be nicely dressed, and 
play the piano-forte, I am easily satisfied ; and, however much 
I may be astonished by the multitudinous acquirements of the 
pedestal ladies, I prefer, for " home consumption," the mild, 
the modest, and the gentle being whose winning influence, 
and tender care, can make that home a heaven. 

For home-consumption, however, Mrs. Nubley was not 
made ; slenderly educated, if educated at all, she was, as soon 

GILBERT GURNEY. 341 

as she was fit for the Indian market, sent out by her father, 
who, having been left a widower, married a second wife, and 
was, together with his juvenile spouse, extremely glad to ship 
off Caroline, consigned to a highly respectable firm in Cal- 
cutta, where, after a few exhibitions, she attracted the notice 
of the prosperous Nubley, and they were married. 

I have no doubt that Miss Caddie for such was her 
name before she, fortunately for herself and Peregrine, 
changed it had been pretty ; there were yet the remains of 
beauty about her. She was, however, as Cuthbert had de- 
scribed her, a white variety ; but from the mode in which she 
dressed, and the way in which she talked, I was certain she 
saw no change in herself since the day she left Mrs. Ogle- 
thorpe's seminary at Stepney. She must, however, speak for 
herself : the leading characteristic of the stuff she uttered was 
an affected disbelief of every thing that was told her. An 
exclamation of delight at the comicality of her companions, 
even when engaged upon the most serious subjects, conclud- 
ing universally with a parrot-like scream of laughter, a toss 
up of the head, and an involuntary application of three of her 
fingers to her mouth an action which had grown into habit, 
from the double advantage it possessed, of exhibiting the 
snowy whiteness of her hand, and hiding a hiatus valde de- 
flendus, caused by the absence without leave of one of her 
front teeth. 

Such was the pair, so 

'_" Justly formed to meet by nature," 

with whom I found myself domesticated at Chittagong 
Lodge. 

I confess, the first evening hung rather heavy on hand. 
The house contained a mixture of old-fashioned furniture, 
and of newly-imported gim-crackery from India. Every thing 
smelt of shawls and sandal-wood, combined with a strong 
flavour of curry and mulligatawney ; and yet neither of the 
people seemed in keeping with the objects and atmosphere by 
which they were surrounded. 

When I was left alone with mine host, I felt a sort of 
dread of the business upon which I was certain he was about 
to enter, notwithstanding the relief I experienced by the re- 
moval of Mrs. Nubley to the drawing-room. The clapper in 
z 3 

342 GILBERT GURNET. 

a cherry-tree to frighten away birds, and the cackling of hens, 
each cackle concluded by the scream of a peacock, in wet 
weather, were all imitated, and indeed embodied, in her con- 
versation even the melancholy drawl and drone of her ex- 
emplary husband, afforded repose to mine ears : and having, 
after a few minutes, discovered that the discourse of the day 
Avas to be devoted to his own discomforts and disappointments 
since he returned home or, as he appeared to think it, come 
abroad I listened with the devoted patience of a doomed one, 
determined that he ought to have his way in his own house, 
especially in the absence of his better half. 

" I never was happy," said Nubley, "till 1 left India 
I never was so miserable as I am now fogs cold came 
over in a bad ship badly found bad captain my wife 

uncomfortable delicate constitution I can't bear salt 
beef not half enough poultry eh!" here he paused, 
and fixed his eyes upon me, and began to pick the stubble 
hair out of his chin, with a short sharp sort of jerk he sat 
so occupied for about half a minute, when he began to think 

" Umph knew his father foolish man not quite so 
ugly as Cuthbert don't think he'll ever come to good in the 
house I'll see." 

I was the subject of the reverie 1 did not exactly know 
how to act, but having been prepared, I thought it best to let 
him fancy that he had said nothing. 

" I suppose, sir," said I, " you feel the change of climate, 
after so long an absence ? " 

" Yes," replied my interesting companion, " I feel the 
change of every thing. When I arrived eh ! the first 
thing you see I did a man likes the place where he was 
born and bred Hottentots do so do the Swiss eh ! 
and I remembered my native place took my wife why 
the devil I ever married I can't think amiable woman to be 
sure talk eh ! don't she talk I don't know why I 
should ask him the question I took her there nobody 
knew her overhung with trees there was the church 
tower, and windmill on the hill, just as I left them told 
her of all the beauxs and belles of the town eh ! Captain 
Gossamer, as we used to call Tom Wilkins best dancer in 
the world eh ! the Miss Mayfields the graces 
symmetry famous and little Fanny Thompson dear 

GILBERT GUKNEV. 343 

thing, I remember her in powder and a sack feathers 
three feet high, and high heels to her shoes took my wife 
there made a point of going to the county ball asked for 
my friends two of the Miss Mayfields had died widows 
saw three of their grandchildren dancing and the third was 
bed-ridden. Tom Wilkins, Gossamer Tom, was wheeled into 
the room in a chair, his body as big as a Dorchester butt, and 
his leg as thick as a milestone eh ! " 

" The effect must have been singular," said I. 

" That's a silly remark," thought Nubley ; " never mind 

it was singular Fanny Thompson, a thing like a teeto- 
tum, died in the year '99 of a dropsy ; and when I asked 
where young Bob Buz, the curate, was the finest fellow I 
ever saw to switch a rasper, as he used to call it I found 
he was bishop of Dorchester my friend Tippit, the attorney, 
had been hanged for forgery fourteen years before ; and Squill, 
the apothecary, had run away with the squire's daughter ; and 
after passing what the monsters told me was a long and happy 
life, had died worth a hundred thousand pounds." 

'' Curious," said I, not knowing exactly what to do. 

" I tell you what was more curious still," said Nubley : 
" you'd hardly believe that I could see the changes in all these 
people but la, bless your heart, they didn't know me, who 
was not altered at all not one of the survivors recollected 
me. Wilkins, with his great gouty toe, asked somebody who 
that old gentleman was meaning me. Now, sir, I don't feel 
myself one bit altered since I danced Sir Roger De Coverley 
at Christmas, in that very room, with a cocked hat on my 
head." 

" One does not perceive the change in self it is produced 
so gradually," said I. 

" Ah ! that's it, is it ? " said mine host. " You are a very 
wise fellow., no doubt umph my wife, too that's a 
woman there's spirits wonderful how she does go on 

even in such a wind as this you call this fine weather, 
I suppose?" 

" For this country," said I. 

" Have you ever been in any other ? " said Nubley. 
That was a most awkward question, because I had not. I 
replied " No but that I judged by description." 

" Never judge by description," said Nubley. " My father 
z 4 

344 GILBERT GUKNEY. 

bought this house by description to me the horridest hole I 
ever was in." 

" Indeed, sir ! surely it is remarkably pleasant," said I. 

" Pleasant, is it ? " said Nubley ; " well then I lie, and 
you are a fine gentleman." 

This observation startled me, not being prepared for lan- 
guage so violent, or an antithesis so strong I merely made 
a sort of conciliatory noise. 

" You write plays, don't you ? " said Nubley. 

Pleasant again, thought I. 

" Not plays, sir," said I. 

" Farces, don't you call 'em ? pantomimes eh ? " said 
my friend ; " stuff trumpery eh ? " 

" I never wrote but one, sir." 

" Ah ! that was one too many," replied my agreeable com- 
panion ; and then again setting his grey eyes right on my 
face, he began stubbling his chin, as before, and, in a soft 
tone, and slow manner, said, " Broke his mother's heart 
nice farce to do that wonder if he cared about it should 
not think he did." 

I found it the most difficult thing in the world to know 
what to do, while undergoing the ordeal of his cogitations. I 
felt greatly inclined to notice what he uttered, because I knew 
whence, and whence only, he could have obtained this im- 
pression. The indefatigable malevolence of the late Miss 
Crab had been at work, and I had no doubt she had given 
Cuthbert an unfavourable impression of me, my pursuits, and 
acquaintances ; founded, perhaps, to a certain extent, in 
justice, which, upon the principle of a process in art, long 
afterwards discovered, Cuthbert had transferred to the mind 
if mind it might be called which was now throwing off 
a few proofs of the success of the experiment. 

" Ah ! " drawled out my agreeable companion, resuming 
the chair, after his brains had been in committee, and speak- 
ing, instead of thinking " we had better go and have some 
coffee. Mrs. Nubley is alone poor body very dull for 
her, after the society she has been used to pleasant people, 
too, in the neighbourhood some of them dine here to- 
morrow the Empsons agreeable family daughters 
eh live in the house with the red bricks and white facings, 
on your right hand and the Illingworths, and the parson, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 345 

Walls very jolly like him eh preaches short ser- 
mons and plays long whist like to play against him, eh 

do you play whist ? " 

Before I could reply to a question the answer to which I 
apprehended would place me as they say of a boy at school 

in the esteem of my host and patron, he had fallen into a 
reverie, and fixed his vacant stare upon me, and had expressed 
his opinion, "Shouldn't think you could not head enough 
for whist eh ? " 

That I did not usually play whist, I ventured to say ; 
that I did not know any thing of the game, I thought it as 
well to conceal. 

" Well, we'll see," continued Nubley ; " we'll have our 
coffee, and then we'll see what you can do with a dummy 
against Mrs. N. and me longs I can't bear shorts I 
play whist for amusement, and I like it the longer the 
game lasts, the more amusement it gives me eh. I dare 
say you think me an old fool I don't care a cowrie for that 

come." 

The last remark with which Mr. Nubley favoured me was 
so equivocally delivered, that I should have fancied he had 
been speaking, instead of thinking ; but as there was a doubt, 
and if I had noticed it, I must have made some fine flaming 
speech, complimentary to his wisdom, I merely simpered, and 
prepared to follow him ; when, as he proceeded to ring the 
bell, to announce our removal to the servant, I heard him 
mutter, " I wonder what the deuce he is grinning at ? " 

I admit, that having passed four hours in Chittagong Lodge, 
I did repent a little of having at once plunged in medias res, 
and pledged myself to a protracted visit. However, time 
softens asperities, and I hoped that the Nubleys, like olives, 
would become more palatable when I got accustomed to them ; 
and, resolving to put the best face upon the matter, and, ac- 
cording to Cuthbert's recommendation, dig for the ore through 
the unpromising soil, I proceeded to the drawing-room, where 
sat Mrs. Nubley alone, on a sofa, playing at cup-and- 
ball. 

" Lauk, Nubley," screamed the lady, " what a time you 
have been. I'm dead sleepy ; all your fault, Mr. Gurney, 
every bit of it. Your sex, in England, are so inattentive to 
females he, he, he, he ! " 

346 

GILBKRT GURNEY. 

" I assure you," said I, " that time has flown so agreeably, 
that I was not at all conscious of the time." 

' ' Lauk ! " replied the fair creature, " how can you talk so ? 
you are such a man for quizzing. Agreeable ! I'm sure 
you must have made all the agreeableness yourself he, 
he, he ! " 

" Perhaps not, my dear," said Mr. Nubley ; " tastes differ. 
We have had some very interesting conversation." 

I endeavoured to consider to what part of our dialogue this 
observation was applicable. 

" May be so," retorted the lady ; " Mr. N. can be very 
agreeable when I am absent, and any where but at home : I 
always say he hangs his riddle up with his hat did you 
ever hear that saying before, Mr. Gurney? he, he, he !" 

" Once, 1 think, ma'am," said I, with becoming gravity. 

" Once," said Nubley, " a thousand times, it is in all the 
jest books " and then came a reverie, " What a fool she is, 
trying to play the agreeable with that young coxcomb ! " 
" Have you had your tea, my dear ? " followed immediately. 

" No," said the lady, " the fool hasn't had her tea." 

Nubley growled, and walked to the window, and there in- 
dulged in a long conversation with himself. 

I discovered, however, by Mrs. Nubley's observation, that 
the mental ejaculations of her happy husband were not always 
suffered to pass unnoticed, at least by her. The effect her 
remark produced was, however, sufficiently visible to Assure 
me that it was somewhat out of the ordinary run of events. 
Mr. Nubley grew cold and reserved, and acting upon the 
principle of buckets in a well, Mrs. Nubley became propor- 
tionably more lively : she rattled and clattered in the most 
marvellous manner ; described all the families in the neigh- 
bourhood ; gave me a catalogue raisonne of the beauties, and 
summed up, by bidding me take care and not lose my heart to 
Miss Wells, the rector's daughter ; concluding with one of 
her most violent convulsions of laughter, and a look, which at 
sixteen, would no doubt have been very exhilarating. 

The next day came the talked of party, and the relief was 
delightful : the description of Mr. and Mrs. Nubley of their 
neighbours had not been overcharged ; the people were agree- 
able, and pretty, and very nice ; but my choice was made 
after half an hour's association with them the Wellses were 

GILBERT GURNEY. 347 

the flowers of the flock. Wells was an extremely pleasant 
man, and Mrs. Wells, when and where she liked, an agreeable 
woman. The daughter for although there were three, one 
only came to dinner was extremely nice, and rational and 
agreeable ; she was palish, with soft, intelligent, bluish-greyish 
eyes, and under those eyes a darkness of skin to me most 
engaging ; she had fair hair, and a remarkably pretty mouth, 
about which there was a playfulness, which gave a peculiar 
air of na'ivete to all her observations. None of her features 
were what some particular and affected personages would call 
classical : but she was " very nice." Her figure, though upon 
a small scale, was particularly good, just plump enough to 
hide angles, and full of those in-and-out-isms which constitute 
in my mind true symmetry ; as for her feet, Cinderella's 
slippers would have been, as Shakspeare says, " a world too 
wide." 

The day and evening passed away, much as days and even- 
ings do, but by a sort of congeniality of feeling, which I can- 
not describe, Mr. Wells and I, and Miss Wells and I, and 
Mrs. Wells and I, seemed to be more together than any others 
of the party. I found him full of anecdote, of ready wit, and 
of certainly a convivial turn. Mrs. Wells saw that I admired 
her daughter, and therefore set me down for a gentleman of 
taste ; and Miss Wells, being equally aware of my opinion, 
was in so good a humour as to be really delightful. 

This pre-disposition in my favour, was, I have no doubt, 
strengthened by the representations made by Mrs. Nubley of 
the wealth of my brother, and of the opportunity which pre- 
sented itself to me of joining him in the extensive concerns of 
his important establishment. Every thing was couleur de 
rose; and when we broke up for the night, Mr. Wells hoped 
I would call upon him the next day : he had a capital billiard- 
table, a good library, guns, fishing-rods, every thing that could 
contribute to killing time and game, and he should be delighted, 
and so on. 

When they were gone, we of course talked over our friends ; 
but when Mrs. Nubley began rallying me about my particular 
attention to the Wellses, I thought I never heard any thing so 
grating and discordant in my life, as the tone of her voice. 
Yet when she praised Mrs. Wells and her family, I thought it 
sounded infinitely less inharmonious. 

348 GILBERT GUBNEY. 

I did call at Wells's next day ; I did see his comfortable 
house, and his library, and his rods, and his guns, and his 
billiard-table ; played half-a-dozen games with him we 
were an excellent match just what is always agreeable to a 
billiard player in his own house, he could win four games out 
of six ; and there I staid until it was time to go home, as I 
called it, to dinner. Wells even pressed me to stop and par- 
take of theirs ; but I felt it was impossible to absent myself 
from the Nubleys without notice or permission, so I returned 
to Chittagong House not however without regret, nor be- 
fore I had promised to go the next day to luncheon with the 
Wellses. 

This was the first morning of my acquaintance with this 
worthy family. I candidly admit that what I saw I liked, 
and perhaps however ungracious it may seem to say so 
liked it all the better from the contrast it afforded to the pro- 
ceedings at our establishment. I need scarcely say, that the 
visit was repeated, and repeated, until my visits there became 
habitual ; and until at last Mrs. Nubley began to complain of 
my exclusive attentions there, as depriving her of what she 
was pleased to call " my agreeable society." However, she 
had a female friend just arrived, who was staying with her ; 
and at my then time of life, I was in the habit of gratifying 
my inclinations and pleasing myself, without perhaps a due 
regard to the feelings or expectations of others. 

Nubley went dreaming on, and although I had been at 
Chittagong Lodge upwards of five weeks, never had once 
touched upon the subject which brought us together. I lived 
in a state of indescribable nervousness lest he should broach it; 
and he, I really believe, feeling himself, even divided as my 
attentions were, relieved and supported by my presence, was 
equally unwilling to press a topic, the discussion of which 
would in all probability terminate my stay. He had installed 
me as croupier at his dinner-table, and besides treating me 
openly with attention and kindness, had evidently changed his 
opinion of me, a fact which I collected from his murmured 
thoughts. One thing seemed strange, and was certainly com- 
plimentary to me. It seemed as if I were equally agreeable 
to the mistress as to the master of the house ; and having 
arranged my mornings much to my satisfaction, and the even- 
ings being frequently varied, either by making visits or receiv- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 349 

ing company, I began to be quite comfortable under the un- 
promising roof of my hospitable friend. 

As for the effects of my semi-domestication at Wells's, like 
the approaches of age, they were so gradual, as to be indivi- 
dually almost imperceptible. Nothing on earth is so treacher- 
ous, or so delightful, as the habitual association with agreeable 
people in the country. In London there is a round a circle 
a sphere and people move in it, and jostle, and part, and 
talk, and flirt, and laugh, and separate, and, except for a moment 
in assemblies or at balls, do not meet perhaps again for a month. 
But in the country, placed as I was with this dear delightful 
family, the attachment grew hourly and daily, until I at last 
became identified with their pursuits and amusements ; until, 
when I began to think it absolutely necessary to leave the 
Nubleys, lest, as the saying goes, I should wear out my wel- 
come, I found it more difficult than ever to make up my mind 
to part from the Wellses. 

Of course it will be thought, as indeed it was said, by seve- 
ral of those meddling gossip-mongers who invariably infest 
small country-town society, and who, having been civilly drawn 
out of their sequestered houses or lodgings to enjoy the amuse- 
ments and conversation of their wealthier or more aristocratic 
neighbours, repay those little attentions, by making observa- 
tions upon all combinations and connections they happen to 
see ; and retail, in their own coterie, every incident or con- 
versation, whence they can collect subject-matter to wound or 
annoy innocent people, who are merely following the bent of 
their own inclinations, and enjoying the " goods the gods pro- 
vide," that I was a received and accepted lover. My constant 
visits at the rectory were food for all sorts of stories ; and, 
above all, for the report that I was almost immediately to be 
married to Miss Wells. Now, how really stood the case ? 
the family of the Wellses liked me, and I liked them, and so 
we lived constantly together. 

Miss Edgeworth, in one of her admirable novels, has ex- 
pressed her opinion of the important effects of juxtaposition in 
bringing about the most serious change in our state of life ; and 
certain it is, that its influence is never so decidedly powerful as 
when the two, so constantly together, are associated in a quiet 
neighbourhood, where either party is intimately acquainted 
with all the peculiarities of the locale, and all the combinations 

350 GILBERT GURNEY. 

and connections of its inhabitants. Both are then competent 
to judge, and to discuss, and even to think alike ; and cer- 
tainly, if Harriet Wells and I ever thought or talked of any 
thing except ourselves, our conversation derived its peculiar 
interest from the community of our knowledge as to men and 
matters by which we were surrounded. 

As I write this without any view of its meeting the eye of 
strangers, I will honestly confess, that I had as much idea of 
being in love with Harriet Wells as I had of flying. As 
Wolcot, the radical rhymer, who called himself Peter Pindar, 
said, when speaking of the wonderful powers of Mrs. Siddons, 
and the effect producible by those powers upon the tenderer 
passions of the other sex, " She is beautiful, magnificent, 
and enchanting, but I should as soon think of marrying the 
Archbishop of Canterbury." Now, Harriet was extremely 
nice and agreeable ; but I certainly had no more idea of mar- 
rying her than Peter had of pairing with the primate. 

It is true, that, after a time, Harriet arid I walked about 
together. I went to her father's house every day after break- 
fast, and she used to sit down at the piano-forte, and her sister 
Fanny accompanied her, and they played duets ; and then we 
fancied we liked particular songs " Sul margine," I recol- 
lect, was one and Eliza, the youngest of the Wellses, a little 
plump thing in a pinafore, used to mix in our revels ; and then 
we had luncheon, and then Mrs. Wells was very good-natured, 
and then I used to play the devil with the girls ; and then 

But stay ; somebody may see what I write, and, be it 

understood that, by playing the " devil," I mean playing a 
game so called, which originated, I think, with the Cherokees, 
but was introduced into this country about the period of which 
I treat, and received with an enthusiasm not to be described. 
The devil was a wooden thing, shaped like an hour-glass, and 
he danced merrily upon a string extended scientifically between 
two sticks, and he hopped up, and he dropped down, and we 
twirled him this way, and wriggled him the other way, and 
tossed him over our heads, and caught him upon our line, and 
then, devil-like, across the sticks ; and, in short, he made 
very good fun. From the influence of this imp, " no age, no 
profession, no station, was free ;" and " the greatest and 
gravest" were its votaries. Judges and bishops have been 
known to participate in its delights ; and the Board of Ad- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 351 

miralty, with the first lord at its head, have been seen, relax- 
ing from the severer duties of state, in the diabolical amuse- 
ment, in the garden at the back of their office, at Charing 
Cross. At this harmless diversion I was, what Etonians call, 
a dab ; and Harriet's figure looked so pretty when her arms 
were uplifted to catch the descending devil, that I really 
thought I never beheld any thing much more engaging. I 
suppose she saw, by my eyes, what I thought ; for she seemed 
to grow more and more good-natured as our acquaintance ma- 
tured, and at last appeared to expect me at luncheon as regu- 
larly as she looked for that semi-demi-dinner itself. 

But, dear me, I did not love her. I felt none of that hang- 
able, drownable desperation about her that I had once felt 
before for another. Not I. I was interested about her merely 
by Miss Edgeworth's juxtaposition. My visits had become 
habitual. I seemed to be looked for at Mr. Wells' s, and I 
should not have fancied my day properly made out, if I had 
not gone there : and then I knew every thing that was in the 
girls' work-boxes, and in their music books ; and I tossed 
over the threads, and pulled about the strips of muslin, and 
picked the pins out of the pin-cushions, and stuck them in 
again, and talked of Widow Harrison's sprained ancle, and old 
Walker's rheumatism, and went with Harriet and Fanny, 
loaded with flannel for one, and a bottle of wine for the other. 
In short, there I was, happy beyond measure, having a dear, 
sweet-tempered creature always on my arm, or, if not leaning 
so, sauntering by my side, till at last I never felt happy unless 
I were there ; and yet I was not in love. 

The time, however, as I have just said, had arrived, at 
which, it appeared to me, that I ought to quit Chittagong 
Lodge. " Harriet," said I I had got to call her Harriet, 
and had, I admit, established a slight right of familiarity with 
her, by voting myself her brother. It is quite extraordinary 
by what means congenial spirits commingle. I used to call her 
" sister," and so called her Harriet; she used to call me 
"brother," and so called me Gilbert : and then she was a bit of 
an astronomer, and she loved to watch the moon when it was 
full and bright, and we used to go and look at it ; and then I 
used to be so very much afraid that she would catch cold ; and 
then I used to tie her handkerchief round her neck, and then 
she used to thank " her brother," and then " her brother" 

352 GILBERT GURNEY. 

used to be very much pleased with her sisterly gratitude, and 
I believe once or twice, not oftener, permitted his approbation 
of her sororial affection to produce a sort of fraternal acknow- 
ledgment, which, between two such near and dear relations, 
could not be very wrong. And this was the way I went on, 
but without an idea of my pure affection for the dear girl ever 
assuming any other character. 

" Harriet," said I, the moon being exceedingly bright, 
" what a dreadful thing it is, that when a man is most happy 
he is most miserable ! " 

" What do you mean ? " said Harriet. 

" I mean," said I, " that no human being can be more per- 
fectly happy than I am at this moment ; and yet, paradise as 
it is, I must leave it." 

" Leave it ! " said Miss Wells, and her dove-like eyes were 
turned upon me with a look not to be forgotten. " Where are 
you going?" 

" I must go to town," said I. 

" Must you ? " said Harriet, and I felt a sort of involuntary 
pressure on my arm; she was leaning on it; and then 
came a dead silence a pause of five minutes. It was at that 
moment I first began to think I was fonder of Harriet than I 
meant to be ; for what on earth endears a girl to one so much, 
what so entirely upsets all resolutions, fetters the mind, and 
chains the heart, as the notion that she loves ? 

I found I could not break this silence. Harriet kept her 
eyes on the ground, and walked with a measured step. I felt 
that she trembled. What could I, what ought I, to do ? I 
had but three hundred and ninety pounds a-year, certain. She 
had nothing : as I have said before, two negatives make an 
affirmative in grammar, but, " barring accidence," two nothings 
never make any thing. I should have liked to have caught 
her to my heart, utterly stifled her with kisses, and proposed ; 
but I had no right to do so. I had no right to presume to 
take a charming girl out of a sphere in which she was happily 
placed, and subject her to the ups and downs of a life regu- 
lated only by the annual receipt of three hundred and ninety 
pounds. So I just laid my hand upon my heart, and said, 
sotto voce, " Be quiet." 

The eloquence of silence is proverbial. We both felt it ; 
and Harriet made no effort to speak, until just as we got to a 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 353 

side gate, opening into her father's grounds. The sight of 
home seemed to re-assure her ; and the consciousness that such 
was her feeling made me uncomfortable. Trusted with this 
young creature, (young enough myself, God knows ! ) and 
having had her thus implicitly confided to me in our wander- 
ings, could I have wounded her feelings so deeply, that, until 
she felt that sort of instinctive courage which, if not the pa- 
ternal presence, the paternal property (the consciousness of 
being at home) could give, she did not dare speak till then ? 
No, no. I had done. nothing, said nothing, which could in- 
tentionally offend her. 

" And when," said she, having evidently kept my last words 
in her thoughts ever since they were utterred " and when 
do you go, Gilbert?" 

" I think the day after to-morrow," said I. 

ft I thought," replied the dear, kind-hearted creature, ec you 
were engaged to dance with Miss Illingworth at the ball on 
Tuesday ? " 

" Miss Illingworth ? " said I, with unaffected surprise. 

" Yes, Gilbert," said Miss Wells. " If you forget your 
promises, I do not. I heard you make that promise at Mrs. 
Nubley's the other evening. I never forget what I hear." ; 

" I dare say you are right," said I, glad to affect a sort 
of gaiety ; " but I scarcely recollect Miss Illingworth her- 
self." 

" Ah ! then you should," replied Harriet. " What is sport 
to you, may be death to her. Hopes are excited, thoughts 
inspired, wishes created, by a word or a look, where the feel- 
ings are interested, or the heart prepossessed. You forget what 
you said ; perhaps she does not. I know she admires you : it 
will wound her if you are not present to fulfil your promise, 
for she has talked about it to others." 

" My dear Harriet," said I, " bright as the moon is, I am 
delighted that it is even yet so dark that my blushes cannot be 
seen. I give you my honour that, if I did say any thing of the 
sort to Miss Illingworth, it was said most inadvertently ; and 
as for any thing I may say to a young lady, amongst the many 
of this neighbourhood, having an effect upon her heart, you 
really do me too much honour." 

Harriet drew her arm from mine I cannot describe how 
and, in a tone of something between laughing arid crying, 

A A 

354 GILBERT GURNEY. 

exclaimed, "Here's mamma waiting for us." So she was. 
Harriet, however, passed her, and ran into the house. 

" Mr. Gurney," said Mrs. Wells, " you keep that girl out 
too late ; she is a delicate creature, and ought not to breathe 
night air. I really must insist upon it, that she does not stay 
in the grounds after the evening has closed in." 

It was very evident that Mrs. Wells was very angry, and I 
endeavoured to mollify her ire by making an observation upon 
the clearness of the sky and the brightness of the moon, to 
which she did not appear to me to return such agreeable 
answers as heretofore had dropped from her lips. As the aspect 
of affairs seemed gloomy, I thought the next best thing to do 
was to effect a retreat, and I accordingly wished her a good 
night to that she returned a sort of half-and-half answer ; 
when, to my surprise, I heard a sudden rustling in, or rather 
out of, a laurel hedge that flanked the walk by which Harriet 
and I had returned to the house, succeeded by the immediate 
appearance of Mr. Wells himself, who exclaimed, in a mock- 
heroic tone 

" ' Who talks of going, with a voice so sweet ? ' " 

" What ! " cried Mrs. Wells, " are you there, my dear ?" 

" My love, I am," replied Wells. " But what do you mean 
by letting Gilbert go at this unusually early hour ? Where's 
Harriet ?" 

" She is in the house," said the matron. 

" Ah, well," said Wells, " so will we be soon. You, of 
course, will stop, Gurney, and have our little music, and our 
piquet, and our petit souper eh ? Nothing like winding-up 
well." 

" I thought you were gone to bed," said Mrs. Wells to her 
husband. 

" Did you, my dear ?" answered he ; " then, for once in 
your life, you were mistaken. Come, let us go in. Is the 
billiard-room lighted ? Let us be gay life is short ; we 
will have a touch at the queues and balls. Come come 
along." 

And so, with great joyousness, we entered the hospitable old 
house by one of the modernised French windows, which, as 
the French themselves say, " gave to the lawn." 

Nothing could be more comfortable nothing more agree- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 355 

able. We went to the billiard-room. I chose my favourite 
queue chalked him poised him pointed the red ball 
and went off (which Mr. Wells always forced me to do) ; but 
I made nothing, and did not feel quite sure what ought to be 
done with the balls when my respectable adversary had played, 
because and it was quite a new feeling Harriet was not 
in the room. The pinafores were gone to bed ; and Mrs. 
Wells, who did not seem to have recovered her good temper, 
established herself at a work-table in the billiard-room, which 
served as a second drawing-room, and was by no means ex- 
clusively devoted to the game. 

I wondered where Harriet was. I never had felt either 
anxious about her coming or going before ; but it seemed to 
me that our dialogue in the garden had closed unsatisfactorily, 
and I was afraid that she was somehow affronted, or wounded, 
or annoyed, and had gone to bed, as well as her sisters. I 
saw the balls running about the table, but my mind was not 
with them : my thoughts were up-stairs fixed on things 
above. 

" Why, you cannot make a hazard, Gilbert : what is the 
matter ? " said Wells. 

" I do not know," said I. " That is a cannon, however." 
" Not a bit of it ! " exclaimed the enthusiastic performer, 
" a kiss ! " 

cf Ah," said I, " probably. Then here goes again." 

" And that," exclaimed my opponent, " is a miss !" 

I did not at all like this combination of words, and, in fact, 
wished the game at Old. Scratch, when suddenly was opened 
the door of the billiard-room, and in came Harriet, looking as 
demure, as placid, as good-natured, and as perfectly alive to 
the ordinary amusements of the evening as ever. I watched 
her, to see if there were a trace of ill-feeling towards me on 
her countenance. Dear soul ! no. And when she sat herself 
down by her mother, and commenced that most absurd of all 
anomalous nonsenses called " work." I felt that I was ex- 
tremely glad she took so much interest in my concerns, and 
showed so much anxiety for my fulfilment of engagements. 

I wo'n't go the day after to-morrow, thought I, as I gave 
my ball a thump which caused it to hit the other white ball 
exactly on the opposite side to that which I meant it to touch. 
I will stay, and I will dance with Miss Illingworth, to show 

356 GILBERT GURNET. 

Harriet that I religiously keep my word, and prove to her how 
powerfully her reproof has acted upon me, Just as if she had 
known my thoughts, Harriet lifted her eyes from the strip of 
muslin which she held in her hand, and looked towards me. 
Our eyes met. I cannot define the character of their ex- 
pression ; but I recollect saying to myself, " Upon my life, I 
am carrying this joke a little too far." 

At half-past ten, as usual, supper was announced, and we 
proceeded to the dinner parlour room never to be forgotten 
by me. It was a low wainscotted apartment, with a beam be- 
low the ceiling, which it supported, crossing it in the middle. 
Every footstep in the chambers above, could be heard over- 
head ; and, except that it was of a good size, it was by no 
means a desirable salle a manger. To me, however, it was 
delightful : it had been consecrated by hospitality and kind- 
ness ; and the strongest feeling by which I was actuated, as I 
led my amiable hostess into it, was that of regret that, whether 
I stayed till Wednesday or not, I must at all events, leave it 
within a very few days. 

Yet, for all that, I felt assured that I did not love Harriet, 
not as lovers love. The great puzzle was, how to define 
the sentiment which she had inspired. It was more than 
friendship. Friendship cannot last long between two people 
circumstanced as we were. Of Platonism I have a very faint 
notion ; for it seems to me that feelings, like time, cannot 
stand still : to what point my intimacy with Harriet had car- 
ried mine I could not exactly ascertain ; and certainly had 
never imagined how essential her society had habitually be- 
come to my happiness, until I found myself on the eve of 
being deprived of it. 

At supper, Harriet seemed out of spirits, and her mother, 
what I considered watchful and a watchful mother, in a 
small party, is unbearable. On the contrary, mine host was 
more than usually agreeable : his conversation was full of joke 
and repartee, in which he was eminently succassful when he 
chose to be so ; but, somehow, it appeared to me that he 
talked more than usual of the advantages of matrimony, its 
comforts its blessings the respectability it gave to a 
young man the refined delights it afforded to a young 
woman. 

" Sarah and I," said Mr. Wells, " are proofs of the sound- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 357 

ness of my doctrine. We married young, and have lived 
long, and never repented it never disqualified for Dunmow 
yet." 

" I'm sure," said the lady, " if we ever have differed, the 
fault, has been yours ; and I must say, with regard to the 
doctrine you are now supporting, I do differ entirely. Why 
should people think about marrying without means ? The old 
proverb is quite true " 

te Which Moore has so sweetly versified," said I. 

" I know nothing of versification, Mr. Gurney," said the 
matron ; " but this I know, that nothing, in my opinion, can 
be more unwise, than bringing two people together without 
fortune, and entailing upon them a life of perpetual embar- 
rassment and worry." 

" You are wrong my dear," said mine host. "Where 
there is genius or talent, the very fact of having a fond and 
affectionate wife dependent upon him for existence is an ex- 
citement to a man to exert his energies, baffle the waves of 
opposing ills, and, by ' opposing, end them.' " 

Thinks I to myself, that may be very true ; but if I saw a 
wife so depending upon me, the very thought of the pre- 
cariousness of her position, and the regret for having removed 
her from competency to share my difficulties, would unnerve 
and unfit me for the exertions it would be my duty to make. 
Harriet took no part in the conversation, but appeared en- 
tirely absorbed in the delicate and difficult task of peeling a 
peach. 

" I confess," continued Mrs. Wells, who was as obstinate 
as Echo in the particular of having the last word, " I see no 
good in preaching what nobody in their senses would practise." 

" What do you say, Gurney ? " said Mr. Wells. 

" Why, sir," said I and I was rather flurried by the 
question "I really " 

" Suppose, now," said Wells, "a girl of eighteen or nine- 
teen more or less, as the case may be had won your 
heart, and you had won hers, should you stop to consider 
whether you could live upon so much a year, or so much 
more, or as I said before less ? I know you would 
not." 

" Why, sir," said I, " Love seldom calculates. He is 
A A 3 

358 GILBERT GURNEY. 

painted blind. I never have thought upon the subject : but 
of this I am quite sure, that, whatever love without money 
may be, money without love is destruction." 

" I told you so, Sarah," exclaimed mine host. " Few young 
hearts are mercenary a woman's heart never is, as I firmly 
believe. She will squander and waste to the right and to the 
left ; and she will make her husband give fetes, and parties, 
and dinners, and dejeuners, and all the rest of it ; but a selfish, 
stingy woman is a rara avis." 

" Better be stingy, Mr. Wells," said Sarah, " as you call 
it, than extravagant. More fortunes have been saved than 
made ; and I hate to hear you talk in so unguarded a way 
while persons are present who certainly ought not to listen to 
such principles." 

" Sally, my love," said Wells, who was somewhat taken 
aback by his wife's reproof, " I never say what I do not 
mean, and I live with my children as I do with my friends. 
If my words were not in accordance with my thoughts, I 
should not argue as I have done ; as they are, and as I have 
no concealments, I speak out, and I should think myself the 
most unhappy father in the world, if I thought a daughter of 
mine could be spoiled by a misinterpretation of my senti- 
ments." 

" As for your daughters being spoiled," said Mrs. Wells 
significantly, " 1 do not pretend to say any thing about it ; but 
I think we may as well retire. Come, Harriet, it is quite time 
for bed." 

Harriet, who had taken no share in the conversation, looked 
at her father and then at me. Wells saw that his wife was 
what might be called out of humour about something, and 
seemed to me to be resolved, in spite of his former brag about 
the Dunmow flitch, to have his own way. 

" Why, Sarah, dear," exclaimed he, " are you going to bed 
without your negus ? my poor girl, too, has had nothing in the 
world to eat or to drink." 

IC Nothing for me, pa," said the innocent girl, with an ex- 
pression of fear of ma's anger. 

" / want nothing more, Mr. Wells," said the old lady ; " I 
cannot bear to hear nonsense." 

" Well, love," replied her husband, " we wo'n't quarrel for 
the first time in our lives about nonsense it would be non- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 359 

sense if we did ; so, Harriet, ring the bell, and let us have in 
our accustomed hot water, sugar, and the et ceteras. 

1 Black spirits and white, 

Red spirits and grey, 

Mingle, mingle, mingle, 

Ye that mingle may.' 

What a fellow that Shakspeare was, Gurney ! No circum- 
stance can occur, no occasion present itself, but his words 
prophetic and inspired as they are become more applicable, 
more to the point, than any other we can find." 

" Even when perverted," said I ; and when I turned my 
head to meet the wonted gentle smile of Harriet, I saw a tear 
trickling down her cheek. What had caused it ? something 
her mother had looked, no doubt, for she had said nothing. I 
felt extremely uncomfortable, and repented not having gone 
"on the first intention," as surgeons say of the healing of a 
wound. I never had been placed in so unpleasant a situation 
during the whole course of my acquaintance with the family ; 
it was a release when the servant obeyed the injunction he had 
received, and disturbed the awkward silence which followed 
my last attempt to make conversation, by the noise he created 
in putting down the glasses, and bottles, and decanters, and 
jugs of hot and cold water, with which it was the custom 
to decorate the table at Mr. Wells's, at that period of the 
evening. 

Mrs. Wells, however, was not to be soothed ; she would 
drink no negus, and she would go to bed. Harriet, who was 
conscious of no offence, and who found herself supported by, 
I believe, her favourite parent, gave a gentle affirmative to her 
father's inquiry whether she would have some wine and water: 
this seemed to increase Mrs. Wells's ill-humour, who, pushing 
her chair from the table, rose from her seat, and said in a most 
awful tone, " Well, 7 am going to bed ; " and, in order to put 
this determination into immediate practice, proceeded to the 
table in the corner of the room, whereon were deposited the 
chamber candlesticks, for the purpose of procuring a light. I 
saved her the trouble, lighted her candle, and presented it to 
her ; she did not thank me, but that, as we were old friends, 
I did not much care about ; but, looking at Harriet, she said, 
in a most discordant tone, " I suppose, miss, you will not be 
long after me ? " 

This unsettled my poor girl, who was about to swallow her 
A A 4 

360 GILBERT GURNEY. 

whole glass of wine and water at a gulp, and accompany her 
exemplary mother, when Wells interposing said, " When she 
is tired of our society, she will go. Sit still, Harriet finish 
your wine and water if you are not sleepy, stay where you 
are." 

I saw the look which Mrs. Wells gave her husband after 
this speech ; it was full of reproach ; it seemed to say, " That's 
right, Mr. Wells, teach your daughter to disregard her mother." 
He evidently understood it as I did, and when she quitted the 
room, which she did with an air of indignant grandeur, Wells 
jumped up and followed her. Harriet then seemed most 
anxious to follow them ; that I prevented. 

" You are not going ? " said I. 

<c I think I had better go," replied Harriet, " I am afraid 
papa's angry." 

" I am sure mamma is," said I ; " but don't you think it 
would be better to let them settle their little differences by 
themselves ? Besides, if you go, I must, and I have no in- 
tention of moving for this hour ; your father has not yet com- 
menced what he calls his ' brewing/ " 

" I cannot think what has happened to put my mother so 
much out of humour," said Harriet. 

" Nor I," said I, " except that perhaps she thinks I kept 
you out too late in the air ; however, if that be all, I shall 
have few opportunities of repeating the offence." 

" But are you really going so soon ? " said Harriet. 

" I must," replied I ; " besides all other reasons, one seems 
paramount. I came down to this neighbourhood to stay with 
my friends the Nubleys, and from the first week I made your 
acquaintance I have only been four evenings at their house, 
unless they had company." 

" But you will stay for the ball ? " said Harriet. 

" If you wish it." 

" Of course," said Harriet, " it makes no difference to me; 
only you promised Miss Illingworth, and I " 

" It is decided, Harriet," interrupted I ; "I stay." 

" There's a dear good brother," said Harriet ; " but isn't 
my father gone a long time." 

" I do not think so," said I : "if he were to stay ten 
times as long, so that you did not follow him, I shouldn't 
care." 

GILBERT GURNEY. 36l 

" No," answered she, " nor I, if I did not think that some 
unpleasant feeling existed between " 

At this moment the gentle heart of the affectionate daughter 
was relieved of all its apprehensions by the return of her 
"pa," humming one of his favourite tunes as he came across 
the hall, and who entered the room smiling as the dawn. 

" My old lady is a little out of humour," said he, resuming 
his seat, " about Harriet's staying out so late ; however, I 
have set all that to rights it is all sunshine now and so 
now for my toddy." 

" I am sure," said his daughter, " if mamma disapproves of 
it, I will never offend again I hope she is quite sure of 
that indeed I shall have no " 

I was on thorns she was going to say I knew she was 

<f no inducement to stop looking at the moon after to-mor- 
row ;" luckily she did not conclude her sentence, for the ex- 
emplary toddy-maker stopped her short in her quite needless 
explanation, by repeating, " Sure of that ? ay, that she is 
so am I say no more about it, dear. Gurney, some grog? 

come, no ceremony, help yourself push the sugar to him, 
Harriet make yourself useful as I say, Gurney, I hate 
your automatons every thing in its time all things in 
their season I like to see my girls useful as well as orna- 
mental." 

I confess I was not quite of that opinion I hated to see 
women do any thing but sit still and hear their own praises ; 
even the exertion necessary to the display of accomplishments 
I considered too great for the delicate creatures who adorn the 
world. However, I made a sort of affirmative noise, and 
Harriet, who seemed to foresee a lengthened sitting, from the 
joyous and social temper of her father, made what is called a 
move ; she went through the ceremonies previously observed 
by her respected mother, and I performed the same offices re- 
garding the candle as I had executed for the elder lady, the 
only difference being, that when, instead of a cross repulsive 
frown which Mrs. Wells had bestowed upon me in return, I 
received one of Harriet's gentlest and sweetest smiles, my little 
finger somehow became strangely entangled with hers in the 
handle of the candlestick I extricated it, and we shook 
hands she kissed her father's forehead and cheek, and re- 
tired. Little did I anticipate the sequel. 

362 GILBERT GURNEY. 

"That's as good a girl as ever lived, Gurney," said her 
father, as she shut the door " help yourself she has not 
a fault that I know of." 

I bowed assent. 

" Are you really going to leave us ?" said he ; " you find 
us dull what are you going to do after you return to 
town ? " 

I told him my future plans, and we were insensibly drawn 
into a lengthened conversation, which lasted upwards of an 
hour, as it subsequently proved ; during which time we had 
drunk a very considerable quantity of whisky toddy, which 
my excellent host had undertaken to make, not only for him- 
self, but me. I had called a halt with the brandy and water, 
which he advised me never to drink weak, as deleterious ; 
and after that, upon his earnest persuasion, I submitted my- 
self to be toddyised according to his will and pleasure. 

It was about one o'clock in the morning. I recollect the 
candles on the table had grown very short, and the wicks re- 
markably long, when, while preparing my third tumbler, 
Mr. Wells recurred to what, it was clear, was a very favourite 
subject. 

" I wonder, Gurney, you don't marry," said he ; " rely 
upon it, as I said at supper, there is nothing gives a man a 
place in the world so respectably as an early marriage just 
taste that ; is it strong enough ? no, a leetle drop more it 
settles a man is it good ?" 

" Excellent," said I, " sipping what appeared to me to be 
aqua-fortis and sugar, but which, from its colourless appear- 
ance, looked as weak as water. 

" Have you ever turned the subject over in your mind ? " 
said Wells "ever seriously thought of fixing?" 

" Sometimes I have," said I and the faces and figures of 
Miss Emma Haines, and Mrs. Fletcher Green, flitted before 
my eyes "but I see no chance, even if I resolved upon 
the measure, of realising my wish." 

" Why so, Gilbert ? why so ? you don't drink, man, eh 
why so ? " 

" Why, you see, sir," said I, " I have no fortune adequate 
to the support of an establishment, and I " 

" Fortune ! " said mine host, swallowing a comfortable 
draught of his own mixture " what has fortune to do with 

GILBERT GURNEY. 303 

it ? You have a profession, if you choose to follow it ; as a 
single man you have no need of more income than you have, 
and therefore you do not pursue it ; if you had a wife you 
would." 

" I might," said 1 ; " but there are very few parents, I 
suspect, who would permit me to marry their daughters upon 
such a principle." 

" I differ with you there, Gurney," said Mr. Wells ; " my 
notion is, give a girl a good husband and I call a clever, 
honourable man a good husband hang the money give 
her a good husband, the man whom she loves, and all will go 
well : it will be all sunshine, and shine the sun does, alike 
upon the cottage and the palace." 

te It is not every man who entertains such liberal principles 
as you do," said I. 

"Well, but what does that matter?" replied my friend. 
" Come, come, finish that glass, and let me make you an- 
other look ! don't you see I have finished mine, eh ? What, 
as I say, signifies that ? One parent of these opinions is 
enough, if that parent finds one young man of his way of 
thinking. Now, for instance, supposing any man were to 
make an offer to my dear child, Harriet the sweetest girl 
in the world, 7 think a treasure to any human being who 
may be happy enough to win her if she liked him and said 
Ay, do you think I should say No, because he was not rich ? 
Give me your tumbler." 

Saying which, he replenished the huge vessel which I had 
thrice emptied. 

" But perhaps," continued he, " Harriet is not after your 
taste ; and you would say in reply to my observation, that it is 
quite natural I should be glad to take the first that came 
but that is not the case. Harriet has not been unwooed, al- 
though she has not yet, that I know of, been won. Of course, 
opinions on such matters differ ; and although I think her 
every thing that is amiable, you may not." 

" Indeed, sir," said I, with sincere warmth, " I have the 
highest opinion of Miss Wells ; nobody can admire her more 
than I do ; nobody can more justly appreciate her excellent 
qualities." 

" 'Pon your life ! " said Wells ; " really are you serious ? 
Why then why the deuce don't you come to the point ? 

364 GILBERT GURNEY. 

you know my feelings on the subject why not marry 
her ? " 

" Sir," said I, startled at the course the conversation had 
taken, and seeing through a sort of halo round the candles two 
Messrs. Wells sitting opposite to me, " I never ventured to 
allow myself to think of such a thing. I " 

' ' But why not, my dear friend ? " said he " have you 
tasted the new glass, eh ? come, you don't like it taste 
and try, eh ? Why not think of Harriet, hey ? " 

" Why, sir," said I, in a faltering tone, " if I ever did 
think upon the subject, it would be absurd in me to put for- 
ward my pretensions she would never consent." 

" Do you think not, Gilbert ? " exclaimed he ; " then I 
think very differently I do, by Jove I think she is very 
fond of you ; and I think that the cause of my old lady's 
snappishness to-night is her having made the discovery. I 
can see through a millstone as well as my neighbours I 
could have told her that myself a fortnight ago but what 
does it matter ? why should I interfere ? I said to myself, if 
Harriet like Gilbert, and Gilbert like Harriet, I am sure I 
have no objection, eh? come, you don't drink." 

" Sir," said I, " I really am not conscious " 

" Conscious," said Wells ; " come, none of your nonsense. 
Old birds, Master Gilbert, are not to be caught with chaff. 
Do you make me believe, that either my girl or you care 
three straws what the moon is made of? or that when you 
go out in the garden astronomising, you look at any stars but 
her eyes ? No, no the fact is, she is very fond of you, and 
you are very fond of her." 

" I have already expressed my opinion of Harriet," said I, 
" and certainly am not disposed to retract a word I have said." 

" You are a good fellow," said Wells ; <( a fine honourable 
fellow ; and I like to hear you call her Harriet." 

" You are too kind," continued I ; " but whatever those 
feelings may be, I am quite sure it would be useless for me to 
expect a return." 

" Useless ! " interrupted he ; " why useless ? I tell you 
the girl is over head and ears in love with you. Now, that's 
the truth." 

" In that case," said I, " my happiness would be com- 
plete." 

GILBERT GURNET. 365 

" Would it ? " exclaimed the animated father ; " then, by 
Jove, you shall secure immediate felicity. Wait a moment 
finish your toddy. You shall have the confession from her 
own lips." 

" The ladies are gone to bed," said I, somewhat startled at 
the promptitude of his proceeding. 

" No matter/' replied he, lighting his candle, " nothing 
like the time present strike while the iron's hot. We'll 
see who's right finish your toddy that's all. I'll be back 
in a few minutes." 

And away he went, sure enough, leaving me in a sort of 
maze a kind of wonderment, at what possibly could have 
brought about the event which had just occurred, and what 
would be the next step in the proceeding. 

In a minute, I heard my excellent friend in the room over- 
head his own bed-chamber; a slight murmuring followed 
his arrival ; presently I heard the sound of feet pattering 
and paddling over the floor ; then I heard them along a 
lobby, at the end of which was Harriet's apartment. Every 
thing was still it was two o'clock in the morning. I heard 
the door of her room open I heard my friend again in 
his own room ; then I heard some more scuffling and patter- 
ing about, and the door of Harriet's room shut and then 
came a pause, and a murmuring and I finished my glass 
of toddy. I could not go away, for Wells said he was coming 
back again. What I was to stay for I knew not; yet, in 
that jocose vein in which I indulged in other days, I con- 
tented myself with quoting Gay, in a whisper, and mut- 
tered 

" The wretch of toddy may be happy to-morrow." 

Little did I think how close at hand my happiness was. 

I had what with listening and wondering fallen into 
a purgatorial state of intermediacy between sleeping and 
waking, when I was recalled to the entire possession of my 
senses, (under the operation, always be it understood of the 
happy compound which my excellent host had so admirably 
made, and so liberally administered,) by the opening of the 
dinner-room door, and the appearance of Mr. Wells, of Mrs. 
Wells, and of Miss Wells ; the two latter evidently in a state 
of amiable dishabille the elder lady looking excessively 

366 GILBERT GURNET. 

good-natured, and the younger one seeming ready to sink 
under the effects of her extraordinary re-appearance in the 
parlour. I instinctively rose reeled a little round saved 
myself, by catching the back of my chair and saw, what I 
never expected to see, two Harriets : as this duplication had 
previously occurred with regard to her respectable father, I 
was a good deal puzzled. 

" Sit down, dear Gilbert," said Wells. " Sally, my love," 
continued he, addressing his better half, " Gilbert has declared 
his feelings towards Harriet Who's right now, old lady ? 
He loves her, and she " 

" Dear papa," said poor Miss Wells, " what do you mean ? " 

" I mean all that is good," replied Wells. " Sarah, my 
love, let us step into the drawing-room for a few minutes, and 
Gilbert will tell her what he means." 

" I mean, sir," said I 

" I know what you mean, my dear fellow you have told 
me that already," said papa. " Ask her the question 
that's all." 

" And don't be long, Mr. Gurney," said Mrs. Wells, " for 
I am afraid the poor dear girl will catch cold." 

And having made their speeches, this respectable couple 
disappeared in a moment. I winked my eyes they were 
gone I concluded through the doorway ; but, for all I 
saw of their exit, they might have gone up the chimney. 
When they were fairly out of the room, Harriet who 
seemed to me to be quite aware of my extraordinary and 
unusual elevation of spirits said, in her gentlest tone of 
voice, " What does all this mean, Gilbert why have you 
sent for me,? I am only half awake but it does seem 
most extraordinary why are we here?" 

"Upon my word," said I, endeavouring to see through 
what appeared to be a thick fog, and trying to speak plain, 
despite of what seemed some grievous impediment, " I don't 

know, Harriet; your father ," there I faltered, and 

she began to cry. I " mooned" out, that my sympathetic 
ignorance of the object of our dialogue had wounded her 
feelings I would not have given her a moment's pain for a 

gold mine. " Your father," I resumed, " told me that ," 

hereabouts I forgot what he had told me, "that if I were 
to offer myself to you as a husband you would not 
refuse me." 

GILBERT GURNET. 36? 

The look she gave me I never shall forget it was like 
the sun clearing away the morning mist : there was a mixture 
of pleasure of surprise of doubt of melancholy, in the 
expression of her countenance, well suited to our extraordinary 
position she gazed at me for a moment steadily. 

" Gilbert," said she, sobbing, " I am sure you have too 
much honour, too much kindness, too much feeling, to say 
this if you are not in earnest ; is it for this I have been brought 
here ? What can I say ? Oh ! my wild, thoughtless father 
my pride my what does it mean I am sure you 
would not trifle with me ? " 

How could I ? a warm-hearted, amiable, excellent girl ; 
and oh ! how like volcanoes covered with snow are the cold- 
mannered, placid, quiet creatures, whose fire is all within ! 
She was alone with me her feelings excited my affection 
brought out, like the doubtful colouring of some suspected 
master, by the varnish of Wells's whisky the result was 
inevitable. 

" Harriet," said I, catching her round the waist, and ' seal- 
ing,' after my usual fashion, the preliminaries on her lips, 
" your father is mistaken, you will not I know you will 
not accept me ! " 

She said not a word. Her head dropped on my shoulder, 
and her hand rested in mine. I sealed again the door 
opened, and in walked Mr. and Mrs. Wells ! 

" I told you so, Gilbert I told you so," said Wells. Har- 
riet disentangled herself from my bold embrace, and, followed 
by Mrs. Wells, quitted the room ; not, however, before the 
elderly lady had patted my head in a most flattering manner. 

" I told you so, Gurney," said Wells. " Come, one more 
glass health, happiness, and prosperity son-in-law, pledge 
me !" 

By the ingenious contrivance of a spirit-lamp under his 
huge silver kettle, Wells retained enough of the caloric to 
keep it up at a proper temperature, even though the servants 
were gone to bed. I bowed assent, for I confess I was rather 
overcome ; and we commenced our fresh and last glass stand- 
ing, or rather sitting, in an extremely different relation to each 
other from that on which we stood earlier in the evening, when 
Harriet and I were on the gravel-walk, talking about the 
moon, and my reverend friend was in the bosquet, listening 
to us. 

368 GILBERT GURNEY. 

The conversation did not flow rapidly or freely ; the " Of 
course, Gilbert, you will come to breakfast ! " sounded more 
like a claim than an invitation a result, rather than an im- 
pulse ; and as for talking of Harriet, now irrevocably my 
own, it seemed to me a matter of impossibility. Wells once 
or twice patted my shoulder, and once took my hand into his, 
and sipped a sort of paternal " God bless you, my boy," to 
which I replied in the same spirit ; and so we went on until it 
was three o'clock, and the sun, which had set while I was 
yet wholly disengaged a platonic friend of Miss Wells a 
bachelor, free as a bee, to sip and rove, and rove and sip 
had risen upon me, a pledged and accepted lover. It seemed 
strange rather pleasant, but extremely wrong ; however, I 
thought silence the safest course, and therefore held my 
tongue; and when I was quietly "let out" by my intended 
father-in-law, to make my way to the house of my neglected 
and much-injured friends, with whom I fancied myself stay- 
ing, he gave me just such a pat on the shoulder as his exem- 
plary lady had bestowed upon my head, and I found myself, 
in a bright summer morning, measuring the breadth, rather 
than the length, of my road to Nubley's hospitable mansion. 

This may hereafter seem improbable and unnatural, but, 
nevertheless, it is true it is a fact an incident which, as 
will appear in the sequel, led to many others. I confess, as I 
wended my way from Wells's, I began to reflect and to think, 
but with that sort of maudlin wisdom with which men are 
uniformly possessed under similar circumstances. However, I 
wound up all my calculations with one conclusive remark 
made to myself, but in audible voice " What is done cannot 
be undone Harriet is mine for ever!" and I clasped my 
hands, and stamped my feet, as I went along, as if she were 
there, and saw and heard me. 

I reached Chittagong Lodge the family had been buried 
in sleep for hours I felt ashamed at being so late, and when 
I slipped and stumbled up the staircase, consoled myself with 
thinking that I was doing it on purpose. I entered my room, 
and threw myself on the bed ; and there I lay, overcome by 
sleep and fatigue of mind nor did I wake until my servant 
came to fetch my clothes, when I was disturbed by the noise 
he made, and found myself, at nine o'clock in the morning, 
recumbent on the quilt, dressed as I was, when I came home, 
and betrothed to Miss Harriet Wells. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 3t>9 

"When the man had left the room, evidently very much 
astonished at finding me as I was, I began to revolve in my 
mind the events which had occurred during the past evening 
and night. I perfectly recollected the extraordinary scene 
which had been performed, and felt conscious of the responsi- 
bility which I had taken upon myself nor was I, in the 
slightest degree, affected by it ; because I was sure that Har- 
riet was a loveable creature, and that, after all, as Mr. Wells 
had said, matrimony did give a man a place and respectability; 
and that I should be delighted, whenever the moon shone, to 
walk about with my dear blue-eyed girl, and look at it, and 
talk about it ; and then she was such an affectionate daughter, 
there could be no doubt but she would make a kind, dutiful 
wife ; and she was such a kind sister, that she must make a 
tender mother, and so on ; and I was charmed with the 
prospect, until I began to consider, what I always had con- 
sidered before when in my sober senses, the power of three 
hundred and ninety pounds a-year to afford those comforts, 
not to say luxuries of life, which a well-bred woman abso- 
lutely requires. 

" Of course," said I to myself, " as I never made any dis- 
guise of the smallness of my income, Mr. Wells must intend 
to put us at least beyond the difficulties of the world ; and if 
he contributes an equal sum to my own income, I do think, 
with management, something like eight hundred a year will 
do a cottage a cow and content ; nothing can be more 
charming, and more rational." And so, by the time I had 
changed my costume, in order to breakfast with " the family," 
I had worked myself up into the belief that the thing would 
answer ; always, however, with a proviso, that the events 
which I had registered in my mind of the previous evening 
had not occurred in a dream, instead of being realities. 

I scarcely knew how to excuse myself from Mr. and Mrs. 
Nubley at breakfast : however, as the thing was done, in the 
course of the day I should be able to make one general apology 
for my apparent ill-breeding, in passing so much of my time 
at the Wellses' ; and I resolved to make my retreat as early 
as possible, so as to avoid the questions of my kind host, or 
the significant looks of his lady, who, I knew, was perfectly 
aware of that of which I myself was utterly unconscious, 
namely, that I had been caught. Harriet was an interesting 

B B 

370 GILBERT GURNEY. 

creature, and that is the truth of it, and Mrs. Nubley was 
too cunning in such matters not to see what was going on. 
What may be thought of Mr. Wells's conduct, I know not ; 
but I have seriously reflected upon it very frequently since. 
However, it was une affaire finie, and so away I went, looking 
like a simpleton, and feeling like a fool, to be received in his 
house as the affianced husband of his darling daughter. 

CHAPTER IV. 

WHEN I reached my reverend father-in-law's residence, 
I felt a sensation to which I had, up to that period, been a 
stranger. The reality of the last night's proceedings, which 
came over me in a sort of cold shiver, at finding myself all at 
once, as it were, one of a family of which I knew but little, 
and of which, however generally agreeable, some of the 
members might, for all I knew, be unfavourably distinguished 
by some xmpleasant circumstance which had not yet reached 
my ears, made me rather nervous. But this was nothing 
compared to what I experienced when I went into the bil- 
liard-room and found Harriet there. I could not define the 
sentiment which occupied and overcame me. There she 
was ; her eyes beaming with their usual softness, her bosom 
heaving, the colour flickering on her cheeks, and her pretty 
ringlets flowing over her snowy forehead as usual ; but the 
thing that struck me as so excessively odd was, that they were 
all mine, that she was mine my own, and that I might 
press her in my arms, and feel her heart beat, and kiss away 
the tear which glistened in her eye, and twist and untwist her 
curls just as I pleased, with nobody on earth to find fault 
with me. I felt just as if I had bought a new toy at a very 
large price. It was very agreeable; yet somehow the zest of 
the thing was gone, I had caught my hare, the chase 
was over, doubts and fears, if I ever had any, were ended, 
and the future Mrs. Gurney came bounding to meet me, 
evidently expecting that sort of welcome which I was much 
too well-bred to refuse her : but it was so odd four-and- 
twenty hours before, she would have frowned at me and 
looked cross, if I had caught her in my arras. I do not 

GILBERT GURNEY. 371 

think she would have cried out, but she would have seemed 
to be angry ; and now, simply because I had imbibed two or 
three extra glasses of whisky-punch with her reverend father 
the night before, there she was, as kind and as coming as 
could be ! 

I was very much at a loss for a subject of conversation. 
I had never carried my amativeness, upon any former occa- 
sion, to so advanced a stage, and I did not know exactly what 
I could now say to interest her. Of course making professions 
or declarations would be superfluous. I had already made 
the last and most decisive declaration man can make, and one 
which it was quite clear I should not have made if I had not 
been devoted to her. I thought the best thing I could do was 
to walk her out into the garden, and give her a little exercise 
before breakfast. I proposed a stroll, and she of course as- 
sented, and there we rolled and rambled, I with my arm 
encircling her taper waist, and not saying one syllable. We 
were what the truly poetic call, lost in the ecstasy of our own 
feelings, and we did nothing but sigh and look at each other, 
except that I occasionally pressed her closer to my side the 
side on which my heart lay, and that, whenever I did so, she 
affectedly turned her head the other way, and muttered, 
"don't." 

It is very wrong, I dare say, to put such a fact to paper, 
but I do honestly declare that I felt as if I had done some- 
thing extremely foolish, if not absolutely wrong, in permitting 
Mr. Wells to bring the affair to so speedy a conclusion. What 
the deuce was I to do with a wife now I had got one ? I had 
never spoken of her fortune, for I never cared about money ; 
but, supposing, with all his eloquent flourishes about libe- 
rality, and independence, and all the rest of it, the Rev. Mr. 
Wells had neither the inclination nor the ability to give Harriet 
anything by way of portion, what was to be done ? And 
then, when children came as come they naturally would 
matters would be worse. I really Avas not happy. I felt 
something like a fly in a honey-pot, over head and ears in 
sweets, but terribly puzzled how to get out of the scrape into 
which it was quite clear I had gotten myself. 

Somehow I did not quite admire the alteration in Harriet's 
manner. I became restless and fidgetty. I saw faults in her 
which I had not previously observed ; and all at once I said to 

B B 2 

#72 OILBERT GURNEY. 

myself, " Dear me, dear me, and this is the being to whom I am 
to cleave for life, who is to be my companion eternally, and to be 
taken with me wherever I go ! I wonder how she would look in a 
London drawing-room, and what people would think and say of 
her ! " And then I suddenly dropped from this train of wonder- 
ment and sensitive delicacy, into a desponding course of reflec- 
tion that, in all probability, with our pecuniary means, we should 
neither of us have an opportunity of exhibiting ourselves in 
the higher circles, unless they chanced to be the higher circles 
of the playhouses. 

Harriet saw that my mind was occupied with various 
thoughts, and perhaps wondered that I did not somehow 
touch upon the fact of our nuptials, or express an ardent 
anxiety for naming the day. It may seem very strange, but 
for the life of me I could not allude to the subject. Once or 
twice I thought she was going to say something about it her- 
self, or about the scene of the preceding night, and whenever 
she seemed going to speak, I had recourse to my happy expe- 
dient of giving her a gentle squeeze, and drawing her to- 
wards me, which had the immediate effect of checking her 
observation, and inducing her to say " don't," and turn away 
her head. 

The seasonable appearance of Mrs. Wells and the two 
younger girls, put a period to the most embarrassing tete-a- 
tete in which I had ever been engaged. The eld lady I 
mean the mother of Harriet, for old she was not, except by 
comparison was all smiles and good humour ; and Fanny, 
who had evidently been made acquainted with all the occur- 
rences of the preceding evening, gave me a look which I shall 
never forget, indeed there was so much of archness about 
it, that I thought to myself I had never seen her look either 
so pretty or so intellectual before. 

" Our papa is but just up," said Miss Wells. 

' ' Our papa ! " 

" You gave him too much whisky-punch, Gilbert, last 
night," said Mrs. Wells. 

" He helped himself," said I. 

" And you too," said Harriet, with a look which I did not 
like. 

" Yes," said I. " It is seldom that I am betrayed into 
such excesses. I scarcely recollect how I got home." 

GILBERT GURNEY. 373 

" I saw no symptoms of your excess/' said Mrs. Wells, 
" when we last parted. It must have been after that, if you 
did exceed." 

I saw the^ drift of all this ; but I affected blindness, and 
complained of a headache. 

<' That accounts for your dulness," said Harriet. 

" I am not conscious/' said I, " that I am dull. I have 
been thinking " 

" Quite right, too, Gilbert," said Mrs. Wells. " The 
cares of the world are coming upon you now ; it is quite 
right to think." 

" What cares, ma' ?" said Fanny, bursting out into a most 
unseemly laugh. 

Harriet coloured crimson, and fired one of the fiercest 
frowns she could command at sister Fanny. 

" Fanny, dear," said her mother, who seemed to think that 
I should disapprove of the expedition with which the intelli- 
gence of my capture had been spread through the family, 
"run in and see if Mr. Wells is down stairs yet; he told me 
he should be ready for breakfast in a quarter of an hour." 

And away went the laughing Fan. 

" I suppose," said Mrs. Wells, " that papa and you will 
want to have a long cause this morning, and I think it will be 
as well if I and the girls go and call upon the Nubleys." 

" When is the ball, Harriet ? " said I. 

" To-morrow night," replied the future Mrs. Gurney. 

" And I am to dance with Miss Illingworth ? " asked I. 

" To be sure, if you please," replied Miss Wells, evidently 
piqued. 

te You told me it was an engagement," said I. 

" To be sure !" replied Harriet. ie And I am engaged to 
dance with Lieutenant Merman of the 45th every dance for 
the evening." These words were enunciated in a most deter- 
mined manner, and their delivery was succeeded by a burst of 
tears. 

I did not know that I had done any thing to outrage my 
little wife's feelings; but, from what I saw, it seemed that 
the change in my position which had been wrought in six or 
seven hours was most extraordinary. 

" I am sure," said Mrs. Wells, " my dear Harriet, you are 

B B 3 

374- GILBERT GVRNEY. 

not engaged to Lieutenant Merman, or whatever you call him, 
in any such way." 

" Well, ma," said Harriet, " if I am not, I might be, and 
may be if I like ; and if Gilbert goes and dances with that 
odious Miss Illingworth, I have just as much right to dance 
with Henry." 

This statement of rights I confess did not please me; nor 
did I admire Miss Illingworth's being called odious, in whose 
praise and cause Harriet had been, the night before, most elo- 
quent ; neither did I admire the familiar manner in which she 
spoke of the gallant Lieutenant as Henry. 

" I am sure, Harriet," said I, " I have no wish to dance 
with Miss Illingworth, nor should I ever have thought of 
such a thing, had you not told me that I ought to do so ; and 
in order to oblige you, I proposed fulfilling what you repre- 
sented to me to be my promise." 

" I might have said so yesterday," said Harriet ; " but cir- 
cumstances are changed. Miss Illingworth can't think you 
have any serious intentions with regard to her now ; and, for 
my part, / would rather not go to the ball at all." 

" What !" said I, " and abandon Henry ? " 

Mrs. Wells, who saw that there were certain clouds rising 
in the horizon, thought it wisest to put an end to this little 
discussion, in which Harriet's temper did not appear to quite 
so much advantage as it might have done, and hurried us to- 
wards the house, where the ever-volatile Wells was ready to 
receive us. 

Mr. Wells was a specimen of the order to which he be- 
longed, by no means favourable as regards its sacred character, 
but he was an excessively pleasant person, and always con- 
trived to make his house agreeable, and his visiters not only 
pleased with himself and his family, but, which is infinitely 
more satisfactory, pleased with themselves. I saw his fail- 
ings ; I disliked the levity with which he occasionally treated 
serious subjects ; I was aware that his practice was not in 
accordance with his preaching, and I saw several venial faults 
in his general character, but I felt quite sure that he had a 
very high opinion of me, and that he never was so well pleased 
as when / was his guest. So, I believe, thought every one of 
his ordinary acquaintances. 

" Gilbert, how are you after the punch, eh ? " cried the 

'GILBERT GURNEY. 375 

reverend Bacchanalian. "Well, I hope? Punch of my 
brewing is always wholesome, not a headache in a hogshead 
of it. Give us your hand. I am delighted to see you. Har- 
riet, kiss me, dearest : I presume I am not the first so favoured 
on this auspicious morning?" 

Harriet looked towards me, I thought somewhat reproach- 
fully, as if she thought my ardour had not been quite so con- 
spicuous as it might have been. 

" Come, old lady," continued the pastor, " give us our 
breakfast. Fanny, love, how dost do ? Where's my little 
Betsy, my Bettina ? " 

And hereabouts Fanny and her plump junior saluted their 
reverend sire, who speedily ensconced himself in his arm- 
chair ; and as we all sat down round the table, his face bright- 
ening with an expression of extreme delight, he first smacked 
his hands, and then rubbed them, and then exclaimed, 
" Here we are, a happy family-party !" 

While the ungraceful process of egg-eating, tongue-demo- 
lishing, and tea-drinking is going on, it may not be amiss to 
give one anecdote of my intended father-in-law which may 
serve to throw some light upon his character. It seems that, 
in the outset of his clerical career (for he first started in life as 
a lawyer), he found it difficult to get rid of his lay habits, and 
not unfrequently an oath mingled in the volumes of words 
which issued from his lips, added to which he maintained an 
ancient custom of his, of frequenting races, and betting to a 
considerable amount. These proceedings made some noise in 
the village where his preferment lay, and at length a complaint 
was lodged with his diocesan, who, with the generosity and 
impartiality of a great and good man, resolved at once to send 
for him, tell him what the allegations were, which were made 
against him, and leave it to his own sense and feeling to cor- 
rect what in his new sacerdotal character was, in point of fact, 
extremely censurable conduct. 

Wells, somewhat flurried by the episcopal summons, and 
judging, " conscience-stricken," that it originated in some 
complaint from his parishioners, repaired to the bishop's palace 
with anything but agreeable feelings upon the occasion. He 
described to me the sort of nervous agitation which he expe- 
rienced while pulling the heavy bell which was to summon the 
porter to the prelate's gate. He consoled himself, however, 

B B 4 

376 GILBERT GURNEY. 

by the reflection, that all unpleasant interviews are infinitely 
worse in imagination than in reality, and sent in his name with 
the resolution of one determined to bear with meekness and 
resignation the infliction for which he had, in truth, been a 
little prepared, by the conversations which had, more than 
once or twice, taken place in his neighbourhood between the 
more rigid of his flock, and which had been repeated to him 
by some exceedingly goodnatured friends. 

The bishop, a man of exemplary piety of character, and 
lamb-like meekness of manner, received him with that sort of 
bland and paternal kindness which a surgeon, who is about to 
cut off the leg of a highly-distinguished patient, exhibits to 
his victim, a kind of encouraging gentleness, which may 
strengthen him up to bear the slashing cuts which, for the 
salvation of his life, he proposes, in a few minutes after, to 
inflict upon him. He begged him to be seated ; hoped he 
had not inconvenienced him by requesting him to call, and 
hoped that Mrs. Wells and his daughter he then had but one 
were well. Wells felt soothed and re-assured, and began 
almost to think that he had been mistaken in the object of 
his lordship's letter, and that, instead of a reprimand, he was 
going to give him a stall in his cathedral. He was soon unde- 
ceived. 

" Mr. Wells," said the bishop, " it is of all things in the 
world the most unpleasant to censure ; and, 1 do assure you, 
it is because I have a high regard for you, and a high opinion 
of you, that I have sent for you hither to say a few words, 
which, I am quite sure, at least if I know anything of your 
real character, will obviate the necessity of any further steps 
on my part. What I refer to are some reports which have 
reached me, I can scarcely say officially, but which have been 
forwarded to me by a party in your parish, who incline, con- 
scientiously I am sure, to a more rigid course of living than 
men of the world are generally apt to pursue ; and these 
persons throw out that an evil impression is given to the parish 
by your inconsiderately I am sure devoting a great portion 
of your time to sporting matters, and a habit of using, during 
such occupation, oaths to a considerable extent. Now. my 
dear Mr. Wells," said his lordship, stopping my respectable 
father-in-law, who was about to interrupt him, " be assured 
that no bishop hates meddling with the private conduct of the 

GILBERT GURNEY. 3? 7 

subordinate clergy of his diocese more than I ; and it is not in 
the character of diocesan, but of friend, that I have taken 
this opportunity of warning you of the existence of those 
opinions and feelings, and of suggesting an alteration in the 
tone and tendency of your recreations, which may effectually 
put a stop to such observations and remarks." 

" My lord," said Wells, " I really have no words to thank 
yqu for this kindness. I am quite sensible of the errors 
which your lordship has so justly, so properly, and so con- 
siderately pointed out to me. You are aware that I have not 
long embraced the profession which I have now chosen, and 
that habits of early days are difficult to shake off; but rely 
upon it that from this moment they end : you shall never 
again have occasion to say one word upon the subject, nor 
shall my enemies have an opportunity of attracting your lord- 
ship's attention to any levities of a similar character." 

" Don't say another word," said the bishop : " I have 
treated you as a friend, and I rejoice to see that you take my 
interference in good part. I thought you would, and* I have 
not been deceived ; and now, Mr. Wells," continued his lord- 
ship, " as our business is over, come into the next room, and 
take some luncheon." 

Wells described his delight at the mildness and moderation 
of the bishop's reproof; and, quite fascinated with the kind 
and hospitable conduct which formed the sequel, he too gladly 
accepted his lordship's invitation, and a few minutes more 
found them seated at a table, upon which were placed dishes 
in sufficient number and variety to deserve the name of dinner. 

The conversation assumed a general character, and the 
bishop having set the example, Wells drank one or two 
glasses of wine, the bishop telling him that, as far as he was 
concerned, that was the only meal he enjoyed, the late dinners 
of society not agreeing either with his appetite or constitution. 
Wells found the prelate alive to the mirth of his pleasant 
sallies; and, encouraged by his lordship's smiles, went on de- 
scribing a variety of incidents and circumstances in his hap- 
piest vein, until at last touching upon the subject (which very 
much interested the particular quarter of the county in which 
his living was situated) of a marriage said to be in agitation 
between a certain Sir Harry Lackinfield and a Miss Stroin- 
berslcy, a great heiress in those parts, the bishop said he was 

378 GILBERT GURNEY. 

perfectly convinced it would take place before the next 
Christmas. 

" I don't think so, my lord," said Wells, who knew the 
match was off. 

" I do," said the bishop ; " and I have tolerably good 
grounds for my belief." 

" I'll be d d," exclaimed Wells, " if I don't bet your 
lordship five to two that it never comes off at all." 

" As this, I presume," said the bishop, rising from table, 
" is to be the last bet you ever intend to make, I will not rob 
you by accepting your offer, and leaving you without a chance 
of revenge. Good morning, sir ; you have my best wishes 
and sincere hopes of a desirable change in your proceedings : 
the evident difficulty of correcting confirmed habits will, I am 
sure, induce you to pay particular attention to my friendly 
suggestions." Saying which, his lordship rang the bell, Mr. 
Wells descended the stairs, mounted his horse, and rode 
home. 

This little anecdote will pretty well serve to explain the real 
character of Mr. Wells, who, although as far as I knew or 
could see, was not chargeable with any flagrant impropriety, 
was, I must admit, of a class of clergymen infinitely more nu- 
merous in my younger days than since. Within the last four- 
and-twenty years, the tone of character and the manners of our 
spiritual pastors and masters have undergone a most striking 
and advantageous change. It sounds odd, and even absurd 
to say so, but true it is, that religion has become fashionable, 
and its cultivation and pursuits have taken place of what, in 
the days of our grandfathers, were called spirit and humour, 
which, in plain English, meant profligacy and dissipation. 
No midnight broils now break the public peace, no feats of 
drinking are recorded in our periodical papers, as matters of 
admiration. It is no longer thought brave to beat the watch, 
nor considered extremely wise to break the lamps ; quiet 
lodgers are now never roused from their slumbers by bell- 
ringings of the "Tonsonian school," nor are waiters thrown 
out of tavern-windows, and charged in the bill. 

To the mere ofF-scourings of society are these performances 
now confined ; indeed, so peculiarly marked are the few re- 
maining professors of such absurdities, that it is common to 
see posted up by the parish authorities notices to " Lamp- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 379 

breakers and others ; " thereby clearly proving that such per- 
sons are a totally distinct race of themselves. 

If these outward signs of change in manners are so evident, 
still more so are those by which society, of a more refined cha- 
racter, is distinguished. Piety, charity, sympathy, and bene- 
volence are its attributes, and the esteem and best affections of 
those whose affections and esteem are worth possessing, are 
acquired by the unaffected exercise of moral and religious 
duties, unaccompanied by the artificial and over-strained pu- 
ritanism, which, not unfrequently, like its very antipodes, cha- 
rity, " covers a multitude of sins," In these days, a profligate 
parson is an object of hatred and contempt ; and the same in- 
fluence, which has worked the beneficial changes to which I 
refer, has produced that general alteration in social life which 
has sobered and chastened the rakes and bullies of other times 
into accomplished gentlemen, cultivating the arts and sciences, 
redeeming hours of agreeable and rational conversation from 
the service of the bottle ; who see neither wit in immorality, 
nor wisdom in profaneness ; and yet perceive no crime in mirth 
and gaiety, nor any gloom in the observances of religion. 

I was led into these reflections by the account which Mr. 
Wells gave me after breakfast, which seemed to me to last 
longer than usual, of his change of profession from the law to 
the church, and which he seemed resolved to confide to me, 
together with some more minute particulars of his early life, 
which, although strongly illustrative of my position as to the 
superior state of public morality in later days, I do not think 
would be either edifying or acceptable to the reader of my 
notes, let him be whom he might. 

" I was called to the bar," said my reverend friend, 
ee knowing but little of law went the circuit got no busi- 
ness ; never left the Hall during term got no business 
there in town or out of town just the same wouldn't do. 
Went next circuit, and there saw my inestimable Sarah, then 
pretty, young, and amiable with a tolerable fortune, and 
niece to a bishop. I made my offer accepted by the young 
lady frowned upon by the old." 

My reverend father-in-law's case seemed very like my own. 

" I talked of industry," continued Wells, " and argued 
earnestly on my yet favourite topic of the stimulus to exertion, 
and my conviction of happiness, content, and all that, till at last I 

380 GILBERT GVRNEV. 

got a conditional hearing from Sally's mother, Mrs.Grimsthorpe. 
She had spoken to her brother-in-law, the bishop he met 
me at dinner I spoke before him in a subdued tone. I was 
then on promotion, and our meeting was followed by an inter- 
view, in which not, perhaps, very flattering to my talents 
he told me very candidly he did not think I should make 
much figure at the bar, but that if I made up my mind to 
take orders, he would do whatever he could, having no 
family of his own, to push my interest. 

" The proposition pleased me. 1 did not stop to consider 
my fitness or unfitness for the important change ; all I looked 
at in the affair, I saw as a lover sees, who is not quite blind, 
except when his mistress is actually the object. It was 
evident to me that I should never get a living by the law ; 
it was equally clear that 1 should get one in the church ; 
and, therefore, without a moment's hesitation, I jumped at 
the prelate's offer, and submitted myself to his directions 
for my future guidance. 

" The difficulties in my way were few. I had graduated 
at Cambridge ; I was to be furnished with a title, my own 
good bishop was to ordain me, and that ceremony was very 
shortly to be followed by another, which was to unite me to 
the object of my affections, so soon as any piece of preferment 
fell vacant, which might give me a home to take her to; 
for up to the moment of the relinquishment of my secular 
pursuits, I occupied chambers, on the third floor of Hare 
Court, in the Temple, ' a shady, blest retreat,' not well cal- 
culated for the residence of one so good, so amiable, and 
tenderly-reared, as Sarah Grimsthorpe, who was then the 
very picture of our dear Harriet ! " 

I wished, devoutly, that my excellent friend had not given 
me the last piece of information. Nothing is so terrible as 
to see a woman hideous in face, unwieldy in person, and 
coarse in features, walking with a daughter, fair, slim, sylph- 
like, and symmetrical, but who bears just sufficient resem- 
blance to her Gorgon-like parent to convince one, that when 
she comes to be as old as her mother, she will be her very 
counterpart. Mrs. Wells was, for her standing in life, a very 
respectable-looking lady ; but, to live for twenty, or five- 
and-twenty years, watching the progress of my pretty 
Harriet, till at last she should reach the maternal standard 

GILBERT GURNET. 381 

of age and size, seemed to me to be a dreadful anticipation. 
However, I believe I was wrong ; constant, habitual asso- 
ciation deprives these evils of their importance ; youth goes, 
and age comes so gradually and imperceptibly, that the 
change, so visible to other eyes, is not made evident to those 
who suffer it ; else why should Mr. Wells himself have 
proposed, that very day, that his wife and daughter should 
have two dresses made of the same material, and in the 
same fashion ? However,, I listened to his adventures with 
attention, hoping to reap some instruction in the end. 

" Well," continued he, " having completed my metamor- 
phosis, and become a deacon and a curate, I commenced doing 
duty. I confess I was a good deal alarmed at the sound of 
my own voice in reading ; but when I came to preach, the 
recollection that there was no council on the other side to 
reply, put me somewhat at my ease my good patron had 
lent me a sermon for the occasion, which turned out very 
effective, as I was told, although the omission of several pages 
in the middle of it, which I had unfortunately left at home 
by accident, rendered it not quite so connected as it might 
have been if I had had it all : the mishap, however, had 
the effect of shortening it, which, perhaps, contributed to 
please the parishioners, some of whom, as it were, " slept, 
or seemed to sleep," not much admiring the practice of 
parsons who treat their texts as Dido did the hide, and 
lengthen them out until they encompass a very Byrsa of 
time. 

" With all decent speed," continued Wells, " my patron 
ordained me priest ; and never shah 1 I forget the kind manner 
in which he addressed me upon the evening after my admission 
to that rank. ' Mr. Wells,' said he, ' you are now placed 
henceforth it becomes your own affair to push yourself. I 
have given you my pledge that . the first piece of preferment 
which falls, in my gift, shall be yours ; but mark me I have 
observed in your character something like carelessness of your 
own interests, a dilatoriness, a procrastination ; recollect, 
that much of your success will depend upon your own 
activity. Very often, vacancies occur in livings, of which 
I do not hear for several days ; other people are on the alert ; 
and even before I have been made aware that I had the 
power to bestow the preferment, I have received applications 

382 GILBERT GURNEY. 

from high quarters, which must be attended to, unless I 
have actually given away the benefice ; therefore, be vigilant, 
keep your eyes about you, and the moment you hear of 
a living dropping, start off directly to me ; for I do assure 
you, seeing how much attached you and my niece are to 
each other, I am most anxious to put you in a situation 
to marry, although I entirely agree with her mother in the 
prudential postponement of your union until you have a home 
of your own, and are, in fact, established.' 

" I need not add," said Wells, " that I not only promised 
punctual obedience to his lordship's instructions, but that I 
rigidly practised the course he recommended. I made a con- 
stant round of visits of inquiry after the health of all the most 
ancient incumbents in the diocese, and found, to my infinite 
dissatisfaction, that they were all uncommonly well ; and this 
salubrious state of things continued for several months, during 
which period I was placed in the extremely unpleasant position 
of what is called ' waiting for dead men's shoes.' At last, my 
suspense ended : one day in January sharp frost ' an 
eager and a nipping air ' I was on horseback, crossing Glan- 
berry Hill I heard the toll of a church bell, when, casting 
my eye as a fisherman would his bait, without the hope of 
a bite into the valley below, there I saw what what 
do you think ? " 

" I cannot guess," said I. 

" A funeral, wending its way out of Glenberry parsonage 
towards the church door ; the effect of the black procession 
upon the white snow was most remarkable. Glanberry was 
worth 8007. a year, and in the bishop's gift. In an instant, 
all his lordship's allegations against my activity and watch- 
fulness flashed upon my mind three weeks had elapsed 
since I had visited that neighbourhood, and then, ' The 
rector was quite well.' Still I did not know how to excuse 
myself to my patron for my palpable remissness, nor calculate 
the mischief the delay might have occasioned. 

" In order to ascertain the precise date of the event upon 
which so much depended, I pulled up at the corner of the 
deep-rutted lane which leads down to Glanberry village, and 
which looked, at the moment, like the top of a twelfth-cake, 
considerably mangled about the sugar, and hailed one of the 
clods of the village. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 383 

ee c I say,' cried I, ' how long is it since Mr. Simpkinson 
died ? ' 

" ' Last Monday, sir,' said the man. 

' ' ' He wasn't ill long ? ' asked I. 

" f Only three days, sir, said the man. ' That's just it, sir 
we are here to-day, and gone to-morrow.' 

" ' Thank you, my friend,' said I, resolving, at all events, 
for once, however much I admired and admitted the pithiness 
of his remark upon the uncertainty of life, to reverse the prin- 
ciple in my own case. I muttered it to myself, ' I shall be 
gone to-day, and here to-morrow/ and putting spurs to my nag, 
hurried home to my intended mother-in-law's ; and, without 
further delay, took a post-chaise to the first inn on the high 
road, and thence, per Comet, transported myself to London, 
where my right reverend patron had established himself, in 
order to attend his parliamentary duties. 

" I need not," said Wells, " detain you with an account of 
the kind reception I met with. The bishop took me cordially 
by the hand, expressed not only his great delight at the va- 
cancy, and the opportunity it afforded him of securing my 
happiness with Sarah but his approbation of my activity and 
vigilance in having got the start of any other applicant. He 
pressed my hand again at parting, and wrote an extremely 
warm note, of which I was the bearer, to Mrs. Grimsthorpe, 
introducing me formally as the rector of Glanberry. 

" When I left his lordship's house," continued my father-in- 
law elect, " I felt very differently from what I felt when I 
arrived. I was conscious of a responsibility which had never 
belonged to me before I had the cure of souls I felt the 
importance of my ministerial character, and resolved, now that 
I had really and positively assumed it, to act up to the expec- 
tations which I fancied my patron had formed. 

" I hastened to my mother-in-law's, and was rewarded 
with a smile and a shake of the hand by the old lady, and a 
squeeze of the hand, and something more agreeable, by the 
young one. The day of happiness had dawned, and the next 
morning I was to proceed to Glanberry, to communicate with 
the respected Mrs. Simpkinson, on the subject of taking pos- 
session, having previously bound Mrs. Grimsthorpe and Sarah 
to the most inviolable secrecy, inasmuch as, after what the 
bishop had told me of occasional applications from ministers, 

384 GILBERT GURNEY. 

I felt that the thing, however near my lip the cup might be, 
was not perfectly safe till I was actually inducted. 

" To Sarah, the prospect of a residence in that part of the 
country was very agreeable. Glanberry parsonage was beau- 
tifully situated in the valley, it is true, but sheltered by a 
tuft of tall and noble trees a clear trout-stream circumun- 
dulated the grounds, black as ink beneath their shade, and 
bright as silver in the sunshine the place, too, might be 
improved and so on, but it was all we wished for, all we 
wanted ; and however much my happiness was alloyed by the 
reflection that a human being had died to make way for me, 
I could not help remembering that he had held the living five- 
and-twenty years, and came into possession of it under a si- 
milar contingency. 

" No sooner had we breakfasted," continued Wells, " for 
with such credentials as the bishop's presentation I was held 
presentable at the dejeuner of the dowager, than I mounted 
my horse and rode off to Glanberry, resolving to take no ser- 
vant with me, nor give any indication of the object of my 
visit. Instead of mounting the hill, I kept along the lower 
left-hand road, and when I approached the boundaries of my 
parish, I pulled-up into a walk, fearful lest the ' very stones 
should prate of my whereabout;' and, having as quietly and 
unostentatiously as possible reached the second-rate inn, I de- 
livered my nag to the ostler, and, telling him I should not be 
long gone, set forward upon what, however advantageous 
to me the results, I could not but feel to be a delicate and 
disagreeable conversation with the late incumbent's family. 

" I approached the rectory ; but, I must confess, strong as 
I was in the zeal of my new calling, I saw in my way thither 
many moving sights, girls of tender years, evidently with- 
out control, and boys, still yet their juniors, using language, 
which, however venial I might have thought it when I occu- 
pied other stations, convinced me, that the strictest attention 
had not been paid to the morals of the population. ' This,' 
said I to myself, ' I will soon set to rights ; and Sarah is so 
good, and so devoted to works of charity and beneficence, that 
she will be a fitting helpmeet in my labours.' Many other 
things I saw, scarce worth enumerating now, which cried 
aloud for correction ; and drawing good from evil, I felt rather 
gratified than otherwise, that something was left for me to do, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 385 

in order to raise myself in the estimation of the well-disposed 
portion of the inhabitants of Glanberry. 

" When I reached the rectory, I rang the bell it sounded 
mournfully. How often had the late incumbent rang that 
bell, which, for nearly a quarter of a century, had announced 
to his watchful wife and affectionate children his return to his 
peaceful fire-side. ' How transient,' thought I, ' is everything 
of this world ! How justly does Young say 

The spider's most attenuated thread 
Is cord, is cable, to man's tender tie 
On earthly bliss ! 

Here is the house in which he delighted here are the 
grounds which he improved the trees he planted and 
these are now mine ; and that study, through the windows of 
which the cheerful fire, beside which he sat, was wont to 
gleam at this time of the year, and before which his favourite 
spaniel lay and slumbered that, too, devolves on me : all 
his care, all his partiality were vain ; and yet so will it 
be with me, who am now so anxiously about to take posses- 
sion of it.' 

" A servant, in the deepest mourning, opened the gate. I 
asked, in a tone and with an expression of countenance unas- 
sumed and natural while such thoughts were in my mind, ' if 
his mistress were at home ?' The man answered ' yes;' and 
as I followed him round the gravel sweep to the door of the 
house, I could scarcely refrain from a tear, while thinking 
that the hour was come when the quiet of an amiable family 
must be disturbed, and they cast upon the world, to seek 
another habitation and a home. 

" The man ushered me into the drawing-room, where I 
found the amiable daughters of the late incumbent their 
mother was yet absent : this, somehow, I did not regret, and 
I even felt a hope that she might not present herself; inas- 
much as what I had to communicate might be told to the 
young ladies with less painful effect than it would be likely to 
produce upon their surviving parent. Upon hearing my name 
announced, the eldest of the group arose, and motioned me to 
take a seat ; I said that ' the object of my visit was to say a 
few words to Mrs. Simpkinson, whom I had understood to be 
at home, but ' 

" ' Mamma is at home,' said Miss Simpkinson, ' and will 
be here in a few minutes pray be seated.' 

o c 

386 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" I sat down, and cast my eyes round the drawing room, 
which looked extremely comfortable, and commanded an ex- 
ceedingly pretty view of the grounds, which were very taste- 
fully disposed in the valley ; while the side of the hill whence 
I had viewed the funeral, well-studded with tall firs, afforded 
an evergreen background to the clumps and clusters of laurels 
and other immutable plants which graced the lawn. 

" ' I assure you/ said I, ' that it is with no small degree 
of pain I pay Glanberry this visit ; I am quite aware that, 
from long habit, it must have become a favourite residence 
with you all, and nothing is more disagreeable than displacing 
a family, to whose taste a house is so much indebted for im- 
provement and comfort.' 

" ' It will, indeed,' said Miss Simpkinson, ' be a dreadful 
sacrifice when we are forced to give it up ; my two sisters were 
born here, and I came hither when I was but two years old.' 

' ff When/ said I, tenderly ' when does your amiable 
mother think of leaving this ' 

" ' We propose,' said the young lady, ' going to London in 
about ten days.' 

" ' I trust,' said I, ' that your mother will not think of hur- 
rying away on my account, let her suit her own conve- 
nience, and take her own time. I need not explain further the 
nature of my visit the more lightly such details are touched 
upon, the better for all our sakes ; if I get in by Lady-day 
I shall be quite satisfied, because I see, by the state of this 
room, it must be new papered.' 

" ' Yes, sir,' said Miss Simpkinson, ' it is rather faded.' 

" ' And I think,' said I, seeing how philosophically the 
orphans bore the subject, ' I shall knock down this end of the 
room, and throw out a bay-window where the recess is ; by 
doing which, and cutting through the wall, and making a 
pair of double folding-doors into the dining-room, we shall 
get a vista from one end of the house to the other.' 

" ' Papa once thought of doing that,' said the second 
daughter. 

" ' Poor dear man,' said I, ' those reflections are now of no 
use I mean, besides these alterations, to add a conservatory 
to the suite, which I think will have a good effect ; will you 
allow me just to measure a little?' Saying which, I rose 
from my chair, and paced across the room. 

GILBERT GCRNEY. 387 

" f Pray, sir/ said Miss Simpkinson, after whispering with 
her sister, ' might I ask, did papa ever communicate to you 
his intentions ?' 

" ' No,' said I, ' we never were personally acquainted ; but 
of course none of these alterations will be begun till you have 
finally quitted the premises.' 

" ' Finally !' said Miss Simpkinson, ' we are only going to 
London for six weeks.' 

" ' Why/ said I, blending a little of the dictatorial with 
the pathetic and sympathetic, ' after you once leave the house, 
I think I must be compelled to take possession ; because it will 
be a great object to me to be here early in the spring/ 

" m f Pray, sir/ said the young lady, ' may I inquire what 
you propose doing here ? ' 

" ' Living here altogether/ said I, ' I shall have no other 
house for the next year or two.' 

" ' In what capacity ? ' said Miss Simpkinson. 

" ' As rector of Glanberry/ said I. I feared I had not 
made myself sufficiently understood ; but I was delicate in 
explaining. ' The bishop has presented me to the living, and 
with all proper consideration for your feelings and conve- 
nience, as well as for those of your excellent parent, I think the 
period I have fixed is as distant as I can well name.' 

" ' Dear me ! ' said Miss Simpkinson, ' how very strange ! 
would not you like to see papa ? ' 

" ' Oh dear no/ said I, ' not for the world.' 

' ' ' Ah ! ' said the young lady, ' here he comes, to explain 
for himself/ 

" I turned round, and beheld, to my infinite amazement, 
a most respectable rubicund divine and a lady, moving along 
a nice smooth gravel-walk, looking as plump as red-legged 
partridges, as loving as doves, and much better than I could 
possibly have expected. 

" Our meeting was of a very curious nature ; I was consi- 
derably embarrassed ; I did not personally know my fat friend, 
but his eldest daughter, opening the glass-door which led to 
the garden, admitted the happy couple, to whom she presented 
me, as her pa and ma. 

" ' Sir/ said my clerical friend, unshovelling his head, ' I 
am extremely glad to see you/ 

c c 2 

388 GILBERT GURNEY. 

" ' You are very kind, sir,' said I, ' I have only just called 
to take a look over the premises.' 

te ' Yes, papa/ said Miss Simpkinson, who seemed rather 
angry, and sufficiently versed in church matters to see that 
there must be some mistake, ' this gentleman says the bishop 
has presented him to your living.' 

' f ' Indeed ! ' said papa, ' as how, sir, I ' 

" ' Why, sir, briefly thus/ said I ; ' upon the death of our 
lamented friend, the late incumbent, I applied for the prefer- 
ment, and obtained it/ 

" ' Upon the death of the late incumbent, sir !' said my 
friend, ' why you could scarcely have been born when the late 
incumbent died it is more than four-and-twenty years 
since.' 

" ' Dear me, sir/ said I, ' then I must be either mad or 
dreaming ; I made the application to the bishop only the day 
before yesterday, and the day before that, I became acquainted 
with the demise of the late rector.' 

" At this announcement every body stared, and the lady of 
the house, with a prudence worthy of the highest praise, stuck 
the poker into the fire. 

" ' Demise, sir !' said Simpkinson, ' why ! do I look like a 
dead man ? Here I am alive and well 1 cannot say merry 
for the dress in which you see my family will sufficiently 
announce that we have experienced a sad and heavy loss.' 

" ' What, sir ! ' exclaimed I, so completely overcome as not 
to be able exactly to fashion my words properly, ' wasn't you 
buried last Tuesday ? ' 

" ' Not I/ replied the incumbent, for such he proved to be; 
' my poor brother George, who had" been staying here for some 
time, died last week, and was interred in our church on the 
day you mention, but for me ' 

" ' Well/ exclaimed Miss Simpkinson, who seemed de- 
lighted with the result, ' I thought there must be some mis- 
take/ 

' ' 4 Upon my word/ said I, ' I can only throw myself upon 
your kindness and indulgence to forgive me; there certainly 
is a mistake, and the mistake is certainly mine ; the similarity 
of the name, and the profession, I believe' here I received a 
nod of assent ' have caused this contretemps, and I have 
only to apologise for what must appear a most impertinent 

GILBERT GURNEY. 389 

intrusion upon you at this moment. I hope, sir,' continued I. 
proffering my hand to the worthy rector, ' you will pardon 
me, and that our very curious introduction to each other may 
lead to a future acquaintance ; you may rest assured that I 
should be the last man in the world to rejoice in your death.' 

" ' Ha ! ' said the third daughter, who before had said 
nothing, and seemed now determined to fire off an old joke, 
'it is not pa's death you would rejoice in, sir, but his living.' 

" I affected not to understand this quibble of the pert thing, 
who, I could see, was the pet of the family, and fancied her- 
self a beauty ; and having bowed to all the party, tripped over 
the carpet, and stumbled down the steps, and left the house in 
search of my horse, whose stall in possession was worth infi- 
nitely more than my rectory in prospectu. 

" That," said Wells, " was my first great failure. How- 
ever, time and patience conquered all obstacles, and I married 
Sarah upon an income not much exceeding what you state 
yours to be now and as for her fortune, she did not come 
to it till the death of her excellent mother ; but we contrived 
to get on, and although we had nothing superfluous, yet we 
lived as people in our state of life should." 

I was very well pleased to hear this adventure of my re- 
spectable father-in-law, and it was told with all the advantages 
of point and manner, which very much reminded me of my 
friend Daly ; but I did not quite relish the climax. By way 
of inference from the story, he told me of his skill in making 
the most of a little, and in the art of doing as well upon a 
small income, as another man could upon a large one ; these, 
however, were not agreeable indications to a lover who had less 
than four hundred a-year, who stood pledged to marry a 
charming young lady with nothing at all, which seemed, from 
all I could collect, to be the real state of the case. 

Wells, however, whose volubility when once " off" was un- 
checkable, and who appeared to me, upon this particular morn- 
ing, resolved to talk me out of the main object of my interview, 
which was really to ascertain how I was safely and consistently 
to fulfil my engagement with him and his daughter, would 
not let me pause here ; nor could I get quit of him till he had 
explained to me how the bishop rallied him upon his blunder, 
and how he got a living in Norfolk, where his sporting pro- 
pensities were fully gratified, and whence his excursions to 
c c 3 

390 GILBERT GURNET. 

Newmarket produced that gentle remonstrance from another 
prelate, of which he had just given me the description. " The 
acquisition of this preferment/' said he, " accelerated my hap- 
piness. Never shall I forget the strange embarrassments of 
our wedding-day, or rather evening ! Sarah, as she still has, 
had then a great dislike to show or affectation, and we deter- 
mined when the happy hour was fixed, to take it quietly, and 
resolved, as we were to start for Norfolk, to have no favours, 
no ringings, no noises, no dejeuners, nor anything of the kind ; 
but to take our dinner domestically with my mother-in-law, 
and start in the evening with no servant but Sarah's maid, 
and so sleep at Chelmsford at the Black Boy, a remarkably 
good inn in those days: we did not send down for rooms 
afraid of being found out, and didn't like being laughed at. 
Wedding over Sarah and I, one we fulfilled all our in- 
tentions, were kissed and blessed by the amiable Mrs. Grims- 
thorpe, and by seven o'clock packed in our postchaise. Away 
we went post-boy in the dark, both as to the night, and as 
to the matrimonial part of our expedition changed at Rom- 
ford, and reached the wished-for inn at a quarter after ten. 
Waiters, chambermaids, ostlers, and landlord in a mo- 
ment were at the carriage-door. Down went the steps up 
came mine host. 

" ' Very sorry, sir,' said he, ' we have no accommodation to- 
night ; not a room disengaged, sir. The third division of the 
75th regiment of foot marched in this afternoon ; and neither 
here nor at the Head (Saracen's) is there a bed unoccupied. 

Great regret, sir, wish you had written, sir, and ' 

" Poor Sarah was a good deal tired what with the jour- 
ney, and the excitement, and one thing and another. How- 
ever, what could be done ? Nothing remained but going on 
to Witham. Blue Posts capital house decided in a mo- 
ment ordered horses took four to accelerate our move- 
ments. First and second turn out, down the yard up they 
come poke them in boys mount crack go the whips, 
and away go we. I confess it was very provoking ; but there 
was no help for it." 

" Well," said I, "you reached Witham ? " 

11 Just at midnight," said Wells. " Lights in the windows, 

and groups at the door ; all up. There things looked 

better, and Sally was preparing for a spring from the carriage, 

when the waiter, with extended arms, meant rather to repel 

GILBERT GUKNEY. 39 1 

than welcome us, sang the second part of the Chelmsford tune, 
by informing us that we couldn't have a bed in Witham, as the 
second division of the 75th regiment of foot had marched in 
that afternoon, and occupied every available apartment. 

" This was enough to try the patience of Job. I swore, 
and Sarah cried ; but all in vain. We had, as in the former 
case, no resource but proceeding to Colchester, where the more 
extensive means of accommodation gave us hopes that, even at 
the late hour at which we should reach it, we might find 
shelter ; and, accordingly, two elderly post-boys were aroused 
from their slumbers, and mounted upon jaded horses, which, 
however, by dint of flogging, arrived in front of the Cups, at 
Colchester, at about half-past one, where, to our great delight, 
we found every thing remarkably lively and gay. 

" ' Can we have rooms ? ' said I, in a tone of anxiety not 
to be described. 

" ' Yes, sir ; sitting-room and bed-room directly,' said the 
waiter. ' Beg to apologise, sir, for the sitting-room down 
stairs; but the first division of the 75th regiment of foot 
marched in here this afternoon, and the officers are giving a 
dinner to the mayor and several members of the corporation, sir.' 

" ' Oh,' said I, ' never mind the mayor and corporation : 
show us to our rooms ; for we are tired to death.' 

" ' This way, sir,' said the man, who was speedily joined 
by a chambermaid ; and together they ushered us into a par- 
lour on the left-hand of the gateway, in which parlour stage- 
coach passengers were generally fed in the daytime. 

" ' Which do you like, ma'am,' said the maid to Sarah, 
' the feather-bed a-top or the mattress ? 

" The question, under the circumstances, excited a consider- 
able degree of confusion on the part of my dear bride, who 
evaded a direct answer, by desiring to be shown to her apart- 
ment; while her maid, who had rushed incontinently to the 
kitchen fire to warm her feet, was summoned to attend her 
mistress. 

" I took advantage of their temporary absence to fortify 
nature with a glass of egged-wine, which I found agree so 
well with my constitution, that I ordered a second, at the 
same time telling the waiter to desire the chambermaid to send 
my wife's maid down to me. This instruction was obeyed ; 
and I desired Mrs. Harvey to ask her mistress whether she 
c c 4 

392 GILBERT GUKNEY. 

would allow me to send her any thing to cheer her up after 
her worrying journey, or whether she was coming down again. 
But I got very little consolation from the maid, who gave me 
to understand that her lady was in the greatest agitation, and 
that she really did not know what to do. 
" ' What is the matter ?' said I. 

" ' Matter, sir ! ' replied the maid ; ' matter enough, I 
think ! Where do you think your sleeping-room is?' 
" ' How should I know ? ' said I. 

" ' Why, sir, if you'll believe me,' said the maid, ' you 
have to go into the mess-room, as they call it and a nice 
mess it is in among all the soldier-officers, and mayors and 
corporationers, and turn to your right-hand, right afore 'em 
all. It's the only room unoccupied or, at least, as was un- 
occupied ; and there's my poor mistress, tucked up, and trem- 
bling like a haspen leaf, with nothing but a half-inch plank 
between her and the first division of his Majesty's 75th regi- 
ment of foot ! ' 

tc ' The deuce she is! ' said I. ' What a state for a bride ! 
There's not a moment to be lost ; I'm off. Poor Sarah 
exposed to the conversation, at least, of those oysterous, bois- 
terous convivialists ! ' 

"'When /come down/ said the maid, ( one of 'em was 
dancing on the table, and twelve or thirteen singing some- 
thing to the tune of the " Sprig of shilaleagh and shamrock 
so green;" and I'm sure it's near three o'clock in the morning.' 
" ' Broiled bones for thirteen, and two more pecks of 
oysters,' cried a waiter in the passage. ' Three bowls of 
punch, and eight brandy-grogs, cold without." 

" In a frenzy I seized the candlestick, and, marshalled by 
my Thais, ascended the staircase, and having, under her 
direction, pushed open a door, found myself, sure enough, in 
the midst of a galaxy of heroes, military and civil, who were 
good enough to receive me ' with all the honours/ and a 
shout which continued till I had made good my landing in 
our apartment, the door of which I locked and bolted ; and 
having then, with great labour, dragged a chest of drawers, 
which happened to be in the room, against the portal, fell to 
soothing my poor Sarah, who lay shivering and shaking at 
the stormy hilarity of our gallant neighbours. 

"It may be easily imagined that we did not sleep much. 

GILBERT GURNET. 393 

More than once, before they retreated, attempts were made to 
force an entrance to our room. At some periods we were 
treated with shouts of laughter, following loud toasts and 
louder songs ; nor was it until near five o'clock that the 
corps dispersed, the whole party singing ' God save the 
King,' fortissimo. To these succeeded people putting out 
the lights, and clearing the things away, who continued their 
avocation for another hour at least, so that our start in ma- 
trimonial life was anything but propitious ; however, I tell 
you this as a warning ; and when you carry off Harriet, 
take special care to inquire whether any of his majesty's troops 
are moving on the same line of march." 

It was impossible not to be amused by the manner in which 
the reverend gentleman related the story, which was infinitely 
more piquante in his version of it, than in my transcript ; but 
still it ended with an allusion to a subject of which, as it ap- 
peared to me, he now never lost sight I mean my marriage 
with his daughter, to which he incessantly referred, as I 
thought, in order to stamp indelibly upon my mind the abso- 
lute certainty of its occurrence, taking my silence as an ad- 
mission and acquiescence, before he came to that particular 
discussion, the issue of which appeared to me likely to influ- 
ence the result very seriously. 

He had scarcely finished this tale of misadventures, before 
the ladies made their re-appearance, accompanied by my 
friends the Nubleys. This was a new embarrassment, and a 
fresh entanglement; I should no doubt be presented to my 
old acquaintances in my new character, and thus more wit- 
nesses to the earnestness of my proposal, and the seriousness 
of its acceptance, would be procured. However, the conver- 
sation which I so much desired, could not be very long de- 
layed ; and as I thought it was best to put a good face upon 
the matter, I joined the new arrivals with an air of gaiety, 
which I must say Mrs. Nubley seemed fully to appreciate, 
and duly to sympathize with. I admit, however, that I felt 
extremely awkward when I offered my arm to Harriet, and 
rather more so when she accepted it; but I was quite over- 
come when, with what appeared to me a malicious activity, 
the rest of the party contrived to separate, and leave us 
together, and alone, at the identical turn in the walk where, 
the night before, we had stopped to look at the moon ! 

394 GILBERT GURNEY. 

CHAPTER V. 

THE evening, and supper which succeeded to this " observ- 
ation," varied very considerably from any of which J had 
previously partaken at Wells's. Instead of catching a look of 
Harriet's soft eyes stealthily, or wishing to cajole myself and 
others into a belief of my perfect carelessness about her, we 
were what might be called fixed settled : everybody got 
out of our way ; nobody interfered with us ; and when the 
dear young pinafore, who had always been hopping and 
jumping about us, came evidently prepared to ask Harriet 
some naive question, her mother called her away with a sort 
of snub, just as she would have interdicted her peeping at a 
brace of birds in a cage, dear creatures, who never breed if 
they are looked at. The thought struck me at the moment, 
and I could hardly help fancying my dear fair-haired Harriet 
and myself a pair of canaries, in order to encourage whom in 
their matrimonial propensities, the careful fancier hangs up a 
ready-made bag of hair, and moss, and other materials, essen- 
tial to the progress of nidification. 

The only thing which enlivened me in the midst of my 
happiness was a particularly favourable display of my dear 
friend Nubley's extraordinary faculty of thinking aloud, which 
he made infinitely to my delight, and to the superlative horror 
of Mrs. Empson, his partner at whist, during one of the inte- 
resting periods of that sublime game. 

" Play, ma'am," said he to his partner, and then he 
thought, " Umph, I suppose she'll play her king she must 
have the king. I can see into Sims's hand he hasn't got it. 
Mrs. Illingworth can't have it, she refused before umph!" 

The poor lady was confused in the highest degree. Of all 
that her partner had thought, and which of course their 
opponents heard, she did not feel it right to take advantage, 
being certain, at the same time, that if she did not, she 
should be overwhelmed by a broadside of censure for her 
blundering ; for Nubley was a strict player, and never meant 
to express one of his thoughts or surmises. She chose for 
herself, and played the king a proceeding which imme- 
diately produced a telegraphic signal between Mr. Sims and 

GILBERT GURNEY. 3Q5 

Mrs. Illingworth, which as the coup made them game and 
game, in the rubber made no great difference. 

Wells was more than usually agreeable, and when that most 
sociable of meals (supper) came, we sat down snug and cozey, 
and it was all very enjoyable. But Harriet ! what could I 
do ? she was mine. I could not maintain an establishment 
without means, and yet I possessed her ; and in the middle of 
the gaiety I thought and every body knows how rapidly 
the chain of thought rattles through the brain that, if my 
brother Cuthbert were really so rich, and so much attached to 
me, I need not go to plod and follow in his steps, and come 
home, perhaps worn out and broken down, like Nubley, in 
order to secure a competency. He himself had achieved that 
great object ; he had sacrificed, as I considered, his time, and 
certainly, by his own account, injured his health, in money- 
hunting, and having accumulated a fine fortune, of course he 
would leave it to me at his death a conclusion to which I 
was naturally drawn by his having most liberally proposed to 
augment my income during his life-time. This, as I warmed 
with some of my excellent and reverend father-in-law's mix- 
ture, rather raised my spirits, and Harriet brightened up too, 
perhaps because she t saw my cheerfulness increase ; and so 
when the party dispersed, and I walked home with the Nub- 
leys, I felt that I had not done so foolish a thing or perhaps 
I might say, had not been led into so foolish a thing as I 
at first fancied my proposed alliance with the Wellses to be. 

The manner in which Nubley had wrapped himself up for 
his summer evening's walk, totally precluded the possibility of 
any lengthened conversation. I took charge of Mrs. Nubley, 
whose long residence in hotter climates, I suppose, had ren- 
dered a small exhibition of a little warm negus, or something 
of the sort, congenial, for she who held my arm never 
ceased talking till we arrived at the gates of Chittagong 
Lodge, and when we had achieved this, Nubley put his frog- 
like mouth out of his steaming worsted net comforter, in which 
his chin and even nose were enveloped, and said, " That Sims 
is a beast five rubbers we played together, he revoked 
twice, told of it once, and trumped a thirteenth." 

Nothing more passed that evening as to my prospects, 
except a few cheering laughs from Mrs. Nubley, at the re- 
collection of Harriet's tender looks cast towards me during 

396 GILBERT GURNEY. 

the evening. <r Lauk, Gilbert, you are such a man oh 
dear ! he, he, he !" all of which sounded most discordant to 
my ears, because, with all good intentions, it proved to me 
that I had not so abstractedly fixed my devoted glances upon 
the tender young creature as I ought to have done. The 
morning, however, brought with it scenes and events, for 
which, although I might naturally have been prepared, I 
scarcely expected so soon scenes which I am able now but 
imperfectly to describe, and events which at one blow tottered 
my air-built castles to their foundations, and darkened the 
prospects which hope had rendered brilliant. 

When once an idea gets possession of the mind, sown there 
like an acorn, how rapidly it begins to germinate how it 
grows up, and spreads its branches, until it affords a refreshing 
shade under which to repose ! The new view I had recently 
taken of my brother's position in the world, with the con- 
sciousness, and indeed his own declaration to the effect that 
he would at all events take care of me, had so turned the 
current of my thoughts and anticipations, that I fell asleep 
from mere weariness of calculating the results of the de- 
claration I resolved to make to him of my preference for 
England, and the tranquil pleasures of domestic life, upon a 
small scale, to the more magnificent allurements of an Eastern 
residence, where, after all, the luxuries by which a man is 
surrounded, are only so many attempts at counteracting evils 
which here, where we have not the luxuries, do not exist. 
Thus, making a sort of debtor and creditor account of the 
ills and advantages of a Calcutta life, it appeared to me that I 
should find true happiness no where but at home. This 
feeling even pervaded my dreams, and I went down to break- 
fast resolved to remain where I was, and trust to Cuthbert's 
fraternal affection and generosity for the rest. 

When I entered the breakfast parlour, I found Nubley 
moaning and murmuring, with a letter in his hand, which he 
had just been reading. He looked at me with one of his 
contemplative stares, and even before the usual matutinal 
salutation, muttered out, " Poor devil bad business 
umph ! not my fault that he stopped so long going to 
be married too ! " and then recovering from his eloquent 
trance, he held out his hand, and said, " Good morning, Gil- 
bert." I echoed the words somewhat excited by the 
oracular exclamations of my unconscious host. 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 397 

" Letters from Calcutta," said Nubley. 
<e Any news from Cuthbert ? " said I. 
" Yes," replied Nubley " bad indigo-crop eh ! 
good for holders market overstocked with English goods 

glass and tin in demand." 

" But Cuthbert is well ? " I inquired. 

" Government paper high" continued he " your 
brother yes not well by any means : he is married 
at least so he writes word, I think." 

" Married !" exclaimed I " Cuthbert married !" and the 
words, as I repeated them, seemed to wither all my hopes. 
In an instant all the expectations I had formed of my 
brother's protection and assistance, even if I remained in 
England, were overthrown. He had formed a new con- 
nexion new ties would bind him, new interests affect him : 
he would become the father of new Gurneys, who would of 
course supersede in his cares and affections the collateral 
branch. 

'"' Yes," said Nubley, " married a widow a very nice 
woman was a barrister at Calcutta, and died about ten 
years ago that is, I mean, her husband poor fellow ! 
He was a great smoker chilum after chilum a very great 
smoker ! " and then, relapsing, he continued ' ' Yes, 
cuts him out to be sure must go hates it I know what 
an ass he must have been, to be sure, to go and fall in love 
with that girl. Umph ! Well, Mr. Gilbert," added he, 
speakingly, " I suppose now you will make up your mind to 
take your departure forthwith your only chance nothing 
to be done here can't keep a wife upon four hundred a year 

bonnets, shawls, trinkets, gewgaws." 
" I want none of them/' said I. 

" No," said Nubley ; " but Mrs. Gilbert Gurney will : look 
at my wife never easy but when she is buying something she 
does not want." 

" Lauk, Mr. N. ! " screamed the lady, who most provok- 
ingly entered the room in time to hear her husband's observa- 
tions, " you are such a man he, he, he ! " 

" Ugh ! " said Nubley, as soon as he heard her voice, " you 
are there to speak for yourself pretty business no matter 
nothing to us, to be sure we cannot help it here, Gilbert, 
read that side of Cuthbert's letter." 

398 GILBERT GURNEY. 

Saying which, he handed me that which, if not my death- 
warrant, at least contained my sentence of transportation, and, 
doubling down one side of the letter, which contained some 
private remarks upon the relative qualities of the different ar- 
ticles in which I was destined hereafter to deal, pointed to the 
passage which was appointed for my perusal. I accordingly 
read as follows 

" In marrying I have sought to obtain an amiable and 
rational companion of the merits of Mrs. Falwasser you are 
competent to judge. Increasing in years, as I now am, I felt 
a want of some being near me and about me who would take 
and express an interest in my proceedings, and to whom I 
might confide the thoughts and feelings which, constituted as 
we are, become a painful burden when confined to our own 
hearts and minds. I had hoped that Gilbert would, long 
before this, have accepted my often-repeated invitations to my 
home and my affections ; but I fear my applications continue 
disregarded ; and I have nothing to reproach myself with upon 
his account in forming this alliance. Mrs. Falwasser's three 
children are, as you know, in Fngland for their education ; 
and, if you have an opportunity of communicating with them, 
through the lady under whose charge the two eldest (girls) 
are placed, and to whom Mrs. Gurney troubles you with a 
letter, I should feel obliged by your making her acquainted, 
for their sakes, with the character of their father-in-law, and 
in assuring them, as well as their brother George, that in me 
they will find a second parent, anxious, for their mother's 
sake, to do everything in my power to render them happy, re- 
spectable, and comfortable." 

I could at the moment read no further. Here was the 
strongest evidence of the kindly generous feelings of my 
neglected brother diverted, by my carelessness of his exhort- 
ations and suggestions, into other channels, even in a more 
decided manner than I had anticipated. 

" Umph ! " said Nubley, " you find out now what you have 
lost. That's the way of young people commit follies get 
sorry get better commit more like what the proverb says, 
' Marry in haste, repent at leisure.' " 

" Lauk ! Mr. N.," exclaimed the tea-making lady, who saw 
that I was seriously affected by the bouleversement of my for- 
tunes, and the reproachful observations of my brother, " how 

GILBERT GURNEY. 

you do talk why, Mr. Cuthbert seems to have married in 
haste perhaps he may repent at leisure he, he, he, he ! " 

u Stuff/' said Nubley, " why should he repent ? Mrs. 
Falwasser is a clever, steady, respectable woman." 

" I'm sure," said Mrs. Nubley, " I have nothing to say 
against her respectability or her cleverness ; but she used to 
dress like a girl of fifteen, and talk the greatest nonsense J 
ever heard in my life. They say she talked Mr. Falwasser to 
death ; and as to vanity lauk ! there never was such a woman 
he, he, he, he ! " 

" Falwasser was a brute ! '' said Nubley. " A queer, odd 
little man coarse in manner abrupt in conversation, and 
so absent that you could not keep him to one point five 
minutes besides, he was such a dirty-looking dog." 

Overcome as I was by my feelings of disappointment and 
sorrow, I could not but open my eyes and ears to these two 
speeches, which, as specimens of self -ignorance, if 'such a word 
may be coined, seemed to me by far to exceed anything I had 
ever previously heard. Each of these people drew the other's 
portrait, while caricaturing the imperfections of their absent 
friends and this they did with the most perfect sang froid, 
and an utter unconsciousness of their own faults and foibles. 

" Don't read any more, Gilbert," said Mrs. Nubley, " till 
after breakfast." 

" Let him alone, Caroline," said Nubley ; " let him get it 
over : he will be better able to decide what's to be done." 

" Lauk, Mr. N., you are such a man ! " replied the lady. 
" He, he, he ! " 

I resumed my reading. 

" You must not let Gilbert suppose, nor suppose yourself, 
that this alteration in my state has made, or will make, any 
difference in my feelings towards him. That it will necessarily 
make an alteration in my power of serving him is true. I 
must not only consider the claims of those with whom I have 
linked my fortunes, but I must look forward to the claims of 
others who may yet be born : but although I apprehend any 
farther solicitation will be vain as regards my brother's voy- 
age hither, I beg you to assure him that nothing would more 
add to rny happiness than availing himself of the still open 
opportunity of reaping an honourable and respectable com- 
petency for his after-life. I admit I have been prejudiced 

400 GILBERT GURNET. 

against him by the letters of our late mother's friend; hut 
those prejudices are formed neither against his heart nor his 
principles ; they point rather at his pursuits, his companions, 
and a flighty unsteadiness, which I know are all operating 
against his embarkation in a lucrative and highly respectable 
concern, which, with you before his eyes, cannot fail to hold 
out a prospect even brighter than that which greeted me on 
my arrival in this country. I give him up, I confess. I have 
written to him by this opportunity, once more urging him to 
action, arid assuring him of the kindest reception and welcome 
from myself and from his affectionate sister-in-law, who has 
from herself added a postscript to my letter." 

" There," said Nubley, " that 's all there is about you." 

<( There is enough," said I, almost sobbing with grief to 
find how deeply the calumnies and misrepresentations of Miss 
Crab had sunk into my brother's mind ; and to think how 
childishly I had conducted myself, so as to justify them in a 
very eminent degree. 

" Well," said Nubley, " what d'ye say ? will you go ? you 
have nothing to look for from him here you have engaged 
yourself to be married to a girl without a pice : what's your 
determination ? " And then added the worthy gentleman, in 
one of his ' mental ejaculations,' " the fool won't go, even 
now." 

" I will go," said I, striking my hand upon the table "I 
will disprove the calumnies of my bitterest enemy : I will 
reinstate myself in Cuthbert's good opinion ; and I would 
rather go to him now than before, because he has less left in 
his power to tempt me with." 

"' That's right," said mine host ; ei what will you do about 
Miss ? will she wait for you till you come home with your 
fortune ? " 

I cast my eyes over Mr. Nubley's person, and thought 
but not aloud. 

" No, sir," said I ; " why should we not be married before 
I go?" 

" What ! " said Nubley, " and leave her behind a sort 
of widow bewitched ? " 

" Behind ! " exclaimed I, " no : make her the partner of 
my voyage." 

" Umph ! " thought Nubley, " sleeping partner, eh ? " 

GILBERT GURNEY. 401 

" Lauk, Mr. Nubley," screamed the lady, " what a man you 
are he, he, he ! " 

" Will she go ? " said Nubley. 

" I should think, undoubtedly, yes," said I : and then 
there flitted across my mind the possibility of her refusing 
to make the sacrifice ; and then came a resolution to try her 
affection by that test ; and then a notion that perhaps she 
would hesitate ; and then a determination how I should act. 
To go I had positively decided. Acted upon by a combina- 
tion of feelings, I saw but one course to pursue ; the con- 
viction of what I had already lost, increased my anxiety to 
save what yet remained. I too had added, by my matrimonial 
engagement, to the obligations which pointed to the under- 
taking ; and I looked with anxiety, like my brother, not only 
to the immediate claimant upon my care and protection who 
really lived, and seemed to live for me, but to those of others 
yet unborn. I felt, too, that I had no other mode of re- 
deeming my character for steadiness and sobriety ; and as, I 
believe, above all other ties or inducements upon earth, to 
put the scheme into execution, was a desire of vindicating 
myself from the attacks and insinuations of Miss Crab. I 
should triumph over her; I should trample down the ob- 
stacles she had maliciously thrown in my way, and prove my- 
self worthy of the affection and countenance of a brother, of 
whom every body who knew him spoke with esteem and re- 
spect, and whose letters breathed the spirit of kindness and 
benevolence, which his actions so beautifully embodied. 

While this discussion was going on, Nubley seemed a good 
deal agitated. He fidgetted, and by the expression of his 
most inexpressive countenance, I anticipated some most ge- 
nerous proceeding on his part. I was sitting at the end of 
the breakfast-table, buried in thought ; he stood before me in 
the same state of mind. As usual, he looked me full in the 
face ; and, as usual, began stubbling his chin. " Umph 
partly my fault should have stopped his going to Wells's 
wish I could do something for him myself can't with nine 
nephews and nieces, besides the whole tribe of Caddies he 
ought to go." 

" I repeat, sir," said I, forgetting my usual caution with 
regard to his cogitations, " I will go ; and I will not lose a 

D D 

402 GILBERT GURNEY. 

moment in proceeding to the rectory, and stating my determi- 
nation to the family." 

" Lauk ! " cried Mrs. Nubley, " you'll frighten them to 
death ; the very mention of a sea-voyage will put the whole 
family into fits, he, he, he, he ! " 

" Never mind the family or their fits," said Nubley ; 
" you are in the right humour, Gilbert ; go while it lasts, and 
don't be bamboozled go." 

I was in such a state of agitation during the walk to the 
parsonage, that everybody passing me must have thought 
me mad. I foresaw the sensation my announcement would 
creat I scarcely anticipated the actual consequences. But 
delay was worse than useless : if I lingered on a few more 
hours, or a few more days, it would only be protracting the 
state of security in which we appeared to fancy ourselves the 
night before, in order to render its overthrow the more pain- 
ful ; besides, with Mr. Nubley for a confidant, it would be 
vain to attempt any concealment of the eventual termination of 
the business. It should be done directly ; and the first 
paroxysm of my feelings had not abated when I found myself 
in Mr. Wells's library. 

" Why, Gilbert," said the divine, " you are earlier than 
usual to-day : eh ! what's the matter ? you are flurried 
hurried not worried, I hope ? " 

" Never so much in my life, sir," said I ; " my brother 
Cuthbert is married married to a widow with a family of 
children ; and my only chance for an existence, is in an im- 
mediate voyage to Calcutta." 

" What, now ? " said Mr. Wells ; " to India now ? surely 
the intelligence of your brother's marriage cannot have ob- 
literated from your memory your own engagement of a similar 
nature with my daughter ? " 

" Obliterate, my dear sir," said I ; " no : on the contrary, 
the imperious necessity for my immediate departure, more 
deeply than any thing that could have occurred, impresses that 
engagement on my mind. Harriet will, I am sure, not 
hesitate for a moment to accompany me to a home of love and 
happiness, where, in addition to my brother's welcome, she 
will now receive one from my new sister-in-law. My 
brother's letters, although they express a doubt, which I must 

GILBERT GURNEY. 403 

remove, of my perseverance in my projected voyage, breathe 
nothing but kindness, and anxiety to see and greet me." 

" That I have no doubt is the case, Gilbert," said Mr. 
Wells ; " but recollect, this greeting and welcome are offered 
by your brother to you, individually and personally ; he is as 
little aware of the change which will probably take place in 
your condition, as you were yesterday of that which has 
occurred in his ; and I think it will require great consider- 
ation I am sure my wife will think so before we consent 
to the transportation of our darling child to a distant country, 
and new connections, without, as our prejudices would tell 
us, the slightest chance of ever seeing her again." 

" There is no such chance, my dear sir," said I ; " we shall 
not remain long -there; a few years will be sufficient, I trust, 
to fulfil our most anxious desires ; and we shall return to you, 
happy, and I trust wealthy." 

" Wealth, Gilbert," said Mr. Wells, " does not constitute 
happiness. I admit it forms a principal ingredient ; but you 
know my maxim that which I have so often expressed 
that which I acted upon, when you honestly and honour- 
ably confessed your attachment to my daughter ; and, as 
far as I am concerned, I would rather see you and her 
snugly settled in this neighbourhood, upon your own small 
income, than lose the pleasure and charm of her society 
and, I may say, yours for the sake of reaping a harvest 
which, like that of our friend Nubley, is housed too late 
in the season to be enjoyed by the farmer besides, the 
voyage ! " 

" A mere pleasant excursion," said I ; " a sail in a wherry, 
from Westminster to Wandsworth, is infinitely more dan- 
gerous." 

" For its duration, I grant you," said Wells ; " but you 
will, I am sure, forgive me for recalling to your recollection 
the many descriptions you have given us of your own horror 
of the undertaking, the bare apprehension of which has kept 
you hitherto from performing what you all along felt to be an 
act of duty and affection to your brother, but which, now that 
you all at once have discovered the absolute necessity of per- 
forming it, are ' trifles, light as air ; ' and that the perils and 
dangers, and inconveniences and miseries, which you, as a 
D 2 

404 GILBERT GURNEY. 

single man, could not venture to encounter, will prove to be 
nothing more than a pleasurable excursion to a girl who has 
never left her paternal roof, and who is as inexperienced in the 
world, and as ill able to endure its asperities as an infant." 

" I see, sir," said I, " that you are opposed to my proposi- 
tion : what can I do ? how am I to act ? " 

(< I do not understand, Gilbert," said Mr. Wells, " why you 
are so suddenly and violently affected upon this point ; your 
brother has repeatedly written in a similar strain, and " 

" Yes," said I, " but his last letter shows me that I have 
already lost some part of his affection and regard ; and that I 
shall eventually be shut out from his heart, if I remain ap- 
parently inattentive to his wishes, and regardless of his 
advice. Besides, the new tie, the new anxiety which I have 
incurred, forces me to rally, in order to render myself worthy 
of the love of her to whom my faith is plighted. Will you 
permit me to speak to Harriet upon the subject, plead my 
cause with her, and hear her decree ? " 

" Most certainly," said Wells ; " reserving always for 
myself and her mother the right of controlling her decision 
according to circumstances. What her decision may be, I do 
not pretend to say, although I might probably guess ; but this 
I know, that her dread of the treacherous element, to which 
you require her to confide herself for weeks and months, is 
such, that although it is said, ' Love's power is invincible and 
irresistible/ I apprehend even she will falter, before she agrees 
to be the partner of your expedition." 

" I am content to rest my fate upon that," said I ; " let 
me, therefore, speak to her, while you consult Mrs. Wells. 
Rely upon it, a life of happiness opens to us. All the objec- 
tions I had to quitting England will be overcome by having 
Harriet the companion of my voyage ; and the study of my 
life will be to make her happy." 

" All this, as you say, Gilbert," replied my Harriet's 
father, " looks bright and cheering ; but you forget what we 
shall feel who lose our child. I am certain her mother will 
not hear of it; however, I promise you, if not your advocate 
with her, not to plead against you : she shall give her judg- 
ment fairly upon the merits of the case, in her own mind." 

" I am satisfied," said I. 

" You will find Harriet in the breakfast-room/' said 

GILBERT GURNEY. 405 

Wells ; " but, before you see her, let me hope that you will 
not exert a greater degree of influence over her than you con- 
sider actually necessary to put her fairly in possession of your 
proposition. Do not blind her to the concomitant ills by 
which the expected advantages will be surrounded ; and, above 
all, recollect, that as yet her filial duty is paramount to any 
other." 

" I will recollect all this," said I ; " you may trust me." 

" I am sure I may, Gilbert," said Mr. Wells, taking ray 
hand. " This affair has come upon me suddenly, and has 
unsettled me, and worries me. If I had fancied the voyage 
to be a sine qua non, I never certainly would have consented 
to the match ; that is now too late to be revoked, and, there- 
fore, as an optimist, I trust we shall make the best of it." 

Saying which, Wells proceeded to find his wife, and I 
walked to the breakfast parlour, where he had told me I 
should find Harriet. 

What course the reverend gentleman really intended to 
take with his better half, touching the subject-matter under 
consideration, I did not exactly comprehend. I had seen 
enough of Mr. Wells, to be quite aware that he was a perfect 
man of the world ; and the consenting scene to which he 
had referred during our conversation, was never absent from 
my mind. Nor could I fail of remarking, that, even upon 
the present occasion, in spite of all opposing difficulties, he 
pronounced his opinion, that whatever might occur, or 
however the discussion might end, the engagement was too 
far gone to be revoked; so that I judged their verdict would 
be, either that I should fulfil the contract, and marry Harriet 
before my departure, leaving her, as Nubley described it, a 
sort of " widow bewitched ; " or, that we were to plight our 
faith and troth, and so wait for the marriage until my return. 
Both these courses appeared to me full of difficulty and 
annoyance. If I were merely going on a voyage, with the 
engagement on my hands, to return again in one, two, or 
even three years, the case would be different ; but I was going 
for an indefinite period, and in a pursuit which, to be profit- 
able, must be lasting. To be sure, I had heard Daly talk of 
" shamming sick," and had the precedent of my friend the 
army surgeon, in the stage coach, for getting a certificate for 
the liver complaint, or rheumatism, which, as nobody can see 
D D 3 

406 GILBERT GTJRNEY. 

a pain in the side or back, may be assumed at pleasure. But 
in these stratagems I had no faith ; so I determined to tell 
my story plainly, simply., and candidly, to my gentle sweet- 
heart, Harriet. 

I found her as directed ; and, after a few of those soft 
nothings, of which the early part of an English conversation 
is fgenerally composed, drew her towards the subject, and 
eventually told her, almost verbatim, what I had told her 
father, adding that he was then actually engaged with her 
mother in discussing the affair. 

" But why discuss it at all?" said Harriet, fixing her soft 
blue eyes on mine : ' ' if you would stay in England, we should 
be as happy as the day were long, with your present income. 
What do we want, that a small income will not furnish ? I 
have been used to the life you see us leading here I seek no 
other ; and here we are always sure of shelter and welcome." 

" Yes, dearest," said I ; " but life is transient and short, 
and the day will come when all this scene must be changed, 
and some successor as your father so well describes in his 
story of the Glanberry rector will come, and assume the 
mastery." 

" True : but," said Harriet, her eyes filling with tears at 
the bare allusion to the death of her beloved father, " that is 
surely not to happen yet ; besides, we can have a happy home 
even without this our own favourite cottage with the wood- 
oines." 

" Cottages sound well in poetry," said I, " and woodbines 
are bright and fragrant in summer ; but when winter comes, 
they are nipped, and die ; and when age creeps on, cottages 
and casements become unfitting adjuncts to a happy life. Be- 
sides, Harriet, duty, brotherly love, and a desire to restore 
myself to the good opinion of one whose affection I have 
nearly lost, urge me to the voyage." 

" Oh, Gilbert," said Harriet, " think of the perils of the 
sea, the duration of your misery : pent within the ribs of a 
frail ship, exposed to storms, and to all the casualties of the 
deep ! " 

" They are trifles," said I. 

" No, no, Gilbert, they are not trifles," said Harriet ; " and 
my poor heart would beat and bleed for fear and wretched- 
ness, were you to encounter death and danger in their most 

GILBKRT GURNEY. 407 

awful forms for my sake. But if it be for your honour, for 
your fame, for your advantage nay, dear Gilbert, if it be for 
your pleasure, that I should share all these with you, I am 
ready to embark to-morrow." 

The noble generosity of the gentle girl, rising gradually 
from timidity to heroism, with the warmth and kindness of 
her feelings, completely overcame me. I caught her to my 
heart, and kissed the sweet lips over which such proofs of 
affection and devotion had flowed. It was at that moment 
she'won my heart for ever : conduct which I confess I had, 
upon trivial occasions, thought trifling ; coldness which I had 
at some times noticed as indicative of want of sensibility ; and 
levity which I had misconstrued into an indifference towards 
me and my affairs, were all obliterated by this burst of womanly 
devotion. 

I had carried my point. She had voluntarily agreed to 
share my fate ; and Wells and his wife entering the room at 
the moment, it may easily be imagined I lost no time in com- 
municating my triumphant success. 

" I wish, Gilbert," said Wells, " that I could reciprocate 
your exultation, or even permit you to enjoy the satisfaction 
which I see expressed in your countenance. I told you we 
must reserve a veto upon Harriet's decision, and I am obliged 
to exert the power. Her mother will not hear of it." 

" Madam," said I, looking anxiously at Mrs. Wells. 

" It is so, Mr. Gurney," said the lady, in a tone 'more of 
sorrow than of anger/ " I have lost two sisters in India. It 
is a subject upon which I never touch ; but it was the severest 
blow I ever encountered, and under circumstances which it is 
not worth while now to explain. You may be sure that these 
events have some influence upon my mind upon this occasion. 
But in addition to these, I have, really, under the apprehension 
that some such proposition might be made, consulted our me- 
dical man on the point, and he is decidedly of opinion, that 
Harriet's life, like those of her dear aunts, would be sacrificed 
by a residence in a hot climate." 

" But, my dear mother," said Harriet, " if Gilbert goes, he 
risks his life. We are pledged to each other ; why should I 
not share the dangers which he feels _it right, and just, and 
honourable to encounter ? Suppose, mamma," continued the 
animated girl, " suppose we had been married a month since," 
p D 4 

408 GILBERT GURNEY. 

and the supposition was followed by a crimson blush upon 
her cheeks, "and he had received the letters to-day which 
have actually reached him, and determined his course, should 
J have abstained from accompanying him then, if he had 
wished me to be with him ? " 

" No, my love," said Mr. Wells, " nor should you ; nor 
would you, in the present case, had not a medical opinion been 
so decidedly expressed upon the subject. But I am sure Gil- 
bert is not a man likely to take advantage of the influence he 
has over you, to induce you to hazard your life for the grati- 
fication of any personal feeling of his own." 

The manner in which this was put silenced me. I really 
knew not how to act. Most true it was that I felt the positive 
necessity for going. If I went, it was of vital importance I 
should go forthwith. It now appeared that delay would be 
unavailing, because the constitutional predisposition, whatever 
it might be, which was to prohibit Harriet's visiting India now, 
would be equally an objection a month or two hence. 

Oh, how true it is, that we never know the value of a thing 
till it is lost, or in jeopardy. With health, and wealth, and 
every thing covetable and desirable, it is the same. Twelve 
hours before, I had no conception how deeply I was interested 
in Harriet Wells. I could almost jokingly have talked of 
giving her up ; and here, now that it seemed I was likely to 
lose her, I thought my very heart would have broken. 

I never shall forget the expression of Harriet's countenance 
when her mother gravely and solemnly pronounced the refusal 
of her consent to the voyage. She neither burst into tears, 
nor screamed, nor raved, nor fainted : she sat on her chair, 
like a statue, as pale as marble, her lips firmly closed, and her 
hands strongly clenched. There was in her countenance an 
expression of positive, fixed determination, in which, accus- 
tomed only to see her sweet, playful smile, and unclouded 
brow, there seemed something awful. This conflict with her- 
self, this concentration of her energies, proved too much for 
her ; and suddenly rising from her seat, she rushed out of the 
room, in a state to me the most alarming and painful. Her 
mother followed her, and Wells and I were again alone. 

" This is a sad business," said Wells. " But even were I 
to add the weight of my influence to your entreaties and Har- 
riet's wishes, what would it be in the scale against her mother s 

GILBERT GURNEY. 409 

objections objections strong and reasonable in themselves, 
and supported by a special opinion upon the particular case. 
Think, Gilbert, what would our feelings be what your own 
were we to hear that our dear good child had become the 
victim of a calamity, against which, being fore-warned, we 
ought to have been fore-armed." 

To this appeal, delivered in the kindest and most affection- 
ate manner, what reply could I make, what further remon- 
strance could I offer ? He saw that he had touched the right 
chord ; and it was clear to me, that whatever activity he 
might have displayed in securing a husband for his daughter 
in the first instance, he was equally determined with his lady 
not to risk her safety by the fulfilment of our engagement, 
coupled with the proposed condition of emigration. 

Mr. Wells added to what he had already said a request that 
I would for the present return to Mr. Nubley's, where I should 
hear from him in the course of the afternoon, expressing his 
opinion that Harriet ought to be kept quiet and undisturbed by 
any further agitation on the subject at present. I assented to his 
proposition, and quitted the rectory with a heavy heart ; and 
on my way back to Nubley's began strangely to waver in my 
resolution about the voyage. However, upon my arrival, I 
found that the indolent Mr. Nubley had contrived, upon this 
special occasion, not only to write, but despatch by a cross 
post, a letter, announcing to a friend of his my desire to secure 
a passage in his fine ship, the Ramchoondra, of nine hundred 
and seventy tons ; that he was most anxious for my good ac- 
commodation ; describing, moreover, the situation which I was 
going to fill ; and winding up his lengthened eulogium by 
announcing my name and connexion with the eminent house 
of which he himself had been the head. With such an avant 
courier, who could doubt that I was destined to enjoy every 
convenience and luxury which the Ramchoondra could afford. 

At any other time this extraordinary instance of kindness 
and activity on the part of Mr. Nubley would have received, 
as it certainly merited, my warmest gratitude. But upon the 
present occasion, so far from feeling pleased or obliged to the 
worthy man, I could have kiUed him for his vivacity. 

I related to him all that had passed at the parsonage, which 
he received with sundry noises and meanings. " I thought 
so," said he "good job too eh pretty girl, I admit 

410 GILBERT GURNEY. 

sad incumbrance no use taking them to India all get sick, 
and white, and old quite forget her in a month." 

" Do you mean, sir/' said I, " that 1 should violate my 
engagement ? " 

"Eh," said Nubley "no not violate what oh dear 
no don't do any thing ungenteel only what I say is 
wait she is very young you are not very old marry when 
you come back that was my advice before, so it is now." 

" It appears to me extremely probable," said I, " that I 
shall be compelled to follow it." 

"When d'ye go to town," said Nubley "to-morrow 
eh?" and then he thought "If I don't get him off at 
once he won't stir. The ship will sail in less than a week 
not much time for buying slops and things." 

" I know all about that," said I. " I have already been 
to those shops that will not take me much time but it is 
quite impossible I should leave this place in the present po- 
sition of affairs." 

" Oh," drawled Nubley " what, it is neither on nor off 
what we at Calcutta used to call neither my eye nor my 
elbow shilly, shally eh ? " 

" No, sir," said I, indignantly ; " I have nothing to com- 
plain of in the conduct of any of the parties concerned on 
the contrary, they have all behaved with honour and kindness 
I cannot expect them to sacrifice a darling child at my will 
and pleasure." 

"' Sacrifice a torn-tit," said Nubley ; " they are just playing 
fast and loose to try you. Take my advice, go to town per 
mail to-night you can come back here on your way to 
Portsmouth. You'll see the difference I remember a play 
in my boyish days I forget what it was called and who 
wrote it but there was a young woman and a wheatsheaf, 
and an old woman and a spinning-wheel, and a squire covered 
with leaves like the children in the wood, and one of the 
people sang a song which said 

4 Mind your sickle, let her be, 
By and by she'll follow thee.' " 

"Follow, sir," said I, "she, Miss Wells, would not wait 
to follow, she would gladly be the partner of my voyage and 
my fate." 

GILBERT GURNEY. 411 

" Would she ? " said Nubley " then she will ; you'll 
have a favourable answer." 

" No, no, it may not be/' said I, " and how to act I can- 
not tell." 

" Why, if you have a spark of feeling," said Nubley, " or 
a grain of sense, you'll go to your brother. I have laid a 
train for the whole affair : you'll be treated like a nabob in 
the Ramchoondra, and ten to one, if these people throw you 
over, you'll fall in with some deuced pretty girls aboard, who 
will drive this little woman clean out of your head ; " and 
then he thought " and a devilish good job too." 

" Well, sir," said I, " I will not discuss the matter at pre- 
sent. I am to hear in the course of the afternoon from Mr. 
Wells, and by the contents of his letter I will regulate the 
time of my departure." 

" Now there you talk sense," said Nubley ; " your depart- 
ure is certain all that remains doubtful is the time at which 
you are to go and a very pretty affair too. What a silly 
fellow to put it off till his brother married that Mrs. Fal- 
wasser she'll worry him to death, poor devil umph, no 
business of mine." 

This last was as usual intended for a soliloquy ; and at its 
conclusion Nubley went out muttering something about tiffin 
and tallow Madeira wine, and mull-mulls leaving me 
to reflections of no very agreeable character or complexion. 

It was about four o'clock when I received the following 
letter from Mr. Wells, according to his promise : 

" Rectory, half-past 3. 

" MY DEAR GILBERT, 

" Our poor child is extremely ill, and in a state not to be 
disturbed by the agitation of any such question as that which 
unhappily occupies our attention at this moment. I feel per- 
fectly satisfied that your course is to proceed to your brother. 
I have long since told you I held that opinion, and whatever 
may be the sacrifices which I and my family may be called 
upon to make, rely upon it we shall be the last to advise or 
suggest a relinquishment of your expedition. 

"As to poor Harriet's going to India (a circumstance, which 
in our happier days we have referred to rather as a joke than 
a certainty), I once for all announce to you its entire impossi- 

412 GILBERT GURNEY. 

bility. What with her mother's feelings, my own objections, 
and the positive opinion of the physician, we should, even sup- 
posing his prognostications to prove ill-founded, be placing her 
in a situation of unnecessary risk and peril, and ourselves in a 
life of perpetual misery, anxiety, and uneasiness. 

" Think this over., and I am sure you will see the necessity 
of leaving her to our care, and to the effects of that care and 
time to soothe or heal a sorrow and disappointment which 
will, I apprehend, be of serious importance to her health as 
well as happiness. If there were a chance of your return 
in any reasonable time, it would be my pride and happiness 
to continue to consider you as her accepted lover, and my fu- 
ture son-in-law ; but engagements of that nature I think are 
best left to the parties most interested. All I can say is, that 
no objection will be opposed to your maintaining your claim 
upon her hand ; nor is there the remotest probability of the 
impression you have made being obliterated or superseded dur- 
ing your absence : a more simple, kind, and affectionate 
heart does not beat in human breast, than that of my poor 
dear child, whose situation claims all our interest, and demands 
all our tenderness. I only repeat, because it is best to be at 
once decisive upon the point, that to India no power on earth 
will induce us to let her go. I leave it to your honour and 
good feeling to take this statement as final. 

" Mrs. Nubley has been here, and tells Mrs. Wells that Mr. 
Nubley has already written with regard to your accommodation 
on board an East Indiaman ; and that the question now only 
is, at what hour you take your departure from this place for 
London. She also says you return here on your way to Ports- 
mouth. Under these circumstances, I would suggest your 
leaving it as early as convenient. It is impossible that you 
should see my poor child, even if you protracted your stay 
here for a day or two. She is terribly shaken. I would, 
therefore, suggest, that you should write to me from London, 
giving me an insight into your plans ; and if you should be 
content with all I can, as a parent, offer, we shall see you 
again when you return Harriet's mind will by that time, I 
trust, be fortified so as to bear the interview and separation, 
and be satisfied with a life of hope till brighter days shall 
come. 

" I feel most sensitively the difficulty and delicacy of our 

GILBERT GURNEY. 413 

position ; but the esteem and regard I entertain for you - 
the anxiety I feel that you should do well, and prosper in all 
the essentials of the world, induce me to speak openly, fairly, 
and candidly, upon a subject with which I am assured your 
happiness is nearly connected, and in which mine is wholly 
locked up. 

" Do not answer this ; but write to me from London, and 
direct your letter to be left at the post-office. In the state to 
which Harriet is reduced, the abrupt arrival of a letter from 
you might produce serious effects. Believe me let our con- 
nection terminate as it may yours, my dear Gilbert, faith- 
fully and sincerely, 

" R. WELLS." 

This letter, which was as much, nay, more than I could 
expect, was anything but satisfactory to me, whose attachment 
to Harriet had so violently increased in consequence of the 
conviction of her devotion to me, which I had derived from 
her conduct in the morning, as very nearly to drive me to a 
final and formal abandonment of rny speculative scheme, and 
a declaration of my resolution to marry the dear girl, and live 
upon love. However, Nubley's mingled severity and incredu- 
lity, drove me into the other and more prudential course ; and 
growing feverishly sick of the neighbourhood of the rectory, 
and the atmosphere of Chittagong Lodge, I availed myself of 
a vacant seat in the London mail, which passed close to the 
lodges of the park ; and by eleven o'clock at night was rolling 
along the road to London, having taken an affectionate leave 
of my hospitable host and hostess, who concluded her length- 
ened farewell by wondering how 1 could run away from so 
pretty a girl, who was so desperately in love with me an 
observation which procured her the epithet of " fool " from 
her husband, who squeezed my hand at parting, and told me 
I should hear from him the following day. 

CHAPTER VI. 

IT generally happens providentially that at seasons when we are 
afflicted with griefs and sorrows the very circumstances con- 
nected with them compel us to exert ourselves in worldly 

414 GILBERT GURNEY. 

matters, so that the inevitable excitement serves as a" diversion 
from the sad subjects which would otherwise wholly engross 
and probably overcome us. 

From the moment of my arrival in London, until the day 
when I should return to Chittagong Lodge, on my circuitous 
route to Portsmouth, to embark in the Honourable East India 
Company's ship, the Ramchoondra, every day and every hour 
of each day was parcelled out and divided for the transaction 
of some business connected with my enterprise. During the 
night of my journey, I admit that my brain was maddened 
by the complexity of thoughts which were running through 
it ; but even then sleep came to my aid. Emulating the 
heroes of Newgate and the Tower, who have been shaken out 
of a slumber to mount the scaffold, it was necessary for the 
guard, on our arrival at the White Horse Cellar, to nudge me 
not gently, in order to rouse me to a sense of my situation. 

Tired nature, however, when refreshed, became obnoxious 
to all the " ills that flesh is heir to ;" and when I awoke, con- 
fused and astounded by the suddenness of the appeal, and 
found myself sitting at the corner of Berkeley Street, with a 
day beginning at a quarter after six before me, of which I 
was just conscious that I had but two or three available in 
England, I really felt bewildered the tenderness and firm- 
ness of Harriet Wells had completely overset me. I did not 
expect such noble, charming conduct. I would have given 
worlds, as I got out of the mail, to have got into the first 
morning coach downwards, renounced my design, and aban- 
doned all my fine prospects, and acceded to her sweet, woman- 
like proposition, of living contented upon what we had. 

How much do men sacrifice to the world ! how much do 
they yield to the opinions of others ! I felt that if I now fal- 
tered in my resolution to go to my brother, Nubley would set 
me down for an idler a waverer in short, a vagabond ; 
and Cuthbert's not very favourable impression received from 
Mrs. Pillman, would be strengthened and confirmed by the 
representations of my new friend ; but Harriet, for whom, as 
I have already said, I before fancied I cared but little, had 
won me fascinated enchained me. 

However, / had decided so had Wells and his wife ; and 
go / must and go Harriet must not ; and all I had to 
do was to live on in hopes and in love : for as to rny affections 

GILBERT GURNEY. 415 

taking the course which my dingy friend of Chittagong Lodge 
predicted, it was absurd beyond belief. My heart could now 
know no change and as Sheridan says 

" Least of all such change as they would give it ; " 

and, accordingly, I whiled away time till the world was " a- 
foot," and till my most active man had knocked up my land- 
lady indeed, being called at half-past six, in London, is 
enough to knock up any body and got things as comfortable 
as he could, and prepared breakfast ; during which interval I 
dissipated my cares and shook off my sleep, by walking to 
Hyde Park Corner, and so down the Green Park and Consti- 
tution Hill, to my lodgings. 

When I announced to the poor lady who kept the house 
my design of immediately starting for India, she endeavoured 
to dissuade me from so rash an undertaking, because a ne- 
phew of her's had been killed at Majorca ; and my worthy 
and trusty servant, who never fancied I should really under- 
take such an astounding enterprise, joined in her entreaties to 
me to desist from such a perilous undertaking, because his own 
brother's wife's sister's son had been drowned in a gale of 
wind in Chelsea Reach. These facts unnerved me as I sipped 
my tea at breakfast ; but at ten o'clock " I was a man again !" 
and, as my dear good friend, old Firkins, said of the hole in 
his inexpressibles, " I was surprised at my own presence of 
mind." 

Well, to the city I went : to Broad Street, to the agents ; 
to St. Mary Axe, to Favell and Bousfield's, took my old cata- 
logue of slops, and fitted myself out. White jackets and ca- 
lico shirts at per hundred ; and, as Hull would have said, 
thousands of stockings and millions of neckcloths, all of which 
the worthy people promised should be packed up and packed 
off in the course of that forenoon, and in five hours more be 
stowed away on board of the Honourable Company's ship 
Ramchoondra, then lying off Gravesend, being to go round on 
the Tuesday morning to St. Helen's, thence to begin her voyage, 
with a fresh departure. 

Having thus expeditiously arranged this affair, I went to 
the Jerusalem Coffee House a place strangely combined in 
my fancy with artichokes and old clothes-men, and there saw 
my captain, who looked as much like a captain as he did 

41 6 GILBERT GURXEY. 

like a coal-heaver. However, he was very civil told me 
he had got Mr. Nubley's letter that he had sent off to the 
ship to prepare me a comfortable berth death to me ! and 
informed me that as the weather would be hot for a consi- 
derable time, he had selected one of the poop cabins for me, 
with a view of giving me plenty of air. 

This particular mark of civility not then understanding 
much of naval architecture I did not exactly comprehend ; 
but made a bow of gratitude for his kind intentions, the sin- 
cerity of which, however, I began to doubt, when he added, 
that the cabin he had so chosen was the " starboard booby- 
hutch." 

All this I subsequently discovered to be cant, or techni- 
cality, and found the cabin an extremely nice one, looking 
out on the quarter-deck, through jalousies, or blinds, and 
having a port on the quarter, in fact, one of the nicest 
residences for a single gentleman afloat that could be ima- 
gined. The captain, moreover, furnished me with a list of 
his passengers, which I read with much interest, in the hope 
that some one of them might have been somehow known to 
me before, but I was disappointed. There were in the list, 
a judge and his lady, a colonel commandant of a regiment, 
his wife and children, a chaplain, two captains, three lieu- 
tenants, two ensigns for the king's service, three writers, and 
four cadets for the company; and then there were Miss 
Hobkirk, two Misses Twiggle, two Misses Scropps, Miss 
Amelia Scratchum, going to join her sister, Mrs. M'ltchem, 
Miss Louisa Spokes, and four Misses Warts. I had heard 
that the Company's ships were so well served that they were 
called floating taverns, but this Ramchoondra seemed to me 
more like a floating boarding-school. 

The captain saw me smile at the list of ladies, and said, 
" Now, Mr. Gurney, there is one thing which it will be as 
well to tell you at starting. All these young ladies are 
under my personal protection, and for their comfort and 
respectability I make such rules on board as I conceive right 
and proper. I do not permit the young men, during their 
passage, to walk on the same side of the deck with the young 
ladies while they are out taking their airings of course I 
vary my regulations as I see fit ; but I am sure you will not, 
under any circumstances, counteract my exertions for their 

GILBERT GURNEY. 4*17 

advantage. You know I have full sovereign authority when 
we are afloat ; any thing like insubordination I care not in 
what quarter it arises I put down with a strong hand. 
I have the power of inflicting personal restraint where there 
is an infraction of discipline. I can put my refractory pas- 
sengers in irons, and have done it before now. I certainly 
do all I can to render that restraint as little irksome as pos- 
sible, and have had my fetters covered with green baize ; but 
I am not to be trifled with the honour, virtue, and cha- 
racter of all these young ladies are committed to my care, and 
I will maintain them at the risk of my life." 

I stared at him the idea of the nature of the cargo, and 
of the responsibility, and the fetters, and all the rest of it 
a cargo which no office in the world, I suppose, would ven- 
ture to insure, startled me. I could say but little in reply to 
all his cautions. I felt that at least they were, as far as I 
was concerned, perfectly superfluous ; so I shook hands with 
him, and departed from the Coffee House, he having acquainted 
me that he had no demand upon me for passage money, 
Mr. Nubley having informed him that my brother would 
settle that account upon our arrival at Calcutta, and having, 
moreover, impressed upon my mind the absolute necessity of 
being at Portsmouth on the following Thursday, at the latest, 
as the convoy were actually waiting the arrival of the two last 
ships from the river, one of which was the Ramchoondra. 

When J left this worthy man, for so he really and truly 
was, I found myself enlightened upon subjects entirely new 
to me. My abstract notions of a ship had previously com- 
bined something dirty, and pitch-smelling, and smoky below, 
and wet above; and when I heard of etiquette, and dis- 
tinction of sides, while the ladies were taking their walks, 
and all that attention to the rules of decorum, infinitely more 
rigid than the most rigid observers of propriety would require 
on shore, I was astonished. As for the girls, they might 
walk or not, my heart was cased in steel, and my passions 
and feelings would live upon the recollection of my Harriet ; 
that is to say, if when I saw her on my way back, her parents 
would not relent, or she decide. But then, what time had we 
for preparation ? to be sure there might be some female 
Favells and Bousfields at Portsmouth, who would provide a 
lady's wardrobe as speedily as mine was prepared in London. 

E E 

418 GILBERT GURNEY. 

But these were vain hopes. I knew her parents had made 
up their minds that she should stay, and I was quite sure, 
tinder these circumstances, their child would not make up her 
mind to go. 

Well, the two days passed, and the third dawned, on 
which I was to quit the huge, foggy, smoky city, in which I 
had first drawn my breath, perhaps, and in all probability, 
never to return to it. I called on Hull, he was in the 
country ; I called at Daly's lodgings, in Duke Street ; not 
only was he gone, but the shop was shut up over which he 
had lived. I dined at Dejex's my last dinner; every thing 
as usual, but how changed to me. My eyes lingered on the 
rayed clock over the fire-place, which I had remembered from 
my days of boyhood : it seemed to me the type of my career 
my sun was setting, as far as England was concerned ; and 
I walked out of the coffee-house, and roamed about the streets 
looking at the moon the moon which, when but a few days 
younger, I had gazed on with Harriet, but which now was 
ever and anon hidden by patches of black cloud, blown by a 
sharpish wind between us, the brightness of the one re- 
minding me of past pleasures, and the fitful wildness of the 
other filling me with forebodings of the trials to come. 

On the third morning after my arrival, I paid all my very 
small outstanding bills, and parted with my most excellent 
servant, whose devotion to me was sadly overbalanced by an 
aversion from the sea, and a dread of the voyage, which no 
representation of mine could possibly overcome. I regretted 
the separation, for he was an excellent fellow, and had been 
my servant ever since I was old enough to possess ex- 
clusively such a functionary. However, I might as well 
have endeavoured to persuade a cat to take the water, and, 
therefore, leaving him to die on dry land, I embarked in one 
of what we then fancied fast coaches, on my return to Mr. 
Nubley's, and on my way to Portsmouth to that Ports- 
mouth which had been the scene of my former jokes and 
jollities, but which henceforth was to be remembered as the 
last point of parting between me and all that I held dear. 

There were three other passengers in the stage, and, at any 
other time, I should have listened to their communications, 
and culled amusement from their absurdities ; but now, I had 
no time for these. My hours of travel were occupied in con- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 419 

sidering what course I should pursue with my reverend 
father-in-law elect. I would not for the world I could not 
for the world, for I never was selfish have persuaded 
Harriet to risk her life, and disobey her parents, by either 
insisting on her accompanying me, or of taking the strong 
measure of following me ; and yet when I saw her, in the 
agonies of separation from me and this I knew and felt I 
should see, without inculpating myself in a charge of vanity, 
after what I had already witnessed in her conduct towards 
me what could I do ? how could I act ? I had pledged 
myself to Wells upon the point ; and, let the struggle be what 
it might, I resolved, please God, to redeem that pledge. 

It has often been a question with me, whether our hours of 
happiness or sorrow fly the quicker. The doubt sounds odd ; 
but I have passed many of both, and yet the doubt remains. 
I found myself at the turning to Chictagong Lodge long 
before I expected it, and a few minutes more brought me 
into the presence of that good, but most eccentric creature, its 
worthy master. 

" Well," said he, as little moved by my re-appearance in so 
short a time from my departure, as if I had only been into 
the next room, "I have heard from your captain all 
settled eh ? good cabin capital li ving every attention 
paid you more comfortable than ever you was in your life 
wise thing you have done." 

" If it had not been done off hand," said I, " it never would 
have been done at all ; if I am to take physic, I see no 
kind of advantage in standing smelling to it for an hour. Is 
Mrs. Nubley quite well, sir ? " 

"Ugh," said Nubley, "well! what should be the 
matter with her ? a constitution proved at Calcutta she is 
as thin, and as dry as a Bombay duck." 

" And the Wellses, sir ? " said I. 

" The Wellses," said Nubley, " oh ! dear me, I had 
quite forgot I have got a letter for you from Miss Wells 
eh dear, where did 1 put it to? I hope I hav'n't burnt 
it or sent it up to the agents in London by mistake 
eh?" 

" A letter, sir," said I ; " why a letter ? I hope in less 
than half an hour to see her to " 

" Poor devil ! he's done," muttered Nubley. " You won't 
E E 2 

420 GILBERT GURNEY. 

see much of the Wellses here/' said he. " They are gone 
fled you have put up the whole covey after winging your 
bird." 

" I do not comprehend you," said I. 

' ' Don't you ? " said Nubley, staring at me with the most 
unmeaning expression of countenance " I wonder at that 
they are gone to his sister's, in the New Forest." 

" What can be the object of such an expedition ? " said I. 

ff To get out of your way," said my friend, who had been 
all this time poking and rummaging amengst a heap of papers 
en his library table. "Oh! here's the letter that, I 
suppose, will explain all. I think Wells has acted like a 
sensible man, and I hope you'll do the same" " not that I 
think you will " (in the sequel.) 

I was too much affected by the intelligence of their de- 
parture, evidently caused, as Nubley said, by the desire of 
avoiding me, and by the receipt of the first letter I had ever 
received from Harriet, and which, from all I could see, pro- 
mised to be the last and only one I ever should receive, to 
break its seal before a witness. I therefore quitted the library, 
and ran to my own room, where 1 tore open the envelope, and 
read these words : 

" DEAR GILBERT, I write this with the consent, and 
even at the desire, of my father and mother. They warmly 
and tenderly enter into our feelings ; but, having decided 
upon this course, they have thought it better that we should 
not meet again at least before your voyage. God will, I 
trust, give me strength and power to obey their commands, 
and forego the melancholy satisfaction of bidding you a long, 
but, oh ! let me hope and pray, not a last, adieu. 

" That you should do that which is right and just, and 
what your best friends think ought to be done, is exactly what 
I wish and desire ; and, above all do I wish and desire it, 
because a failure, on your part, at the present moment, might 
be productive, in addition to mere worldly loss, of a disunion 
between you and your nearest and dearest relation. I own that 
I talked the language of my heart, when I urged your stay 
here upon a more moderate income, which I am sure, know- 
ing myself, would afford us all the comforts of humble and 
domestic life ; but I have thought, I have taken counsel of 

GILBERT GUIINEY. 421 

my excellent parents, and I feel, that to urge this course upon 
you, or even to permit you to follow it for my sake, would be 
the height of selfishness. Could I ever be happy, my dear 
Gilbert, if I found myself hereafter the cause of your estrange- 
ment from your brother's affections ? No ; you shall see 
that I can make a sacrifice of my feelings of my happiness 

to sincere affection, and a sense of duty. Follow my hum- 
ble example; go, be rich, be happy, and continue to be 
beloved by him, whose affectionate anxiety for your welfare 
demands a willing obedience to his wishes. 

" I can scarcely write but you will forgive me: remem- 
ber, my stay in England is a sacrifice to duty my going, 
my mother says, would break her heart. Can I, dare I, quit 
her, who for twenty years has watched over me, prayed for 
me, and taught me, not less by precept than example, to know 
the duties of my station, and to fulfil them to the best of my 
ability ? Dare I offend her or even if I dare, for your 
sake, disobey injunctions which her tenderness and love of 
me have laid upon me can I risk her happiness, perhaps 
her life, by persisting in my earnest wish to accompany you ? 

" I repeat my prayers, that I may be able to maintain the 
resolution to which I have come ; it is because I have made 
that resolution, that my father thinks our meeting again an 
event to be avoided. It sounds cruel ; but I know his heart, 
and am assured that his conduct is regulated by nothing but 
kindness. I think seeing you again, only to be separated, 
would break my heart. Now the blow has fallen, and you are 
lost to me ; I live upon the memory of days that are past, 
and will live, dearest Gilbert, on the hopes of those which are 
yet to come. 

" Write to me, if I may encourage that feeling ; bid me 
linger on through a life of seclusion, till your return ; tell 
me that you do not doubt or mistrust my affection, because I 
have adopted the resolution I now announce to you. Return 

return to me, and you shall find the heart that you have 
won as purely and entirely your own as it is at this minute. 
My poor head aches, and my eyes are sore with crying. If 
I were to write volumes, I could not say more only be con- 
vinced of my truth my sincerity my love. 

" Yours, ever yours, 

" HARRIET. 

E E 3 

422 GILBERT GtJRNEY. 

" Write before you sail, and send me some trifling remem- 
brance the plainer and simpler, the better ; that which I 
have inclosed, you will perhaps sometimes look at ; and do 
not fail to let us hear of you the moment you arrive. My 
father, mother all all of us, unite in prayers and good 
wishes. God bless you ! " 

I had heard of the disinterestedness of women of their 
self-devotion, their self-denial, and their total disregard of 
self ; but living, as I did, not amongst the best, and having 
unfortunately heard strange histories of the worst, I was not 
prepared for this. I will not attempt to describe what I felt, 
and I suppose I need not say what I did : I wrote to her, 
and pledged myself to her eternally, thanking her a thousand 
times for her generous and affectionate conduct, and im- 
ploring her, for my sake, to calm her feelings, and look for- 
ward with faith and confidence, until, by the blessing of Pro- 
vidence, I should return and claim her hand, when I might 
be more worthy of such a treasure, and when the unqualified 
approbation and sanction of her parents would render our 
union truly happy. 

All this I said but it was half hypocrisy if that may 
be called hypocrisy which is merely a disguise of one's real 
sentiments with the best of motives. The dear girl had made 
a sacrifice, which it was not likely I should undervalue : I 
felt that I ought to reciprocate her noble feelings. If I had 
obeyed the impulse of my heart, I should have followed her 
to her retreat, and have implored her to abandon every thing 
for me ; and it Avas evident, by her own mistrust of herself, 
and her earnest appeal to Heaven for support in her good in- 
tentions, that such an expedition would have turned the scale 
in my favour j but reason, and honour, and justice, combined 
to point out to me the recklessness of such a course. To re- 
pay a tribute of self-devotion, by the exhibition of so much 
selfishness as would induce the obedient child to violate her 
filial duty ; to estrange her from the home and hearts of her 
affectionate parents ; tc keep them in a state of perpetual 
dread and apprehension of the fatal consequences of her resi- 
dence in India, and perhaps expose the dear object of my de- 
votion to the reality of the dangers they anticipated ; no 
the struggle was great : but I triumphed. My heart was 

GILBERT GURNEY. 423 

bursting with grief and anxiety, but I sealed and despatched 
my grateful reply, and my apparently sincere entreaties for her 
to be calm and patient, and live on hope, at the very moment 
that her compliance with my expressed wishes would doom me 
to years of unhappiness, perhaps to eternal misery. 

I sent her the pledge she kindly asked that which she 
enclosed to me has never left my bosom from the day it first 
reached my hand. 

Lucky, indeed, was it that time pressed that every thing 
connected with my voyage and departure was to be done in a 
hurry : all was action not a moment was left for reflection 
in two days the Ramchoondra was to be at St. Helen's, if 
the wind permitted. The convoy, as I have already said, 
were waiting for the East Indiamen ; and the commodore, 
with that ardent zeal and activity, so characteristic of the ser- 
vice of which he was an ornament, was one of a school not 
likely to bear delay with much complacency. It was therefore 
understood, that in twenty-four hours after the appearance of 
these vessels, every fore topsail in the fleet would be shaken 
out, and in less than twelve hours we should all be scudding 
before a delightful easterly wind conceive an easterly wind 
being delightful which had been blowing for ten days. 

The whole of the forenoon after my arrival at Chittagong 
Lodge, on the preceding evening, was passed with my friend 
Mr. Nubley, who gave me charge of an infinity of account 
books, and papers of different sorts, all of which he methodi- 
cally arranged in a green box, which he very carefully locked. 
In the sequel he forgot to send the key with it, which, as 
some of the papers it contained were to be delivered to a 
merchant at Madeira, was rather a drawback to my success as 
an accurate and attentive agent. However, when the moment 
came for parting, I found the old gentleman all "kindness and 
friendship, and admitting an April sort of sensation at part- 
ing, of satisfaction at my decision, joy for the advantages 
that awaited me, and regret at losing me, all of which sen- 
timents I had occasion to find satisfactorily authenticated by 
his frequent audible meditations during the last few hours of 
my stay. 

Mrs. Nubley, who, during the thirty-six hours of my 
sojourn under their roof, had kept up a constant fire of jokes, 
after her fashion, touching the separation of lovers, and my 
E E 4 

424 GILBERT GURNET. 

cruelty, and all that sort of nonsense, which had nearly driven 
me mad, shook hands with me affectionately, and, I thought, 
put out her very thin white lips in a recipient position for a 
farewell salute. Whether it was that I did not take the 
hint, or that she was still harping on Harriet, I do not know ; 
but the very last words I heard her exclaim, as I released my 
hand from hers, were " Lauk, Gilbert, you are such a man ! 
he, he, he, he ! " 

I had ordered the postchaise which was to convey me to 
Portsmouth, to wait at the inn till I came, and thither my 
portable luggage was conveyed. It may be easily guessed 
why I did this ; at least I think so. In my walk into the 
village, I should pass the parsonage : was it likely I should 
go perhaps, for ever from the scene of my almost un- 
conscious happiness, without now that its purity and bright- 
ness had burst upon me visiting it once more ? 

I stopped I entered the house which I had heard ringing 
with innocent mirth, and honest cheerfulness. All was still : 
the faithful Martha, who opened the door, in the absence of 
the rest of the establishment, looked at me, and without a word 
from me led the way to the dear breakfast-room where I last 
had seen my Harriet. She looked at my eyes perhaps she 
saw tears standing in them what then ! I am not ashamed 
of them they fell ; and I threw myself into the chair in 
which I had last seen my beloved Harriet, and buried my 
face in my hands when I raised my head I was alone. 

That Martha, old and humble as she was, must, at some 
time of her life, have felt deeply, to have sympathised so rea- 
dily, was quite clear. 

Next to seeing the dear object of my love, a love most 
serious and touching of all loves, because founded upon esteem 
and friendship, ripened into devotion by the merits and quali- 
ties of the beloved that of again beholding around me the 
books in which we had read together the harp near which 
I used to sit and hear her play the desk still covered by the 
song which I had selected for her to sing the thousand little 
accessories all around me, was most painfully interesting. I 
began to repent that I had again ventured into the paradise 
from which I had been driven ; yet I believe it did me good 
my feelings had their way. 

On the wall of the drawing-room hung a portrait of Har- 

GILBERT GURNEY. 4-25 

riet it did not do her justice; there were the features, but 
not the expression, not the softness, the gentleness, through 
which her mind beamed forth yet it was a likeness. I had 
always abused it always turned from it with anger, that the 
"cold limner," as Colman has it, could have made so unim- 
passioned a copy of such an original. It would now be worth 
worlds to me. I felt I had a right to it I felt a jealousy 
lest any other man should even look on it, while I was away. 
I took it from the nail on which it hung I kissed it a hun- 
dred times I seemed to myself to have achieved something 
I rang the bell of the drawing-room, and the aged Martha 
stood before me. 

" Martha," said I, " when the family return, say I took 
this." I showed her the picture. 

" God send, sir," said she, " that you had taken the young 
lady herself, and all would have been well " and the poor 
creature sobbed aloud. 

Guineas were scarce with me in those days, but as I pressed 
the old woman's hand, I left one on its palm, and hiding my 
treasure in the bosom of my waistcoat, quitted the parsonage 
without another word ! 

I was again in Portsmouth drove to the George. The 
sight of Portsmouth, too, under such totally different circum- 
stances from those under which I had previously visited it, 
gave me a new pang. My first inquiry was, " Do you know 
if the Ramchoondra East Indiaman is arrived at St. Helen's, 
from the river ? " 

" Came to anchor about one o'clock to-day, sir," said the 
landlord ; " several passengers in the house, sir, who are going 
by her, the captain has been here, sir, and has ordered 
dinner for the party what name shall I say, sir ? he'll 
be too happy, sir." 

" Party dinner ! " thought I. " What ! are the vic- 
tims merry ! drunkenness before execution ! Gaiety 
too happy to see me ! " This was enough. I told the land- 
lord that I would come back left no name, and " knowing 
my Portsmouth," as the phrase goes, I procured a barrow- 
man to wheel down every thing but an anonymous sac de nuit, 
to the point, and there, according to Mr. Nubley's directions, 

426 GILBERT GDRNEY. 

procured a good stiff wherry to take me and my light luggage 
to the Honourable Company's ship Ramchoondra, which in- 
stead of being at St. Helen's, was comfortably bobbling herself 
about at Spithead, not more than a mile from the beach. 

Then it was that I felt myself, with my two trunks, my 
dressing-case, my writing-desk, two or three odd boxes, the 
green box without the key, some supplementary parcels, 
and what elderly ladies in country towns call " odd-come- 
shorts," really a-float. Then it was that I was satisfied, not 
only that I had made up my mind to a voyage to India, but 
to what had appeared to me heretofore an affair of almost equal 
peril and difficulty to climb up the side of a huge ship, 
with nothing to step upon but bits of sticks, fitter for cocks 
and hens to walk upon than men and women with nothing 
to hold on by, but a couple of bits of cord handed to you, 
swinging from one side to the other, the chance being either 
that you did not catch them at all, or if you did, the first 
effect they produced would be to swing you off the infernal 
little ledges by which it is expected you are to mount. 

I was just in the humour to care for nothing. It blew fresh, 
and just turning out by the battery, slap came a sea right over 
the bows of the boat, which made her shake, her gunwale 
being nearly under water to leeward, and I the recipient of 
more of the briny than I had ever seen detached from the 
main body, directly in my face, the little white horse having 
struck the bow, and made a ricochet over the heads of the 
boatmen into the stern-sheets. No matter ; up we went, and 
down we came, until at last we reached the huge caravansary 
in which I was to be transported. Then came such a hollow- 
ing " Boat alongside," " hand 'em a rope," such a 
washing and splashing between us and the ship ; such poking, 
and fending, and squabbling, and boat-hooking, which ended 
in "Now, sir," to me, I at the same time bobbing and 
stretching to catch two things like skipping-ropes, by the aid 
of which I was, as I anticipated, to help myself up two pair of 
no-stairs into a thing as big as a church, which was rolling 
away from me whenever I tried to get footing. 

However, it was done. I broke my shin in stepping over 
the gangway, and my hat blew off the moment I touched the 
quarter-deck. Had it been a king's ship, I should have thought 
Nature had taken the trouble to teach me manners. However, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 427 

after a hunt, in which several facetious and active personages 
joined, my hat was restored, and I was shown to the cuddy 
a very handsome slip of a room, with fawn-coloured panels 
and gold mouldings, from which opened upon the deck five 
windows, fitted with blinds ; and on the left of its entrance 
was my cabin, which, as I have already said, was a very nice, 
convenient, agreeable lodgment. I found my chests and trunks, 
which had been deposited there till I gave directions which to 
stow away below, with a weekly permission to my servant to 
have access to those which contained linen, &c., so that he 
might bring up the seven days' supply. 

I was quite agreeably disappointed with the neatness and 
nicety of every thing I saw, and the extraordinary attention 
and civility of all the officers who spoke to me, in their different 
degrees. I was asked whether I preferred a cot or a standing 
bed-place. 

. " Mine be a cot beside a hill," 

thought I ; and then came visions of Harriet and honeysuckles ; 
but the question puzzled me ; a cot I had heard of, but of 
a standing bed-place never; and the term confounded me 
altogether. I did not like to display my ignorance. Did they 
mean, by a itanding bed-place, a perpendicular bed ? was I 
to sleep standing ? They saw I did not comprehend ; so they 
carried me into a cabin, where they pointed out a canvass-bag 
hung up upon two hooks, which they told me was Miss Anne 
T wiggle's cot ; and then referred me to a thing something 
like a dinner-tray, made of deal, in the corner, which they in- 
formed me was " Miss Fanny Twiggle's standing bed-place." 

I considered for a minute or two before I would decide 
upon this really important matter ; and having made, even in 
smoothish water, several experiments as to getting into a cot, 
which is something like mounting a skittish horse, I resolved 
upon the standing bed-place, and was forthwith measured by 
the carpenter for a bed after the fashion of Miss Fanny Twig- 
gle's dinner-tray. 

During this discussion, nice as every thing seemed, I began 
to feel very odd. I was not conscious of any particular motion ; 
but when I was in the cuddy, where for the next five or six 
months of my life I was to dine every day, the sight of three 
lamps suspended over the table, all hanging out of the right 

428 GILBERT GITRXEY. 

line, coming back to it, and then dangling the other way with 
a gentle inclination, made me wish, unless there was an abso- 
lute necessity for remaining on board, to get on shore as soon 
as possible. Altogether I confess the prospect of the descent, 
via the skipping-ropes, made me linger on in hope that some- 
thing what I could not guess would happen, which cer- 
tainly never could, to diminish the relative distance between 
the deck of the ship and the boat. This, however, it was vain 
to expect ; and so away I came the side manned for me 
and down I partly slid, and partly tumbled, and was hurried 
aft by one of my crew ; affected to look pleased, took off my 
hat, made a bow, and came back to Portsmouth. 

One thing I had entirely made up my mind to, which was, 
not to dine with the captain and his passengers those I 
should see every day for the next half year ; and the very 
notion of society, labouring under feelings such as those 
which occupied and oppressed me, was worse than death. I 
had now seen the ship, I had been on the poop, I had given 
orders for fitting up my booby-hutch ; my luggage, except my 
bag and a few trifling articles vhich I could bring in the 
morning, were on board ; and I secretly resolved not to return 
to the George until late in the evening, so as to escape the din 
and clatter of a large party. 

1 had a project for passing two or three hours much more in 
accordance with the present state of my mind. The excellent, the 
kind, the hospitable friend, under whose roof I had passed so 
many happy hours, and whence I was journeying in the memor- 
able time of the Prince's boots, had been suddenly and unexpect- 
edly called from this sublunary world about a twelvemonth 
before the time of which I now speak. I felt that it would afford 
me a melancholy pleasure to visit those scenes of mirth in other 
days ; and, although his remains were buried some hundred 
miles thence, I could look upon the house, to me once a home 
of happiness, with a veneration and affection little inferior to 
those which the sight of his tomb itself would have awakened. 

Accordingly, I directed my boatmen to set me ashore on 
the Gosport side of the harbour they obeyed of course ; and 
paying them the amount of their demand for my trip, I pro- 
ceeded along the high street to the village in which stood the 
well-known mansion, determining on my return to get what- 
ever dinner I had, in Gosport, and cross the ferry, so as to 

GILBERT OURNEY. 4^9 

reach the George at a time when the captain and his passen- 
gers had retired, if not to rest, at least from table. 

I walked on, and every hedge and every tree reminded me 
of foregone pleasures, and I believe the very diversion of 
my thoughts, melancholy as the diversion was, from my poor, 
kind, suffering Harriet did me good. I cannot describe my 
feelings when I saw the house of my poor friend ; its door, 
always before open at my approach, was sternly closed, and a 
sharp watch-dog leaped to the top of the palings in front of it 
to bark at me. I loved dogs, and I loved this dog for his 
watchfulness of his master's property but I could not help 
feeling the change. I stood and looked at the windows as 
one would gaze on the features of an old acquaintance ; I 
walked round towards the sea, and saw the billiard room, 
which seemed exactly as it was when I saw it last but it had 
passed into other hands ; I felt glad that I had made the pil- 
grimage, and walked back towards Gosport. 

I had no appetite I wanted no dinner ; but dinner is 
something that divides a day, and certain it is that the six 
hours after dinner, be the dinner what it may, pass incredibly 
faster than the six hours before it. I therefore resolved to 
go through the forms ; and happening to return down the right 
hand side of the street, I turned into the India Arms, kept by 
one worthy Mrs. Mullholland, a name which, in cold 
weather, would, in a sea-port town, tempt an anchorite. I 
asked if I could have anything to eat I was answered, of 
course, in the affirmative. I directed it, whatever it might be, 
to be got ready in an hour, and continued my stroll. 

A thousand times in my life I have found this to happen : 
I have thought of a person of whom I have not thought re- 
cently, and 1 have seen that person curiously soon afterwards. 
As I was strolling in a rather retired part of the neighbour- 
hood of the town, pending the preparation of my meal, I fell 
to thinking of Daly, regretting that I had had no time to seek 
him out during my short stay in London, and resolving to 
write him a letter before I crossed to Portsmouth. The 
thought had scarcely fleeted through my brain, when, if ever 
I saw him in my life, I saw Daly pop his head out of a 
window on the first floor of a small house close by the bar- 
racks. The instant he caught my eye he hastily drew back, 
but, in the following moment, he re-appeared, and, pointing 

430 GILBERT GURNEY. 

downwards with his finger to the house-door, shut the window 
and again vanished. 

I thought it was a vision however, I stopped at the door, 
and, as soon as he could reach it, Daly himself opened it. 

"Come in come in," said he, "make haste come in." 

I obeyed and followed him up stairs into a small but 
neatly furnished drawing-room. 

<f What the deuce brings you here ? " said he to me. 

" I echo the question," said I. 

" Are you staying in the neighbourhood ? " inquired Daly. 

" Yes/' sighed I, " for one night ; to-morrow I embark for 
India." 

And then commenced my narrative ; which, as lovers love 
to talk of themselves, and that pretty lengthily too, I presume 
occupied some considerable space of time. It then became my 
turn to inquire. 

" I," said Daly, " am regularly done the dividend we 
expected in Blinkinsop's business is nil, and all I had of my 
own is gone. Emma has returned to her mother, who is living 
with her major in some part of Ireland ; and I am going out 
with an appointment under Government, if I can escape the 
devils of fellows who are after me." 

" I hope it is a good office you have got," said I. 

" Tolerable," said Daly, " they have given me the deputy- 
secretaryship at Sierra Leone." 

" Oh ! " said I. 

" I know what you mean," said Daly, " but what could I 
do ? it is a fine settlement for patronage; and if men suc- 
ceed to death-vacancies, as they do in the army, I have a good 
chance. It is a sort of Tontine colony all for the benefit 
of survivors." 

" I am sure I sincerely wish you may have your health, ' 
said I ; " but are you really so hard up ? " 

" Hard up," said Daly ; " why, sir, if I could not have 
raised a few guineas, I could not have got out. I borrowed 
three hundred pounds of an accommodating friend about three 
weeks ago, secured upon my salary but when I came to 
have the money, I was forced to take seventy pounds in cash, 
pay sixty pounds interest, and receive the balance in paving- 
stones and blankets." 

" You are joking," said I. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 431 

" Joking ! no," said Daly, " those days are over ; and so 
anxious was my friend to conclude the bargain, and deliver 
the goods, that when I came home the next evening, I found 
both my rooms stuffed from carpet to ceiling with the Wit- 
neys, and a pile of the paving-stones in front of my lodgings, 
looking like a full-sized model of one of the pyramids. I was 
threatened with prosecution by the surveyor of pavements 
menaced with an action by my landlord for overloading his 
floors, and so, egad, I was obliged to give another accommo- 
dating friend twenty pounds out of my seventy, to take my 
bargain off my hands." 

" But, my dear friend," said I, " if you had insured your 
life." 

" I tried that, Gilbert," said Daly, " but I am going to 
Sierra Leone." 

And he said this with a mingled grief and drollery which 
gave me pain to hear. I turned the conversation, by begging 
him to come and dine with me at the India Arms. 

" Me !" said Daly, " I dare not stir out. I am watched 
dodged hunted ; and my only chance is getting on board 
to-night, after dark, in the disguise of a sailor. The ven- 
geance of my few creditors is excited because they believe that 
T was a party to the rascality of Blinkinsop ; while my wife, 
as you saw, on the other hand, attributes to our marriage the 
explosion of his affairs so I am in a nice mess. And now, 
dear Gurney, do not think me inhospitable or unkind, or un- 
mindful of other days; but and I assure you I would have 
seen nobody on earth but yourself leave me; you will be 
watched, and I shall be traced. My only chance is escape ; 
and no matter what anything better than staying here. 
You may depend upon it (and perhaps these are the last words 
we shall ever exchange), what has happened to me is justice. 
I say no more make yourself happy you have been saved 
from the embarrassments and entanglements into which I have 
fallen ; and, as to my conduct, I believe the sentence upon me 
by a just judge would be very much like that of the coroner's 
jury upon the old woman, who stood still to be run over on a 
race-ground ' It serves me right.' God bless you and if 
we ever meet again, may it be in happier times to both of us." 

I saw that my presence kept him in a state of nervous agi- 
tation, and of course did not hesitate to comply with his 

432 GILBERT GUHNEY. 

wishes, and withdraw. I cordially shook hands with him, 
and we parted ; and I walked down to mine inn, comparing 
in my mind the relative qualities of Emma Haines and 
Harriet Wells. 

I confess my spirits had not acquired any great elevation in 
consequence of this interview. I had seen a fellow of infinite 
jest and talent doomed to certain death upon the pestiferous 
shores of a colony founded in fallacy, and sustained by hypo- 
crisy, by deceit and misrepresentation. I had seen him re- 
duced to positive distress, duped and deluded by appearances, 
of which too I might and should myself have been the victim, 
if he had not, by conduct, which I did not stop to examine 
nor he attempt to justify, shifted the miseries from my shoul- 
ders on to his own. 

When I reached the India Arms, the first exclamation I 
heard from a young damsel (Miss Mullholland, I presume,) 
was "Here is the gentleman" the echo of which, like that 
of Killarney, being, " Well ! his mackarel's boiled to pieces " 
both of which speeches induced me to believe that I had 
considerably over-stayed my time, and kept the dinner waiting 
an offence to a cook, of whatever degree he or she may be, 
utterly unpardonable, and only to be equalled by that which 
the king of all kitchen-men took at the conduct of a noble 
marquess, who, when lord-lieutenant of Ireland, ventured, at 
his own dinner-table, before company, to put salt into a soup 
which the artiste had made. 

The frown of the fair handmaiden was not rigid, and my 
little meal was served for here there was no coffee-room 
in the bay-windowed drawing-room, which, from its size, 
the darkness of the weather, and the wetting I had got in the 
boat, appeared even at that time of year chilly. I ventured 
to ask if I could have a fire lighted. Pinafore stared, and 
the waiter was called into council ; it was however permitted, 
and although I heard myself designated as one of those " fire 
Indians" who never can be kept warm, I did not care for the 
obloquy, but felt comforted by the blaze. 

.1 dined I drank some wine but it was all mere matter 
of course my mind was full of thoughts, reflections, and 
contemplations confused and wild in short, I believe I 
was half-crazy but in the midst of this madness, the last 
scene I had witnessed had made a strong impression upon me, 

GILBERT GURNEY. 4"3 

and I felt that I had been remiss in not offering some assist- 
ance to poor Daly, which even short as I was of cash, I 
might have afforded. I therefore resolved upon revisiting 
him now that it was dusk, in order to ascertain whether a 
few guineas, if he would do me the favour to borrow them, 
might be serviceable. I rang the bell, and paid my bill 
but knowing that the orgies at Portsmouth were not likely to 
terminate for two or three hours, desired the waiter to keep up 
my fire, as I should return shortly and take tea or which I 
considered much more probable, some other refreshment 

I went to the house where I had seen Daly, but he was 
gone I questioned the woman of the house strictly, but 
she assured me he had taken his departure for the ship; 
adding, that as she had seen me with him that afternoon, she 
would not say so if it were not true thus affording me a 
proof that she was a party to the necessity of his concealment 
from strangers. However, I had done for the best, and since 
going had been his object, I rejoiced that he was gone. 

. It had now set in to rain, and I began to doubt what I 
should do : however, during my cogitation, the rain fell so 
much faster that I was glad to return to the inn, where I 
intended to remain until the weather cleared before I ferried 
back, and accordingly re-entered the house, and ran up stairs 
to the room, which I considered my own domain, when lo ! 
and behold, I found installed in my armed chair, by the side 
of the fire, which / had ordered to be kept up, a strange 
gentleman, coolly and quietly reading the newspaper, by the 
light of my candles I thought every thing in that apartment 
was, at least for the time, mine. 

When I opened the door he looked up and I drew back 
on the point of flying into a desperate passion with the 
servants, for permitting such an intrusion upon the sanctity 
of my territory ; but I was instantly discovered by the gen- 
tleman himself, who, rising with some difficulty from his 
chair, said 

" I beg you a thousand pardons, sir : I am an intruder 
here, but I trust you will forgive me I am a sad invalid 
I have just landed from a ship at Spithead. I felt very chilly 
and unwell ; and this being the only room with a tire in it, 
the landlady ventured to show me into it it is my fault, 
sir I hope you will excuse me I am going on immedi- 

F F 

434 GILBERT GURNEY. 

ately to Southampton on my way to Bath, and will not intrude 
upon your kindness for any length of time." 

This gentlemanly explanation, delivered in a tone of par- 
ticular sweetness, and with a gentleness of manner unusually 
prepossessing, extinguished all my youthful ire ; and I replied, 
that I hoped he would remain as long as was agreeable to 
himself, and that I only rejoiced in having thought of having 
a fire, which he found so agreeable. 

" Why, sir," said the stranger, " I have been now four 
months on board ship and the calm and quiet of this room, 
and the ease of this chair, are to me something I can scarcely 
describe to you. I have suffered much and I thought I 
should be frozen, for I am chill'd and wet through." 

" Not a word, sir," said I. " Had you not better take 
something warm ? " for I saw he looked wretchedly ill. 

" No, sir," replied the stranger, " what you take to be 
bodily illness in me, is in a great degree to be attributed to 
mental ills. And," said he, a faint smile playing over his 
melancholy countenance, " it is hard 

' To minister to a mind diseased.' 

I have suffered seriously, sir I have lost a fond and 
affectionate wife on the passage home ; and if any thing can 
aggravate such a misfortune, it is perhaps the circumstances 
under which my deprivation occurred where the absence of 
even the most indifferent individual is so marked where 
the vacant place which that individual filled, daily and hourly 
recals the calamity to mind and where the loss of a beloved 
partner and friend is by every common-place event kept fixed 
in the mind and memory. It has been a great trial to me, 
sir, as you may think, indeed, by my speaking of my sorrows 
to a stranger." 

" To nobody, sir," said I, " could you speak whose mind 
is more prepared to sympathise with you than mine." 

" Ah ! sir," continued the stranger, " I return to my 
country with blighted hopes and a shattered constitution ; I 
am now on a pilgrimage to the poor dear children, who, se- 
parated from their mother when almost infants, will scarcely 
know how to appreciate their loss it is to see them, to bless 
them, and to tell them my sad story, that I have landed here 

GILBERT GURNEY. 435 

instead of at Portsmouth, in order to proceed towards Bath, 
in the neighbourhood of which place they are living ; and I 
propose only to wait until my servant brings on shore such 
luggage as I may want for the journey. However, sir, I ask 
your pardon for pressing my affairs upon you : I felt some 
apology was necessary for my intrusion. I have been casting 
my eye over the newspaper : you have no idea how strange, 
to a man who can have heard no intelligence from Europe for 
nine or ten months, the events of the day he arrives appear 
those of whom we last heard in violent opposition to the 
government are here recorded as constant attendants at court 
and where honours descend, the occupation of the sons of 
judges, and of generals, and of admirals, who have succeeded, 
and bear the same titles, are vastly whimsical." 

I saw that my strange friend, who had prepossessed me in 
his favour very much, was anxious to appear in better spirits 
than he really was ; and, as I thought it better for him to 
encourage this disposition, I determined, if I could, to pick 
out a little information, as to whence he came, and, in fact, 
what he was. 

" I see," continued he, " but little alteration in this place, 
or, as far as external appearance goes, in Portsmouth. Walled 
towns are necessarily restrained from enlargement ; and, al- 
though alterations in detail may take place in the streets, the 
limits are set the boundaries marked so that, to the eye, 
from the sea, one cannot expect much change." 

From this time the gentleman conversed freely upon ge- 
neral topics. He seemed unwilling to speak of his own 
affairs ; and whenever any thing occurred which led that way, 
he appeared to me to avoid any farther observation with a 
kind of shudder at the recollection of his domestic mis- 
fortunes. 

I inquired whether my having something warm " would 
be disagreeable to him ; on the contrary, at my suggestion, he 
agreed to have a glass of hot negus an act which looked 
sociable, but one, however, which he did not perform without 
expressing much anxiety about his servant and his luggage, 
and an apprehension that he should not get to Southampton 
until very late. 

As for my being on the eve of embarkation for India, he 
had not the slightest idea of it. The people at the inn of 
F F 2 

436 GILBERT GURNEY. 

course considered me only a casual visiter at Gosport ; indeed, 
when they hrought me my glass of punch, and my new friend 
his glass of negus, the waiter inquired whether I slept there, 
to which I replied that I slept at Portmouth. 

I was glad to perceive that the stranger appeared much 
refreshed by his beverage ; and I ventured to suggest to him, 
as it was now past nine o'clock, and his luggage not yet 
arrived, that he had better remain at Gosport until the morn- 
ing. This he objected to, but faintly, I thought, and inquired 
at what time I proposed to cross the water. I told him 
punch is a wonderful opener of hearts the fact, that I was 
to embark the next day for Calcutta, and that I was staying 
at Gosport, purposely to avoid the gaiety of a re-union of the 
passengers of the Ramchoondra. 

" Is that your ship ? " said the stranger ; IC I know her 
well a very fine ship she is and her captain a very 
excellent fellow. Are you going out as a civilian, sir, or 
in the army ? " 

" Neither, sir," said I ; " I am going out to join a mer- 
chant's house in Calcutta.'' 

" Indeed ! " said my companion ; " and may I ask " 

what he would have asked, I know not, for at that moment 
the waiter entered the room, and, in a stentorian voice, said, 
" Gentlemen, is either of your names Gurney ? " 

" Yes," said 1, jumping up, " mine is ;" convinced it was 
an application from poor Daly. 

" All your things is come ashore from the ship, sir," replied 
the man. 

*' My things come ashore!" exclaimed I, and turned to 
my companion, who astounded me by saying " There is 
some mistake, sir, in this ; my name is Gurney they are 
my things, and I am very glad they are come." 

" But, sir," said I, " my name is Gurney too you are 
coming home, I am going out : you want your things on 
shore, but I want mine on board." 

" Your name Gurney ? " said my companion, rising from 
his seat. 

" Yes," said I, and the blessed truth flashed upon my mind. 

"GILBERT !" exclaimed my companion. 

" CUTHBERT !" cried I ; and the next moment we were in 
each other's arms. 

GILBERT GUUNEV. 43? 

An attempt to describe my feelings at this moment would 
be useless. The whole thing appeared like a dream like an 
event impossible or, rather, like one of those covps de theatre, 
well calculated to make an effect upon an audience, but which 
never occur in real life. The effect it did produce upon one 
solitary spectator, the waiter, was certainly " prodigious." As 
to myself, the certainty of the fact, which, while my brother 
held me to his heart, could not be doubted, coupled with the 
extraordinary chain of circumstances by which the meeting 
had been brought about, perfectly bewildered me. If I had 
been desirous of cultivating an acquaintance with my fellow- 
passengers if I had not been desirous of visiting the scene 
of former pleasures in short, if I had returned from the 
ship, and dined at Portsmouth, Cuthbert would had been next 
day on his way to Bath, and I on mine to Bengal. What 
worked this happy change in my affairs ? the influence of 
my beloved Harriet. Sanctified to my recollections of that 
amiable girl, I could not permit the last day of my residence 
in the same land with her to be profaned by idle revelry, or 
the commencement of new associations; to her, and to 
solitude, I intended to devote the day and how was I 
repaid ! 

In one moment all my plans and purposes were changed. 
Cuthbert, as he had already told me, was a widower; he be- 
came so six weeks after his marriage. It seems, that his lady 
had been forewarned, some years before the death of her 
former husband, of the danger to which she exposed herself 
by remaining in India. She persisted, and when she ac- 
cepted Cuthbert as her second husband, her determination was, 
of course, to remain where she was. The medical men de- 
clared to Cuthbert the absolute necessity of her return to 
Europe ; and this once being established, he resolved coute 
qui coute, to accompany her. The removal, as far as she was 
concerned, was too long procrastinated, and she died on the 
passage, between the Cape and St. Helena. 

These were the facts. The feelings which they produced 
were, as I have already said, indescribable. The whole course 
of operation was changed. I entreated Cuthbert to remain 
where he was for the night ; I proposed crossing immediately 
to Portsmouth, imparting the events of the evening to the 
captain, and then returning to my long-lost brother ; but 

438 GILBERT GURNEY. 

Cuthbert, who, after the first burst of affection and surprise 
was over, felt very much exhausted, begged me not to think of 
coming back ; he would retire to rest, in a comfortable four- 
posted " standing bed-place," at the India Arms, and en- 
deavour to tranquillise himself for the exertion of the morrow ; 
that he would join me at Portsmouth in the morning, and 
that, instead of going, in the first instance, to the orphans, 
near Bath, we should together go to Nubley's, where, as I 
had, in the shortest possible space of time, informed him of 
every circumstance connected with my attachment and engage- 
ment to Harriet, we should remain, until we assembled 
together all parties interested ; " At which period," said 
Cuthbert, "you, my dear Gilbert, shall feel that I can be- 
have as a brother. I gave you up in India in despair the 
business is now disposed of; but, rely upon it, you shall lose 
nothing by not having taken the voyage." 

It may be easily imagined, that I remained with my newly 
restored nearest relation as long as I could ; but I found that 
he required repose, and, accordingly, having satisfied him 
upon as many points as possible, I quitted him, nearly wild 
with joy, and bounded down the streets of Gosport towards 
the landing-place, stamping my feet upon the pavement, and 
thinking as loudly as ever did Nubley himself. Is it to be 
wondered at? could I help it? I wonder I did not go 
mad. 

When- 1 had embarked, the ferry-boat seemed to linger 
the man pulled, but not half so well as usual. I leant for- 
ward, and pushed forward, as if I fancied the ardour of im- 
patient anxiety would propel the little bark. At last, we 
reached the Hard, and away I scampered, rather than ran, 
through the well-known gates, into High Street, and, in less 
than ten minutes, found myself at the George. The Ram- 
choondra party had just finished their tea, and the captain 
was going on board. Poor devils ! thought I what pitch- 
ing and bobbing out to Spithead in this dark night, after a 
merry day's dinner on shore. 

" Why, Mr. Gurney," said the captain, as I came up to 
him, " I expected you to dine with me ; all my passengers, 
except yourself and one other, have done me that pleasure. 
All that sail in the same boat ought to know each other 
ashore." 

GILBERT GURNEY. 439 

" Yes/' said I, holding my breath, and endeavouring to 
show the greatest composure f< but but I I am 
ndt going to sail in the same boat with them." 

" What, sir ! " exclaimed the captain " all your things 
are on board. I'm off to-morrow at noon orders just 
come." 

" So is my brother Cuthbert," said I, " and I have no 
need of making the voyage, whatever forfeit is to be paid." 

" Forfeit ! " said the free-hearted schipper ; " there shall be 
no forfeit. If Mr. Cuthbert Gurney is arrived, I shall be too 
happy to see-him before I start ; and, as I do not think you 
ever much relished the trip, Mr. Gilbert, however sorry I am 
to lose your company, I am heartily glad you are reprieved." 

" Thank you," said I, " and assure yourself, if any thing 
could have moderated the evil which I considered the voyage 
to be, it would have been sailing with you." 

" Well, but," said the captain, " what shall we do about 
your kit ? " 

This bit of solicitude, not being a dancing-master, I did not 
quite comprehend. He saw I did not. 
" Your traps, I mean ? " said he. 

This, not being in the rat-taking line, I was equally at a 
loss to understand. 

" Your sea stock, and chests, and all that ? " continued my 
excellent friend "they must be returned. You wo'n't want 
them the slop-sellers will take them back at a trifling 
loss." 

" Oh," said I, " never mind." 

" Ay, ay, Mr. Gurney," said the captain, " but we must 
mind : the man who keeps on never minding, however well 
that may be when grief is in the question, will never do bu- 
siness. They must be re-landed ; it shall be done the first 
thing in the morning ; there is a lighter coming off with my 
last live stock and vegetables, which shall bring them on shore 
for you," and I'll take care all shall be right. I am deuced 
sorry to lose you, and if I can possibly manage it, I will make 
a point of seeing your most worthy brother to-morrow, to 
whom present my best regards. And so, sir give me your 
hand and good night ; and all I can say is I say it from 
the bottom of my heart I wish you all health and happi- 
F F 4- 

440 GILBERT GURNEY. 

ness ashore, without the trouble of risking the one in search of 
the other." 

So departed my captain and what did I do ? I really 
do not recollect I was too happy to enjoy my happiness, and 
too anxious for its full developement, to endure the process of 
waiting till two or three o'clock the next day, when the de- 
nouement should arrive. I went to bed, but slept not; I 
heard the various passengers of the H. C. S. Ramchoondra 
paddling to their bed-rooms, the last night they were to sleep 
on shore ; and I thought to myself thought I, " This time to- 
morrow, when you are wobbling and squabbling in your float- 
ing seminary, I shall be domesticated with the long-lost 
brother of my heart, and, perhaps, with the affianced wife of 
my bosom." 

As soon as it was light I was up : there I saw trucks, and 
barrows, and bonnet-boxes, and hand-boxes, and hairy trunks, 
and red leather, trunks, and deal chests, containing all the 
trifling extras, which the ladies of the Ramchoondra party 
had recollected after every thing in the world had been packed 
up. And there were the third mate, and the second mate, and 
the ladies themselves, all going down High Street ; and then 
I saw three huge barrow-loads of my things coming up High 
Street, all brought ashore " per lighter," and presently found 
them piled up in the hall of the inn, with a note from the 
captain, saying that he did not think he could leave his ship 
again ; that the commodore had been " blazing away," and 
" sporting his bunting," at a deuce of a rate all of which 
was Hebrew to me then ; reiterating his good wishes for my 
welfare, and enclosing me the first of a set of bills I had drawn 
upon Cuthbert for my passage-money, with an order to the 
agent in Broad Street to give me up " second and third same 
tenour and date, unpaid." 

Sudden joy, like sudden sorrow, seems, at first, like a 
dream ; and as I looked at all these matters and proceedings, 
I almost feared that what had so recently and rapidly occurred 
was a vision. When, however, I saw my excellent brother 
himself walking up High Street, he also followed by barrow- 
loads of bags and baskets, and small trunks, and large trunks, 
and all sorts of odd-shaped cases, containing every variety of 
oriental luxury and comfort ; I began to feel convinced of the 
reality of my adventure. I hurried to meet him offered 

GILBERT GURNEY. 441 

him my arm and felt what it was to feel the pressure of the 
hand of the only living being upon earth who, by the ties of 
blood, could care for me. 

This was, perhaps, the happiest moment of my life of 
what frail tenure happiness is ! I was delighted to find 
Cuthbert apparently so much better in health, than he seemed 
to be the preceding evening, and, although he had taken some 
early breakfast at Gosport, he joined me in a later dejeuner at 
the George. He had, of course, no object in staying at Ports- 
mouth : I merely was trying to know what could be done with 
my " kit," or my " traps," or whatever the phrases were, and 
which I imagined might be transported to London by the 
waggon ; but, with regard to Cuthbert's " things," which 
seemed to me nearly to equal the whole of my stock for the 
voyage, I was considerably puzzled when I found that all the 
oil-skin covered baskets, and high boxes, and low boxes, and 
brown bags, and white bags, which were attended by two or 
three native servants, contained nothing in the world but what 
he wanted every day of his life. 

The servant who appeared to be absolutely essential to his 
existence looked to me like two yards of white muslin rolled 
up, with a yellow top he called him Rumagee then there 
was a fellow whom he called Buxoo, and two other miserable 
pieces of trash and tiffany, who filled the offices of Dobie and 
Dirgie; all of whom he really thought he could not do without. 
I did not like to presume upon so early a restoration to his 
acquaintance, but I ventured to suggest that one good English 
servant would do more, and do it better, in England, than all 
these frail pieces of rice-eating humanity ; and that as the 
Ramchoondra was still at anchor, and I had heard the captain 
most anxiously inquiring of the landlord if he knew of any 
native servants wanting to return, I suggested the dismissal, 
at one coup, of these poor helpless wretches, who, in this 
country, are only useful in making fun for the little boys in 
the streets through which they happen to pass. 

Having, by a parity of reasoning, persuaded my excellent 
brother to compress his luggage into one or two English 
trunks, discarding all the loose basket-work of the East, I, at 
about twelve o'clock (I found him entirely imbued with the 
proverbial indolence of long residence in India) got him 
into a comfortable travelling chaise not, indeed, quite so 

442 GILBERT GURNET. 

splendid as that in which, under other circumstances, I had 
left the Crown some years before and was waiting at the 
door to put the finishing-stroke to our departure, when who 
should I see rolling up to me as fast as he could, but my most 
excellent friend Tom Hull. I started with surprise ! but I 
was delighted to see him ; especially as I was certain I could 
tell him something he could not " happen to know." 

" My dear Gurney," said Hull, " I am glad to see you look- 
ing so well and so happy. Well I have been there come 
from the Isle of Wight sea mountains high give you my 
word never beheld such a scene in my life never mind saw 
the Ramchoondra yesterday afternoon went on board ex- 
tremely civil people show'd me your cabin splendid 
apartment ! eh ! you dog." 

" Splendid ! " said I ; " my dear fellow what, fifteen 
feet six, by six feet eleven ! " 

" Oh ! " said Hull, in a sort of grunt ; l< I don't mean as to 
size but comfort eh! saw your stock thousands of 
shirts never saw any thing like it eh ! Favell and Bous- 
field known 'em this thirty years capital mat on the floor 
eh ! chest of drawers pooh, pooh ! " 

"Yes," said I ; "but I am not going, my fine fellow." 
" Pooh ! pooh ! don't tell me ! " said Hull ; " you are 
going why all that preparation eh ? you can't do better 
' the ball at your foot ' eh ! none of your nonsense ! '' 

" Yes," said I ; " but nevertheless look ! here are all the 
things you saw in my cabin yesterday ah 1 re-landed and 
standing in the hall what do you say to that? " 

"That!" said Hull; "what I always said I said you 
never would go knew it told Daly so wo'n't suit him 
don't care for money what's money to you glad of it, eh ! 
but I must not stop hear the horn got a place on the 
box here comes the coach you know the coachman ! " 
" Not I ! " said I. 

" You do ! " said Hull ; " met him at my house at Mit- 
cham Tom Burr excellent fellow smashed obliged to 
take to that don't you remember Mrs. B. you and Daly 
and Tim eh, you dog? pooh, pooh ! don't tell me! / 
happen to know always go by him, sir good-by God 
bless you delighted to know you are not going." 

And so away hurried my worthy friend, and, tumbling up 

GILBERT QURNEY. 443 

on to the coach-box, whirr went the horn, and away went the 
coach. 

" Bless my soul," said Cuthbert, " what spirits he has, and 
how well he looks ! " 

' Who ? " said I. 

" Little Hull," said my brother. 

" What ! " said I, " do you happen to know Hull ? " 

" Know him ? " said Cuthbert ; I have not seen him now 
for eight and thirty years, but he isn't in the slightest degree 
altered during that period not in the least." 

"How strange that you should recollect him !" said I. 

" Recollect him ! " replied my brother ; " not at all strange. 
Why, he was the man who set up our father's schoolmaster in 
business, out of pure regard to his parents, with whom he 
was personally acquainted." 

Hull, thought I, is not only omniscient, but eternal ; 
but I could think no more of him, or any thing else discon- 
nected from self. Packed up at length in our little travelling 
carriage ; all the Indians dismissed, save one, who, at my 
suggestion, covered his native trumpery with a shaggy great- 
coat, which I had bought the day before, previous to my em- 
barkation from Gosport, away we rattled for Chittagong 
Lodge. Every moment I was with Cuthbert convinced me 
more and more of the excellence of his heart and the warmth 
of his fraternal feelings. I lost no time in vindicating myself 
from Mrs.jPillman's calumnies, and exerted myself to the ut- 
most in prepossessing him with the charms and attractions of 
Miss Wells ; and even went the length (which, to a brother 
under the circumstances, was no breach of confidence) of 
showing him the dear, kind, and generous letter which she 
had written to me. He appeared duly to appreciate her 
merits ; and having avowed himself anxious that I should 
speedily " marry and settle," so as to afford him a "family 
home " these were his own words I had little doubt that, 
when he saw the dear girl, he would be too happy to sanction, 
in the most unqualified manner, my union with the only being 
I now felt could make me happy. 

I will not occupy my pages with the account of our arrival 
at Chittagong Lodge, nor by a description of the warmth with 
which we were received by our excellent host and his fair lady. 
Neither will I throw a damp over the joy which I believe we 

444 GILBERT GURNEY. 

all felt at my brother's arrival, by any further allusion to the me- 
lancholy event which brought him to England alone. It was 
quite evident, by Mr. Nubley's drone and Mrs. Nubley's occa- 
sional titterings, that others besides ourselves were deeply in- 
terested in my return to the village ; and I mightily rejoiced 
when I was sitting, as composedly as I could sit, talking con- 
genial nonsense to the lady of the house, who was employed 
netting, or knitting, or knotting I do not know which a 
new worsted comforter for her better half, to hear Nubley, 
partly in conversation with Cuthbert, and partly in audible 
cogitation, corroborate every thing I had said to Harriet's ad- 
vantage. The reason for this was clear. Nubley always liked 
and admired Harriet ; but while I was poor, and she had 
nothing, he objected to the match. Now, it was quite an- 
other matter ; and when we parted for our respective bed- 
rooms I having first despatched a letter to Mr. Wells, 
announcing what had happened, and entreating him and his 
family to return forthwith I believe we were, bating my 
poor brother's grief for the loss of his wife, as happy a party 
as ever slept under the same roof. 

Between ourselves, I began to suspect that Cuthbert had 
discovered some of those traits of character in the lady of his 
choice to which Mrs. Nubley had before alluded ; because, 
although he certainly was labouring under dreadful depression 
when I first so fortunately encountered him at Gosport, his 
spirits, since he had found consolation in the affection and 
society of a brother, had wonderfully mended ; and, moreover, 
he changed his plan of proceeding post-haste to visit the two 
Miss Falwassers, and Master Adolphus Falwasser, at their 
respective schools ; and contented himself by writing letters to 
the mistress of one and the master of the other, informing 
them of the never-to-be-sufficiently-lamented death of their 
exemplary parent, and desiring that they might be put into 
the deepest possible mourning ; adding, in a postscript, that he 
would go to them the very first moment he was able his 
appearance as their father-in-law being the first intimation of 
the double event of the mother's second marriage and decease. 

Oh ! how I watched and waited during the morning of the 
next day for the welcome sound of Wells's voice who, too 
happy in securing the happiness of his child and myself, would 
come rolling himself into the hall of Chittagong Lodge, ready 

GILBERT GURNEY. 445 

to seize me by both hands, and congratulate me upon the 
happy and unexpected change in my affairs ; but no ten 
o'clock came no Wells half-past ten I could not bear 
the suspense. I walked down to the parsonage ; there was 
my poor, dear, kind old woman ; she had heard that I was 
come back heard of Cuthbert's arrival ; she shed tears 
when she saw me. I went into the drawing-room, and slily 
hung up Harriet's picture in the place whence I took it. I 
thought I should be called simpleton by Wells, or Mrs. Wells, 
or perhaps laughed at by that plump, little, bright- eyed thing, 
Bessy, who was quite as wise in her generation as she ought 
to be and then, as there was no news there, I walked back 
again. My suspense, however, did not last long, for in about 
half an hour a lout on horseback, who ought to have been with 
us at least two hours before, brought me a note from Mrs. 
Wells. These were its contents : 

" What has happened, God knows we have lost Harriet 
she is gone whither we know not her father is in 
pursuit of her. Under any other circumstances I should re- 
joice beyond measure in the news your letter conveys at all 
events, I shall be at the rectory this afternoon, where Mr. 
Wells is either to send or come to us. Harriet quitted this 
place, we suppose, in the middle of the night before last. I 
send you enclosed the note she left. 

" Yours, in the deepest distress, 

" A. WELLS." 

I was thunderstruck ! What did it mean was I again 
deceived was Harriet, too, faithless ? no, no, that could 
not be. With a trembling hand I opened the note which was 
enclosed and read what follows : 

" BELOVED PARENTS, I have struggled in vain I have 
prayed in vain I have fallen, and have only to implore 
your forgiveness I have taught Gilbert to believe I love 
him you have permitted, sanctioned the attachment; nay, 
you have yourselves pledged us to each other I cannot 
permit him to go from me to encounter dangers and diffi- 
culties, and shrink from them myself. I am weak I 
am bewildered; but if I am to act towards him as he is 
acting towards others, and do my duty at least that which 

446 GILBERT GURNET. 

is implied by our engagement I ought to risk all. Assure 
yourself, my beloved mother, that no harm will befall me. 
A thousand, thousand thanks and blessings for your kindness 
and affection. I write incoherently but I feel I must be the 
partner of his voyage. For all the difficulties and inconveni- 
ences I am prepared ; I know enough of woman's sympathy, 
to be assured, that these will be soothed and assuaged, if 
once they know my story in the ship in which we shall sail. 
Oh ! on my knees I implore your pardon, best of fathers, 
dearest of mothers. If you will forgive me, God will, for I 
am actuated only by a sense of duty. Do not, do not follow 
me. I take Frances with me : she will know how to manage 
our little journey. Owing to your kindness, I have money 
sufficient for all expenses. Once more, farewell ! and one 
more prayer for forgiveness. If you should follow me, I 
hope, before you can reach me, to be on the wide, wide sea, 
that I once so much dreaded. Kiss my dear sisters for me, 
and do not blame me, at least to them. 

" Ever, ever yours, 

" HARRIET." 

This nearly drove me mad ; but in the midst of the excite- 
ment, may I honestly aver, it gave me the sincerest pleasure. 
I knew she must be safe : the year eighteen hundred and 
eleven was not the age of romance ; nor were the roads from 
Lymington to Portsmouth infested with wolves or robbers. 
And if any thing could seal the bond of union between us, it 
was the result of the struggle of a pious, well-regulated mind, 
with a passion founded upon friendship and esteem, sanctioned 
by parental authority. Here was no irregularity of feeling, 
no wildness of thought, no wantonness of imagination : she 
felt herself pledged and she loved. From a miserable 
wretch, there never was so happy a dog as I. 

Differently, however, did circumstances turn out. As soon 
as possible after Wells discovered the flight of his daughter, 
and long before Mrs. Wells could write to me, he pursued her 
to Portsmouth. He could hear no tidings of her, as, indeed, 
it would have been strange if he could ; but he proceeded at 
once to the Point, where he inquired if the ship Ramchoondra 
had sailed. " Yes," was the answer ; "she is gone, sir, with 
the rest on 'em, at last." 

GILBERT GUBNEY. 447 

" Then/' said Wells, " all is over ; my girl is lost to me." 

" What, sir, said another man, who was standing by, " did 
you want to send any thing by her ? " 

" No," said Wells, " not I." 

" Well," said the man, " it's droll enough that ship 
seems to have something queer about her. Do you recollect 
that young lady as was down here before it was light asking 
after her ? " 

" Young lady ? " said Wells. " What do you mean by a 
young lady ?" 

" Why, what do I mean ? " replied the fellow, who did not 
very much approve the sharp tone of the question, " I mean a 
very nice young lady, with another very pretty girl, which, as 
I takes it, was her maid ; and she corned down and asked for 
the Ramchoondra." 

" And did she reach it ? " said Wells. 

" Reach it !" said the man, lt you might as well have tried 
to scratch the moon's face with a toasting-fork Lord love 
ye ; she was hull down afore five o'clock." 

" Do you happen to know where that young lady is ?" said 
Wells. 

" I can't say as how I does," replied the man. 

" I think," said another, " as how she went to the Post- 
esses" (subaudi blue). 

" Perhaps then she is still safe ! " said Wells. 

" Oh ! no doubt of that, sir," said the oldest of the boat- 
men, "it's a wery respectable house." 

Conceive the state of the anxious father, shivering with 
cold and anguish his fair, delicate child, too tender to 
look at the moon with me in a flower-garden well shaded 
with laurels, to have been exposed to the pitiless pelting of a 
night storm, and afterward driven to the shelter of the Blue 
Posts at Portsmouth. 

No matter such was the truth. Frances, the maid 
the monitor the companion of the flight, and not impro- 
bably the furnisher of great part of the means, had recom- 
mended repose to her mistress. With her, who loved her, 
and had lived with her from a child, she was secure : but the 
agitation was great; and when later in the morning her 
father, who had not disturbed the rest which he found, by 

448 GILBERT GL'RNEY. 

the description of her person and companion, she was taking, 
at the inn in question, it increased tenfold. 

Judge, then, what it was, when, restored to the arms of 
her fond father, and returned to her paternal roof, the truth 
was gradually imparted to her that although the ship had 
sailed, all that she treasured was yet on shore, and near her 
that every thing was smooth and settle'd and that happiness, 
unclouded and unmitigated, awaited her. The effect was 
tremendous : the announcement, carefully and gradually 
made, burst upon her like a thunderbolt. I ought not to 
write this, because I was the cause and object ; but it is true. 
A revulsion took place in her whole constitution ; and that 
delicacy of temperament which had irrevocably decided her 
mother against her voyage to India exhibited itself in a pro- 
stration the most tremendous and appalling. 

My state of mind may easily be conceived. There she was 
at the rectory, conscious of my being close at hand, the me- 
dical men strictly prohibiting an interview. She sank and 
sank and many were the days in which I stole to the door 
of her room, and sat still upon the stairs to catch the sound 
of her voice even a moan, or a sigh, was music to my ears 
until my heart utterly failed me ; the doctors gave me no 
hope and yet I could not despair : I still watched and still 
prayed and GOD was good she recovered, and WE WERE 

MARRIED. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 449 

NOTE. 

THE reader having now been put in possession of Mr. Gurney's 
report of Mr. Firkins's grievances, as detailed by that worthy and 
never to be sufficiently lamented alderman (for, alas ! he was many 
years since gathered to his fathers) the editor of these memoirs, 
anxious to do justice to Mr. Firkins's feelings,, and to Mr. Gurney's 
accuracy in recording them, considers that he cannot do more for 
the establishment of the sincerity of one party, and the correctness 
of the other, than may be done by submitting a few extracts from 
an authentic work, published many years subsequent to the period to 
which Mr. Gurney refers, giving an account of the journey of Lord 
Mayor Venables to Oxford, written and published at the desire of 
his lordship, and his companions in that enterprise, by his lordship's 
chaplain. As the romance of real life is said to be infinitely more 
romantic than that of fiction, so the details of dignity, splendour, and 
magnificence, ably and carefully written by the rev. gentleman, by 
which the expedition of Alderman Venables was distinguished, very 
much transcend the description given by our respected acquaintance 
Firkins, to my much regretted friend Gurney. The extracts must 
be brief but I am convinced they will be highly satisfactory. 

The first quotation I shall make from the reverend author's book, 
is the description of the departure of the lord mayor from the Man- 
sion House. It is headed " Tuesday," and begins at page 11. 

*' On the morning of the 25th (July), the lord mayor, accompanied 
by the lady mayoress, and attended by the chaplain, left the Mansion 
House soon after eight o'clock. 

" The private state carriage " ( I ought to observe, the italics are 
mine) " had driven to the door at half-past seven >v (which, by the 
way, as an act of volition upon the part of the private state coach, 
was extremely attentive). " The coachman's countenance was reserved 
and thoughtful; indicating full consciousness of the test by which his 
equestrian skill would this day be tried, in having the undivided 
charge of four high spirited and stately horses, a circumstance somewhat 
unusual : for in the lord mayor's carriage, a postilion usually guides 
the first pair of horses," i. e. the postilion in the carriage guides 
the leaders, which are the farthest removed from it. 

"These fine animals," says the reverend author, "were in admir- 
able condition for the journey having been allowed a previous day 
of unbroken rest ; they were quite impatient of delay, and chafed 
and champed exceedingly, on the bits, by which their impetuosity was 
restrained." 

" The murmur of expectation, which had lasted for more than half 
an hour amongst the crowd who had gathered around the carriage, 
was at length hushed, by the opening of the hall door. The lord 
mayor hud been filling up this interval" (the door?) "with in- 

450 GILBERT GXJRNEY. 

structions to the femme de mfnage and other household officers who 
were to be left in residence, to attend with their wonted fidelity and 
diligence to their respective departments of service during his ab- 
sence, and now appeared at the door. His lordship was accompanied 
by the lady mayoress, and followed by the chaplain. 

" As soon as the female attendant of the lady mayoress had taken 
her seat, dressed with becoming neatness, at the side of the well-looking 
coachman, the carriage drove away ; not, however, with that violent 
and extreme rapidity which rather astounds than gratifies the be- 
holders ; but at that steady and majestic pace which is always an 
indication of REAL GREATKESS." P. 12. 

The reverend gentleman describes this majestic progress through 
London to Cranford Bridge ; a powder-mill at Hounslow is blown 
up on the way; but at Cranford Bridge, "just thirteen miles from 
London," the lord mayor staid only long enough to change horses 
" for his lordship intending to travel post from Cranford Bridge to 
Oxford, his own fine horses were, after a proper interval of rest, to 
return to town under the coachman's care." 

" These noble animals, however, seemed scarcely to need the rest 
which their master's" job " kindness now allotted them, for 
though they had drawn a somewhat heavy carriage a distance of 
nearly seventeen miles, yet they appeared as full of life as ever ; arching 
their stately necks, and dashing in all directions the white foam from 
their mouths, as if they were displeased that they were to go no 
further." P. 16. 

" Just as the carriage was about to drive away " (more volition), 
" Mr. Alderman Magnay, accompanied by his lady and daughter, 
arrived in a postchaise. After an interchange of salutations, the 
lady mayoress, observing that they must be somewhat crowded in 
the chaise, invited Miss Magnay to take the fourth seat, which had 
yet been vacant in the carriage ; as the day was beginning to be warm, 
this courteous offer of her ladyship was readily accepted. " 

Here is a perfect justification of Firkins's regrets at his fall the 
unhappy trio, jammed in the po chay, had been the year before in pre- 
cisely the same elevated position which their illustrious friends then 
occupied ; and if the courteous lady mayoress the year before that, 
had been screwed up with her husband and daughter in a po chay 
also, then Mrs. Magnay would have been the courteous lady 
mayoress, to have relieved the Venableses. I must, however, think 
tliat the reverend gentleman's reason for Miss Magnay's ready ac- 
ceptance of the courteous offer does her an injustice. By his account, 
she readily got out of the family jam, not because she duly appreci- 
ated the grace and favour of the lady mayoress, but because "the day 
was beginning to be warm." 

The journey to Oxford was all safely completed, and after seventy- 
six pages of matter, equally illustrative of Firkins's feelings, we come, 
at p. 77., to this description of the rapture and delight of the people 
of Oxfordshire, under the exciting circumstances of the lord mayor's 
return down the river towards London. 

GILBERT GURNEY. 451 

"The crowds of people men, women, and children who had 
accompanied the barge from Oxford, were continually succeeded by 
fresh re-inforcements from every town and village that is skirted by 
the river. Distant shouts and acclamations perpetually re-echoed 
from field to field, as the various rustic parties, with their fresh and 
blooming faces, were seen hurrying forth from their cottages and 
gardens; climbing trees, struggling through copses, and traversing 
thickets, to make their shortest way to the water side. Handfuls of 
halfpence were scattered to the children as they kept pace with the 
city barge, and Mr. Alderman Atkins, who assisted the lord mayor 
in the distribution, seemed to enter with more than common pleasure 
into the enjoyment of the little children. It was gratifying to see 
the absence of selfish feeling manifested by some of the elder boys, 
who, forgetful of themselves, collected for the younger girls." 
pp. 77, 78. 

The last bit for which I have room, is of the more convincing and 
powerfully descriptive cast, than any thing I have yet advanced in 
favour of my poor friend Gurney's estimation of Firkins's dismay at 
his fall. The scene is near Caversham, where crowds of "spectators, 
some on foot, some on horseback, and some in equipages of every 
kind," were collected to see the barges pass. 

" Among the equestrians," says the author, " two are deserving 
that their looks and equipments should be alluded to in more than 
general terms. The animals they bestrode were a couple of broken- 
down ponies, gaunt and rusty, who had possibly once seen better 
days. The men themselves were not unsuitable figures to such a 
pair of steeds. They rode with short stirrups, that brought their 
knees almost under cover of the shaggy manes that overspread the 
ewe necks of the poor creatures ; and carried their short thick sticks 
perpendicular in their hands. " 

This sounds like an account in one of the innumerable books of 
travels in the interior of Africa, rather than a description of a couple 
of natives of Berkshire, within five-and-thirty miles of Hyde Park 
Corner ; however, " so mightily pleased was the lord mayor with 
their uncouth and ludicrous appearance, that he hailed one of them, 
and asked him to be the bearer of a message to Reading, touching 
his lordship's carriage. The fellow seemed to feel as he never felt before. 
An honour was about to be conferred upon him alone, to be the avant 
courier of " the Lord Mayor of London," above and beyond all the 
other riders, drivers, and walkers, of whatever quality and degree, 
who had thronged in view of the civic party; and no sooner had 
his" lordship flung him a piece of money, and told him to ' make 
haste to the Bear Inn at Reading, and order the lord mayor's carriage 
to meet the barge at Caversham Bridge,' than the fellow instantly 
belaboured the starveling ribs of the poor animal that carried him 
with kicks and cudgel, mho in a moment dashed briskly forward, 
snuffling and snorting, across the fields. In the eagerness of his 
flight, the doughty messenger had much ado to keep his seat ; he 
sometimes slipped on one side of the saddle, and sometimes on the 



452 GILBERT GURJSKY. 

other, while the skirts of his unbuttoned coat fluttered far out be- 
hind him." pp. 81,82. 

All this evidence from the pen of a worthy divine, will, I am sure, 
convince the most sceptical reader of the fidelity with which my 
late friend repeated the regrets and lamentations of our friends in 
Budge Row, after their involuntary abdication. Every page of the 
account of that memorable journey and voyage teems with gem-like 
illustrations of a similar character; and I regret that my duty, as 
editor of the Gurney papers, does not permit me to draw more 
largely on its stores. 



THE END. 



LONDON : 

Printed by A. SPOTTISWOODE, 
New-Street-Square. 
