SBARBUTO.

CHAPTER I.

Julius Elstane was born the younger brother of a noble house, of so delicate a frame and sickly a constitution, that for the first years of his existence, it was almost daily despaired of. The hold that the infant seemed to have of life was so frail, that all who tended him wished it broken, to spare the object further pain, themselves a continuance of anxiety. But like the seed of the wall-flower, that of life in him germed and grew hardily in the barren and ungrateful crevice, in which nature had sown it. His visage, impressed with early pain and suf

M124958



fering, preserved its pallor, its look of premature decay ; the eye alone remained unblenched, unsunken, and shone with bright and powerful vigour from amongst the haggard features around. It spoke the principle of the being's life to be in spirit, not in body ; his actions, ways, and thoughts, his juvenile habits evinced the same—the languor of his frame was never spared by, or imparted to, a mind of wonderful activity.

Julius, like his elder brother,'and indeed hia whole family, was naturally a mild, warm, affectionate child ; but that most huge of all quacks and pretenders, the world, with its boasted physiognomical skill, thought fit to discover and prognosticate the contrary of the child from his features. The absence of bloom and fullness in his cheeks, that sickness had robbed poor Julius of, and written pain instead, were regarded by several sage gossips as indicative of crabbedness, of cunning, and finally of malice. Give a child an ill-name—might the proverb say. This conjectural character, kindly attributed to Julius, had nearly the effect of producing it. The parents heard, and believed, that there was some truth hi the opinion. They treated the child accordingly. It became their creed, that he was crabbed, ill-natured, malicious—they said so. The menials heard, believed so too, and their behaviour also evinced to the boy, that such were their sentiments. Cruelty soon imparted to Julius all the illnature and ill-humour, that those physiognomylearned fools of old women had declared him naturally fraught with. Master Julius had unfortunately the appearance of an imp, and his nurses supplied him, as far as in them Isy, with a suitable disposition



But as the younger Elstane grew out of the tutelage of these good gossips, he outgrew the malice they had communicated to him. Their opinion of his character however, as well as their having founded such upon his personal appearance, had made too great an impression on the child to be forgotten by the boy. He bore it in mind, and remarked how far the same cause operated against him as he advanced in years—how many sinister motives and wishes were laid to his charge, on the mere foundation of a visage paler than that of his fellows, and of a body somewhat, though but slightly, distorted.



These reflections instilled venom into his mind at times. It has been remarked of deformed persons, that they are either angels or devils; that they either make up their mind to all the superciliousness, the sarcasm, or slight, that can be consequent upon their physical inferiority, and so become superlatively amiable, the conquest over their temper in the one great point, communicating to it a general suavity on all inferior ones; or else it allows and nourishes the irritation caused by such unjust obloquy, and by dwelling upon it, causes the bile thus partially engendered to overflow the whole thought, thus tinging all with discontent and converting sensibility into spleen. In Julius as yet, however, in spite of the injustice with which he was judged and treated in childhood, this misanthropy had not made uninterrupted progress. It had been checked by a confiding loving nature, formed to depend upon the love and good-will of its fellows; he was reluctant to believe that the host of kindly, loving feelings that were springing in his breast, and were placed there by nature, could be either crushed, or, as far as they outlived the first warning of their fertility, should minister to his misfortune. „



As soon, however, as he entered a public school, he there had a foretaste of the world, and of its quickness to lay hold on any plea for depreciating fellow man. His slight defect of person, his sickly hue, were made use of there as ready taunts ; and ere he had been in this miniature society a month, he found himself at war with his companions, mocked by all, even those whom he could take vengeance upon, and deprived for the same reason of any friend, at least of an eligible one, who shunned to share in the obloquy with which Julius Elstane was treated. Here indeed Julius grew a daemon, and had he remained at that popular seminary for any time, tortured as he was in it, and neglected by his parents out of it, he would have been sent forth from its walls a finished fiend.



Fate delayed this consummation by taking the elder brother of Julius from the world, leaving the hitherto neglected youth heir to the title, fortune, and honours of his sire. He was then brought home, tended and attended with the utmost care, his frail and precious person not trusted beyond the precincts of his paternal mansion, at least of paternal care. It was a delightful change for Julius. His temper soured and fermenting in the forced solitude of a school, where he was taunted with unremediable, and to him scarce perceivable defects, was at once removed to the sight of kind or obsequious faces. The bad qualities once attri





buted to him, could no longer be thought to belong to the heir of Elstane; past hardships were succeeded by the enjoyment of comfort, quiet, and kindness.

The general impressions, however, made upon his mind by his brief and young experience was not altogether effaced. Although his sensibilities were no longer wounded, or his indignation raised against his fellows, still the consciousness that he was, from physical defects, not formed to lead, to shine among his cotemporaries, or even to keep pace with them, inspired him with alienation from their society. He remembered how he had been trodden into an inferior, and a suffering place, and his intellect was not of the order to rest contented with this. These reflections made young Elstane retiring, solitary, studious; they led him to abstract his speculations from the world, where appeared all to mortify, little to encourage him, and to turn them upon himself. Let one of us be ever so little vain, if we be



come retired and pensive in youth, ere experience has afforded other materials for thought than our own minds and passions offer, self must make the greater part of those meditations. We may commence to speculate concerning ourselves in a recurring and enquiring mood, but the mind soon sinks from such exertion into the most passive enjoyment of imagination. Self is the imagined object, the centre, the hero of the scene; and according to the powers of mind of the patient, for this is a veritable disease, he either devotes himself to the mere building of castles, the vulgar supposition of self in the common ways of eminence, or he else idealizes, founds his imagined eminence on peculiar character, peculiar powers and tone of mind, to reach or imitate which fearful model oft becomes the ruling passion of the future life.

In such thoughts, and such meditative tone of mind, Julius passed the years that elapsed between boyhood and youth. Old prognostica





lions respecting him were contradicted ; he lived, and promised long to do so in a slender frame of body, endued nevertheless with a wiry and enduring strength ; and his temper grew to be most placid and unruffled. Julius was exceedingly attached to his sister Julia. Shunning, as he did, all friends or acquaintances of his sex and age, he brought all the ardour, generally devoted to juvenile friendship, and added it to fraternal affection. He allowed her to make him the companion of all her games and amusements, whilst he led her in turn to partake of his studies, his pursuits, and his sentiments, already peculiar. Their only surviving parent was too much wedded to the world to attend to his children. They were abandoned to each other, shared each other's waking dreams, and laid plans for future life, without suspecting that the natural rise of other sentiments would soon place an insurmountable barrier to their pure and romantic projects. It would be impossible here to trace the de



sultory study, the wild train of thoughts into which the curious and capricious, but powerful mind of young Julius led him. But wheresoever that happened to be, whether in the most extravagant flights of fancy, or the more abstruse speculations of philosophy, the youth drew his sister with him. He exerted a command, he raised a spell over her; and to follow him in such pursuits, she forsook the thoughts of womanhood and of her sex. She did not exist for that gay world of love and hope, which young females begin so early to dream, and so late and so reluctantly begin to despair of. She was wrapped in her brother Julius, and in the mass of fancies which his powerful mind had raised around her. She became dead to aught but him; he to aught but to his meditative pursuits, and to the companion of them. And neither dreamed that a different species of happiness, another mode of existence, could succeed in their wishes to the present one.



For a long time this state of existence had been uninterrupted, until at length their parent thought it fit time that they should be introduced to society. Both, even Julia, heard the command with regret. " But it is a new field," said Julius, " where I have made few experiments, you none, Julia. We will enter it, if not for the purpose of amusement, at least for that of observation; and we will repay ourselves for the ennui we suffer in society, by analyzing the mean passions and trifling motives that form its essence." Julia agreed to the sage resolve, and certainly young lady never underwent the torture" of the toilet with such a philosophic prospect of the pleasures to be derived from society.





CHAPTER IT.

Some months elapsed. Julius had found serious food for his philosophy. He had beheld a face and form, lovely as that of his sister Julia, but with other eyes. This did not diminish his fraternal affection, he even confided to Julia the deep impressions made upon him by their cousin Adelaide. Julia experienced no feeling of jealousy in finding herself no longer the sole friend and object of her brother's solitude; she rather rejoiced in his new hopes and wishes; she sympathised with him, and looked forward with pleasure to a similar state of anxiety. The attachment of brother and sister was increased, and even the consciousness that another was, or was about to be dearer to each than either of them, knitted firmer and hallowed their friendship.



Adelaide de Renzi, the fair cousin who had fascinated the eyes of Julius, was his elder by a few years. She had scarcely ever seen, at least noticed, her young relative. She had been some little time mingling in the world, ere he was forced into it. It was strange that in the crowd of beauty, there presented for the first time to his view, he should have fixed his regards on her. So it was. Adelaide was beautfful, admired; not of that extreme loveliness which attracts crowds of suitors and admirers, but of that more refined and less vulgar kind, which, luckily for the herd of fops, fails to fascinate them, whilst one or two, or a little group of superior men, remain in mutual rivalry and thraldrom beneath the regard of a beauty, often perplexed to choose.

Such was Adelaide; so many and worthy her admirers. Poor Julius! were he cast in the mould of the Apollo, he could scarcely hope to realize the new dream that had of late superseded all others. Still he dared to hope, to gaze. Each opportunity would he lay hold on to press forward to the presence, the company of Adelaide; and each time, satisfied with a brief regard, would he hurry to retirement to imagine her beauty, and fancy the possibility of her being his, or else think aloud such meditations into the ears of his friend and sister. This was not the path to success, even if that path were open.



Julius Elstane, however, though retired, was no timid youth. He soon openly enrolled himself amongst the suitors of his lovely cousin, who with a free and disengaged heart, extended to him equally with others a gay countenance, expressive neither of tenderness nor cruelty. As a relation, he had more opportunities than had his rivals to follow up and forward his hopes. By them he had at first been little feared; his personal awkwardness was deemed by them an utter bar to his captivating so capricious and so sought a fair. His approaches were marked without solicitude, and his commencing hopes without envy. Ridicule, satire, and contemptuous remark, all those weapons of malice were spared him at first; and woman, who sees more oft with other's eyes than with her own, looked on Julius with a regard as favourable as upon his rivals of superior person or fashion.



In this interval, ere malice was awake, Julius advanced his suit with ardour. He haunted his cousin, charmed her ear with his romantic and out-o'-th'-world eloquence; and by the power of his mind and conversation, subdued her to a kind of admiration for him. He was a wizard, and hud cast a spell over her. Youth is ever ready to mistake every sentiment for love, which at all times partakes of admiration or of fondness. Adelaide thought she loved her cousin. Perhaps she avowed the sentiment; for the tongue of Julius was not one to leave a secret



of the kind unelicited, and so deceived him as well as herself. Julius reached the summit of bliss in his idea. " With Adelaide," cried he to Julia, " I shall be happy,—we shall be so."

The youth had touched the goal of his wishes, and were it any object other than a woman's heart, he had won it. But malice started up at the fatal moment, and no sooner did it become manifest on whom the regards of Adelaide fell favourably, than all the shafts of ridicule, calumny, and insidious hate were directed to blacken, to distort, and undeify the idol she had chosen. He was crooked, pale, unsociable—an atheist—so said malice, at a loss for a bugbear name to wind up the climax. Then he wanted fashion, worldly knowledge, and how would a girl look by the side of such a poring alchemist. In short, Adelaide was laughed out of her admiration and her love. Julius raged. His fury, his passion, exceeded that of common men in its extravagance. Adelaide was taught to see in it a further proof of Julius's want of manhood, sense, and ton. She spurned him, shuddered at his name, and in a few months became the wife of another.



Julius Elstane was too acute not to perceive whence came the causes of his disappointment. The sex he cursed, but broke off in the midst of his malediction, as he beheld his sorrowing sister sorrowing for him. But to hate one half of the human race did not satisfy his pleasure, and the malice of man, he was aware, had conspired to his misery, as much as the weakness of woman. With a presentiment of what the world would prove, he had not entered it with arrogance or audacious hope; he thought to pass in the crowd of its ranks, undegraded at least, since not allowed eminence. But even this was not granted him. The superiority of mind, of which he was confident, though he did not put it forward, was overlooked in the scale, and from some disadvantages of person, some peculiarities of temper, had been drawn a proof of intellectual distortion and general depravity. He hated mankind, therefore, and with reason. He determined to hate it. But for the present his further resolves were merely those of retirement, thought, perchance study, and above all, ambition, that prompted him to take the fittest vengeance of his depredators, by reaching a super-eminent station from whence he might look down upon and contemn them.



Julia formed the only exception to his general misanthropy. To her he transferred all that copious store of tenderness, which in its first flow had been rolled back upon his heart. To her he was alone attached; with her he alone associated, or spoke. Julia too had been rendered by participation in her brother's wild enthusiasm and extravagance of thought, equally unfit with himself for mingling with the world, at least for enjoying it. And then for reasons similar, although not so strong, she was flung upon his fondness and friendship, and devoted to them, almost as much as he was to her's.

Soon after the parent of Julius died. The youth succeeded to the titles and estates of Elstane, but did not however swerve from his resolution of retirement. Brother and sister still continued to reside together, engaged in peaceful and happy pursuits, Julius dreaming of ambition, but taking few active steps in her pursuit. The misanthropy, in which he had first turned his back upon the world, though not eradicated, had grown considerably softened in exclusion ; and, although it still tinctured his habitual turn of mind, it seldom intruded or interfered to disturb the happy tenor of his contemplations.



Thus passed some further time. The world meanwhile, that had repelled Julius from its circle, when he had sought to enter it, now made endeavours to penetrate into the retirement of Lord Elstane, and to drag him forth from it amongst them. He had spoken in the Lords with dignity and pith; several jeux d'esprit of the day were attributed to him; when met, a sarcasm too pointed not to be remembered and repeated failed not to salute his quondam acquaintance. His name rose; it was noised he was a man of wit, of talent, and as soon as the peculiarities of his mode of life were generally known, that same quack, the world, endowed him with genius, which he really possessed, but which the said world founded on the most silly and unaccountable part of his behaviour. He was whispered, paragraphed, pointed at, and amongst the fleeting topics of the season, his name was the only one that endured without wearying the public from year to year.



Lord Elstane himself was equally amazed and amused at thus finding himself so unexpectedly the great object of interest with a body that had so lately slighted and contemned him. He had reason to hate his fellow men, and hated them. He wished to have as good grounds for despising them, and this, their caprice, afforded him the grounds he sought. He did despise them heartily. And the more they worshipped, with the more violent spurn did he tread upon the bowed heads of his worshippers. Since so many fools were resolved to continue in chace of him, he led them by a thousand capricious ways and windings, to their own breathlessness and discomfiture, and then turned to mock the zeal that had led them on. He affected a thousand extravagancies, to observe how far the public might be led by the nose to admire folly; but in this course he was obliged to halt, for even to the tricks of the most mischievous and silly apishness, his audience, for such society had become, would have continued to clap its paws together in admiration.



The world of fashion, however, like all other kinds and sects of worshippers, will at last, weary of the contempt and aversion of the worshipped. We know the old menace of the fanatics, conveyed in the prayer, that if they were not paid more attention, and taken better care of, they would look out for another and a more considerate deity. So was it with the London fashionists; being frowned at they would have borne, but to keep their ground under a continual shower of sarcasm and satire, and this moreover in return for their good wishes, was insupportable. And accordingly it was not long ere the paeans of the worshippers were exchanged for vows of vengeance and resentment. The same external professions of admiration floated on the surface of society, but in its secret, though shallow depths, the poison of calumny was circulated, from hidden lurking places the shaft was winged, which was to pierce and ulcerate the proud and contemptuous heart of Elstane.



He saw the approaching storm and mocked its force. Secure in the panoply of bestowing interest on nothing, on no one, he tacitly defied his enemies to hurt him. In blasting his first and only passion, slander had given him the talisman that privileged him from future suffering—he could no longer feel. Such was the bulwark he had thrown up before him. But alas ! man is as vain and as short sighted when he entrenches himself in impossibility, in apathy, or despair, as when he plumes himself in the buoyant wings of promise or of hope. Elstane's was an idle vaunt, a baseless security. Like Achilles, we may be all mailed against every probable or foreseen wound; the unindurated heel is sufficient to let in the shaft that brings torture and death.



Julia Elstane, although she had in a great degree shared the retired life of her brother, still mingled to a certain extent in a limited circle of friends and relatives. Lord Elstane urged her to this, and was pleased to see her enjoy those pleasures of society which are necessary to the support of woman's spirits, though man may buoy up his without such aid. He often awaited her return, and enjoyed that hilarity, that cheerfulness in her which society communicates to the generally retired. Of late however he began to observe that she went out less often, and that she returned with a gloomy, Vol. in. c



discontented aspect. Even of a drive, the same low spirits seemed to be the consequence. In vain he questioned her—endeavoured by all the arts of conversation to draw from her the cause of a melancholy that at length begun to grow alarming. She evaded all his enquiries. Could she have become attached, like him unfortunately, and could she pine from sickness of the heart on that account ? Nothing corroborated the supposition. Every circumstance, Julia herself contradicted it. Whatever were the causes, its effects on the spirits and the health of Julia were but too obvious. She sunk into decay gradually. The ill, the pain was mental; it came from even the limited circle of friends, to which she had restricted her acquaintance. " Society then is poisonous," said Elstane, " even its smallest portion most purified, most scrupulously selected: none except the reptiles that naturally compose it can live in it. To me it has been fraught with pain, to Julia with death."





The life of his sister was at length actually despaired of. Julius watched in sorrow by her couch, and looked a frequent question, although he had ceased to importune her respecting the cause of her malady. Mental it had been in its origin he was convinced; but the pestiferous evil that baffled his discovery or conjecture, had now communicated its poison too deeply to the bodily frame to hope for remedy or alleviation, even by the removal of its cause. Julia attributed her fate, of which as it approached she spoke with calmness and without regret, to that prevalent disease to which youth and bloom so often and so unexpectedly fall a prey. But the painful and bitter feelings of anguish, and even at times of angry horror that escaped her, argued a deeper cause.

Lord ElstaHe discovered this by mere chance. Whether it started to his mind unproduced by any occurrence, or whether he gleaned it from the remark or countenance of an acquaintance, it is now impossible to say. He rushed to the side of his sister's death-bed, he asked was it, so ? Had the unspeakable calumny been dropped like poison into her ear? It had. Julia died.



Pen cannot depict, nor mind imagine the state in which Lord Elstane remained after his sister's death. He was overwhelmed, petrified in a kind of stupid horror. The malicious world had dared to whisper that too great an intimacy existed between him and his sister. It was said at first perhaps in jest—heaven's, what a jest! But similar in general are the world's ban mots. His character too was other than the common models—his life guided by peculiar and unaccountable rules. He was retired, people called that mystery ; and, as pity is akin to love, mystery stands with respect to crime in an equal degree of affinity. No matter on what trifling bane founded. The villanous supposition was told and repeated. It reached the ears of Julia, and her only refutation was to die.



So worked the poison on the weaker frame. But on the stronger mind of Elstane it proved a maddening, not a subduing poison. To have so suffered, he, an unprovoking individual, from his fellow men, whom he had despised, 'tis certain, but had not thoroughly hated till now, was a grievance sufficient to drive the tamest spirit to frenzy. But Elstane curbed the wanderings of his senses, whilst he gave his passions rein. Their outward signs however, his temper, he repressed, and scarcely changed his habitual smile as he entered, after having performed the obsequies and remained secluded the time due to the memory of his sister, into the world for the purpose of tracing the calumny to its den, and taking vengeance of its diabolical propagators.

In this he worked secretly, not avowing his sentiment, or even his knowledge of a calumny, which he would not deign to refute. From month to month he failed not to trace it; as most of the links that conveyed it were females, the objects on which vengeance could be taken were few. These he marked; and under the semblance and in the way of fair quarrel, the unerring hand of Elstane, nerved by resolution and revenge, dispatched them one after another, with proper intervals between, to the place of final retribution.



The thus acquired character of a duellist did not enhance much the feelings of admiration professed for Lord Elstane in English society. He was equally feared and hated; and it seemed as if an incubus was taken from the thoughts and anxieties of many a circle when hia lordship bade, as he declared, a final adieu to England and its inhabitants.





CHAPTER III.

For some years no more was heard of Lord Elstane. He had got rid in parting at once of all English property and connections, and when he sailed for foreign shores, he left not one tie, one link between him and his country. Reports frequently reached our metropolitan journals, that " this singular and talented no" ble'' was now voyaging in the African Desert, now sojourning in the delightful recesses of Arabia: to Greece, to Asia, even to the North, Lord Elstane's ever erring steps were reported to have borne him. They may have been all true, or all false; an idle traveller in lack of other news, or Elstane himself for any purpose might have sent forth such reports.



Five years had rolled away; and Lord Elstane once more appeared amongst his countrymen, not however in England, but in the several circles and metropoles of Italy. His appearance was considerably changed, his former pallor and even delicate fairness of complexion had in that time been exchanged for a swarthy hue. The sun alone could not have so embrowned his face; to its southern ray must have been joined reckless exposure, voluntary hardship, a life of wayfaring and peril. The fine expression too, indicative of the continual but minor workings of a susceptible spirit, that used to mark his countenance and attract the eye to gaze upon and study it, was now obliterated, lost in a broader, bolder look of unmingled passion. Accustomed no doubt to the society alone of menials, or at best of an hired escort, his habitual language was command, his demeanour Asiatic, that which revolts equals, and





awes inferiors. And even the domestic arrangement of his household was on the same oriental scale of grandeur.

He had of old been "frugal, had been even accused of meanness in expenditure. Now his princely extravagance was a subject of amazement and admiration both with English and Italians. No doubt his English fortune in Italy was a princely revenue, especially increased as it had been by oaconomy not only during his years of travel, but through his previous life. In the principal towns of Italy, especially in the then more southern ones, he possessed palaces ; and a portion of his funds had been expended in the purchase of the principality of Monte Leone, to the baronial castle and dominions of which he was accustomed to retreat at intervals from the gay revel of the city.

•His aversion to his countrymen seemed to

have completely worn away. English crowded

his table, filled his assemblies, and nothing

could be more kind or courteous than his mantiers towards them, save that they were not more marked, nor did they display any preference. On the contrary, the Prince of Monte Leone, as Lord Elstane was called in Italy, spoke nothing but Italian, adapted himself altogether to the new country which he had chosen, and seemed to stretch forth a courteous reception to Englishmen, as if he were doing the honours of his country to foreigners. It is to be doubted, however, if his hospitality proved always conducive to the happiness of his quondam compatriots. In his princely residence and enter, tainments, play was a favorite and a general pastime, which although Elstane partook of little himself, he certainly encouraged it. And as play is not always to be enjoyed at public tables in Italy, the Palazzo Monte Leone was the resort of many a kill-time visitor, who betook himself thither to lose his money and ennui together. Some of those who thus suffered, and who had reason to look upon Lord Elstane as their evil genius, accused him of concealed misanthropy, at least of a concealed hatred against his countrymen, which led him to establish this, as well as other plans for their ruin; for although there was no proof or appearance that the Prince personally benefitted by the losses of the unwary English, and that in general if one Briton lost, another won, still in gambling although the unfortunate player is always ruined, the successful one only defers his evil day, and by his very success even lays the foundation of future imprudence and destruction.





Another and a similar charge brought against the Prince of Monte Leone by the same splenetic enemies, was, that not only he prepared facilities for the pecuniary ruin of men, but that the society of his palace proved as productive of the moral ruin of the English females thai frequented it. Such indeed was the fact in both cases; the Britons were entirely mulcted, some to suicide, others to perpetual expatriation; whilst under the same auspices, and beneath the roof of an Englishman, which promised protection, the unguarded fair of Britain were first rendered accustomed to the habits of foreign vice. From custom they soon became to behold without censure ; and from that state of feeling to imitation of what they beheld, was not a change, that it required extraordinary powers of seduction to produce.



From him and from his influence there was no escaping. He was the leader of fashion, the magnifico, not only of one, but of all cities, between which he hurried. The Prince of Monte Leone has been known to give fetes on successive evenings at Rome, and at Naples, and to have himself presided over each. He seemed indeed to carry within some malady, that was only to be removed by locomotion. His progresses were surprising, his resolutions sudden, unforeseen. And if melancholy, or ennui, or remorse was the disease, that thus impelled him from place to place, it evaporated on his journey, for wherever Monte Leone appeared, all was joy and congratulation, revelry and feasting.



The whispered calumnies against him now mentioned, were overwhelmed by his perpetual eclat. And if they were true even, what greater attraction to fashionable youth, than the haunt where so many fools had been beggared—whaf society so fascinating to the sagest female, as that which had provedmost dangerous to the sex. With all governments, too, Monte Leone was a favourite; at Rome he was an obedient and devout son of the church; at Naples he made amends for outvying royalty in magnificence by his civil submission and high royalist professions. At Florence he was the literary lord, the philanthropico, and he had perfectly won the heart of the Grand Duke by condescending to become a nominal or honorary chamberlain of his petty court—a compliment and sign of homage, that the Duke begs of those nobles, his subjects, who are almost his equals, and who neither can love nor hate him.



With my readers I shall not preserve any mystery. The accusations which assigned a malicious motive to the Prince of Monte Leone's hospitality and splendour, smothered and unlistened to as they were, still were true. His misanthropy, and that superlative portion of it, with which he regarded his compatriots —and it must be confessed that he had good grounds and reasons for it—had by time ceased to be that irritable feeling of detestation, that frets the mind endued with it, as much as that mind displays the feeling towards others. His hate to mankind, and to Englishmen especially, had been habitual, a bent of his nature, no man felt then his other propensities, and thus influencing his conduct, whilst it left his mind and countenance free to the mask of careless pride, easy gaiety, or even familiar friendship 4 if indeed the cold sufferance of each other that often constitutes acquaintance amongst the aristocratic, can be called friendship.

Beneath this mask he concealed the deep



rooted feelings that fatal circumstances had proved too efficient a cure for. He opened his palaces for the reception of his compatriots, and of society in general, for divers purposes; but amongst the rest, that of ruining and corrupting, of sowing misery and unhappiness around him, was a strong motive. It was that at least which he most enjoyed. By nature no voluptuary, although no principle prevented him from being so, he still joined the revel with all the ardour and enjoyment of the youth, who delights in forbidden, pleasures. He held the torch in many a Bacchanalian scene, in which his heart or taste took no share, except that it could not be said to be disgusted. His delight was a moral one, viz. to contemplate a fool in his folly, and his supreme pleasure was the sight of an English one thus astray. He sipped thus the draught of vengeance; 'twas weak, trifling, but then 'twas perpetual. It was a food that he gloated on, that he should economize, and indulge under the covert of secresy. Open



hatred, declared misanthropy, were an indulgence of spleen too amusing to the world that he detested, for Elstane to practice. The vengeance which he felt the thirst of was real; and to act the hermit, or to rail, would not have satisfied or slaked in the least the absorbingj the consuming passion. Elstane was that most rare being, a practical misanthrope, those who affect the character being always like the hero of Goldoni's French comedy, something of the Bourru Bienfaisant. And as they affect the ascetic character to conceal benevolence, he wore the mask of philanthropy, covering rooted and real hatred to mankind, altogether unnatural, unless to a being endowed with a mind like his, and visited by wrongs from mankind such as he had experienced.





CHAP IV.

The prince was returning from his chateau at Monte Leone, to Rome. It was a fine summer's evening, and Andrea, his confidential servant, was his only companion. For some time the prince rode, as was his custom, at full speed: till the ruins of an old baronial castle, on an eminence not far from the road, attracted his attention. He turned his horse thither to survey it, he was not a little struck with its situation, and the extent of remains that marked its ancient grandeur.

" A proper place for Sbarbuto to ambush in,'' observed the prince to his follower.

At the mention of the dreaded mountain robber, Andrea looked round, but not in dismay. Elstane would not have placed a craven so near his person. " Brutto assai, ugly enough," was all the answer of Andrea ; whilst the prince rode round to examine more minutely the old castle, the eminence on which it stood, and the hidden gorge that lay around, and issued upon the main road.



At first the motive of his scrutiny seemed to be mere curiosity ; he alit, entered the ancient portal, wended through the nettles and fallen fragments that obstructed his passage, and returned more impressed with the magnitude of the building from having threaded its interior labyrinth, than when he had merely contemplated its exterior. This now appeared more imposing, and the prince stood to gaze upon it, regardless of the speed with which the sun was seeking the horizon. Andrea awaited patiently the end of this long soliloquy, casting his eyes, however, to the different sides of the gorge, as if to observe any signs of unwelcome interruption on the part of the brigand-chief, Sbarbuto, of whom his master had been reminded by the savage aptness of the place.



At length Andrea thought proper to approach the prince of Monte Leone for the purpose of warning him of the hour, and of their unlikelihood of reaching Rome at the time intended. His coming startled the prince, who thus abruptly gave utterance to the moral of his reverie.

" I wish that I had an enemy, Andrea f' " Foes are cattle easily reared," replied Andrea, startled, used as he was to his patron's strange thoughts and abrupt way of expressing them. " I thought your Eminence had quite sufficient of them."

" Yes, of whisperers and chatterers enough, Andrea, with venom to fret, but not anger me. They buzz round like wasps, that dare not sting,ande\entheirpetty enmity excites contempt. These are not the foes I crave, but such foes, my good Andrea, as held these walls of old, men with breasts of mail, and tempers of' as tough a metal, when passion kept their lifeblood stirring; with whom to live as friend or foe, a man might neither sleep, nor revel, nor languish in listlessness. Life with them was a race, a combat; now what is it but a gaudy, laughing, tiresome, time-killing promenade ?"



" Truly it is difficult," replied the follower, " to carve out work for a proper man's hand in these times; and since the great soldier has been laid in peace, there is no way left for any idle gentleman to pursue a life worthy of him, but that of joining the chief you spoke of. And I promise your highness, that out of your service to-morrow, Sbarbuto should be, not my master in truth, but my captain." A grin from the serving man, accompanied this signification of his resolution.

'•' Well said, Andrea, thou art an invaluable rascal. But what say they of this Sbarbuto at Rome ?"



" Your highness knows, that amongst such followers as I am, the very shadow of a robber is respected ; and if our eaves-droppers listen rightly, he is no less so amongst the princely fair, the red-capped priesthood, and all the big folks yonder."

" These, no doubt, Andrea, admire whatever or whoever, inspires them with any sentiment, be it love or fear. His feats form the only variety in their sluggish annals ; and the power and mystery of the fellow, is full of the interest for the idle. But the people, the lower orders, good Andrea, what think they ? what say they of him r

" That he is a bold and fearless bandit, whom all the saints could not save from utter damnation for his crimes." ,

" Ay, that is the way in which folk are always revenged, if that they at once fear and must admire. He's a fine fellow, no doubt; thus they vent their admiration; but then he must go to the devil, and that's retaliation for the bugbear that frightened them."



The reader will observe that the greater part of the prince's conversation was in truth a soliloquy, since the fellow to whom such remarks were addressed, was as much calculated to comprehend or reply to them, as any inanimate object of the scene around. But Andrea, like many a personage more sapient but less shrewd, looked an unmoved but quite satisfied comprehension of the deep and subtle remarks, that the master uttered, addressing them to his follower, more to avoid the awkward appearance of soliloquising aloud, than with the intention of keeping up the dialogue between them. In these mingled moods of thought and speech, Andrea would watch his master, as a boy doth a cormorant or diver, beholding it now on the surface of the water, then losing all sight of the object as it dives deep after its prey, and anon catching sight of it again as it rose to his regard. So Andrea looked wise, but said nought, at the last deep moral digression of the prince, who again broke silence.



" Save or damn, let that rest. But do the people love, do they applaud, do they look up to this Sbarbuto ?"

" Why, for the matter of love, I know of few in this land who has any to bestow, except upon his vineyard," replied Andrea.

" Has not this Sbarbuto been benevolent, kind, charitable, to the poor? Has he not comforted them, abstained from harming them, avenged them ? Have they no gratitude ?"

" Those who kneel down to thank their guardian saint for every thing, were it but for a full meal, have no gratitude to spare for men."

" Well said, Andrea; truly I have infected these with my philosophic spirit. Thou hast reason. But what means have they of shewing gratitude ? They applaud, and shout often at the robber's passage."

" It is easier to clap the hands a dozen times together, than stretch forth one once with a grain."



" He speaks proverbs," said Elstane ; " ' a Daniel come to judgment P " And at the Prince's foreign tongue, Andrea looked exceeding grave; for from fatal experience he had discovered, that his master never spoke in that tongue, that some hidden fit of phrenzy, or some unfortunate circumstance, did not. soon after manifest itself. As this, however, was but a quotation, the rule, it seems, did not hold. And Elstane relieved his follower's anxiety, by addressing him once more in the Roman idiom.

" Are not the people oppressed, Andrea?"

Andrea looked, as if he ought to have comprehended so simple a question, and yet he could not.

" Are they not slaves?" repeated the prince. " What the red-bonnetted wretches, the galley-s ?"

" Psha, man, I talk of all Italy; of the peasants, the lower orders—do they not sigh to be free ?"



Andrea here perceived that his master Wot taking his wonted dive beyond the humble reach of a serving man's comprehensions, and remained without moving a muscle.

" Can a fellow who was so shrewd a moment since, be so stupid as not to understand what freedom means," said Elstane ; " but I forget, it is in Italy we are,—are we not, Andrea ?"

" Si Signor."

" Va benissimo! I no longer marvel at your want of comprehension. But to talk plainer, suppose this fellow, this Sbarbuto, instead of lurking amongst the mountains, and kidnapping rich folk, and plundering convoys, were to unite a daring and numerous band, march into yon great city, driving the noble guards, and ragged troops of the pope, before him—suppose he were to do this, what would the popolaccio say ?"

" Nothing. They would peep through the

Vol. m. D



holes in their mantles at what was going forward, and eat their macaroni without comment."

" And if he were to do away with the annone, the tribute ?"

" Then how would the pope live, and the cardinals, and whence would come the wax lights for St. Peter's, or oil for all the shrines of the saints."

" Let St. Peter and the saints go without, or take prayers instead.''

" But they would not. An inch of wax candle," say the friars, " is more agreeable to the saints than ten aves, and a gallon of oil worth twenty masses."

" Well, well, he'd keep the saints, suppose in fire and candle—oil and candle I should say. But could he get by any means this said popolactio to love or stand by him."

Andrea shook his head in utter incredulousness, at the possibility of Sbarbuto's succeeding in any such daring enterprise.



" Do you know why I ask, Andrea ?" said Elstane.

" No, in truth."

" Because," rejoined the prince, " if I thought it could be done, I would turn Sbarbuto and brigand myself, and turn these drones out."

" What ! and make your Eminence's self pope ?" " " Si, Andrea."

After receiving which affirmative, Andrea thought best to sink into profound silence, nor draw by his conversation his flighty master into any such wild ideas; none of which, however daring, was past the audacity of the prince of Monte Leone, he knew, to attempt.

A long pause ensued, during which Elstane and his follower rode rapidly towards Rome ; the former putting spurs to his steed, after having drawn from Andrea the information he required, respecting the light in which Sbarbuto was regarded by the people.



" Or this, or some other object of interest, of occupation, at least is necessary," said Elstane to himself, speaking forth the uninterrupted thread of his cogitations. " I foresaw this, and knew as I exhausted each pleasure, each passion of youth, that ambition alone could stir the blood of my age, aud here .ambition must perforce conspire—in other countries, .it may vent itself in less perilous, more tranquil ways, but here there is'no other path, less than the convulsion of the whole peninsula—there is no political object worth a moment's exertion on the part of a man of intellect. All is so mean, so wretched, that it is impossible to graft aught upon it; and yet this is not the state of things that I would choose ; for they that act pioneers in revolutions, who overturn and clear the way, never advance or live to reap the benefit of what they have done. They set the stone in motion down the steep, and to overtake or accompany its speed is past their strength. They labour for more fortunate successors. The page of history tells us so. And then, why should I so exert myself?— For amusement,—a good and proper reason. —For as to philanthropy, I acknowledge a contrary motive alone, and one which would suffice and satisfy this spirit, but for the mean and petty ways in which the men I hate are to be made unhappy. To go about to lay the petty poison of society for wandering fools revolts my pride, and though it once satisfied my malice, it doth so no longer.



" I hate mankind, and would delight in inflicting upon a portion of them the horrors of a revolution; it will make them wiser, prouder, more powerful, more noble, but not more happy. No—there a love and hatred of mankind too well agree—do, what men call, ameliorate their lot, and you convert the happy, contented, bliss-dreaming, drivelling slave, into an anxious, jealous, proud, irritable, unhappy freeman. In civil improvement, as in knowledge, there is, as Bacon hath rendered Solomon, ' much contristation.' " Here was a pause in the prince's soliloquy. He wavered between the two horrors, either of himself suffering intolerable inaction and ennui, or of benefiting the world by his exertions, evil even keeping pace with that benefit.



" And now," recontinued he, " I have to meet a crowd of fools—those flies which I weave the web of gay society to catch. The gallants that throng my halls may make the heart of an husband ache, and in pursuit of their own pleasure, ruin that of a family for ever. The gay and incautious youth waking upon the morrow, with the remembrance of the immense losses of the night, may rue the palace and the name of Monte Leone. These were my old delights. Now I feel a need of new ones. However, an enemy more noble, a fool more interestingly ridiculous than usual, may start upon my path this night, and defer at least, if not entirely change, the line of my future projects."





CHAPTER V.

No sample of southern magnificence could surpass that displayed in the palace of Monte Leone. The spacious mansion had belonged to his predecessors in the princely title, and the same invaluable collection of pictures and works of art which had been formed by the industry and expense of succeeding princes, were conveyed in the same contract with the nobility of the family to the wealthy Elstane. Modern artists furnished their costly mite to the ornament of those saloons; and canvas worked into inestimable beauty and price, covered the walls, hung with silk and gold, and resplendent with marble.





The lights of festivity were now streaming down these gorgeous apartments, dazzling the beholder that regarded from a distance, but lost amidst the profusion of loveliness and brilliancy that they illumine, to one who mingled in the throng. The Roman world of fashion moved within, with that migratory and similar little world in itself, of foreigners that ever changes, but never deserts the eternal city. There was the proud aristocratic visage of the English noble, the blonde and beautiful countenance of the English lady, easily distinguishable amongst the herd of southern complexions and physiognomies. The fine features of the Italian of proud descent, generally contrasted with an air and person utterly insignificant; the u*ed expression of the veteran and intriguing churchman ; the always gay, but seldom genteel, Frenchman, here were mingled, each bent on their several pleasures; some for intrigue, more for the semblance of it, others for play, trifling, shining, dancing and all the thousand and one kinds of killing agreeably the better Hours of night.



The Prince of Monte Leone with a gay demeanour and smiling countenance, from which one could have gathered little of the agitation that occupied him that evening, mingled in the assembly, joined every group, sat himself by the side of each more important personage for a moment, and discussed those topics of the political world, that interest Italians, with the pococurante tone of a man of pleasure, that esteemed himself either above or below the serious consideration of subjects so foreign to his habits.

With the fair portion of the assembly, the Prince was an object of supreme interest; he had been always so, not only on account of his wealth, magnificence, his rank and titled qualities, but from the mystery that enveloped and concealed his gallantry. A man like him could not but possess the means of winning female favour; as to one who could, yet would not, enjoy such prized preference, such a being was not dreamed of in the society of Rome. And though publicly attached or devoted to no one, except in the commencement of his life in Italy, when one or two connexions of the kind were underwent by him for character sake, he still was accounted a man of gallantry, though certainly of fastidious taste; since scandal, unless the most audacious, could seldom or ever find his name in that respect, within its reach. And -a man of gallantry, in fact, for all his character, Elstane was not. He did not even make that grand and sweeping exception to his misanthropy, that most beings, so professing themselves have made, viz. all womankind. Certainly, as far as respected all the beauty of Rome he was immaculate, insensible. And yet, 'tis surprizing, that with his powers of fascination, so numerous, so attractive, he did not make them cater to his misanthropic propensity; but Elstane loved the principle of hate—the law, as he said, whilst he scorned to be executioner, or to descend himself to petty hypocrisy for the ruin of an individual. He was gratified with being the director of evil, but the immediate agency he considered beneath his dignity.





Amongst the thousand eyes that looked with curiosity towards Elstane, were those of one, who gazed and gazed still with earnest, and were they not female eyes, with more than a polite stare. It was a lovely woman of mature but unfaded beauty, fresh with bloom from its native clime of the north—an Englishwoman, in short. Her fixed regards at length attracted the attentions of the Prince, who was engaged in passing conversation with some brother noble of the land. He too, was struck with the countenance of the fair gazer; but as even the first impulse of those habitually thoughtful and wily, is hypocrisy rather than nature, Monte Leone held the personage with whom he was conversing, and assumed with him a deeper and more serious tone. Under this converse, the Prince gave himself leisure to survey, askance 'tis true, but sufficiently clear for his conclusions, the fair form that seemed as attracted by, as it vra* attractive to him.



It was Adelaide, his first love. The Prince's hand trembled, as it laid hold on the habit of him, whom he addressed. Instead of a slight and gentle retentive hold, the hand of the Prince assumed a convulsive grasp of his neighbour ; his very limbs tottered, he was overpowered. Fifteen years of callousness and induration of the heart seemed rolled away, and his sensibility lay bare and tender to emotion, as it was in boyhood. Count Belbo, whom the Prince held, stared, and was about to fly as from a maniac, when by a forced revulsion, a peremptory exertion of a most energetic will, Monte Leone stood upright and firm, each nerve and muscle strained to the inflexibility of iron. His countenance alone betrayed the desperate exertion, for the smile which vainly strove to cover, seemed frozen as it were upon the strained rigidity of the features; and the suspended breath bespoke emotion curbed and suppressed.



The effect of the sight of Adelaide upon Elstane, was such as the poet would trust to the actor to represent, but himself would despair to depict. She on her part was struck with pure amazement. She had either not heard, or had heard but vaguely of the metamorphose of her ancient lover, Lord Elstane, into the Prince of Monte Leone. A friend had brought her thither to the Princess rout, and in him she discovered her discarded suitor. A woman in after life always pities a man in this predicament, when he most generally is congratulating himself; but that makes no difference. She pities, and therefore regards with interest the object slighted, when ten to one the object chosen has long since cooled and fallen away from all the professions and the charms that were her preference. Adelaide, Lady Devenish I should call her, died to speak to Elstane, to be at once friendly, familiar, kind to him, and to recall in gay allusion, with some slight tinge of pathos, if required, perhaps, the brief attachment that had existed betwixt them. With all a woman's vanity too, she had not the least objection to assume in the assembled throng so conspicuous a place as the quondam acquaintance, the once dear friend of the now admired and unrivalled Monte Leone.



Such was the difference of their feelings. Elstane, the steeled, the heartless hating misanthrope, whose habitual easy smile had proved for years an armour impenetrable to all the taunts, trials and intrigues of life, trembled like an infant before the being, whose form had first awakened in him the spring of early passion. In vain he struggled to control his feelings; they were overpowering. His utmost trained resolution could merely suppress them for an instant, until he retired, and for the first time for years nature resumed her sway o'er Elstane. He wept. Her sway was momentary, and the dashing away of his tears, restored him again to self-possession, coldness and misanthropy.



Once more the -Prince appeared in his gay saloon, his demeanour as careless, his tone and look as joyous as ever ; and his eye ranged over the crowd of beauty, without avoiding or being fascinated by any. Adelaide could no longer flatter herself that his glance had not fallen upon her;—it had, and had passed in seemingly blank ignorance or indifference. She bit her lip in no equanimity. The glance repassed; it met hers. She coloured beneath it. And a recognition could not but take place. It did. But the fair Adelaide was doomed to further mortification from one too well experienced in the art of wounding, whether by hurting woman's foible, or thwarting man's interest or passion. There was a gay, easy, worldly apathetic equanimity in the address of the Prince, that instantaneously disconcerted the innocent vanity of the beautiful Lady Devenish. And the accomplished hater of mankind continued to inflict in ten minutes' converse with her a succession of petty punishments, that upon a woman's sensibility was sufficient vengeance taken almost for the ancient slight she had put upon him. Elstane, too, seemed well acquainted with all that had taken place since his departure, even in the private circles of English We. The extravagance and imprudence of Sir Edward Devenish was not unknown to him, nor that their Ttnlian journey was owing to that cause, as much as to pleasure. With divers other circumstances equally unpleasant he was acquainted, and all were carefully touched upon, or their brink approached, which proved sufficient, by the skilful but polite Elstane. What vulnerable creatures vanity renders us. There is not a human being mingling in society that may not by a few words, from the mouth of either a foolish or a malicious person, be rendered unhappy for a space long enough to allow of a similar act of kindness taking place. It is a curious state of society—all wear daggers, and none coats of mail, and thus each iiunfs life or health is in his neighbour's forbearance. Our happiness depends on the sufferance of others—our misery upon their whims. It was from instinct however, or rather from that acquired instinct which is habit, that Elstane was thus cruel. It was not his intention to be so, and once that he observed the tears starting to the lids of Adelaide, he wondered what could have called them forth ; and regret was for the first time mingled with the pleasure, which he universally felt at the sight of pain, which himself had caused. In despite too of his forced rigidity, gleams of ancient tenderness shot across his spirit, and ere its conclusion, this first meeting with Lady Devenish seemed to go far to remove old pique, dated long enough back, to be by this obliterated, and to re-establish the intimacy at least, if not the attachment, that had been between them.





The worthy, dissipated, and half ruined Sir Edward too, was greeted, in appearance, cordially by his old rival, and the Devenishes were entreated by the Prince, henceforth to consider the Palazzo Monte Leone as their own.





CHAPTER VI.

" Divided, miserable, contented Italy ! thou mayst remain for ever as thou art for me, at least for the present moment,'' said the Prince of Monte Leone to himself, as soon as a late hour of night restored him to solitude.— " 'Twos but a few hours since I wished for occupation, for an enemy, for any object to interest me, and in good truth I have found wherewithal to keep my passions stirring. Adelaide my first love! but no, 1 must not dwell on that; such thoughts belong to another state of existence than to mine, and to retrace my steps so far were vain. Thoughts of those times jar with the thoughts of these, and make me womanish. No! Devenish's wife is the proper light in which to look upon her. Then I am myself, pleased, the smile of malice that plays upon my lip is responded to from my heart by a fresh spring of hate. He mocked, she jilted Elstane. 'Tis well. They are legitimate enemies; and I am tired of torturing fools gratis. The man, the spendthrift Baronet, he can be beggared, touched in his honour, if he cares for that,—and her, she that had my happiness in her gift, and turned me forth to feed on hate and poison,—now by the fiend whose province is revenge, if that her heart be made of penetrable stuff, it shall be pierced and wrung. But she is woman, cries honour, and beneath man's vengeance. Psha ! the nonsense of chivalry is out of season. Guile is the world's weapon, at wielding which the sexes are equal, or our's inferior—why then spare ? 'Tis they who present us first with the cup of affliction, and she to whom I owe my draught, shall quaff her's late, though not less bitter.";





Such were the reflections of Elstane, whilst on her part all those that passed through the mind of Adelaide respecting Elstane, (and thoughts of him were not absorbing,) were of the same mingled nature—resentment on account of his pride and covert unkindness, pity for the state of mind that could have led to voluntary exile, and a still widowed state, to both which resolves she esteemed herself as somewhat instrumental.

These first meetings in after life of ancient lovers are alone worth dwelling on. They are of those few events which are as deep notches in the wooden calendar, on which our days are scratched. They bring us back to the years of youth at one giant stride, and as a vessel wafts us from far climes and long wanderings back to our native land, the sight of the first and once loved form bears us back to youth, and presents again its scenes to our view. It is the more enjoyed too, as being the last clear glimpse, the last open retrospect allowed us to the years which we have left behind ; it is like the view of a loved country beheld from its last eminence, and not to be again enjoyed.



Elstane and Adelaide met subsequently. Lady Devenish was without family; her lord's ceconomy had been imprudent, and home, that guardian charm of English life, had in consequence been unknown in its perfection to her. Her dissipated and careless husband did not endeavour himself to supply all that was wanting of that charm ; and Adelaide gave up naturally, like many of her countrywomen, to modes of foreign life, congenial to a household so divided. Elstane was not long in perceiving that the home of the Devenishes was an Italian one. And in it he naturally assumed the manners and the conversation that were those habitual to his adopted country. Without ever supposing that his early sentiment were again awakened, the trifling turns and compliments of Italian conversation, so full of gallantry, and of love, led to recurrences to Elstane's old attachment, to a gay assertion on his part that it had never died, and to the affectedly incredulous smile which replied on the cheek of Adelaide to such an assertion.



" And can this really be the misanthropic Elstane, of whose insociability England rung ? What charm allayed the churlish dragon in your breast ?''

" The same charms," replied Elstane, " that gave that dragon birth, might well have extinguished its jealous guard. And perhaps those charms have given it the final blow. But wandering brings oblivion, and this sunny clime is powerful in dissuading from gloomy retrospect. The Prince of Monte Leone too, remembers not the wrongs of Elstane," added he, with a gay mock solemnity, all that was ironic of which, betrayed the heart still rankling with remembrance.

" It is a princely speech, truly," said Adelaide, " though I doubt if the wrongs of Elstane were much or many, if all that his own imagination added to them be taken away."



" Take care you wake not the slumbering dragon. Was Sir Edward Devenish's wit, and Adelaide's marriage no wrong ? Was ''

" Nay, no recapitulation. 'Twasbut a ruse, to see how far the Prince remained identified with Elstane. Ah ! this sunny clime, I fear, affords as clear a retrospect to the past, as is suggested by the cloudy skies of Britain. Your feelings, my Lord, are still unchanged.''

" In your presence, truly so, Adelaide," said the Prince, " »nd if the remembrance of the injury I suffered from you endures, it is that the sentiment which preceded and led to that injury, endures also."

" Be not an Englishman by the half only, good Elstane—be all a Briton. Nor breathe your Italian gallantry into a matron's ear.''

A sarcastic smile passed over the Prince's features at this adjuration and comparison be. tween his native and his adopted country.

Vol. lit. B



" Are the dames of England then the pure, seraphic creatures they were wont to be, Devenish ?v

Adelaide started at the fiend-like tone, which his ill repressed hatred to his native land communicated to the ironic question of the Prince. It was even useful to her as a warning against the hypocritic seductions of her former ad. mirer.

"• All degrees of virtue, the inferior as well as the higher ones, exist at home, Elstane. The exterior of life, at least, is decorous there. I hope you do not esteem us all hypocrites."

" No, in truth. But I am easily thrown off my guard, and irritated to mar my own intentions. England I cannot love ; and my foible is my attachment to this land, where if there be sins, the heart that dictates them, makes them almost virtues."

" I respect your predilection, though not patriotic," said Adelaide; "< and in truth, I





like myself to skim the surface of this pleasurable world of Italy, and taste its gaieties with a conforming, though honest, principle. Yet I must entreat that eloquent and cunning tongue of thine which I know of old, Elstane, to confound crime and virtue no more together in the same sentence."

" 'Tis but the words, Adelaide, that can ever be confounded."

" Perhaps so,—but such are dangerous confusions in a lady's vocabulary."

" Ah, Adelaide,'' said Elstane, " I had better make my retreat at once, and forswear your society. I know in what my visits here will end, in what they ought—my own unhappiness. To fly were wisest."

" Vous badinez. Your Highness's apathy and misanthropy is more proof than that. All the asseverations, and compliments, and vows, form here, I know, the ' how d'ye do' of English meeting; they answer to the common salutation of southern society, and here .it is as common and as trivial to say I love you, as there to compliment one upon one's looks. So go on, Elstane, the jargon is not disagreeable to us womankind, when we know the value of the coin, and do not attribute to it more serious worth than it is stamped with. It is so amusing. But yesterday I was ill. Inquirers came in crowds to my bed-side—all my female acquaintances to condole with and question me, not concerning my head-ache, but my heartache. They know of no other disease. And truly I do not wonder at the low state of the medical tribe here, when gallants are the only physicians consulted. " Ma cara, come va il vostro cuore ?" This is the question that greets the sick. So go on Elstane, I understand the tongue of your adopted country, and can endure the sight even of a Prince, that is, an Italian one, who dies for love, without any dangerous sentiments of pity."



" You allow me then to linger on, your devoted admirer Adelaide, excluding hope—*



" Not that of amusing yourself and me, Elstane."

" I thank your ladyship most profoundly, at the same time begging to hint, that Pulicinello, if amusement be your object, would be a far more entertaining companion than Monte Leone."

" Both in their way, no doubt," said Lady Devenish gaily.

Elstane was not pleased; although he could do nought but smile at the lively and firm etonrderie of Adelaide.

Such were the conversations that frequently took place between them, now inclining to the trifling, now partaking of the serious. Elstane always pressing, though obliquely his suit, and Adelaide hearing and heeding it with all the equanimity of a beautiful woman of rank, accustomed to such homage.

The wish of the Prince of Monte Leone had been granted to him. He had found an object to interest his thoughts and trouble them in depths long tranquil; and the beauty, the tern



per, the character of Adelaide, were all calculated to inflict upon him the petty vexation with which he had so delighted to punish others. His mind never knew one entire day's consistency; now given up to brooding over thoughts of past pain and bitterness, he strove to become in principle and by effort, the fiend he was not. He affected to deceive himself into the belief, that his revived affection for Adelaide was feigned, false, and assumed, to cover projects of hatred and revenge; whereas in reality, it was his old passion that had returned to haunt his breast, throwing down before it in the revulsion of sentiment, thai it caused all the barriers which misanthropy and long cherished hate had raised for their continuance. Elstane had long fed his proud spirit on this sullen and saturnine ideal of misanthropy, and it was not only with regret but anger, that he felt himself torn from the haven of apathy, where he had taken refuge! and cast forth again to all the varying; and tormenting changes of sensibility and emotion. Oft in a dark mood would he endeavour to entrench himself behind all the materials of rancour that he had been long gathering: but one recollection, one returning glimpse of past affection, chased away every dark thought, and made him feel once more the early impulse of his young heart. t



Then would he perhaps curse his misanthropic folly, and lament the ill, which as he caused and beheld, he had quaffed as a pleasant cup— resolved to forswear his wonted propensities, and return to the genial and common, kind sentiments of human nature. The image of Adelaide, as she once was, as she was now, was present to his mind, and heightening either mood, increased Elstane's irresolution. His resolves ebbed and flowed like the tide, but at the bidding of a more capricious and fickle cause than the moon, although that planet does reign over folly. And not only did these alternating dispositions take .place with the changes of his own mind; they were produced by the whims,, the smiles, the equally unaccountable kindnesses and severities, of Adelaide, whose equanimity, never exemplary, was much impaired by the still deteriorating fortunes of her husband. For him the Monte Leone palace proved asruinous as to many others. The Prince saw this, and at times relented; but it was too late, or it would have been an act productive of too much eclat to shut up at once the sumptuous facilities of ruin, which his former misanthropy had led him to establish as a snare? for his detested and unwary countrymen.





CHAPTER VII.

Whilst the Prince of Monte Leone was thus absorbed in a passion or intrigue, in which the malice that first mingled with it gave way to sincerity, Rome began to remark his unusal stay in one of his abodes, his altered demeanour, the serious, expressive countenance, that had taken the place of his customary gaiety. Whilst rancour and misanthropy filled his breast, he smiled without effort, as the most hardened and impenetrable body is capable of receiving most easily the finest polish. But when some feelings really genial and generous began to repossess his breast, lie then assumed a clouded brow and anxious aspect; and all the external symptoms and behaviour of misanthropy settled upon his visage, as soon as the dark feeling began to disappear from within.



Trifling, flighty, whimsical, and all woman as Adelaide was, the Prince made little progress in his design upon her heart. He was assiduous, attentive, and was in return well-received. Friendship and familiarity existed between him and the Devenishes. But whether passion or malice was the motive that urged him on, he could see few hopes of gratifying either. Lady Devenish felt an instinctive dread of Elstane, which she could not account for, and on further intimacy much that argued mystery about the Prince tended to increase her distrust. Many weeks passed over—Elstane remained still at Rome, as did Adelaide, and they were often together.

It was upon a night about the time of Carnival, the Prince of Monte Leone had accompanied Lady Devenish to the Opera. He had reconducted her home, and departed. She entered her suit of apartments wearied and oppressed, Elstane's concern had communicated the painful feeling of irritability under which he himself seemed to labour. Sir Edward had not returned : some scene of dissipation, of gallantry perhaps, or gambling, detained him. Adelaide marked his customary absence for this evening with a sigh,' and disinclined to sleep she sat down to pass another hour over a volume till calmness should bring a desire to sleep.



The steps of her attendant had scarcely ceased to resound in the distant apartment, when the silken tapestry rustled behind her, and a figure issued suddenly from behind the agitated folds, holding forth with a menacing aspect what effectually silenced the cry or call for aid, which rose to the utterance of. Lady Devenish. It was a female form, lovely but stern, clad in the vestment of a Roman peasant, and the particularity of the costume marked her not to be an inhabitant of the city, but of the neighbouring hills. Her countenance was of the Roman mould, exquisitely noble in profile, but too regular, marked, and prominent for feminine beauty when fully beheld. Her dark hair was gathered behind in a mass, that hung heavy upon her neck, and seemed to sway back the head, on the top of which a folded square of coarse white linen rested. Her rude stomacher supported the ample charms of robust womanhood ; and the thick folds of a kerchief loosely falling over, together with the dishevelled locks that escaped from her gathered hair, and fell, not in ringlets, over her face, gave her an appearance more dreadful than attractive. She held towards Lady Devenish, the rude, long stiletto of the country, motioning and commanding, though in a whisper, silence.



The terrified English lady obeyed, stretching forth at the same time to the avidity of the intruder, the ornaments which she had just taken from her person. But the hand bearing the stiletto was waved to and fro in refusal, and the lip of the peasant bespoke a contempt of such booty.



" Cosa volete, what would you then ?" demanded Lady DeTenish, " money ?"

The peasant still waved her hand, and paused, as if to consider in what way to open her errand to the Englishwoman. At last,

" II principe," said she.

" The Prince of Monte Leone, what of him ?"

" You have seduced him to your feet."

Adelaide blushed crimson at the word sedotto, although a stranger, a peasant, and a female was the accuser; even her terrors gave place to indignation. But an Italian expression of . sufficient vehemence was not at her command.

" He loves you."

" Me!" cried Adelaide, with a derisive smile, which she successfully achieved, in order to allay the threatening suspicion of this fierce intruder.



" Yes, you, woman, where else does he resort or haunt ?'

" I am his countrywoman, and he is courteous—"

" Not for thy country's sake—if that fresh complexion, which I could mar," and she raised the stilet at the word, " were not the attraction. I know Monte Leone."

" Do you ?" cried Lady Devenish, recovering breath, and allowing curiosity to mingle with her terror, although she asked in hopes of turning away the resentment of the virago from her, by giving her an opportunity of venting it in words, and affording her ladyship, perhaps, an opportunity for displaying seasonable sympathy.

" I do in truth know him, and know him well."

" Where have you known him?" asked Lady Devenish, with a careless easy air, as if she asked the question of a neighbour at an assembly.



" What to you imports it, how or where I have known him. Did you but know him aswell, I need scarcely have come hither; but answer me truly at your peril, has Monte Leone addressed you in the language of love ?"

" No, never, I declare," cried Lady Devenish, looking firmly at her menacer, but her eye quailed beneath the Italian's fixed and piercing glance,—" in Italy, since I have been here at least," she added, to give by such a reserve more force to her disclaimer.

" Ha ! then he has seen you of old, has loved you," and the hand grasped the stilet with convulsive firmness.

" A boy's attachment merely, when we were children,'' Adelaide hastened to exclaim.

The hand of the peasant fell. " Worse, worse than all my fears. A passing fancy might have been forgotten soon; but man's falling back to child's love destroys all felt and formed between."



" But he does not love, he pays no court to me."

" What keeps him then at Rome so long, away from "

" Why should he wander elsewhere ?"

" It matters thee not to know. He should, and shall be warned, he should. And you I do not trust. You must swear—but no, of what use were an heretic's oath ? Hearken. Dismiss Monte Leone ; frown upon him; drive him from you, or depart from Italy. Hold no communication, or,'' and she took from her bosom a little leaden figure or image, and kissed it, "you shall sleep the cursed sleep at Testaccio."

Lady Devenish, knowing that the heretic burying ground was situated in that quarter, understood the menace of the Italian female. She promised acquiescence, an engagement that cost her no pains to make. Adelaide felt even interested for her unknown visitress, whose sentiments, language, and air, seemed nobler than the garb she bore. " Who is it that commands me ?" asked Adelaide, " whom do I obey ? whom am I to fear?"



The female pondered a moment, as if debating betwixt her desire of impressing requisite terror, and that of preserving secresy; the former motive prevailed with her, and as she drew the tapestry, behind which the folded sash lay open for her retreat, she said in a tone that spoke the dread importance of the name,

" Son Antonio, io, della Comitiva di Sbarl>uto. I am Antonia, of Sbarbuto's band— dread me."

She was gone. Adelaide remained fixed to her seat for a space, then followed the form that had just departed, to the window. It opened upon a balcony. But the means by which the midnight visitress had descended or found access, was no longer visible. Lady Devenish re-entered her apartment, closed first every way of entrance, thanked heaven for her escape, and threw herself exhausted on her bed, but not ta repose. A thousand thoughts occupied her imagination. Monte Leone, was he connected with this brigand ? Had that singular, extraordinary, and romantic character, fixed his affections on the daughter of an infamous robber, for so she seemed ? It was like him. At times she doubted of the truth of the woman's last threat. How could she be connected with such desperate men ? and by pretending to be such, she might have supposed to make her menaces more awful. Perhaps it was some low amour of Elstane's, the object of which, jealous of her princely lover's fidelity, took this secret mode of threatening her supposed rival. In these reflections, Lady Devenish went to repose. On awaking the following morning there was no sign of Sir Edward. He had not returned during the night, an unusual circumstance with him, notwithstanding his dissipation. But at length, to the quieting of his lady's mind, the baronet made his appearance in no very good humour, fatigued, and in disorder. It was some time before he could or would give an account of himself. So strange an adventure, he said, had never befallen him. And the adventure was as follows.





He had been returning home at an hour not unusually late, and had already reached the street where their residence lay, when he was suddenly seized by two or three men, who, ere he was aware, or could make the least resistance, threw him down, bound, "nd effectually prevented him, by muffling, from uttering any exclamation. In this state he was borne through the streets of Rome, never very populous even at mid-day, but then entirely deserted, so that no impediment was presented to the ruffians who carried him off. As soon as, they reached the uninhabited part of the city— city only so far as it is enclosed by walls,—they set him free, commanding him to walk with them, which he did till they arrived at the wall, which was surmounted without much difficulty by clambering, the interstices of the broken bricks affording easy steps. That barrier overcome, they continued their course across the campagna. The brigands, as such undoubtedly they were, halted with him in an old tower, presented him with writing materials, and compeuWUiim to write to the city for a certain number of crowns, which they fixed as his ransom. " Where Lady Devenish could have mustered such a sum is quite beyond my comprehension,'' said Sir Edward.



However as the Baronet was pondering on that very disagreeable, and as he was situated, important consideration, a brigand, or rather brigande, of superior rank arrived, reproached her comrades in their jargon, tore the order in pieces, and with more ferocity than the Baronet thought a pretty woman capable of, bade him be dismissed. The plunder they had previously taken from his person, it came not within the brigande's purpose or attention to restore. And thus had Sir Edward spent the night, and so had he returned, after a fatiguing march and re-march to his abode. He con

'



gratulated himself, nevertheless, upon so cheap an escape, and verily the Baronet had reason so to think.

For her part, Lady Devenish thought proper to be silent respecting her share of the adventure; for she immediately perceived the connection between hers and that of her husband—that her visitor was what she avowed herself to be, connected with the brigands—that Sir Edward had been forcibly carried away, not to interrupt the warning and menace conveyed by Antonia. All this was not for her lord's ear, and to disclose part impossible. She buried the apparition of Antonia therefore in her breast, and kept both what she had witnessed, and what she since conjectured, to her private thoughts.





CHAP. VIII.

The next day brought by chance, the prince of Monte Leone to Lady Devenish's. Adelaide had spent the morning in considering what plan she should pursue, what line of conduct adopt towards Elstane. The circumstances were perplexing. To extricate herself at once from further solicitation on the part of the prince, and from the vengeance of her threatener; the simplest resolution would have been to quarrel decidedly with the prince, and to quit the land, or Rome at least; but the suitor was not one to be got rid of utterly by a feigned quarrel, nor was Sir Edward likely to acquiesce in a sudden resolution, that would tear him from many pleasures, into the spirit of which he had just entered, and all without any apparent reason that could be assigned.



Moreover, how could a female resist the temptation of trying what effect hints of what she gathered and supposed to be his connection with one of the wild race of brigands, would have upon the Prince's temper. To hold in this way an invisible weapon over his head, to astonish him by the blows that he could not expect, nor imagine whence they came, was a gratification which Adelaide could not altogether deny herself.

She received the Prince therefore, but with a colder air than usual, and with a strangeness, and indecision of manner, which astonished, perplexed him, and baffled his penetration. " Something must have occurred since yesternight," thought Elstane, " patience—the fair Adelaide will not be long in betraying symptoms of what this ne-v event may have been."



Elstane seemed not to notice the lady's altered manner, but proceeded to discuss with unperturbed ease the merits of " il Corradino,'"' which happened to be the current opera of the time. Adelaide replied in monosyllables to the Prince's criticism, which he spared not the less for her complete abstraction ; when the entrance of Sir Edward brought on the relation of his extraordinary night adventure. Monte Leone betrayed signs of more than usual astonishment, which Adelaide observed with eager and curious scrutiny.

" What their motive could have been in carrying me off from the middle of the city, I cannot divine," said Sir Edward; " it afterwards no doubt occurred to them, to change me into dollars. But the place and the persons both so ill chosen, show their original object to have been other than plunder. And the fierce damsel, why she should release me, is more incomprehensible still, than that her comrades should have kidnapped me."



" Oh ! it was a mere plundering expedition," said the Prince, "and the commandant in female costume, which your gratitude depicts as at once so beautiful and stern, must have been one of the. brigand chiefs in disguise. It is a mask that they frequently are in the habit of assuming.''

" No, no; a woman it was decidedly. I could not be mistaken,—her voice, her looks her very form, unmuffled and unconcealed. And a pretty journey too she must have made; she arrived breathless—her dark and beautiful brow was moist with exertion."

" Have women been ever known to accompany or hold command amongst these bands ?" asked Adelaide.

" Scarcely possible,'" observed the Prince; " I should think, that if ever the Salique law held good throughout, it would be amongst mountain robbers." " I have been witness to one exception," said

VOL. III. V





the Bayonet, in answer to which, the Prince of Monte Leone still smiled incredulously.

"But did you not say you heard her name, Sir Edward," said Lady Devenish, regarding Elstane, " what was it you mentioned—was it not Antonia ?"

The Prince coloured slightly, 'whilst Sir Edward denied all remembrance of hearing the brigand lady addressed by that or any name.

^ You must have dreamed it, Lady Devenish," said the Prince.

" A dream would not have been limited to a single name. If the world of visions proved so communicative to me, I should most likely be possessed of further information respecting the belle brigande?

" For the love of heaven, impart to us more of the dream. I for my part, am eperdument - interested in this history of—Antonia—is not that her name ?"

" Antonk Sbarbuto, I suppose; for less* than

l''*}' . -:•-,-"! l-nn swJiSi6?i

S %





Ihedaughtef, or the chere amie of the fenied leader, she can scarcely be."

"That never struck me,'' cried the Prince; "it might be. Upon my word, I should give willingly a considerable sum to behold this Sbarbuto, of which the world talks so much, or in default of him, his mistress."

" Perhaps a sight of the latter one would satisfy you quite as weil ?" said Adelaide.

" The fair for the foul, not to be complained of assuredly, although Sbarbuto is a gallant fellow. From Tarentum to the Bolognese Apennines, no one is so feared as he. Naples and our pope, are said to pay him ample tribute, on condition that he raise contributions only on forestieri, and truly it is enough for a government to protect its own subjects, and let strangers pay for themselves. It must be some arrears due from the papal treasury, that brings him so near Rome at present.*

"-He is said to occupy the mountains between Palestrina and Frascati."



" Old Rome bearded by a band of robbers,"' said the Prince ; " and in truth an attack might be attended with success to them, and danger to us all. For as to their regiment of ragged dwarfs, and their fat burgess guard, there is not the least dependance to be placed on them. If report says, that Sbarbuto musters strong, I for my part will be gone to Monte Leone, and barricade my castle gates against them.T>

" You would not leave us surely," said Adelaide, " leave the city, what would people say ?"

" Say ! what could they say ? that I feared to trust the keeping of my person to the garrison of Rome. Most truly said, if so."

," It is not that I meant exactly—but, is he really wicked and cruel, this Sbarbuto—had we better fly ?"

" The chances of robber-war are attended with the same hazard, as those of more regular campaigns. He, himself, I have heard described as a generous chieftain; and according to the old chivalry of his profession, he cherishes and aids the poor and miserable, and incommodes only the rich ; which conduct has gained him the hearts of the people."



" How is this, Prince, that you have always escaped in your numerous passages through the Apennines.—you are ever moving; and Monte Leone, too, I believe, is amongst the most dreaded and fearful part of their fortresses."

" I have been often warned to be more cautious,'' replied Elstane, " and have oft escaped, no doubt. Moreover, I am not looked on in those parts, with an hateful or an envious eye, and Sbarbuto respects those who are popular—whatever be the reason, I thank him. I must have been frequently within his reach; but it matters little. He would have used me well; and I would gladly pay the ransom for the honour of his acquaintance and the insight into his ways, which some hours' captivity would afford me."

" Every one to his taste," said Sir Edward, -♦- I feel no desire whatever to enjoy the honour of the gentleman's acquaintance, still less the honour of ransoming myself at the price of a thousand crowns, which was the sum these fellows wanted.'?



The Baronet here departed, no doubt to spread forth amongst the tongues of Rome the adventure that had befallen him, which he found so difficult to account for, although no doubt every Italian to whom he related it, imagined a cause for what had happened,—certainly not altogether the truth, but nearer to it than wry of Six Edward Devenish's conjectures.

The dialogue that followed between Adelaide and the Prince of Monte Leone (for the flatter was determined to probe to the utmost the extent and means of information evidently possessed by Lady Devenish) was sharp and poignant. She on her part having sufficiently tortured Elstane, and satisfied herself that he winced beneath her allusions, and consequently acknowledged the truth of their foundations, sought rather an opportunity to keep her lately made promise, and to quarrel with the PrinceMonte Leone had never been so baited—he felt irritated in the extreme—the allusion, the malice—the wish to hurt and to break with him, evident in the conduct of Adelaide, awoke all the dormant bitterness of his souL He could not draw from her any clue, by which he could judge of how she had gained the information which she possessed. And his lately awakened passion was turning, as it had before been converted, into the gall of hatred. He smothered resentment, however, and covering with an easy smile his internal agitation, took leave of Lady Devenish.





It was a beautiful premature evening of spring. The southern wind blew mildly, though not the Sirocco, up the beautiful and extensive valley, that beginning from the Campagna, terminates in the distant Algidus, and separates the .mountains of Fraseati and Albano from those of Tiyoli and Palestrina. On the sides of the latter range, as well as upon more than half the valley, the declining sun shed its rays, which mellowed and deepened in colour as they decreased in heat and warmed the landscape to the eye, whilst to the other senses, evening began to feel sensibly more chill. At whatever hour or season visited, this broad





vale universally presents to the visitor a pleasant contrast with the desert champagne, from which it retires. Fertile, irrigated, covered with olive plantations, vineyards, farms, and fields of corn; the dwellings of the cultivators, however, are too scattered or too far in the valley, owing to its unwholesomeness in summer, to break the solitude. At once fertile and unhealthy— favourable to vegetation, but pestilential to man—it offers the aspect both of comfort and dreariness—of all the luxuriance of the richest soil, contrasted with the mephitic atmosphere of death thence arising, and evinced by the scrupulous caution with which even the poor labourer shuns to place his cabin within its influence. Some few days in the vintage harvest, in seed time, and at those few other periods of the year, in which the almost spontaneous fertility of the southern soil, demands to be aided by man's hands, the valley resounds at once with labour and festivity, that here always accompany each other, and the ceremonies at least, of old Bacchus's worship are gone through, although the divinity of the god be extinct. With the exception of these periods, the valley is undisturbed in its solitary tranquillity of production, except when, perchance, a mounted keeper of oxen drives forth at his spear's point, his herd to the Campagna, or brings them back at the approach of heat, from that parched herbage, to more fresh and wholesome pasture.



At present, however, there prevailed a bustle in the valley quite unusual. There were " hurrying to and fro," women and families, with all their household property, borne on caratelle, retreating; armed peasantry on the other hand advancing, though timorously ; the glistening of bayonets even was visible amongst these peaceful glades,—a strange and unusual circumstance of late years, in the realms of the church. The troops, however, for this was no other than the army of his holiness on foot, seemed rather undecided as to the point they were to arrive at. They moved in large bodies to one place, then



to another, firing and shouting, a mode of warfare, by which they sought to alarm and drive away the enemy.

This enemy was no other than Sbarbuto and his band, which had been encamped amongst the Frascati hill for several days previous. They had there committed several audacious acts, and amongst others, had dispatched a message to Rome, threatening to sack the city, unless their arrear was paid, and unless one of their gang, whom they averred to be detained at Rome, was set free. The Roman government would willingly have complied with both the requests of Sbarbuto, if it had either of the objects required to be restored; but money they had none, and as to any prisoner, or deserter from Sbarbuto's gang, it knew of none such. A cardinal, however, with a body of troops, it was thought necessary to dispatch towards the brigands, in order to bring them to reason.

As soon as arrived at the scene of depredation, the cardinal commandant dispatched his light troops in all directions, each with a copy of an address from him to those erring sons of the church, the robbers and assassins aforesaid, to repair to him without fear or scruple immediately, for money, absolution, excuses and advice, for such were the arms and vengeance that he had brought forth against them. The robbers, however, on hearing that a cardinal was amongst the troops brought against them, feared to fire a shot in the direction of so sacred a personage ; their known and immaculate devotion forbade. So that, first murdering some half dozen captives that remained unransomed upon their hands, the conscientious comitiva lit up their fires high on the points eastward of Frascati, and secretly withdrew across the valley to the opposite heights. The cardinal in vain endeavoured to reach, or convey his message to them : no envoy could be found of sufficient boldness, and even some malefactors employed to deliver it, made their escape, rather than earn a farther reward by venturing into the clutches of Sbarbuto.





Thus it was, that whilst the efforts of the cardinal's followers were directed towards the Albano hills, the gang were quietly encamped upon the ridge behind them, regarding, through their glass, to their great amusement, the evolutions and cautious advances of the cardinal's party in the vale below, and up the mountains opposite. The immediate gang consisted of about thirty men ; the rest, which altogether might count an hundred, being dispersed, encamped in tens and twelves laterally, in different farms, or convenient lurking places on the hills. In the midst of the principal knot, or head quarters, as it might be called of the gang, stood the redoubtable chief, Sbarbuto himself, silent, now lost in his reflections, and now regarding the motions of the cardinal and his men. He was of the middling, or rather low stature, which, so peculiar and commanding was his aspect, formed a contrast with his gigantic followers to his advantage. Swarthy, muscular, though less so than his comrades, the chief was principally distinguished from them by the absence of any beard, so unusual a want in the south ; so that his was not only, as Ariosto says,



" Pallido il viso oltre il dover barbuto,"

but even the dover barbuto, or chin, was as pale, though embrowned, as the upper part of his visage. Hence was the name under which he passed, Sbarbuto, the beardless; and which, at first, no doubt, a term of reproach, he had converted by his exploits into one of might and terror.

" Comrades," cried Sbarbuto, " shall we carry off this red-shanks to the mountains ? By the body of all saints, what a ransom he would pay!"

" Uncardinale /'' cried more than one of his followers, in reverential horror. And the chief instantly yielded to the superstitious feelings of reverence entertained by them, although he did not seem himself in the least to share them.1'



" If you dare not get rid of him, or turn him to gain, why provoke him hither ?" demanded the chief vehemently. " Dlavolo!"

" Era Antonia," said a kind ofl lieutenant, exculpating himself; " it was Antonia sent the message to Rome, and in our despite. It is the woman that works us harm always."

" Taci? said the chief, " peace. Six of you follow me. If the boar shows not combat, there is no end of the baying. Follow me."

Sbarbuto with this fixed number of his gang, descended rapidly from the eminence, which his little camp occupied, taking advantage of every projecting brow to screen them from being observed from the valley below, till having reached the olive groves, his future course was concealed sufficiently, without requiring any particular precaution ; the Cardinal, like a cautious general, rode, surrounded by his prelatic staff, at the rear of his k'ttle army, furthest removed, as he supposed, from the brigands, but in reality quite within their reach, and unguarded, as he had dispatched all his troops to the heights of the Frascati hills. Whilst the military operations, which he had ordered, were executing, his Highness thought the interval convenient for taking repose, and he had retired accordingly to a comfortable farm-house in the middle of the valley, inhabited at this season of the year, where he intended to pass the night; as much to give an idea of his activity and sufferance of hardship to his court, as with the hope of thereby conquering or reducing Sbarbuto.



Scarcely, however, had the worthy Cardinal seated himself, and began to utter in tranquillity his conjectures respecting Sbarbuto, when that dreaded robber himself, with his few, but well armed and resolute companions, made his appearance in the aforesaid farm-house. The musquets of his attendants, were immediately pointed upon the huddled group of the cardinal's suite, whilst Sbarbuto, first stooping to kiss his Eminence's hand devoutly, ordered his secretary, and some other of his chief officers, to move doorwards upon a forced march to the mountains. If they uttered a word, they were threatened with death. The cardinal protested loudly, but indemnity to himself from harm, was all the robber would grant him, and that more from regard to the feelings of his followers, than to any reverence that he felt himself.



" Is this the way in which you treat a prince of the church P'' said his Eminence.

" The church promised us tribute," said the robber, " and it sends soldiers, with your Eminence at their head, to pay us. We will have our arrears,, or these gentlemen's ransom..'*



" Let those free then," quoth the cardinal; " here are the arrears demanded, but not of tribute, mark me, as thou hast most impiously and dishonourably named it, but as alms for the needy, and protection for the weak. On these conditions, I am commissioned to deliver it to Sbarbuto."

" We are dutiful sons of the church," said the robber, " and will do its bidding. All Romans shall pass freely over the Apennines for six months hence. As to the forestieri—"

" We recommend them to your mercy. But a tithe of the revenue raised upon them, is expected by the friends and relations of Sbarbuto," added the cardinal in an under tone.

" As we are paid, *o will we pay," and a conversation of some length, and concealed intelligibility, took place between the church and the mountain great man. Sbarbuto at length retired, leaving the suite of his Eminence free. The troops marched back to Rome from a conquest, after the fashion of the Latter Empire, and the papal metropolis was relieved from the fear of Sharbuto, and allowed to conjecture how so desirable an object had been effected.





CHAPTER X,

The next day the brigand army, having divided amongst them the supplies brought by their antagonist, the Cardinal, marched towards the far Abruzzo, and for the time took up their station near Rieti, from thence foraging the high road from Perugia through Terni to Rome, sparing the natives, however, according to their late agreement. A considerable detachment of them had been dispatched in consequence of the late truce to Puglia, that they might live and gather contributions through that flat and fertile region, which intervenes between the Adriatic and the Apennines. Sbarbuto alone amongst the chiefs, with a stout band of some thirty robbers, hovered in the above neighbourhood.



Some expedition had occupied this small band during the day ; for at night they all lay in profound slumbers, protected solely by the watch of a female. On the bare summit of a hill they had chosen their resting place, regarding security more than shelter, stretched in slumber all of them, with not a canopy between them and the twinkling stars. Against the trunk of a torn and ragged chesnut reclined the chief, in slumbers also, at a reverential distance from whom lay the circumjacent troop. Antonia watched, cast her regards from time to time down the steep brow, on the summit of which was the camp, and listened to every rumour that ascended from the plain below. All was still. She then resumed her place on the low and pendant branch of the chesnut, against which Sbarbuto reclined, and it seemed that his safety was more particularly a care to her, than that of his followers. . ,,



A shorter slumber refreshed and satisfied the chief, than that which pressed the lids of the band, till the break of day-light. He awoke, and muttered incoherently, as if in doubt where he was or how situated; the stars above recalled him to the cognizance of his hard and exposed couch, and the voice of Antonia by his side, aroused him effectually.

" Has Pietro arrived ?" demanded the robber chief.

" I know not," replied Antonia, in a voice none of the mildest.

"How now, wench? stars and sun alike shine on your ill-temper. Has waking made you fretful? Sleep. I'll walk and watch," and as lie rose, Sbarbuto flung the mantle from around

faint,

" I want no sleep, Giulio," replied the female; " if I did, you know too well how to mar the inclination." ..r. ,.i;...', /-••> >

... .f« With what unkindness ha*fe I dd»>e iso now, Antonia?"



" You woke, and thought of Pietro, Rome, and Pietro's errand thither; 'tis not as you were wont."

" What has Pietro or his errand to do with or trouble thee ?" " I know it."

" 'Tis not difficult to guess; he sees what Zingaro's pocket is best lined with—crowns. Are you jealous, wench, that I should give my mind to the means of supplying you with finery ?"

Antonia looked down upon her garments, none of the richest, by way of answer to the jocular remarks of the robber, and seized the golden collar around her neck, as if she would have torn it from her and cast it away. But the arm of Sbarbuto prevented, and he endeavoured to soothe her pique. ,- "My long absence has soured your temper, Antonia; my plans demanded it, girl. Forget; it shall no more recur. I am on the hills •gain, and never wish to see the inside of * Walled city mote.'"



" 'Tis thus you quit every place with the same feeling of disgust. Weary of the hills, you seek the plain; weary of the plain, the hills. And the true affection that welcomes and awaits you here, is not more prized by you, than the false' and heartless gaiety which you enjoy in the crowded city.'"

" It is, it is; believe me, I love you, and you alone, Antonia; but I have other thoughts and projects beyond affection, and must attend to them. You must be content, girl, with the few hours that the man and the robber can bestow in trifling."

« With one fond word I would be content for months, Giulio, if I thought your mind was bent on enterprize. But it is not so. You are changed. The vigour of your fierce soul is gone, and that contempt of all, for which I first loved you, and which then was an active, fierce, overboiling passion, is now worn away to mere passing fits of spleen, and intervening hours of careless languor. You are weaned from this active life of daring, that you vowed to follow ever, and have become again the mean being of towns,' and revelry and gaiety, which you once despised, and which I do still, Giulio."



" Antonia, you were a robber's daughter."

" He was noble as thyself, Giulio, and chose a free life."

" I upbraid not the choice, since it has been mine. But cutting throats and purses, think you, girl, it is a following large and noble enough to content a spirit such as you have known mine."

" It should more content such, I think, than chattering in saloons, and grinning night after night to painted faces."

" Yes ; but if in these saloons, amongst those worthless crowds, ambition is best to be pursued, friends made, plans matured, and founda

Vol. in. c



tions laid for some noble enterprize, the life must be submitted to."

" But what plan Giulio, what enterprize ?"

" A worthy one, to free an enslaved people."

" And live to rob them after."

" Oh, no! to live amongst them then, were not they so despicable.'"

Antonia shook her head.

" What say you then to becoming a queen— Antonia ?"

" Am I not one on these hills ?""

<; Yes, a rude one.''

" And a less rude one I would not be — to be in silks and gold, and to be mocked and worshipped, whispered an hundred different distracting things to, have no friend, not even thee, Giulio, and to be surrounded with cold, civil, smiling faces, like the strange crowds we see in dreams,—no, Giulio, I am happier here." " Did you not swear to follow me through all fate, through all reverses3n " I did, and will."





" Suppose a throne then a reverse, fe terrible misfortune, and be contented to ascend it for my sake." ., .

" But do you dream, Sbarbuto, to talk thus of thrones?" . ,, , .

" No, in truth, I wake, Antonia, and think on projects to be Fealized by waking men."

" And how,—where is this kingdom ?"

" 'Tis not to be whispered even on the summit of the Apennines, not to thee Antonia. Rest contented that I follow a worthy enterprize, and in neglecting thee have but laid the foundation for our future eminence."

Antonia remained still incredulous and dissatisfied, but Sbarbuto had afforded her at least some other thoughts to share her mind with the jealous suspicions that before filled it.

Day began to glimmer o'er the hills. The robbers started from their slumber, and a few set off in quest of provender for the band's morning repast. Antonia, who had waked during the night, sunk to repose in Sbarbuto's place beneath the chesnut, whilst the chief seated alone upon the lofty brow, meditated future plans, and seemed to await the arrival of some one, whose tidings were to direct and settle his resolves.



With the foraging band who brought back a goat, some wine, cheese and bread, Pietro, the expected emissary, returned. He communicated to the chief all that he had gathered at Rome, and his report seemed of the most welcome kind to Sbarbuto, whose eye and countenance kindled up with pleasure on hearing his follower's account. After some few minutes consideration, he issued orders for the instant march of his band, and in an hour's time no sign appeared upon the eminence of the nightly bivouac of the robbers.





Since the time that Sbarbuto had relieved Rome from its terrors, and the departure of the Prince of Monte Leone had shorn the city of much of its gaiety and interest, the foreigners resident there had begun to take advantage of the fine, and as yet comparatively cool days of spring, to visit those beautiful scenes and objects, scattered. through the country, which it was the mode to see. Amongst the rest, Lady Devenish, her husband, with some other of their compatriots, set forth from Rome to the cascade of Terni. A little before noon, they arrived at the town of that name, and resolved to await the evening ere they repaired to the waterfall.



No situation can be more romantic or picturesque than that of the town of Terni amongst the interminable olive groves, that form almost the only production of these vallies. High above it to the eastward rises a ridge of lofty hills, or rather hill, for their outline is continued and unbroken by any intersecting vale. Behind this ridge, of which the long summit is crowned with pines, ex. tends a rich country, level almost, and of equal .height with the hills that bound it, and look down on Terni, forming a kind of table land, stretched high above the succession of gorges through which winds the road to Rome. In this high .land, a lake had been formed of the waters that found no exit to the vales below, through the unbroken range that formed its boundary. The ancient Romans, in order to drain the lake, cut through those hills, and opened a passage for the waters to pour into the vale of Terni. Thus was the finest cataract in Europe, carved out by the hand of man, not of nature, and 'tis singular enough, that that of Tivoli too, is artificial.



If we add to the effects of this impetuous torrent on the vale below, the consideration that the soil is altogether volcanic, torn, shattered, gaping here, and mangled there, an idea may ' be formed of the chaos produced by the rolling down of so tremendous a body of water for seven or eight hundred feet. Every year the fertile torrent forces itself a new passage, and rolls down its bed the fragments that it has displaced. Thus it has created a scene of ruin that befits it, and which adds materially to the effect produced on the beholder, by the precipitated mass of waters, and its accompanying thunder.

From the town of Terni to the waterfall, the road ascends the ridge of hills described, following the vale, in the bottom of which sweeps the torrent, still foaming and agitated after its descent. Along this as the declining sun began to abate its mid-day sultriness, the vehicles bearing Lady Devenish and her party slowly drove. These visitors were enchanted with a •pot so celebrated; and unable to behold the cascade until they approached very near to it, they appeased their impatience by admiring the fertile valley, the village so beautifully situated on a rocky isle or eminence, between two branches of the stream, and the poble prospect, that as they ascended opened to their view, over one of the most picturesque regions of the globe.



They were soon obliged to alight, and be conducted on foot to the different points from whence the fall was visible. The way lay through vineyards and brakes, and so great was the impatience of the party, and the different spots whence the fall was to he seen so numerous and apart, that they soon became scattered, some remaining above to view the river precipitating itself from on high, others





taking thehr stand by the tjrmk'of'ihe*t*eai£ below to contemplate the cataract in the whole, at a glance, ^."' h'\& ji-j.v;-.'-- X v,,i f j,,ina-»d Lady Devenish, as it happened, remained with one or two companions on the heights^ while the baronet, with others, went to the vale below. None of the party entertained any suspicion of the danger of the place; and since the truce with Sbarbuto, the Roman denizens deemed themselves exempt from any peril of the kind. What then was the surprize and consternation of Lady Devenish, and the few that were with her, on finding themselves surrounded suddenly by a gang of eight or ten brigands. Resistance was impossible; with them there was but one male companion, and he unarmed, and the pointed weapons of the robbers forbad a cry for aid. In a very few seconds the captives were borne by the brigands from the scene of their capture, over the ridge of high land that looks down upon Terni. Tidings of the fact soon reached Sir Edward and the e S



rest of the party. What was to be done ? The Baronet flew to Terni, but long before any sufficient band of soldiery could be got under arms and ready to march, the captives were far beyond the reach of rescue.

As soon as the brigands had conveyed their prisoners beyond the immediate vicinity of the cascade, rough litters were prepared for Adelaide and her companions, and thus for the rest of the day they were borne rapidly through the wild passes and barren mountains of the Abruzzo. At night, when the brigands stopped, the other prisoners were ordered to write for ransom ; to Adelaide alone no such request was directed ; and this exception respecting her filled her with terror, and led her to suspect that some dreadful fate was reserved for her. She begged to be allowed to dispatch also a message for ransom; but she was answered that being the chief of the party, and a lady of consequence, her ransom was a serious consideration, that could neither be determined on, nor gathered in so short a time. She was informed at the same time, that whilst her companions were to wait at the place where they at present were, for the success of their appeals to their friends, and endeavours for freedom, she, as the more important personage taken, was to be conveyed to the head-quarters of the band in Puglia. At the idea of being separated from her friends, her countrywomen, and abandoned alone to the guard of these mountain ruffians, Adelaide gave herself up as lost. She begged of them in her distraction, to kill her at once, or else allow her the same chance of freedom with the other prisoners. But the bandits were inexorable, and deaf to both requests ; yet contrary to the usual habits of the ruffians, their demeanour was courteous, and even submissive; and were it not for all the horrors she had heard respecting these men, Lady Devenish could have discovered in their demeanour towards her little cause of fear. After a night of dreary terrors, for fatigue compelled sleep, Adelaide was summoned early to proceed upon her journey. Her companions took leave of her as one whom they were never to see more, so much were each impressed with their individual fears. Lady Devenish with a presentiment scarce less fearful, re-commenced her journey, borne upon a sure footed mule, whilst her escort walked by her side. Their route lay through the wildest regions of the Apennines, wilder at least than she had ever traversed. Not a village appeared upon their track, not a sign of cultivation, and the few shepherds of those lofty and desert region! knew too well the martial figures and gaudy uniform of the band not to retire at their approach. At first horror-struck, Adelaide was at length weary of the savage monotony of these mountain-scenes, and she internally rejoiced that her promised place of rest was to. be in Puglia or on its borders, which she had always heard described as a flat and peopled country.





From the abrupt and varying course of the road, which of course followed the meanderings of the valleys, Adelaide could form no judgment concerning the direction they were pursuing. Indeed for a long time she did not doubt the truth of the information she had received, as to Puglia's being their place of destination; but although little skilled in the movements of the heavenly bodies, she could not fail to remark at length, that according to the visible course of the sun, it could not be eastward, much less south eastward, that they were journeying. Towards the close of day, the sun was declining before them, rather to the left, and the thought struck Lady Devenish suddenly, that their steps were returning in the very same direction whence they had set forth the day before. She gave utterance to her suspicions, at once guilelessly and loudly; and was

-i answered by a mocking laugh from the bandits,

who asked her if she thought a bird's road practicable in the Apennines. For the present the captive silenced her fears, and awaited further progress in the journey to overturn or corroborate her suspicions.



Darkness came at length, to interfere with her observations. To its verge, however, Adelaide was certain of not having yet quitted the mountain regions, and the lofty heights around, visible even in night, as they interrupted the stars from her view, told the same conclusion. Puglia must have been mentioned, thought Adelaide, in the hearing of my companions, in order to misinform them and mislead pursuit. We must by this time, and in this direction, be re-approaching the Roman territories-- to what end or purpose, Heaven knows !

Such were the reflections of Adelaide, when they were interrupted by a general halt of the party, and the departure of one or two in advance. Though gloomy, the night was not altogether so dark as it had at first fallen; and at present Adelaide, as she gazed eagerly on the sombre vacancy before her, was enabled to descry at no great distance, an edifice of considerable extent. Its outline bespoke it a castle; it stood too upon some height, separated from where the party halted by some chasm, from •which the noise of rushing waters arose to scare the unbroken stillness of the night. By dint of gazing upon the darkness before her, Adelaide gained the power of descrying more, and she could plainly mark the entrance of the castle facing a bridge, no upraised one, but of ponderous masonry, thrown over the chasm. There too a little cluster of houses, amounting to a village, seemed gathered; and Adelaide remarked with joy, that their habitations formed a little street through which they must pass in order to enter the strong abode before her. Even that slight chance of aid afforded her a glimmer of hope.



In this she was disappointed ; for upon the return of one of those who had been sent forward, the gang turned from the road, and descended the steep ravine, causing Adelaide to dismount, and bearing her themselves down the precipitous bank. To cross the torrent below seemed a feat of peril even in the open day, but the passage was performed by the party here, with ease, as by persons accustomed to it- Lady Devenish was borne over by her conductors in safety, up the steep opposite bank; and in a few moments an open postern of the castle received and closed upon the captive Adelaide and her escort.





CHAP. XII.

Foit ihe space of a day, Adelaide was abandoned to her conjectures or suspense. No oneappeared from whom she could extract a word. Yet she was splendidly lodged, courteously treated, and could not help comparing her captivity to that of Pekuah in Rasselas; all she hoped was, that the termination of her's might be as happy. She had been led to expect a visit from the chief of the band -T and what she at first dreaded, she at length began to wish for.

Sbarbuto abruptly entered her apartment on the second day. At the first glance, Lady Devenish was astonished at his total want of the ferocity which she had depicted in so daring a leader. .tfis manner was courteous and elegant—his features even resembled those of one whom she had known, and once admired. But the tone of his voice, in his coarse Italian dialect, or broken French, was altogether different from any she had ever heard. Lady Devenish lost no time in questioning him respecting her ransom—whether any steps had been taken, or emissaries sent to procure it,- and why she was unhappily distinguished from her companions in misfortune, and not allowed to attain liberation with them.



The robber replied to her demands in excuses and reasons, similar to those offered by the guard that had brought her hither, but, at the same time, in such a careless tone, as implied his little anxiety as to how far such pretexts imposed upon her. This light way of treating what was of such fearful importance to Adelaide, filled the thoughts of the captive with anxiety and terror. She begged to be allowed herself to dispatch a peasant with a letter to her husband ; but Sbarbuto replied, that none but his own immediate followers could be allowed within the precincts of the castle.



" What castle ?" demanded Lady Devenish.

" This."

" How called ?"

" The name imports not," said the robber.

" It appears to me strange," said Adelaide boldly ; " that so noble an edifice as this should be allowed to remain in the open possession of such as thou art, Sir, with all deference to your power and dignity."

" And it is in Puglia ?"

" I said not so."

" Your comrades informed me, that thither our journey was bent; but this mountainous country does not answer the idea of that region, which descriptions have led me to form."

The robber smiled.

Lady Devenish, whose eyes had been long



immovably fixed on his, flung herself abruptly at his feet.

" I know you, Elstane," cried she, " I am in yonr power. Be merciful, and return me to my friends."

" Of this," said the Prince of Monte Leone, for Sbarbuto was no other, raising up Lady Devenish, " we will talk hereafter. At the present it is sufficient, that Adelaide Devenish, and De Renzi, knows into whose power she has fallen. Let her think what cause hath Elstane to be kind or cruel."

So saying, the robber prince closed the door of the apartment after him, as he departed, leaving his captive to a new train of reflections and fears, which he knew his presence would produce, and for which purpose he had made his appearance.

Adelaide was more horror-stricken upon r&flection than she had even been at the first discovery of so strange an identity. Every evil act and sinister motive that she had ever heard attributed to Elstane, crowded into her mind—all she remembered herself—his vindictive temper, which she had twice given cause of excitement against her—her capture too, and separation from her friends, no word of ransom or release, bespoke her plainly an object not of gain, but of vengeance. What that vengeance was to be, was another dreadful consideration. Elstane had not feared to let her discover his being the same with Sbarbuto; would he have revealed this grand secret of his life to any one, whom he had not destined to the silence of either death or eternal captivity. One or other seemed imminent, and Adelaide for the first time censured herself, and gave way to a feeling of remorse for former coquetry.



From the hag that attended her, the captive Adelaide could draw no consolation whatever ; the old woman regarded her with a look of peculiar sternness and malevolence. Ill will was evident in all her motions, and there was no relief from the tyranny of her gaoler, even in the sympathy of an attendant, which old romances inform us frequently was the case. Adelaide in vain endeavoured to discover the region in which she was, the name of the castle and village; but she made no doubt in her own mind that both were those of Monte Leone. In vain she endeavoured to soften the aversion of her attendant for her; she even affected respect for the Madonnas and other sacred images that hung around the apartments, thinking, perhaps, that it was as an heretic that she attracted dislike instead of pity. But not even the affectation of devotion for her favourite saints could conciliate the old attendant, bring a smile to her visage, or any thing like a willingness to receive and afford information to her ears and tongue.



Whilst Lady Devenish was thus in that worst stage of terror—suspense—the Prince of Monte Leone was immersed in thought, not more certain, nor more tranquil. The resolution to seize and bear away Adelaide had been taken in a hurried moment. His spies had warned him of the visit about to be paid by the party to Terni, and he grasped the opportunity at once, without giving himself time to reflect upon what his ulterior treatment of her would be. To have the being that first spurned him completely in his power, was alone and in itself a gratification.



If the thoughts of Elstane had vacillated between his old affection and his long cherished revenge, in Rome, at the first sight of Adelaide, and in his subsequent converse with her, much more was his mind torn and divided at present between these conflicting sentiments. Her late conduct there to him previous to his departure, had certainly awakened all his former rancour, at that time almost subsided ; and that rancour still endured, allayed however, somewhat, by beholding her in so helpless a condition, and appeased by its being now in his power to gratify it to the utmost. In a fit of irresolution he had visited Adelaide; and as he has frequently appeared in the presence of many as Sbarbuto, who had not recognized him as the Prince, yet had not been discovered, he was in hopes, that neither might Adelaide discover the identity.



She had, however; and he, aware of the train of terrors which the knowledge of being in his power would lead her into, took the first draught of revenge, by abandoning her to those terrors, with a parting threat, calculated to increase them. In those Adelaide spent the rest of that day, and the night which closed it. Elstane made his appearance on the morrow.

" For God's sake, my lord," said Lady Devenish, " release me from suspense, and let me know to what fate your hatred destines me."

" My hatred, Adelaide !"

" You yesterday declared it, Sir ; and do not your actions bespeak it ?"

" They do bespeak, indeed, an interest in your fate; but who can say, whether it be of love or hate."



"They are the same, Elstane, both equally fearful to me." , ; '-."v.v :- * ,•-' -;-i,<*

" Say not so,—'they may bring very different consequences."

" Release me, Elstane, I will keep the secret you have so imprudently suffered me to possess, and I will depart from Italy."

" Impossible J the thought is too hazardous. Here you must be content to abide for a while, in secret and in safety."

" Safe, Elstane, whilst your present mild mood lasts ; but an hour hence may bring over you the black bile of your rancorous and revengeful thoughts, and—"

" Yes, my fickleness is well remarked; but if the first burst, the extreme of my bitter thoughts, for which I have had good cause, Adelaide, produced to thee no detriment, future paroxysms will not. To have seen you too is to be disarmed. I cannot forget what preceded all,—my love, my early adoration of thee."

VOL. III. H



" Avoid these thoughts above all others, Elstane. They lead to the bitter consequences. They may lead even me to renew that conduct which has so galled you. Forget, and let me depart. You but excite yourself and me to suffering.''

" Depart from hence you cannot, Adelaide. I had some idea to communicate, but you seem high, harsh, and not prepared. You forget how and where you are. I leave you to another night's meditation, and to-morrow I may find you in a temper more rational."

" Elstane," said Lady Devenish, but the Prince had abruptly departed.





CHAPTER XIII.

The mind of Elstane was distracted between conflicting passions; with the vague desire of gratifying all or either, he had grasped at the object of his interest, and that now within his power, he could not resolve which of those passions he should allow to predominate, or to which of them he should render his fortunate capture subservient. One moment the daemon stirred within him; his wrongs, his sufferings, the blight that his feelings had undergone, were present to his mind; and to gratify his hate to the uttermost was then his decision. But how ? The revenge he desired to take was by moral punishment, to torture or insult an enemy



were not his ideas of revenge, and he scarce saw any other kind than these in his power with respect to Adelaide, whose heart was not so linked to Sir Edward as to pine or break at the separation. Her captivity was of course to her a source of inconvenience, of terror, at least of ennui, but of any greater suffering it was not productive. None, even the most diabolical, can coolly obey the dictates of hate, and follow up projects of vengeance, unless the meanness of the feeling be somewhat redeemed by the power and manliness of the person hated, by the grandeur or refinement of the means employed. Elstane gnashed his teeth in impotent wrath ; the object that had stung him was but a woman, and his captive too, and he scorned every mode of retaliation that his resentment could devise.

Disappointed in one way of gratification, Elstane abandoned thoughts of revenge, and recurred to those tender feelings towards Adelaide that had so oft sprung forth, and had been as often blighted. He cursed his unheroic fickleness, as he felt the feeling begin to sway him; but he was too much the child of those varying whims to oppose any one of them successfully. The past came over him. He thought of Adelaide in her early loveliness, when he first beheld her; and the knowledge that she was at present in his power, disarmed his resentment for her ancient cruelty and slight. In a moment's magnanimity he had resolved to forget, forgive, and release her at once to the world again; but she was possessed of his secret, and this was a circumstance that demanded consideration, and resolution less hasty.



Whilst such fickle reflections held Elstane awake upon his pillow, thoughts of unmingled dread alone possessed Adelaide. She feared every thing from the fierce and revengeful temper of her old lover, and was, aware that her discovery of him must of itself prolong her captivity. Her mind was perhaps more painfully occupied than Elgtane's; his was distracted by irresolution, a necessity of doing and determining something, and sleep was scared from him by such a state; to her, on the contrary, oppressed with one feeling of terror, and knowing that all was useless save patience and hope, fatigue brought at length its refreshing opiate. She no longer was conscious of the train of perspective suffering that still faintly gleamed upon her fancy, and the morning beam shone through the lattice of her prison as she slept.



Lady Devenish was suddenly roused by the entrance of a step into her apartment. She started up in terror. It was not that of Sbarbuto however, as her first waking fears conjectured, it was a female that entered—the same that had in a manner similarly secret and mysterious intruded upon her privacy in Rome. She was habited and armed precisely as she had been then, and Lady Devenish instantly recognised her menacer, who warned her to silence by a fierce gesture.



" Thus have you kept your promise, northern. Thus have you minded my threats," said Antonia.

" For having obeyed them too rigidly,'" replied Lady Devenish, " I am thus captured and imprisoned."

" In verita, and he is attached to thee, then ?"

" No, no, not attached," cried the captive, recalling words that she thought might prove dangerous, " but piqued—"

" I understand; and he is about to liberate and accept thy ransom."

" I fear not," said Adelaide.

" Rise then," cried Antonia, " I will put you beyond his love or hate, and will myself answer his wrath," added she, moved, and pacing the apartment not as lightly as secrecy demanded.

Lady Devenish once more willingly obeyed the order of the fierce damsel, and habited herself for departure without affording Antonia any opportunity of again urging her. Antonia then led the way from the prison. They traversed staircases and corridores innumerable, full of terror, and interest, and heart-beating— at least to Adelaide—until having arrived at the postern by which the captive lady had been formerly introduced, she and her conductor now made their exit by the same. To render Adelaide's escape certain, the brigande aided her to recross the torrent and surmount the steep side of the ravine beyond, and then re- , commending her to seek some cottage and the means of flight, with a tale of prudent secrecy, Antonia returned to the castle of Monte Leone. The Prince in the meantime arose after a late and troubled sleep to his uneasy state of indetermination. After long internal combats of this nature, and alternating from a strained, energetic mood of mind to a relaxed one, resolution, generally subsides at least into the milder, as the wavering mind finds it easier to content itself





with this, than by exertion to work itself up to the other. So it was with Elstane; each fit of his misanthropy and spleen became less and less powerful, while those intervening thoughts of tenderness, dissuasive of harshness and revenge, grew to have power and ascendancy. In this humour he resolved once more to visit his prisoner.

The reader need not be informed that he found no Adelaide in the apartment, to which she had been consigned. Antonia was there in her stead, and Elstane's regards seeking Lady Devenish, met .those of Antonia.

"How is this, Antonia, where is the prisoner ?"

" What prisoner ?"

"The Englishwoman."

" Aye, your fair countrywoman. You may - seek and not find her, Giulio."

" Do not trifle with me, girl. Thou durst not have set her free."

" What durst I not do, Giulio, if I would '<-"" " Not this, woman, if you regarded life." '• I do not regard life more," said Antonia, with a firm though deep voice, " and therefore did it."



Elstane paused a moment, looked sternly at her, who thus defied him. " For what purpose, my good girl, do you trifle with a man like me, —do I love jesting ?"

" If I trifle, you have taught me." "How, or with what ?" " With all that is serious, dear, or vital; hast thou not trifled, Giulio, with woman's love, with woman's heart ?"

" With thine, I suppose."

" With mine."

" Indeed."



" Yes, Giulio, I will speak, and will reproach you for the last time. You have trifled with me. You sought our hand, an outcast, a miserable despairing wretch, hated by a World that spurned you from it, and where you left behind not one that cared for your fate. This was your grief, your despair, and I, even I, Elstane, born to better things, though there thou foundest me, took pity on thee—loved thee, when nought else would—restored thy wandering reason, and gave thee that affection which I vainly thought could have consoled you for the slights of others. So you vowed at least; and that, like thy every other word, was false. I was a rude, unadorned, unintriguing woman of the mountain, and of robber's lurking holes,—not the courtly, wily dame of society, who smiles and fascinates by torch-light. —You have forsaken me——''



" We will settle these complaints afterwards, Antonia; where is the Englishwoman ?"

" In hell, then,—since you interrupt and insult my griefs with mention of my rival."

" Woman, thou hast not committed murder?" asked Elstane aghast. Whilst Antonia, whom jealousy had worked up to the temper of a fiend, enjoyed the horror that Elstane's mistaken suspicion caused him. She thought she perceived in his sudden emotion, the pang of love disappointed; and the sight increased her jealousy and rage.



" Thou hast not murdered her ?" again asked Elstane.

" Have I not, traditoreT' exclaimed Antonia, seeming to allow the truth of-the accusation, and pointing to her stiletto, " a robber's mistress to fear, or know not how to take vengeance."

"• Then by all thine accursed saints," cried Elstane, every vein swelling with desperate anger, " thou shalt follow thy victim. What wert thou to me but the play-thing of an hour,

thou sanguinary , thou with a heart to

feel. Compare thyself with her,—be jealous of Adelaide de Renzi. I never loved, nor cared for thee an atom, and will now never see thee more."

" Kill me Giulio, kill me," cried Antonia, " 'twere better mercy. You threatened it. Fulfil your threat. You have spoken bitterer than the blow can be.''



" I may have threatened," replied Elstane, his fury, but not his agitation subsiding, as he trembled in every limb, " but I am no executioner, no assassin. Go thy way, woman. Death will find thee soon enough."

" It will, thou hast truly spoken, thou slabber with the tongue—this is a nobler weapon," and as she spoke, Antonia buried the stiletto in her neck. She had learned too truly where the fatal blow should be dealt. In an instant she was a corpse at the foot of Elstane.

A number of the banditti rushed in at the instant into the apartment, with the tidings, that the prisoner had escaped,—that Lady Devenish had been seen riding from the village of Monte Leone.

" What! she, that was here, alive, escaped, —then have I murdered my Antonia for a lie !"

" You," cried a robber, " Sbarbuto murder the daughter of our ancient chief ?"



" 'Tis true, my friend.''

The words that passed were few. The robbers were indignant at what they thought the bloody and ungrateful crime of their chief—a crime this was even to them. Elstane provoked them. And ere the life-blood of Antonia ceased to flow, that of the unfortunate Prince of Monte Leone mingled with her's. He died by the swords of the band, which he had so often led to peril and to gain.

A few days after this catastrophe, the following paragraph appeared in the Diario di Roma:

" It is with the utmost regret, consternation, and horror, that we have to relate, that a body of daring and nefarious brigands, found access last week into the castle of Monte Leone, and there after having plundered the palace, murdered in cold blood, the illustrious and excellent Prince thereof, whose memory Rome will long lament, &c. &c."

The truth was of course whispered amongst the higher circles, within which every Italian event is carefully confined ; the public knew no more than what the official lament of the Diario informed them.





TL CRITICO.

INTRODUCTION.

There was a strange, whimsical, old bourru, for some time a prisoner at Verdun, of the name of Malkin, which the morose and cynic temper of the man had occasioned to be increased to the more characteristic one of Grimalkin, and by no other appellation than this was he known there latterly. He was a detenu, one of those Englishmen seized by the French government upon the rupture of the short peace : and to a civilian, who had never calculated on suffering ill person the hazards of war or captivity, the fate was a cruel one, thus to be exiled and immured unjustly for the best years of his life. Malkin, never perhaps the best tempered of men, was by this rendered a most ferocious cynic, and his inamiability was not softened by finding himself in the midst of military countrymen, whose habits, conversation, and amusements were every way uncongenial to his.



Malkin was a man of letters, of studious habits, and refined taste; and it was whilst in gratification of his love of the arts and antiquity he voyaged in Italy, that the French seized him as an English subject, and consigned him to thirteen years captivity. Thence he issued in fifteen, and for some years subsequent he was detained in England by a law suit, which terminated in the detents favour, and recompensed him for his long captivity by late riches.

This arranged, the old gentleman set forth



to revisit Italy, and for some reason best known to himself, he caused his passport to be drawn out, not for Jeremiah Malkin, but for the name of Doctor Brown. Under this title he determined to travel, and no doubt he had some forcible reasons for assuming a false name in his passport, a species of deceit which the police of all foreign countries are peculiarly severe in punishing. Our Doctor however defied the police to undoctor him, and the better to become his new character Malkin mounted a wig, brown as his name, and moreover taking the hint from the Jtomme gris of the French stage, or the Green Man of Jones's humorous translation, he habited himself in brown from head to foot, a colour moreover with which- the cynic's bilious countenance offered no sort of contrast. He found it convenient thus to affect the humourist, since he could not live without exercising his satire on all around, and by offering a weak or ridiculous side to the world, the world is indulgent enough in return to endure a great deal of impertinence, provided always it assume the semblance of wit, from a personage who thus pays for such immunity by a degree of self-exposure.



In this guise the soi disant Doctor traversed Italy ; a man of such shrewdness, information, and wealth was no where unknown; and on his route he obtained perhaps from the chance cry of some malicious children the appellation of Doctor Bruno, by which he became to be as universally styled in Italy, as by Grimalkin at Verdun. Luckily all his Verdun acquaintance had enjoyed in that amiable fortress a sufficiency of continental life to satisfy them for some time, and render England a more agreeable and novel residence to them than Italy could prove; so that the Doctor ran little chance of being recognised as Grimalkin. And a lap*e of twenty years, seconded by a formidable perriwig, was sufficient to defy recognition on the part of any old friends whom he might have formerly known in Italy.



Such was the personage who took his place in the diligence from Lyons, which crossed the Alps to Turin. The Doctor was one of those who love a diligence, its adventures, its characters, its conversation. Like all old people who have outlived friendships, those passing acquaintanceships afforded him vast amusement,—the more so, the more they happened to be of that lower rank of life which was not to be mingled with in saloons. He was in a good humour moreover, rare with him ; he was hastening to revisit a land for which he had felt an early love, and where he promised himself the delight of observing the changes that twenty years of varying fate had operated, and of comparing the present with the past. As he was a lover too of the last century, Lyons had pleased him. There was nothing new, modernized, fantastic about the town; the filthj the dark coloured mansions, the mode of life, and even of thought, political as well as otherwise, at Lyons, still savoured of the early days of the revolution, that is, of a score of years previous. And Malkin, who was sick of the modern cant, the plaster and the mason's hammers that notify the eternal improvements, the modernizings of London and of Paris, was pleased with a city, where the innovating hand of the present century was so little visible.



From these reasons the Doctor was in a mood of rare self-complacency, and surveyed his companions in the crazy but ample machine in which they were embarked with the air of a philanthropist more than with that of a cynic. The first person his eye hit upon, and whom he addressed, was one of that species of Frenchmen that throng Italy, namely, commis voyageurs, gentlemen who smuggle adroitly, talk with assurance of course against priests and ultras, whom the commercial spirit, so widely spread in the present time through all ranks of Frenchmen, causes them to hate and despise, and any one of whom I recommend to the attention of my inquisitive countrymen, as affording a sample of how the middling ranks in France are educated and affected. The cynic tried the young votary of commerce on divers subjects, and after probing some time in order to discover satisfactorily in what exact peculiarity or possession the young Frenchman was so peculiarly vain, he ascertained that the very nucleus of his pride was his being a Parisian. He boasted of his being a native of that unrivalled metropolis, and looked with contempt down upon all his provincially born companions. Now an Englishman, thought Malkin, would rather give himself out as a native of the Orkneys, than allow himself to have been born a cockney.



Having indulged his curiosity and love of comparison by the study of one subject, the Dottor turned him to another, who happened to be one of his own countrymen, a youth also of somewhat superior rank in life to the Frenchman. Now let us see, thought Malkin to himself, what the foible of the Englishman may be. In pursuance of this resolution, the Doctor questioned his young compatriot, who was travelling of course for pleasure. The youth had been in Italy before it seemed, and of this trip he was not a little proud; so that had he known that twenty years since the figure that addressed him had been a traveller there, he must in consistency have almost worshipped him. As the Frenchman's pride was centered in the exact place of his birth, that of the Englishman lay in the extent of his travel; the latter seemed to care not a fig for his country, he was too liberal by far for any sentiment so vulgar as patriotism ; and all the execrations uttered by others against the climate of England, the young Bull was always forward to echo. His delight was in the south, and his greatest vaunt that he was born to live under its pure and sultry sky. He was highly offended at the old gentleman in brown for hinting that he suffered from the heat; he repelled the insinuation as the grossest insult that could have been offered to him, and averred that he utterly abhorred any meaner temperature than 90°.





Whilst the Dottor turned inside out, for his passing amusement, these two specimens of the rival nations, the third person seemed to enjoy the ridiculous presented by the others with much shrewdness and some pity. But when still unsated, Malkin turned with the same jntentions towards him, the Italian, for such he was, very soon gave the old gentleman.roughly to understand that he had mistaken his man, and that two fools in one journey ought to content him.

The traveller who thus rebuffed the cynic was also very young, although his air and complexion and habit bespoke some years of military service. A scar or two on his visage, and a red ribbon at his button-hole, showed that he had taken an early opportunity of distinguishing himself; and a few years of peril and glory, if the latter is to be reaped in the gallant ranks of a conquered army, had given him all the self-possession of a man of the world far his elder. He was an Italian, he informed the inquisitive Malkin, and had served the Russian campaign in the division of the viceroy, Beauharnais. " Whither was his journey bent ?" " To his native city, Florence." " His name ?" " The Viscomte Perotti.''



" Perotti," quoth Malkin, " why I was extremely well acquaipted with—hem—ha—do you know the Comte Perotti ?"

" Pretty well," replied the youth, " the Comte being my own father."

" Impossible," rejoined Malkin.

" Monsieur," cried the young soldier in

VOL. III. I



amazement, and after a moment's pause, " my good old gentleman in the tobacco-coloured wig and small clothes, you have displayed more impertinence since you entered this vehicle than I thought modest England could contain. You imagine perhaps that by assuming the habit of a character, you may use the language. But in this case I swear to you it shall not be repeated with impunity."

" Stoutly spoken thou beardless hussar; we will not quarrel, but something tells me that I shall see you on your knees to me yet, craving pardon for this your impertinence."

" Me kneel !" said the youth, all that was soldier in him blushing at the word, " I vow, old boy, if you constitute yourself my confessor, you will fi»d a very refractory penitent."

" And I vow to worry thee, boy, into good behaviour in thy despite; for I have taken a considerable liking to your impertinence."

" Preserve your friendship for those who





value it, my old Zingaro. I hate your nation, and only tolerate thee at present, because we are compelled to be fellow travellers."

As the conversation thus grew national and warm, the commis began to look important and eager to join in the controversy, whilst the young Englishman, instead of taking the part of his countryman, affected to contemn national prejudices, and both arguers as dreadfully illiberal.

" You are a Bonapartist then," said Malkin, in wrath at the sound of his name from whom he had suffered captivity.

" Ni oui ni non," rejoined the young soldier, •' but I am sufficiently one to wish that we had had a struggle with you for life and glory on your own soil."

" That I honour you for, hate us as you will; but since you are but half an admirer of the tyrant, here's my hand; given it has been to few, and never given without a measuring or without consequences."



" Que le diable nfemporte" said the Italian; " if I understand either your enmities or friendships. But here, since thou art a queer, blunt, old fellow; and is this a step to my worshipping you on my bended knees as you have threatened ?"

" We'll talk of that when the time approaches. It was a word that leaped from my mouth without bidding; and I never knew one of those headlong prophecies fail altogether. Nous verrons."

" Notts verrons," replied the soldier. In the meantime the carriage rolled through the flat and insipid country, that universally stretches at the foot of the Alps and on either side of them for some extent, and no external object intruded its view to distract Malkin from knitting a friendship with his chance acquaintance, to whom he seemed to have taken a strange, sudden, and in him most unusual liking.

It was not till the second morning that the tedious vehicle and its company approached the magnificent range of the sunny Alps. These in the grey morning began to rear their craggy line of bulwarks, here jutting out, and there retreating, in the boldness of nature's own irregular fortification, whilst more lofty Alps were seen peeping up from behind the internal keeps and dungeons of this regionary fortress.



" Ben provide Natura al nostro stato

Quando de 1'Alpi schermo

Pose fra noi, e la Francesca rabbia,"

repeated Malkin, as he and his young companion ascended on foot the natural barrier of Italy. The Englishman was moved at thus entering the land, where for the first and the last time, he observed with a sigh, he had tasted the genuine pleasures of life. The young Italian too could not be without some sensations on retreading his paternal soil; and both in consequence looked on the scene in that excited *tate in which so noble a one should alone be looked upon. The road wound up the first stepping stone of the Alps, as the Echelles may be called, amidst crags that sunk precipitously down to where the barrier stream brawled, as if it would express by its noisy dissonance the separation which it marked. It was a wild, bleak pass in despite of the clime; shrubs, and nought but stunted shrubs, vegetated in the crevices of the rocks, and the two countries whose opposite borders rose from the stream frowned in bareness and defiance at each other. It had been the scene too of many a sharply contested struggle, and not a few of the laurels of Catinat and Villars were gathered on this spot, so well known in the annals of tactics. But the young soldier thought little of these heroes of the old school of warfare. No peculiar impertinence in him, when even Turenne is criticised and slighted by Bonaparte. He had no faith in military genius illustrated at any period previous to the days of Monte Notte and Millesimo.





" Which do you feel, proud or humble, young Italian," said Malkin to him, " in thus beholding the barrier of your country ?"

" Neither one nor the other. There is little left to be proud of now on either side. Vivent les viettesfemmes, elles regnent partout."

" Of what country do you consider yourself?"

" You must give me time to think ; for our northern campaign, proved, by the miseries it brought, such a school of selfishness, that I have almost forgotten since where either my patriotism or my allegiance is due. But as I hope to gain admittance into the good, easy guards of notre bon Jtomme, the archduke of Florence, I must, I suppose, try to consider myself a Tuscan, a circumstance by the bye I had almost forgotten, and must in consequence, as a good citizen, hold in utter abhorrence all other Italians, the Frenchified Milanese, for example, and the priest-ridden Romans. Ah! long life to old Italy, where patriotism has meant a love of the municipality ever since the days of our good priors."



" Babel with its confusion of tongues," said the old man, casting up his eyes, " was nothing to this confusion of all ancient feelings, brought about by an inundation of ragged, republican Frenchmen. I fear that I shall recognize few of the features of my poor Italy."

" How long is it since you have been there ?"

" Twenty years—an age. I do not think I ever knew an Italian whose memory dated so far back."

" Aye, the southerns are happy in the art of forgetting, and five years back forms the horizon of their retrospect."

" Well, they at least know how to enjoy the present,"

" But meagre fare they feed on in the way of pleasure at present."

" Morally as well as physically, you have





heard how little the Italian can live on; water melon or maccaroni for his stomach, and his vanity is as easily sated."

Here they were overtaken by the lumbering vehicle, and the conversation as well as friendship between the new acquaintances kept increasing in warmth until they reached Chamberi, when the Charmettes supplied them with an inexhaustible fund of argument and discourse. The next day they climbed together Mont Cenis, and kindled their mutual zeal with contemplating together the views, the hues, and gorges of the Alp. " These are not changed at ieast," observed Malkin. " Hundreds of living tides have swept over this eternal mound to devastate yon fair peninsula; there they have wrought changes. But here are none. On the Alps, as on the ocean, man and his machines may pass, but nature resumes her reign the moment he is gone."

" You will have other comments to make, my good Doctor,'" observed Perotti, " on descending into yon plain, for Italy lay outstretched before them far; and from the height where they were stationed, the lesser Alps scarcely appeared more than hillocks upon the vast extent of country that seemed to be visible almost to the Adriatic.



In despite of the poetical exclamation of old Grimalkin, man has left some memorial of him upon those lofty places, which have undergone certainly some changes in their state since Horace Walpole and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu passed them with inconveniences, •which certainly exist not now, and which they have humorously described in their letters.

Mai kin and Count Perotti soon reached Turin, nor did they separate there.





LETTER I.

Milan.

Ah ! my dear friend and fellow captive, you did well not to accompany me. The Italy we once knew is no more. Its ease, its gaiety, its frankness—that perfect absence of every impediment in the smooth road of life—of suspicion, care, prejudice, is no longer to be met with and enjoyed. All is changed—the very dolce far niente, that was once the essence, the vital spark of an Italian's life, is extinguished in a kind of yearning after being active, rather than in activity itself. Bless you, the nobles whom twenty years since I left on couches lolling, I find on horseback, in clubs, in libraries, talking no longer of belia donnas and of prima donnas —no, but of politics, news, amelioration, constitution, and a thousand other fine things, the rumour of which never reached us in our captivity. One old noble, who to my own knowledge faithfully attended his chosen mistress for thirty long years unfatigued, and unvarying in the tone of his addresses, or the topics of his diurnal conversation, hath left a son, whom I called on from respect to his father's memory, with letters of cover, since here I am incog. What, think you, were the objects of his enquiry ?—Some new improvement in the Lancastrian school of education, and he marvelled that I had not brought him the last pamphlet of the benevolent Mr. So-and-So, on the state of theprisons in England—I was amazed : and made a retreat towards the palace of a Duchess, who once was all that was trifling and amiable in society, and tender in friendship. Again, amazement—she entertained me with an enigmatical tirade against Castlereagh and the holy alliance. Now patriotism is a fine thing, and so is politics, and so is liberalism ; but, answer, if they be not cold first fruits of hospitality, sorry greetings to an old traveller, who was always bored enough with the utile, through all its moods and tenses, in busy England, to fly to dear, warm Italy, in search of the dulce.





And this the good folks call the progress of civilization. Ah, cant is a delightful thing to make folks contented with the present whim, and dole forth its pedantry in the guise and semblance of philosophy. Its effects as yet have been singularly unfortunate. Milan, that lovely, noble, and social city, which I remember brilliant and united as one lovely and delightful family, exists now but in sullen groups, looking with fear and suspicion on each other, and breathing but in whispers. The great families, that could open an asylum of cheerfulness at least, to the others, are each absorbed in the selfishness of private sorrows or reverses, occasioned by the too just love of some of their members for this said speedy civilization. The talons of Austria's double eagle seem to have been infixed in every heart, and altogether, from highest to lowest, so unhappy a people I never beheld. As for me, whether the fault be with the rulers or the ruled, I care not, the effect is all that concerns such a being as myself, who have suffered long and extraordinary enough to find Rochefoucault's maxim no startling paradox, and who beholds in other's ills some slight consolation for his own; nevertheless, in despite of such consolations, Milan fails not to weary and disgust me. I had looked for some of my old enjoyments, my old society—but all is changed—I am as one of the seven sleepers, and awake to idle life whenever any object familiar to me has passed away.



To do justice to Turin, nevertheless, I found it as petty and as loyal as ever, with all the petit maitreism that the presence of an actual court, be it ever so poor, communicates to those who surround it . I climbed up the ladder of a hayloft to see poor G , whom I had remembered a youth of my own age combating against me, and venting Rousseauism in discomfiture of my Burkeism. I had no fear of his recognizing me. He kindled up with the vivacity of a Frenchman, determined to be prodigal of all the hospitality he could afford—his smiles. I chatted of old times, but could extract from him nothing beyond a shrug; yet the fellow had materials to have answered me, having directed the diurnal of the " power that was," whatever power that happened to be for all the years that have elapsed since; but I never blame the reed for bending, it is its nature; it is only the man of pith, which, like the bull-rush, cannot bend without breaking, and becoming incapable of



again assuming an erect posture. G is the

only Turinese who has any pretensions to a literary character, if we except the historian of the American war, whom I saw at Paris sunning himself in the Palais, habited like an Abbe of the last century. I like the man, and would have spoken to him, but that I feared the keen



old fox would have known me. Poor G ,

I believe he is starving for all his secretaryship.

By the bye, M , the Greek, is here, in the

legation of some great northern power, affecting liberality, whilst he receives the wages of despotism. Bien Grecque, said B , who neither

loves him, nor his more celebrated compatriot. He is learned, however, and can actually read Homer in the original,—a feat for Italy. I was astonished to hear him speak of Monti with admiration. I knew that the young Greek scholar had aspired to the lovely daughter of the poet, and had been a received suitor till that wealthy dilletante in literature, Count P—, made his appearance, and carried off the prize.

M was wroth, but years work wonders;

and he now speaks of his mistress, his rival, and of the poet, without resentment. He is too fond, I suppose, of the good things of Milan, to remain at variance with a knot so admired as Monti, Monti's son-in-law, and daughter.



But, good heaven ! what a trifling feat to acquire literary reputation in Italy ! There, indeed, " it is an easy leap to pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,"—what have those fellows done, that would not and has not been . done better by any stripling amongst us, that has ventured on the forlorn hope of the pen ? One beggarly essay, the fruits of a month's lazy reading, and more lazy thinking, has proved sufficient to place this man high and almost unrivalled, on the critical bench. But Greek is the grand object of deism and admiration, because no one knows it—they are as desperate Athenians here in literature, as we at home endeavour to be in architecture, with perhaps about as much success.

But as Alfieri says,

" G\& m' immildno,

E quivi io tosto esclamo un altro Oimd

Le cene, e i pranzi, e il volto ospite umano,

E i crassi corpi e i vie piu crasse ingegni,





Che il Beozio t' impastan col Germane,

Fan si ch' io csclami: ' Oim6, perchd pur regni,

Alma bontit degli uomini, sol dove

Son di materia inaccensibil pregni!' "

The Milanese gave a full refutation of this bitter satire almost at the time it was written, by the verses of Monti. His birth place and country can scarcely be stigmatised in the present day as the Boeotia of Italy, and the Tuscan-loving satirist might even there have seen enough to have made him reverse his judgment.

I saw the Cavalier, as Monti was now called, as weak and vulgar a personage as a poet need well be. He looks just the man that would deal forth the old critical abuse that we remember him immersed in; and precisely the butcherlike looking fellow, that would compose such butcher-like verses as the following, on the decapitation of the unfortunate Louis. You can never have heard the diabolical ode; and although it would be death, without benefit of clergy, here to be known to be possessed of it even in memory, I shall still scribble one verse for your just appreciation of Cavalier Monti.



" Tingi il diio in quel sangue spietato

Francia, tolta all' indegne catene ;

Egli e sangue alle vene succhiato

Di tuoi figli che il crudo trad}.

Cittadini che all' arme volate,

In quel sangue le spade bagnate,

La Vittoria ne bellici affanni

Sta sul brando che i regi feri.

Giu dal trono, crudeli tiranni,

II servaggio del monde fini,"



France never produced a specimen of such disgusting jacobinism as this, by the pious author of the verses on the death of Basseville. At present, however, secure on the political shelf with a pension, a rich son-in-law, and the order of the iron crown, Monti is engaged in a vigorous and amusing war with the good literati of Florence, about the Cruscan dictionary, and superiority of the latter. In carrying this on, he has published a very fearful Philological Proposta, in five volumes, about as lengthy and tedious a proposal as Slender would have gone on to make to Anne Page if dinner had not cut short his courtship. Could you but see the logical argument that he brings into the field against his opponents, the old lumbering syllogism, quotation and authority— it is like a modern light infantry man taking the field with an old English cross-bow, or an arquebuss, or matchlock of centuries past. As his enemies, the Cruscian, however, are not a jot more advanced in wordy warfare, or more weaned from the critical weapons of their ancestors—it seems likely to be a drawn battle. I would Tassoni were living to immortalize in octave rhyme their pedantic combat; it is worthy of



the bard of the " Ravished Tub." P ,

too, has entered the field, and, like another Ajax, covers old Hector with the seven-fold shield of his pedantry, thick as his noble scull; and even G , whom I spoke of, has flung



his dart against the Cruscan, in furnishing to the grand work an essay, in which Johnson's dictionary is elevated above the united labours of La Crusca. ' Quelle belle cftose que L'orthographie,"" said Moliere.

More of this, however, when I enter the head-quarters of the enemy. Monti I re-met at the Marchesa's. Behold us at table,—the wits, amongst whom was jammed and,los.t my miserable self, at the Marchioness's end of the table, around her. Lo, with the first morsel, their inflammable excitements light up—some subject is started, tongues are in motion, and gesticulating hands keep time to the voices, each brandishing a silver fork ever and anon with a piece of viand affixed to it. Her ladyship was as loud as any, and let me tell you, the Milanese dialect in the mouth of a female, is any thing but distingub. In vain the domestics thrust the passing plat between the heads of the arguers, they talked—when lo !



they were checked in mid-career. " Qui non si parlor politico," exclaimed the grave voice of the Marchese, and all were mute as mice; the argument was quashed, and the noise of mastication alone resounded in the saloon—a desperate noise, most desperately mauvais iont amongst us, I should think, foreigners do make in the jaw exercise, of both kinds, whether of emitting words, or admitting viands.

What a propensive look of aristocracy and patronage his Marchese-ship has—he evidently deems his five thousand a year a ne plus ultra in incomes, and he is right for his latitude. He is a true, cautious, shrewd noble. They call him here laclie, simply because he is no fool; now I honour his dignified apathy to the fate of a country that is past helping. Really for an Italian noble, or one or two of them, to think of combating the power of Austria, or asserting the independence of his country, is like struggling on the scaffold with the executioner; it were wiser to submit to one's



fate with dignity and resignation—to keep a spirit for the right season, if ever that should appear, but not to be vapouring it about on all sides and occasions, like the torch of a link-boy. There are a crowd qf the better born here, who are making fools of themselves already, and will end by making themselves and their country miserable. But my promise was to give you an account of literature ; and this is not digression, the Marquis being at the very head of the thing here. On the whole I like him ; and his wife is as shrewd as amiable, two qualities that combine but in woman, and seldom except in one of rank.

The conversation of Visconti was very interesting to me; nor was that of Manzoni less so—he who has the audacity to profess romanticism in the classic land of Italy, ultra classic too, since the days and ascendance of Alfieri. It is the Jyric parts of the Carmagnola that are beautiful, unfortunately not the dramatic. A great part of them are in the same strophe and stanze with Monti's infernal odes, and the comparison, both with respect to taste and poetic verse, is by no means favourable to the veteran. Never, theless, Manzoni is more spoken of in France than in Italy : at Paris I heard him rapturously extolled, nay even in London, whilst throughout the Peninsula, except to a small sect of Lombard friends, his name is made little mention of. Some one had given me a letter to that young scamp, Bertolotti, who seems a kind of light, satirical corsair, of whom all the world is afraid; somehow or another I could not find him.



So much for literature—now for myself. Know, that I have found a travelling companion. Thou, Malkin, Grimalkin, a companion? I hear your question in reply. Aye, some queer old character like thyself no doubt —an abbe; an antiquarian—or a priest with unclerical ideas beneath his tonsure—none of these, nor old, nor queer, nor learned, nor whimsical; but a young, brisk, headlong dragoon.—Dragoon !—Aye, dragoon, a halfpay cutter of throats, but lately the follower of him whose name makes me turn sick, and brings to my wrists and ankles the cool, uncomfortable idea of iron bonds.—But how, in the name of wonder?—Patience, and you shall hear. This youth and I were shaken into acquaintance simply by the tumbling of the Lyons diligence, in which I embarked myself plebeianly. His countenance did not strike me, until I heard him speak in a vain, impertinent, cavalier manner, by the bye, for which, nevertheless, I liked —on tient toujours a ceux de sa propre httmeur. On demanding his name, who should he prove but a son of my old friend Perolti! Although the Count was decidedly not married at the time of my happy sojourn of old in Florence, still the youngster assumes the name of Vicomte. Be it so. I am not the man to gainsay those innocent pretensions. Young Perotti, of course, is acquainted with all my old friends in Tuscany, and he has stores of such commu



VOL. III. X



nication, which when wearied with other thoughts, I am delighted to hear. Besides, he ought to be able to inform me respecting the particular object of my coming here. He ought, and, I think, is; but for what reason I cannot divine, whenever I make mention of the name, he avoids it scrupulously, and runs on in some of his military slang stories, to draw and mislead my inquisitiveness. What reason the boy can have for this, is impossible to imagine —how he can be touched or interested by any name connected with me. Still he is so decidedly, and this rivets me to him the more. He is not overburdened with money, the poor demisol, gay as he is. I have half told you, he was one of Buonaparte's cashiered. So that as an old friend of his father's, and a rich one too, I succeeded in keeping him with me ; and I believe, we shall make the tour of Italy together, at least as far as my denouement, should I happen to light on such an adventure. . But, say you, why do I not write and ascer





tain. My dear fellow, I have written repeatedly to the only address whence I could procure information without publishing my possible disgrace, and no answer returns. Why not take post for Rome, Florence, Naples, and put myself out of pain and incertitude at once ?— Ask you again. No, I am whimsical ; and like the sublime of pausing on the brink of a precipice and. gazing down. It surrounds me with a feeling of romance, that is flattering—fate has not yet cleared her accounts with me, so that I may still dream a liitle. and as I have pursued my suit leisurely in England without allowing myself to be distracted Dy what did, though it should not, interest me more ; so will I continue my journey by tiie maiked out, regular route leisurely; and if 1 light upon the worst, why it will happen but as an every day circumstance after all.

Adieu.





LETTER II.

Verona.

Tijere is no flying post through Lombardy; at every step, at every town, the stranger is delayed by the hospitality and attractive conversation of some well-informed noble. Verily the aristocracy of Italy begins to rival our own. Ugoni, Arrivabeni, Velo, these are men that deserve an upper chamber to sit in, with some influence in the affairs of their country. Something of the kind must happen, unless indeed, they are silly enough to break out in a premature insurrection, and then—why, as usual, they will be the servifrementi, till another half century brings round another calm prospect of freedom.



You know Ugoni's excellent continuation of Corniani's very bad book. I know not where so many enlightened men are to be met with as in Lombardy, and their conversation is more delightful than that of either our London or Paris circles. The misfortune of London is that every thing is in print; there can be no thought, no remark, no tidings that can possess the least charm or novelty in conversation;— not only so, but all those who can speak, write too, and consequently in one's intercourse with celebrated men, this reserve is continually perceivable—a parsimony, more than a want of ideas, the man avoiding to utter what must either be a repetition of his last essay or speech, or what must supersede something of the kind, that he meditates for the ensuing week. Now here fortunately, wits, statesmen and philosophers, have no vent for their bright or deep thoughts, whether stray or laboured, but in conversation. The press is shut against them, ditto the tribune, and a little rational chat amongst themselves, or with foreigners, is the only means they have left of airing their knowledge sufficiently to endue it with freshness and spirit, such acquirements, unlike wine, becoming insipid when sealed up.



In London no one talks ideas except in public ; in private the conversation is kept up by intercommunication of facts, of occurrences, of the materials in short for public holding forth. Hence London talk is dry ; it may be piquant at times, as anecdotes generally are, but in respect of thought it is devoid of all spirit and originality. Now the Parisian world sin in an opposite direction. They are too speculative, too philosophical, the Frenchmen of the present day. They reduce all to theory, and no matter what subject they discuss, whether present, past or future, politics, arts, sciences, or scandal, they always keep up, by way of accompaniment, a running base of profound philosophy, to which they refer, and by which they measure every thing. They systematize all, and from the first word of a person whom they have beheld for the first time, they will draw you a subtle sketch of what must be his character and disposition. Simple souls, they think to oppose ministerial acts, by fine theories, and while M. Villele, disclaiming more than a dry unfolding of his budget, proceeds with the utmost coolness to overturn the entire and sacred constitutions of twenty years' standing, Royer Collard gets up to extinguish him with reasonings drawn from the primal philosophy and the first principles of human nature.



They are methodists in philosophy, the French; and so was De Stael, the Cybele of the present company of divine philosophers and statesmen in France. They think metaphysics, at least moral philosophy, never amiss; they carry it about with them, and coin it even into small chat, for their profoundly read, and profoundly thinking ladies.

Moreover the French talk too much; it is the crying sin of the nation, to which their eternal want of freedom and originality in all things can be traced. Their talk [is a kind of perpetual mill, in which ideas are ground to dust—they are so refined, turned, crushed and sifted, that you can no longer distinguish a new from an old, an original from an unoriginal one. Hence common-place is stamped on every thing they think or say, be it ever so profound ' or new. Translate any new sentiment into French, it is instantaneously common-place; translate a shallow, hackneyed remark into the same tongue, it instantaneously acquires piquancy and gloss. It is the bed of Procrustes, that stretches or reduces all sizes to its own standard of decent mediocrity. Such are its properties, such those of the nation—all attributable to their inextinguishable love of chattering, and communicating their ideas, yet crude, to one another.



Italy, I am happy to say you see I am

in better humour with our dear peninsula, than when I indited my last letter, but then ten days passed in chateaus of these Lombard nobles, from whence 'twas with difficulty I tore myself, have reconciled me to the country, and made me think it even superior to what it was of old. There is still certainly much of the ridiculous and the censureable amongst them, which will no doubt attract the notice of my splenetic pen, in any of its bilious moods; but for the present, happiness inspires me with panegyric. Italy, then, I was about to say, at least northern Italy, offers in the habits of its society, a medium between London and Paris, between the crude, dry anecdote, and soul-less intercourse of the one, and the affectedly profound and feeling, the speculative, mystic Germanism, and the continual struggle to shine and display, which spoils the other.



The Italians are social, but they can spend an evening, nay a week, alone. And silence, which proves a rack to any Frenchman, and a down bed to an Englishman, is to him a very sufferable state of repose. The dispersion, too, ft



of these enlightened men in their different cities, is productive of great advantage. Nothing is more true than that men of equal age benefit each other very little in the way of intellectual intercourse, if that takes place every day ; it is only when such minds meet after intervals, that the mutual developement of each other's thoughts and progress acts as incitement and improvement to each other.

In addition to these reasons which make the society of Lombard gentlemen, for I do not speak of the ladies, so agreeable, is the exclusive faculty which Italians possess, of diversifying grave subjects of conversation by the lighter topics of the arts. In England, and in France, they now talk as much upon those points, but 'tis no longer the same thing. Here they are at home on the subject; an Italian speaking of the arts, is like a beautiful female conversing on love; there is no learning, no borrowing of ideas, no acquirement, all is natural, and flows fresh from the feelings, and is felt as much even by those who cannot altogether comprehend the truth and force of the remarks. This, I need not say, is a relief, a repose to the mind after having reasoned on graver subjects, but in the north it is on those lighter subjects that men seem obliged to make the greatest exertion in order to shine, or even to utter any thing to the purpose. It is painful to hear an English company engaged in a discussion on the arts— not one thought or remark is ever derived elsewhere than from books or from southern mouths, —it is a continual effort, and no one in his proper place, all ridiculous. Beyle would say, it was as bad as a symphony of Haydn, played by amateurs. What is more strange is, that British folks delight in discussions, where they are so little at their ease.



By this time you have perceived that the old bourru is apprivoisi, completely so. The mild air of the south seems to have entered my blood. Although there are some things which put me out of humour. The women—but that is my old cue for ranting and railing, so I pass on, not to mar the unity of this amiable epistle. Perotti still holds by my side; I have not since tried him on the subject, that strangely enough appears to be nervous to us both. Stranger still, his military enthusiasm here awakened by the thousand spots marked by the blood of the French and Austrian armies, amuses me. I have marched and counter-marched with him and Napoleon from the Oglio; and every now and then he cries out in pointing to some indistinguishable hillock in the distant plain,—lo Castiglione, there Monte Chiara; and truly the country from Milan to Desenzano at least wants some association of the kind to vary its flat and uniform insipidity. In passing Catullus's lake and island, however, this became troublesome, for I was lost in the age of Augustus, whilst he was fighting Wurmser and Beaulieu on these classic coasts; and he was dunning me with some inflated paragraph of the French despatches of those times, whilst I was murmuring





" Peninsularum, Sirmio, insularumque,

Ocelle, quascunquein Hquentibusstagnis,

Marique vasto, fert uterque Neptunus.'

Quam te libentur, quamque loetus, inviso!"



Sadly ignorant those Italian youths of all that ought to interest them; education is at its lowest ebb. Still the youth pleases me.

The approach to Verona is wearisome. The Alps grow tame as they sink towards the Tyrol, and nothing but the towering height, and sublimity of these mountains, can compensate for their monotony. You see Verona, too, from a very great distance, as well as the long tedious road that stretches between you and it; although on the foot of the Alps, its situation is any thing rather than Alpine. I was not borne up with the enthusiasm which I had felt of old in approaching the city of the fair Capulet, and if we had not been received cordially by Count , I promise you all the



good humours which the hospitality and delightful society of my Lombard hosts had stored me with, would have evaporated ere I had poured it forth on paper to thee.

Adieu.





LETTER III.

Venice.

Lord Byron's admirable drollery represents Italian ladies as •' no blues—they never lisp in criticism," quoth the poet. And this too he •wrote at Venice. Now foreheaven, if not the " bluest," at least the " biggest of blue bottles" I e'er beheld is the Venetian dame at present, and his Lordship's intimate acquaintance, the Countess Albrizzi. She writes, hath written, and will write; and amongst her works are " Ritratti" as she called the publication or sketches of all her learned acquaintance. In addition to this, and in opposition to the sweet, unlearned naivete, described to be the quality of these southern houris, her conversation is more profoundly azure than any one of our island dames dared to be. But his Lordship spoke perhaps of a young unmarried female of Italy, and her I allow colourless.



You remember Sterne's delicious morceau of the three phases of womanhood in his day, coquetry, freethinking, and lastly—devotion. I remember the countess of old in the first stage, in which, to tell the truth, I do believe, she was a proficient. But the revolutions of the world since Sterne's day have sadly upset his grades. The esprit fort is now confined to the French women; English and Italian leave out altogether this stage of their progress, so much the vogue in the days of the sentimental traveller ; and in its stead the ladies of late have begun to substitute bhieism, and a very laudable, innocent substitute it is. And I, knowing what worse mania it has replaced, always treat it leniently, and give it quarter. Sterne, I am convinced, would have now read coquetry, blueism, and devotion. ; •



The Countess, in spite of the years that paint, alas, cannot disguise, is in the second stage most flagrantly, and loves to see men of science at

her levee. L , whom I asked to introduce

me, informed me that some character as a man of learning was necessary to my being well received. I gave him in return a carte blancke, being, as you know, a smatterer and indifferently versed in very many branches of knowledge. L chose for me the profession, as it happened, of the only study of which I know nought, viz. mathematics. Was I to blame for the blunder ? Who would have thought of a mathematician being acceptable to a lady of quality ? The event will teach me to calculate on the rationality of a woman's whim, or to give a carte blanche to the imagination of an Italian.

The Countess began to talk geometry to me, and that in the hearing of many listeners, for the purpose no doubt of bringing me out, and politely affording me the opportunity of uttering a few hard words. But the Brown Doctor was dumb, and all the world laughed at his expense.



One circumstance almost induced me to suppose that this leading Venetian dowager was verging towards the last stage that I have set down for womanhood. This was an etiquette which she seeks to establish in her pure domicile, that the males should restrict themselves and their lounging to one side of the apartment, and the ladies to another, something like the Scotch ball so humorously described in a letter of Goldsmith's. I fell into further disgrace by sinning most unwittingly against this by-law of the Palazzo Albrizzi, and by seating myself very cavalierly by the side of a fair dame, who seemed not at all displeased at my transgression. She allowed me to transgress for a sufficient time, this fair dame, and then was good enough to inform me both of my crime, the nature of the regulation, and the cause thereof,—the latter being no more than a Jaw to produce general conversation ; for were her large assemblies allowed to dissolve themselves into private tete-ii-tetes and couples, intrigue would eclipse blueism, brilliancy, and destroy the superiority of intellectual over physical charms. Gallantry would prevail to push the old dowager from her stool, and reign in contempt and forgetfulness of her. By the bye, it is the only attempt that I ever either beheld or heard recorded, to restrain the ease and complete freedom of an Italian saloon, and this too in Venice, the luxurious queen of the Adriatic, so famed ever for the looseness of her zone.



Here was Canova silent, whilst Cicognara spoke for him; you would have thought that the modern Phidias knew nothing of art, so simple did he seem, whilst the amateur poured forth his profound virtuoso verdicts. Canova has a countenance beaming with genius, whilst his conversation and demeanor possess all the honhommie of it. He is what we would call a simple, good-natured soul; only like Scott, too amiable, and too full of praise and lenient criticism for the young votaries of his art. His works indeed bear witness to this soft disposition ; he revels in the graceful, the reposing, the tranquil, whilst he in vain endeavours to express force and vigour by dint of distortion. His Hercules and his Boxers are examples. Calm energy he cannot body forth ; even the irritable worldly-thoughted Napoleon he has made a contemplative philosopher, and his Mars, for all his helmet and mustachios, is the god of any thing but war. He is at present amusing himself in ordering the arrangement of a church that he has erected at his own expense in his native village of Possaguo. He even quitted his own peculiar art to paint the palla behind the great altar.



But with riches and independence, even the arts have quitted Venice. Except the brazen horses, and Canova's Hebe, sculpture can scarcely be said to be represented in this noble city; and the pictures that Austria has caused to be restored, through decency in the first instance, to her, there will be soon found some pretext such as the sinking waters, or the ruin her own government has caused, for removing them to Vienna. One hope however is left— Venice itself cannot be removed, and Palladio alone will immortalize her, though if individual Englishmen can purchase and remove palaces, government might take it into their head to transport churches.



If the arts be thus low, to what depth must not literature have sunk ! The press of Venice was of old the most active one of Italy, besides being the oldest of Europe. I was surprised to meet with an edition of Bacon printed there wonderfully early, under the reign of the Inquisition of State. These mysterious tyrants suffered what an Austrian police would not; for certainly an attempt to re-print the Novum Organum, or indeed an English author of any kind, would be looked on as rank carbonarism. The booksellers in Venice are the most timid of



the Peninsula, and they form no bad barometer of the degree of oppression throughout different towns and states. At Milan there is a little less fear; those who are beneath the very eye of tyranny become used to it, and acquire the courage to deceive it. In Florence, Molini will procure you almost any book—nay print it, with the necessary precaution of placing Londra, and his brother's name, on the title page. In Rome, nothing of the kind is to be had at first, till you linger and talk liberalism to the dealer in literary wares, and anon after you have gained his confidence, he produces slily from a cunning nook, a volume of Rousseau, a Casti, a Lady Morgan, which last he displays to you with great self-complacency and triumph, demanding for it about four times the sum of the London edition. Such is the effect of martyrising a book, that fifty copies of this, an unprecedented sale for an Italian city, were disposed of instantly in Florence. At Naples, the police and censorship is, like the tyranny of all



hot climates, at once severe and remiss. They punish the least transgression with perpetual and lonely imprisonment, but take very little trouble to catch the criminal, unless voluntary information offers itself. Thus at Naples also any proscribed work may be procured; and even Monti's revolutionary writings are, I am told, more easily obtained there than at Milan. But my Venetian dealer in books shrugged his shoulders, and turned up his eyes in utter horror and amazement, upon being asked for some forbidden volumes. He was afraid the narrow street had echoed the suspicious name, and that he should be in a dungeon before night. But all this is natural to Venetians, who have never been from under a reign of terror.

I passed Verona without mentioning the name of Pindemonte, the Italian Gray, as some one has called him without much reason. His countrymen, who are by no means rural, scarcely understand his " babbling about green fields" and English gardens. His tragedy is very feeble, and even his lyrics have as much of the school of Delia Crusca as of Crusca. Still one cannot help esteeming and admiring the gentle, dilettante soul that could write pastorals, whilst his country was regenerating itself, or endeavouring to do so, by the aid of the French.



Conquerors often have had poets to celebrate their names, and transmit them to posterity embalmed in verses; but strange to say, revolutions and revolutionary heroes have always wanted tiiese chroniclers. The terrible machinery of turmoil and blood put into fearful motion in their time, fright away the muses; and revolution, however it may bribe bards already known, and perhaps viellis, to turn their stream of panegyric into a new channel, has never generated a poet for itself. The puritanical revolution of England would of course not have tolerated any such airy personages of such affinity to the old court fool, and rhyme always savoured to it of idolatry But France, whose enthusiasm was altogether of the patriotic kind, without any leaven of bigotry, or severity of morals, she too that delighted in fetes, and songs, and anthems, it is marvellous that it did not give birth to a patriotic poet. Yet notwithstanding one or two fine odes of Le Brun, neither he nor Chenier can be deemed to have supplied that desideratum.



In Italy, a more poetical soil, the French were happier : Monti, who had sprung to fame by a pious philippic against democracy, impiety, and revolution, read his recantation in verse as soon as he was paid for it. And the sublime translator of Ossian was also purchased by the conqueror to laud him, which Cesarotti performed with all the dullness of a laureate in the " Pronea." But both poets in gaining the favours, the largesses, crosses, and honours of the French Emperor, lost the confidence and admiration of their countrymen, who then looked around for another bard, young and independent, and one that would not forget patriotism in selfishness. This character they thought to espy

VOL. III. L



in a son, at least an adopted son, of this queen of the Adriatic.

This was Ugo Foscolo. He was well known at Padua for his temper, talents, and acquirements, long before he produced any work ; and the events of the revolution were of all other the most fit to develope such a character. No book ever made such an impression on Italians, as the Letters of Ortis. Nothing of the kind had ever appeared in the tongue. It had all the full feeling, the passion, that may be read and felt by every Italian, even by their unreading females; and under this popular guise it contained the germ of independence, it breathed a spirit comprehensively national, which was communicated to every heart Dante and Petrarch had written on this patriotic theme of old, but the days of these antiquated bards were considered past. Alfieri had lately sent forth some sparks of a similar tendency; they were nevertheless but sparks. The haughty aristocratic poet was splenetic, indignant, inde





pendent, but scarcely patriotic; and the republics and free states of his country drew down the strokes of his satire, as thickly as did the petty despots that enthralled it more ignominiously. Thus he exclaims on the subject of Genoa, the loss of whose liberty is so much lamented:—

" E bench'un Re non mi piacesse, io voti

Kon fea pur mai per barrattarmi un Re

In sessanta parrucche d'lcKoti."



There was no knowing what such a man would advise, or have. And all his admiration for England and contempt for Italy had the effect which the writings of most cynics have, that of hurting the vanity of the nation, without correcting or ameliorating it in the least.

Ortis was Alfieri's indignant patriotism, deprived of its peevishness, its waywardness, and unconquerable aristocratic prejudice. It was united too with the extreme of feeling and passion, which Alfieri was not at all endowed with. And the effect was greater than both the life and writings of the tragic poet; it inspired reading Italy with a common sentiment of union and love of their common country, and went farther than any other single cause to destroy those petty municipal patriotisms, which like cankers fretted and destroyed the great and the only worthy one. Its publication is an era of which Englishmen seem not to feel all the importance. The French saw its spirit, its influence. Buonaparte did all in hi* power to enlist its author amongst his literary satellites—in vain. And both author and book were proscribed tacitly, but still as virulently almost, as they have been since the restoration of Austria to her Italian dominion.



They are very proud of Foscolo in Italy, and deservedly. They seem really to love him; and the man, I believe, is most loveable at a distance, the

" A tutti aspro e a te stesso," as he addresses himself in one of his sonnets, being tod true to allow of his general amiability. Poor fellow, whilst he is busy writing criticism, translating Homer, and editing Dante, the worthy folks in power here will not but believe that he is still plotting for the liberty of his country, for which the poet is now too old and too us& to trouble himself. And for a bookseller to sell the Ortis would be a crime worthy of the carcere duro.



There is no Italian poetry more beautiful than the commencement and most part of the Sepolcri, although its termination be so pedantic and cold. It was addressed to Pindemonte, deservedly, for it is in the style of the Veronese poet, superior to any thing of his, and more truly in the vein of Gray. The political writing of Foscolo, such as his address to Bonaparte at the congress of Lyons, as well as his poetical fragments, are, owing to their proscription, exceedingly scarce. The following sonnet of his, which is rare to be met with, will amuse you if you have seen the man. It is what our young portrait painters now are so fond of—a full length picture of himself, encadri, in a sonnet, in imitation of a similar piece of vanity by Alfieri:—



" Solcata ho fronte, occhi incavati intenti; Crin fulvo, emunte guance, ardito aspetto; ' Labbro tumido acceso, e tersi denti,

Capo chino, bel collo, e largo petto ^

Giuste membra, vestir semplice eletto;

, Jtatti i passi, i pensier, gli atti, gli accenti ;



Sobrio, umano, leal, prodigo, schietto;

Avverso al mondo, avversi a me gli eventi»

Talor di lingua, e spesso di man prode;

Mesto i piu giorni e solo, ognor pensoso.

Pronto, iracondo, inquieto, tenace,

Di vizi ricco e di virti>, do lode

Alia ragion, ma corro ove al cor piace j

Motte sol mi dara fama e riposo»"



Adieu.





LETTER IV.

• •

Bologna.

In fulfilling my promise of entertaining you with my impressions on mingling with the better informed class of Italian society, and my observations as to the present state of their literature, I had forgotten, at least whilst I sate writing to you, my own immediate concerns. A circumstance has just not only recalled them to me, but absorbed me in them. ;

You know my predilection for Bologna, and for its kind, and hospitable inhabitants, those good-natured, learned, and amiably pedantic men, their lovely, and more instructed females, than I have met elsewhere. Thitherward, with anticipated pleasure, I bent my course, after a tedious visit to Arqua, the ugliest and most desert of all holes that ever capricious poet thought of selecting for his hermitage—and such roads to and from it; but I must not indulge in that common place complaint of travellers. The ferry, misnomered bridge of the Lago Oscuro, wafted us within the influence of the pontifical keys, and a cardinal's jurisdiction, a consciousness, that pleased me,—it is variety after having traversed the realms of so many sword-encinotured despots, to come within the more amiable one of the Almighty's Vicar, soi disant, and unworthy though he be, and to feel oneself in a country where the ruling aristocracy are, or ought to be, learned. By the mass, as the lay poet of the Reformation indevoutly swore, I love and respect the priesthood, simply, were there no other reason, that they are and ever have been the most maligned race of men upon this earth, and that which hath borne most meekly a weight of calumny that they deserved not more than their lay brethren* . >





My respect for pontifical power was evidently hurt on beholding the green mounds and plains, that now occupy what once was the ducal city of Ferrara, covered with the white uniforms and cane-bearing corporals of Austria. My companion, Perotti, was so indignant, that I could scarcely contain him; there is no moral emetic that a foreigner cannot gulp down with a shrug. The difficulty with which my companion restrains himself upon this and other occasions, led me to suspect gaily, and without seriousness of course, the reality of his Italian blood and birth. I hinted my suspicion jocularly, and lo ! my young Count had been galled on the sore spot, and his choler rose against me vehemently; more subject of wonder, thought I. However I proved to him, according to that brief form of demonstration which I love, that he was a fool, —and so it ended.

All the fine things of Ferrara, Tasso's dungeon, Ariosto's tomb, I had seen long ago, so went in search of the old librarian, whom I had known at an intelligent man, and not then young; he was deeply learned in the Ferrarese Chronicles, no limited circle of reading, understand ; for those dukes or their historiographers have left behind them as much materials for their history, that it were well for us if those of England of the eighteenth century be as ample. I saw my man, without his learning, as it happened. For very unluckily for that essential faculty in a librarian's brain, his imperial majesty, of Austria, had chosen of late to spend almost a whole day, examining, like a true Cesarean prince, the pretty pictures and illuminated designs, in the splendid vellum volumes of the library. Alas! the poor librarian! the imperial visitation, for such it was, he never recovered. To have been so long in contact with his impe.rial majesty, so long in converse with him. My old acquaintance could talk, could think of nothing else. I asked him for all his old hobbies, Tasso's MS. Ariosto's autograph—no, no, he could and would talk of nothing but the





emperor, the emperor—and so I left him, not the first victim of imperial condescension.

From Venice, southward to Mount Garganus, Aye, and to Brindusium, all is villanous along the coast of the Adriatic, yet strangers think it necessary to tread the prescribed route by Ancona. They pay for their obedience by ennui, for except the interesting relics of the middle ages at Rimini, (the most perfect traces of those times, perhaps, is that left there by the Malatestas,) and the miraculously transported chapel of our Lady of Loretto, there is not one object on the whole, flat, unvarying route, to recompence one day's boiling in a caleche. Even the inland road from Ferrara is miserably insipid, till you get in sight of Bologna.

This old mother of jurisprudence has any thing but a legal look, such at least as is worn 'by all our edifices, nooks, courts, or palaces so dedicated. I see at this moment before me her white mansions, placed at the foot of the Apen





nines, upon whose heights the monks alone have dared to build, ad the winding steps to the lofty stations witness. Thick gloomy towers rear themselves from this assemblage of gay, white mansions, not rising with spiral lightness, like our steeples from the mass, but rather lifting themselves up in defiance, and thus preserving the martial character which at first they were intended to wear, when erected to awe or overlook an approaching enemy.

There are nobles at Bologna, but no aristocrats ; the former are too few to uphold an exclusive society, and the legative court being held at Ferrara, fortunately removes from their happy walls the faste, pride and empty vanity of a minor court. High life is common in Italy, easily entered into; but those fond of middling, easy, and well informed society, should take up their quarters at Bologna, where, nevertheless^ since the days of Attila, the conquering hero himself included, no Zingaro can be persuaded to stop, except for the few hours necessary to glance at the remains of the Caraccis, and other masters of the Bolognese school.



" Olfre Parma," writes Alfieri, " oltre Modena, ei mi r spinge,

Oltre Bologna; senza pur vederld; _ Come del barbaro Altila si finge."

On arriving, we sent odr cards and letters to

the Prince 's. The world, as they say

in France, most characteristically, of any crowd which one mingles in or receives, was to be with him in the evening. This he graciously notified to us, and thither we went accordingly. There were several Florentines present; they were not difficult to distinguish, their eternal aspiration, and the fervent good will with which they seem to dispatch each distinct syllable from the mouth, amongst the Bolognese, whose jargon is positively the worst in Italy. It is to the Tuscan, though so near, what the Norman patois is to the pure Parisian dialect,—singular that districts and towns adjoining should be in opposite extremes.



I soon joined the conversation of a Florentine group, and although my wish to appear as not having before known Italy, prevented me from asking direct questions, and satisfying my curiosity respecting my old connections at Florence, in a straight forward way, still it is next to an impossibility to sit next a woman who knows what you want to know, and depart uninformed. No one knew me, that is certain. Perotti passed, and spoke to me on several subjects, and no sooner had he departed, than strange to say, the little knot began instantly to talk of—your humble servant Sir Malkin, or Count Malkin, as they would have me in my own despite formerly, merely because I had a carriage with some sort of crest thereon. Less than a Count, to bear arms was a thing incredible.

" The young man resembles him very much," said they : " Whom ?" asked I, in amazement.



• " The Viscount Perotti resembles his father, the Count, of course—whom else would he be like?"

"In truth I don't know ; but like old Perotti he is not—the Count is a whiskered, slender, muscular Florentine ; the youth is fair and full."

" Then, Sir, you know the Count Perotti ?" " I have had that pleasure." " Having travelled Italy before, Sir, you ought to have learned by this time, to rest satisfied with a very slight resemblance between parent and child. It is a law of politeness here."

"• Indeed, I shall attend to it for the future. But pray, in what year was the Count Perotti married ?"

Here was a loud laugh. " Good ladies, have I in this offended another law of politeness ?"

" Not only a law, but the very principle of it. Do you want us to go about to un-Count your young friend yonder, when he is secure in possession add reversion, since the Archduke has guaranteed the continuance of existing titles."



" Who was his mother, pray ?"

And the reply to this would have solved the difficulty, at least would have gone far to do so, if the young person who was most concerned is the enquiry had not approached at the moment, and occupied his fair townswomen the rest of the evening, by a large expenditure of gallantry.

I thought to observe something expres in this interruption, and Was a jot displeased. But certainly it was I who sought his acquaintance, , not he mine; by what motive I was urged is even now incomprehensible to me. And morg- .c over I am a wilful, cross-grained being, always drawing inferences from character, rather than from circumstances, and the young soldier pleases me, in despite of the enigma that attends his existence and interference.

Even whilst I write, tidings have arrived, which defer the eclaircissement, which I thought approaching. Young Perotti has just received a letter from his parents, informing him that imperative business calls them off to Naples, perhaps to Sicily. Can any still whisper of the revival and approach of the forgotten Malkiu be instrumental in producing this sudden resolution ? A suspicion breaks in on me. They •write, however, that they long to see the companion who has been so kind to their son, and conclude by entreating us to proceed straight to Home, instead of passing through Florence. I am a floating feather, au gr( des vents, and acquiesced in the Viscount's desire to obey his parents. Florence is reserved for the last.— Adieu. ' • . \ ' ' .- •••





LETTER V.

Rimini.

We passed through Ravenna, and now are here, having traversed a most uninteresting country, my mind occupied totally with those middle ages, of which each step in these towns reminded me. We had a companion in our journey, a rara avis certainly, as you will acknowledge, when I inform you that he was an Italian politician. Finding his company consisted of a Frenchman and an Englishman, for Perotti has altogether Fair Francais, he took the opportunity of giving free vent to feelings, which he was no doubt compelled to keep to his own bosom, except when once in the twelvemonth Such an opportunity as the present occurred for indulging his loquacity.



The extent of the poor politician's reading and knowledge, with which he deemed himself quite qualified to pull down the present fabric of Italian government and substitute another, was Titus Livius. He was of Padua, and that accounted for his choice. But how lamentably deficient is the land in the materials for education, when a man like this, really eager in pursuit of political instruction, can find no volume more modern, or more suited to the state of the age, than old Livy. He owned, he could lay his hands on no other. You may imagine the politics of my Paduan, he was all classical, all .municipal—the sublime of legislature to him was an assembly of the people and consuls— when I mentioned a representative government to him, he stood as if I spoke Arabic, but at last understood sufficient to tell me, that he was 'neither an aristocrat nor Anglomane. I allowed 'him, therefore, to unfold his views, without interruption, and our lowest radicals were sages ifl comparison with him.



Although we parted with him at the gate of Rimini, nevertheless the train of ideas that his display had generated, kept still occupying my mind, and the political state of Italy, its past and future fortunes, and the characteristics that have produced these fortunes, attracted my consideration for the rest of the day. I may as well here convey to you my thoughts on the subject. I care too little for these things to follow up, or give myself to any study of them, so that this shall be my only letter dedicated to so grave and so dry a topic. •

The great difference between the public spirit of the ancients, and that of the moderns, is obvious to any one who has thought upon the subject to be this, that the amor patrice, or bond of society, was, with the ancients, an attachment to a certain spot or city, to the sticks and stones of their general home; whilst, with the moderns, all such feelings are referred to the soil. This municipal spirit, prevalent of old, is easily accounted for from the principles of the heathen religion, whose deities, confined to a certain spot, were supposed to fix their habitations and affections solely and exclusively there. The hearth, the street, the quarter, and in fine the town, had each its tutelar deity, and the local affections of the people filled the same concentric circles with their religion. I will not confound myself in your good opinion with the anti-classical Goths of the day, by endeavouring to prove, as might so easily be done, how false and petty was in its origin this feeling, with which the Greeks and Romans effected such wonders. I need only say, that however practicable and beneficial in a barbarous age, it is altogether incompatible with extended knowledge and freedom, and that it runs completely counter to the more noble, because more free and equitable spirit of modern times. In the



present age, thanked be providence, we neither

* have such a cause, nor look for such an end,; Powers are now nations, not cities, and although they may want and cannot aim at the brilliant and attractive qualities displayed by more confined societies of men, they in general possess, accompanied with superior happiness, the more substantial blessings of probity and honour.



It is not astonishing, nor perhaps unjust, that those nations, which of old led the way in the ancient path of eminence and civilization, should now be the last and weakest to tread the way of the moderns. The cities of Italy inherited from the Romans their municipal laws and habits; and wedded to these, they have existed and endured, though without progression, in the midst of the contrary spirit of modern times, like splendid exotics. This brief space of history is not without its brilliancy to be sure; but it would have proved eventually, better for the continent, which this petty, scattered greatness divided, if the growth of feudality had not been interrupted prematurely, until, as in our own and other countries, it had become ripe for a lasting amendment, and settled into a free and representative government.



Italy is at present extremely ignorant. The class who have arisen above extreme ignorance, have acquired but that negative knowledge which amounts to discontent, and would change without knowing how or for what. A few old saws and revolutionary prejudices, form the whole basis of knowledge, on which the plans of a liberal party could be based. They talk and plot to no end. For the only true and irresistible conspiracy is that general one, which is read in the faces of all, but can be extracted from the tongues of none. This grand work they attempt, on the contrary, in circles and families, and merely awaken tyranny, without striking one blow towards its destruction. What with action and re-action, the mildest government is forced to be tyrannical. What is to be done, is not for me to say—revolutions should always be judged subsequently, not previous to their taking place ; but, however, judgment should be deferred, advice may precede such an attempt; and mine would be,—cease to be classical.



This, in fact, is the great principle to be established and impressed upon the modern world, especially upon Italy, and those countries that need regeneration. Let nations remain still classic in their literature if they will, and as the old school of French criticism would have them ; it may at least excuse in them lack of genius, and so be advantageous. But political existence is no such indifferent matter; and if they would attain to such a blessing, and such an honour, they must adopt the new spirit of those nations that have known how to acquire it. There can be no doubt that the classical leaven, that mingled so incongruously and ridiculously with the mass of the French revolution, was the principal cause of its worse than failure. It was not natural wickedness, or badness of heart, that drove the republicans to blood. We have, no doubt, mild, good men, radicals amongst us, that in the same situations would, by the force of circumstances, come to commit the same crimes. It was the Roman stilts, upon which the French revolutionists mounted, that enabled them to wade with unconcern through torrents of blood. Robespierre, couched on the soft cushions of the Tuileries, was of the Roman soul—so was Napoleon, outstripping his eagles in flight.



The Romans were, without doubt, a great and noble race of people; but their grandeur was not natural—it was the product of false excitement, kept alive for the space of seven hundred years, during which every energy of the people was called forth, to render them domhiators over all the nations around them. The French for a brief period have tried their utmost in a similar way; from the highest to the lowest

VOL. III. M



rank, an universal excitement was applied to them, the knowing all as much as man was capable of. To institute a fair comparison between the countries, it may be observed, that in this struggle, as in all those which had previously taken place, the mental and physical power of England has never been so universally, so thoroughly excited. She has warred and conquered, but with apathy or carelessness always in one half of her population, and with armies enrolled for the most part from the dregs of the people, of men incapable of any national feeling. Her grandeur is passive, consisting not in what she does, but might do —not in what she has done, but in what she has refrained from doing. And the glory of her statesmen and heroes is the same—their names are not so renowned as those of Caesar, or pf Buonaparte—why ? Because the steady grandeur of their country forbad.

But to return to my first consideration. The Inhabitants of the classic countries could not





be induced to forsake the feelings and habits of their glorious ancestors ; and even overwhelmed and sunk as they were, their attachment to the old laws and customs enabled them to overcome, at least in the cities, those of their numerous successive conquerors; however superior the Roman institutions, arrived at the height of their perfection, were to the still infant customs of the Teutonic nations, the ascendancy of the former must have eventually tended to make civilization retrograde. The reasonings and opinions of the ancients, on any moral or political subject, can never be brought to blend with Christianity, the great everlasting principle of the modern world. Whilst, on the contrary, to blend with it, the institutions of the Teutonic nations were admirably and no doubt providently adapted. These were a new people, virtuous, brave, and independent, possessed with at least the germs of those just and enlarged ideas of freedom, which do not, like



the classic goddess, militate against, and continually impede the natural progress and improvement of society.

Nothing could equal the amazement of the Roman philosophers and historians, who penetrated into the German forests, and witnessed the customs which prevailed there; even their modern descendants are at a loss to conceive how so noble a state of society could have been generated in rudeness and barbarism. But the hand of providence, which it is not decorous in man to detect, except in influencing such mighty events, no doubt prepared such a stock as the means of regenerating a world, morally exhausted. Even a philosopher, six centuries back, might have foretold, that classic feelings were doomed to be utterly extinguished; and that, like the Jewish nation, they had been proscribed by an irrevocable edict. The re-alluming, or obstinate retention of such in the petty towna of Italy, necessitated that country's being once more over-run by the people of the north. The last spark was extinguished in Venice; and Italy convinced at length, it is to be hoped, of the vanity of re-erecting herself on her old pedestal, has yet to commence her career amongst modern nations. " Sed ohe" you have already cried to my speculative politics.



Adieu.





LETTER VI.

Pesaro.

•

I may have abused the dull shores of the Adriatic, but here is what forces me to read an instant recantation. You have heard of the daughter of the Italian Pindar; of her beauty, wit, spirit, and accomplishments. Report never could have done her justice, and all the superlatives of Italian panegyric are flat and failing in the attempt to celebrate her. The Countess is a lovely, commanding woman, all heroine; her form, her eyes, her speech, and soul. She is the most perfect model of Italian beauty, with spirit and vivacity seldom to be met with in the south, except in some hideous Gorgon, that feels herself compelled to compensate for personal defects by mental efforts of a prodigious kind.



And she is learned too, the jade, and quoted Cicero to me most apropos ; where had Byron's precious observation been, when he declared the non-existence of learned ladies in his adopted land ? In Italian literature, she is more at home than any critic or poet of her country that I ever met with; and the poetry of Italy does so aptly blend with a woman's conversation. Which of our authors can our English ladies quote, suppose them of what age, state, or temperament you will ? Byron they dare not, without being ridiculous; passion is a subject upon which an Englishwoman is seldom at home, any expression of her general sentiments on a subject so interesting, would be immediately taken as personal, and the fair speaker a woman of intrigue. Moore, I am afraid, would be worse. And as for any other name more antiquated, what lady would brave the accusation of blueistn by daring to allude to them ? Even Pope, in our circles, has almost shrunk into black letter. Here how different ! There are gradations of poets for all classes—Metastasio for the young female and the namby-pamby gentleman—Tasso for the young, who would be more refined—Ariosto for the matron, who is past the age of either blushing or affecting it— and Dante for her, who, like the Countess, assumes the lettered and the patroness, and who is even not ashamed of putting forth political opinions.



You know it was she who made something of Rossini; gave him ideas, in fact; those that a lively and superior woman alone can give. A thousand anecdotes are related of her spirit: I will recount one.

The Countess was at Naples, of course filed and made much of; and every beau plumed up his wit for her encounter. Amongst others, who strove to shine in her presence upon this occasion, was General Pepe, a very handsome, stout, good-natured fellow, as any in existence,





without, at the same time, the least superabundance of brains. Well, the General, in order to be extremely spirituel, and tilt in argument against the Countess, took upon him to declaim against womankind, to praise heaven, jocularly, that he was still unharnessed, and a considerable variety of sharp common-places of the kind. The Countess listened in silence, without reply, but was evidently not pleased, which encouraged Pepe to continue. What was his astonishment on receiving, as soon as he had retired home, a regular, firmly-penned challenge, a defiance on the part of the Countess, setting forth, that as he considered it manly to insult womankind in general, she would stand -forth for her sex, and resent his impertinence. The General sent his Aid-de-camp to remonstrate. But no, the Countess would proclaim him a coward, she vowed, if he would not abide a single combat. Another man would have laughed off the Lady's resentment; but Pepe was just fool enough to



be embarrassed by it, and the Countess woman of spirit and cunning enough to persevere, and annoy him seriously. How it concluded, I have not heard; but the circumstance gave rise to much laughter at the time, and is characteristic of her.

The Count is an amiable pedant, whom his wife declares she loves to adoration; and so she does, although after the Eastern fashion, she thinks a passing affection for any other pretty fellow, as not derogatory from the great and perpetual one which she owes to her husband. This is amusing, and quite Italian, this infidelitas in infidelitate. At any mention of the Count's years, sinking health, literary reputation, or in short any ticklish subject respecting him, she is moved, the fond creature, and weeps. The fit of emotion, however, proves no impediment to the intrigue of the evening. He, good man, is contented and happy, proud equally of himself, his wife and father-in-law ; absorbed in his literary researches, and engaged in carrying the war, under Lombard banners, against the Tuscan pretensions of literature.



I have just received from him, a flagrant proof of what mere slaves the nobles of Italy are. The Count is extremely desirous to travel north to see France, and perhaps England; but the Pope, otherwise Gonsalvo, is afraid of letting the nobles of the state wander into foreign countries, where they incur the danger of being inoculated with liberalism and infidelity. And on this vague ground, the Cardinal actually prohibits a rich and powerful noble to travel. Consider, at the same time, that Romagna is the mildest of Italian governments, and then judge if the nobles are discontented on just grounds. I often ridicule them; not, however, for their discontent, but for the childish, unwise, and ineffectual ways, in which they shew it.

The Carbonari system prevails much, and wisely, in those towns of the Adriatic, and in the northern part of the Roman states. They are nearer to Lombardy, and enjoy the advantages of its fertility and commerce, without being oppressed by the tyranny and capricious code of laws and magistrates that harass the towns north of the Po. The fair of Sinigaglia too, so celebrated and frequented by commercial travellers, is very instrumental in communicating information and liberal ideas amongst the subjects of his Holiness, who, if he were wise a la Machiavel and not Pius the seventh, would certainly put a stop to these fairs and their lucrative commerce. Those legations, that were formerly so blindly attached to the Holy See, proft'er now nothing beyond a liberal and luke-warm allegiance. And it must at the same time be allowed, that the Cardinal Legate, who governs them, adapts his conduct wisely to the state and feelings of the governed. He is much beloved, and indeed so is the Pope himself, personally, who is of Cesena, a town of their legations. The priestly adulations of his court, wanted the other day to saint the mother of his Holiness, but Pius would not hear of it. They, however, declared her venerable, which is a sort of brevet of saintship, or saint elect. Determined too, to avoid the unpopular scepticism of his predecessor, Pius the Sixth; the present Pius would never allow any of his relations to visit Romer at least he never welcomed them.





Whilst upon the subject of Pius, I cannot but mention to you a little pamphlet, that the Count shewed me, and which is an Omelid or Homily, published by Pius, when Bishop of Imola, in the year 1797. What do you suppose this new Homily to be ? Verily, nothing more nor less than a panegyric of democracy. Such a production from the pen of a Roman bishop, and a Pope elect, is one of the miracles of the eighteenth century. " The gospel of Christ," says he, " was given to us as a digest-of laws, to render men perfect in society, and to establish that equality that makes us so happy in the present day." " Believe not that the Catholic religion is opposed to democracy, far from it; no, no, my dear brethren," concludes the Homily, " be good Christians, and you will be the best, the very ne plus ultra of democrats."



" Why, my dear Count," said I, " are you not afraid to have such a document in your possession ?"

But the Count is a would-be ultra, and a high-church man here, and only shewed me the Homily to evince his own and his Holiness'* liberality. For liberality I read inconsistency, and the Count was annoyed. However, he said nothing.

Adibu.





LETTEK VII.

Rome.

Behold me once more in Rome, established in a position no less lofty, conspicuous, and celebrated, than the old residence of Claude upon the Pincian hill; whilst there before me lies the Italian evening sky, the eternal model of the artist. Know you, that to me the day-light sky of Italy, is very wearisome and insipid—the sunshine streams thick over the landscape, and amounts almost to a mist, leaving but a circle of blue over head, whilst the whole girth of the horizon, to a very considerable altitude, presents but a hazy white. Evening recompenses for this, no doubt, were it not so brief;



" The sun's rim dips ; the stars rush out,

At one stride comes the dark,"



and you have scarce opened your lattice to enjoy it, ere 'tis gone.

The extensive view of Rome that my window commands, though fine, is certainly not classic. I cannot espy a tower nor a brick of antiquity, far as my view reaches over the tile roofs of the modern city to St. Peter's. Nevertheless, I can catch a glimpse of the winding Tiber, and that is sufficient. In a little innocent espionage, commonly called gape seed, I am admirably situated, looking upon the Piazza, and into not a few of its windows, all occupied by Zingari, arrived, arriving, or departing. A phalanx of lazy valets de place, pimp and lounge around the fountain, in awaital of their British masters' orders. Some of these climb the gigantic flight of steps that ascend to the Pincian, in order to promenade thereon. In addition to those intrusive memorials of my country and the age, that one would wish here to get rid of at times, my neighbours are that most canaille of all rabble, the French artists, who have their polar, or academy, up here. They are excessively gay and vagabond, in contrast with the young English of the same class, who seem extremely dull and well clad. ,



I went to visit in my brown disguise, but with a very respectable letter of introduction,

my old acquaintance, the Cavalier de R ,

once a poet, now a banker. The French, who patronized the muses wherever they found them, but more especially in a jacobin, took the bard from prison, I believe, but certainly from a state of insolvency, and constituted him their banker at Rome. Of course he made hay while the sun shone. I remember him, gay, active, intriguing ; he is now fat, bald, gouty, and epicurean. He received me with an air of dignity, and a hauteur which he thought necessary to be assumed towards an Englishman, in order to preserve his own dignity. It was amusing, this state, this representation of a banker amongst his clerks. I have seen the ditto, perhaps the type and model of this, at the west end of our metropolis, and from a mighty Briton too, or north Briton, who, like the Cavalier, affects the jacobin moreover. For impertinent pride, trust me, nothing can equal the prospective faste of your would-be republicans. But d. noire mouton —the Cavalier, before he decided on the reception he was to give me, or before he unbent his sleek countenance into a smile of benignity, resolved to try his man. He pointed from his country house window, over the way, and asked



me if I knew the Duke of H •, his very

dear friend, who resided there.—No, I had not the honour of knowing his Grace. Did I know Lord So-and-So ?—Neither had I that honour. He went through our peerage, at least through all the travelling peerage, that he had come in con



tact with, and on finding his visitor not acquainted with any of these great men, the Cavalier dismissed altogether the little courtesy that he had hitherto shewn, and shrunk into the great man at once. I remembered the fellow of old, and more than half reminded him of the time at which the little papittotes around his temples nearly stood on end—but I was gone. To do Italian upstarts justice, however, it must be confessed that of the men who amassed fortunes during the administration of the French, there are few who are not humble, beneficent, and friends at least to the arts. There are some of De R.'s anacreontlche, pretty, especially the Arco d'Amore. His respect for aristocracy and contempt for any Englishman unconnected with it, is venial enough in a distinguished foreigner, who must choose amongst acquaintance. Although hated by the religionists, the Cavalier is an amiable, well informed man of letters, and much respected.

Cancellieri is another Roman of letters,



almost the only other. There is little remarkable about him, except a considerable likeness of figure, feature, and manner, to Sir James Mackintosh; although, I should think, poor Cancellieri would make but a sorry figure as an orator. The chief work of Cancellieri is on Dante's originality, but the print is too fearfully small, and too herisse with quotations for any Christian, who is not an Arcadian, to read it. He is a voluminous writer, and has published worlds of epigrams, elegies, and prefaces. Amongst other saintly productions of his, are histories of the Carcere Tulliano, and of the chains which held St. Peter there; also a biography of the apostles since their death (a Roman bull) that is to say, a history of the heads now preserved in the Lateran.

He has written, too, a learned dissertation to prove that the celebrated statues of Marforius and Pasquin are those of a river, and of Patroclus, thus asserting for poor Pasquin, the honour of representing the friend of Achilles. Another controversial work of his, is a defence of the Roman mode of counting the hours, and a proof of its superiority to the Oltremontan mode. He has written curiously upon the Tarantismo, the Malaria, and interestingly on the ceremonies of the papal court, and antiquities in general.



The only man of real genius that Rome of late years gave birth to, I cannot say possessed, since she possesses Canova, is dead, Viscomti. He was indeed a connoisseur above the cant of his art, a profound antiquarian, without pedantry ; a man in short of such genius, as no other country, except Italy, could spare to the arts. In England at his age, he would have been a politician, by this time perhaps a peer; in France, he might have followed the same career, and illustrated his superiority on a pre^ mature scaffold, may be, or present nonentity. To see a mind like Viscomti's, such capacity and profoundness of judgment, expended upon the catalogue of a museum, is pitiable, and would be preposterous, if- the unequalled grandeur of the Vatican, did not in a degree ennoble the task of illustrating it. I am not profound enough in those subjects to judge, but I never hear Viscomti mentioned, but with an acknowledgement of his transcendant abilities. Even Pius the Sixth, who more than hated, who actually abhorred him, was compelled to tolerate the presence, and reward the talent which he could not supply.



His change, as the French say, or the small coin of petty antiquarians and virtuosi, that Rome is at present compelled to put up with, in lieu of the sterling and compact talent of Viscomti, is lamentable. These are your Feas, your Vasis, and your Nibbys,—fellows that wander like dogs round the Forum, snarling and quarrelling about some pillar, which each would wrest to his peculiar identity. They have fallen out about the portico and columns between the Forum and Capitol, which we remember to have been satisfied with as the Temple of Concord—more than once indeed have we, with Middleton, evoked the shade of Cicero beneath its shadow. But now there is some newer reading, and the Temple of Concord is no more. I am resolved, however, not to be cheated of my sentiment, nor my old associations, and a Temple of Concord it shall be to me ever, although it has proved one of discord to these modern antiquarians.



Bless you, you can form no conception of the new nomenclature introduced. The famous old sticks and stones, and fabrics, that I used to know so well, and worship so appropriately, have been set topsy turvy. Rome with all its relics, resembles an apothecary's shop, in which a mischievous apprentice has been let loose, and who has changed all the labels, confounded phials and boxes, and jumbled the whole pharmacopeia together. The deities of Olympus have changed their lodgings yearly, as is the fashion in London, where, I hear, to occupy the same residence for any length of time is desperateiy bad taste, and bad ton. Here, however, the gods are ejected and re-lodged at the whim of an antiquarian crew, who could neither write books, nor find arguments without the aid of fresh hypotheses. The solitary column, to which we used to attach some respectable name or patron at least, is now handed over to that scoundrel Foeas; and poor Jupiter Stator has had his three legs knocked from under him— so that he can stand no longer. They, forsooth, propped up the Comitise. The Capitol they dispute inch by inch, till they no longer know which end is which. And the ancient orator, if he were alive, might literally exclaim, as he did metaphorically of old, " Where is the Tarpeian rock ?" Nay, I do verily believe, that some of these fellows are sufficiently inspired by the genius of absurdity, to assert that the Pantheon was an exaggerated columbarium, if the inscription were not there to contradict them.



In the way of building, there has been nothing done since we were here, if we except the new barracks, as they may be called, around the Piazza, for our countrymen, and the palace of his Highness, the Prince of the Peace, who, if he were not very squeamish, might have as princely residences, as any he can build, to buy for little. However as title goes with land, the nobles here have some idea that the city residence is connected in a similar way with the family honours; Odescalchi, when he sold his dukedom toTorlonia, sold him land, town palace, and all, like Cassar, when he spent his last obolus for the high priesthood; for the young and noble prelate, who is, by the bye, the most celebrated preacher in Rome, is said to look boldly towards the popedom. There is the Colonna Palace, stripped of its noble gallery, abandoned to decay. I was present at the sale, and seldom have witnessed a scene that affected me more strongly than the extinction, so it may be called, of this noble house, and the hoarded treasures of their cabinet put up for sale. Cared I to have burdened myself with that species of lug



VOL. III. N



gage, which is more inconvenient than lead or quicksilver, to transport across foreign countries and domains, viz. books, I might have formed a pretty library cheap, but an old signet of the family contented me, for the name and the memorial sake.

The Albani collection of gems and statues, which made Winkellman a connoisseur, is utterly dissipated. The cardinal was odious to the French, and he was, consequently, plundered without mercy, and all his antiquities sent to Paris; from whence indeed some are now returning; but of the splendid gems that adorned, if you remember what the cardinal absurdly called his caffe-haut, there are scarcely any forthcoming. The excuse is, that they at present adorn some royal closet or bed-room at the Tuileries, whence it would not be decent to remove them —one of the abundant excuses, this, of the strongest. The Borghese villa is another ruin, a veritable ruin indeed—for the old prince, who thought the splendour of his villa were to last





in eternum, placed the pedestals of his statues in the ground, independent of the parquet. His pictures, in a similar way, were inserted in the walls. He was scarcely cold in his grave, when they were torn up by the obsequiousness of his son, and transported, where they still remain, the chief treasure of the Louvre. There is an antique Hermaphrodite lying here neglected, similar to the famed one ; but it had lain in a damp sewer jiear Frascati, and its external polish is irrevocably gone ; and on this account they seem not to value it. Though the statues are lost to Italy, the pictures of the Borghese collection have been brought back to their old abode by the banks of the Tiber, whither the Prince intends to return no more. He amuses himself building, and driving sixteen horses in his carriage, at Florence. Amongst the literary characters of this great city, by the bye Lucien and Louis Buonaparte should not be forgotten. How different was Napoleon from his brethren; he seems to have taken the energy of all to his own share. Never existed a pair of simpler, betternatured souls, than these would-be authors, and would-not-be princes of the Buonaparte family ; and Joseph, I believe, was of the same character.



They live very contentedly here, although Louis has thought proper to feel huffed the other day, on some account, and threatens to leave Rome. How unlike soever the brothers may be to Napoleon, the females were certainly the Emperor's own sisters; they all have ambition, the love of intrigue, deceit, and the talent to put such propensities in exercise—but peace with the defunct race.

Know you, that the best antiquarian scholar I have met in this antique city, is, very strange though it be, the Russian ambassador—a Hun the most learned in Rome—so it is. As to his name. You will excuse my pen, it could never achieve it, no more than my tongue. He never goes out, but receives the world at his palace, which is in the Piazza. Navona, by the side of Pasquin; the old Russian declares, that he is on the best of terms with his neighbour, which is likely, as he is rich, generous, and unmarried; the two former qualities propitiating the popular godship of Pasquin, and the latter leaving him without the sine qua non of Roman raillery. The Piazza Navona, is at present a kind of Roman Covent Garden, filthy in proportion to its latitude, and noisier still—an agreeable abode for an antiquarian.



The Chiji Palace still collects the most intellectual society of Rome, as must be the case any where, where English nobility and mind preside. Her Grace is printing a splendid edition of Carols Virgil; Rome does not forget that she is a Hervey, and the literary fry dedicate accordingly. What an ocean of sonnets she must be daily inundated with. The Duke is a man of more taste and knowledge, especially in the arts, than seems at all congruous to a man of his rental. Not only our nobility indeed—but that of Europe, seem at present verging towards becoming a body of intellectual Quixotes.— Esprit and taste are again the mode. I thought on my return from Verdun, to have heard nothing talked of but pugilism and four in hand; but truth, like wine, cannot pass the sea, without the addition of some strong mixture to keep it from turning.





LETTER VIII.

Naples.

What a delightful journey for a man, who has not buried the memory of his school-boy days, is this from Rome to Naples! Independent of all recurrence to past times, it is beautiful; with reference to them, it is sublimely interesting—the Roman territory from Albana to Velletri forms, certainly, one of the most beautiful scenes upon the globe; but you have seen an hundred and one descriptions of the place. We dine at For'Appi—what impertinence—a little wretched inn, in the midst of the marshes, dignified into such a name, celebrated by the mention of two such celebrated and different personages, as Horace and St. Paul. Nevertheless, it is situated certainly at the termination of the old canal, on which the poet embarked. The frogs are as noisy as ever, but the salubrity of the air must have considerably deteriorated, as no living person could at present be induced to pass a night, moored in a canal boat, amidst these marshes. As we never passed Rome before, I am thus particular.



Grass must have grown considerably on the late saxis candentibus of Anxur; for the heights are now too green to merit the epithet. There is something to me strikingly interesting in the natural boundaries of empires, and as I fear the nature and fate of Italy is to be divided, here certainly is the barrier and the gorge that a handful could defend. That such scenes should remain immutable, that they should now correspond to the description of two thousand year* ago, is but what we ought to look for—the contrary ought rather to amaze us. Yet in despite





of this reasoning, there is a principle in the human mind, how far connected with its own ' perishability I shall not here stop to examine, which causes it to wonder at the duration of any object for so considerable a length of time, and even to be inclined to doubt of it. Universal change and decay seem to be what the mind, from a knowledge of itself, expects, and the duration of inanimate nature strikes it as an exception. Such at least were the sentiments that struck me, on reading with great delight, be it said, Livy's history of Hannibal's campaigns in the country where I was. Fabius, said he, sent Minutius, " ad firmandum pra&i sideo saltum, qui super Terracinum in arctas coactus fauces imminet man, ne, immunito Appiae limite, Pcenus pervenire in agrum Romanum posset." The Pope, however, here extended by about a mile and a half the limits of ancient Latium, to the Torre dell Epitaffio, which forms the limit of the two states.



We were not annoyed at Fondi, as you may well suppose, by any of the municipal pomp, that proved so troublesome to the poet. As to the pretextam, we could not see a whole coat in the town ; and as to fare, which form the traveller's materials for judging, there was nothing whatever to be procured, but wild ducks from the neighbouring marshes, and sour oranges from the surrounding groves.

How beautiful is Mola, the last scene of Cicero's life ! As to the building they shew as his tomb, it must have been an old light-house, or lanthern. Of his villa, you may trace the foundation distinctly enough, beneath the shallow and limpid wave of the Mediterranean. The part of it that is not under water is under vineyard, consequently almost impervious ; but the spot is enough ; it is not for the perfection of masonry that we look. The view of Gaeta from the ruins, is strikingly beautiful. I asked the Cicerone, whom it was built by, to try his depth ; he knew it had been founded by, and called after, una donna, a lady—but shook his head on my informing him charitably, that the said lady was the nurse of ./Eneas. He was one of those that love not to be taught.



I slept at Capua, in a bed that even Hannibal, in the days of his most rigorous disciplineship, would not have grudged to his soldiers. What a place for the head quarters of luxury, not even beautifully situated, and with no quality likely to render it so exclusively the temple of epicureanism, except the fertile corn plain in which it lies. The climate, I was surprised to hear, considered cold and damp, and far inferior to that of Naples. The ancients had their tastes; we moderns have ours.

Naples is the true metropolis of Italy: every other city in the Peninsula, has a village air in comparison with it—such bustle, such tumult— so strong is the stir of human life in it. Rome compared with it is a desert—so is Florence. Rome is an aristocratic city, such I fancy Moscow to be from what I have heard, full of good society, of splendid, isolated palaces, but none of the commerce, the life of the middling ranks stirring in it. Florence is inland, and a city so situated, without being constituted the metropolis by a government system of centralization, can never vie with a rival upon the sea shore. Florence and Leghorn united might rival Naples, but separate as they are they must sink in the scale. Not only in this reality of the thing, but also in aspect, in appearance, Naples decidedly bears away the palm. The strong, gloomy palaces of Florence, are said to bestow upon the Tuscan metropolis an aristocratic air ; but these are scattered, frittered. These sombre relics of the middle ages cast certainly a gloomy grandeur on the scene, or piazza immediately under them; but this is by no means communicated to the town in the ensemble.—Quite the contrary. View Florence from any point, from without, within—from Fiesole, or from the bridges, and the aspect it offers is that of a gay, comfortable, picturesquely situated town; but of a metropolis it has not the pretensions. Naples, on the contrary, however considered, from wherever viewed, is an imperial city. In political arguments, when Italians of the present day are apt to indulge in dreams of future grandeur and freedom, I have heard urged with seriousness, the impossibility of ever hoping to metamorphose so regal a city into the seat of liberty or popular power.





In polite literature, Naples is null; in this respect Florence bears away the palm. Even in the arts, except it be patronizing music, this city is very low. So negligent are they here, that the gallery of excellent pictures which they possess, they do not think it worth while to hang up or to arrange. They lie here and there, scattered through the apartments of what are called the Studii. The Danae of Titian I saw unframed, carelessly thrown against the wall, and resting upon the floor. Such a being as a Neapolitan poet is not in existence; for I will not except the noble Duke of Ventignano, who professes to write tragedies, and which are the most desperate trash that ever noble condescended to inflict upon an obsequious audience of flatterers. Foreigners say, that the Marchese Berio has talent, taste, &c.; the Neapolitans themselves know his worth, and do not say so much. Music, in fact, has overshaded and killed the sister arts here; and it is most^easily conceived, that a man so constituted, as to be capable of enjoying acutely the musical drama and poesy, if I may be allowed the expression, of the great composer, and enabled to taste this enjoyment nightly, is not in want of being pleased or excited by verse ; he has not leisure for it. Such an appeal to his feelings is dull and insipid, after the more subtle and powerful call of music; and the stanzas, even of a Tasso, are flat to him after Cimerosa and Rossini.



In a nation too devoted by nature, clime, and



habit to physical enjoyment, pleasures purely intellectual, and arts founded on those pleasures, can scarcely flourish. It must be something bodily, tangible, or palpable that can interest them. Thus in poetry, narrative alone pleases them; the exploits of Rinaldo and his brethren, and even these far less than tourists represent. I have visited the famous Mole now a number of times, and never have I once seen any one Lazzaro reciting, Tasso, or any verses, to his brethren. Whatever is admired however is narrative ; the platonic subtleties of Petrarch, or even the rural and didactic poetry of Pindemonte here are tasteless. Tasso and Ariosto are the only favourites. This indeed is more or less true of all Italy, at least of popular Italy, the lower orders, and the more southern regions of the peninsula.

The same principle of preference that I have observed as having influence here with respect to poetry, may also be traced in the graver pursuits of the Neapolitans. They shun the abstract, the speculative, the ideal, and grasp at the solid, the material in philosophy. For example, of such a science as metaphysics they are, I dare say, not aware. No one could think of devoting himself to these aerial nothings; for he who was at all inclined to trifle or busy himself in subtleties, would rather devise some new system or arrangement in the arts, or in antiquities, than in philosophy. No—those who must reason here, for there is a reasoning necessity, a reasoning mania always in a certain proportion of a people, turn it always towards legislation,—unfortunately one of the paths of knowledge in which experiment is totally forbidden to them. To this pursuit too they are induced by the eminence of the bar at Naples, especially at present, when the military profession has a little sunk in general esteem. Naples now enjoys the honour of what once belonged to Bologna, that of producing the best lawyers in the Peninsula, and not only mere lawyers, but men of enlightened and lofty views. If ever a revolution should open an avenue to this class to advance to public notice, the name of Poerio, and others, cannot remain uncelebrated. The fame and example of Filangieri seems to excite the better informed of youth ; and the literary hermits of the metropolis are busied in modelling an embryo constitution, to be set up as soon as a fit opportunity may offer. Report says, they would find a very proper one in the archives of the late reign.





The murmurs of his beloved subjects happened once upon a time to reach the ear of king Joachim. The monarch demanded the cause, looking at the same time in an opposite mirror, to observe if aught was wrong in his apparel, such neglect of his august person being ample cause in his idea for a people to murmur. Nothing was amiss, however, the royal hair was royally frizzed, and the purple velvet boots wrinkled secundum artem. Two courtiers undertook at the same time, as often happens, to answer the monarch's question. One replied, that the cause of these murmurs was the lustre of St. Carlos, the thickness of the rope by which it was suspended, impeding the view of his subjects in the gallery. Another urged modestly but briefly—it was a ticklish subject, and one that required brevity—that his beloved and faithful subjects wanted a constitution.'—" A constitution, and a slender rope of sufficient strength to support the lustre of St. Carlos. My people demand but two things. Parbleu ! let us make them happy. Dispatch a courier to Paris for them instantly." The courtiers informed his majesty, that neither of these commodities were manufactured in France. Joachim thought this both absurd and treasonable, but acquiesced. " Where then are these things to be had ?"—" In England, please your majesty." " I never encourage contraband," exclaimed the monarch ; " and moreover, must keep up the continental system. However, for two such trifles, I don't care, if I do dispatch a letter of marque to Britain for them. Let one be dispatched—And, hark ye, let me have at the same time, a dozen of M'Daniel's best razors, a sabre from King George's cutler, and half an hundred of Windsor soap." The royal orders (I can assure you this is no invention, the speech such as it is given, was spoken) was carried into execution. The letter of marque was dispatched, and returned after having procured Joachim's little commissions of soap and razors, with the more important one of the chain of Birmingham manufacture, that still upholds the lustre of St. Carlos, and with the constitution, fabricated, 'tis said, in Berkelysquare. The latter, proving the only part of his importation not to king Joachim's taste, it lay, and still lies amongst the archives of that gilded, though not golden, reign.





The young legislators, however, will not trust to this in store, but frame new ones for them-* selves. How perverse is mankind in its amusements, it will fix on that very mode which it Is impossible to gratify fully, and vain to gratifyby half. There are some studious men here, profoundly versed in the Lancastrian, and other new modes of education, and this in a country, where to attempt to teach a child the rational spelling book, would be a crime deemed worthy of imprisonment for life: the mere word rational would be quite sufficient to hang the unfortunate teacher. And so much for the hopes of national education.



Poor Cuoco is not dead, as we had heard, but deranged; some say, that fear for the consequences likely to accrue to him on account of his bold, talented, and veracious book, was the cause that deprived him of his senses. Singular that he should possess the courage to have written it, when he has sunk under the fear of its consequences. His " Saggio Storico sutta Rivoluzione di NapoliJ* is the best historical work of modern Italy, necessarily the most severely proscribed, and the most difficult to procure. From ten to twenty scudi is often given for a copy. I never have met with his Plato in Italy, however much I should like to read a romance written by an Italian.



Here of course, as elsewhere, throughout the many cities of the classic Peninsula, are crowds of old nobles and others, who have acquired a kind of brevet rank in literature; gentlemen, who, without ever having written a piece of composition more flagrant than a sonnet, still are pointed out to strangers.as personages, and themselves affect the state of this fraternity; a catalogue is sufficient, but this I shall spare you.

I cannot conclude my letter to you from Naples, without alluding to the theatre. The Fiorentini, where they act Goldoni's comedies, and far better dramas, translated from the modern French stage, is the only rational place of amusement. The others are but arenCB for the display, of legs and voices. There are two comic actors, however, admirable and perfect in their kind. Tonino, as one of them is called, who is at St. Carlos, was a great favourite with Joachim, who made him his first garde de chasse—the other, Casaccia, converts the opera of the Barber of Seville into a comedy, and makes the music of that chef d'oeuvre quite secondary to the excellence of his exaggerated comic. His Doctor Bartolo, played in the Neapolitan dialect, is one of the best pieces of comic acting I ever beheld.



The Perottis are in Sicily, whither the Viscomte has gone to join them. I, who had no wish to undergo a voyage to Palermo, return to Florence, to await my young friend, solve my enigma, and decide on some plan for the future.





LETTER IX.

Florence.

Here I am alone, in the dark still, not having had the nerve to make enquiries. I remain the whole day shut up in my chamber, that luckily overlooks the Arno, and in the evening betake myself to society, where I meet a crowd of young new faces, a mushroom race that has sprung up here under French dominion. All the old people have utterly disappeared, even those who have not ceased to live, have become metamorphosed ; the Abbe is without his collar, the priest without his gown, the lawyer without his wig; and all are united in professing a most profound ignorance of any event that took place in the last century. Whether this proceed from fear, or weariness, or dislike of the subject, I cannot discover. Crowds of rude, raw, uninformed English, jostle one in every society, and there is now no sanctuary, no mansion, into which this rabble has not penetrated. What is more vexatious than this, their utter destruction of pure foreign society, they have the impertinence to complain that they are not entertained, that they are not fed, and there are mansions, where other refreshments than those of conversation were never either thought of or needed. What is worse, these folks threaten to be stationary here, whither they profess to have come through a love of the arts, and a desire of refined conversation, finding fault at the same time that their palates and stomachs are not gratified.



There is a good reading room however, where our taciturn countrymen are certainly more in their sphere, and consequently more agreeable companions, than in the converzationi, where all esteem it a duty to converse. And hard duty they no doubt find it. The person who has established these rooms, is also the editor of the periodical work of Tuscany, the best certainly of Italy. He is said to be a man of much information and taste, as indeed the journal evinces, and if his collaborators were not so very scientific, and philanthropic, and important, he would, no doubt, go on very well. But there is a strange air of mock importance about literary folk in Italy ; they affect to meddle with and be versed in the very sciences, in which, being denied the practice, their theoretic knowledge must be puerile. If they would but condescend to be amusing, to trifle for a space, to scribble some agreeable nonsense out of rhyme, they would do more to elevate their literature from its present crude, frouzy state, than by all the scientific or philological disquisitions that the brains of plddding pedants could give birth to.



The grand desideratum in Italian literature, especially in Tuscany, where there have appeared fewer translations from the lighter authors of other countries than at Milan, is works of

Vol. in. o



elegant, polite prose, such as females and youths of the male sex might read with profit and amusement. Literary taste is as yet in Italy the same limited, sacred thing, that it used to be when the dead languages formed theonly vehicle of learning. There is Italian poetry certainly, although that even not of the purest and fittest kind for female study; and between these and profound science, there is no medium; there is no prose work of imagination, no essays, no common ground, upon which, as in other countries, intellects and informations of all degrees may meet and exchange sentiments. Even the popular history of Tuscany, agreeably written by Pignotti, a poet of no contemptible powers, is treated with disdain, as neither fine nor lofty enough for Cruscan taste, and is consequently despised.

There is a learned Cruscan style, which the Tuscans think necessary to be written, in order to an author's being considered classical. This is the foundation of the quarrel between them and Monti, who has withdrawn his allegiance from the Cruscan court, and has set up a verbal mint for himself and his followers in Lombardy, where they coin words at discretion, or give to the current language of the day all the stamp and authority of criticism. The war now has been carrying on for some time, the Tuscans acting for the most part on the defensive, a necessary mode of warfare on the part of a body so very weak both in number and talent.



The Marchese C , was represented to

me always as presiding at Florence over all that was learned, liberal, intellectual, or in fact worth knowing. I had never seen the personage before, I was aware; but many circumstances might have occasioned that. In my mind, he was figured as a venerable old personage, who having certainly not reached his pre-eminence by writing, or by any overt act of authorship, had acquired his literary chiefdom by years. Judge of my surprise on entering his very magnificent palace, at being ushered into the presence of a young



\ man, habited a I Anglais, his cravat in the exact

fold, the room strewed with the marks and tokens of political and literary dandyism. I fancied myself in the Albany, till the very peculiar Italian accent of the Marquis recalled me to Florence.

He is, without exception, one of the finest, handsomest men I have ever beheld, the noblest of the noble, with a forehead comme il y en a peu in the peerage. He is amiable, kind, generous, and noble as he looks too ; is the very model of the modern Italian noble, liberal, anglomane, enlightened, travelled, and well versed in all the political and worldly knowledge that becomes one of his rank to be an adept in. Unfortunately he affects the philosopher in addition to all this, and would argue metaphysics with me, of which he knew nothing. He is unmarried, and likely to continue so, in despite of the noble race of which he is the descendant, and which calls upon him to transmit his proud



name. Perhaps be exclaims with Guido, in Dante's Purgatory.

" Ben fa Bagnacaval che noa rifiglia:

E mal fa Castrocaro, e peggio Conio,

Che di figliar tai Conti piu s'impiglia."



A worthier patron literature could not have i but genius with the wish and power to foster it, are relative and correlative that seldom find one another in life. The Marquis will do liis utmost to bring forth the least spark of talent, now so much wanting, when Tuscan literature is threatened in its long legitimate preeminence, without a single worthy son left to defend it. Foscolo has the will, and the hatred to Monti, to stand up the champion of Florence; but as there are more laurels than guineas to be gained in such a contest, it would very probably be one not altogether to his taste. As it is, the literary army that Florence maintains resembles *very much FalstafTs company of recruits; a most bare ragged set they are, in store both of habiliments and information, as ever entered upon campaign. Grub-street, in the last century, might have mustered such a troop of the splendidly ignoble, but certainly would fail to match them in this.



The Florentine bard, that alone challenges the learned, and dares compete with Monti, is a gentleman named Niccolini; he has written one or two tragedies, Grecian of course, classic, Cruscan, and stupid. Nothing but Ajaxes and Aristomenes will satisfy those men as heroes— those dramatic characters, so convenient to idea-lacking poets, who can thus at need, if Helicon should refuse to fill their pitchers, replenish them at the Boeotian fount of Plutarch at will. Our early classical education has the effect of setting our taste completely in opposition to the whole continent; for whilst to us, when we grow into men, all those classic names, with which we have been familiar in childhood, as with Tom Thumb and Jack the Giant Killer, are laid by upon the shelf, as it were, respected and revered when not moved or brought before one, but hooted away as puerile, past, and common-place, when forced upon the notice in after age ; continental folk, on the contrary, who are universally, with respect to classical acquirements, the seri studiorum, come with the freshness and maturity of manhood to these same personages, that we at the same age begin to consider as bores. They stumble on them as novelties, uphold and admire them, whilst we scarcely graduate, even we are ashamed to allude to names or subjects so pedantic, or so redolent of school. Hence we are, what in the jargon of the continent begins to be called, romantic.



Vigorous attempts are making here to establish a national theatre, and no doubt was the plan forwarded by government, and were their dramatic authors to keep up the spirit of it, the stage would meet with eminent success, and have considerable influence, in every respect, political



and literary, upon Tuscany. Actors in this land, where the passions speak almost independent of the tongue, could not be wanting, nor an easily interested and feeling audience. But some kind of a national drama is wanting; for the people, however attracted by the novelty of the thing, to listen attentively to Antigone in Orestes, must demand for their general entertainment, scenes and characters more germane to their modern ideas. If they would even condescend to play Manzoni's " Carmagnola,'' but no—that would be a romantic sin, too flagrant for the classic Tuscans. Yet if the awakening of national spirit be their object, as they profess, representations of ancient Italian grandeur ought to be more effectual of this object, than all the magnificence of Greece, whose feats and heroes, however sublime, have dwindled into the visionary and unreal from distance. Alfieri with his interminable political allusions, which may be considered as a succession of clap





traps, rather than genuine poetry, would be flattering to the present feeling of Italians perhaps; but politics is a vein of sentiment that people soon grow weary of hearing declaimed even ia prose; how sickening then must they not become In verse. Love has "been much cried down, as hackneyed, and people say they grow tired of this necessary leaven in every plot; but after all there is no interest to be compared with that so excited and the most worn-hearted of us all will be still won by one of those hackneyed stories of passion, misfortune, &c., when history and legislation itself have lost their charms. Love in 'fact, let the jaded peruser of novels exclaim as he will, is like bread, the staff of sentiment and interest, and that imaginative food on which we can banquet most constantly without becoming utterly weary of it. Private passions, not public ones, must be the material of the drama ; it is a very morbid, unsound, and consequently no lasting taste in a people, to demand such personages on the scene as Brutus, Vasa, and others. It were as well to frequent the hustings for an evening's amusement . The pleasure is merely egotism, and the illusion of the scene is destroyed.



But without exception, the best dramatic performances in Italy, taken altogether, are the Marionettes at Milan, and Pulicinello at Naples.

What would chiefly conduce to the drama's flourishing at Florence, is, that its opera is proverbially wretched,—theatre, singers, all worthy of each other. I must add, that they have a tragic actress here, who possesses considerable talent. An Italian female on the stage must ever be coarse, I mean, in voice and gesture. They are so in private intercourse; and this, necessarily exaggerated on the stage, becomes disgusting. If this is true of Italy in general, it is much more so of Florence, of which the accent is not guttural exactly, but aspirated to rudeness. The national pronunciation is like Buonaretti's school of design, strong, expressive, the muscle of every syllable strained, if I may so say. This in a female is excessively disagreeable, however enchanting to one enamoured of the Italian language in its purity, as Alficri late became:



* Eccomi all' Arno, ove in suonanti note

La Plebe stessa atticizzando addita,

Come con lingua 1'aria si percuote.

Ma non mi i'u, quanto il dovea, gradita



L'alma Cantata allor, perche m'era io

Anglo-Vandalo-Gallo per la vita :

Ne mi albergava in core altro desio,



Che varcar 1'Alpi, e spazfar la vista,

Fra que' popol grandi, a petto al mio.

Quind'io Fiorenza gi.-i tenea per vista;



E muto e sordo e cieco a ogni arte bella,

D? Anglo sermon quivifacea provvista:

Ignaro appien di mia futura Stella,



Che ricondurmi all' Arno un di dovea

Balbettator della natia favella.'

The mistress of the tragic poet is fast declining. She is one of those ladies, who have quarrelled with time, and is excessively angry at having grown old. Her ill temper on this account breaks out upon all occasions, and she is altogether quite as unamiable, as was indeed necessary to a spirit congenial with that of Victor Al fieri. The Duchess, however, has too much of the woman still left to imitate the poet in hurrying herself alive from the world; she will receive, will show herself to the last. 'Tis said that a horse will eat, when dying, to his last breath. I will not conclude this indecorous comparison between that animal, however noble, and woman.



Our friends, the French, have been unjust, I think, to Florence. There is no other city in Italy, which they have not greatly improved, in many instances expending' the state's revenue upon its capital city's embellishment. Milan owes its Arena to them, and its intended portal. Venice, one side of St. Mark's Square—Rome, the clearing around, and to the base of her most celebrated ruins—Murat's road at Naples is itself an enormous and costly embellishment to the city,—but to Florence absolutely nothing has been done. Why ? They were not peaceable. The very contrary. It was the only city -where the French were received without the least tumult or opposition. It did not require embellishment. On the contrary again ; it is the very city of all other Italian ones, which offered to the French the most opportune and most needed means of illustrating their taste, their munificence, their love at once of the arts, of Italy, and of her great names. The church of Santa Croce for example, in which repose



" Angelo's, Alfieri's bones,

The starry Galileo with his woes,"

and Machiavel, still wears a naked, brick, unfinished front. A million or two of francs would have splendidly finished this edifice, immortalized the undertakers so far, and won them the hearts of the Florentines, who are so alive to the beauty of their city. Nothing of the kind was attempted. Similar openings for im* provement at a trifling expence were obvious to them in every part of Florence ; but the selfish government was blind and careless of them. Tuscany at least is undeniably happier for the late changes.



I, however, am not sorry for this sameness of objects, the race are indeed metamorphosed, but the locale is the same. There is no modernized quarter here, no flaunting white palace erected by a Zingaro; the only person committing brick and mortar at present being Prince Borghese. Florence is, ever as it was, pictures and statues all in their old places, and looking just as blank and unconscious of their late travels as a young Bull returned from the grand tour.

Our ambassador seems very much liked here. A young man of his taste must feel quite at home in such a scene ; and with the exception of little bickerings between his lady and the Prince B, on the score of rival balls and parties, the English and Italian society seem to make one, the English however taking the lead. In Naples, on the contrary, where there are riches, the national nobility do not yield the pas in society. Whilst at Rome, the nations are fairly balanced. But enough of this.— Adieu.





LETTER X.

. Pisa.

There is no scene nor time so sad as a fine summer evening to a solitary man, not engaged or occupied with pkasant thoughts. Upon a sombre, dark, cloudy day, I can sit and suffer, laying the blame of desponding spirits upon the atmosphere; but when one feels answerable to nought but one's own breast and cares for unhappincss, then, indeed, it becomes intolerable, I felt it so the other evening, and sallied forth in consequence. I followed the crowd to the Cascine, at first on foot, till recollecting myself that every shop-keeper here has his carriage, I grew proud, turned back the few steps I had proceeded, and ordered forth my rumble-tumble



of a caleche. It looked sufficiently spruce, however, for the companions it rubbed wheels with.

'Twas thus, thought I, now nearly twenty years past, I sallied forth in search of gallantry and adventure, and found, as you know, that which I sought, namely, a pretty Florentine face. I did not dream then of carrying the joke so far, but marry I did the outlandish female. She proved amiable as she was lovely ; our union was not without the blessing of offspring : and I, oblivious of old England, was growing all a Tuscan, when it pleased General Vaubois to march his Frenchmen to the attack and plunder of us poor unarmed English at Leghorn, and throughout the Tuscan dominions. I fled of course from the Gallic enemy, and having no notice of the enemy's approach till they had reached Pistoia, it was too late for making any arrangements, other than that of my simply making my escape. I left a pretty round sum of money in her hands, and from



that day to this, have never heard more of her. You know how oft I wrote and re-wrote, to her, to friends, no answer ever was returned. In 1802 I once uiore sought Italy in search of her, when the cursed usurper laid his hands upon me, and consigned me to long imprisonment. Since then, conscious that the world, even she who was most dear, had forgotten me, I grew careless, and resigned myself to apathy and spleen. So much so, that I have been in Florence a full week without taking any steps to discover what has been the fate of my family. I dreaded to ask—I feared to be told, the grave has closed over all your hopes—I feared other things, no matter what!

That lovely evening, however, made me too impatient of uncertainty: it recalled past times too strongly to allow me to slumber in suspense over the present. I mentioned to you my susprise at having hitherto met so few of those acquaintance whom I had known of old in society. The fact was, that they were out of the mingled mob in which foreigners mix, and kept to their own little circle. In the Cascine, however, where I drove, to kill more gaily the passing hour, I soon recognised, though certainly with doubt and difficulty, some of the old familiar faces, though betraying sad marks of how " age had clawed them in his clutch." I was of course, from my precaution, hrecognizable; but so strong was the impulse which urged me at the moment to claim recognition, that prudence scarcely restrained me. Amongst others was a gay gossip of mine and of my wife's, laughing as loudly as if it had been her daily occupation for this five-and-twenty years. And most likely it had been so, I knew the laugh, the voice, for the countenance might certainly have passed undetected. I formed my resolution to speak to her at all events; but till the promenade was concluded it was impossible.



As soon as the dusk dissolved the compact file of equipages, I drove home, and sallying forth on foot, bent my steps towards the abode of my old acquaintance. The empty carriage was driving from the door. She was at home. I hurried up the stair, ere I began to reflect in what character I should appear, or make excuse for my appearance. My determination, however, was too completely wound up to permit of my retiring, so that I boldly entered, was announced as Doctor, &c. made my bow, sat down, and thanks to Italian ease, we were in the midst of interesting conversation in the space of three minutes. She did not know me, but from my assurance thought it a matter of course that she should have known me: so the first difficulty was got over.



In a little while I ventured to bring the conversation back to old times, a retrospect that old people of all other countries so delight to indulge n, and lay hold of any pretext for so doing. But here 'twas otherwise; my old wrinkled gossip looking as if she seemed not to remember the last century. I mentioned, however, one or two circumstances that aroused her attention forcibly, and convinced her that I had known Florence and her in the times that she seemed to forget. I asked for friends, the most distant first—they were, for the most part, dead, ruined, missing—age and misfortunes had carried away the then standing generation, and conscription had done the same by the then rising one. I at last asked for myself, for Mai kin ? " Drowned, poor fellow," was the reply, " in embarking hurriedly from Civita Vecchia, for Palermo." The event was so coolly told, that I would have believed it of any other than myself. I thought my old friend's tone much too careless on so interesting a subject . She saw I was affected, somehow, and continued, " But, Lord, twenty years ago and more ! who thinks of these things now ? You must have known Signer Malkin, Sir, the mention of him seems to move, to interest you." " I was," replied I, recovering breath, " a very intimate friend of that gentleman, and have come here chiefly for the purpose of looking after his family and affairs." i The old lady's countenance grew exceedingly





grave at this intelligence, and several minutes elapsed before a single word was spoken on either side. At length I asked if Mrs. Malkin was alive or dead ?

" Dead! ah, no ! and yet I can't say—wasn't on terms of intimacy by any means—haven't heard of her lately. Did you make any enquiries ?"

" This is the first."

" I had applied to the worst person—knew of no other, nevertheless—couldn't advise. Did Mr. Malkin leave a testament ?"

" Not that I know of."

" I hope in my heart that he is not by any chance alive, as I have heard suspected lately, or that he has not escaped shipwreck."

" Thank you, Madam," was upon my tongue; which sentence I had nevertheless the presence of mind to suppress, substituting for it a demand of why she wished such a confirmation of evil report. "'Twas so inconvenient," she replied " at times for the dead to come to life." This there was no denying. " Besidei, could a young woman like her be expected to remain single all this time. If alive, she is most likely married and settled elsewhere.'' " In that case, indeed, the revival of the dead husband would be inconvenient." " I should think not in the least," retorted the lively old Florentine. I still held my opinion, with a smile, not of the sincerest gaiety. " Pourquoipas arranger I'qffhire a Vamiable" concluded she. " Pourquoi pas" was all that I deemed safe to rejoin as a negociator. Then I left her and her information, returning home in a far greater quandary than that in which I left it.



What am I to suppose ? what do ? what if her jest were true ? I should not hang myself. I care for no soul upon earth, and caring very little for myself, I may make the confession without fear of being thought over-selfish. Still if a son of mine were living—.

I received a letter from Perotti, dated Palermo, saying that they were returning by sea to Leghorn, and that he hoped in a few days to introduce me to his family, that they might thank me for my kindness, &c. I am anxious, indeed, to see the Count, as he can in a word solve my difficulties; he is, or -was, a gay, worldly, yet good-hearted man, to whom I should have no objection to disclose myself. But 'tis better to see him ere the resolution be taken.



At once, for variety, and to draw nearer the disembarkation of my future friends, I set off for Pisa, a gloomy city, with the look, somehow, of Venice or of Padua about it. It has the beggarly little colonnades of the latter, and the sombre, narrow, aquatic air of the former. There is an immensity of raggamuffins here, more liberally educated than elsewhere in Italy. Stepping intp a shop, I took the monthly periodical of Pisa, and found some excellent writing in it, superior even to the Antologia. The Pisans are dreadful!}' municipal, and attached to their city; mpre proud and jealous of it than the inhabitants of Athens could be of the Acropolis. This occasions them to be, and to appear rude to foreigners; but these are peculiarities we have but to understand, in order to forgive.—Adieu.



CONCLUSION.

Fob Englishmen who travel to Italy with any other views than those of commerce, Leghorn must be an insupportable residence. The bustle, the magnitude, the manifest wealth of a really great sea-port, its docks and navies, compensate somewhat for the discomfort attending it; but Leghorn, though the most considerable port in Italy, can be considered by an Englishman but as a petty one. Brigs and coasting sloops alone are ranged round the brim of its extensive harbour ; and except the walls that shut out the Porto Franco from the town, there is no esta

Vol. in. T



blishment, no object of commercial magnificence risible. Join to the want of all those things that we look for in a sea-port, the filth of the people, the closeness of the atmosphere, and rooms, not of Italian extent, but subdivided into cabins by architects of marine taste, through which the hot scirocco from the sea, or the as unwholesome vapours from the marshes that surround the town, daily circulate. Such were the comforts that exercised our friend Malkin's spleen at Leghorn, where he awaited the arrival of the Perottis from Sicily.

The day at length came, and the voyagers had no sooner conveyed the sick and sea-worn Countess Perotti to an hotel, than the Count and his son hurried to acquaint the Doctor with their arrival. Cordial were the greetings between Malkin and both his friends, young and old, although the Count of course had not the least suspicion that he had fallen upon an ancient acquaintance. The Countess was not sufficiently restored that day to be at all visible, and tne tnree genLemen accordingly spent it together, in improving their good opinions of each other.



There is a fine open piazza at Leghorn, desolately wide, indeed, which in that marine, cooped.up town, may be looked upon as the quarter-deck for the pacing of the inhabitants. Here the Perottis and Malkin promenaded; the former with a truly Italian terror of the sea, rejoiced to feel their legs once more on terra firma. Malkin, who felt cordially towards his old friend, was pre-determined not to keep up his incognito with him beyond a day or two, a few enquiries, and some slight amusement that he promised himself as the effects of his disguise.

"A singular meeting and friendship, that formed between me and the Vicomte," observed Malkin.

" Truly singular and fortunate."

" These friendships at first sight are rare between the Briton and the foreigner."

" Oh! Ercole has a little of English blood in hi» Y«fns—'twas' a* instinctive particle of patriotism, his becoming so suddenly accroche to you."



" Ercole," repeated the Doctor; and after a pause, " that was a kind remembrance of the Count Perotti."

" How kind ! what remembrance f

" You had a friend named Malkin," said that identical person.

" I had indeed!" said the Count, " What of him ? You knew him ? Is it long since ?"

" A very long time. His name, I believe, or that of his son, was Hercules."

"Was it?" said the Count, shewing a considerable number of his tooth, though he by no means smiled. . (

" You must have so called him in memory of your old friend."

"No! indeed I don't know how it was. A whim of the Countess, or some such reason."

" It must-hare been a strong and urgent reason," urged Malkin, " in this orthodox land, where infants are scrupulously named after Mints, and none but saints, in order that they may have an especial patron in time of need. That such a heathen name as Ercole should have taken the place of a Christian one, deserves a reason."



The Count looked with a full, inquisitive glance at his companion, but attempted no rejoinder.

" But, tell me, Count," continued the Doctor, " I have a reason for asking—what has become of Malkin's wife and child ?"

The Count looked again at his interrogator, and desired his son, Ercole, to see how his mother, the Countess, was at present. When the youth had departed, Count Perotti said, " Is not the person who speaks to me Malkin ?"

" The same."

" Then 'tis a comedy or a tragedy, and a hair's weight will decide which it shall be."

" How is all this ?" asked Malkin.

" Simply," replied Perotti, " that Mrs.



Malkin is the Countess Perotti, and the Vicomte Ercole, who is to be the heir of my sorry title* but of a comfortable fortune, is thy son. I

* - »

wish you joy of coming to life."

" Whether to wish myself joy or not, is a mooted point; but come, I will. A wife I don't want, but a family, and, above all, a youth to be interested in, I do. Shall we be friends ?"

" By all means. How the Countess will laugh!"

•' Laugh !" thought Malkin. But it was too true; she wept and laughed, and the latter predominated. There did not exist a happier family in Tuscany than the Perottis, and our friend Malkin, the true Beppo.

The End.
