THERESA.



CHAP. I.

Strange things the neighbours say have happen'd here;

.Wild shrieks have issued from the hollow tombs;

Dead men have come again and walk'd about,

And the great bell has tpll'd unrung, untouched.



Blair.

JL HEexile was careful, the next morning, to obtain information as to his way to the Abbey of Marienfels; but he Was not a little startled on learning that it lay beyond the Swiss confines. It immediately struck him that the sorcerer's invitation to meet hhn was the result of a deep-laid plot, to deliver him into the hands of his enemies. He might be an impostor, or he might wish to thwart the designs of Pro

VOL. IV. B





vidence: such a wish, he had learned from the narrative of Herman, he was not unlikely to entertain. In the latter case, indeed, he would be among the most inconsistent of men, whose passions and weaknesses he boasted himself superior to; but what was too much for human inconsistency, when the desire of life created the delusion?

The notion of his being an impostor was one which was at war both with his senses and his pride, therefore it was immediately dismissed, and the other he would not permit to impede his purpose, conscious as he was, that if the sorcerer did seek, in the vain aspirations, the vanity and arrogance of his heart, to thwart the decrees of Omnipotence, he had nothing to apprehend from such an attempt.

Resolved, therefore, to keep his appointment, he set out on foot, there being no horse-road but one, which was several miles round. The way was intricate and difficult; but had his mind been at ease to enjoy the romantic richness and variety of





its scenery, it would have amply repaid his toil. It sometimes wound amidst desp ravines, in whose bottom a river, shrunken by the summer heats, rolled with a murmur that hardly reached his ear. As he trod the midway path, that tracked the side of the precipitous bank, its current was sometimes entirely lost beneath the dense foliage of overhanging woods. Now it fell over rocks that increased the violence of its sound, and now it wound, deep and quiet, through a meadow that occupied the expanding dell; and the small mill was seen at work, and the white bleach-ground afforded its contrast to the verdure, yet rich where the rays of the mid-day sun found but short rest; for they were even now, when it was early in the afternoon, intercepted even from the path by which the exile passed. Numerous kine were resting in the shade of the tall alders and poplars that bordered the river; and the carol of a peasant girl, as passing a bridge, formed of a single plank, that crossed the stream, she balanced a pail she bore on her hfnd, smote feebly, but sweetly, on the car of the exile.





The loneliness of these regions was marked by the timidity of its inhabitants; a female peasant of whom he inquired his way, made signs to him Jo keep at a distance, and retired from the path till he had passed; and two lads, who were gathering nuts in the coppice above, as soon as they heard his whoop, looked at him for a few moments, saying some words to each other, in evident consternation, and then fled with the rapidity of the lizard or the chamois, bounding amidst ledges of rocks, and chasms, and tangled furze-brakes, where one would have thought those animals alone could have found a passage. Sometimes he climbed what he deemed the acclivity of a mountain, but when he reached its summits, and the majestic Alps rose in vast amphitheatre around him, it dwindled to a hillock.

It was after he had toiled upwards in this manner for several minutes, that he entered a field, into which the path led, over a stile; but before he had advanced many paces, he perceived that the sward having been broken up for cropping, the plough had obliterated all traces of it; and as there wns no sign of a footstep, he concluded that some impediment having been thrown in the way of passengers, in order to secure the crop, they had formed a new track. He walked round* the close, to try if he could find egress in any other part of it but that by which he had entered, being unwilling to retrace his steps; but observing, as well as the thick hedgerows would permit him, that the lands presented, as far as li^s eye could react), nothing but crowded shocks, 'he gave up the idea of* finding the pid path as hopeless; and being faint with the heat and fatigue he had undergone, he laid .himself down beneath a tall, wide-spreading linden, and soon fell fast asleep-. rf.'





He might have slept about an hour, when he was waked by the prattle of some young peasants, who were busy plucking haws, sloes, and other wild fruit, and who observing him as soon as he raised his head, ran as if for their lives, directing their steps towards a part of the hedge which was particularly close, and creeping through it like so many rabbits.





The exile, considering that if he could overtake them he might have some chance of regaining his route, without making any retrograde movement, followed. When he came to the place where they had passed through the hedge, he found he had been deceived when he had before examined it, by the branches of a wild vine, that hung in unpruned luxuriance of spray and tendril before an aperture sufficient to afford a passage to the largest man.

He passed through, and was able to keep the little mountaineers in view for the length of several fields, though he found it impossible to overtake them. At last he lost sight of them, but still proceeding in the direction he conjectured them to have taken, as he reached a common that bordered the cultivated grounds, he perceived them all collected round an old man, who was seated on the grass, amidst some fern and furze bushes; a bill lay by his side, with which he appeared to have been laying the hedge, outside of which he sat, for he was taking off the large gloves used in such an operation of husbandry, in order to refresh himself from a basket which a young woman had just set down by him.





His attention was now directed to the exile by the children, who all spoke and pointed together, while they crowded round him, some holding the skirts of his jerkin, and some crouching beneath his legs.

As soon as he could disengage himself from them, he advanced courteously to meet the exile; and having learned the cause of his situation, signified his ability to direct him, but first invited him txy partake of the homely meal which had just reached him.

The exile complied, after he had succeeded in making his peace with the little people, shaking the hand of one, not tendered without some remains of reluctance, patting the head of another, and distributing among them all the small coin he happened to have about him.





The maiden who had brought the basket, and whose sun-embrowned countenance, white teeth, coral lips, and swelling breasts, might have attracted his eye, at least if Theresa had left him eye or heart for any maiden but herself, now displayed its contents, consisting of milk, new cheese, flat cakes, which the old man took care the exile should know were of her own manufacture, for she was his daughter, and abundance of fruit. The fare was all excellent in its kind, and if it were coarser much than it was, fatigue would have given it a relish.

When the meal was ended, and the old man had returned his simple, but acceptable, because sincere thanks, to the Giver of all good, he turned to his guest, and said, taking from the basket a flask of wine, which was now all that remained in 'it; "If Mein Herr will come to yonder





I

paling, where the high frees make a still more refreshing shade than that we have enjoyed here, I can shew him both the old. and new Abbev of Marienfels, while we empty our flask." He then rose, and moved towards the place he had pointed to, Edward following. When they reached it, a scene of incomparable sublimity rushedall at once on his eve.

The paling ran along the brow of a steep declivity, from which it had formerly separated a sheep-fold erected on. the common. The vale which this bounded was hemmed in on the opposite side by a still higher bank, and so abrupt, as to. seem to defy the footstep of man; jn," this a wide chasm opened, immediately opposite to where the exile, with his rustic host, were standing. The gorge thus formed was united at top by a bridge formed of the trunks of huge , larch, some of the unshredded branches of which . still remained beneath. A vast body of water tumbled through it, someliirhes B 3 '../





shooting up columns of foam, and laving, with wide-spreading showers of spray, the larch, the chestnuts, and the beech, that feathered the sides of the steep banks on either hand, and now impended over the" stream, and now dipped their foliage in its wave. Sometimes it glided in smooth, unbroken course, when' there was an interval of rock; then again foamed, and fretted, and at length rolled, one vast unbroken mass, over a deeper fall, and then pursued its way, limpid and smooth, through the quiet vale. In the distance, as you looked through the chasm, the waters retired in long perspective, and spreading into an ample lake, a lovely landscape lay around its banks, now spreading in fertile and richly-wooded levels, and now diversified by gentle undulations, varied with vineyards, and corn-fields, and hop-grounds, and dotted with cottages, whose curling smoke was now distinctly seen on the dusk of the high background of the scene, from the lower part of which the sun had already withdrawn his rays. At the further ex





tremity of the lake, the towers of a ruined monastery were seen, rising from amidst woods; and further back, amidst uplands, which were also well wooded, a similar building, the freshness of whose walls, together with the glitter of its vanes, and chime of its clock, just then borne, with hollow sound, over the waters, indicated that some holy community sent up their orisons to Ifeaven within its precincts.

Farther to the left rose the slender spire of a village, the low-roofed habitations of which here mingled with the trees, and there formed a small quay along the edge of the water. Several small vessels, that bore testimony to the wealth and industry of the place, rode at anchor in its pleasant bay, and the white sails of others were seen stealing in various directions over the smooth waters, and now doubled a headland, and now were concealed behind a wooded islet; while sometimes the dash of oars, and sometimes the chorus of the boatmen, were caught by the distant cliffs, and thrown back with clear response, even to where the exile viewed the scene.





Far beyond the monastery, vineyards and trim farms rose in beauteous array; these yielded, as they approached the higher regions, to forests of pine and larch, from amidst whose towering shades, rocks of granite, totally denuded of vegetation, shot up their huge masses, presenting every shade of grey and blue, in veins transverse and longitudinal; their summits were enriched with the magic colouring of the declining sun; but still richer and more various were the hues that tinged the Alps beyond, together with the fleecy clouds that now capped their summits, now, like the stole of some tall virgin, chaste as their own snows, majestic as their forms, enwrapped them beneath.

Edward stood for some moments gazing in silence on the prospect. His host allowed him to gaze for some time without interruption, but at length said—" That's a glorious scene, Mein Herr; people com-e a great distance sometimes to see it, and I don't wonder at it, though I wonder much how they can leave their homes so long, and where they get the money that they are obliged to spend on the road; For my own part, I never was ten miles from home in my life, but once, when I went a pilgrimage to Eiimdlen, and then it cost me all I had saved for five years before; and I found things in such disorder when I came home, that I determined I would not be absent again in a hurry. The people about here don't take so much pleasure in viewing their own prospects as strangers do; I myself often pass along the brow of this hill, thinking,, it may be, about a stray kid, or a lame horse, or the reaping of a field of corn, and never turn my eye to the right or left ; but still, if any thing happens to vex me at home, or if I think that things are not going as well with me as I could wish, I sometimes come out in the evening, and stand here, and look at those high mountains, and that bJue water, and those rocks, and those woods, and if the bell of the monastery tolls for vespers, I wait till its last sound sinks amidst the hills, or murmurs on the waters, and then I know that pious men are praying to God, and I pray with them, and feel myself comforted; and then I have sometimes sat me down, and felt, as it were, chained to the spot, till night had fallen, and nothing was to be seen but the gleam of the waters through the gorge, and nothing to be heard but the roar of the torrent. But I am prattling, while I should begivingMein Herr the information he wants. Does Mein Herr see those ruined towers in the trees? there is an island just between us and them ; there—that which has the cottage on the knoll- in the very centre;—that from behind which the prow of that small vessel is just appearing ; there —see the sparkle of the oars in the water. Does Mein Herr mark?"—Edward nodded —" Well, that is the old Abbey of Mariertfels; the new Abbey, that Mein Herr may see further up, bears the same name. I suppose Mein Herr is going to the fair of Meerfedt yonder? he will be full late."





"What!" said Edward, starting, "is there a fair at that village?"

He now thought confused sounds, such as he had recently heard more close to him, came upon his ear.

"Yes, for certain," said his host; "and I thought it might be thither you were going, for by the time you would reach the Abbey, the gate would be closed; no stranger is admitted after sunset."

"But It's the old Abbey I am going to," replied the exile.

The man stared, muttered, and crossed himself—" The old Abbey ! why it will be full dark by the time you get there." "And what then?"

"What then ! why then, if you were hardy enough to go within there fields of stich a place after dark, you might seek long enough before you would get a companion on such a pilgrimage. What! has Mein Ilerr never heard the cause why that old building was deserted, and the brotherhood removed to the new building?"





"Never."

"Oh, that accounjs for his thinking of a journey to it after nightfall. There's no one can give Mein Ilerr better information upon that head than I can, and if he has time to listen to me, and will sit down here, beneath the shade of these weeping birches, I will tell him all I know."

Edward, though he wished to reach the Abbey some hours before the time appointed, in order to examine its precincts, and take measures to guard against any cheat that might be attempted to be practised on him, still felt some curiosity to know what had made it a bugbear to the neighbourhood; and accepting the old man's ofTer, sat down.

"It is now some fifty years, Mein Tlerr," said the old peasant, " since the affair happened which I am going to relate; and how Mcinllcrr should beignorantofit, is to me incomprehensible, for I verily thought it had been well known all over Switzerland;

Y





when I was at Einsidlen I met no living soul who did not know it as well as myself. I remember when Thomas Bach(who since stood godfather to -my grandson) and I went into the Golden Sheaf to get some refreshment the evening we arrived—and a lovely evening it was, just such .a one as this—and happened to be talking about if, that a pilgrim came over to us, and asked us whether we weren't talking about the extraordinary matter that-had occurred?"

"But," said Edward, interrupting him, "vou forget that I have not a great deal of time to spare, and if you describe to me so fully how well the thing is known, you will fail to make me know it, which is the mater now in hand."

"True, true, Mein Herr. Well, it is some fifty years since—my poor father was then living, rest his soul—my father, Mein Herr must know, was tenant to the monastery, and had been there overnight with a basket of fowls, and it being late when he was about to return home, the abbot had permitted him to lie in the cell of one of the monks, who happened to be absent. Heaven help us! I never shall forget when he returned in jhe morning, before it was light, and knocked us all up, and rushed in as if the devil was at his heels, looking as pale as a ghost, and all wet and bemired. It's well he took care never to stav at the new Abbey after nightfall, though he was often solicited to do so by the abbot, who esteemed him much, thinking he was one of the best tenants the community had, for my mother made most capital cheese, and our corn was always the best in the canton."





"But when shall we get to the Abbey at this rate?"

"True, true, Mein Herr. Well, as I was a-saying, it was some fifty years since— I shall endeavour to tell it in my father's own words, for he had a good right to know all about it—it was some fifty years since, that one evening—it was the eve of our Lady— the whole community having for. at least an hour retired to rest, about ten o'clock, the night being dark and stormy, a loud





knocking was heard at the portal of the monastery—a loud knocking was heard at the portal of the monastery—yes, these were my father's own words. The porter came to the gate in his shirt, growling and very dissatisfied, at being called out of his sleep—growling and very dissatisfied at being called out of his sleep—aye, that was just what my father said, and he had a good right to know whether such a thing would make Barnabas discontented or not, for many's the time he has been surly enough when he has had to let us in, an hour after the glorious sun was looking upon the earth." ,

"But the knocking at night?" "Aye, aye; I beg Mein Herr's pardon. Well, Barnabas asked who was there? for besides that the night was dark and stormy, how did he know but it was some banditti, who had evil designs against the monastery. 'We have something,' said a hoarse voice, that Barnabas could scarcely hear for the howling of the wind,. and beating of the rain against the windows of the portal, 'we





have something of importance to communicate to the abbot; you may let us in without fear.'—'I'll take care how I do that,* 'said Barnabas ; ' when the wolf came to the lamb's door, he talked like her mother; it's not ail gold that glitters. Sometimes a man fishes for an eel, and catches a snake ; we must be merry and wise; a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush."

"Gaspar,'' muttered Edward to himself, "had the conciseness of Tacitus or Thucydides when compared to this man, who was certainly intended by Heaven for a school divine, whatever mischance put him to the plough."

"Well, Mein Herr, Barnabas gave them a score more proverbs, that I don't now recollect."

"Heaven be praised!" said the exile, unheard.

"He had proverbs at his fingers' ends, and was considered a man who knew the world as well as any other. Well, he opened the wicket a little, taking care not to remove the great iron chain that secured it, and a flash of lightning just then lighting up the whole of the great court, into which the portal opened, he saw three knights on horseback, armed at all points. Barnabas, about a week afterwards, gave us a minute description of their plumes, and their surcoats, and their housings, when he came over of a message from the abbot; the message, if I recollect right, was to. bring over, as soon as he could, the four sacks of wheat that had remained behind from the last cart-load, for having laid out the site of the new Abbey, the workmen would want to be supplied with victuals. This wheat was some, Mein Herr must know, of a particularly fine kind, the seed of which the abbot had himself given my father, and"





"But pray why need I know any thing about this? What I want to know is, why the Abbey was deserted?"

"True, true ; I beg Mein Herr's pardon. Well, let me see—Gadso, Mein Herr has put me out. Well, Barnabas—no, that wasn't it—it was about fifty years since—"





The exile now perceiving that the tale would not be finished before morning, determined that he would not await the conclusion ; and starting up, and affecting to have forgotten some pressing business at the fair, begged the rustic would point him out the way.

It was in vain that the poor man reminded him that he did not seem to know any thing of the fair a little while before, and offered to proceed strait forward in his tale; he was obdurate to all he could urge; and the discomfited historian, with evident marks of reluctance, shewed him a path that wound down the bank, and marked several points where the road ran along the margin of the lake, after passing through the gorge.

He rushed onward, looking behind him frequently, terrified lest the mania of narrative should prompt the old man to accompany him, and pelt him with the proverbs of Barnabas, and the seed oats of the abbot.





He found him better skilled in topography than in the arts of narration, for he was enabled, partly by his directions, partly by an occasional open of the woods and hills to the lake on his left, to find his way without any further inquiry.





CHAP. II.

It is a fearful strife, 'J

For man endow'd with mortal life, ,

Whose shroud of sentient clay can still

Feel feverish pang and fainting chill,

Whose eye can stare in stony trance,

Whose hair can rouse like warrior's lance;

'Tis hard for such to view, unfurl'd,

The curtain of the future world.

The Lady of the Lake.

It was already dark when the exile reached a chasm in a wall that crossed a hill, and seemed to have been the enclosure of a park in which the Abbey stood, the grey masses of which were now discerned at no great distance, by the feeble light of the stars, rising amidst close plantations of yew and cypress, while he could hear distinctly the sounds of business and merriment ascending from the neighbouring village, over which the atmosphere was all bright with bonfires and illuminations,





partial glimpses of which he was able to catch here and there, where there chanced to be an opening of the trees and houses.

He contrasted the simple gaiety that there animated all hearts, the bustle, the music, the light, with the dark errand upon which he had approached the awful structure before him, with the shriek of the howler, that came in the breeze, the silence, the solitude, the gloom that surrounded him. '■ ''»

He felt chilled in his frame and his mind, and for an instant thought of changing hispurpose, for the search of theswarth maiden amidst the scene of rustic pleasure; but this was only the feeling of a moment, the next he was ashamed of it, and sprung through the breach.

The first care of the exile was to examine the edifice itself; it was still, in many places, undecayed, its massy construction having resisted the weather; and in others the dilapidation seemed to be more the result of the removal of the materials for the new building, than the effect of time.

VOL. IV. c





He paced the cloisters, ascended into the galleries, and entered several of the cells, once the scene of penitence and devotion, perchance the poor refuge of broken spirits, upon which the world had trodden, perchance that of the dark villain, who ill concealed within their walls the lust for those worldly enjoyments from which his crimes had compelled him to remove. Silent and solitary as they had been, when their echoes only returned the bare foottread of the midnight penitent, or the low murmur of his prayer—when their arches gleamed only to the dim cresset that depended from their centre, or the slender taper of the nocturnal visitant of his last receptacle, they were now more solitary, more silent.

The whiz of the bat's wing was all the exile heard as he passed along, or entering, viewed, by the dim star-light that found entrance through the narrow casement, here the decaying remains of a breviary, there a scourge, still clotted with the blood of some self-tortured ascetic.





The chapel, into which he now made his way, bore every mark of having been once a superb structure; the roof having fallen in in several parts, he was enabled to examine, by rather a stronger light than the other parts of the building afforded, the fluted pillars, the rich painted windows, the magnificent carved work that surrounded the high altar, the tessellated pavement, and the colossal mosaics, with which the walls had been decorated.

He paced the aisle for some minutes, contrasting its present cheerless aspect with that of the time when it had blazed with tapers, and reeked with incense-* when the splendid vestments of pontifical dignity, mixed with the simple garb of humbler holiness, had enriched the scene, while the strains of holy melody had now pealed, now lingered in dying cadence of sweetest symphony beneath the far-stretching concavities of its roof.

Through these the rising wind, finding entrance through the apertures of the roof, now swept, in hollow and mournful-sounding blasts, in the pauses of which the exile heard the echo of his own footstep, however light he pressed the pavement, throughout the whole length of the fabric.





Again he felt his spirits yielding to the chilliicss, the gloom of the place, and the dark thoughts that were associated with its aspect, and he sought the open air. Here, too, every thing bore marks of desertion and decay. The walks, which appeared; to have been formed with taste, were overgrown with grass, and docks, and thistles!;. the ponds that had supplied' the community with water, were overspread" with green slime, or choked with sedge; while.the Triton or the Naiad, who had held the conch, or>the urn, lay prostrate in the centre; and the plunge of the otter, and the flutter of the wild-duck, scared by the unwanted sound of a human footstep, was heard as the exile approached; the palings were broken, the shrubberies exposed to the devastation of cattle; several of the fruit trees of an extensive





orchard were ramified and otherwise decayed, for want of pruning; and the low howl of a fox issued from the door of an elegant pavilion.

The exile, as he stalked through this scene of desolation, thought jt was indeed a place fitted for unholy deeds. The prospect of what was to come, together with the interest which the scene had excited, had rendered him unconscious how the time passed, and he started as he heard the bell chime fhe hour from the towers of the other, building, and found that it was ten o'clock—that before two hours should have elapsed, he should have held converse with the dead.

He was pursuing his rambles through the grounds, in anxious rumination, when he thought, as he passed beneath a clump of cypress, that he heard his name repeated by a low voice, the tones of which were familiar to his ear, and which seemed to issue from among the trees. He stopped and turned; the sound was repeated, and shortly after a slender figure emerged from the shade, and advanced towards him with a light step.





There was something so gentle both in the voice and gait of the figure, that it could not inspire distrust, and he quietly awaited its approach.

When it reached him, "Oh, milord," it said, taking hold of his arm, and addressing him in accents which he now, with a mixture of wonder and gratification, recognised for those of Juan, "Oh, milord, how ghjd I am I have happened on you at last ! I was sadly afraid we should have mised you."

"Happened on me at last!" repeated the exile, still more surprised; "but how did you know I should be here, and at this hour? and what impelled you to seek me here?"

"That you shall know all in good time, my lord," said the minstrel, in a tone of solemnity very different from his accustomed accents; "but .you must suspend your curiosity for a while, till we reach the old summer-house; there—you may see it there, a little way up the hill, where my mother and Theresa have stationed themselves, that they might have intercepted you if you should have passed down that way frdm the road."





"Theresa," said the exile, "station herself to intercept me! why, what new mystery is this?" But then he seemed to recollect that Theresa was near, and nothing else, and he ran, or rather flew, in the direction in which Juan had pointed.

The women were standing at the door of the summer-house, and, as they saw him approach, advanced to meet him.

He could scarcely disguise the rapture he felt at again beholding them; he pressed their hands to his bosom with all the warmth of friendship—oh! it was more than friendship ; then gently reproached them for having left the hostel before he was up; and then informed them of the intention he had formed of seeking them, and becoming their companion in their return to France, and their protector when in it, if they would allow him to claim that title.





While he spoke he rolled in his hand the slender fingers of Theresa; he found they trembled. He looked in her face, anxious to discover the nature of her emotion ; and notwithstanding the darkness of that, and the darkness of the night, he thought he could perceive that it was joy. He wished the scene had been less awful, the blast less cold, that hope might have been ceriaipfy.

"Weshall most gladly," said the Moor, '.' avail ourselves of the kindness of our benefactor; but this is not a time or a place to arrange matters of that nature."

"No more is it/' said the exile, again returning to the surprise he had felt at first. "In the name of Heaven, how came you to know I should be here at this hour r and what induced you to surmount the terrors the place usually inspires, if I have obtained correct information respecting it?"

"That you have," said the Moor; "but had it been ten times more repulsive, surely we could not have hesitated to visit





if, when the safety of our benefactor was concerned."

"My safety !" said the exile, with increased surprise; but he immediately recollected the doubts that had preceded his resolution to obey the invitation of the sorcerer. •''''''

"Time presses," said the Moor; " if your will listen to Theresa, she will explain all."

The exile was silent, and Theresa, having first looked anxiously round, to see that no one was at hand, began.

"You must know, milord, that the fair of Meerfedt, where we have been pursuing our occupation, lasts three days, of which this is the last. In the evening of the day before yesterday, we had retired from our labours, very much fatigued, and I was just beginning to undress myself to go to bed, when Juan rushed into the room, in violent agitation—' Theresa/ said he, in a loud but impassioned voice, 'I have discovered a villainous plot against the liberty, very possibly life of lord; Rivers !' He was about to inform me how,' but suddenly recollected himself, and taking me by the hand, whispered, as he hurried me from the room, 'We shall lose the opportunity oF knowing more about it.' ,





"I followed him, terrified and agitated, into the room where he slept; we both walked on tiptoes, and when he got in, he laid his finger on his lips, to enjoin silence. He then led me over to a slender partition, that separated the apartment from another, and made signs for me tp put my eve to a fissure in one of the boards. I did so; but was ready to sink with terror when I beheld the sorcerer. There were two men with hint, fn the garb of soldiers; he was just dismissing them, and said, as they passed through the door, 'Remember twelve o'clock at the Abbey of Marienfels; don't fail; rest assured I shall deliver him into your hands!' He then stalked up and down for a little .time by himself, and went out.

"Juan now informed me that the words I bad heard related to you, as he had discovered, from the first part of the conversation which he had overheard, the soldiers were in league with some Englishmen, to whom they were to deliver you, when they themselves had made you a prisoner, through the means of the sorcerer. What further evil awaited you I know not, but one very necessary piece of information, which Juan's trepidation had prevented his obtaining, was the night upon which you were to be entrapped. We were determined, however, to do our best to save you."





The exile pressed the minstrel's hand, and she returned the pressure by a sweet smile; and she repeated, "We were determined to do our best to save you, and7 going down to the domia—pooh, I mean tosay my mother, we informed her of what was going forward ; she. warmly approved of our designs, and regretted that indisposition, by which she had been' all day confined to her bed, prevented her from' assisting us. We went out immediately to the fair green, and remained there till twelve o'clock-, when we left tbe sorcerer





busy at his usual tricks; for that night we were secure.

"Yesterday morning we left the hostel where we had lodged, and, in order to watch his proceedings more effectually, we took up our abode in a small lone cottage in the woodlands which separate the grounds of this from those of the new Abbey; and a little after the chimes had gone nineo'clock yesterday evening, Juan and I stationed ourselves where you found us just now. The—my mother could not come, being _ still too much indisposed to bear the heavy dew that was falling.

"I remained here in great anxiety,' as' you may well suppose, for the place, and our business, was enough to inspire me with that, even if the life and liberty of my mother's benefactor had not been at stake.

"The Abbey clock went ten—nothing stirred but the grey wing of the howlet, that sometimes swept athwart me; eleven—all was still, silent, and lonely; twelve—I now thought our business was over for that night, when I heard a step, and soon perceived Juan approach^ ing. He came up to me, breathless with the speed he had made. * As I kept my. watch,' said he, 'about two minutes before the hour struck, three persons passed me, making towards the Abbey; one of them I am positive is the sorcerer, the other two I could not identify for the men we saw with him, but I greatly fear lord Rivers is. lost for ever; perhaps we may find him





-yet about the monastery, before he falls into the hands of his enemies; let us hasten; thither."

* "Good Heaves !" said the exile, "and have I indeed found such friends, so young: and yet so daring, when my welfare was at stake! Solitude, darkness, an haunted abbey, a terrific sorcerer—yes, the world has still something worth livingfor."

Theresa smiled with an expression he could not define; he cast towards her a penetrating glance, from which she turned her eye, and continued—" We reached the Abbey—you were no where. to be. seen. We had visited in the daytime, and explored every part of it. Juan proposed that we should go through it, in the faint hope of meeting you in some of its deserted cells or galleries. I trembled, but followed in silence. After passing through corridors that ran round several courts, we at length made our way injp the great gallery of the chapel, and a light from the nave soon informed us that the sorcerer was there.





"We soon discovered him, bv the lijiht of a lanthorn which he held in his hand, amidst some ruined tombs and monuments that are in the enclosure »,n the south side of the fabric, through a breach in the wall of which they can be discovered.

"The two men whom Juan had seen were still with him, but were persons of very different aspect from ihe soldiers we; had seen in the hostel. They had all the appearance of persons extremely terrified, and not at all likely to be objects of terror to others. Their thoughts seemed bewildered; and when the sorcerer spoke.. to them, and appeared to point their attention to some inscription or other object, it was some time before they could collect themselves sufficiently to attend to him.





"All three now passed through the breach into the chapel, and"—she hesitated—"I can go no farther: with respect to what now occurred, my lips must be for ever closed."

"Go no farther !—lips for ever closed!" said the exile; " what can this mean?" He recollected the words of the sorcerer, which he had so recently heard —" Thou shah behold unhurt what others, if they have but a glimpse of, close their eyes in temporary death, or madden, if they are not so fortunate, unless reason holds out at the expence of life."

"Oh," said the Moor, "this is the most extraordinary of all things; neither she nor Juan will say a word even to me of what they were witnesses to, and sometimes seem perfectly agonized if I press them. They might tell, they say, but they add, that I would not wish to make their instant destruction necessary; all I can learn from them is, that Theresa fainted at an early period of whatever dreadful scene was presented to their view; but this daring young urchin, who is always apeing the man, held out to the last; and I much fear," added she in a melancholy tone, "that his courage will have cost him dear, for he has not been himself since. He has been several times seized with fits, after which he talks in a wild and incoherent manner; and he has been otherwise so unwell, that I would fain have persuaded him not to leave his bed ; but there was no prevailing on him to consent to this."





The exile listened in silent astonishment, and turning towards the youth, perceived by the feeble light which the moon, now risen, cast through a dense cloud, that his face was all swollen and inflamed; and on taking hold of his hand, he found that it' burned like a coal. He was about to second his mother's persuasions that he would return to the cottage, when the Abbey clock, to the preceding sounds of which,





as it struck the quarters, they had not, in the earnestness of their conversation, attended, chimed; they anxiously reckoned the strokes; it was midnight.

"It cannot be so late," said Theresa; "yes, it is; there—if you listen, you can hear faintly the peal of the organ from the monastery; it plays while the monks enter the chapel, and take their seats.'*

"Silence,'" said Juan; "there are people passing beneath the clump where I was just now stationed."

All looked, as he pointed, concealing themselves behind the shrubs that had ornamented theentrance of thearbour. Two figures were discovered stealing down towards the Abbey, while they endeavoured to elude observation, cautiously keeping within the shade of the trees.

They had scarcely passed, when a third appeared, who, as he bore a lanthorn, was immediately recognised by the whole group for the sorcerer. He stopped for a few moments, and holding the lanthorn high, looked around him. He spoke to himself, and, as the wind blew towards the



r arbour, they were enabled to catch his words.





"All hitherto proceeds well," said he; "Heaven grant nothing may keep the bird from his cage! The night (he looked towards the moon, still shrouded in her cloudy mantle), the night is favourable; every thing conspires to seize his imagination, overawe his mind, and make him an easy prey. How mournfully the wind sighs through the heads of those tall cypress! the very appearance of that old, gloomy, deserted fabric, is sufficient to damp the courage of the bravest man; I could almost feel inclined to yield to terror myself, whenever I behold its massy towers, at such an hour as this, often as it has been the scene of my triumph, when I have trampled upon the spirit of the living, and fearlessly communed with the dead— But time presses; ere this he will have been in anxious attendance."

As he spoke this he passed on.

The Moor now proposed that they should retire and conceal themselves in some remote part of the grounds or the adjacent woods, till the sorcerer and his myrmidons, thinking that their victim had escaped their snares, should withdraw. But Edward, who felt his curiosity wound up to a pitch that he could no longer bear, and who thought that he might also unravel the web of the conspiracy which had been hatched against him, determined to reconnoitre the operations of the enemy, and his companions could not be persuaded to leave him, although, if he were assailed, it was not probable that they could afford him any assistance.





Juan said, that since he was determined, he thought the best way of ascertaining what was going forward would be to ascend into the gallery of the- chapel, where he and Theresa had been stationed the night before, and where it was utterly impossible they could be discovered. He thought he could easily find the way, and as the entrance to it was at the farther end of the building from that towards which the sorcerer and his accomplices had passed. they would, if they made directly for it, be almost certain of escaping them. "The purpose, milord," he added, "for which these persons have come, does not appear to be of a ghostly nature, otherwise I cannot be certain that I should undertake to serve you as a guide, after what I last night had the misfortune to behold." He shuddered as he spoke.





Each felt that there. was no time to lose, and the exile, while he contemplated, with pity and uneasiness, the evidently diseased frame of his young friend, nodded acquiescence in his proposal.

The whole party soon made good their lodgement, and awaited, in mute expectation, the result.

A breeze had arisen, accompanied by driving rains, which sometimes sweeping the clouds that obscured the moon, allowed her disk to appear for a moment, as if to shew more clearly the wildness and desolation of the scene ; then darkness returned; the wind sung loud amidst the fissures of the fabric, and the high trees that waved without; and now it paused, and now iV-; rose again, and, as it rose, the wild plaints of spirits whose reign had been disturbed, rose to the ear of fancy, in melancholy accompaniment.





"What a cheerless place !" said Theresa, in a low voice.

"It's no wonder that we should find it so/' said Juan, "when the sorcerer himself seemed to feel its influence."

Edward was again about to express his sense of the generous temerity that had been exercised on his account, when alight appeared at the gate of the building, and immediately after the sorcerer entered, holding his Ian thorn.

He was unaccompanied, and stepped cautiously forward, turning the light alternately to either side, and examining every recess as he advanced. At length he called the exile by his name in alow tone; the echoes -of his voice whispered along the walls. He traversed the whole length of the chapel several times in this manner, and at length evident marks of impatience were discernible in his countenance, as the light which he held falling occasionally athwart it, shewed all its terrible lineaments, rendered more ferocious and repulsive by the chagrin under which he suffered.





He now seemed to abandon all hope of finding him he sought, and suddenly gave a loud whistle. Immediately two men in the garb of soldiers rushed through the breach in the chapel wall, from among the tombs, where they had been concealed, and advanced towards him.

When they reached him—" For this time," said he, "you have missed your victim; we must chuse some better opportunity; fear not that I shall let him escape."

The men appeared extremely dissatisfied, and after a short pause, one of them, seizing the sorcerer by the collar, cried, "My friend, this is child's play ; I much doubt you have brought us on a wrong scent, in order that the game might escape."

The sorcerer looked at him with a frown that seemed to overawe him, for he slowly Telinquished his grasp. Then with a smile, in which scorn, derision, and disappointment, were blended, and in a voice that, without effort, seemed to possess a volume of sound, equal to that of a dozen ordinary men—" Worm/' said he, " thinkest thou that I directed my steps hither for the sake of the miserable reward proffered by* your employer to tempt my avarice? or thinkest thou a menace from such a reptile as thou art could stir in me any feeling but contempt? Slave! I am prompted to spurn thee; but no," added he, assuming a calmer tone, produced probably by the terror displayed by the offender, "no, thou art no fit object for the wrath of Walmer. Know that it was for purposes of my own I sought to deliver lord Rivers into your hands; I wished him to live, that he might be the instrument of vengeance, but I wished the hour of that vengeance suspended; I wished him to be a captive till an hour big with doubt and darkness to myself had passed, after which, I would have nerved and directed his arm. In the custody of the capricious tyrant who seeks his life, he would have been safe as the gems that glitter in his diadem. My power," his form dilated as he spoke, "should have preserved him. But I fear it may not be :'' he sighed deeply,. and crossing his arms as he spoke, looked upon the ground ; "yet to the last I will struggle for the glorious prize of immortality. One effort more, and if it fails, this poniard—but why delay the blow at all? What is it to me that his hand should





inflict no, there is severer retribution

in it, and I would not that the culprit's crime lost any portion of its meed."

He then turned to the soldier, who seemed more dead than alive, and said—"You shall have the fugitive, fear not; and before that solitary chime shall sound that draws the thoughts of man, if perchance his couch afford not slumber, to the shadowy and awful forms of that viewless world, to which his darkling fancy or melancholy musings ever turning, acknowledge the links by which the lapsing time connects him with it—ere that chime shall sound, thou shalt herebehold the spirit of him thou seekest torn from his body, to declare where that body may be found. The summons it shall n ow receive may not be disobeyed. Tremble not, wretched animal! thou shalt take no harm; my power is effectual to save as to destroy."





Having spoken thus, he passed through the breach, and soon returned, bearing in his hand a bag, which having opened, he displayed a similar apparatus to that which Herman had described as having found in the wood, and again in the chapel of baron Walstein's castle. He immediately proceeded to set the tapers in the sockets, and arrange them before him.

While he was thus occupied, Juan and Theresa, both almost dead with terror, in a low voice besought the exile to leave the chapel; but he had no ears for them; he perceived that the meditated incantation was to be directed against himself, and his bosom was heaving with tumultuous

Vol. IV. D .. ...



r self-interrogations, as to the conduct he should adopt, whether he should wait till his spirit, wrested, as the sorcerer said it should be, from his body, should leave that body a prey to him and his companions, or, rushing down, become the assailant in the contest, however unequal. He embraced the latter resolution; and drawing his sabre, delayed putting it into execution only till he should have seen some portion of the sorcerer's proceedings, which a curiosity inflamed almost to madness induced him to believe could not immediately affect him.





The sorcerer meanwhile completed his preparations. Describing a circle round where he stood, within which he placed his companions, as if for protection, he poured a vial of liquid in three several places, and then scattered a powder over each. Each spot sent up a reek that filled the building with a heavy and intolerable odour. He then, with a wand, which he took in pieces from the bag, and fastened together by joints framed for the purpose, drew several





strange figures upon the pavement, then waved it aloft, and immediately fell into the fixed attitude that Herman had described him to have done, when he disclosed the scene of murder at the masquerade; his eyes had the same terrific glaze as of v death, and his form was motionless.

The soldiers gazed upon him with a wild expression of terror in their countenances, while fheir limbs shook beneath them; and Juan, Theresa, and the Moor, clung round Edward in equal pain.

The exile alone was fearless; every

emotion was sunk in that of curiosity;

and in the eagerness of his desire to miss

no part of the coming spectacle, he

advanced in full view of his enemies,

bending over the balustrade of the gallery,

so that they would have needed the aid of

no sorcerer to discover him, had not their

faculties been too completely bound up

by fear to admit of their using them for

any other purpose than to contemplate

the terrible being that stood before them,

his spirit, to all appearance, wrapt into some other sphere of existence. His countenance was turned towards the high altar, and had just exhibited signs of returning animation in a slight convulsion, when suddenly ablaze of light burst from it, that filledthe whole chapel with a light clear, pure*, and brilliant, as the summer's noon, when the east wind has chased the clouds, and the frame of man springs buoyant in the lightness of the tempered air.





The sorcerer worked in stronger and stronger convulsions; at length he seemed to have completely recovered his suspended animation.

The exile, who conceived that the brilliant light was the effect of his power,. expected every moment the tone of high command to issue from his lips, and was now rushing down, and was again withheld by curiosity, when, to his astonishment, instead of any expression of authority, his countenance assumed every symptom of extreme terror and dejection ; he looked fixedly towards the altar, from whence the light seemed to proceed, but which the





exile could not see, as he was stationed immediately above, and the gallery projected far beyond it ; a sudden weakness seemed to seize him; he tottered, and at length sunk on his knees, his eyes still fixed upon the light, with terror that had increased almost to frenzy.

A pause ensued, during which even the most high-wrought expectation could not prevent theexile examining the astonishing scene that was passing before his eyes. The light, the purity of which declared a source far different from any of the gross materials by which man endeavours to remedv the absence of the all-cherishing sun, while its strength passing through 'the ruined windows and chasms that the roof of the fabric presented, spread wide through the atmosphere, insomuch that, the wind having become perfectly hushed, the song of the throstle, aroused by what seemed the light of day, was heard in the neighbouring trees, filling the silence.

The terror of the sorcerer, the soldiers prostrated with their faces on the earth, the emotions of his young friends, which seemed now to have in them more of wonder and less of terror, all presented a scene that filled his bosom with a painful and undefined feeling of awe, into vwhich the fears of the sorcerer had flung hope—of wonder, with which the loveliness of that clear light and the sweetness of the throstle's notes had blended admiration.





While he stood half entranced, awaiting the issue, a voice, loud as the thunder's roar, issued from the altar.

"In thy impious daring," it said, " thou didst at first barter thy wretched soul for permission to fulfil the decrees of Omnipotence, and thou wert suffered for a season to gratify thy miserable pride. When the guilty fall, it matters not whether Heaven's lightning blast, or a worm sting them. But with this thou wert not satisfied; thou hast presumed, in the madness of thy arrogance, to war with Heaven, seeking to thwart its immutable resolves. Thy hour is come! it may not be averted! perish !—And thou, unhappy wanderer, seek not, in the restlessness of thy agitated spirit, to explore those depths of fate which the Almighty in his mercy hath concealed from man; tread quietly and humbly the path that duty has marked out for thee; irt due time thou shalt be led by that unerring hand that moulds all human will, impels all human action, to the act thou art destined to perform. Meanwhile, let not passion blind thy reason, or cast a stain upon thy name, that would make thy offspring blush to remember it'. The warrior of his country may not wield a mercenary blade; the Christian may not wantonly cast away that life with which Heaven has gifted him. Contumacy doth not compensate for sin." The voice ceased, and its subsiding murmur was like the far-ofT swell- of ocean, when the whirlwind hath passed from its bosom. A short interval of silence ensued, during which the light glowed with augmented splendor, and again the throstle's song was heard, and then the light gradually withdrew, till no vestige of it remained, and the feeble gleam of the tapers that stood before the sorcerer, scarcely enabled the dilated pupil to embrace any object that was not close to them.





The note of the throstle was no longer heard; the breeze had so fallen, that, as it swept, it scarcely moved the tall heads of the trees that towered above the decaying roof, and sometimes let their luxuriant branches fall through its chasms.

The spirit of the sorcerer seemed to revive in the absence of the object, before which no sternness of mind could bear him up. He raised his head, and supporting himself by the aid of the wand as he knelt, for he appeared too weak to stand—" 'Tis even so," said he; "the hand of fate may not be staid; we seek to shun the precipice, and when we think ourselves secure, we awake as from a dream, and stand upon its brink.

"My doom is pronounced; I feel the death within me from which I had fondly hoped I was exempt. Oh! the fiend whom I have served works within me, and drags me to his footstool. Yet baffled, cheated, stricken to the dust, the spirit that taught me to aspire above mortal hope is yet unconquered within me; fear is yet a stranger to the spirit of Walmer."





As he spoke a sudden revulsion of feeling seemed to belie his words; he again stared wildly towards the altar, from which/ A feeble, dismal, bluish light, which formed a strong contrast to the former, now streamed, and again his countenance quivered and wrought with strong spasms— "Hah t" he cried, "art thou too there? stay, stay, stay T thy reign is not yet begun."

He strove to rise, but was unable; then by a strenuous effort he seemed to recover a portion of his intrepidity, while a hideous grin of satisfaction struggled with the terrors that still distorted his features, and at length triumphed; he was calm, but hiscalmness was more terrible than any passion that shakes the frame of man. The hand of death seemed to fasten on him, but moved not his spirit; the livid hue of mortality overspread hiscountenance, which B S





again wasall distorted ; buthis eye confessed not the influence of pain ; it still marked the fullest consciousness, was fixed, was dreadfully stern. At length he fell, but again raised himself, and again looked with the same expression towards the altar; but he could no more ; the weakness of the body rapidly augmented ; he again sunk to the ground; his limbs writhed; he struck his clenched hands against the pavement; then he was motionless; and a heavy groan, that, half stifled, marked to the last the inflexible stubbornness of his spirit, proclaimed his dissolution.

The light that had issued from the altar suddenly withdrew; the tapers were extinguished with a hissing sound; and dismal yells, as of exulting demons, filled the fabric. When these were no longer heard, the exile and his friends remained for some minutes silent, eacn wrapt in their own thoughts. At length—" Has man," said he, " ever before witnessed any thing similar to this ?—has—"

"Hark !" said Theresa; "the wondrous scene has riot yet closed; list to thoss sounds! oh, are they not divine?"





As she spoke, a strain of more than mortal melody swelled in the direction of the altar: all listened with a mixture of awe, wonder, and delight: again the strain arose, and the praises of the Most-High wero breathed upon the midnight air: so sweet, so solemn, so impressive as that strain, no sound had they ever heard; and now it was committed to one clear voice of exquisite flexibility and modulation ; and' oh! how soft, how tender, and yet how holy were its accents-! then as it paused, a full rich chorus burst upon the ear, filling1 the soul with a lofty enthusiasm, and this in its turn died gradually away, until but one note of thrilling sweetness lingered on the silence; and now it was heard no longer: the ear still watched for its renewal, but no sound answered its expectation.

"Heaven," said the exile, in a solemn tone, "giveth up no part of this fair portion of creative skill to the rule of the evil one: if, in fulfilment of its immutable purpose, it permits malign spirits to brood within these walls, their reign is bounded, and the yell of the demon yields to the sweetness of angelic minstrelsy, as the dark and turbid hour of human life may be illumed by the cheering rays that patience, fortitude, and piety pour into the soul."





"\ have heard," said Theresa, "thatstrains, such as we have just listened to, often unheard of those who stand around, and are still of this world, sooth the departing spirits of the just, and overcoming the pains of dissolution, imprint on the lifeless features a sweetness of content, that the *inner may not behold, and continue evil; oh ! may such be the comfort of our parting hour !'*

As she spoke the enthusiasm of her wordswas communicated to her actions; she grasped the hand of her mother, and that

of Juan, and holding them to her bosom, looked at that heaven towards which her thoughts were directed, while the fire of her eye was distinguishable even in the

feeble starlight.





The exile was carried away by the enthusiasm of the moment; he thought of the hitherto simpleconversation and actions of the simple, lowly, uneducated minstrel; and as he contrasted it with the lofty ardour of the words he now heard, the angelic grace, the sweet and tempered dignity, of the fine form that was now before him, he said to himself—"Of a truth, if a livelier spark of the divinity lurk within us, it will shine and burn, although no friendly hand may fan it; of a truth, no occupation, however lowly, may corrupt a nature in which there is inherent purity."

He gazed upon the minstrel; her hat was thrown back, her luxuriant tresses, . which had escaped from it, thrown carelessly over one shoulder, fell down her side, in graceful negligeneej leaving one side of her beautifully-formed neck exposed to view; her attitude, the wrapt expression of her countenance, her whole appearance, spoke of her intimate alliance with that heaven tl which her eye was uplifted. The exile,





for the moment, saw in her only a saint who might be worshipped; and, in a transport of devotion, seized her hand, and carrying it to his lips, imprinted on it a burning kiss.

This action, however, stopped, in all the current of enthusiasm, and some little coldness and confusion was on the point of succeeding, when Juan complained of being very ill, and expressed a desire to go into the air; as he spoke, he leaned against a pillar for support, and almost immediately after fell.

The exile, distressed and alarmed, took him up in his arms, and carried him out of the building, the women following in great a"itation and alarm. When he reached the foot of the staircase that led from the gallery, he found that .the boy had fainted, and carrying him over towards a fountain that was erected in the centre of the court were he stood, and the trickling of water from which.reaching his ear, informed him that it still afforded a supply of that element, he sprinkled his face with it, and was about to open the breast of his doublet, for the admission of air, when the Moor, who had just come up, entreated he would forbear, the disease under which he had recently laboured having rendered him extremely susceptible of cold.





It was upwards of an hour before the youth had recovered his senses, and then he was so feeble and languid, that it appeared difficult to remove him to the cottage, and Edward began to fear that they should have to take up their abode for the night within the desolate fabric in which they had witnessed so terrible a scene. Juan, however, said that he thought, if he were to rest for a little while, he should be able to walk; and a few drops of rain falling, the Moor proposed that they should take shelter, for a few minutes, in some less decayed part of the building.

They accordingly made towards a portal that opened on the side of the court, to the right of that by which they had entered it, and found themselves, as well as they could discern by the starlight, for the moon had set some time before, in a spacious hall, paved with squares of black and white marble, along one side of which an elegantly constructed staircase, also of marble, led tothe galleries, and on the other a bench, sunk in the wall, beneath a rich painted window,, still whole in aH its parts, afforded a resting-place for the poor invalid.





They all sat down by him, and insensibly fell into conversation on the occurrences they had Witnessed, and Theresa related several stories of apparitions^ which she" said she had heard when a child, from the peasants who dwelt near her mother's residence, with great simplicity, but with a skill in the selection of circumstances,. and portraiture of passion, that made theblood curdle in the veins even of those who had recently witnessed things more awful than they now heard of; while the exile was still more deeply impressed with admiration of the fine talents she had received from Heaven, and regret that they should be all un.pruned and uncultured, like the forest vine, that, in the depth of some savage wilderness, grasps with its tendrils every friendly branch, and ramifies in rich luxuriance, till the husbandman, as he passes, sighs to think that had the vigorous and healthy stem received a timely care, it might have been the loveliest and most beauteous ornament of the beloved spot to which the labours of his life were devoted.





While they were thus beguiling the time, for Juan still remained too weak to be removed, Theresa having come to a passage of more than ordinary effect in one of her tales, paused, to allow it to work its due effect on the minds of her audience: whether it was fancy that was awaked by the tale, or the place, or the late occurrences, or tlvat some person was really lurking around them, Edward, starting suddenly from his seat, asked if something had not passed? if no one had heard a step?

"I did think something glided beneath the staircase," said the Moor, in a tone of fear and uncertainty, " and passed through yonder door. Good my lord/' she added, "let us leave this place; those men who sought to make you their prisoner may have recovered from their fears, and may be lurking amidst the ruins, in the hope that you may have been detained from your appointment by some accident, and would hasten to it when no longer impeded, in the hope of still finding the sorcerer; or, if we suppose that they conceive you, in consequence of what has happened, to be an object of the immediate protection of Heaven, and would, therefore, not dare to attempt any thing against you, still others, not so influenced, may have arrived since, to assist their comrades. If Juan is unable to walk as yet to the cottage,we at least had betterseek some more retired part of the ruin ; its ample boundaries will not fail to afford us concealment; but this appears to be a part of it through which no one that searches for another could fail to pass."





Edward admitted the propriety of her counsel, but first determined to explore some of the avenues that led from the hall". to ascertain, if possible, the degree of danger he might incur from a further stay.





He gently refused to attend to the remonstrances of his companions, and once more drawing his sabre, issued from the door through which the Moor had imagined that the figure passed.

It opened on a kind of passage that terminated inanother hall, and through a door on the opposite side of this from that by which he had entered, a wide area presented itself, which he thought, from the light that descended through the roof, must be the chapel. He entered it cautiously, and found that he was not mistaken; all was still as death. He advanced along the walls, that if any one was there, he might escape observation. He stopt for a moment; he thought he heard whisperings near the breach into the cemetery; but listening again, he was convinced that his fears had deceived him, and he proceeded more boldly.

He was now opposite to the spot where thesorcerer had fallen; he hesitated whether he should examine it, and ascertain whether the soldiers had shared the fate of iheir companion, or had merely suffered a temporary insensibility, the result of their fears.





The rain, which had now come on with great violence, beat against the windows of the fabric, and the wind, which had again risen, howled dismally beneath its arches.

There was danger that, if a new partyhad arrived, they might be reconnoitring without, and that the violence of ihetempest would drive them suddenly in upon him, perhaps with a light, which would at once reveal him.

He waited for some time longer; nothing stirred ; his courage augmented, and he advanced to the fatal spot. The soldiers were no where to be seen, but the corse of the sorcerer lay before him. . He stooped to examine it; it was already stiff and cold, and, as it lay immediately beneath a chasm in the roof, the garments were drenched with the rain. He mused deeply as he stood by if; he thought that no common vicissitudes of mortal life were to 'be compared to (hat which placed h'm by the lifeless trunk of one, who, but a short time before, had prepared to snatch his own soul from its mortal tenement, and force it to become the reluctant betrayer of its proper interests; but he suddenly recollected the uncomfortable situation in which he had left his friends, and hastily retraced his steps.





When he reached the hall, he found the bench deserted; greatly alarmed for the safety of its occupants, he stood for a moment in self-deliberation, as to what way he should take in search of them, when he heard himself called by a low voice from a dusky corner of the apartment, lie made towards it, and found those he sought; Theresa informed him that, while he was absent, the persons who had before alarmed them, or some other, had again passed by the staircase, and that they had taken up their present station with a view to concealment.

Juan now said he thought he could proceed to the cottage, and having issued through the door by which they had first entered, the whole party soon found themselves on the walk which led to the summerhouse. The rain had again ceased; they passed on, casting many a glance backward on the Abbey, as its huge masses now sunk into the darkness of the hills behind, and now, as they gained an eminence, flung its shadowy outline upon the skv or the waters.





J

At length, having passed a steep and

closely-wooded acclivity, that screened it

from their view, they quickened their

steps, Edward and- the Moor supporting

Juan, and soon found themselves at the

door of "the humble habitation which was

* to afford shelter and rest to their harassed

minds and bodies.

They knocked several times, but no answer was returned; at length the old woman who tenanted the low mansion was heard striking a light, which soon shone through the narrow casement.

The door was now opened. As the party entered, the old woman cast a scrutrnrzing glance at the exile, and then a significant one at Theresa, but said nothing; she then kindled a fire, and observing that it was so long since her lodgers had gone out, they must stand in need of refreshment, set about preparing such homely viands as her cupboard afforded.





Meanwhile Juan was got to bed with all possible expedition; and the exile had the satisfaction of hearing, in a few minutes, from the sister, that he had fallen into a deep and quiet slumber.

The cooking of ihe ancient dame of the cottage was soon dispatched, and the exile sat down to the poor refection, under circumstances that made it appear a banquet fit for the gods. It was sweetened by the poor man's sauce—a healthful appetite; it wasssveetened by toil that had been suffered, and peril that was passed; but far keener was the zest it derived from the presence of her who had shot fire into his heart the first moment he had beheld her, whose every glance, and smile, and word, had since aided her faultless form and beautiful countenance to win upon his heart, and who had just braved terrors that might have appalled the most resolute of the rougher sexj that she might shield him from his enemies.





Never, at the full-fraught board of luxtiry and grandeur, had he felt the delightful sentiment that inspired him, as he seated himself between his gentle friends, at the rude plank fashioned by rustic industry— never, when the meaning smile of some enamoured peeress had accompanied a desire to receive from his hand a portion of some costly dainty, had it excited a palpitation quick as that with which his heart bounded when Theresa, whose shape, slender and elegant, yet full and round, with scarce an angle to offend the eye, now divested of the coarse part of the poor covering that was wont to conceal it, and quite sufficiently adorned by the slight boddice and petticoat that remained, had divided his attention with the office of president of the feast, which he had assumed—when Theresa stretched forth her hand





lo steady the wooden dish, a portion of the contents of which had already escaped, partly from the undue distribution of the mental faculties of the carver, partly from his want of habit and skill in humouring its several customary obeisances to right and left, backwards and forwards, beneath the pressure of the clumsy knife, and, while she held it, smiled a smile in which there was pity for his fallen fortunes, esteem for the good-humour with which he could accommodate himself to their privations, satisfaction at the cause of his awkwardness, and a spice of that archness and roguery that loves the slender misfortunes of one's friends, and that gave a poignancy to its other ingredients. The exile smiled too, but he did not complete his task the sooner for the assistance afforded him, for it was pleasant to labour with such a partner, and he loved to examine the mould of the long taper fingers, and to mark how the lowliest office might call forth a grace, sweet as the violet's

VOL. IV. E





perfume when bruised by the foot of the steer.

Why missed not the once-luxurious exile the prompt service of the liveried lacquey, the golden goblet, rimming with the red, rich, sparkling beverage, the voluptuous strain, or the dazzling wit that seasons the rich man's banquet? Why looked he with placid content upon the withered Hebe, as she placed by his side the rude pitcher, filled with the pure, but tasteless element r Why did the largeness of his bounty bespeak the tranquil joy that loves to spread itself around, when the favoured servant of the household, with tail erect and importunate mew, and restless attitude and frequent remembrance of head and shoulder rubbed beneath, a paw stretched upwards, demanded to participate in the feast, and was joined in her suit by the prick-eared, shaggy-coated cur, who rose to the pleasant steam, and shook a shower of ashes from his bides, and strained his eye, and h^Jd his head erect, and whined solicitation, while each seemed encoura





ged, rather than repressed, by the hand and Voice that would have protected him from their intrusion, so soft, so sweet was the rebuke, and each still seemed to wonder at the goodly and unwonted profusion that had taken place of the rigid temperance to which they had been trained by their ancient and prudent mistress? Why was each vengeful, each ambitious thought banished the exile's bosom? Why was the sacred grief, the loved, the treasured grief, that from his heart's best vein had welled such sweet and bitter waters, lulled for a season? It was that thou, almighty Love, didst rule the hour, didst pour into that humble shed a living stream of that thy purer light, that sooths, and cheers, and warms, but scorches never—thou, thou, almighty Love, who, if the simple wants of nature be supplied, pefmittest not thy votary to roam in mazes all fantastical and intricate, that know no egress; nay, even these wants, all pressing as they are, be but thy influence felt, have lesser pungency. Turn we to Maracanda's deep, vast soli





sons, with whom the business of life might connect her.

The morning ray had scarcely streamed through the narrow casement, when, anxious to preserve life and liberty, that might now be employed for a grateful and pleasant purpose, he rose from the straw couch on which he had stretched his limbs*, and tapped gently at the door of the inner chamber.

The soft voice of Theresa answered the knock ; he asked how Juan did, and having learned, with satisfaction, that he had passed a good night, he departed, with many a sigh heaved as the distance increased between him and the dwelling that contained all tbat made life valuable.

He had remained upwards of a week at the hostel, awaiting the promised message, solacing himself with rambles in the forest, in the course of which he often visited his 'favourite bank, and with the sweet numbers, that more than the presence of pontifical grandeur, glorified Avignon; but no tidings reaching him, he began to fear





that either Juan continued ill, or that some mischance had befallen his friends, in consequence of the sorcerer's death, or their efforts for his preservation.

When once this apprehension had assailed him, he found suspense intolerable, and determined, at whatever risk, to know the event. Accordingly having left W4esendorf as the shades of night fell, in order to diminish the danger he incurred, he arrived at the cottage the next morning, just as the day began to break.

He knocked at the door, but no answer was returned. He repeated the knock; the dog growled, but seemed unwilling to rise from his warm lair in the chimney-corner, conscious that poverty wants no guard.

Again he knocked; still no answer; he became impatient, and at length making his way round to a window which he knew opened from the room occupied by Theresa, he was alarmed at finding that there was no curtain before it, and, as well as he could distinguish in the grey obscurity of the dawn, that the room was deserted.





He now again applied to the door, and still receiving no answer, he was about to break it open, in the augmenting impatience and agony of his soul, when, chancing" to cast his eye along a path, that, after running by a hedge that inclosed the cottage garden, suddenly turned into the wood, taking the direction of the ruined abbey, and on which a few early sparrows were already busily employed picking seeds scattered by the autumnal breeze, he thought he could perceive a female figure emerge from the wood, and advance towards him.

It slowly approached, and he soon was enabled to recognise the ancient tenant of the cottage, who, when she was near enough to be heard, cried, " Alas! Mein Herr, what has brought you hither? I hope you haven't been long waiting? I suppose you know what has happened? Well, who would have thought that so sweet, so fine a young creature"

"Who—vwhat—what young creature?" asked the exile, in a voice half-stifled with.





terror, and to whose imagination the death of Theresa immediately presented itself, as the cause of the old woman's sorrow. " In the name of Heaven, speak quick! what has happened? where are the dear friends I left in your dwelling?"

'' Alas! dear heart, then you know nothing about if, as it would seem; I don't know that any thing ever grieved me more since the day"

"But pray don't talk now," said Edward, "of any other grief, but say as briefly as you can what has happened." Who is dead? he would have added, but his tongue refused to form the cheerless articulation.

The beldam was again commencing her circuitous method of information, when he grasped her violently by the»wrist, and his whole frame and countenance exhibited such marks of almost frenzied misery and consternation, that she was frightened, and renouncing for that time a privilege she had never before been known to abandon,





declared that Juan had paid the debt of nature.

Edward, who, in the anxiety of his love, had never once thought of the probability of his being the sufferer, felt as if a mountain had been heaved from his breast, but the selfishness of his satisfaction soon presented itself to his conscience; and when he had learned that the old woman had left his mother and sister praying at the grave, and he had proceeded to partake of their sorrows and their devotion, he wept plentifully as he walked, for he remembered the gentle manners of the youth, and that it was to preserve him he had risked the existence of which. he was now bereaved, at the very opening of that season when man begins to triumph in the consciousness of his faculties.

He had not advanced far before he perceived his unhappy friends returning slowly to their humble lodging. As he approached, they seemed alarmed, bHtthe gentle accents of his voice were soon recognised, and they stood beneath a spreading oak, whose sear leaves the morning breeze was shedding around them, till he had reached them. The yet feeble light scarcely permitted him to distinguish their countenances, which, moreover, were shaded by large mourning hoods, as were their whole persons, by the foliage that spread wide above them.





Their grief was silent; perhaps its violence had in some degree exhausted it.

Edward pressed the head of each to his bosom, (sorrow ever justifies familiarity, for it excludes the thought of evil,) and wept over them.

They walked slowly to the cottage, the mistress of which had already lighted her fire, and set about preparing an early meal.

When this had been dispatched in melancholy silence, Edward tried, as well as bis own emotions would permit, to offer consolation to the mourners; but the Moor having informed him by a sign that she wished to speak to him in private, he followed her into the inner apartment; and she there informed him, that Theresa had exhibited some slight symptoms of the malady that had destroyed her brother, who had become rapidly worse since the morning after the adventure in ^he abbey; that she had observed that thesfe symptoms were sure to recur whenever her mind was drawn towards him; that she had in consequence endeavoured to divert her attention as much as possible, and had in some degree succeeded, notwithstanding the recency of the calamity, for she exhibited a consciousness of the necessity of it, and lent herself willingly to any efforts for the purpose. She •wished him, therefore, not to mention the ill-fated youth in her presence. She then proceeded to inform" him, that a longer stay would possibly be productive to him of very evil consequences, for that several horsemen had been of late seen upon the high grounds around, some of whom had even slept at the abbey; and some report of his having been lodged for a night in the cottage having got abroad, two monks had been sent to ascertain the fact, and h?,d departed apparently very little satisfied with her assurances, and that of the old woman, to the contrary. She added, that she was now ready, together with her daughter, to accompany him to France; but she feared that neither would be able to bear the journey on foot, or any part of it, in consequence of the recent fatigue they had endured in attendance upon Juan. She had heard, she said, that the lake issued by anotherchannel,besidesthatatitsextremity, from its bason, and fell into the Rhine; and she thought, if a boat could be had, that to fall down that river would be as easy and pleasant a method of performing the journey as could be devised; the only difficulty, if be would accompany them, being as to how he should dispose of his horse. She then pointed to a higher part of the banks of the lake to the left, as the spot where the waters found egress.





The exile had fallen into a fit of uneasy thought, when she mentioned Theresa's illness, but had chqered himself with thehope that a change of scene, and due attention to keep the image of her deceased brother from her mind, might prevent any evil consequences; he had also considered with much satisfaction the great medical skill of the pere Etienne, who had assured him that he would soon follow him on a visit to his brother. He now mentioned these grounds of consolation with much eagerness; and at the same time expressed his resolution to sell his horse, and adopt the plan of conveyance proposed by the Moor, observing, that in his journey from Wiesendorf, he had passed the branch of the lake to which she had alluded, over a rustic bridge.





It was now determined that he should immediately return to Wiesendorf, and having sold the horse, should be in waiting with a boat on the third morning, at an early hour, in a small cove that was situated immediately beneath the ruin, where they would join him.

He then took leave, and having completed his arrangements with all possible expedition, and taken up his residence at a little town on the right bank of the lake, a little below the outlet, the night previous to the. appointed morning, the stars were yet clear in the firmament, though a solitary lark was already carolling beneath them, and the waterfowl were issuing in small flocks from the creeks where they had passed the night, when he anchored his boat in the cove, assisted by the person from whom he had hired her.





CHAP. IV.

The grey mist left the mountain's side,

The torrent shew'd its glistening pride j

Invisible, in flacked sky,

The lark sent down her revelry;

The blackbird and the speckled thrush,

Good-morrow gave from brake and bush.

Lady Of The Lakh.

The exile and his companion had not waited long, when a rustling amidst the trees, and immediately after the sound of light footsteps, announced the approach of his fellowtravellers.

Their old landlady preceded them, bearing a lanthorn, for it was still dark; and Edward remarked with pleasure, as he steadied the plank by which Theresa passed" into the small vessel, that the eye of the old woman, as she received her farewell, glistened with a tear, and her lips moved in a parting blessing.





He now arranged her whom he was in rapid progress to consider the treasure of his life, in as convenient a situation as he could,-wrapping her and her mother in long cloaks, which he had taken care to purchase for the purpose, and seating himself next to her at the helm, desired the boatman to get under way.

The practised navigator obeyed, working the vessel with a pole round a headland that formed the cove; then having hoisted the sail, the snowy canvas bent before the morning breeze, the murmuring surge smote the prow, dashing a light spray athwart it, the slender streamer fluttered aloft, and the trim and gallant bark, which, to the fond fancy of the steersman, appeared like a thing animate and elate with the consciousness of precious freight, cleared steadily the waters. "We shall be able to make Constance to-night," said Edward, addressing the boatman.

." If the wind holds," replied the other, "we shall."

Silence now ensued for some minutes. disturbed only by the scream of the waferfowl, as they rose on the approach of the vessel, the murmurs Of the parted waters, and the low humming of the boatman.





At length, Edward perceiving that the eye of Theresa was fastened on the towers of the old abbey, that were seen rising amidst the gloom, and fearful of permitting her mind to rest on the ideas that were associated with such an object, asked her whether she did not feel the morning air cold on the water?

"Thanks to his care, she was quite warm."

"I had no notion," he continued, '* of finding you so punctual; as I approached the cove, I calculated on blowing my fingers for half-an-hour at least."

"We should have been inexcusable,'' said Theresa, " had we been inattentive to the comforts of one who has been so sedulous in promoting ours. I fear," continued she, in a gentle tone, " that being excluded from associating with high-born dames, you may miss that pretty arrogance and caprice, that I have known so highly prized by some of your sex, that mimic empire to which you love to bend, while you grasp with so firm a hold all real power. I should be inclined, perhaps, to indulge you with a specimen of it occasionally, but I fear I might be like the ass in a fable, which a young friend of mine once read to me, that got deserved castigation for apeing the manners of the lapdog."





Whether Theresa was sincere in this selfdepreciation, or whether it was an artifice of female vanity and confidence to challenge comparison, we shall not venture to pronounce; but certain it is, that it did cast our hero into deep thought, in which he called over the roll of all the fine ladies he had ever known; and he thought the arch and playful manner in which the words had been spoken, had more in them of grace than could be found in the antics of a thousand of those to whom the part of the lapdog in the apologue had been assigned. "I am banished the court," said he to himself; ".butI have found in Nature's wildest haunts more than a court can present. The fragrance of the exotic was indeed passing sweet, and stimulating to the sense, but its sweetness surfeited, and to preserve it from every rude breeze was costly. Here is the simple rose, that, all unprotected and unscreened, blooms on its thorny stem, dispensing a perfume so congenial, so refreshing, I feel it may not satiate/'





The dawn now feebly glimmered in the east, as the vessel glided with steady, but rapid motion over the bosom of the lake. As the light grew, the surrounding landscape gradually disclosed its features, which seen from the surface of the water, assumed a cast of greater magnificence, for the minuter parts being concealed from view, the bolder outlines of the more prominent were flung unbroken around.

The high grounds to the right presented a great variety of surface; the bank sometimes rose perpendicularly from the water's edge to a great elevation, thinly sprinkled in its ascent with lichens, briony, ivy, and other hardy plants; but its brow was fringed with coppice, that girt a gently swelling summit, whose still fresh verdure was cropt by a herd of deer, just risen from their lairs, and moving amidst a few scattered chesnut trees that surrounded a ruined watch-tower.





In other parts, the shore retired with now a bolder, now an easier sweep, rich With hamlets, and farm houses, and orchards, and vineyards, till it reached the foot of a high mountain, that stretching northwards, now sent forth itsmasses in promontories, the summits of which seemed to impend over the smiling scene beneath, now threw upon the eye, from its majestic woods, the thousand tints with which the autumnal sun had overspread them, and now retired in deep gullies, into which the light was not yet sufficiently strong to penetrate. Beyond, to the eastward, still higher summits occasionally rose above the nearer mountain, enriching with their numerous shades of purple, deep or famt, in proportion to the distance, the warm and mellow colouring of the landscape. Fleecy clouds at various heights moved slowly along the side of the mountain, now veiling, now disclosing its several features, and then sometimes rising in an oblique direction, were dispersed in the atmosphere. Even at that early hour there was no want of animation in the beauteous scene; peasant children were perched in various parts of the cliffs, seeking for the eggs of the waterfowl that haunted them. The report of an arquebuse drew the attention of the travellers to a point of rock from which its smoke was discernible, slowly wilhdrawing, as well as the sportsman reloading his piece, ajid his dog bursting through the thicket, to deposit the small but grateful conquest at his feet. Several flocks of sheep were quitting then* folds in the lowlands, and ascending to their mountain pastures, each attended by their wonted guardian, and the faithful companion of his toils, who watched his eye, and, if it uttered command, pursued the straggler, and drove him bounding to his fellows; while the alternate bark and shout were





returned from the rocky delis, that at intervals confessed the sweeter voice of reed or flagelet. At length the ether all flushed with a deep golden hue, above the mountain tops, the vapours rose quicker into the atmosphere, and soon the edge of the sun's disk was seen at the head of a deep ravine, the darkness of which was deepened by pines and larch, that descended its whole length. When the full orb repressed the eye, it rested on a silver stream that fell beneath these with a tinklin^ sound, and the lower current of which, when it received the light, gleamed at intervals through their foliage.

While the travellers gazed with a pleasure, in which even grief may not refuse to indulge on the loveliness of creation, their little vessel had insensibly reached the mouth of the stream that was to convey them to the waters of the Rhine; they entered it, "and after a difficult navigation of a few hours, a vista of the high banks disclosed to them the green waters of that ancient river, passing in-smooth-., unruffled





lapse. Before they left the gorge by which they were to enter it, they determined on breakfasting ; and a green sward, with fragments of rock, presenting them with a favourable situation, with a natural board, and natural seats, they landed for the purpose. They collected firewood from the coppice, and the boatman being provided with flint and steel, soon blew up a cheerful flame, beneath the shelter of an indented crag.

The exile ascended a height which overhung their pleasant saloon, presenting a vault rich with Nature's fret-work and enamel; and finding his way to a cottage, that peeped, with its turf seat, and its chesnuts, from between two green banks, soon returned with a supply of goat's milk, fruit, and other rural dainties.

He then stood with his arms crossed by the fire, and watched Theresa as she prepared the meal; but sometimes he looked at the boat gently rocking in the stream, and sometimes at the waters of the river,. seen through shrub-fringed cliffs; and now





he marked the goldfinch and his mate, and their progeny, flitting from thistle to thistle; and now listed the mellow note of a blackbird perched upon the top of a neighbouring sycamore, which having shot up to a greater height than those around it, had sustained a nipping blast, and though still full and luxuriant beneath, presented only withered and naked branches above; and then his mind rested on the rampiked plant, and he thought that it was an emblem of the ambitious man; and because that it was like himself, he wished some friendly hand might shred away decay, and give it still to ramify in humble and undistinguished luxuriance; and as he formed this wish, he looked again on Theresa, and as he marked her household skill, and the grace with which she ennobled the lowliest occupation, he thought that, all poor and coarsely garbed as she was, if he were seated on King Henry's throne, and thus elevated above censure, he would without hesitation snatch her to his bosom.

VOL. iv. v \





Again he looked around him ; the scene was very still, very secluded, and very pleasant. The light air smote on his brow, cool and refreshing ; the music of the dark maiden's voice invited him to his meal, and as he seated himself on the rockyfragment by her side, he had almost said, "I can scarcely think that I am miserable."

The meal concluded, the travellers reembarked, and having soon entered the Rhine, they glided with a favourable breeze between its pastoral banks—dined upon its margin as pleasantly as they had breakfasted—and towards evening, the broad waters of the lake of Constance lay spread before them.

The wind was hushed as the sun declined from its meridian, and as the vessel glided gently over the wide expanse, they had full opportunity to examine the loveliness of the surrounding scenery, and to listen the various rural sounds that came from the populous banks.

Night had fallen ere they made the city of Constance, but they could observe its





its towers rising from the water as they slowly approached it, more clearly defined foy the light that rising from its populous streets, filled the atmosphere above; and they were pleased to contrast that light, and the distant and confused murmur of voices, with the silent waste of waters that spread around them, where nothing was heard but the ripple of the low wave, as the prow cleared it, or the whistle of the boatman, as he braced the sail and looked anxiously upwards for a breeze, or the dash of oars as some light market skiff shot by them towards the port.

It was late before they landed; the bustle of trade was stilled, and the inhabitants appeared all to have retired to rest: as they stood consulting with their boatman as to the best means of providing a lodging, a watchman, with a lanthorn in his hand, issued from a street that ran from the quay.

The exile having applied to this man, he conducted them to a small, but neat house of entertainment, the mistress of which was on the point of extinguishing her fire. The arrival of guests, however, suspended this operation, and the travellers having been provided With a slight refreshment, withdrew to ,the comforts of cleanly beds, and neat apartments, from whose chequer-screened windows they anticipated the pleasant prospect they should enjoy on the morrow.





The succeeding day they spent in examining the city, then thriving and populous, but soon to undergo a sad vicissitude, when, merged in the confederacy of Smalcaldc, she was to share a more than equal portion of the ruin with which the successful tyrant whelmed its supporters. But the busy merchant recked not of the day that bis posterity was to wander in cheerless poverty through grass-grown courts, artd dilapidated streets, and wealth, and hurry, and the joyous confusion of business, reigned all around.

"I know not how it is," said Theresa, as she passed through the crowded mart; "I have been obliged to frequent crowds of late, but I have never been able to acquire a relish for them."





A noisy vender offish passed her rudely as she spoke, and had nearly shoved her down. She grasped the arm of the exile, and looked terrified. He turned short, and seeing what had happened, inflicted summary chastisement on the offender.

Theresa's terror increased; she feared that the peasant would retort,. and she grasped the arm of the exile tighter, and implored him to leave the place; blither fear was vain; the man had felt at once that he was no match for the stranger, and slunk away, midst the laughter of those who had witnessed his rudeness, and its consequences.

Theresa again entreated him to leave the mart, but whether it was that he thought her fears childish, and such as ought not to be indulged, or thought it would be useful to her to become acquainted with mercantile affairs, or wished to gratify his own curiosity, or whatever else might have' been his motive, certain it is, that he turned a deaf ear to all she could urge, notwithstanding that he had no later than that very morning, in a fit of his ancient gallantry, declared that he lived but to do her bidding, and thereby earned as sweet a blush as ever dwelt upon the cheek of modesty; notwithstanding this, he now led her about against her will through the thickest parts of the croud, explaining this and that, with a volubility that hardly permitted her to repeat her prayer; so that the poor girl had her panic so often repeated, that she at length became more practised, and instead of grasping his arm on the approach of danger, thought she found a more effectual protection by shrinking behind him; and .by that time, it is to be presumed, he was weary of the place himself, for he evinced no longer any reluctance to leave it.





They continued their journey on the ensuing morning; and having reached SchaflThausen about noon, stopped to change their vessel, and contemplate the magnificent cataract, that there interrupts the navigation of the river.





The exile stood with Theresa on the brink, and he amused himself with remarking the natural bias of soft woman's spirit, in the awe and trepidation with which she stooped forward to view the foaming torrent, and the abyss below, into which it precipitated its waters; and then pointed, for the voice could not be heard, with a look of satisfaction, to a cottage on the slope of an eminence embosomed in trees; but he was more pleased when, approaching himself the brink, he placed his foot on a projecting rock, and stooped till his plume was dashed with the spray, and his companion forgot the fears she had entertained for herself, and advanced to draw him back, with gentle, but anxious solicitation; and then he stood by her for several minutes, and listed the thunder of the dashing waters, and marked the tumult of the crowded beach, some loading, others towing their vessels> the form of man diminished by distance, and his loudest shout unheard amidst the rushing of the flood; and he lent his mind to the littleness of man, compared with the rude and" careless, but grand and enduring monument of creative power that was before him; and as he looked at the maiden, and marked a kintired feeling depicted on her eloquent countenance, the awe that stole into his mind was at once enhanced and sweetened.





When their slender stock of moveables was transferred into their new vessel, they again glided forwards, listening the receding roar till it sunk in distance, and the quiet lapse of the stream alone was heard, or the peasant on the bank stimulating the horse that towed them.

They arrived at Lauffenberg that night, when they quitted the river, and having engaged with a muleteer to convey them across the Canton of Basle, they passed the next day the upper extremity of the ridge of the Jura, and arrived without accident, on the evening of the same clay, at a village on the borders of the forest, in which the brother of the beneficent monk had taken up his abode, and, as the exile was enabled to ascertain, about three leagues from his dwelling..





CHAP. V.

Chi mi vede soletto in viso smorto

Piissegrane questo bosco a lento passo,

K come ad or ad or, qual nomo assorto,

M'arresto immobil si che sembro un sasso;



E come spesso nel sentier più torto

M'implico si, ch'appena poi trapasso;

E come gli occhi, ch'ognor pregni porto,

Alzo alle stelle, e'n terra ancor gli abbasso.



Oh quanti, dire, ha in seu crude martiri

.Quell 'infelice, e quanti affanni rei!

Sembra talor, che l'alma esali e spiri. Maffct.



The first care of the exire, on the etisuing morning, was to seek some pleasant and sequestered spot in which to deposit his treasure, where no vulgar eye might intrude upon their privacy.

Such an one he had no difficulty in finding amidst the wild mazes of the forest, and it was not till he had completely settled his friends in their humble habitation, which 'he supplied from his own small store with every article conducive to rural convenience, that he felt himself at leisure to visit his future host.





He found that he had been for some time in expectation of his arrival, and had prepared the best chamber in the dwelling for his accommodation.

He was a cheerful and intelligent old man, whose tejnper had not been soured by the disappointments he had experienced, and his daughters comely, simple girls, who, after surveying their guest with timid. curiosity for a few minutes, withdrew to their household occupations.

The exile, after he had been three or four days an inmate of the family,. wondered that neither of the damsels gave any indication of a wish to ensnare his heart, for he had never, at any preceding period of his life, resided in the same dwelling witfo a young unengaged female who had forborne such an attempt;. but the problem was solved on the ensuing- Sabbath, when, two well-looking, though rustic youths^





made their appearance at the cottage; and the sire informed him, that he entertained hopes of their being able ere long to take his incumbrances off his hands.

A latent sting of offended pride had ere this been rankling in the bosom of the exile, and though he had felt it with emotions of indignation against his own weakness, and a firm resolution to expel it, still the force of habit was constantly impelling him to the practice of some of those soft seductive arts, which he had never found to fail, if the quiescent attractions of his 'fine person and expressive countenance were found insufficient.

We do not mean to say that love, pity, penitence, melancholy, and all the other feelings which take man out of the little, low selfishness of his nature, had not gained such effectual power in the mind of our hero, that he would not have been enabled to subdue his vanity, or at least to fly from the necessity of a contest with it; but the information he now received did away even the necessity of a tacit compromise, and he felt relieved from that irksome gnawing of the spirit, ever consequent on a struggle between a sense of duty, and every lofty, every generous feeling on the one hand, and some involuntary stirring of sordid and turbid passion on the other.





He now returned the frank and simple attentions of the innocent girls with tne feelings of a brother, and felt, what he had never felt before, how sweet it was to be the undesigning friend of a young, handsome, and innocent female, to receive her artless confidence, and having aided her in the accomplishment of her wishes, her artless and ardent gratitude.

-He had leisure now to turn his thoughts to his own situation, to ask himself what views he should substitute for the dark purpose which the voice he had heard in the Abbey of Marienfels, and which, he doubted not, was a voice from heaven, had driven from his mind—to recall the image of Luise, .dwell upon the lesson of her dying hour— and steady his mind in the resolution never to debase the maid that loved him.





He determined to await the tide of events in patience, when he was trying neither to accelerate or retard them; but with respect to the love that was growing in his bosom, indeed had almost engrossed his soul, he could come to no decision.

To be the husband of an itinerant musician, who could not read—if he were ever to regain his rank, if ever any of his former companions should pass by chance the retreat in which he might hide her and his shame from the world—the thought was terrible; but far more terrible, and with greater energy expelled the mind, was the thought of her filling the arms of another—of her smile cheering his labour—of his infant pressed with a twofold warmth, because k bore his image, to her fragrant bosom.

Self-deliberation on this topic was sure to terminate in postponement, or in vague hope that some event, he could not say what, might solve the knotty point, or in a vain, half-formed resolution to rest content with the enjoyment of Platonic affec



s





tion, in any thing but the acceptance of the lesser evil, the acquiescence in the lesser privation, which was in fact his only alternative.

He at first determined not to nourish a passion that he at times could not but foresee was likely to be productive to him of much misery, in a greater degree than a reasonable attention to his protegees rendered necessary; and he endeavoured, by solitary rambles in the forest, by calling up the image of Luise, to whose memory it would be treason if he were to love again, by a close study of a few select books with which his host had sought to improve his retirement, and by awful meditations on the event which was to makfe him the instrument of Heaven's vengeance, to wean his mind from the minstrel; but it was in vain—a solitary ramble nourished love; the mild countenance of the poor Luise would not wear a frown of prohibition; she was now above alt earthly jealousy. . Books, however pleasing, are read with no relish by the lover, if his mistress hear them not, if she do not glow with the lofty, soften with the tender sentiment, smile at the archness of fantastic humour, or wonder at the cunning of the hand that sets before the eye the sweet varieties of nature.





He resolved to try the more active pleasures of the field; and for two or three days the remedy was useful; but he was not a little puzzled, when afterwards he returned day after day with empty pouch, to answer the questions of the old soldier as to what parts of the forest he had tried for game, and to still his wonder that the abundance with which it teemed should have permitted his toil to be bootless. If J»e would, indeed he could have repressed every question, every shrug, by a confession of the truth, for the truth was, that the hours he was supposed to be traversing the forest, he had spent in the cottage where Theresa had taken up her abode, and which was not more than one league distant.

This was not because he had become





blind to the danger that hirked around him; but it was a matter of duty and Christian benevolence, that he should not be an inefficient protector, when he had promised his protection.

His dear friends were lone women, without the means of arranging many things that a woman's strength was unequal to. There was scarcely a day that he had not a bed to put up, or a grate to fix, or a bacon-rack to hang, or some other job of a similar nature to begin or complete; oh, it would be difficult to say all that's to be done in a newly-established household, however small. It was this humane attention that made him throw aside his fowlingpiece; and then there was no reason that he should not take pleasure in his toil, for it was passing sweet when Theresa handed him a hammer or a chisel, however simple was the office, or when she steadied the stool on which he stood, and begged him to take care he didn't fall, or came so familiarly when he called Theresa, for truly he did very much affect to pronounce that name like one to whom the owner of it belonged.





The autumn passed in this manner, and by the time it had passed, the household was completely arranged; and the motive which the exile had assigned to himself for the frequency of his visits, of course no longer existed; but by this time he had imposed on himself a new task, namely, that of preceptor to the maiden; and as she learned every thing he taught her with surprising quickness, he found a double incentive in the pity it would. be to leave so fine a mind as she possessed waste, as he found a double delight in the performance of the duty, for duty he would think it.

But he had now another inducement, besides humanity or love, to spend his hours as he did, for the family in which he had become domesticated received constantly a guest whose company to him was utterly disagreeable. This was an old military gentleman, who resided at a short distance, and who having served with the sieur Thomas de Villeneuve, had contracted with him a close intimacy; and as he had no family, and had saved some money during the course of his peregrinations, which he had intimated should at his death be divided between the daughters and his friend, he was looked upon, in some degree, as a second parent, and was an almost constant visitor at the cottage.





The first day he dined there after the arrival of the exile, he had made very strong remarks on some bitter language that had fallen from the latter with respect to Henry and his favourite, which had not gone without a retort; and after his departure in the evening, the sieur Thomas had informed his guest that his ancient friend had been in his youth favoured with some very high marks of distinction by his sovereign, a circumstance which had caused the current of his loyalty to flow ever since with a force that almost converted a virtue into a vice; and having mentioned the connexion that subsisted between them, he begged, as a favour, that he would indulge his foible, assuring him that in every other respect he would find him well worthy of his esteem and good will, provided he subscribed tohis doctrines of implicit obedience, and never mentioned a crowned head with disrespect.





The exile was by no means so tenacious as not to yield a ready acquiescence; but the old officer so frequently broached his favourite subject, and appeared so little satisfied with the non-resistance of silence in the person he had resolved should be his. antagonist in argument, that his presence became insupportable to one who, from his cradle, had never been much accustomed to impose any restraint on himself.

His fair friends, too, had imbibed some suspicions with respect to his want of success as a sportsman, and his constant descent into the dell beyond the fern hills, and the old beechen covert; and talked sometimes of a linnet's nest that no rude hand might approach; and hinted how reasonable it was for those who repose confidence, to find it in return; for when could woman think of aught else when she could think of love? This latter grievance he would not perhaps have felt as one, if he had been deceived as to the gratification of his love; but as it was, it combined with the other principle of repulsion to aid the attractions of the linnet's nest, which, sooth to say, wanted no assistance; the shades that screened it might not be easily beheld and avoided.





He now commissioned a peasant to provide him a reasonable quantity of game, to save appearances; emptied his shot-pouch and powder-flash into a brook he was used to cross in his return, as occasion required; and took his station, with great punctuality, every morning by Theresa's fireside.

Till now he had never lived. The bound of the forest roe was not more active than the range of his beloved pupil through the paths of knowledge he spread before her; and this was a source of delight such as he had never formed any idea of.

Those only who have marked a fine female mind in a beauteous form, expanding at the touch of love, while it confesses nothing of the pride that forms the chief stimulus to male learners, eliciting surprise by its powers, admiration by its graces, and rapture by its timid and humble unconsciousness of both, while its possessor seeks but to please the dear instructor—such only can appreciate the attractions of his present employment.





He became every day more and more enamoured; and soon finding that it was impossible to conceal from the family of his host the real occasion of his absence every morning, he indemnified himself for the pain of the confession, that he visited two destitute females, whom fortuitous circumstances had placed beneath his protection—a confession made with a reluctance similar to that with which an outlawed miser reveals to a friend the spot within the land he must no more revisit, where his treasure is deposited, by lengthening his visits, from which he now never returned till near bedtime.

The winter had now set in; the forest had yielded its leaves profusely to the first Frost that in the course of the night had fringed with silver the margin of the brook, and sprinkled with rime the willow that dropped its branches to its surface; but the orange foliage of the beech still held with its accustomed tenacity, and still mingled with the green of the lofty pine and humble juniper, screened from the northern blast the cottage of love.





The frost appeared to have visited the earth only to increase by nakedness the dreariness of the scene, for it immediately yielded to heavy rains, that swelled the brook to a torrent, drenched the soil, and drove the cattle that had wandered amidst the forest glades to the bounteous crib, and the well-thatched homestall.

The exile, however, permitted not the weather to rob him of his enjoyments, notwithstanding the remonstrances of his friends in either cottage; indeed it increased them, for what satisfaction did he not derive from the cares of the dark maiden, when he arrived drenched with rain at the vine-dressed porch, and-saw her, as he passed the casement, sitting at her work, remote from the fire, in order that he might not be made to wait a moment for admittance, when she took his cloak and cap, and looked wistfully at the drenched plume of the latter, and sighed to think he had endured the pelting of the storm, but soon cheered again, that she might cheer him, and set his chair by the ruddy blaze she had prepared against his arrival, and took from it the warm slippers, and pressed him to remove from his feet its well-soaked covering; and then, when all was settled and comfortable, looked at the window as the storm dashed against it the sleet and the rain, and with a tone and an eye that spoke sincerity of pity, lamented the hard lot of those who were not so well fenced from its fury as themselves! The hours that succeeded might not easily be forgotten by one who had a heart to relish them.





When the lecture was over, mingled with smiles and approbation on the master's side, in which love reigned triumphant, and timid hopes that she had succeeded to his satisfaction, or that of the pupil, together with sportive remarks on her inaptitude, so unpardonable in one of finished stature; then the wild Provencal tale, or the sweetest love-strain breathed among the myrtles of Italian bowers, supplied by the small library of the veteran warrior, (for the old man loved the Muses,) was produced from the pouch of the exile, and sweet was the delusion of fancy, and the anxious impulses of pity, fear, and hope that followed; and when the volume was closed, then neither might the employments of the friends be severed.





It was a joint task to feed the redbreast (man's willing guest when the tempest is abroad) that had already sought shelter from the inclement season, and erred not when it chose its hostess. If the maiden prepared the simple meal, the exile fanned the embers, and moved each more pondrous vase; if she worked, he watched with silent and pleased surprise the beauteous flower or leaf grow beneath her fingers,

VOL. iv. . G





and selected the silks that were to form their future shades, and was chidden for lack of skill when he presented them, and, unabashed, tried again, for the chidings of the maiden were pleasant to his soul. When she sung at His bidding, he touched a rustic flute, and the notes that he mingled with the breathings of that voice were of a sweetness that he thought no skill of his could have extracted from any tube contrived for purposes of melody.

Mysterious and fantastical are the ways of love; love is like the dreamed-of essence that we grasp, and it vanishes—the full-blown rose that we pluck, and its leaves are scattered—the nectared cup that bathes our lips, and is dashed upon the ground.

Often had our hero rioted upon lips so pouting, so red, so moist, they might not be surpassed in richness—upon breasts so full, so round, so white, the blue vein's course was seen in its minutest windings; but never had he felt the undefined, the tumultuous, the perturbed, yet the all-delicious sensations that now raged through





his veins at the sight of forbidden beauties. Tin now, he had not known the contest of timidity and passion; the struggle} painful yet pleasing, between the desire to enjoy, and the fear of offending, or, stiH more, the fear of rendering the object of a love for which we could not, with cheeks unblenched, or utterance unobstructed, feel there might be a limit, unwofthy of retaining it. He had heretofore greedily snatched what was apparently refused, but in reality as freely offered; and scarcely had he possessed, before he wondered at his avidity. How different was it now! he was like some intrepid youth that plunges in the dammed* 'up current; he breasts its eddies, his eye filled with the glow of courage that may not dispense with danger, and joys to hear the pent-up waters fret and foam and rage around him; if the mound gives way, and the river thunders to the plain, there too he loves to float upon the quiet tide; but he will often, at the bidding of memory, repair to the scene of his more vivid, more





turbulent joys, and mark with delight the crumbled bank, and deep-worn ravine, that tell of the pleasant toil and hazard he had coped with. He was like the waters themselves of such a current, that love to spend their confined force in grateful wanderings from their legitimate channel, now circling some hillock, now dividing some mead that shed profuse verdure, touched by the freshening moisture.

The joy of his best triumph was not equal to that of the stolen glance, that, sent over the shoulder of the maiden, rested on the full firm orb that swelled from her simple but neatly-adjusted vesture. The hem of her garment, as it touched his instep, while his foot was near to hers beneath, thrilled his every nerve; and if, while he read some passage from the page of some enamoured bard, fraught with a keen passion, she removed not her round soft arm from the grasp of his trembling fingers, the flush of his burning palm, that was a moment which the blessed in Heaven might envy him.





The maiden was virtuous, but she loved, and she could not conceal that she loved, «. for she was artless; but her very love had in it a purity that cast a mountain rampart round her innocence. If the hand of the exile imperceptibly, perhaps unconsciously, slid round her waist, and was rising gently upwards, she removed it gently, but she frowned not—nay, in very deed, she looked £S though she wished it had a right to rest (here; but there was in that gentle removal, and in the timid confusion that accompanied it, a prohibition more effectual a thousand times than scorn or indignation, which are often meant to stimulate the intruder.

The exile felt it so, and even when he sometimes affected to look upon the strange shapes of the winter-evening fire, from » dusky corner, but in reality looked upon her countenance, illumed by its beam, and saw her eye resting intently on him, and' filled with a mighty lore, even that did not impel him to think for a moment, that were he treacherous villain enough to make the attempt, he could succeed in sallying her virgin purity; her loveliness lay before him like the fruit of the Indian plant, that, ripe, and from on high, attracts the eye of the weary wanderer—like it, all ripe and tempting, but, like it, unassailable.





Sometimes, indeed, her gentle rigour was more relaxed; but it was in those seasons when even the rude and petulant passion of man lists the voice of virtue and is still. He had told her of the ill-starred Luise, he had imposed it on himself as a penance to do so, at the hazard of losing her esteem; but the heart of Theresa imbibed a keener passion, when she marked his penitence, and he saw that, and he spoke frequently of the maiden he had wronged, and who, now beyond the reach of his cruelty, slumbered in Rosemalde; and in the sympathy of her who lived to love him, he found a joy as keen, but more holy, than the smile of her love; for then, as she mingled her sobs with his, he hid his face upon her shoulder, and took her hand between his hands, and pressed it to his bosom, and tfoefrtb his throbbing temples, and was not forbidden, and was greatly comforted.





But this was a state of things that could not last with one so impassioned, one who had never checked his passions. The grape's delicious juice inflames the soul of man, but a thousand grateful visions ascend with its fumes as they assail his reason; but if the Circean draught be continued, a cold, languid, and joyless obstruction succeeds.

With respect to Theresa, it is hard to say how long she might have rested content with the joy that was in her grasp; the exile saw distinctly that she loved him, but he was surprised, and somewhat piqued, to find that her love produced in her none of either that turbulent delight that had taken possession of him, since he had been her constant companion, or of that pining misery into which it was now about to be changed. She loved, and she was ignorant whether she might ever. repose in the bosom of him on whom she had bestowed her heart—nay, she loved with deep, settled, rooted love; he could see it well, and yet she was calm and happy, as though secure of the fulfilment of her wishes: had she not a spice of Adelaide's indifference? oh not she was delighted when he came, sorrowful when he went, smiled when he smiled, wept when he wept, with ready sympathy; he knew not what to think of it. But for himself, his short-lived joy was rapidly retiring; the more inflamed his passion grew, the more uneasiness arose, from his inability to decide upon making the maiden his wife; he grew impatient, gloomy, and sullen, and remained absent from the cottage for three days at a time, spite of the mild, unexacting dejection, and tear-reddened eye that he marked when he resumed his visits. At those times he used to wander through the forest, the soil of which had now become hard with the frost, that had succeeded the rains. Every thought was dark, for it entered his mind through, the medium of the doubt and discontent that pervaded it.





When he dwelt on the memory of Luise, he shed no tear; when he thought of the wizard, whose fate he had witnessed, he felt as if he wanted again the sad and aweful feelings that accompanied his pursuit of knowledge with respect to that mysterious being; and it was with a dark, fierce, and impatient joy, that he contemplated the promised blood of him whose crimes had sated his soul with horror.

Theresa marked the change that had thus taken place in his mind, and it affected' her severely. The efforts of her mother and his to divert her mind from dwelling on» the death of Juan, and the terrible mysteries she had witnessed, and which she still' could not recollect without an aberration^ of reason, that increased with the continuance of the fearful images that assailed; her fancy, had not been unsuccessful; butt as chagrin took place of tranquil enjoyments, the task devolving. now, as it did, on< one, seemed to be more difficult; she reverted more frequently to the source oE her malady, and the consequence was, as might be naturally expected, that it every day gained ground.





Of this the exile, wrapt in his own meditations, which were not unallied to madness, was not aware, till one day, after an absence longer than usual, he happened to pass through a glade in the forest, hurryingforward to anticipate the minute when the sinking sun would send a flood of fire through the boles of the aged oaks, that spread westward far beyond the scope of human vision, and view that mighty blaze refracted by the earth's white vesture, from a spot where he was accustomed to behold it, and find in its quiet and soothing grandeur a brief respite from wretchedness.

He was just about to enter the brushwood, on the opposite side from that he had issued from, when the figure of the beloved maiden caught his eye, at a little distance; her cloak was drawn tight around her; her hair, partially disengaged from her hat, floated on the breeze; and her step was hurried and irregular.





He felt surprised, he knew not why; for as the weather was serene, though cold, she might have come out for exercise; but there was something in her appearance and manner to create surprise; the truth smote on his mind; he stood to see which wayshe would take. She did not passinamorig the trees, but turned and walked to and fro; he slowly approached her: as he came near enough to obtain a view of her countenance, he perceived that her eye rolled wildly, that she muttered to herself, and that her whole deportment was that of a person bereaved of their reason. As soon as she saw him, she started, then hurried towards the trees, but stopped when she reached them, turned round, and gazing wistfully at him, burst into tears.

His soul was filled with terror and-anguish; he gently took her hand, and in a voice that evidenced extreme anxiety, asked if she was not well? She made no reply; she appeared like one who had awakened from a turbid dream; the tears she shed copiously seemed to have relaxed



r





the tension of her mind, and the wildness of her aspect had given' way to her wonted gentleness, tinged with a slight confusionShe placed her arm within his, and they silently took the way that led to the cottage.

Here, when he learned from her mother that her malady had increased to a very alarming degree, he felt as if he was again about to murder the maiden of his love, though with a different weapon, and nothing but the terror of alarming her could have curbed' the usual vehemence of hisself-reproaches.

Nothing so effectually expels passion as passion ; he forgor> in his anxiety to sooththe maiden, the sense of evil that oppressed his own heart; but when again she was serene and happy, again the wayward fit had. grasped him, and he recommenced his wanderings.

Theresa, who observed that- when he came to her after severe bodily fatigue, hismind seemed calmer, sought no longer torestrain him, but as the weather continued. fine, she sometimes proposed to walk with





Mm. The offer was always accepted with delight; but she appeared to reap more advantage from the attendance'she1 was willing to devote to the mind-diseased man,. than he did,. as she followed him throughcoppice and thicket, winding the vale, or climbing the steep,. while he appeared unconscious of the fatigue he imposed om her, or felt himself; hersinews were braced, her cheek was flushed with a deeper red,and the inestimable treasure of a robuster health was-the reward of her love.

She seemed to' have in a great degree shaken off the disorder that threatened in< every darker hour to overwhelm her rea>son; she could now speak of Juan with* calmness-; but not even now could shedare to cast her thought towards the scenesof horror that had snatehed him from her side; for the exile,"in the wantonness of security, as he marked hep strengthened. frame, had glanced at the topic, less im^ pelled by curiosity than a desire to have a* topic of conversation suited to the gloom' that darkened his spirit; but he. could not hermit's peace, and not estranged from heaven—a happiness within his grasp, and for the rejection of which nought on earth* might compensate.





It was on thi* spot, where his solitarywanderings were used to terminate for the day, when the exhaustion of his frame made^the stillness of his spirit less painful, that he now each evening, at the selfsamehour, stood with-Theresa, and opened eaclv avenue of his. wounded heart to the sweet consolation that she knew well to administer.

Her response to his descant on the solemn sweetness of the surrounding scene was filled with a wild and all*-unchastened' eloquence, that relumed the fading fire of his eye; for her fancy was of itself luxuriant, and' it gratified him to think that hisinstructions had still further enriched it;. but to arouse admiration and delight is not the way most effectually to obliterate uneasy thoughts-. She knew how muck less violent is the transition from wretchedness to sorrow, than from wretchedness to> pleasure—how much less liable to reaction; she knew how sweet a balm its sacred drops could shed upon the corroded spirit. She paused; and the name of Juan died upon her lips, as if he too had heretofore stood by her in such a place, and at such an hour; but as she looked upon the grief-worn countenance of the exile, all pale, within the fine but neglected locks that, scattered by the breeze, were cast dishevelled around it, it was easy to know that her look of ardent pity, the tears that fell fast upon the hand she grasped in hers, all, all was for him. Nor was it ineffectual; he too remembered that the youth had died, that he might live; the chord of softest vibration was touched: he spoke of the youth, and he spoke of Luise; the tkle of grateful sorrow swelled high. Again he hung over the maiden of his heart,commingling copious tears; and when the growing night compelled them to leave the accustomed haunt, as they slowly drew near tire cottage fire, he felt his bosom lightened of a heavy load.





CHAP. VI.

Eternamente d'amoroso foco

Ardera, merec vostra, il petto mio;

Ne fin che pere cangiare etade, o loco,

II vostro amor giammai ponga in obblio;

Ami crescer vedrete a poco, a poco .y



Dell amor vostro in me sempre il desio.

CORSINI.



Matters were in this state when the pere Etienne arrived on his promised visit to his brother; and after having given the exile pleasant tidings of his boy, informed him that he had obtained a promise of very high rank for him in the Emperor's service; or if he had thought better upon that subject, he would be enabled, by the interest of a nobleman of very great court influence, to obtain him a civil employment, by the acceptance of which he would be placed in an advantageous situation, at once to use the documents in his posseslion for the destruction of the perfidious favourite, and, instead of cutting off the hope of reconciliation with his royal master, enable him to perform services that would tend to bring about such an event; he added, however, "that if he accepted the post, he must set off for Vienna immediately, as it could not remain much longer vacant."





The vision of the Abbey of Marienfels had produced a due effect upon the mind of our hero; he devoutly held that a voice from heaven had forbidden him either to seek death, or to enter a foreign service; therefore it only remained for him to decline or accept the latter offer.

If he had never seen the minstrel, he would not have hesitated; but now, to the astonishment of the pere, after having hinted something of the change which had taken place in his mind, with respect to the boon he had at first solicited, he begged time to deliberate on the very advantageous proposal that had been just made him.

When he retired to consider of it, it at first struck him that he could carry his treafsure with him; but on second thoughts, many difficulties, in the way of the execution of this plan, presented themselves to his mind. Theresa, if it were known that she was no relation of his, and the difference of complexion would sufficiently declare that, must, if she permitted his visits, sacrifice her reputation; for suspicion is a weed that perhaps germinates every where, but it thrives and grows rank in a metropolis, where innocence can never be sufficiently marked to check its growth: if he did not visit her, she might be exposed to the insults of libertinism, and that gratuitously, for what corresponding advantage should he enjoy? t





He perceived clearly that he had no alternative left but to decline the offer, or make her his wife; and for some minutes the uneasiness under which he had suffered for some time was increased; but he was, fortunately for the rest of his perturbed and wearied spirit, now driven to that point at which man, compelled to an election of a lesser evil, shakes off the doubt that is greater than either, and having embraced what he dreaded, almost instantly finds that it will not press with the weight he had 3L supposed.





He determined to wed; and he had no sooner done so, than the gibes and scoffs he had contemplated appeared, even if he should have to sustain them, no way formidable.

An hour before he was pining in misery, because he could not resolve upon a measure that he now set about accomplishing, with an ardour which might easily have been supposed to result from the removal of any barrier to the gratification of his desires, but one self-imposed. In half-anhour he was at the cottage door, and- as he entered it, the joyous smile that had taken place of the gloom by which his countenance had been so long clouded, at once pleased and surprised the maiden.

But when he told her of the offer that had been made to him, she turned pale and hung her head. He asked her, for he could not for the life of him proceed with the deliberatiorivwhich an affair of such importance requires; whether she would accompany him (her eye brightened, but there was something of doubt and distrust in it) as his wife, as his own, own wife, the treasure of his bosom—the dear, dear wife, the possession of whom might be the best subject for gratillation or envy, as friend or foe might cast a glance upon ihe economy of his being?





The poor girl, whose hand he had held in both his while he spoke, appeared at first thunderstruck; but now she half-raised her head, and looking with a smile of doubt from the corner of her eye, said faintly, " What! a poor, wandering minstrel to be the wife of a lord?"

"Aye,"answered he; "and a thousand times more precious to my soul, than the richest, noblest dame that Henry's court can boast its ornament."

A wild stare of joy now animated her countenance, she drew her head back, and looked him full in the face for a moment, to see if sincerity was written on his brow; and when she perceived that it was traced in legible characters, she flung herself into his arms, and burst into a passion of tears. Edward compared her artless joy with the practised coquetry he should probably have met with in a woman of his own rank, and was confirmed in the opinion that he had done well.





He staid the remainder of the day to enjoy his new-found happiness, and it was not a little augmented by the infantine and almost ludicrous simplicity, that made every effort of the destined spouse to conceal the hugeness of her satisfaction utterly abortive.

Sometimes she sat for a quarter of an hour at a time, in perfect unconsciousness of what was passing around her, till awakened by some call of her mother; and the exile loved the smile of that daydream better even than the music of her voice. In her household occupations she blundered a dozen times in a minute, and was at length obliged to abandon them altogether to one whose joy was more tempered than her own. If the hand of the exile roved as before, but with greater freedom, she removed it as usual; but she seemed at the same time anxious that he should have a multitude of minor tokens of the good-will she bore him; and when they parted at night, she refused not her lips to the first burning kiss he had ever impressed upon them.





The next morning he communicated to the friendly monk all that had happened to him since their separation.

He heard with astonishment, such as they were calculated to excite, and with no mark of his former credulity, the first part of his narration, and admitted that very strange things had before reached him with respect to the death of the baron; but when he came to mention his connexion with the minstrel, and the step he had taken the day before, he shrugged up his shoulders, seemed much to pity his folly, and while he expressed a wish that at least he had been less precipitate, he took from his bosnm a letter, which he had just received, and which, on his giving it into the exile's hand, was found to contain tidings of the death of the nobleman upon whose favour his future fortune was to have been founded.





The exile, however, to whose mind the yesterday's joy of his beloved was still present, made light of the misfortune; said he had for some time been contemplating a life of quiet obscurity; and after thanking the father for his exertions on his behalf, desired he would add to the obligations he had conferred on him, an immediate visit to the future partner of his life.

The pere willingly complied, and on his return, admitted the strength of the temptation, which had impelled him to a step he could not consider otherwise than unadvised, and was rewarded for his admission, notwithstanding the manner in which it was qualified, by all the documents, the possession of which had led him to project the ruin of the cardinal. . When he communicated the disappointvoi,. \v, H





ment he had sustained to Theresa, she seemed pleased at it, smiled, and said, " that it was himself and not his rank she loved; and that she should now have him all to herself, or with only the little cares of rural life to take him from her, and many of these she would share, and none of them would beget the uneasiness inseparable from the stronger stimulants of ambition, and the pursuit of wealth."

The removal of doubt, says Petrarch, is the beginning of comfort; and it is doubly so, if it open, through the mist of prejudice, a way to the gratification that nature acknowledges.

The exile now, in the fulness of his new-found happiness, wondered how he could have for a moment hesitated to grasp it, and inwardly smiled at the puny evil that had deterred him ; -but while there was any portion of joy yet unattained, he was not of the placid nature that could refrain to taste it, finding a greater sweetness in the consciousness that he could when he pleased, and fearing that enjoyment would





sate. In a weelc from the arrival of the pere Etiehne, he was called upon to exercise his holy functions; and the peasant Edward clasped to his heart his poor, his. lowly, his dark-brown, but withal, his beautiful wife, with a rapture ten thousand times more keen than it is probable he ever would have derived from the possession of a titled dame, in the bosom of pomp, of luxury, and flattery. If his joy could admit of increase, it did so, when, a few days afterwards, he saw the child of the still fondly-remembered Luise, for which the pere Etienne had, at her instance, dispatched a trusty messenger, cradled in her arms, killed.in her fragrant bosom, and heard her call Heaven to witness that she would be unto him as a mother, while the willing tear was shed for the sufferings of her that bore him; and the pleased infant smiled and chuckled, as if conscious he had. found a friend. How holy an embrace was that which followed!





The days now passed rapidly, for there was no decrease of love.

The voluptuary says that possession cloys. He who really loves finds in it an augmentation of his passion; the coolness of marriage is not, with such as can taste of higher joys than mere sensuality affords, the result of satiety; it is the result of discord, which is most likely to arise when the feelings are keenest, and most refined; but fortunately every one's experience has taught them that there are couples who advance from youth to age, subjected to no chill but what is consequent on the general resignation of passion; and even where the eye has often lightened with wrath, and the bitter word has blasted affection, even then, is there any passing gallantry that can afford a sentiment so powerful as that which influences the forgiving litigants, when grief or joy (for joy asks sympathy as well as grief) draws them to each other? Sweet then is the memory of ancient loxe, sweet the memory of com





mon cares and common sufferings; most sweet the pressure of the common bond, that,binding close their spirits, expels every wayward humour.

The exile, perhaps, was not exactly possessed of the temper that would render love enduring; but the still, deep, pellucid waters that rest in the hollow of the stately mountain-top, finding their level through a thousand unseen veins, give birth to the soft verdure that circles the brow of the neighbouring eminence. Even so had Theresa gentleness enough for both; the frame of her mind was of a structure that is seldom to be met with, combining, as it did, the keenest sensibility with a temper not, indeed, insusceptible of being ruffled, but quite insusceptible of that gall which, infused into the wound that passion inflicts, forbids it to cicatrize. Therefore it was that no couple ever loved warmly as the sojourners in the forest, with a fairer chance of continuing to do so; and warm assuredly was their love. When weeks and even months had passed away, it was still





tinsated; it had even increased ;" and indeed the chief uneasiness in the lives of those whom it held in bonds so firm, resulted from the excess of it.

If the exile journeyed to some rural emporium, in search of such conveniencies fos the simple household as the forest hamlets did not yield, he was miserable lest some accident might betide in his absence; and this feeling, as he drew homewards, would augment to pain almost intolerable, till the wane moonbeam, or the glow of embers, disclosed to him the form of his adored wife (for that was the word that, once the subject of his pleasantries, now sounded sweetest in his ear) stationed at the small casement, where labouring under anxiety similar to his own, she would spend the weary hours of expectation; but well was that anxiety repaid, when the well-known, long lkstened-for ring of hoofs, was heard upon the gravelled-path by which the peaceful abode was approached; and then how agile was the bound with which she sprang to meet her love! how fervent the embrace that followed that short absence which had seemed an age to either!





Speak I of that which is not? oh, it often is! and if it seldom endures, meet . cause is that for sorrow, for were it lasting, then would penury and toil, and all the ills that bow the soul of man, be but a burthen which his strength would toy with. I would not, when I spied that fairest flower of human life, with perverse shrug, and look of unreal pity, damp the pleasure of those who are delighted with its fragrance and its beauty; I would not say it was an illusion that would soon be dissipated; for is not the morning vision- of the healthinvigorated frame, to him who slumbers on thesunny bank, joy? and from the rose that withers all unsightly on the ground, does there not still breathe a perfume that proclaims it to have been once the pride of the garden?

Thrice happy they, who, like the fortunate peasant of the forest, may find a lovely spirit in a lovely form; for then no howling tempest shreds the flower; its hue and its fragrance subsist unimpaired for its given season; and perchance, in that coot, but bright and tranquil hour, when the receding sun pours sweetly his farewell ray, the loveliness of its morning seems to re'vive to one who knows that it is gazed on for the last time, ere the silence of winter broods upon the fields.





The remembrance of Liiise seemed nowonly to temper and mellow the happiness of the exile; his tears would still flow in honour of her image, but the prayer of her closing hour had been heard; they were tears that soothed, not galled his spirit; and Theresa forbid them not, for well she knew that sorrow for the buried was safety for the living spouse; and she was true to the promise that was, as it were, her dowry, for with maternal love she cherished hisboy; and when she saw him pressed to his bosom, she would throw her arms around both, and think with satisfaction of the approaching hour when another pledge of no feeble love would share that dear embrace.

The hours glided imperceptibly, and





love still seemed almost their only employment; the thoughts of the enamoured couple seldom wandered from the fireside where they sat, or the forest path where they rambled; though now they had constant tidings of the great world, in consequence of a plan of correspondence with the maiden of Amersville, which it was one of his chief cares to arrange on his arrival in his retirement, having been carried into complete effect.

If any thing could enhance his happiness, it was the letters of this most honoured friend, for the consciousness of having the heart of one who could pen a page fraught with so rich, yet so simple an eloquence, devoted to him with so romantic an attachment, that she chose rather tocherish his image than seek any less congenial, though more substantial happiness —this was a balm to his still proud spirit, more soothing a thousand times than any triumph of the days of his ambition.

He read her letters to Theresa, and stopit 3 .





peel at every period to express his approbation, and demand an acquiescence in it; and sometimes he even pressed them to his lips, and devoutly blessed the writer. The reader has seen that Theresa could be jealous, yet she now evinced no symptom of jealousy; and though the exile by no means wished to create it, he someiimes, when the ardour of his feelings hurried him into what might be termed extravagant panegyric, wondered, as he cooled, that all was still placid and composed in the dark countenance of his beloved. Was the source of this tranquillity to be found in the formula with which he generally perorated, "What a thousand pities it is that this excellent creature has but one eye!"

The spring was now far advanced, arid the peasant had nearly got through his agricultural labours, when Theresa sought him one evening a little before sun-down. She found, him, just after having wiped the sweat from his brow, leaning on his spade, contemplating the descending orb, and listening the multitudinous harmony that filled every coppice, every thicket, and the fiiH head of every lofty tree, coloured with the fresh verdure of the season. She tapped him on the shoulder, ere he had noticed her approach; and when he turned, and smiled, and kissed her, she put her hand into his. He felt a slight hardness, the result of household toil, upon that palm which was, when first he knew it, softer than velvet: for the first time he regretted his want of wealth; a slight dissatisfaction sat upon his brow. Theresa perceived it, and its source at the same time; she smiled, and said, " Ah, see what you have subjected yourself to! but don't think the worse of a hand because it is hardened in your service; the heart that loves you shall always be soft."





Edward was ashamed of his discontent, seized the hand, covered it with kisses, and pressed it to his bosom.

"I am come to you? I fear," said

Theresa, "more I ground for un

easiness; come, the primroses





upon yonder bank, that rises over the tender green of the springing corn, that while we examine our own poverty, we may be consoled, as we see before us the riches of Nature. I am come to render you an account of the slender funds that you delivered on our marriage to my care, together with those which my own labours had provided; they have diminished much faster than we had reckoned upon; we have been but poor calculators; I fear we must adopt a much more contracted scale of expence than that upon which we have hitherto regulated our household." She then detailed, with unfailing precision, the various heads of expenditure, suggested various modes of saving, but concluded with expressing her apprehensions that no plan they could adopt could save them from great difficulties.

Her views of their exigencies were so comprehensive, she had so exactly foreseen every thing that might probably occur, and every thing that could obviate inconvenience, that when the exile weighed the matter, he could find nothing to add or amend. He pressed her tenderly to his bosom, and told her so; and added, "We must probably have many conversations on this subject, and whether they may lead to a satisfactory conclusion, I know not; but this I know, that while we communicate our little cares, and sit in mutual speculation on the means of removing them, we shall find that such an occupation will endear us to each other—we shall find in it a bosom sweetness, a home-felt union, such as no wealth or grandeur can afford. Meanwhile, let us have one evening more of the unclouded time we have been passing, and while all Nature is blithe around us, be content with the joy of the hour, and nestle like the small birds in the brake, free as themselves from the cares of tomorrow."





Theresa was not slow to consent; and 'while she pillowed her head upon the breast of her lord, and looked fondly in his face, and filled him with unutterable bliss, he thought the birds sung sweeter, and a fresher fragrance breathed from the violets and primroses that sprung around them.





When they returned to their cottage, he found the Moor depositing on the mantlepiece a letter from Isabel, which had just arrived.

He opened it, after the customary homage of kissing the seal, and found that it contained an account of a meeting which was soon to take place between the French

and English monarchs near ;and

after she had described the preparations which were on foot to celebrate so remarkable an event, she took occasion to dwell upon the excellent opportunity it afforded for him to attempt to regain the favour of his sovereign, which, in consequence of the interest she had employed, she did not V think would be attended with any great difficulty, and which, as the plate of meeting was within the French territory, could at all events be made without risk. She reminded him of the pleasure that Henry took in gymnastic and chivalrous exercises, and the opportunity he would have of dis





playing his own skill in them; and concluded with an injunction that he would, however, confine himself to such as were not attended with danger.

This letter aroused the dormant ambition of the exile, but, considered with a reference to the probable difficulties that were before him in his peasant character, it was a more rational subject for meditation. His ambition, indeed, was not exactly of the nature of that by which he had been before actuated; he thought more now of displaying to his own Theresa the strength and beauty of his form, invested in the graceful habiliments of war, or of winning her applause by feats of chivalry, than of leading armies and presiding in councils; and such is the strange inconsistency of man, he had thirsted since his marriage to exhibit to the world that invaluable prize, for the grasping of which he had before it feared its ridicule.

He asked Theresa her opinion, when he had read her the letter. She shuddered at the thoughts of his encountering the lance of some gigantic warrior, and joined in the injunction of Isabel; she gently expressed her apprehensions that the poor brown minstrel might be forgotten, amidst the splendid beauties of a court; but he asked her was it possible? and then she acquiesced in what was clearly the inclination of his own mind, and which he resolved on indulging, as soon as he had taken the advice . of the friendly monk and his hospitable brother, who were both most urgent with him not to let slip an opportunity which. might never again occur.





CHAP. VII.

Ed ecco a un tempo stesso il buon trombett»

Da della pugna i segni, ond 'i giierrieri,

Per andarsi a ferir con somma fretta,

Abbassair Taste, e spronan i destrieri Corsinj.



He muttered—'twas nor fay nor ghost

I met upon the nightly wold,

But living man of earthly mould,



Oh dotage blind and gross! Makmiow.

The marechal de Fleuraiges has related, that one day, during the progress of the sports that enlivened the celebrated meeting between the French and English monarchs, known by the name of " the field of the cloth of gold," the vanity of Henry being siimulated by the successes of his wrestlers, he was anxious to try his own skill with the chivalrous Francis; but sustained a most dolorous and shameful defeat. Neither the marechal, however, nor any other historian, has detailed the particulars of the morning triumph so accurately as to notice the fact we are now about to mention, supplying thereby the defect of their narratives.





There was one French wrestler of gigantic stature, who had thrown several Englishmen, and was on the point of being proclaimed victor by the herald, no one any longer daring to cope with him, though the anxious monarch had repeatedly offered a reward of considerable magnitude to any one who should throw him, but in vain

The voice of the herald was uplifted for the last time, when a graceful figure, habited in a plain camblet dress, that sat close to his shape, and displayed its light symmetry, stepped forward to the trial; he was masked, and signified to the herald that he would contend only upon the condition of not being required to make himself known until he pleased, provided he was victorious.

Henry being made acquainted with this, acquiesced, though with some reluctance. None of the English present hoped a favourable event, when they contrasted the slender form of their unknown champion with the brawny vigour of his adversary, or that of those he had already overcome; but the field soon rung with their shout of joy and exultation, for a victory more speedily and easily achieved than any that had humbled them, now relieved them from the mortification under which they had seemed by no means easy.





They crowded round the conqueror, arid it was not without much difficulty he could prevent the mask being torn from his face; and was at last able to escape from their rude kindness only by a notice that he would take a part in the ensuing sports. In all those of which he in consequence did participate, the foot race, the throwing of the quoit, archery, &c. he seemed to win without an effort; but when he had knelt and received the prize for his sixth victorv from the hands of the monarch, he suddenly disappeared, leaving the crowd disappointed at his escape, but delighted with the address he had exhibited.





On the ensuing day, however, he was again on the field; but the fervour of the moment was gone by, and he was suffered to remain unmolested.

The reader will doubtless have anticipa-: ted that this was no other than our hero, the daring prowess of whose early youth they will call to mind; it was indeed noother; and he now awaited a further opportunity of increasing the title to the royal favour, which had been already strongly expressed towards him; after which, he having resolved to throw himself at the feet of the monarch, and having made himself known, demand to be confronted with the persons who had calumniated him.

While he was thus arranging in his own mind the manner in which he should proceed, the trumpets sounded, and a champion of either nation, armed cap-a-pie, entered the lists to commence a tournament, which was to be the chief business of the day. The French champion was unhorsed at the first onset; but the victor soon yielded his honours to a new antagonist. For some time the alternation of success was pretty even; but at length a French champion, of graceful stature, and singular strength and skill, maintained the field, after having worsted six English knights successively.





The countenance of Henry glowed with shame and indignation as he saw his warriors pushed from their seats. While a seventh competitor was arming, he took from his finger a ring, which the herald was ordered to proclaim worth ten thousand ducats, and flung it to where the origin nal prize, consisting of a sword, the hilt of which was inlaid with diamonds, was deposited.

It was of no avail—the knight shared the fate of his predecessors; the French champion brandished his lance, and wheeled his steed round the lists, elated with victory, and desirous of shewing- that he was yet fresh, and desirous of reaping new laurels.





The wrath of the English monarch waxed hotter. He seemed to labour with some thought that had struck him, and which after a little time he appeared to have matured, and found likely to answer his expectations.

He called the herald, and whispered something to him; the man bowed, and went over to a part of the amphitheatre where a number of ladies, richly clad, were seated, viewing the sports; he seemed to deliver a message to one of them, whose place denoted the elevation of her rank, and she instantly rose, and giving him her hand, 'he led her to the king.

As she proceeded to the throne, she was obliged to pass near where the exile stood; and what were his emotions, as he recog-r liised in her his beautiful but perfidious Adelaide!

Her vesture was enriched by a blaze of jewels, and the plume of the ostrich, rising





from a coronet of pearl, shadowed her polished forehead and arched brow.

The monarch seated her beside him ; and the herald proclaimed, that if the lady Adelaide Beauclcrc, the richest heiress of .England, should find the mind and countenance of the victor, in the existing contest, as well worthy approbation as his valour, she would bestow on kim her hand, and in the event of his not pleasing her sufficiently to justify her acceptance of him as her spouse, the king would- richly endow any other maiden whom he might select, and find less difficult of choice.

The first emotion of the exile, when he heard this extraordinary proclamation, was pity mingled with disgust, for the weakness of the vain creature, who would thus permit herself to be exhibited as the prize of brutal strength, or of a skill which he had learned to think infinitely less of than he was wont to do.

He looked at her; good Heavens! she was eminently lovely! and there was the placid smile that he had so often essayed, but in vain, to dislodge from her countenance.





A thought now struck him what a pleasant vengeance it would be for her perfidy if he could win, and then reject her—what a homage to the beauty and the 'ove pf the lowly, but the dear, dear peasant he had left in the forest of Mauriac. As he thought of the rich triumph he wished to obtain her, he loved her more than ever; but he was destitute.of horse and arms; when he left home, his stock was too slender to admit of his purchasing either.

While a thousand anxious thoughts and desires were agitating his mind, a person who stood by him snid—"This is all a trick."

"A trick !" said he, startled both by the words and bv a confused remembrance of having somewhere seen the person who uttered them, though he could not recollect where or when," a trick!" he repeated.

"Yes," said the other, who appeared to be a young French gentleman; " that is the count de Sancerre, who bas been so successful; he is the favoured lover of the •lady Adelaide; and the king having some time since proposed to her, what he has just now done, to set her up for a prize, the count, to whom he had before refused his consent to marry her, bethought himself of this stratagem to obtain it. This I have had from the count himself, who is a friend of mine."





The exile now thought it would be a cruelty, which his own happiness had divested him of the wish to practise, if he were to intercept the object which the lovers had in view; but again he reflected that he would have a right to resign his prize in favour of the vanquished; and then how sweet would it be to combine such an act of generosity with his vengeance—a vengeance which he could not think otherwise than fair! he might enjoy at once the sweets of revenge, and that proud consciousness of magnanimity for which others had been glad to abandon it. But it was of little use to speculate upon a

VOL. IV. I





triumph he had not the means of achieving; and he was just turning to ask the person who had spoken to him whether he had not had the pleasure of seeing him before, when he observed the eye of the monarch directed first towards a knijrht, who was pressing forward to offer himself a candidate for the beautiful heiress, and then, with an appearance of anxiety, towards himself.

He was standing at the edge of the circle, and as the king looked fixedly on him, i he bowed respectfully; the bow was returned by a gracious nod, and a smile of satisfaction; and the herald was immediately dispatched to him, with an inquiry whether he would enter the lists?

* He made known the obstacles that were opposed to his wish to do so; and immediate orders were issued, to his infinite joy, that he should be accommodated immediately with a steed and armour from the royal repositories.

In a few minutes he was in the lists; and as he took his lance from the person





appointed to act as his esquire, bowed gracefully'to the monarch—with practised hand v pulled round the head of a beautiful barb that bore him, and was pawing the ground, as if proud of his gallant burthen—and then stretching his limbs, to give his arms pliancy, revealed all the symmetry, fiexibi-. lity, and elasticity of his frame: the field rang with the acclamations of those who had witnessed his activity and courage on the preceding day.

He now wheeled to his ground; and before the trumpet sounded the charge, he cast his eye once more towards Adelaide. She had at length dispelled the smile that had so often grieved him; an emotion of the deepest anxiety and terror sat upon her countenance; her mouth, half open, disclosed her ivory teeth, and her eye was intently fixed upon the combatants. A slight emotion of wounded vanity stung the mind of the exile; another then had aroused a sensibility which had been proof against all his efforts; and she now witnessed his danger with every symptom of the most painful apprehension.





The reflection filled him with an anger which he had not time to subdue; and the last note of the war-kindling trump still vibrated on the air, when his adversary lay stretched upon the ground.

His fall had stunned him; and as the bystanders, in order to give him air, speedily disengaged his head from its iron covering, the exile could not sufficiently wonder at the taste of his quondam mistress, for her lover was, to all appearance, about fifty-five years of age, with a thin head of hair, already grey, and a countenance covered with scars, that accounted for the pFowess he had exhibited, and in other respects so ill favoured, as to form a perfect contrast with the robust symmetry of his stature.

He had not leisure, however, to indulge his wonder at female caprice, for the king, who had descended to the foot of his throne, was urgent that he should come and receive his prize, and make known the gallant warrior who had so ably maintained the honour of hi3 country.





He approached, led by the herald; bowed gracefull ; and falling upon one knee, lifted his vizor.

"Lord Rivers!" said the monarch, starting.

"Lord Rivers!" echoed a thousand voices.

The English side of the field was filled with murmurs and shouts of applause.

"I knew," said an old soldier, who had served at Gunegate, " it could be none other."

"I knew the graceful flexure of his arm, and the gleam of his eye through the mask," said a fair dame, whose best favours he had once enjoyed; "did I not tell you it was himself?"

The women waved their handkerchiefs and clapped their hands; the soldiery shouted, and threw their caps into the air, for he had been a prodigious favourite; and the monarch, after appearing to sustain a short conflict with his feelings, stretched forth his hand for him to kiss.





The exile pressed it respectfully to his lips.

"I have reason to think you have been injured," said the king; " but were it otherwise, you have redeemed yourself; you are restored to your dignities and possessions, and it is with no slight satisfaction I now place in your hands the vast augmentation of the latter, which your valour has won."

As he spoke, he beckoned the lady Adelaide, who advanced, and taking her hand, he placed it in that of the exile.

Edward cast his eye towards her for a moment; she was more beautiful than ever, and" her countenance was animated by a smile of exultation and delight, blended with a slight confusion. He joyed in her beauty, but it was because the public sacrifice it enabled him to make to his Theresa was enhanced by it; he wondered at her pleasure; but that, he felt, in reality reduced the sacrifice to nothing. What! to be satisfied to change from one lover to another in the twinkling of an eye, because a little skill in arms, perhaps chance, had favoured him! Oh, monstrous levity! could she that was guilty of it belong to the same species as a Theresa or a Luise?





"My liege," said he, as he rose, and threw the wrought baldric from which the elegant sword depended, over his shoulder, and placed the ring upon his finger, "with this I shall be ever ready to combat the boldest of your foes; and as this ring compasseth my finger, so shall a sense of your royal favour ever compass the heart of the wearer; but for the wealthy, the beautiful bride you offer me, (oh, why should she wear so beauteous a semblance!) I cannot accept her."

"Cannot accept her I" cried the monarch, with a mingled emotion of astonishment and anger; "cannot accept her! how—why ? Is she not beautiful—is she not rich? were you not formerly her suitor f"

"She is beautiful,- my liege, and she is rich, and I was her suitor; but most cruelly did she treat me as such, and"





"Oh, pooh, pooh I" said the king, interrupting him; " you will love the better as spouses for having quarrelled as lovers; but, gadso, I had forgotten, in the hurry and surprise of the moment, to ask what were the feelings of the lady.—Fair dame, do you accept the conqueror? do you love him as heretofore?"

The countenance of Adelaide assumed an expression of the most impassioned tenderness, as she said, "Yes, my liege, I accept him, as the best boon my gracious sovereign can bestow; and oh, to say how I love him, (she pressed her hands to her bosom,) a thousand summers' suns would afford not space sufficient for that pleasant task!"

Henry smiled, and again put her hand into that of the victor, who stood shaken by a variety of conflicting emotions, now looking towards where the women were seated, among whom an audible titter had arisen, and now at the unaccountable crea





ture from whose lips such words had issued, in such a manner as he thought would have suited only one already a wife, orsome amorous. wanton; and while his astonishment every moment increased, so did his disgust, for besides that her boldness was so well calculated to beget it, he still thought that her return to him, from one whose danger a little before had so much distressed her, was merely the effect of the good fortune he had just enjoyed.

He kept his eye fixed on her for a moment, calculating which, her beauty or her worthlessness, was the greatest; while the eye of the bewitching creature seemed sportively to supplicate acceptance.

"I see,"said Henry, "yourrepugnance has soon vanished; it would be singular indeed if it did not, and it is singular enough that it should ever have subsisted." These words recalled his scattered thoughts—" My liege," said he, somewhat softened by the love that war. evidently felt either for himself or his glory, which, after all, was his attribute, was a part of himself, " my liege, I regret much I cannot answer now the love of this all too-lovely creature—I am married."





"Married!" cried the king, "married without my permission!"

"My liege, had you not cast me ofF— had you not banished me? could I, without risking my very existence, have asked your permission ?*'

"Well, well, no matter, no matter," hastily rejoirfed Henry; "it will be easy to get a divorce; I shall have an application made at the court of Rome immediately."

"No, my liege," said Edward, with emphasis, and looking towards heaven; "my vow was registered above, and no human power can dissolve it; and were it otherwise, the wealth of worlds could not purchase my consent to its dissolution."

'* What!" cried the monarch, "do you dare to thwart my wishes for your welfare —to set my will at defiance? What! ho, guards! but rio—I had forgotten—here my power is limited; well, be it so; I withdraw the grace I so freely tendered.''





"My liege, I can only regret that such is your determination; I- cannot cast from my bosom the wife that fills its every crevice. I came hither from a peasant's shed to seek for justice; it is refused me, and to that shed I must again retire; but the light of heaven enters it, and freedom is around it; and she whom w-ithin its narrow precincts I have sworn to love for ever, could soften the horrors of a- noisome dungeon, can make that shed an heaven! As for the lady Adelaide, I claim a victor's right, and with her own consent., which I presume there will be no difficulty in obtaining, I shall deliver her to one, who, before I entered the field, impelled by my desire to regain your highness's favour, had fairly won her—to my valiant adversary;"

"What!" said the French king, who had left his own throne, and advanced to that of his brother monarch, curious to learn what was going forward, and to see the cavalier who had with such ease unhorsed his champion, "what! the lady Adelaide wilT consent to become the spouse of my old, ancient Jean Masson, whom I knighted only three weeks ago, because I knew I could find no one so likely to ensure a triumph over your English warriors! and by my faith, sir knight, 1 must have leave to say, that never was there so proud a wreathe so easily won, for France boasts not the man who would have entered the lists with the hardy and long-practised Jean; but in what regards his marriage with the lady Adelaide, I fear, if indeed heradmiration of valour be so great that she would dispense with every other attribute, that in our sex is wont to captivate the female heart—I fear me, I say, that such a laudable inclination, one that, if it should become prevalent among the fair, would fill the world with a bolder race of men than heretofore hath trod its surface, cannot be gratified, for Jean hath at home a partner of his bed, whom- he must have chosen upon a principle similar to that which regulates the choice of the noble heiress, for





her face is haply as repulsive as his own; but for the matchless vigour of her arm, be it enough to say, that to her prowess alone did the valorous Masson, even till this hour, yield the pre-eminence; and well, I ween, that such prowess would form an effectual obstacle to the completion of the projected nuptials, if, indeed, Jean hath had the temerity to contemplate the change, although the influence of my brother of England at the Papal court, which you have-so worthily declined availing yourself of, should be employed to promote them.'*

While the monarch spoke, he kept his eye intently fixed on the rich prize, whom one of the combatants, as it appeared, was unwilling,and the other unable to accept; and the exile, who still held her hand, having pondered for a few moments on the motive that the person from whom he had derived his information could have had for deceiving him, now, without trusting himself to look upon the face of the vie





lim, while in the art of sacrifice, led her . close up to the exasperated Henry, laying, "Here then,. my liege, I deliver up to you a treasure too costly to be deposited in the bosom of one who can, at the bidding of your highness, be reduced from affluence and rank to poverty and exile."

The boldness of this speech, which the vexation of recent disappointment had drawn forth, seemed to augment the anger of the king, and the daring individual whohad uttered it was expecting some fresh burst of rage from him, when, to Ids infinite astonishment, the whole expression ofi his countenance suddenly changed to that of the most intemperate mirth, and putting; his hands to his sides, he laughed till the platform on which he stood shook beneath' him.

The exile was wholly unable to account for this sudden transition; he first looked at him, then at Francis; but perceiving that the countenance of the latter indicated as much wonder as his own, and that he still kept his eye fixed on the lady Adelaide, he suddenly turned round, and beheld a metamorphosis.





The plume and coronet, together with the braids of flaxen hair which they surmounted, had fallen from the head of Adelaide, and together with the diamond spangled robe, which was extremely full, and fastened with loops, that could be loosed in a moment, lay at her feet. Dark ringlets clustered around her alabaster brow, and the holiday garb of the peasant's wife sat close to her shape. Gracious Heavens! it was Theresa herself; but Theresa, no longer the dark Theresa; the whiteness and transparency of her skin vied with that of the fairest daughter of Albion present, and the mantling crimson of her cheek was like the flower that drops from the bosom of the village maiden, and rests in the centre of the vase which her hands have filled from the distended udder of rich pastured kine, when she kneels beneath the hawthorn, in the coolness and fragrance of the evening hour, and chaunts the unpremeditated lay of love.





The exile gazed in mute astonishment and perplexity.

'' Deliver up this treasure, that is too rich for your bosom !" said the monarch, hardly able to get out his words for laughing.

"Will you no longer love your Theresa," said the damsel, " because she has cast away her borrowed complexion?" and as she spoke, she looked a look at him so full of all that love can boast of sweet, of tender, and of sportive—oh! that look itself was worth a diadem. Ah! poor Theresa, the peasant loved you, but

the lord—the lord

Seme confused notion of the truthflashed suddenly on the mind of the exile.

It at first increased the ludicrous confusion in which he stood, his eye glancing from object to object, and his breath almost suspended with anxious doubt; but that look of love overwhelmed every other emotion; it was the very3very eye of Theresa; he would doubt no longer, nor check the powerful impulse, till a tedious explanation had assured him. He looked at his beautiful prize with kindling eye; but again he hesitated, and examined her from head to foot; the slight and graceful swelling of her shape, that, before he left V the forest of Mauriac, had promised him an augmentation of felicity, was distinctly perceptible; it dispelled every remnant of uncertainty, and he clasped her to his heart, more delighted with her than ever, notwithstanding the tricks he perceived she had assisted in playing on him, because he had found her to be the only woman he had ever truly loved.





He then led her to the king, and both knelt before him.

The monarch, delighted with the issue of a plot which had been of his own devising, was again about to require the offered renunciation, but he could not get out the words for laughing; and he took a hand of each, and threw it round the neck of the other, patted the cheek of the wife; and bid her maintain the loyalty of her husband, remembering that but for her sovereign, she would never have known whether he loved her or her money the best.





He then made a signal to a person who stood by the drapery that hung on either side of the throne; the man immediately pulled a cord that depended from the festoons at top, the curtains fell, and discovered, seated in a species of alcove they had concealed, the lady Ellesmere,' the donna Theresa Rosilla, who had acted the part of the mother in the drama which was now closing—the pere Etienne and his two brothers—the abbot, with whom the reader was made acquainted at the commencement of this history—the old officer to whom our hero had token such exceptions in the forest of Mauriac—and the person who had misled him with respect to the identity of his late adversary, and who now held by the hand a young girl, whom it would have been almost Impossible to have Jtnown from the pseudo Theresa, while she worse false hair; and at either extremity of the dramatis persona; stood James, our hero's former domestic, and his friend Conrad.





The whole party now came forward to greet the happy pair, who had just risen, after having kissed the hand of their sovereign. Edward, though he felt somewhat awkward, when he reflected on the credulity which had enabled them to imDose on him,

a. *

for he now perceived that, from whatever motive he had yet to learn, (though circumstances forbid him to surmise that it could be other than a good one,) they had imposed on him, met nevertheless the congratulations of each with the cordiality of one upon whom a long vista of happiness has suddenly opened. "But where," said he, after he had for the second time respectfully pressed the lips of the still beautiful Ellesmere, "where is the angel who has led me to the felicity that promises to shine upon my future days? for assuredly to her, whose life is spent in disinterested efforts to promote the happiness of others, I somehow feel that I am indebted for all that is in my grasp—where is the lady Isabel i"





The lady Ellesmere smiled—" Isabel," said she, "is perhaps not quite so disinterested in the present case as you imagine."

"I'm Isabel," said the false Theresa, in a voice that thrilled his every nerve, for they were the very tones in which, when he had paid his last visit to Amersville, he had heard the same words pronounced by the poor blind maiden.

Again he looked amazed; but he was now somewhat familiarized to wonders, and the tide of joy was flowing higher than ever in his bosom.

As the eagle of the mountain stoops from heaven upon the tired hare couching in the fern, he rushed, regardless of the noble presence in which he stood, on her who united in her single person all that he had ever admired or loved in the mind or body of woman. She shunned not the stormy embrace, as heretofore inherdream, end when he raised his head from the rich banquet of her moist and ruddy lips to gaze upon her, hers lay still upon his arm, and in the witching smile that disclosed her ivory teeth, there was love, and joy, and triumph, heightened by the delicate flush of modesty, that feels a slighter puncture.





Enraptured and heedless of all around him, he seemed as if he could gaze for ever, when he felt himself pulled gently by the arm, and turning, he perceived the damsel who was, as we have mentioned above, so like his Isabel.

"Milord," said she, "ne sa ressouvient il pas de son ami Juan?" then changing to the English language—"of his good rtje.'ni Juan, who I would have you all, good people, to know, died in his service, after having first stung his face and hands with nettles, with a resolution and heroism passing bis tender years, in order that he might assist in weaning him from an untoward desire he had unluckily imbibed of taking a trip to another world before his time, as well as certain other mad vagaries. Give me leave, my lord, to introduce you to the count de Sancerre, who just now gave up his title, in order that he might give such additional energy to your arm in the fearful contest$into which you were about to enter upon, as a little lurking jealousy is capable of bestowing; and who, now that I have resumed the sex to which I originally belonged, is, or pretends to he, my devoted admirer. Look a little sharper at him, my lord—I dare say that title sounds sweetly enough in your ear again, notwithstanding your late cottage content—a little sharper, and you will possibly recollect a friend of longer standing than you think forr





Edward, who had shaken cordially the offered hand, now, as he taxed his memory, recollected in its owner the young man who had shot the marmots, and shewed him his way in the mountainous track when he had lost it, the day he had crossed the Swiss frontier. "And pray," said he, then turning to the pretty banterer, "who is it that I am so much indebted to for aiding to restore me from grief and madness, (o hope, and life, and love?" %





"I was formerly the lady Adelaide Beauclerc," replied the damsel, "but I resigned that appellation for a while in.favour of my cousin Isabel; and now that she has given it me back again, I believe;" added she, looking archly at the count, "I sha'n't keep rt long."

A crowd of lord Rivers's former acquaintance, among whom were even some of those who had looked down upon him in his supposed disgrace, now crouded about him with importunate gratulations.

He was too happy to use the opportunity he enjoyed of retaliating neglect, but soon becoming weary of hypocrisy which he could not but despise, as well as of the sports, which had recommenced by order of the king, he led his Isabel away from the crowd, to question her as to the wonders, in creating which, it appeared that she had so considerable a share.

She persuaded him to postpone the gratification of his curiosity till night, when she could explain every thing at leisure, and without fear of interruption; and then she led him through several rows of tents and booths, disposed in the manner of a fair, till having reached a remote part of the field, she directed his attention to the identical black drapery, and skull, and cross bones, which had been so precipitately carried off the fair green at Wiesendorf, by the archers, together with their proprietor.





On the proscenium of this terrific-looking theatre there were two figures, one of whom was haranguing the crowd with antic gestures, and disclosed, as they approached, the features of our hero's quondam fellowtraveller, Gasper; and the other, who was masked, and wrapped up in a long black cloak, having uncovered his face, and made a low obeisance to the lady Isabel, exhibited the countenance of the wizard, returned, like Juan, from the nether regions.

Both now saluted lord Rivers, who returned their courtesy, not without having the satisfaction derived from the events of the day a little alloyed by a certain feeling





of shame, to think what a puppet it had been found necessary by his friends to make of him.



Vol, iv.





CHAP. VIII.

What strange events can strike with more surprise,

Than those which lately struck thy wondering eyes?



P* KNELL.

When much wighed-for night had arrived, and the exile, after having partaken of a sumptuous banquet, at which he appeared as one whom two monarchs delighted to honour, retired with his beloved to a splendid pavilion prepared for their reception, and when they had tasted the first joys of love, renewed by absence, and listed for a while the heavy roll of the nightly drum, the strain of hautboy and recorder breathed faintly from the remotest verge of the field, the expiring murmurs of the camp, and the flapping of the pennon, that above their airy chamber fluttered in the breeze, then the impatient Edward demanded from his spouse the performance of her promise.





Isabel's Tale.

"I need not dwell upon the heart-scald your aversion to me inflicted, when you last saw me at Amersville. If I had not soon obtained some ground for hope, I should not have been alive now to fill the arms that circle me with so dear a pressure.

"The first thing that communicated that hope, was the riddance of that cumbrous mass of flesh, which had combined with other matters to provoke your dislike; it soon yielded to sorrow and disappointment, and as I had but small bones, I was as thin and genteel as you could wish me: about a month too after you left us, a lady in our neighbourhood, who had lost an eye by cold, in the same manner as myself, returned from Paris, where the pere Etienne, whose medical and surgical skill, which you had before mentioned to us, was becoming every day more and more celebrated, had effected her cure by an operation, the practice of which is still confined to himself, all the faculty having, with their usual abhorrence of innovation, cried it down.





"As soon as my dear mother, whom sorrow was consuming as rapidly as myself, heard of this, her hopes became quite sanguine, and we immediately transferred ourselves to Paris, where the good Erienne succeeded to the full extent of our expectations, and said, the last day he visited me in his medical capacity, that he derived a double pleasure from his success, inasmuch as he had removed the only obstacle that lay between his honoured benefactor, and the possession, he was pleased to say, of the woman who best deserved him.

"I now applied myself to the culture of the French language, which I already, from conversing with our good abbot, who was master of it, spoke with fluency, and still more diligently to the acquirement of all the shewy accomplishments which you prized, give me leave to say, somewhat above their value. I succeeded, as my friends, and particularly my fond, my delighted mother, informed me, a merveille;: and just as you returned from your embassy, I was in England, prepared to try my luck.





"Perhaps vour numerous gallantries, concerning which we had no lack of goodnatured informants, ought to have made me consider an union with you as any thing but luck; but oh! it is very hard for poor woman to cease to love him to whom she has once devoted her soul.

"We were apprehensive that if I were introduced to you again under my own name, your repugnance to Stumpy would so prejudice you, that you might see as. through a mist any title I might have acquired to your love; and a favourable opportunity offering, we determined that your judgment should have fair play.

"My uncle Beauclerc had resided for sometime on the continent; we had met .him and Adelaide, who, except in point of the colour of our hair, is said to be so like me, that no one would know us asunder, at Paris; and now the thought of borrowing her name suggested itself. Her. father wasto bring her over in the course of a couple of months, when she was to be presented at court, and it was no very difficult matter to make a false Adelaide anticipate this event.





"We made the experiment, as to whether her substitute would pass with those who had known her two years before, when she left London, and it succeeded completely.

"There was now but one difficulty in our way, namely, to get the consent of his majesty to the imposture; and hence arose all the trouble I have had to prevent your incurring real misfortune, and all the uneasiness to which you have been subjected.

"The king, who had been a playmate of my mother's, and who remembered the pleasant hours he had passed with her with great satisfaction, readily consented, and desired to see her and me after our first trial, which, shall I say? was tolerably successful. We accordingly had an audience of him the morning after the balli We Found that some officious person had, subsequently to my mother's first visit, satisfied the inquiries which that had prompted, by making him thoroughly acquainted with every particular relating to our common inheritance, and the vain efforts that had been made to bring us together:





"He was pleased to say a great many flattering things of me, and expressed great indignation against you for the treatment I had received from you.

"f know not for my part how any one could have learned all that he seemed t6 know respecting us; but you may be sure the industry of many to learn any thing to your disadvantage, was stimulated by the high favour you enjoyed at court.

"It was easy, however, tosee that your enemies had by no means succeeded to the extent of their wishes, for he next launched ©ut into the most extravagant encomiums on you; but after this; he said that you were becoming arrogant with success, and that it was necessary to chastise you by a little adversity, (you know how he love-* to regulate the morals and religion of the people whom Heaven, as he says, has confided to his care, and of whose conduct he js to render a strict account). He reprobated, in terms of great asperity, the harshness tha,t he had heard you had exercised against me, and swore vehemently that you should never have me, unless you took me as some compensation for your miscon.duct, believipg that you took me from the lowest depths of poverty.





"We were thunderstruck, as you may well suppose, at this arbitrary determination; and my mother made some timid attempts at remonstrance, but was soon silenced by a gentle, but perfectly firm assurance of the monarch's, that his purpose was unchangeable.

"He added, that he would leave to ourselves the enginery by which the delusion was to be efft cted; but that without we could effect it, without you took me supposed to be pennyless, you never should have me.. He would afford us every fact





Itty for the carrying on any stratagem we might chusa to adopt; and he suggested. that I might follow you into exile, whither he was determined to send you, in the course of a few days, or I might, as I had appeared to you only beneath a disguise, deceive you as to my identity by resuming my own hair, and speaking to you only inv> a foreign language, which was very practicable, for as he was pleased to say, I spoke French like a native, part of our conversation having been carried on in that language. :.

"He could not caution us; too rigidly against any coltusion with you, for it would; for ever forfeit his favour. He then made us swear on the Evangelists that we would exert ourselves to the utmost to deceive you to the intent he desired, and that we would not employ any one in our proceedings who Would not take a similar obligation; and before he dismissed us, he gave us to understand that the courtship which was to end in our union, and your





restoration to your country, your property, and your dignities, wast*be carried on under the eye of sir Robert Elford, who had never yet deceived him or his father, and who having been for many years engaged in confidential missions to the continent, was utterly unknown to you.

"We had heard of the extravagant loyalty of that person, and had we no other inducement, the fear of your impetuous temper betraying before him any knowledge you might have of our good king's vagaries, would have sufficed to prevent any communication. *

"He appeared to you in the forest under the disguise of an old French officer, but not in the least disguised in character. You will recollect the pains taken by the sieur Thomas to prevent your speaking harshly before him of his Majesty, and it was nothing more than necessary, for even what you did say was faithfully detailed, though fortunately the compleat success of his scheme so pleased the king, that he would not entertain any resentment against you on account of it.





"But one of the things most important and necessary to mention is, that the capricious monarch dwelt above all things on the expediency of trying your loyalty, which, he said, he had no doubt, would come out of suffering like gold out of the fire; if, indeed, it unfortunately turned out otherwise—if you should enter the service-of a foreign prince, a thing he would not allow himself to contemplate for a moment, then your disgrace should be no longer a jest, (I believe you have felt that it was no jest to you at least,) and that it: would be in future highly expedient for you, if you loved your life, to keep out of his reach."'

Edward muttered an execration, but soon recollected his present felicity, checked another, and substituted for it animpas* sioned kiss.

"You may easily suppose what a state of perplexity we retired in ; we were to be made, against our will, the cause of a cruei persecution against one whom we would have gone any lengths to save from persecution, and I was to have you for a husband, whom I now loved more dearly than ever, because I saw plainly I was to have a return of love only, provided I could get you to wed me under an error, which it did .not appear very easy to create; but to create it was now our only resource: on our very first consultation we decided against my appearing as an impoverished exile, for it might not be very convenient for my uncle to have it said that he had been banished; and while he enjoyed his rights, how could Adelaide be poor?





"Fortunately for the other scheme, which the king had suggested, and which, indeed, was our only resource, we had some singular facilities.

"You remember having informed us of the remarkable likeness you had found to subsist between my mother and the domia Rosilla; you remember too having mentioned to us the heavy calamity that had befallen her, and the severe censure you passed on yourself for having neglected, after having taken her under your protection. We heard your account of her with great concern, and when we left home for Paris, we determined to visit her on our way.





"We found her in a very wretched situation, for what she related to you concerning her ejectment from her little tenement, was the fact; and both her children were dead.

"She had contracted a severe complaint, the source of which, I fear, was poverty, and the hardships consequent on it; and my mother proposed that she should come with us to Paris, in order to obtain medical assistance. The poor creature gladly accepted the offer, and the pere Etienne restored her to perfect health in a few weeks. • .

"She continued with us while we resided in France, and when we were returning home, my mother took such pleasure in her; society, that she proposed that she should become an inmate of AmersvilleiCastJe for the remainder of her life, lo her infinite delight; for she had contemplated a separation from us as an evij, all desolate as she was, worse than death; she had learned that her father was dead, and if deprived of us, she had not a friend in the world on whom to rest for counsel or comfort.





"She was now with us in London, and having first applied to Adelaide for her assistance, who immediately acquiesced, and promised also that of her favoured suitor; the count de Sancerre, we concerted our little plot.

"The extreme likeness you yourself had remarked between the domia and my mother, and which was indeed very striking; would sufficiently account for a likeness between her children and my mother's relative, and a dark skin, and Isabel's hairy and speaking in a foreign language, which-; as Adelaide, I took care you never should hear from me, afford sufficient means of accounting for the success of our imposture.

*' You may remember what a dunce yon





found me in English; you now see I had my motive for making that an exception to the quickness with which I did learn many, and seemed to learn a few of the things you taught me in our dear hut in the forest—ah! we must often visit that hut."

Edward gave the velvet cheek a pat of acquiescence, and she proceeded.

"It now became necessary that you should not love Adelaide so well as to prevent your loving Theresa; and hence her indifference, hence her perfidious desertion of her banished lover.

*' Well, you were proscribed. James, whom we had given up to your service for a time, and who is no other than the Ro- • bert you once used to thresh so unmercifully, incited you to fly without seeing me, by creating a false panic; and with the assistance of his uncle, in whom he increased your confidence, by calling him his father, effected your supposed escape. . "I warned you of a fictitious danger





on board the vessel, as we sailed in company with you to Calais, in order that I might place you in the hands of the pere Etienne's brother, who was instructed not lo seem as if he wished to guide your future peregrinations, but to discover what were your intentions.

"Having learned these, we were before

you in D ;and there my heart received

the severest pang it had ever felt, when Ilearned the situation of the poor Luise, which was soon made known to me by a lady whom you had slighted, as I was given to understand by one of her friends. I know not whether, notwithstanding my prior claim, I should1 not have thought myself bound to renounce you, (he felt her frame all shudder as she said this,) if Lnisehad been recoverable, and not the wife of Conrad; but the pere Etienne assured me that she was beyond the power of medicine to restore. I visited her several times both before and after your arrival; and oh i let me not dwell upon the sorrow wrought al





most to agony, which the sufferings of the poor, meek, uncomplaining, dying creature poured into my heart—she"

"Gh, for Heaven's sake do not dwell upon it then!" said Edward, while he heaved one short convulsive sob, and felt, for the first time since the death of the poor thing, that the subject was painful; "pray do not talk of her for one night; her image shall be recalled when the perturbation incident to joy, as well as sudden feelings, shall have a little subsided."

"I shall only mention her name then," said Isabel, "when it is necessary to illustrate my tale. I visited her frequently, of which, as I have since learned from you, she informed vou, but she did not know me even by a false name—perhaps if she had thought I was seeking the heart—but I am already departing from my promise.'

"We were in daily consultation with the pere Etienne whether we should seek to cure you of libertinism, by letting you see the ruin you had effected, or spare you the too terrible shock your feelings must necessarily experience, when chance, whicfr brought you to her dwelling, put a period to our deliberations on that head.





"We remained in D -, that is, my

mother and I, for the Moor, though she had followed us from England almost immediately, was now in Paris with Adelaide, waiting thcproper season for entering on her part in the drama.

"You were once very near catching usr, if you recollect, at the house of the pere, and in order to lull your conjectures with respect to the rest, he was obliged to acknowledge a part of the truth.

"When Luise was no more, we allowed you for a little time to indulge in the virtuous sorrow with which her death had filled your heart; but we shortly began to fear that it would dry up the springs of life, and at all events it was time to get you to the spot where the great business of the piece was to be performed.

"The visit to the vaults and turret of the Casile of Sindenbosch was the result of our deliberations; we had several persons era» ployed to fill the lower parts of the drama; but we wished to have them in as trusty hands as possible, and therefore it was that we engaged Conrad, with much persuasion and great difficulty, to join the confederacy. It was by accident he fell as he passed the castle, when you discovered him.





"I need hardly say, that the combat yoir plunged into, with your wonted intrepidity, was a part of our machinery; the man who was to meet you let his sword fly from his hand as if by accident."

"But what was the necessity of conjuring up ghosts to drive me into the toilsi^ would not the fear of the mortal enemies I had to cope with have sufficed?"

"Supernatural enginery," said Isabel, "formed no part of our original plan; it was accident that first introduced it, and its effect upon you that led to our adoption of it.

"On the evening appointed for the commencement of our operations^ the pere Etienne, my mother, and myself, resolved to be at hand, unseen, partly from a motive of anxiety about the poor heartbroken wanderer, we were obliged to persecute so unwillingly,and partly to examine the castle and the vaults, which the pere informed us were well worth seeing.





"You recollect what a lovely evening it was; we spent several hours viewing the grounds and the ruins, and had just completed our inspection of the vaults, when you were very near discovering us; your guide, whose name I now forget, but who was a person engaged by Robert, endeavoured to prevent this discovery, by first striking with his sword on the wall, arid when he thought that was not notice enough, by letting fall his lanthorn, as .if by accident.

"You may remember the sigh that attracted your attention when yon stood for a moment in the subterranean rotunda. Itwas I heaved that sigh, for we were standing at the entrance of the passage, and could see all that passed, the pere; who had with him flint and tinder, having extinguished his lightL you were so pale and "Worn with sorrow, I could have sighed to see any one so depressed; how think you must I have felt, when you were the object of commiseration, and when I had to ask myself whether I was not inhuman in ever having consented to add to griefs which, to have alleviated with kindest sympathy, would have afforded me the highest gratification I could have enjoyed.





*' We followed you into the ruins, and as you were descending from the turret, having missed your way, you were again near discovering us. You pursued the pere to the room where we were, and we had just time to pass through one of those concealed doors, to be found in all old buildings, and ascend a staircase that ledto the room above, when you entered.

"The boards of the apartment we were now in were in many places torn up, and in others decayed, and there were so many small crevices in the ceiling beneath them, which, however, were too small for you to discern from below, (for if you recollect, V





tbe chamber in which you were was lofty), we were obliged to leave our light outside.

"When you made that pathetic appeal to the outlaw, who you supposed to have fied from you, I wept heartily; and it was not without much effort I could stifle my sobs. The sigh that again reached your ear passed through a crevice of the ceiling just above where you stood, and on which my mouth happened to rest, as having knell down upon the joists, I was endeavouring to obtain a glimpse of you through another fissure that ran transverse to it.

"1 now come to the mysteries of the vaults, and first with respect to the letter

which von have since assured me you your

3. J ' .

self had deposited in the coffin of Luise: it^s true you did so; but I had taken it thence when I went to take a last look of her while you were at Rosemalde, making arrangements respecting her interment.

"The history of the spots of blood, and the warning from the grave, is as follows: I happened to call on her one evening before you and she met, and I found her shedding tears over this letter; she laid it down on my entrance, and observing some little time after that the blood had attracted my attention, she told me that it had been often the toy of her grief, and that it having happened to lie beside ber once when the want of nourishment had forced her to throw up blood, some drops had fallen on it; and feeling, when the paroxysm was over, that she had done with life, she had scribbled on the cover such words as her melancholy thoughts had suggested.





"When you put the letter into the cof-fin, it had formed the upper one of a package, and you knew it again by the date, which was subscribed beneath the address on the back; but if you recollect, the blood was all on the side that was next the remainder of the package, and thus escaped your notice.

"I took the letter as an affecting remembrance of the poor unfortunate, and now have it, for when I understood you had lost it, I had a diligent and successful search made for it."





"But the groan that I heard from the top of the pile of coffins ?" said the exile.

"Was uttered by my mother. In de- ■ scending one of the ruined staircases of the building, she had sprained her ancle; and as she passed through one of the courts, she was obliged to sit down, it had become so painful, and have it fomented by the pere.

"The place where she was sitting on a fragment of the ruined vaults was just over the pile of coffins; she heard your exclamation as you fled, and the pere, when he subsequently went down into the vaults to serve you as a guide (you remember that you had one), having examined the vault, found that a great part of the stone roof had given way just in that point, so that the passing of the sound was facilitated.

"I had meanwhile gone out on the battlements of the castle, to see if a cart, which we had sent for from a neighbouring village to convey my mother to town, was coming; and the stillness of the air invited me, not dreaming that you were so near me, for when I went up, I thought you had left the castle, to sing a German air I had learned of Luise, for I had been engaged while in D in the study of that





language, during such moments of leisure as my anxiety about you left me.

"When you addressed me, I'll venture to say that of the two, the ghost was the most frightened; but as you have since informed me, you held your head down, and that accounts for your not observing my alarm.

"I could not account for the form of your address; but I perceived that you had taken me for the spirit of Luise, and that you were in want of comfort, which I immediately bethought myself of administering. 1 had been a great mistress of mimicry in my childhood, but had left off the practice of it entirely, in compliance with the wishes of my mother, long before I felt the.impropriety of it myself; but Ij

VOL. IV. h ...,





had not lost the power, and was now abfe to exercise it to a good purpose. I imitated the voice of Lu ise; and you were not yourself, I suppose, such a proficient in the German language as to be enabled to detect the badness of my accent, if indeed that would not be much less distinguishable in a feigned than a natural voice.

"I made my speech, and retired behind the battlements."

"But the thunder and lightning ?" said the exile.

"The cart just arrived that moment in a court of the building, of which we were obliged also to send for the keys to the peasant who kept them, for we had entered the castle in the same way at you did, having left the horses on which we had ridden from D at a cottage in the neighbourhood.

"This court was at the further end of the edifice from where you were; and the rumbling of the cart echoing through the vaults beneath, seemed to you like distant thunder, and as the pavement was in many places torn up, the peasant who drove the vehicle waved a torch he had brought with him, in order to increase its light in such a manner as would enable him to avoid the broken flags and heaps of rubbish that lay about, and the glare it made you took for lightning. We did not chuse to leave you all night in the vaults; the pere Etienne guided you out; and thus ends the history of one night of mystery and horror.





"When you visited the pere Etienne the next morning, you were resolved on a foreign service and death, so that we had two very evil resolutions on your part to cope with, instead of one.

"The pere at first endeavoured to dissuade you from your purpose; but he soon found that impracticable; and a thought then struck him, that your recently-acquired belief in supernatural agency might be made subservient to our views. He was deliberating with himself as to the means he should pursue, and also as to some feasible excuse for forwarding what





he had at first seemed willing to thwart, when' you supplied him with the latter, while you wished to exasperate him against the cardinal. You were greatly pleased with the rage into which you fancied you had roused him; but the interests of all the orders of monks in Europe, I appre. bend, could not have moved the philosophic tranquillity of his nature, in themanv ner you have since described to me.

"While you were sitting with him, you happened to mention the arrival of a courier from England; and at the consultation that followed after you left him, it was resolved that we should make one attempt to wean you from your resolution to enter a , foreign service, before we put you under a

course of discipline for the purpose, for it was that we chiefly feared. I was vain enough to thfnk that if I had you once in the forest of Mauriac, you would soon love me too well to die;" she laughed, jmd a storm of kisses bore witness to the correctness of her judgment.

"Accordingly the courier was bribed to





deliver you a letter 1 wrote in D that

same day, as if he had brought it from England.

"When you visited the pere the ensuing day, every thing was prepared for your reception; a domestic was to have the door open, as if by chance, and you were to surprise the pere reading a book, which he was to hurry out of your sight, and he was to withdraw for the purpose of letting you inspect this, and imbibe the notion that his incredulity was not real, and this impression was to be assisted by his questioning you on the subject with apparent interest.

"When you came, he first bent a Tittle towards the advice he would have given you, had you been permutable; but when he saw what an obstinate toad it was, he appeared happy that what appeared to you a forced disinterestedness, bad been disappointed, and he snatched with such wellfeigned eagerness at the documents which were to destroy the poor cardinal, who, if he never be destroyed till the pere Etienne seeks his destruction, may reign long enough.





"I need not dwell on the means by which we made yon a prisoner in the city, and at length expelled you from it, sending you off to the forest of Mauriac; but resolved that your journey thither should be one of the most eventful that had ever been performed by living wight.

"We had several consultations as to the manner in which we should proceed, and could hit on no scheme to our liking, when one morning the pere sent for my mother and me in a great hurry. He seemed quite pleased when we entered his apartment, and immediately proceeded to inform us of the ground of his satisfaction; but I shall give you the information he now imparted in his own words:—

'When you left me yesterday,' said he, 'I Was more perplexed than ever, and I was almost on the point of giving up the affair as impracticable, when I was surprised by a visit from an old acquaintance, whom perhaps I should not at any other time have much cared to see, but who was now a veryacceptable guest, because I saw immediately what useful assistance we might derive from him in the furtherance of our views,, to manage our wayward one.





'Of this person I must first give you some account. His name is Robert Walmer; he was both at school and at college with me. There are a class of persons in the world whose powers, if well directed, would obtain for them the praise of genius; but being possessed of an unhappy bias to pervert them, never obtain, as they never deserve, any epithet but that of strange or fantastic. Of this class was-our man; he was the strangest animal in- the world when a boy; and he had not been, a man above two or three yearsi when he made away with his patrimony, in the pursuit of the philosopher's stone.

* When this was gone, he bethought himself of employing the property of others; and a great extent of chemical knowledge he had obtained in "the course of his efforts, enabling him to play the sorcerer with great effect, he made this a means of entrapping several weak and superstitious men, who had money to spend, and making them subservient to his views.





'You must not, however, class him withcommon swindlers, for he was always confident that he was promoting the interest of his victim as well as his own; and the magical rites by which he led them on to his purpose, and which he knew to be deceptive, he considered in the light of a pious fraud.

'His tricks, however, brought him at length into a situation, in which it required all of a-very powerful interest I possessed to save his life. I, fortunately for him, happened to be at Vienna at the time when he was condemned to lose his head.

'When he was set at liberty, I made him promise me that he would abandon alchymyfor ever. ''He did so without any difficulty, assuring me that he fully perceived the fallacy of the pursuit that had brought him into such a perilous situation as that from which I had extricated him.





'Knowing that he must be pennyless, I offered him a small sum of money; but he refused it, saying he had the means of earning a sufficiency for his wants.

'I' asked him what he meant to do, and

"he informed me that it was his intention to

travel as a quack-doctor and conjurer to.

the various fairs of Germanyrand the other

countries of Europe.

'I endeavoured to dissuade him from this scheme, and suggested several plans of sober industry; but I found it was impracticable to get the dog from his vomit, and from that day till now I have never seen him.

'He has been pursuing his avocation in the neighbourhood of this city; and hearing I was resident in it, he came to renew his thanks, and to inform me, that he had never, in any instance, violated the promise he made me.

'I-asked him how he had succeeded' hr; the extraordinary line of life he had chosen; he acknowledged that he remained^ poor, but said he. got enough; to lijve, and that he had, from an interested motive, made fools of mankind till the thing had grown into a habit, and he could not dispense with it, though he was conscious that had he followed my advice, he might have been much better off in respect of worldly matters.





'It immediately struck me that he might be of essential service to us, and I mentioned the situation in which we were placed with respect to lord Rivers, whose character I described to him as combining every noble quality, with a certain impetuosity and simplicity, the latter of which he never suspected formed any part of it, but which would be sure to lay him open to a well-spun delusion. As an instance of it, I mentioned his having talked to me a day or two before of a shocking report concerning baron Walstein, who was recently dead, namely, his having put count Steinberg to death privately in prison, when there was not an individual perhaps

in 0- who did not know that the baron

rather boasted, of, than concealed, this crime, conceiving it to have been a masterstroke of policy.





'When I mentioned this circumstance, be struck his forehead, ruminated for a few minutes, and then suddenly exclaimed, (I have U—it will do.'

'He then told me that he had seen lord Rivers twice, once in England when a boy, in the house of his kinsman de Montfort, and again when invested with the honours of diplomacy, in the house of Meister, the father of Luise.

'He had endeavoured to make an alchemist of de Montfort; had failed; but had nevertheless contracted a warm friendship for him, and had been often an inmate of his house in< Italy, and always a welcome guest in England.

"Meister and count Steinberg, he further informed me, had been the dupes of his art; he had found them both sinking into the grave, in consequence of the loss of their wives; and if he had lessened the fortune of the one, and annihilated that of the other, he had in return prolonged their lives, by giving them a sufficient stimulus to a new train of thought and feeling.





'These persons, he said, he would make useful agents in the drama he had already, in a great measure, arranged; and the death of the baron and his own should form the two chief incidents. Our friend must be driven to the former residence of Meister, where now resides a talkative old woman, the nurse of Luise, with whom this Waluier; I am inclined to think, from some hints he gave, formerly intrigued, in the character of count Steinberg, which, for certain reasons, he always adopted when he visited Meister. He describes this old lady as likely to be a very serviceable, though unconscious agent in our plot; and the house, he says, and the country for some miles round, is provided with machinery, ready prepared to aid in the accomplishment of our views.

'There is only one thing that staggersme, and that is, that we must give our lord up entirely into his hands; he assures me at a hair of his head sha'n't be hurt; but he may be obliged to have recourse to such strong stimulants, in operating the cure he has undertaken, as our less-hackneyed minds might revolt at.'





"You may be assured that if the pere felt this a serious scruple, that I did not think light of it," continued Isabel, resuming her own narrative; " but Wa-Imer would not enter into our views upon any other terms, saying he could not risk a failure in the proper business of his profession by the application of inferior enginery, and that it would answer no purpose but that of making us uneasy, if he were to disclose their nature. Now as I am acquainted with every part of the machinery that was employed, but the contents of the manuscript that caused you to swoon with horror, I presume that must have been the strong stimulant he alluded to, and what it was, I have to learn from you, for though he afterwards told the pere Etienne what it was, the pere has constantly refused to communicate the same tome, when I complained of the occasional fits of gloom to Appenine, where chance would apparently" read to their meeting.





"But here he breaks out—' But cold drops bedew my temples while I write; the same stars inform me, that the youth is, before that hour, to be the indirect cause of my own abandonment of that life which I have now preserved for so long a time beyond that conceded to man, and which I had hoped might last for ever.

'Yet stay; as I have counteracted-the laws of nature in many instances, why may not I do so now? must fate, because it is unerring with respect to others> beso also with respect to one who has in some measure thrown aside the attributes of mortality?'

"Here there^ was a chasm in the manuser'rpt, as if the writer had been interrupted. There was a new date when it recommenced, as thus i—' I have again consulted the stars. If a certain horir can be passed;. but after all, that seems liable to doubt.

« Confusion tand darkness compass me ;. I know not how to resolve**;;





"I believe the manuscript went on for some time in this strain; but! became so sleepy, that I could not read any more; and when I wished to obtain it in th"e morning, I found that the busy old woman had burned it."

"I believe, however, that I have repeat* ed the words very nearly as they were Written, for the impression they made was deeply engraven on my heart, and in every hour of more gloomy thoughts, I have repeated them to myself.";

"I am glad," said Isabel, sighing, " that the pere did not comply with my wishes; I could have contemplated nothing so horrible; and I much doubt whether I could have permitted you to labour under the shocking impression with any inducement, however powerful; but to resume my tale—'.

"You were expelled, as I said, from

D ;and as Walmer was plentifully

supplied wiih money, there was nothing spared that could give effect to the drama we were about to perform. I had set off some time before you; I met domia Ro* silla and Adelaide on the French frontier, and we immediately began to prepare for our parts. We spent a day in our assumed characters at the hostel in Wiesendorf, that by becoming acquainted with the people as minstrels, we might give the progress of our plot a greater verisimilitude.





"When you were pursued to the river, a discovery was near being the result, of your failing 1o see the gap that had been made in the hedge, on purpose to enable you to conceal yourself; and it may be, that if you had not at lenglh perceived it, some of our actors would have had no very great cause to remember their ingenuity with satisfaction.

"Your endeavouring to leap the gate, by the marks that you left of the attempt, enabled Conrad to substitute a better reason for taking a wrong direction in pursuit of you, for a worse one, which he had devised.

"I need not remind you of the several phenomena that occurred in the course of your ride with Gasper, but explain such of them as may yet appear enigmatical to you.





"He led you purposely by the old building that resembled Sindenbosch, that a feasible opportunity might be afforded him for entering on the history of count Steinberg; but first I must inform you, that his tale was nearly all true; even the death of the gardener was brought about in the manner he described, for the old man having seen the father of Walmer, who was a little addicted to the same pursuits as the son, though not to the same extent, with a former count Steinberg, confounded him, with our assistance, the delusion being favoured by their very remarkable likeness, and the son's wearing an old-fashioned dress, which had belonged to his sire, in order to communicate to his person an air of singularity.

"Gasper was originally an uncommonly simple peasant, but had a latent intelligence of shrewdness, of which Walmer had availed himself, after he had caught him tip in the tree before the chapel window, nnd spared his life, as he at first supposed, ift compliance with his earnest supplications, and the intercession of count Steinberg.





"It was not an uncommon practice with the wizard, as he informed the pere Etienne, to convert delinquents of this kind into faithful agents, having first obtained a power over their minds proportioned to their crime, and the terror of its being visited with severe castigation; thus he had induced the servant mentioned by Luise's nurse, to leave the country on a mission concerning the constant object of his pursuit, without mentioning his intended departure to any of his friends; and as the poor man died before the business he went on was completed, the panic his absence created was the more efficient.

"Gasper, however, was the person he had ever found most adapted to his views; and as you may observe, their connexion has been permanent. As he could tell you his tale as he had often told it before, at least the greater part of it, ere he knew that he was deceived, it wore a more natural semblance than if it had been pure fiction; and i\e took care to employ his best skill to mingle with it such imaginary incidents and feelings as were calculated to heighten its effect.





'* According to your own account, he must have played his part in a masterly manner.

"lie. was assisted;by Walmer and other agents, at various points of his progress; and the hand that excited your wonder, and which was fashioned by myself, to be applied with some glutinous substance to his breast, you were not able to distinguish from a real mark, in the faint light by which you saw it.

"The music at the head of the lake had been employed against the intellects of poor Meister, on a former occasion, that is, similar music, for in the present. case, Adelaide and I were the performers; and as Gasper led you a roundabout way to' the village where we met, we were enabled to anticipate your arrival; we were greatly





amused while we were there before, to think how the surly host and hostess would have changed their demeanour had they been made acquainted with our real rank.

"The manner in which a supernatural semblance was given to our music was this—

"We were stationed in a cavern in- the small rocky island that, if you recollect, was at the head of the lake, and this was closely stopped with a large stone. Several tin pipes were conveyed from it through the bottom of the lake, which was there not more than knee deep, some of which rose in the water just above its level, and created a belief, when the sound was sent through them, that it rose from its bosom; others again extended to the shore, and were laid into the stems of the trees, false bark being artfully fastened over the part that was excavated for the purpose. We could send the sound through whichsoever of the apertures we pleased, by stopping all the others; and thus shifting it from tree to tree, we made it seem to advance along the shore, till it stood above





your head, issuing from the upper part of the tree against which you stood, and which you might have observed to be in a state of decay, owing to the operation that had been performed on it, one that certainly was not very favourable to vegetable life.

"It was in a manner similar to this that you were again deceived in the house of the Moor, for it was all full of such conveyances of sound; and through one tube that passed from the adjacent apartment, where I was at the time listening to your* conversation with the old lady, I enjoined her silence in the voice of Luise, when she was about to disclose to you a fancied secret, which was, that she had a pair of young princesses concealed in her house, for as we were not to appear here, we had assumed our own dresses. Into this belief she was brought by seeing some valuables about us, which she thought could be the appurtenances only of people of very high rank, and by catching Adelaide in the act of making trial of a new wash with which the pere Etienne had provided us, that which we had used before for smuching our faces not having been found sufficiently adhesive, and she supposed that it had been provided, in apprehension that some emergency might create a necessity for disguise.





"An important feature in the plan of our sorcerer was, that you should be repeatedly led to a certain point, and that on the very verge of having your curiosity gratified, your hope should be frustrated. This wide open to the play of the fancy, he said, was more stimulating than any engine of terror, or wonder, however vast,that might be examined; it was like the darkness of an unfathomable abyss, besides the notion of horrors that could scarcely be seen without producing death or madness.

*' Hence the abrupt breaking off of Gasper's tale, his affected drowsiness at night, and his escape in the morning, which was facilitated by some opium infused into the drink you took when going to bed—hence the interruption too of the; tales of the groom and the steward's son, and at last of Herman himself. . .«





"The sorcerer deserves great credit, inasmuch as having such a complex machinery to manage, all was done without failure; his agents, many of whom had served a kind of apprenticeship to him, and who were now brought together by. the freedom with which we. supplied him with money, were exceedingly expert and active,

"It. was they that broke down the bridge, jammed the chair, prepared the press to fall, persuaded the old lady to burn the papers in the morning, and hunted you into the wood where yon found us for the second time; having occasional or permanent confederates in the plot stationed whereyer it was .proper your fears should be applied to.

"Lt was Walmer himself you followed to the pond near Wiesendorf, for he had been watching your movements, and as soon as he perceived that you saw him, he led you on.

Vol. iv. to





* The pedestal of the statue was hollow, and there was a door in one side of it, which opened by sliding upwards like a portcullis, and the recess thus formed was appropriated to the scrapers and other instruments necessary to clean the bottom of ihe pond.

"The door was reached by means of a plank, which, when not in use, was sunk at one end in the water, for it let down with a kind of hinge, in order to prevent children from passing to the statue, and an iron rod which was fastened to it, and locked at its other extremity in a recess beneath the lank, served to raise it when necessary; the key of this had been obtained from the person who had the care of it, and thus the sorcerer was enabled to frustrate your search; and the light from the tent in the wood soon caught your eye, as it was intended it should.

"Here you heard the terrible tale of the baron's death from Herman Largen, who had been long an acquaintance of Walmer's, and whom you having known in





the baron's service, he deemed a fit agent on this occasion, but not on that account only, for his intelligence fitted him admirably for the part he was appointed to act. I need not tell you that his tale was pure invention, or at least had no other foundation than that the baron had exhibited strong symptoms of remorse when dying.' I have before had occasion to let you know that his having caused countSteinberg to be puttodeathin prison was a thing well known, and scarcely denied by himself; besides that, many things have transpired since his death to shew that he was a prodigious villain; so that even when crimes were imputed to him which he had not committed, the injustice that was done him could scarcely be called such, though if it were otherwise, it would seem that our prime minister was not a man who would stick at trifles.

"Herman mingled a portion of his own feelings in bis tale, to give it an appearance of reality, which you will easily sepa



r





rate from the rest; his dramatis persona, with the exception of the baron, were purely ideal, so that you may «et yotir mind at rest with respect to the naughty Martinelli, and the pass of Foscari in the bosom of the Appenine.

"Of the people in the tent there were only Herman, and the person who acted the part of his partner next day, in the secret; the narrative was interrupted by the voice of Walmer, who had followed yoti down, and whom you once had a gHmpse of, conveyed through a pipe which was introduced into the tent under the soil, and -which you failed of perceiving the next day, because it was covered with a sod so nicely adjusted, that no one could distinguish that the hand of man had any thing to do with it. The manner in which your approach to the tent was discovered with certainty was this. Wires were disposed in several directions, which all meeting beneath the canvas of the tent, in one spot close by where Herman sat, and lightly covered with straw, if he failed to hear you, the motion of these when touched without was sure not to escape him.





"The archers who seized the sorcerer the ensuing day were sent by the authorities of Appenzel and St. Gallen, at the instance of the pere Etienne, and did no( themselves know but there were real charges against him; however, they received orders to liberate him before they reached Appenzel, whither they were conveying him. ;.' ..

"At the Abbey of Marienfels we had every facility for our operations afforded us by the abbot of the new monastery, who had been a fellow-student of our good monk's. The choir of the cathedral were properly disposed in a part of the building towards which you will not think it strange that the false Juan did not lead you, and it was well.blocked up at every avenue which you were in the least likely to discover yourself. The light from the altar was produced by a chemical preparation, to which the joint skill of Walmer and the pere contributed, and the voice was that of the pere himself, passed through a speaking trumpet. The light was changeable in its hue, or extinguishable at pleasure, and the tapers of the sorcerer were extinguished by a shower of water poured on them at the proper juncture by a man stationed on the roof of the chapel, in which yon will recollect there was a chasm immediately above them.





"The body you supposed to be WaTmer's, and to which you were drawn by the person who passed through the hall beneath the staircase, and by whom we affected to be alarmed, was that of a malefactor who had been executed the day before at a neighbouring town, and had been purchased from the executioner. It was habited in proper costume, and next day consigned to the earth. We had taken care to occupy you till such time as all the necessary arrangements were made, and a corpse might have cooled; the shower of Tain that happened to fall was favourable to the trick, for it was calculated in some measure to account for its getting cold in so short a time. hearty. However, this reluctance I con« quered' in due time, because I wanted an excuse for those tears, which, shed with you, I was aware would afford you the best consolation you were capable of receiving in the gloomy state of mind into which you had fallen.





"You must allow that the sorcerer acted the dying scene in a finished manner; I can assure you that the fright I appeared to suffer was not altogether feigned; the place, the hour, the horrible workings of the man's countenance, served almost to counteract the calmness I might be supposed to derive from my knowledge of the whole being unreal.

"Here ended our mysteries, but we were obliged to act a little longer. I feigned a bias to madness whenever yoii questioned me concerning what I had seen of the sorcerer's pranks before; because, in truth, it would not have been very easy for me to have given you a satisfactory account of it. It was because it was connected with this subject too, that I would not bear the mention of Juan's name, and also because I could not grieve as much as might appear reasonable for the poor little fellow, inasmuch I knew him to be alive and





"When the.pere arrived, I saw him before you did, and he proposed to give you the alternative of separation or marriage; well knowing, as he said, that it would effect a complete cure; and indeed the event answered his expectations.

"You must not suppose that all your instructions were thrown away on an artificial creature who only pretended to learn what she already knew; I had preserved carefully a great mass of ignorance that I should otherwise have parted with, in order that I might have the pleasure of resigning it, while the pleasure-beaming eye of him I loved told of my aptness.

"There was nothing I took so much pleasure in as writing to you in my own character, and then having my letters read to me as Theresa, with comments. Oh, how I did enjoy that burden of your panegyric—' What a thousand pities it is she has but one eye !'—you little supposed she was •looking on yau with two. §





'" I made it a matter of conscience to work in my little household as any female, because you were obliged to work as any male peasant; but I shall soon get my bands soft again; and it is pleasant to reflect, that if any convulsion, to which all human affairs are liable, should affect us* we are able to dispense with riches, and make our proper toil contribute to our support. Ah! will the castle ever afford the happiness we have found in the cot?

"But will you forgive your Isabel for the tricks she has played you?"

Edward's answer was a close embrace.



The moon, that had now risen, streamed through an opening in the internal drapery of the pavilion, and falling athwart



i





I

the couch, shewed to the husband for the first time, as he reposed by her side, the countenance of his beloved divested of its umber vesture. He raised his head, and gazed on it with transport; a touch of virgin timidity pressed upon the heart of the beautiful creature, as, for the first time after the removal of her disguise, she marked, in the wan moonbeam, the keen, wild gaze of the inflamed eye, and felt the eager grasp of thirsty passion rushing to indulgence, and she hid her face in the bosom of her lord.

Once more did Hymen wave his torch above their couch, shedding fires as pure and glowing as that noontide beam that fell in ocean, when cleaving its translucent green, the Queen of Love first rose from its depths and floated on its surface, dashed her white arm against the amorous surge, that pressed and kissed her bosom, and looked around and smiled, for all in ocean's depths, on plain, hill, mountain, vale, she felt was hers.

On the morning which followed that night of bliss, the exile again received the felicitations of his friends, and was formally confirmed in his honours and his property by his sovereign.





But his ear was not yet sated with the music of his Isabel's voice, and when the noontide beam struck hot amidst the clamorous crowd, and panting candidates for humble fame, the amorous pair, seated on a shaded bank in a neighbouring wood, listed the far-off murmur.

Then all was asked anew, and all was told, for the happy Edward liked to contemplate in the narrative the force of that love that had fashioned the fond girl to his wishes, and drawn her from the pleasures of polished life to share with him the toils at least of poverty, and find it huge delight; for it was a creature simple as beautiful, that would not scruple to own that she was happy—happy that he roved the heiress of Amersvrlle, but ten thousand times more happy because he had loved the lowly minstrel.

The fond husband would never tire of





hearing the naif and tender comments with which she would enrich the tale as often as she would repeat it, and more than curioT sity, the sweetness of every word that issued from those honied lips, was hisincentive to question her with respect to every minute particular she might have omitted, before thev returned reluctant to the festivities that wearied them.





CHAP. IX,

Ces amans plus heureux que les vertu» 'v..'..M%,

Et dont les sentimens profonds, pur» et (jm,M:.ii

Résistent aux faveurs, sont respectés du Vza».,

Aux plaisirs de s'aimer trouveut de nouveaux iiiutuA*.

Un doux ravissement leur fait verser de» Utfiut*',

Enchantés du present, calmes sur l'aveuir,

Savourant du passé l'aimable souvenir,

L'un et l'autre rend grace a l'objet qu'il aAitt c-,

Et ne demande au ciel qu'un cœur plu* UtoAct «im/js*.





Spurning the cold communion of tlte wiMd,

Will dwell with you- gouTUfc»





To none who had witnessed them, à'iA th* festivities of the field or the cloth of fcoVd bring in their termination greater «at'iat'itction than to the lord Rivers anl hi» *>i»ouw> for they longed for the seclus,iou of tho** venerable shades where they might fancy the spirits of Isabel and de Montfort hoTered around, and joyed in their felicity.





The sun of royal favour would again have shone upon the exile, now no more an exile; but he had received a salutary lesson, and that, and far more, the tranquil joys of happy love, stifled every seed of ambition in him, never again to germinate.

He left the slippery paths that lead to grandeur and to fame to be trodden by men less fortunate, and for the deprivation of every satisfaction to be found in a successful ascent, he found ample compensation in the mild delights of philosophy and letters, and rural occupations, but above all, in forming the minds of his offspring, and cheering the dwellings of his dependents beneath the approving smile of his Isabel.

After the lapse of a few years, it was proposed by Isabel, that as a reward for a tiny urchin with his own eye, his own lip, his own smile, she had just presented him with, he should visit with her the scenes where she had been busied in fastening around him the toils of love.





The proposal was eagerly accepted; hand in hand they wept over the mound in Rosemalde; and many an hour they sat with each an arm entwined round the pollard on which the ardent kiss of new-born love had been imprest.

They visited the house of Meister, the hostel in Wiesendorf, and the cottage near the Abbey of Marienfels, bringing with them a pleasing surprise, and also more substantial satisfaction. The little old nurse, as she contemplated the rich glow of loveliness that had seduced the exile from his allegiance to the shade of her Luise, readily forgave him. The family of the hostel had reason to rejoice that Heaven had gifted them with kindly natures, and the fervent blessing of the time-worn tenant of the cottage was from the fulness of her heart.

In the forest of Mauriac they found the good old officer, whose dwelling had afforded an asylum to our persecuted hero, like the hardy and venerable oak of the mountain,still vigorous amidst scions shooting from his proper stem.





His hospitality had not gone unreward-: ed, and his storm-beaten spirit found comfort in the later hours of life. He had taken care to preserve exactly in the state in which it had been abandoned, the dear cottage of their humble loves, and once more the couch was pressed that had ri-vetted their souls for ever.

When they rose from it, the sun shone sweetly through the narrow lattice, inviting. them to visit their former haunts. ,

All day long they wandered, or sat in the. forest, grudging even the little time they devoted to necessary refreshment, and when it was evening, they stood on the spot where the spirit of the exile was wont to find a momentary rest.

It was a sweet calm hour; the sun was again amidst the stems of the oaks; the, dark blue summits of the Jura, impending ever the beauteous landscape, stretched





riong the eastern horizon; the cottage, and the orchard, and the dove-cot, the scene of happy love and household contentment, still bright with the gleam of the westering orb, lay all in prospect.

It was the spot where the eloquence of Isabel, impregnate with fictitious grief, had soothed the real sorrows of her Edward.

As they cast their eyes around, there 'was pleasant memory, and the magnificence of nature. Each felt the pressure of the other's hand, and in the fulness of their joy <here was silence.



POSTSCRIPT.



In the composition of the foregoing pages, the author, not conceiving that the customers of circulating libraries were used to set any very high value' on chronological





exactness, was induced to risk a slight ana^> chronism, which, if detected, he trusts the indulgent reader will easily pardon.
