SHACKELL AND BAYLIS, JOHNSON's-COURT. 



CHAPTEK I. 



THE GUARD-HOUSE. 

Turn melancholy forth to funerals ; 
The pale companion is not for our pomp. 



Meanwhile welcome joy and feast, 

Midnight shout and revelry, 

Tipsy dance and jollity. 

Rigour now is gone to bed, 

And advice, with scrupulous head, 

Strict age and sage severity, 

With their grave laws, in slumber lie. 



Milton. 



Milton. 



It has always been the policy of the ruling 
party in Ireland, to exaggerate popular com- 
motions into insurrectionary movements ; and to 

VOL. II. B 



% THE O'BRIEXS and 

assign to disturbances, merely local, a political 
origin. 

The drunken riot at the Strugglers had 
scarcely commenced, when it was bruited about, 
by the secret service men of the government, as 
a tumult of the most deep-laid conspiracy — a 
guerre a la mort, between the people and the 
mihtary, the volunteers and the garrison! the 
prehminary explosion of a long-concerted plot, 
which was to be followed up by the rising of the 
White Boys in the south, the Right Boys in 
the east, the Heart-of-Oak Boys in the west, 
and the Heart-of-Steel Boys in the north, with 
every other " wild variety''' of " Boys," which 
in Ireland, at all times (and particularly in the 
epoch alluded to), served as terms of terrorism, 
to scare the timid at home, and flatter the pre- 
judices of the ignorant and credulous abroad. 

The review in the Phoenix Park, distinguished 
by the most brilliant sham fight that had been 
exhibited on any similar occasion, evinced to the 
suspicious vigilance of government, that the old 



THE O FLAHERTYS. J5 

spirit of eighty-two had suddenly received a 
new impulse, and was again bursting forth with 
more than its original splendour. 

Other scintillations of public spirit, it was 
asserted, w^ere hourly exploding ; which threw a 
light upon the state of public opinion. From 
tlie academic eloquence of the young and ardent 
members of the Historical Society (then the 
glory and pride of the university), to the less 
developed, but more formidable associations of 
the sober, civilized dissenters of Ulster, every 
thing intimated, to the heated imagination of 
the public authorities, some powerful impulsion; 
against which their vigilance was to be directed. 
The faintest breathing in favour of parliamen- 
tary reform, or Catholic emancipation, was 
deemed sedition ; and the commonest street broil 
was considered an insurrectionary commotion. 

On the first intimation, therefore, of the riot 

at the Strugglers, every demonstration of power 

and every show of fear were exhibited. Esta- 

fettes flew between the Royal Hospital and the 

B ^ 



THE O BIIIENS AND 



Mayoralty ; the castle sentinels were doubled, 
the castle gates were closed ; and a captain's 
guard was thrown into, what was then called, the 
"Old GuardEoom,'" (situated in the lower court, 
near the ancient Chapel and Wardrobe Tower) 
a building long since swept away by modern 
improvement, and then only occupied in cases 
of emergency. Commands were issued to hold 
the troops in readiness to march upon the people ; 
patrols were sent out ; piquets established ; the 
streets were cleared, the shops closed; and the 
awful silence of the capital was disturbed only 
by the trampling of steeds and the roll of car- 
riages; whose flambeaux, flaring behind, reflected 
a murky glare from the arms of the military. 

Power and pleasure, despotism and dissipation, 
were then inseparable images in Irish society : 
and while the city exhibited the appearance of 
a town besieged ; the gay and the fair, the great 
and the dissipated, were reckless of public woe 
or weal; and hastened to their various rendezvous 
ot amusement — to the innocent pastimes of the 



THE OFLAHEllTYS. 5 

kuicka Jcutchoo party at the provost"*s house, or 
the more select media noche of the castle, — which, 
like those of Versailles in the pious and profligate 
reign of Louis the Fourteenth, were at once 
puerile and licentious. 

Composed of persons, congregated like mon- 
kies, for the sole purposes of love and mischief — 
frequently beginning in a game of romps, and 
occasionally ending in a suit at Doctors' Com- 
mons — these private relaxations were independent 
of all controul from the cares of public dutv. 
Nor werc any public disturbances permitted 
to intrude upon the elegant delassemens of the 
high officials and their particular coteries ; except 
such as might be discussed to the amusement of 
the Lord Lieutenant after dinner ; when fun 
and frolic gave a zest to business, when puns 
were manufactured with insurrections, heads 
and walnuts were cracked together, and rows 
and risings,— a drunken broil, or a White Boy 
irruption, — were treated with equal seriousness ; 
that is, with equal levity. 

The account of the tumult had reached the 



6 THE o'bRIEKS AXD 

castle, just as the lovely \ice-queen and her 
bevy of beauties had risen from table, amidst 
acclamations much too loud for the quietude 
of modern hon ton. These were called forth 
by the true Irish gallantry of a young and 
devoted admirer of her Excellency ""s, who ob- 
serving the water in her finger-glass tinged 
with the dye of black gloves, which had sullied 
the rosy tips of her fingers, drank off the 
polluted beverage to her health ; declaring in 
all the ardour of Tipperary enthusiasm, " that 
it was sweeter than necthar, and far suparior to 
His Excellency's Champaigne," though that was 
Ferns's best ! ! 

It was reserved for the fortunate Captain 
O' Mealy to announce the event of the tumult 
at the Strugglers ; for which purpose he called 
out the under secretary, a pretty boy diplo- 
matist, the Honourable Freddy Fitzjohn, in the 
hopes of being called in himself, (for the Cap- 
tain's social and civil manoeuvres were infinitely 
more scientific than his military). The result 
answered to the intention. The Captain was 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 7 

called in, and while the under secretary whis- 
pered the news to the chief, the chief passed it, 
(with the bottle), to the chancellor ; who gave it, 
with the toast " of Kitty Cut-a-dash" to the 
commander of the forces ; and the commander 
communicated it, without note or comment, to 
the Lord Lieutenant, Captain O 'Mealy was then 
called on for a song; and he chaunted forth 
" None can love like an Irishman," an axiom 
denied by his Excellency, who was seconded 
by all the English officials present. 

The board then proceeded to transact business ; 
and the members of His Majesty's most honour- 
able privy-council filled their glasses, and gave 
their opinions. The contents of many wise heads, 
and many bright flasks were now poured forth 
together. More troops were ordered out, and 
more wine was ordered up. The state butler 
and the first aid-de-camp were kept in perpe- 
tual activity. The wine was declared prime, 
and the times periLous. The disbanding of the 
volunteers, and the knighting of Ferns, were 



8 THE o'bRIENS and 

orders carried in council, without a dissenting 
voice. The pohcy of elevating some to the 
peerage, and others to the gallows, was then 
started by Lord Knocklofty, whose family had 
progressively prospered by such measures ; and 
it was agreed to by the Lord Chancellor, with 
a comment on the propriety of exterminating 
all the Catholics (one of his lordship's most 
favourite schemes) ; while the wisdom of mul- 
tiplying jails and jobs, of raising barracks, for 
which there were no troops, and building foun- 
tains, for which there was no water,* was 
admitted nem. con. 

The genial current of private feeling now 

* When the erection of fountains for the accommoda- 
tion of the poor was decreed, the jobbers fixed upon Mer- 
rion-square as one of the sites. The inhabitants justly 
objected that there were no poor in the immediate vicinity, 
and that a fountain would be a public nuisance in the 

most elegant square of the capital. Sir Jno. De , the 

advocate of the job, promised that the building should 
be ornamental ; and that, upon his honour, one drop of 
water should never be admitted into it. He and his re- 
presentatives have been true to the engagement ; and the 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 9 

flowed freely, with other genial currents. Par- 
ticular interests mingled with general concerns ; 
and, as confidence and claret circulated together, 
politics and pretty women were discussed with 
equal frankness and ardour. Then were brought 
upon the table, the services done to the state by 
the Ladies Knocklofty and Honoria Stratton, in 
a late contested election ; when the Proudforts 
(the provincial bashaws of the country for half 
a century) were nearly worsted by a patriot, 
whose name was destined to make a part of the 
history of his country. In consideration of 
such services, Lord Knocklofty solicited a cor- 
netcy of Dragoons, for his fair friend Lady 
Honoria (nothing else being get-at-able at the 

fountain, to this day, continues as dry as if it had been 
built for a powder magazine. 

Over the edifice may yet be seen the following 
appropriate inscription, as if in mockery of the 
people, — 

*• His saltern accumulem doni?, aifungar inani 
Muncre ,*" 

an unlucky allusion to the decease of the Lord Lieutenant 
at whose command the project was undertaken, 

B 3 



10 THE o'bRIENS and 

time), which was instantly granted ; and " la 
belle soldat,'^ was immediately toasted by Lord 
Kilcolman, in as good French and as honest a 
feeling as those in which one of his celebrated 
countrymen, afterwards toasted " la belle sexe^' 
at a similarly "highly contracting" party. Lady 
Knocklofty, too, was hinted at by his Excel- 
lency, as a proper person to fill the station of 
judge advocate, on the demise of the present 
incumbent ; and the Chancellor in compliment- 
ing the high judicial talents of his own widowed 
sister, declared that her sex only incapacitated 
her for the situation of attorney general, which 
he had recently vacated. In compensation for 
this salique disability, the affectionate brother 
said she would accept of a pension on the concor- 
datum list, which was ordered to be enrolled 
instanter. 

Amidst such national discussions, the council 
sat late and drank deep ; occasionally receiving 
intelligence, and issuing orders ; and they ex- 
hibited an unity and a mutual good under- 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 11 

Standing, for which the Irish cabinet has not 
always been remarkable. Even the Lord Lieu- 
tenant and his chief secretary, agreed upon 
most points ; his Excellency, for once, took the 
lead at the board ; and his secretary, for once, 
did not affect to act " as viceroy over him." 

While the Duke was thus giving up to a 
" party, what was meant for mankind," a little 
curly-headed page ran into the dining-room, 
and with an arch look, presented him a bit of 
twisted perfumed paper. It was opened and 
read with empressement ; and the page was in- 
stantly followed into the adjoining and but 
half lighted throne room. The temporary ab- 
sence of the governor, and general governor of 
Ireland, aiforded infinite mirth and inuendo to 
the whole " council assembled ;" and when he 
returned, toasts were given, and puns were 
made, which left the representative of majesty 
in no doubt, as to the suspicions created by his 
sudden absence. The first to join in the jest, 
of which he was the subject, he observed that 



12 THE O'BRIENS AND 

affairs of state must be attended to, ordered 
every man to fill a bumper, called on the chan- 
cellor for a toast, and desired " Nosey Tisdall" 
(the court droll of the day) to sing a song, 
a I'apropos. The droll obeyed, and chaunted 
forth— 

*' Oons! neighbour, ne'er blush for a trifle like this j" 

while all the " members present" joined in the 
chorus of — 

" No age, no profession, no station is free ; 
To sovereign beauty mankind bends the knee:'* 
&c, &c. &c. &c. &e. 

Meantime the Duchess and her " allegra 
hrtgata'^ waited in mortified impatience for the 
breaking up of the privy council, to begin her 
games of magical music, blindman's buff, or 
puss in the corner ; amusing themselves as they 
might, sometimes, like the ladies of the villa of 
Schiffanoza,with tales and stories, which had some 
points in common with those of the Decamerone ; 
and sometimes by mystifying a drowsy page, or 



13 

" selling a bargain" to an unsuspecting aid-de- 
camp ; both of whom they occasionally sent forth 
as scouts to bring in news of the row, and to 
make returns of '' the killed and wounded." 
The arrival of some of their own elect, the 
clique of the castle in their romping frocks, drove 
the privy council out of the heads of the fair 
stateswomen ; who soon found they could "better 
spare"" those " better men," whose devotion to 
business and to the bottle outweighed the at- 
traction of their own splendid charms. 

The play of high spirits, the excitement of 
inordinate vanity, (the one so often mistaken for 
wit, the other for passion,) were now in full 
operation ; and called forth whatever was bril- 
liant and buoyant, in look or temperament of 
either sex. Warm blushes bloomed warmer, 
bright eyes shone brighter, as the plumage of 
tropical birds grows more vivid in the season of 
those transient loves, which in flutter and in 
brevity do not ill image the commerce so pecu- 
liar to British gallantry, called flirtation. 



14 THE O'BRIENS AND 

While each was thus engaged with each, and 
all with all, the patronized protegee of the even- 
ing, a foreign female harpist, was led in by the 
master of the ceremonies, in vain. The pedal 
harp was then such a novelty, that its very form 
was " a lion ,-" and yet the splendid performer, 
though anticipating the excellence of a Krump- 
holtz, had scarcely run over a few modula- 
tions, when she was called upon to symphonize 
the game of magical music, — a game as favour- 
able to particular tete-a-tetes, as it is advanta- 
geous to forms, which in their doubtful search 
after the enigma of the mission, have the whole 
range of graceful action at their command. The 
paying and releasing of forfeits, however, con- 
stituted the point of the game ; and Lady 
Honoria, as judge, contrived to turn every 
penalty into an epigram, shewing little mercy to 
her enemies, and none to her friends. 

It was now Lady Knocklofty's turn to be 
guided by the forte and piano of the harp. 
After sailing round the room with the theatrical 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 15 

grace of one to whom stage effect was not un- 
known, vainly warned, by the harmonious per- 
former, of her remoteness from the object of her 
search, she became petulant, and got as much 
out of temper as she had before been pre-occu- 
pied ; until tearing off her diamond necklace, 
she flung it into the Duchess's lap, which held 
the forfeits, exclaiming " there — give me a task 
and I'll perform it ; but save me from the in- 
sipidity of hunting under cushions for hidden 
handkerchiefs, or the bore of taking Lady 
Mary O' Blarney's scarf and tying it round 
Lord Muckross's head." 

At that moment the Captain of the guard in 
sash and gorget, all powder and importance, 
joined the circle and soon became its centre. 
Called upon for news of the tumult, he drew 
up, took snuff^, looked grave, and with the face 
of one who brought " news of price," narrated 
the important events of the evening, in which 
he had played himself the most important part. 
He talked of '^ moving accidents," of mob and 



16 THE O'BRIENS AND 

military, of rescues and reprisals, of his rencontre 
with the son of a catholic peer in disguise, (the 
real Captain Right he shrewdly suspected ;) and 
of his own feather cropped, and three hairs of 
his whisker singed, (the parties were produced 
in court as corroborating testimonies). But 
when he discovered that Captain Right, who 
had acted so very wrong, was not only the son of 
a catholic peer in disguise, but the volunteer 
victor of the Star Fort, " whose officiousness,"" 
added Captain O'Mealy, looking at Lady Knock- 
lofty, " prevented every man on the ground 
from flying to her Ladyship's assistance," then 
the last " colpo di pefuiello,^' was given to the 
picture; and though some doubted, and some 
disbelieved, all were interested, because all were 
amused and excited. 

At the Duchess's request, however, the vm- 
finished game of magical music was again 
resumed. Lady Knocklofty was called upon 
to redeem her forfeit; and Lady Honoria, 
the judge of " what was to be done to 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 17 

the owner of that superfine thing," decreed 
that she should fulfil a task which appeared 
impracticable to all, and which was possible 
only to one too interested in its performance to 
hastily abandon the attempt. 

While the collective wisdom of the nation had 
been thus occupied in the dining-room of the 
castle, in providing for the exigencies of the 
times, and the ladies in the drawing-room, in 
providing for their own amusements, the tumult 
had been quelled, by the wisdom, prudence, 
and activity, of a single magistrate; and the 
most conspicuous actor in the conflict, placed 
under the guard of Captain O'Mealy (who had 
been obliged to relinquish the distinction of his 
Excellency's society, to take command of a 
patrol), had been marched a prisoner to the 
castle guard-house. He had walked firmly and 
rapidly in the midst of his mounted guard; 
while Captain O'Mealy, riding on one side, and 
occasionally throwing his eyes over the person 
of his prisoner, somewhat shadowed by the 



18 THE o'bRIENS and 

group in which he was merged, sung out, for 
his own amusement, and the benefit of the 
pubHc, his favourite air of 

" We Irish boys, both high and low. 

Are clivir, brisk, and handy, 
And the ladies, every where we go, 

All swear we are the dandy. 
To be sure we are, and indeed we are ; 

With my hie ! folathrum Leary. 

To be sure, &c.*' 

This jocund genuine Irish air he sometimes 
varied for the more placid melody of '^ Maw 
chare amy^'' which he gave with a cantahile 
that had often excited the admiration, and 
drawn to the window many a " cJiere amie,'''' to 
whom his vocal powers were not unknown, in 
the neighbourhood between the barracks and 
the castle — his 

" Daily haunts and ancient neighbourhood." 

Though Ennis born, the Captain was Dublin 
bred ; and he had served his time to a button- 
maker in Wine Tavern-street, which had been 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 19 

the scene of the night's conflict. With " a 
soul above buttons," and a voice above par, — with 
the most dauntless impudence and the finest 
barytone — Barnaby O' Mealy had pushed and 
sung himself into the first company in the 
capital, and into the last company of " Royal 
Irish,*" one of those regiments " de circanstance,'''^ 
something between a job and an expediency, 
which served the purposes of the government 
for the time being, and filled the pockets of the 
Colonel permitted to raise it. 

When the patrol had reached Wine Tavern- 
street, the Captain commanded a halt on tlie 
scene of the recent action, which was still strewed 
with commemorating fragments of the battle. 
The old dilapidated tavern of " the Strugglers," 
lay in deep shadow, (the moon rising behind it), 
and was confounded with the formless mass 
of walls of its ill-assorted neighbour, the Fran- 
ciscan nunnery ; where a faint twinkle of light 
streamed from the solitary grated casement 
already noticed : haply some votive taper of a 



20 THE o'bJIIENS AND 

vestal shrine, which was suddenly extinguished, 
as the clanking of hoofs resounded on the 
pavement beneath, and scared the vigilance of 
the pious votarist " by sounds unholy." A 
sentinel kept guard at the shattered door of the 
tavern. 

"Cintry," cried out Captain O'Mealy, "did 
this thing appear again to-night ?" as Hamlet in 
the immortal Shakspeare says ; — that is, did any 
of thim rebelly, ruffianly, papist mob appear 
here upon the premises ?" 

An answer in the negative, with the assertion 
" That all was right," satisfied the Captain ; 
who had only asked the question and made the 
halt, in his love of habitual display. But a man 
loitering near the place having volunteered some 
vague information, instantly engaged his at- 
tention; and much idle and unmeaning talk 
ensued, which produced the effect intended by 
the Captain, gradually gathering an auditory 
around him, and bringing heads to every 
window, and spectators to every door. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 21 

When a full half hour had thus been dawdled 

away, the word was again given to the guard, 

and they continued their route, followed by 

many of the mob ; while the captain again raised 

his clear, mellow, but vulgarly modulated voice, 

to the reiterated refrain of — 

** Maw chare amy — he-he, 
Maw chare amy. 
Maw chare amy — he-he-he, 
Maw chare amy." 

The party had now turned into High-street, 
which was more spacious and better lighted than 
the remoter avenues, giving to the Captain a 
more perfect view of the person of his prisoner, 
whose head was now in strong relief, though the 
rest of his figure was in shadow. Captain 
O 'Mealy neared his horse, and taking the 
place of one of his men, accosted the prisoner 
with — " I believe I have seen you somewhere 
before, to-day ; at laste, I take it for granted, 
if not much mistaken ?" 

"'Tis probable, Sir," was the cold reply. 

" If I'm not greatly decaived, you are the 



22 THE o'buiens and 

young lad who led on the attack upon the Star 
Fort, — T think I recollect your prawfile ?" 

" I had that honour,^' said the youth, with 
animation. 

" It was a mighty nate thing, 'pon my ho- 
nour, — that is, for the volunteers. The reglars 
(barring we cavalry) couldn't do it better ; you 
must have had a good many rehearsals to get 
it up so well, as we say at Lady Ely's Attic; 
and it's a pity but so genteel a beginning should 
have so — so — " 

" So what, Sir .?" interrupted the prisoner, 
petulantly. 

" So unlucky an inding, Sir, that's all," said 
the Captain, " for though a row is a good tiling 
in itself, and what no gentleman need \ye 
ashamed of, yet it all depinds upon the style of 
getting it up. It''s only a little while ago, that 
my friend. Lord Knocklofty, myself, Kilcol- 
man, and the three Honourable O'Mullins's got 
into the deviPs own row, returning a little dis- 
guised, as we say in Ireland, from the Lord 



THE o'flahertys. 23 

Chancellor''s, and were all clapped up in the 
watch-house — give you my honour we were — 
which reminded us of the prince and the chief 
justice, in the immortal Shakespeare; but there 
is every difference in life, in getting into a scrape 
with men of quality, and fighting with the 
commonalty, and taking their parts."" 

" There is, indeed," replied the prisoner, 
emphatically. 

" And it's pity but a fine young fellow, like 
yourself, should get into a scrape, that may be 
the ruin of you ; for if you are an indintured 
apprintice, as I suppose you are,~and, by the by, 
may I ask your trade .?" 

"My trade, Sir?" 

" Oh, it's all in the way of kindness," con- 
tinued Captain O'Mealy, with a patronizing 
air; "for I might be the making of you, in the 
way of getting you the pathronage of the great- 
est lady in Ireland ; for I'm hand in glove with 
thim all, from the Lady-Lieutenant down — " 

The young man tossed his head haughtily. 



24 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and drawing up his college robe, which had 
fallen mid-way down his figure, so wrapped its 
folds over his arms, as to display, in full light, 
the gold tassels still pendant from its hanging 
sleeves. As they glittered in the moonlight, 
Ihey caught the eye of Captain O' Mealy, who 
now first observed the University cap and robe 
of his prisoner. He remained silent for a moment, 
as if collecting himself for a new train of ideas ; 
and then dismounting, he gave his horse to one 
of his men, and taking his place beside the pri- 
soner, observed — "I ask pardon if I've made a 
little mistake in taking you for- a mechanic, Sir; 
but I believe I have the honour of addressing 
a young collegian, and a non nobis domine.^^ 

" A what, Sir?" demanded the young man, 
smilingly. 

'' Why, a nobleman's son ; at least I suppose 
so, from the gold tassels. Sir, I beg to intro- 
duce myself to the honour of your acquaintance; 
my name. Sir, is Captain Barnaby O' Mealy, of 
the Royal Irish." 



25 

" And mine, Sir," said the prisoner, touching 
his cap, " is Murrogh O'Brien." 

" The Honourable Murrogh, son of the Earl 
of Inchiquin, I presume?" 

" No, Sir; a son of Lord Arranmore." 

" Lord Arranmore ! I have not the honour of 
knowing his lordship, which is extraordinary ; as 
I may say the whole rid binch are my intimate 
frinds and particular acquaintances; a new 
crayation, I presume ?" 

" No, Sir, a very old title revived." 

" Humph ! Mr. O'Brien, you are a happy 
man, Sir." 

Mr. O'Brien smiled, in the probable concep- 
tion that his position was a singular one for a 
happy man ; while Captain O' Mealy, passing 
his arm familiarly through that of his prisoner, 
continued — " A very happy man, Sir ; for 1 be- 
lieve ycfu are the very identical individual, now 
I look at you close, that saved the life of Lady 
Knocklofty, by stopping those devil's own skit- 
tish animals of her's, and " 

VOL. II. c 



26 THE o'bKIENS and 

" Was that Lady Knocklofty ?''' interrupted the 
prisoner, witli an obvious interest in the question. 

''It was, Sir; the most intimate friend I 
have upon earth, and wonder but you should 
know her, Mr. O'Brien ; for, if I'm not intirely 
dacaived and much mistaken, all people of qua- 
hty know each other." 

'* I have not been long in Ireland ; and since 
my return to my native country, my time has 
been exclusively occupied by my collegiate pur- 
suits. Had I gone into society, I could not fail 
to have distinguished a person so attractive as 
Lady Knocklofty.'' 

" Oh, that alters the case intirely," said Cap- 
tain O' Mealy ; " but thim that never went 
among the people of fashion, might know Lady 
Knocklofty : she drives on Sundays in the 
Phaynix, and on the Circular every day in the 
week, with her Excellency ; and, as the ballad 
says— 

** If you'd wish to see her Grece, 
The circular road it is the piece ; 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. S7 

For there ache day she drives her gig, 
Wilh her hair tied up like a barber's wig." 

" Is her ladyship a widow ?" asked the young 
man, with interest and pre-occupation. 

" A widow, is it she ? Why, Mr. O'Brien, 
you must be a stranger indeed, not to know that 
Albina, Countess Knocklofty, is the wife of* the 
Right Honourable Claudius Antoninus Marcus 
Frederick Proudfort, Earl of Knocklofty, Baron 
St. Grellan, Viscount Mount Raven — a Baronet 
and Lord Lieutenant of the county of Mayo ; a 
member of his Majesty's most honourable Privy 
Council, Knight of the most noble Order of St. 
Patrick, Colonel of the Royal Irish, Captain of 
the St. Grellan Loyal Volunteers, Keeper of the 
Privy Sale, Chief Remembrancer of the Ex- 
chequer, First Commissioner of the Customs, 
Reversionary Secretary of State, Governor of 
the Lying-in and Foundling Hospitals, Master 
of the Revels, and Searcher, Packer, and 
Guager of the Port of St. Grellan. Brother to 
c2 



52» THE O BRIENS AND 

one archbishop, and nephew to another ; uncle 
to three bishops, four deans, and two arch- 
deacons, and the head of the greatest, most 
powerfullest, and loyallest family of his Majesty's 
dominions of Ireland.'' 

The captain here paused for want of breath, 
and his prisoner observed — " He is a happy 
man ; Lady Knocklofty is a,, very attractive and 
beautiful person." 

" Oh, she's a lovely fine crature surely — 

' The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars. 
As daylight does thim lamps,' 

as the immortal Shakespeare says ; only she 
wears too much rouge, as I often tell her. 
Lady Knocklofty, dear, says I, 1 wish you 
would allow me to rouge you; for its I have 
the notes for it, and paints all the faces at Lady 
Ely's for stage effect. By-the-bye, Mr. O'Brien, 
if you get out of this scrape, as I expect you 
will, being a lord's son, I'll inthroduce you at 
Knocklofty House, I will, pon my honour; 



THE o'flaHERTYS. 29 

and between ourselves (lowering his voice con- 
fidentially), you are not quite unknown to her 
Ladyship, for I pointed you out to her as 
she was driving oiF after the accident. Lady 
Knocklofty, says f, that's your haro, says I, 
— pon your honour ! says she ; pon my ho- 
nour, says I : upon which, O'Mealy, says she, 
tell him, says she — in fact, she said as much, 
as that she meant to provide for you de viv 
wau /" 

The prisoner was a moment silent ; and then 
said, " Any mark of Lady Knocklofty 's notice, 
could not fail to be a distinction ; and I would 
certainly rather receive it de vive voice, than 
by any intermediate means. 

The answer evidently puzzled Captain 
O'Mealy ; but resolved rather " to burst in 
ignorance," than betray it, he continued to 
hum, " If you would wish to see her Grece,'' 
while debating in his mind what sort of an ap- 
pointment de viv wau might be, which the son 
of a nobleman preferred to any other. 



30 THE o'bKIENS AXD 

The party had now passed by the guarded 
gates of the upper Castle-yard (the residence 
of the viceroy), and decending Cork-hill, pre- 
sented themselves at the lower court ; when 
signs and countersigns were asked and given, 
pass words whispered, and all the military 
mysteries of times of civil broil, strictly ob- 
served. They were then permitted to enter. 

The Castle of Dublin, a strong fortress, 
erected in the thirteenth century, for the defence 
of the capital, and of the English government, 
had once contained within its moated walls, the 
high court of Parliament, and courts of justice, 
with state prisons, state dungeons, state chapel, 
state gambling houses, and all the other ap- 
pendages of state, belonging to an order of 
things, founded on force and violence. Though 
few vestiges now remained of these features of a 
feudal despotism — though no draw-bridge, or 
portcullis impeded the ingress, though no con- 
stable of the keep or gentleman porter was 
visible on the walls, though no body of warders 



THE o'fLAHEUTYS. 31 

Of troop of archers, or pike-men bearded tlie 
ramparts, to scan such as, once entering them, 
" left hope behind," — still this ancient fort, 
and modern chateau, appeared to the imagin- 
ation, and low toned spirits of the prisoner, 
sufficiently awful. He had been in lands, where 
such strong holds were more than monuments 
of the lawless power of darker and more distant 
times : he had lived under institutions, which 
made the will of one, the law of all ; and where a 
word or breath sufficed to incarcerate for life in 
such fearful edifices, the young and hopeful, 
the brave and bold. But recently returned to 
his native country, with a memory stored by 
reading, and early associations, with its ancient 
history, the towers of the Castle of the pale 
were still beheld with emotion, by one who 
considered himself by name and by descent the 
representative of the " mere Irish." 

The lower castle-yard still indeed bore some 
resemblance to the description made of it in the 
preceding century, as a " space or court, to the 



32 THE O'BRIENS AND 

east of the Castle, where stood the chapel for the 
service of the household, a lodging for the office 
of groom-porter, or gaming table, the Provost- 
Marshal's prison, the armoury and dwelling to 
the smiths and armourers, the wardrobe tower, 
the stable of the chief governour, and a range of 
fair buildings, the offices of war, ordnance, trea- 
sury, and for the regulating of the deeds and 
conveyances of the kingdom and the like." * 
Most of these offices remained, and were now 
guarded by pacing sentinels '4 while the moon, 
as it shone from behind the wardrobe tower, 
and its ancient adjunct, the Castle chapel, threw 
a broad and picturesque shadow upon the pave- 
ment, with a singular effect. 

" ' I do not like the towers of any place,' as 
th' immortal Shakspeare says ;" observed Cap- 
tain O'Mealy, pointing to the building. 

" Nor I neither," said the prisoner, with a 
sigh. 

* Ware's Antiquities. 



THE oVlahehtys, 3S 

" Did Julius Caisar build that tower ?" 
asked the Captain, still quoting from the 
only author with whom chance had made him 
acquainted. 

" No,"" said the prisoner, replying with 
naivete to the question, and falling into the 
general error of mistaking the wardrobe tower 
for the Birmingham. " It was erected, I have 
read, by the English deputy, John de Birming- 
ham, Baron of Athenry, in 1842. From that 
tower the gallant 'O'Donnel, of Tyrconnel, es- 
caped from the tyranny of Ehzabeth, From that 
tower, high as it is, escaped the brave Lord 
Delvin, one of the unfortunate few who, strug- 
gling for the independence of Ireland, sought 
to effect it at every risk." 

«' Lord Delvin, do you tell me that ? — why, 
he is one of our private thayathricals at Lady 
Ely's, and acts in ' the gang' to my Mac- 
heath." 

" I mean the Lord Delvin of 1600, who was 
committed in ward here for joining in a con- 
c 3 



34 



spiracy with the Earls of Tyrone and TyrccFn- 
nel, my own ancestors/' 

" The Earl of Tyrone," interrupted the 
Captain, confused by names so famihar. " Is 
it the great Beresford, Earl of Tyrone, my par- 
tiklar acquaintance and intimate friend ?'* 

" No," said the youth, smiling, " the great 
O'Neal, Earl of Tyrone, who, in league with 
the Lord Maguire. ..." 

" Oh ! I know, — a relative of the honourable 
Kitty's?" 

'' O'Cahan, and other chieftains of the 

sept of Ulster, intended to surprise the castle 
of Dublin, cut off the Lord Deputy and coun- 
cil, dissolve the state, and set up a government 
of their own." 

"'O the rebelly papist thieves," interrupted 
Captain O' Mealy, indignantly. 

" On the contraryj" said the youth, with an 
earnestness singular in one in his position, " it 
was a papist who betrayed this conspiracy ; but 
though Lord Delvin was in charge of the con- 



35 

stable, the stern Tristram Eccleston, he escaped. 
There are resources in the brave and the 
enterprising, which, like those of Heaven, are 
inscrutable." 

As the prisoner spoke with vehemence, Cap- 
tain O'Mealy gazed on him in evident doubt 
and amazement, mentally observing, ^' I wouldn't 
wonder if the Honourable Murrogh was Cap- 
tain Right, devil a wonder ;" a suspicion that 
brought with it a host of speculations, which 
afterwards formed the ground- work of his de- 
tails in the Duchess's drawing-room. 

The party had now drawn up to the guard- 
house, which formed a part of the mass of 
building adjoining to the old chapel, and had 
been one of those " nameless towers"* which 
have since been taken down to make room for 
other necessary buildings. The prisoner was 
conducted in the usual form, and given up to 
the lieutenant df the guard, a pursy, ponderous, 
elderly gentleman, whom Captain O'Mealy in- 
♦ Ware. 



36 THE O'EKIENS AND 

troduced as Lieutenant Ellis, of the Royal 
Irish. In consideration of the prisoner's rank, 
as Captain O' Mealy observed, he would be per- 
mitted to remain in the officer's room, to which 
he was at once conducted, till he should be 
given up to the civil power in the morning. 

" And now, my dear O'Brien,"" said the Cap- 
tain familiarly, and drawing his dear O'Brien 
into a little den, which a camp-bed and dress- 
ing-table shewed to be the sleeping-room of the 
officer on guard ; " I've just a word for your 
private ear, while I tit-a-vaie myself a taste 
for her Excellency's little private paurty, and 
shake a dust of powdher into my whiskers. I 
needn't tell you, you've a friend in court in 
your humble servant, and will spake to Lady 
Knocklofty to back you out of this bit of a 
scrape : I'm just stepping in to meet her at 
her Grace's private paurty, and — " 

" To Lady Knocklofty ! no, I intreat you,^' 
interrupted his prisoner eagerly. 

" Death alive, man ! the women of quality 



THE o'fLAIIKRTYS. 37 

will like you the better for a bit of a row. Why, 
what is there so much the go as Viscount Kill- 
kelly and Baron Killcoachy, as we call my 
friend Sir Terence Flynn^ of county Galway, 
the chief of the Pinking Dindies, who nateley 
pinked his friend in a duel in the morning, and 
killed his coachman with a tinis ball in the 
afternoon ; and an't them Cherokees too, an't 
they the life of the place ; frightening all th' 
ould ladies in their sedan chairs, smashing the 
fine furniture of their particular friends, and 
playing H-11 and Tommy through the town ? 
But at all events hadn't I better go to my lord 
your father, for I suppose he knows nothing of 
your situation, and inthroduce myself to him 
as '' 

" I am not quite sure that my father is in 
town, at least he was not this evening.'"' 

" Well, any how, I'll go and thry to-mor- 
row," said Captain O' Mealy officiously; and 
secretly determined to add his lordship's name 



So THE O BRIEXS AND 

to his list of titled acquaintance — " where does 
he keep, when he is in it ?" 

" At O'Brien House," answered the prisoner 
with some hesitation. 

" O'Brien House ! humph ! Well, sure I'll 
be there at cock-crow ; some where about the 
new squares, or Stephens' Green, I suppose ?" 

" No, its an ancient family mansion, and lies 
in what was once the principal quarter of 
Dublin.^' 

" And where is that ?" O'Brien hesitated — 
then replied, " along the south bank of the 
river." 

" Oh, aye, I know, — near Moira House, where 
I'm to be inthroduced next week." 

" Further still, it occupies part of that 
ground, called Lord Gal way's walk." 

" Why .^ it's like the house that Jack built 
at the back of God's speed ; but stay,"" said 
Captain O' Mealy, taking up the almanack that 
lay on his table, and probably doubting the 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. SB 

truth of O'Brien's information. " Here''s ould 
tell truth ; let us see Lord Arranmore ! aye, here 
it is, the Right Honourable Terentius O'Brien, 
Baron of Arranmore — O'Brien House, Dublin — 
Castle of Dunn Engus, isles of Arran — Grouse 
Lodge, Connemara. Well, Sir, if your father 
isn't well lodged, it isn't for want of houses ; 
though, to be sure, they are something out of 
the line of fire, as we say in the Royal Irish. 
But now, mind, have a bit of a note ready by 
the time I come back from Her Excellency's 
small, little, private paurty, and I'll find out his 
lordship, if he's above ground, and make your 
pace with him, to-morrow morning, 'pon my 
honour I will." 

" To save you all trouble,'' said O'Brien, 
impatiently, " my college-porter will deliver 
him a letter from me, if you will have the 
kindness to let your servant leave it at the 
Porter's Lodge of the University." 

" Well, my dear fellow, give you my honour 
I'm greatly intherested for you, and when you 



40 THE o'ERIEXS and 

are out of this scrape, and enters bail, and that 
sort of thing, will get you to inthroduce me to 
my lord your father, and hopes you will both 
take a friendly dinner with me. So keep your- 
selves disengaged for some day next week ; and 
I'll ask Knocklofty and the Chancellor, and a 
few others, to meet you : and now I lave you 
the reversion of my tojdit, since you're a little 
flustered or so ; and wash the blood spots off 
that comely fine face of your's, and I'll sind 
Serjeant Flanagan, who is a great bone-setter, 
to put a taste of gold-baither s lafe over the 
scratch on your timple, and a bit of black 
plaister over that, which will look for all the 
world like a beauty spot ; and then Lieutenant 
Ellis will invite you to supper. So, fare you 
well till we meet, which will be soon, as I must 
return to my guard in an hour or two." 

O'Mealy then once more recommended his 
noble prisoner to the attention of his ancient 
Pistol, Lieutenant Ellis, and, tittivated and 
powdered up to the highest bent of his personal 



THE o'flAIIERTYS. 41 

ambition, the captain of the guard sallied forth 
to parade his vulgar absurdities to her Excel- 
lency's select coterie, where his reception has 
been already described. 

The reversion of the toilette of the Irish 
military Adonis, was an advantage of which 
O'Brien was happy to avail himself; and 
having benefited by the skill and black patch 
of Serjeant Flanagan, and pulled up his black 
stock, after the manner of Captain O' Mealy, 
ruffled his handsome head into a mass of curls, 
laid aside his customary robe of " inky black," 
and permitted the serjeant to brush the dust 
from his green uniform, he presented himself in 
the guard-room. 

Lieutenant Ellis, a coarse, dashing, vulgar- 
looking person, alone occupied this apartment ; 
and was seated at the fire, poring over the orderly 
book, and sipping brandy and water. He mo- 
tioned to the prisoner to take a seat, and insisted 
on his swallowing a glass of the potation, with 
such importunity, that it was vain to resist. The 



42 THE o'briexs and 

refusal of a second glass, and a cold answer to 
his idle questions, soon gave him impressions of 
the prisoner's character and designs, not very 
advantageous. Silence and sobriety were, in the 
estimation of Lieutenant Ellis, misprisions of 
treason: with him, the man who would not 
talk or drink, was " fit for plots and stratagems ; " 
and unwilling to keep company with one at once 
so dangerous and so dull, so sober and so sedi- 
tious, he drained off his goblet, read out the last 
order to the serjeant of the guard, and retired to 
the littJe bed-room, where he soon gave audible 
intimation of Ms manner of keeping watch and 
ward. 

The prisoner, meantime, had seated himself 
on an old-fashioned settle, beside the guard- 
room fire, and availing himself of some writing 
materials, which lay on the table, began a letter, 
dated from the castle guard-house. Having 
written " my dear father,*"* he paused. To 
this dear father he had much to say ; but the 
current of his ideas was dried up. The ex- 



THE o'flaheutys. 43 

haustion of fatigue fell heavily both on body 
and mind ; nature had gone to her uttermost ; 
and the will and the intellect were alike in 
abeyance. The pen fell from his hand, his eyes 
closed ; he sank gradually on the old settle, 
and life was soon to him as though it were 
not. As he lay with one arm pillowing his 
head, the other thrown listlessly over his breast, 
he imaged, in the grace of his attitude, and the 
youth and beauty of his person, the " sommeil 
cC Endijmiotu' such as the genius of painting, in 
various ages, has represented it. 

The clock of the castle had struck, but he 
had taken no note of time ! Ages or hours, 
a minute or a night, might have elapsed between 
the last sensation of slumbering drowsiness and 
the first of awakening consciousness, which was 
occasioned by a painful tingling that ran across 
his closed lids, and induced him instinctively to 
press them still closer. Though his eyes were 
deeply shaded by the long dark lashes, and by 
his upraised hand, the painful sensation became 



44 THE O'BRIENS AND 

more and more intense; till starting up, in sudden 
and full wakefulness, he perceived that the un- 
easiness arose from a burst of light, held close 
to his face. 

At his waking, the person who held it, 
drew back abruptly into a remote corner ; and 
he could just perceive that it was a stranger, 
muffled in a military cloak, and that they were 
alone. Before, however, he could make further 
observation or inquiry, Serjeant Flanagan came 
forth from Lieutenant Ellis's room, and giving 
the stranger a paper, said, " Plazeyour honour, 
i€s all right — that's enough. Sir, if a man was 
condemned to five hundred — the prisoner is to 
attind you." 

The stranger now advanced a little, in the 
direction of a small, low arched door in the 
guard-room, which seemed to lead into the in- 
terior of the building. There he paused, and 
touching his hat with a slight degage military 
salute, observed, in an affected and effeminate 
voice, " Serjeant, acquaint the gentleman with 



THE o'flahertys. 45 

my order ; or, stay — you had better shew it to 
him." 

Flanagan presented the paper to the prisoner, 
who was now on his feet, and had taken up his 
cap, and drawn on his robe. It was an order, 
in the proper technical form, empowering the 
lieutenant of the guard to give up the prisoner, 
the Honourable Murrogh O'Brien, to the bearer. 
What was most extraordinary in the event was, 
that it was dignified by the signature of the 
Lord Lieutenant. 

" May I ask, Sir," demanded O'Brien, 
" whither I am to be removed ?" 

'* For the present," replied the young officer, 
*' not I hope beyond the castle walls ; for it is 
cursed cold," (and he folded his cloak more 
closely round him), " and to-night's duty is no 
joke." 

" I suppose I'm about to be called up for 
examination then ?'"* demanded the prisoner. 

" Yes, for examination — there is no doubt of 
that." 



46 THE o'briens and 

" Before a civil or a military tribunal ?" asked 
O'Brien anxiously. 

" Oh, very civile '^ replied the officer, in an 
accent, that struck upon the just then irritable 
nerves of his prisoner to be jocular even to 
jeering. All the blood of the O'Briens rushed 
into his face; and resolving to ask no more 
questions, he followed his guide in sullen 
silence ; who led the way through a low, arched 
postern — the serjeant lighting them with his 
guard-room light, which, as he held it on high, 
discovered an obscure stone passage. 

" There," said the young officer, " take away 
your greasy light ; the smell is suffocation. Can't 
government light guard-rooms, with something 
that an't grease ? pah !" 

The Serjeant offended by the haughty man- 
ner of this " officer, who was no soldier,*" but 
appeared to be some dandy youth of qua- 
lity, recently initiated into the coarseness of 
military service, suddenly slapped the door, 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 47 

and left the guard and the guarded ahke in utter 
darkness. 

" By Jove," exclaimed the young officer, 
" this is a pleasant adventure ! The lamp that 
hung here, too, is extinguished ; but don't be 
afraid, Sir.'' 

'' 'Tis not my habit. Sir," replied the prisoner, 
abruptly. 

" I know the way," (continued the young 
leader) " 'tis a private one, between the lower 
and upper court ; a short cut, though an ugly 
one. It saves exposure, however, to night air. 
Stay, Sir, here are three steps — give me your 
hand — one, two, three — and now on, and step 
boldly." 

The prisoner, with a feeling of extreme pro- 
vocation, Literally obeyed his finical guide, gave 
his hand, and '' stepped on boldly;" when sud- 
denly, and with a movement not unobserved, 
he involuntarily removed his cap ; for by some 
illusion of the senses, some dream of the fancy. 



48 THE O'BRIENS AXD 

he was struck by the odd conviction, that the 
ungloved hand that led him — 

'* to whose soft seizure, 

The cygnet's down was harsh," 

was — a woman's ! 

" You had better not uncover your head," 
said the officer, looking over his shoulder, as a 
gleam of light, from the further extremity of 
the passage, discovered the act. 

" I did so upon instinct," said the prisoner, 
laughingly, '* I was scarcely conscious that T 
did it at all." 

" It must have been a strange instinct; to 
what conclusion did it lead you ?" 

" For an instant, that I was in a woman's 
presence." 

" Well, stand not upon the gallantry of your 
instinct, but resume your cap ; for these passages 
are damp. Curse these boots ; I wish the fellow 
that made them was wedged into one of them, 
up to his neck — they must have been made on 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 49 

the last of the Irish giant. I beg your pardon 
for a moment, pray hold my spur,'' — and he 
paused to arrange the " cursed boot," which he 
had hitherto evidently dragged after him with 
difficulty. " And so (he continued, in his lisping 
tone) you have had the romance to turn this 
no very pleasant event, of being brought up for 
midnight examination, into — a honne fortune .^" 

*' A bonne Jbr tune,'' repeated the prisoner 
angrily, and feeling his cheek tingle with a 
sudden blush at the coxcombical supposition. 

" Aye, to be sure,"" replied the officer, still 
fiddling with his boot, " for if you could think 
that a lady led you along these mysterious 
passages, at this witching time of night, it 
follows of course," 

" No, Sir," (interrupted the prisoner petu- 
lantly), " I thought nothing about the matter. 
The fact is, I am not yet half awake. I was 
taken by surprise out of a deep sleep ; a soft 
voice and a soft hand did the rest, and led to 
the absurd idea." 

VOL. II. D 



50 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" Not SO absurd neither," (said the officer). 
*' This castle is a frolicsome place; and wo- 
men, who keep grown gentlemen at arm's- 
length, do sometimes interest themselves for us 
boys." 

" Because it is for us boys only, they can do 
so with impunity," was the reply. 

" Humph ! not always, we flatter ourselves," 
said the officer conceitedly, taking back his 
«pur and moving on. " It sometimes happens 
our spirits are too bold for our years." 

" Say rather," said the prisoner laughing, 
" that our years are too few for our spirits/' 

" You may uncover your head now, if you 
will," (observed the officer, passing through a 
little grated door, through which the faint light 
had hitherto proceeded), " for now you are on 
holy ground." 

The officer paused ; and the prisoner per- 
ceived with surprise, that they stood in the 
centre of an ancient chapel, doubly, but dimly 
lighted by the waning moon, which streamed 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 51 

through its gothic casements of painted glass in 
many vivid lines, borrowed from the robe of 
St. Patrick, or the girdle of St. Bridget,— and 
by the flickering red light of a waxen taper, 
in a brazen chandelier, suspended above a little 
gallery, which had the air of a royal tribune in 
a Catholic church. 

" Many a stout heart has quailed here,*' said 
the young officer, with theatrical emphasis; 
" for this chapel communicates with Birming- 
ham Tower, the State Prison. Many an Irish 
rebel, many an O'Neil, an O'Donnel, and an 
O'Brien too, were shriven here, on their way to 
execution : ' arch rebels all, time immemorial, 
they say.' "" 

^' Rebels, indeed !*" exclaimed the prisoner 
with vehemence : " there are still many, I be- 
lieve, in Ireland, who sigh for the return of 
those terrible times, when love of country was 
. a penal crime, and the life of a native Irishman 
had its price, like the head of the Irish wolf; 
but there are still, be it hoped, many who would 
d3 



«.**^ 



vt^ 



5a THE OBRIENS AND 

die a thousand deaths, to prevent their recur- 
rence.*" 

" Let such be silent here," said the young 
officer, in an admonitory tone ; and proceed- 
ing on, they passed through a lateral door, 
under the gallery, — but not before the prisoner 
thought he heard a rush of sounds above, like 
the flutter of birds disturbed into sudden 
flight. He was now much struck by the oddity 
of this manner of being " brought up for exa- 
mination." A doubt, a confusion of ideas, or 
rather of sensations, left him without the power 
of reflection or inference ; and all other functions 
were, for the time, " smothered in surmise." 

" Does your spirit flag ?"" asked the officer, 
as they passed from a matted gallery into a stone 
and vaulted passage, in utter darkness, save 
from a distant flash which gleamed at its further 
extremity. 

" Not a jot," was the careless reply. " Come 
what come may, I am prepared." 

" Give me a pr6of of your presence of mind," 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 5S 

said the officer, turning short round to his 
prisoner. 

" Wliat proof do you ask ?" was the laughing 
reply. 

" Quote me a line instantly from any au- 
thor, in any language, no matter what ; but be 
quick." 

*• * Di raia sciochezza tosto fui pentito, 
Ma troppo mi trovai lungo dal lito,' " 

rephed the now almost amused, and thoroughly 
awakened prisoner. 

" Oh ! you know Italian : where did you 
learn it .?" 

« In Italy.'' 

" In Italy ? but you are an Irishman !'* 

" Soul and body." 

" Humph !" said the interrogator, signifi- 
cantly. " T ant pis pour vous. — You have, at 
least, the Irish qualities of wit and courage : 
but wit and courage, without discretion, will 
not avail, where you are about to appear." 



54 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" I fear I should want both," (said the pri- 
soner, in evident excitement, and again strangely 
puzzled by the oddity of the adventure,) " if 
that which is impossible should be true ; like 
some dogmas in religion." 

" Oh ! you are at your instincts again, are 
you ?" asked the guide archly. 

'^ May I beg to ask you a question ?" was 
the eager reply. 

" I can answer no questions now, Sir," said 
the officer coldly, and quickening his creeping 
pace : " I have already held too much parley 
with a prisoner, though all about nothing at all ; 
and nothing can come of nothing. So now, 
follow, and be silent.'' 

As he spoke, they issued from the stone pas- 
sage, into a spacious, handsome, and architec- 
tural vestibule. Its roof was supported by 
massive pillars ; and its marble pavement was 
heavily paced by sentinels, who carried arms to 
the plumed helmet of the officer, as he passed. 

At the moment, when they were about to 



THE o'flahertys. 55 

ascend a broad and noble staircase, which 
branched into two flights at the first landing, 
the state-porter in the outer hall, cried pom- 
pously, " The Lord Chief Justice's chair."" 

*' The Lord Chief Justice is coming down," 
replied the footman, in the same vociferating 
tone, from the corridor above. 

" The Commander of the Forces' carriage 
stops the way," cried the porter, below. 

" The Commander of the Forces is coming 
down," was the answer from above. 

At this solemn announcement of the approach 
of two great officers of state, the guide and 
guard of the prisoner suddenly turned back on 
his steps, beckoning to his charge to follow. 
Tripping lightly back, through the passage they 
had already cleared, he opened a door to the 
left of that matted gallery, through which they 
had issued from the chapel, and silently, but 
with a significant gesture, ascended a flight of 
narrow, ill-lighted, stone steps, terminating at 



56 THE o'bRIENS and 

another door. The door opened, and discovered 
an unexpected vista to the amazed prisoner. It 
was a long corridor, with a stuccoed and orna- 
mented roof, containing many small cupolas ; 
from each of which were pendant massy gilt 
chandeliers, filled with wax-lights. It opened 
on either side by a succession of doors, to dif- 
ferent suites of apartments ; while the intervals 
were filled with sofas of scarlet, on which 
lounged or slept, a numerous train of pages, 
grooms of the chamber, and footmen in gor- 
geous liveries. A door, flung open, at the 
further extremity, discovered an armoury, where 
a group of beef-eaters were gathered round 
the fire. To the right, a foreshortened view 
appeared of the broad stone stairs, with the 
pacing battle-axe; from which the officer had 
turned at the approach of the Chief Jus- 
tice : (an incident which convinced the pri- 
soner, that he was acting under some private 
and secret authority, unknown to the privy- 



THE 0*FLAHERTYS. 57 

counsellors). Beyond all, and terminating the 
perspective, was visible the moon-lighted vast- 
ness of St. Patrick's Hall. 

At about the middle of the corridor, the officer 
paused. A groom of the chamber flew to open a 
door to the right, which as they entered was 
quickly closed after them ; and the parties found 
themselves in a dimly lighted room. A solitary 
wax candle here and there just dispelled the 
utter darkness, and faintly designed the stately 
forms of a throne and canopy, with heavy 
draperies of dark velvet, and a few old pictures 
in cumbrous frames. All was silent and still, 
save a faint burst of merriment, which was 
scarcely caught through the double doors of an 
adjoining apartment; and which was soon over- 
powered by the full tones of a harp. 

The air performed was not unknown to its 
spell-bound auditor ; whose senses responded 
to the mellifluous sounds in most amazed 
sympathy. It was peculiar to that region, 
where he last had heard it ; and was part of 
d3 



M THE O'BRIENS AND 

a celebrated litany, sung in the Santa Chiesa 
di Loretto at Rome, to which the modern audi- 
tory of Europe have since listened with undi- 
minishing rapture.* 

" Where is that music ?" demanded O'Brien, 
eagerly. 

" In the spheres," was the reply. 

Though too confused for conjecture, O'Brien 
was now half inclined not to advance further, till 
he had some explanation with his leader ; who, 
with his hand upon the lock of a double door, 
(within the deep and dark embrasure of which 
he already stood,) beckoned him on. 

" I cannot, Sir," he said : " I will not proceed 
further, till you tell me for what purpose I have 
been brought thus far." 

" A soldier, and afraid !" exclaimed the 
young officer, scoffingly. *' What danger do 
you suspect. Sir .?'' 

• Well known, by Rossini's adoption of it, as the mo- 
tive oiDi tanti palpiti. I give the anecdote as I found it, 
without vouching for its accuracy. 



THE oVlahertys. 59 



" None ; but I fear- 



" What ? Out with it, man !" 

" A ridicule," returned the bewildered pri- 
soner. 

" A ridicule ! a dainty fear truly for the ring- 
leader of a riot, and a prisoner in the Castle of 
Dublin/' 

" You talked of the castle being a froHcsome 
place," said the prisoner, advancing to the door- 
way, and now full of the idea that he was the 
victim of some anti-chamber mystification — per- 
haps in the hands of a mischievous page, or pos- 
sibly in those of the vulgar O' Mealy, who might 
be engaged to shew him up for the amusement 
of his friends, " the people of quality." 

" Why, yes," said the young officer, lowering 
his voice, and beckoning to his charge to advance, 
" so it is a frolicsome place; and I know it 
was even proposed this night to Lady Knock- 
lofty, whose life, by the by, you saved to- 
day " 

" Lady Knocklofty,' said her champion, 



60 THE O'buIEXS AKD 

with emotion, and entering the embrasure to 
catch the words. 

" Stay," said the officer, speaking in a whis- 
per, " close the door behind you, and I'll tell 
you all." 

The prisoner obeyed, and they were for an in- 
stant in utter darkness. The music ceased, and the 
officer, taking his hand, emphatically whispered, 
from the motto of his own colours — " Fais ce 
que doy, arrive que pourra^' — then throwing 
open the second door, drew him quickly for- 
ward, into a blaze of light and beauty, — into the 
presence of the vice-queen, and her merry court. 
A shout of " bravos," received the officer and 
his charge ; and while the latter "stood a statue,^"* 
the former threw aside his helm and cloak, and 
knocking off the '^^ cursed boots," from the 
silken shppered feet they had encumbered, dis- 
covered the imposing and splendid figure of 
Albina Countess Knocklofty. 



THE o''fLAHERTYS 61 



CHAPTER II 



THE FROLIC 



Avea in ogni sua parte iin laccio teso, 
O parli, o rida, o canti, o passo mova, 
Ne maraviglio e se Ruggier n' e preso, 
Poi die tanto benigna ss la truva. 
Quel cli6 di lei gia avea dal mirto iuteao 
Com' e peifida e ria, pooo gli giova. 
Che inganno o tradimento non gli e avvisu, 
Che possa star con si soave riso. 

Orl. Fur. vii. 16, 



" There,"' said Lady Knocklofty, throwing 
ofF her ponderous helmet, shaking out her ruffled 
drapery of soufflet gauze, (which the cloak of 
Captain O'Mealy, borrowed for her disguise, 
had crushed,) and resuming her turban a la 
Roxalane — " There, good folks, give me your 
applause, for I have won it hard and well." 

'* I fear we must give you more than that," 
said Lady Honoria peevishly, *' if you hold us 
to the letter of our foolish bets." 



68 THE o'briens and 

" Hold you ! to be sure I shall, my dear," 
returned Lady Knocklofty, in the greatest pos- 
sible excitement, and evidently concealing some 
flutter of feeling, under an affected eagerness 
about her bets. " I have done my part ; — now 
for yours. Duchess, my diamonds ; Kilcolman, 
your cool hundred; Freddy Fitz John, your 
ten to one ; Lady Honoria, name your night 
for the sally-km and raking pot of tea, after the 
play ! A good let off, let me tell you, dear ; so 
no grumbling." 

" I rise to explain," said Lady Honoria, 
affecting humour, to cover out her real annoy- 
ance ; for she had taken up some by-bets on the 
non-performance of Lady Knocklofty''s froHc, 
which were not as easily paid off, as the sally- 
lun, and its raking accompaniment — " I be- 
lieve. Lady Knocklofty, that the bets stood 
thus " 

" My dear Honoria," said Lady Knocklofty, 
laughing violently, and speaking vehemently, 
" all your wit won't save your tea-pot. ' Till 



THE o'flahertys. 63 

thou can'st rail my seal from off my bond,' '' 
she added, theatrically, " ' thou but offendest 
thy lungs to speak.' " 

" The betting-book will decide all," said the 
Honourable Freddy Fitz John, (a pretty little 
sucking secretary ,) who, pert and priggish, passed 
the precocity of a smart school-boy, as the 
earnest of future talents he was destined never 
to exhibit ; and who, as a considerable loser in 
the betting speculations of the evening, was 
mentally applying his " Giles-Gingerbread" 
diplomacy to the raising supplies for the liqui- 
dation of his " losses." 

" The betting-book, the betting- book,'* called 
out the comptroller of the household, (over 
which he held no controul). 

" The book, the book," re-echoed the Ho- 
nourable and Reverend the Dean of the Chapel, 
(the first of his Excellency's thirty chaplains,) 
who had just joined the party from the dining- 
room, full of the spirit, and without the grace 
to check an hiccup as he called for " the book," — 



64i THE o'bRIENS and 

which might have been the Talmud or the 
Alcoran, Joe Miller or Jonathan Wild, for all 
he knew to the contrary. 

The '' compte rendu'' of the aid-de-^camp's 
room was immediately produced ; and one of the 
gentlemen in ordinary read out as follows from 
its pages : — 

'' The Countess Knocklofty having, at the 
game of magical music, forfeited her diamond 
necklace, engages to redeem it by the perform- 
ance of the following feat, viz., she will release 
the prisoner brought this evening to the guard- 
house, in the lower castle-yard, by Captain 
O'Mealy, and produce him in the presence of 
her Excellency the Duchess of Belvoir, before 
the clock strikes twelve. 

*' N. B. It is understood, as stated by the 
Captain of the guard, that the prisoner in 
question must be a gentleman, namely, the 
Honourable Murrogh O'Brien, son of Lord 
Arranmore, and the same who distinguished 
himself as the leader of the Volunteer corps of 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 65 

the Irish brigade this day, in the sham fight 
at the Phoenix park ; and therefore presentable 
in the society of Her Grace the Duchess of 
Belvoir." 

A long list of bets followed, for and against 
the possible performance of this enterprize ; 
made according to the confidence of the several 
betters in the ways and means, headlong temper, 
and dauntless and romantic spirit of the chief 
actress in this frolicsome drama. 

All eyes were now turned on him, who was 
recognized as the hero of the day ; and whose 
captivity had thus so pleasantly been cut short. 
There he was, and consequently, the conditions 
being performed, there was no more to be said 
on the subject. Those who could pay their 
debts of honour on demand, paid them ; and 
those who could not, pledged their honour to do 
so when they could. 

" There !" said Lady Knocklofty, sweeping 
her winnings into her handkerchief, and still 
laying the agitation of her manner to the ac- 



66 THE o'briens and 

count of her cupidity. " There ! I flatter my- 
self this is fairly won, and daringly earned; 
for what woman dare do, I have done." 

'^ Which is the short way for a woman to be 
undone," said Lady Knocklofty's dear friend, 
Lady Honoria, to Lady Knocklofty's grateful 
protegee, the Honourable Catherine Macguire. 
Between these ladies there existed a confidence, 
if not a friendship, which had insensibly grown 
out of similar tastes and humours — a sense of 
the ridiculous — and that talent for ridicule 
which is so often found unallied with any other. 

To the axiom of her ally, as applied to her 
protectress. Miss Macguire acceded, with one 
of those comical grimaces, which constituted 
a leading trait in her list of amusing abilities; 
and she added, '' You know, of course, how this 
was done ?" 

'•' Not by a coup de baguette ^^"^ repHed Lady 
Honoria. " She has had an audience, I take 
it ; and the Eccellenza has yielded to ' her most 
petitionary vehemence,' and given her an order 



THE oVlahertys. 67 

for the prisoner's release. Under the double 
influence of beauty and of Burgundy, the poor 
dear Duke would give away the whole kingdom, 
if there were any one fool enough to accept it." 
*' Exactly," said Miss Macguire ; and pursing 
up her comical mouth, she hummed in her 
friend's ear, from the fashionable burletta of the 
" Golden Pippin,^' 

" Jovey, my soul ! 

What does it say ? 
Fire the north-pole — 

Jove's your valet !" 

" Exactly," said Lady Honoria, laughing. 

" But now," said Miss Macguire, " that she 
has got that handsome, stupified creature here, 
what will she do with him ?" 

" You do not know, then, that he is the 
engouement, the Prince Lee Boo of the moment ?'' 

" EnfTouement I yes, perhaps ; but here ! and 
the Lord Lieutenant, the cavaliere pagante of 
the day !" 



68 THE o'beiens and 

" Well ; this handsome, stupified creature 
will be the cavaliere pagato^ comme de raison^'' 
replied Lady Honoria ; and both the ladies 
laughed loudly, but prettily ; as ladies of fashion 
only know how to laugh, when to laugh is 
notoriously becoming, and the object some par- 
ticularly dear friend. 

Meantime, the " handsome, stupified crea- 
ture," the Astolfo of the adventure, had passed 
the short interval in a confusion of all the 
senses, which extended minutes to months, and 
gave to something less than half a quarter of an 
hour the importance of a century. Stunned, 
dazzled, abashed in the first instance ; indignant, 
irritated, and perplexed in the next ; gazed at 
by many, noticed by none, (not even by 
0"'Mealy, whose broad, vulgar face was notable 
over the shoulders of more elegant, though less 
' lofty spectators,) knowing not how to retreat, nor 
how to advance without making a scene, or giving 
prise to a ridicule, he still stood where his fair 
and false guide had left him. He leaned against 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 69 

the projecting wood-work of a window near the 
door by which he had entered ; and was half 
involved in its crimson draperies, with an effect 
which rendered his person a picture. He 
still wore his black gown half drawn over his 
dark uniform ; and his fine head, lighted by a 
chandelier, came out in strong relief, and har- 
monized with the rich hues of the well draped 
back ground. 

The audible reading of the betting book had 
put him in full possession of the nature of the 
embroglio in which he was involved ; and though 
there was clearly more of idle frolic than of 
premeditated insult in the part allotted him, 
still the conviction neither diminished his awk- 
wardness, nor dissipated his perplexity. The 
dim, mysterious avenues he had passed ; the soft 
hand that had guided him — that sudden burst 
of light and loveliness that had succeeded to 
darkness and solitude — the brilliancy of the 
drawing-room, and the persons by whom it was 



70 

occupied, and by whom he was surrounded, all 
alike confounded and bewildered him. That 
he was then occupying a spot, in what he had 
deemed the den of political corruption ; that he 
was surrounded by those who drew their very 
existence from the misery of his country (that 
country he would die to serve or save) ; that he 
stood confounded with those against whose sys- 
tem of aggression he had registered a protest, 
solemn and sincere as the patriot's last sigh on 
the scaffold of his martyrdom ; that he was the 
laugh, perhaps the scorn of those he scorned, — 
were fancies or convictions, rendered insupport- 
able by the morbid state of his feelings, and 
the previous depression of his spirits. They left 
him without the power, almost without the will 
to act ; and wholly deprived him of that pre- 
sence of mind, the want or possession of which 
mars or makes a fortune. What might have 
been turned to the account of personal advance- 
ment by those who knew how to make the most 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 71 

of it, was, by one " so green and young in this 
old world,"' only considered as a personal in- 
dignity, or a mark of disrespect. 

In spirit and bearing, O'Brien was a " petit 
Dunois.'''' He had hitherto, during his short 
life, acted as if 

" D'Orlando e di Rinaldo era cugino,'* 

With a temperament all Irish, and a character 
made up of those elements, which in the poetry 
of life form its sublime, but in its prose tend a 
little to the ridiculous, — impetuous and spirited, 
as the genuine Hibernian always is, petulant 
and fierce as a foreign militaire usually affects 
to be, — his natural and national qualities had 
been sharpened rather than subdued by a life 
of early excitement and vicissitude. Too sus- 
ceptible to impressions, as they flattered or mor- 
tified his passions and his pride, he now stood 
in a position the most painfully opposed to all 
that was strongest or weakest in his nature. 
He who had fought his way through half 



72 THE 0'*BRIEN5 AND 

Europe sword in hand, had not now the courage 
to pass through a group of frivolous coxcombs 
of both sexes. He who had desperately led 
more than one forlorn hope, now in the midst 
of gaiety and pleasure, looked the picture of a 
forlorn hope himself. Infinitely more willing to 
be shot, than to be laughed at, he was de- 
voutly wishing himself up to the neck in the 
trenches before Belgrade, where he had already 
distinguished himself, rather than in this en- 
chanted palace of a " possente Alcina^" when the 
possente Alcina herself came forward, 

** Con allegra faccia, 
Cod modi graziosi e reverent!,'^ 

and changed in a moment the whole character 
of his sensations and course of his ideas. 

The Irish Vice Queen, the beautiful Duchess 
of Belvoir, had hitherto stood in the centre of 
a group, the members of which, with the true 
effrontery of fashion — that affects no feeling, 
and knows no restraint — as coolly and delibe- 



THE o'flahertys. 73 

rately were pointing their glasses and their 
glances at the victim of their supercilious no- 
tice, as* philosophy directs its microscope at the 
insect it studies. But now, supported on either 
side by Lady Knocklofty and the old Earl of 
Muckross (the latter, par parenthese^ a dried 
specimen of a genus now almost extiact, the 
travelled Irish nobleman of the old school), she 
advanced in the direction where O'Brien stood, 
who retreated " deeper and deeper still,"" within 
the recess of the window. With her beautiful 
eyes fixed smilingly upon him, she said, in a 
good-natured and half audible whisper, " Speak 
to him. Lady Knocklofty ; the frolic, you know, 
was your own." 

" Mine, dearest duchess ? It was every one's 
frolic. But, come, I have had the glory, and 
will perform the duties arising from it, — -even 
that of asking Mr. O'Brien's pardon for the 
liberty I have taken with him." 

O'Brien bowed, as men only bow who have 
learned to bow abroad ; and blushed, as men only 

VOL. II. E 



74 THE o'briexs axd 

blush to whom the world is still new. His bovr 
and his blush had their due effect ; and were 
received at their full value. 

"■ I am sure," continued Lady Knocklofty, 
" he will forgive the means, for the sake of the 
result, if }'our Grace will permit me to present 
him to you.*" 

" I desire particularly to make the acquaint- 
ance of Mr. O'Brien," said the Duchess, with 
her bland smile and tone ^ '' and to offer my 
apology at the same time. For though not a 
party concerned in the frolic, yet, as consenting 
thereunto, I believe I should come in for part 
of the blame." 

Lady Knocklofty then, with the manner of a 
master of the ceremonies, said, "Duchess, in 
the absence of Sir Phelim O' Kelly, I will pre- 
sume to do the honours, and present to your 
Grace the Honourable Murrogh O'Brien.'* 

0''Brien again bowed, and the old Lord 
Muckross, with an air between that of Lord 
Herbert of Cherbury, and Sir Lucius O'Trig-. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 75 

ger, requested his introduction also of the 
" Camerara Mayor ^" as he termed Lady 
KnockJofty, and complimented the victor of the 
Star Fort on his military skill ; adding, " that he 
hoped his laurels, won in the morning, would 
not be tarnished by the adventures of the night ; 
for that the saviour of Lady Knocklofty 
could not fail to be an object of interest to all 
who had the honour of knowing her ladyship." 

*' It was a gallant rescue,'' said the Duchess. 
" 1 saw it all, and for a moment it struck me 
that your life was more in danger, than that of 
the object of your protection. How can you, 
my dear Lady K., drive such horses .? T am 
not a timid whip ; yet I would not trust myself 
to your greys, within sound of a cannon shot 
— no, ' not for a wilderness of monkeys.' " 

"Except," interrupted Lady Knocklofty, 
throwing down her eyes, with a peculiar expres- 
sion, " you had some preux chevalier near, to 
come to the rescue. Alors le jeu vaut hien la 
chandelle.'^ 

e2 



76 THE O'BRIENS AND 

"Aye," said Lord Muckross, "there it is. 
What is death to others, is sport to you tyrants. 
There is not on earth a more pitiless savage than 
a beautiful woman ; and whether — 

* Her hero perish, or her sparrow fell,' 

c'cst egal, provided she shews her power." 

" Vous parlez avec connoissance de caitse" 
said the Duchess, tapping him with her fan. 

" I have seen service," replied his lordship, 
taking snuff, conceitedly : " they alone jest at 
scars, who never felt a wound." 

" Mr. O'Brien, you do not seem to have es- 
caped unhurt from the field, to judge by the 
mark on your brow. I hope it was not in my 
service.?'' said Lady Knocklofty, fixing her eyes 
on the black patch, which rather became than 
disfigured the wearer. 

" I wish it had been. Madam," replied 
O'Brien, confusedly. " It is, however, so 
slight a scratch, that I am quite ignorant how 
or where I came by it.*" 



THE o'FLAHERTys. 77 

"I hear," said the Duchess, "that Lord 
Charles Fitzcharles has got into the same scrape 
that has brought you, Mr-O'Erien, into the ' dur- 
ance vile ' of our strong hold ; and to which, by 
the by, your deliverer. Lady Knocklofty, must 
soon yield you up. For you must not be found 
here by the big wigs," she added, laughingly, 
"who all dine with the Lord-Lieutenant to- 
day." 

" Oh, I'll send him back in due time, under 
the care of the Captain of the guard," said Lady 
Knocklofty; "but, dear Duchess, as one good 
turn desers^es another, pray present me to Mr. 
O'Brien, for he cannot, upon instinct, know 
who I am." And she laid an emphasis on the 
word, that brought a rush of odd recollections 
to the mind of O'Brien, which tingled in every 
fibre. 

" Oh, my dear," said Lady Honoria, who, 
with the rest of the exclusives, had now gathered 
round the party, " we all take it for granted, 
that you and Mr. O'Brien made your acquaint 



78 THE o'briens and 

ance in your journey through those long pas- 
sages, which do not always ' lead to nothing.'''^ 

" No, upon my honour," said Lady Knock- 
lofty, vehemently, " Mr. O'Brien never dis- 
covered the disguise ; and took me for an officer 
on duty, till I threw off O'Mealy's cloak and 
cap in this very room. I appeal to you, Mr. 
O'Brien." 

" Appeal to him !"' abruptly interrupted Lady 
Honoria, in the same jeering tone. "Why, 
child, on such an occasion, his testimony would 
go for as little as O'Mealy's did, in the cause 
of Miss Juliana O'Gallagher, O'Mealy de- 
fin dan t." 

" Pray, let us have that," said Lord Kilcol- 
man. " Now, Lady Honoria, in your best 
manner. O'Mealy, my boy, come into court — 
Miss O'Gallagher plaintiff." 

O'Mealy came forward, pulling up his stock, 
and roughing out his whiskers, with a look of 
affected bashfulness, that only added to the 
habitual expression of his invincible impudence. 



THE o'flahertys. 79 

" Give your lordship my honour, I have no 
notion of what Lady Honoria is going to tell : 
but I hope she will speer the leedy ; that's all." 

" Now, Lady Honoria," said Lord Kil col- 
man, rubbing his hands — for O'Mealy was his 
butt — " now for it. Silence in Court." 

" Well," said Lady Honoria, " when Coun- 
sellor Cornelius O'Gallagher insisted on know- 
ing the Captain's intintions, in consequence of 
a visit to the barracks of the Royal Irish, paid 
by Miss Juliana, and when he demanded that the 
Captain should pledge his honour that the lady 
was still as well qualified to preside as priestess 
in the Temple of Vesta, as before the aforesaid 
visit ; the Captain then and there replied, 
' Upon my honour, Counsellor Cornelius, your 
sister is as innocent for me, this day, as the child 
unborn : and if she were not, Counsellor, I'd 
swear, upon my honour, to the fact, all the 
same.' '' 

" I don't see the application of the anecdote. 



80 



THE O BRIENS AND 



however well told,'' said Lady Knocklofty, 
coldly and haughtily. 

" Nor I," said the Duchess, endeavouring to 
look grave ; while all the rest of the party 
laughed loudly, on the pretext of Lady Ho- 
noria's admirable imitation of O'Mealy's mincing 
manner and indomitable brogue. Meantime 
O^Mealy, encouraged by being noticed at all, even 
for his absurdities, and now seeing that O'Brien 
had obtained a '^ grand succes,^' shook him by the 
hand, and with the whisper of " I tould you I 
would do the needful for you,"" turned to 
Lady Honoria, exclaiming familiarly, " Upon 
my honour, your Ladyship is too sevaire upon 
me entirely. All that story of Juliana O'Gal- 
lagher had not a spark of foundation ; for at 
that very time when people were talking of my 
seducing the young cratur's affections, and 
carrying her oif to the barracks, I was in fact 
deeply and sariously attached to Miss O' Kelly, 
or at all events to Miss O'Tool." 



THE oVlaHERTYS. 81 

This confession, the result of garrulous vanity 
and inordinate folly, produced a general laugh, 
louder than the first ; and all as^reed that the 
price of O'Mealy was beyond that of rubies. 

With all her wit and humour. Lady Honoria 
was sometimes unpen trop forte for the Duchess. 
Although her Grace had thrown off somewhat of 
the high manner of English ban ton since her ar- 
rival in Ireland, she had not familiarized herself 
with that breadth and freedom of speech which 
distinguished a particular class (and that the 
highest) in Irish society, among whom wit was 
seldom impeded by propriety ; and who, whether 
they " sold a bargain," or told an anecdote, 
did both, with little reference to that bien- 
s6ance, which though coming under the head of 
minor morals, is rarely found separated from 
the great. 

The Duchess did not therefore join in a 

laugh, so coarsely and indelicately raised at the 

ex pence even of a rival ; and without appearing 

to notice the application, she coolly presented 

E 3 



82 THE O'BRIENS AND 

O'Brien to the Countess Knocklofty, as the 
lady whose life his gallantry had probably saved 
in the morning. With a graceful gravity that 
imposed on all, she then took Lady Knocklofty's 
arm; and seating herself on a sofa, motioned 
O'Brien to approach, and (by one of those acts 
of conscious power which dares do all, or of 
female caprice, which does do all,) placed him 
between Lady Knocklofty and herself. 

The effect of this conduct was instantaneous. 
Laughter was hushed into sneers; and sneers 
gradually were subdued into approving smiles. 
Hitherto through all the apparent cordiality of the 
Duchess's manner to her accidental guest, there 
was a by play, directed to the initiated, which 
spoke her subjection to the worthless and the 
worldly, by whom she was environed. A sly 
glance at Lady Honoria, or a significant nod to 
Lord Kilcolman, evinced the necessity of prov- 
ing to the high tribunal of Irish ton that her 
gracious reception was but a mockery, a civil 
mystification, played off on one whom "nobody' 



THE o'flahertys. 83 

knew, and who had been seen " no where.*' 
The few who composed the ohgarchy of fashion 
and of faction in Ireland, were then deemed 
"everybody;" and the whole of space not 
occupied by them, was termed "no where." 
" Le meme propos par le mime jargon^^^ has 
served the purposes of society under all its 
changes and modifications ; and from the swear- 
ing, slanging, drinking Duchesses of Whitehall 
and the Cockpit, to the coarse, petulant Peer- 
esses who presided at Kew, and who hunted 
down " the pretty fellows'' at Hanelagh ; and 
from them to the cold, brusques^ dull dames who 
reign amidst the more decent but less amusing 
coteries of modern fashion, all, in their passing 
supremacy, have condemned to utter insigni- 
ficance the nobodies who were out of their clique, 
and have consigned to obscurity the places which 
were not consecrated by the exhibition of their 
follies, or the display of their power. 

But the Duchess had now pris son parti ; and 
whether her conduct was the result of good 



84 THE o'bRIENS and 

nature, or of female caprice, the object to whom 
it was devoted profited largely by its direction, 
and yielded gradually to its seduction. For 
man, however he may adhere to principles, can- 
not always command sensations ; and if there is 
an age in which the influence of politics and of 
pretty women are at odds, O'Brien was yet 
far from having attained it. He was, indeed, 
a devoted patriot. His love of country partook 
of all that passion which leads men to things, 
deemed great, or desperate, as circumstances 
direct. Life to him was of no value, when its 
sacrifice could promote the great cause of its 
adoption. But if such is the enthusiasm which 
in all causes makes martyrs, 'tis time only that 
makes saints; and the honest, but ardent 
novice, who now sat exposed to such temptations 
as St. Anthony never dreamed of, sighed to 
think how much easier it is to suffer with a Mu- 
tius, than to resist with a Scipio. Convinced 
that the " English interest " was, for once, 
committed to fair hands, he felt, in every fibre? 



THE o'flah5;rtys. 85 

that it was the female, and not the male oli- 
garchy, which could most effectually *'do the 
king's business." 

The society of the vice-regal drawing-room 
was now broken up into groups, and formed 
into petit pelotons. Incipient flirtations were 
forming in the recesses of every window, and 
decided affairs were yawning out their tete-d- 
tetes in every corner. Some of the CorypJicei of 
the Curragh were betting upon their Eclipses 
and their Mrs. Slamakins ; and some histrionics 
of the private theatricals were holding forth on 
the rival merits of Mrs. O'Neil and Mrs. Gar- 
diner.* The intimates, or particular cortege of 
the vice-queen now drew near, and took their 
places, as ease and grace directed, round her, 



* Two beautiful and accomplished leaders of what was 
best and most intellectual in the Irish hon ton of the day. 
The poetical productions of Mrs. O'Neil were as admir- 
able as those of her friend Mrs. Greville. 



86 THE o'bRIENS and 

who, though many among the attendant graces 
were all divine — 

'* Yet still the fairest queen, 
Like Dian 'midst her circling nymphs, appeared." 

The group was picturesque, and with its acces- 
sories of light and shade, of ponderous mirrors, 
and grotesque girandoles, would have painted 
well. From the variety of colour, form, and 
costume, it looked, indeed, like a carnival party 
designed by a Callot or a Canaletti, or like an 
antique masque got up by Ben Jonson, or de- 
scribed by Scott. The epoch alluded to was, 
indeed, a sort of saturnalia of the toilette ; it 
was the only interregnum in the despotism of 
fashion on record, between the final breaking up 
of the old German costume, which came in with 
the English revolution, and the Greek, which 
came in at the French ; -a brief pause, when 
beauty, for once emancipated from the tyranny 



THE o'flahertys. 87 

of ton, pranked herself as she pleased, and never 
looked more beautiful. 

The dress of the Duchess (her favourite 
dress), a hat and corsage of black velvet, with 
diamond loop and cross, and a petticoat of rose- 
coloured satin, full in folds and hue, recalled 
the heroine of the " Merry Wives of Windsor ;'"* 
while Lady Knocklofty (in the same turban and 
caftan, in whicli, a night or two before, she had 
played Roxalana), imaged one of those — 

** Forms 
Which the bright sun of Persia warms." 

Lady Honoria, always original and always 
simple, the glass of fashion, but not its reflector, 
might have passed for a Swiss peasant, the 
Claudine of Florian, or the prirna Ballerina of 
the Italian opera. Miss Macguire, plump and 
pretty, fat, fair, and twenty-five, wanted but 
the cornucopia, to exhibit as the goddess of 
plenty. The Ladies O 'Blarney (the Ducliess's 
inseparables) who had obtained the name of the 



88 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Graces, whom they resembled in number and 
nudity, were draped as if escaping from the 
bath, or ready to plunge into it. Others almost 
as fair, and quite as fantastic, — in large, full- 
feathered hats, and loosely flowing tresses, — 
their zones scarcely bound, and their drapery 
scarcely fastened (even by the precautionary 
pin of Sir Peter Lely), formed the outward 
line of this nucleus of beauties, who all 

" 111 circles as they stood, 
More lovely seemed than wood-nymphs or feign'd 
goddesses." 

The presiding deity, the " pulcherrima illcC 
of Irish jobs, and Irish gallantry, beheld xhe 
arms and back of her sofa, surrounded by the 
manly, handsome representatives of the young 
oligarchy ; while Lord Muckross, the last relic 
of the old, lay at her feet, in the attitude of 
Hamlet's fantastic gallantry, playing with her 
fans, as fans were played with when such occu- 



THE o'fLAHEETYS. 89 

pations had their use and influence ; — when a 
course of flirtation was not a course of science ; — 
and when love, not lecturing, was the end and 
object of the social system of the day. 

Among the devoues who were crowding round 
this queen of hearts, were two young looking 
persons, evidently in the first evening of their 
noviciate at the Irish court. They were both 
distinguished by the inalienable inheritance of 
the Geraldine race, golden hair, full blue 
eye, and a mild benignity of look and smile. 
As they now stood, in the prime of youth- 
ful beauty, there was a contrast between the 
elegant but manly softness of their thorough 
bred air and manner, and the style and bearing 
of the ofiicial hierarchy, the cold hauteur of the 
Proudfort party, or the broad dashing swagger 
of their political followers, and social disciples, 
the Kilcolmans, the Kilmallocks, the Kilmain- 
hams, and " others." 

The elder of these two youths was frequently 



90 THE O'BRIENS AND 

addressed by the Duchess, by the title of Lord 
Walter Fitzwalter; and the latter by that of 
some inherited knighthood of romantic sound, 
and historic reminiscence, whicli bespoke him a 
descendant of that heroic branch of the Geral- 
dine family, the Desmonds. vThey had both 
already taken their stand under the onflamme of 
}:>atriotism ; the one destined to attest the sin- 
cerity of his vocation with his blood, the other 
by the sacrifice of almost all '-^fors Vhonmeur,''' 
Such were the men whom the Machiavelian policy 
of the day endeavoured to lure into the snares 
of power, by baits which rarely fail, but which 
in the present instance did not succeed ; for, if 
the heart sometimes yielded, the principle stood 
firm. 

O'Brien thus encircled, enthralled in " doke 
jyTigione,"" was smiled upon by the three graces, 
interrogated on his adventures of the night by 
Lady Knocklofty (with that anxious maternity 
of manner, the more dangerous because the 
least suspicious), insidiously cross questioned by 



THE O'FLAHEETYS. 91 

Lady Honoria, drawn upon with a flattering 
familiarity by Miss Macguire, (who had pro- 
mised Lord Kilcohnan to '' trot him out"), and 
plied by the Duchess with those courteous com- 
mon places, which princes and their representa- 
tives so well know how to dispense. He replied 
to all with an impassioned bashfulness, and 
with an earnestness and naivete^ the natural 
expression of strong excitement. This was his 
first introduction to the society of British beauty ; 
almost the first to the female society of any 
country. His young life had been divided 
between the ascetic solitude of the wildest part 
of Ireland, the monastic cells of a foreign col- 
lege, and the rude haunts of a foreign camp. 
With his eyes now turned on the naturally 
impassioned countenance of Lady Knocklofty, 
and now fixed on the splendid orbs of^ the 
Duchess, who archly enjoyed his confusion, — 
he answered their multifarious questions '* un- 
willingly, he knew not what." But what- 



92 THE O'BRIENS AND 

ever he did answer, pleased ; and pleased per- 
haps for that very reason : for women ever 
prefer the confusion they excite to the wit they 
inspire. 

' " How well he speaks!" said Lady Knock- 
lofty to Lady Honoria. 

" So did Balaam's ass, when the angel ad- 
dressed him,'* said Lady Honoria ; " and you 
see the Duchess, the irresistible Duchess, has 
already inspired your Cymon." 

This intimation fell, as it was intended, on 
the heart of Lady Knocklofty ; who suddenly 
interrupting one of her Grace's questions, rose 
and said : " Come, Mr. O'Brien, the Duchess 
mtist not make you forget that you are a 
prisoner on parole, that I am responsible for 
your surety, and that Captain CMealy must 
return to his guard, and will conduct you to 
your prison-house." 

" As long," said the Duchess, laughing, " as 
you keep guard on Mr. O'Brien, you know, he 
is safe." 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 93 

" Mr. O'Brien does not, perhaps, feel so," 
said Lord Muckross. 

" When chief meets chief, then comes the 
tug of war," whispered Lady Honoria to Miss 
Macguire, delighted with the struggle for power 
between the rival beauties. 

Lady Knocklofty replied coldly to the 
Duchess's observation, " I believe my guard is 
relieved. But Mr. O'Brien should know that 
the Serjeant waits for him in the yeoman's hall ; 
and he must not be found here, when the Lord 
liieutenant comes out of the dining-room.*' 

" That wont be ere rise of sun," sung forth 
Miss Macguire, a stock witch in Macbeth : " for 
I have observed, when once his Grace passes 
midnight at table, like other spirits, he never 
retires till cock-crow." 

" Then let us have supper," said the 
Duchess ; " and place little Gore, as a vi- 
dette to warn us of the enemy's approach. 
When 'tis time to dismiss our Captain, I'll 
give him his bouquet d'adieu. 



94? THE o'briens and 

" Give it him now then," said Lady Knock- 
lofty, whose temper brooked no controul ; " for 
I must go ; and I will not stir till Mr. O'Brien 
is delivered back to the serjeant of the guard.'"* 

^' Well, do give it to him, Duchess, and 
relieve Lady Knocklofty from her responsi- 
bility," said Lady Honoria significantly, and 
throwing her eyes, with a look, understood by 
the Duchess, on that beautiful bust where 

" Nel bel sen le peregrine rose, 
Giunte ai nativi gigli." 

The Duchess, with more of playfulness than of 
discretion, and more occupied with teasing an 
imperious rival, than in supporting her own 
dignity, actually drew from the bouquet that 
oa-namented her bosom, a rose, and then looked 
and smiled ; but still she paused ! O'Brien's 
eyes followed the movement of her beautiful 
hand ; and his unpractised gallantry, anticipat- 
ing her intention, was almost ready to bend 



THE O'FLAIiRUTYS. 95 

his knee to the ground, to receive the precious 
flower, half held out to him. 

" Fairies use flowers for their charactery. 
You are a happy man, Mr. O'Brien," said Lord 
Muckross ; *' and he cast a reproving look at 
the Duchess ; who, at once recalled to herself 
by the remark, let the flower carelessly fall upon 
the carpet. O'Brien darted forward to seize 
it, but it was already under the foot of Lady 
Knock lofty. 

" Tour de comedie des plus plaisans,'' said 
Lady Honoria, clapping her hands; while the 
Duchess, piqued, and now " every inch a wo- 
man," and not an inch a queen, said, 

" VVelJ, Mr. O'Brien, never mind, you shall 
have a fresher flower, another day ; and it shall 
not be a bouquet d^ adieu /" 

^* Your Grace may console, but cannot com- 
pensate," said the object of this flattering contest, 
almost inarticulate from emotion. " The flower 
with which you intended to honour me, was'* 
— '^ consecrated,*" he was about to say ; but he 



96 



THK O BRIENS AND 



paused. He felt he was saying too much, and 
saying it awkwardly ; and yet he had said 
nothing, nothing that expressed his feelings. 

'' 'Tis sport to you, but death to him," 
whispered Lord Walter in the Duchess's ear, 
in strong sympathy, with feelings fresh and 
ardent as his own. 

" Come," said the Duchess, good humour- 
edly, " sit down, my dear Lady Knockloity, and 
grant a few minutes longer furlough to your 
prisoner : he must take some refreshment 
before he goes. So, Arthur," (turning to the 
youngest aid-de-camp in waiting), " order sup- 
per, and gather up those flowers, which Lord 
Kilcolman has thrown down with his Atlas 
shoulders." 

Arthur flew to execute his lady's commands, 
— to order supper, ere the fulness of time sent 
him to order armies ; and to pick up prostrate 
flowers, ere his destinies sent him to restore 
fallen dynasties. The next moment a door was 
thrown open, en suite with that by which the 



THE- O'FLAHEItTYS. 97 

Countess and her captive had entered, and dis- 
covered the little apartment leading to the round 
room in Birmingham Tower ; which looked like 
" Pomona's bower,*" ornamented with spring 
foliage and aromatic shrubs, and filled with 
tables, which, though not piled with " angel 
food,"' groaned under more substantial fare, and 
were set off with 

" fruits of delicious vines 
With freshest flowers crowned." 

The odour of rots and ragouts, more gracious 
to the exhausted forces of rompers and rattlers, 
than that " shed from love's dewy wings,"" now 
caused an universal desertion from the drawing- 
room. A general rush took place; none standing 
" on the order of their going" — but going " at 
once," with an indifference to forms and eti- 
quettes enough to make the majestic portrait of 
the Duchess of Ormond (which hung over the 
reigning Duchess's head) start from its frame, 

VOL. II. Y 



98 THE O'BRIEIQS AND 

and to faire fremir cVhorreur^ the presiding 
chamberlains of castle ceremonies. A buffet 
was served in the drawing-room, in the centre of 
the Duchesses select circle, with fairy elegance 
and magical celerity. Iced Champagne, and an 
high seasoned Mayence were the principal items 
selected by her Excellency's maitre d^hotel ; 
who, besides being lineally descended from that 
preux of the kitchen, Vatel, had served in the 
petits appartemens of Monceaux ; where luxury 
still raised altars, of which Madame de Genlis 
doubtless never dreamed, amidst the convent 
cells of Belle Chasse. 

At this period, supper was no less the fa- 
vourite meal of the Irish, than it had been of the 
Romans and the French. Conviviality was then 
the predominant quality of their temperament ; 
and the most excitable of all people were most 
excited by that light but stimulating meal, 
over which care in any country rarely holds an 
influence. The quests of her Grace's round table 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 99 

seemed to quaff wit with their wine ; many a hmi 
mot followed many a honne bouche ; 

*' Et Tesprit qui vient du corps. 
En biea mangeant remonte ses ressorts." 

Tokay was recommended. Burgundy was sipped, 
the Champagne circulated rapidly ; and looks as 
sparkling, though not as cold, gave it a zest 
worth all the horaccio in the world. The old 
Irish fashion of kissing the cup, to pass it to the 
rest, was quoted by the young knight of the 
Geraldines, and practised by the fair lady he 
pledged. The old earl repeated his usual 
chanson a boire — 

'* Nous n'avons qu'un tems a vivre 
Amis, passons le gaiement," 

and there was not a dissenting voice to the 

doctrine ; while all, in the full enjoyment of the 

hour, seemed to feel that the present is the mil- 

r2 



100 THE O'BRIENS AND 

lennium of the wise, " et que Vavemr est aux 
fousr 

While the grosser senses were thus engaged, 
that which is most the slave of the imagination 
was fed with the magic of sweet sounds. A 
fine German military band played in an adjoin- 
ing room, those delicious, languid measures, 
(then a novelty in Ireland,) which have since 
had such vogue; — an appropriate accompani- 
ment to the smothered " colloquies divine," 
which say so little and mean so much. It was 
in that tone of voice, so indistinct to all but the 
ear to which alone it is addressed, that Lady 
Knocklofty continued to flatter to intoxication 
the auditor, to whom she addressed herself ; 
who, inspired by the double philtre, poured 
from flasks and eyes, was yielding up the reserve 
of pride and the shyness of inexperience, to 
blandishments, powerful in proportion to their 
novelty. The canon law against grandmothers 
is not so absurd as some may imagine ; and the 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 101 

syren of forty has always a chance against the 
sylph of fifteen, when the object is still of that 
age, when passion is not nice, and when the smile 
that solicits is, under all circumstances, worth 
the frown that repulses. 



102 THE o'bRIEXS and 



CHAPTER III. 

THE FROLIC CONTIXUED. 

Puis dit a I'ane ; " Or conte moi ta vie, 
Et guardes toi bien d'omettre un seul fait ; 
Car si tu faux, je ne te faudrai pas." 
L'ane craigiiant de recevoir puissance 
Repond ainsi. 

While chacu7i avec sa chacune uttered an 
infinite deal of nothings that meant every thing, 
and said every thing that meant nothing, the 
excitement of the scene passed with all, for the 
exuberance of sensibility, or the fervour of wit. 
Every man fancied himself in love, and every 
woman believed it. All in their turn contributed 
to the general festivity, and kindled at the re- 
ciprocal corruscations of gaiety, emitted from eyes 
that sparkled, and lips that smiled. Even per- 
sons, by their calling and maniere d'etre^ the 
most displaced in such revels, partook of the 
tone and spirit of the moment, and sanctioned 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 103 

by their presence the follies which they did not 
personally promote ; while their individual pe- 
culiarities and professional exterior of gravity 
served to promote the fun, which such contrasts 
ever heightens. 

Among the latter class, was the Honour- 
able and Reverend Lady Mary Sullivan, 
more usually called the " good Lady Mary," 
sister of Lord Knocklofty, and the wife of the 
bishop of St. Grellan. Her place, as she de- 
clared, being assigned by Providence " among 
pubhcans and sinners," she yielded with sub- 
mission to its dispensations ; and was as seldom 
absent from the public entertainments, or private 
parties of the castle, as her husband, the bishop, 
was from its levees and audiences. Gifted, how^- 
ever, like the rest of her order, with a restless 
abounding of sanctity, in season and out of 
season, her precepts and her preachments 
yielded ample food for mystification, while they 
awakened an affected respect for her "good- 
ness:" and when she got credit for her intentions 



Ii04! THE o'bRIENS AND 

she did not the less provoke infinite mirth by 
their displaced fervour and sincerity. She now 
sat at the Duchess's petit souper, eating her 
ice with an air of sober self-denial, such as that 
with which Madame de Maintenon fasted on a 
herring, while all around feasted on flesh at the 
merry banquets of the Hotel Scarron. 

Next to Lady Mary stood the very reverend 
the Archdeacon of St. Grellan, soaking a Na- 
ples biscuit in a glass of Tokay ; himself suffi- 
ciently soaked to render the advice of that dear 
friend and patroness nearly unavailable. To her 
urgent entreaties that he should follow the ex- 
ample of the Bisliop, who had retired from the 
dining-table, without appearing in the Duchess's 
circle, he opposed the pertinacity of a fuddled 
man ; and he continued to hold his ground, 
though he could scarcely keep his feet ; and to 
stick to a theme which had enlisted some of the 
most acrimonious passions of his never very pla- 
cable temperament in its discussion. This theme 
was the flushed, fluttered, and highly- excited 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 105 

youth, who, being placed between those to 
whom " all bishops, priests, and deacons" then 
bowed, as " the givers of all good things," had 
become the accidental object of the Archdeacon's 
envy, as he habitually was the natural sub- 
ject of his mahce. For the Reverend Joshua 
Hunks was the son and successor, in the arch- 
deaconry, of the Reverend James Hunks, whose 
title to the estates of Moycullen had been de- 
feated by O'Brien's father, some three-and-twenty 
years before, in favour of the Count O'Flaherty. 

Hovering near, without being invited to join 
the gay and fair party of the Duchess's petit 
convert^ he resembled, in his dusky canonicals, 
a croaking raven among a flock of birds of bril- 
liant song and feather ; and he fixed the victim of 
his meditated attack, (as monkeys and maniacs se- 
lect the objects of their mischievous antipathies,) 
with an obstinacy which the prudent councils of 
the " good Lady Mary," for once, could not 
disturb. Primed with port and persecution, the 
flush of excess burning on his cheek, the power 
f3 



106 THE O'BRIENS AND 

of protestant ascendancy beetling on his brow, 
the consecrated bacchant was a prophetic image 
of the more modern members of his caste, who, 
intolerant at the board as in the pulpit, and in- 
temperate in both, make " sweet religion a living 
fountain of gall," and render society one pro- 
tracted feast of the Lapithae. Full of ire and 
envy, with every irascible passion mounted by 
wine, the Archdeacon had, with difficulty, re- 
strained himself from a formal attack on the lion 
of the night, at the first moment when he harl 
found him engaging the attentions of Lady 
Knocklofty ; and when the Duchess, with the 
etourderie of a great lady, remembering nothing 
that did not directly concern herself, inquired of 
Mr. O'Brien, "if he was not of the illustrious 
house of Inchiquin," the Archdeacon suddenly 
burst forth, and interrupting the answer of the 
person addressed, exclaimed — 

" Lest the young gentleman should be too 
modest to answer for himself, Madam, I can 
answer for him that he is not of the Inchiquin 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 107 

family. He is, I think, the son of a townsman 
of mine, one Terence O'Brien, an attorney, who, 
having first brought himself into note by a 
htigious victory over my father, the late Arch- 
deacon of St. Grellan, in favour of a foreign 
papist, contrived afterwards to ruin himself by 
the pursuit of a dormant title ; for the recovery 
of which he was indebted to the impatience of a 
committee of privilege, to which the king had 
referred him. Worried out with his pretensions, 
contained in volumes of fusty parchments, they, 
some time back, declared him a peer on his 
petition in forma pauperis. Upon which, by 
way of a grateful return, he must needs become 
a relapsed papist. I beheve the young gentleman 
is also nephew to the two Jacobite old ladies, the 
Misses Mac Taaf, who so vehemently opposed 
the Proudforts at the last election, and witli a 
few paltry freeholders nearly turned the scale in 
favour of young Mr. Daly." 

The brutality of this speech, which would not 
have been made in so gross a form, except under 



108 THE o'briens a-j^d 

the influence of inebriety, had its natural effect ; 
it produced disgust towards the reverend chro- 
nicler, in all not prejudiced against O'Brien ; and 
these were principally the women. By putting 
Lady Knocklofty in the wrong, it put her in a 
rage, not the less violent for being necessarily 
suppressed ; and by clouding the gaiety of the 
moment, it annoyed the Duchess, and almost 
tempted her to desire the page in waiting to 
order the archdeacon's carriage ; since, like all 
the great, her Grace could suddenly draw up, 
and dash down obtrusive presumption, with the 
same hand that had capriciously caressed it into 
its perilous familiarity. But O'Brien instantly 
and exclusively fixed her attention on himself, 
by coolly observing to her inquiries, (while the 
expression of his countenance spoke the struggle 
of indignant feeling, and the effort he made 
upon himself) — 

" I am much flattered by your Grace''s in- 
quiries, and as I could ' but little grace my tale 
in speaking of myself,' as the archdeacon has 



THE o'flaKERtvs. 109 

observed, I am much obliged by his anticipating 
the httle I could say. I am, indeed, Madam, 
the son of the poorest peer in the realm, whose 
misfortunes are involved in those of his country ; 
and who, in early life, persecuted into apostacy 
by that gentleman's family, has lately redeemed 
an involuntary error, by abjuring it. Of the 
anecdote he has related of my two female re- 
lations, I was ignorant ; but I rejoice to learn 
that they have had the moral courage to oppose 
power in its strong hold, to assert the elective 
franchise, and permit their tenants to vote as 
conscience dictates. For the rest. Madam, I 
have no occasion to blush for a family, whose 
hereditary rank sanctions the condescension 
which places me in the enviable position I now 
occupy ; and whose poverty is at least a proof of 
the uncompromising honesty which has accom- 
panied a title that never was bought or sold." 

*' Bravo! Mr. O'Brien," said the Duchess, 
who, with every woman in the room, was, for 
the moment, a partizan of the frank and spirited 



110 THE O'BRIENS AND 

speaker—" Bravo ! I will take my iced sherbet 
to your Champagne. Will you, Lady Knock- 
lofty, like a generous enemy, be de la partie F" 

^' With all my heart," said Lady Knocklofty, 
gaily ; and both ladies, laughing and nodding, 
touched their glasses with that of O'Brien ; while 
the rest of the fair guests bowed, and sipped, and 
smiled at one, " who, rich in title, if not in 
wealth," had been endowed by nature with grace, 
spirit, eloquence, and beauty,— qualities which 
never fall unacknowledged upon female appre- 
hensions. 

From these, however, were to be excepted the 
Lady Honoria and Miss Macguire: the latter had 
views on Lord Kilcolman, which an obvious 
admiration of the hero of the evening might not 
promote ; and the former, on the arrangements of 
the house of Proudfort, which the prepossession 
of Lady Knocklofty, if carried beyond a mere 
gout passager, would considerably discomfit. 
Meantime, the dean sat cowering and glouring 
by the side of Lady Mary's chair, like an ill- 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. Ill 

omen'd bird of prey, disappointed in his aim, 
and waiting for another pounce. 

" I suspect, Mr. O'Brien," said Lord Muck- 
ross, who fancied he saw in the spirited youth 
'' un matador cle sa jeunesse^'" "that notwith- 
standing your very Irish name and birth, your 
education has been foreign, and '' 

" Oh ! that is obvious from his bow," inter- 
rupted Lady Honoria, in her wonted tone of 
irony, " which bow, by the bye, I remarked at 
the review to-day. You mere Irish may smile 
as you will, but there is an air acquired by 
foreign education, which not all the dancing- 
masters in Ireland, from dear Fontaine, ' avec 
ses graces^ to Paddy Elanaghan, with his ' dance 
up to the griddle, and down to the broom,' can 
neither give nor take away. You have lived 
much in other and better worlds than this, our 
ultima Thule^ Mr. O'Brien," added Lady Ho- 
noria, with a significant look at Lord Kilcol- 
man, and a knot of kindred spirits of which he 
was the centre and the soul. 



ll'^ 



With the sensitive apprehension of a morbid 
pride, always on the qui vive, because always 
at odds with fortune, O'Brien had intercepted 
this look ; and now suspecting himself the butt 
of the foolish and fashionable practice of hoax- 
ing (the quizzing of that day), he took his 
position of defence, and with lance in guard, 
was ready to meet the assault with at least as 
much force, if not with as much coolness as it 
was made. He replied therefore, drily, 

" I have served abroad. Madam." 

" Mass," whispered Miss Macguire to Lord 
Kilcolman, who answered in his Munster 
brogue — 

'* I'll ingage ! I wonder what the devil 
Lady Knocklofty and the Duchess see in the 
fellow, to make such a fuss about him ?" 

" Oh ! he is very handsome," said Miss 
Macguire. "• Lady Knocklofty says he has 
quite a Roman head." 

" Roman catholic, I suppose she manes," 
said Lord Kilcolman, laughing at his own wit, 



THK O'FLAHERTYS. Il3 

and unmindful of Miss Macguire's precaution- 
ary hint of *' Hush, for gracious sake, Lord 
K. ; if you don't take care, we shall all be pro- 
perly unpopular. You had better go with the 
stream ?"" 

" If I do I'll be d d !" said his Lord- 
ship. " Upon my honour and soul, I never saw 
such a coxcomb in my life.'"* 

" Do you mean,"" said Lord Muckross to 
O'Brien, " by having served abroad, that you 
have borne a commission in some foreign 
army .?" 

" I mean, my Lord,"" said O'Brien, now sus- 
picious of every question, and irritated by the 
look and laugh of Miss Macguire and Lord 
Kilcolman, " I mean that I have served abroad 
as other mercenaries have served at home ; and 
have been driven by necessity to turn that into 
a trade, which ought to be a profession — fighting 
for any cause, good or bad, that I was hired to 
defend. I have been for some years in the Aus- 
trian army — " 



114l THE O'BRIENS AND 

Lord Muckross drew up, and bridled like 
one of Richardson's "charmers." There was 
something revolutionary in this answer, some- 
thing of the new democratic school, that touched 
his aristocracy to the quick, and diminished 
his prepossession in favour of the imprudent 
speaker. 

" Your definition is a singular one, Sir," said 
an old Colonel of the battle-axe, whose service had 
been confined to the castle yard ; " and allow 
me to say, as one who has borne His Majesty's 
commission for thirty years, that ii it be a trade 
to serve one's king and country, hired or not, 
it is a glorious one." 

" It has not been my good fortune to be per- 
mitted to serve either. Sir," said O'Brien. 
" In the late war I should have fought against 
the interest and honour of both ; and I rejoice 
that I was then too young to bear arms in a 
contest, which lost England the best of her 
colonies abroad, and exposed the weakness of 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 115 

the councils which too long had governed her 
at home." 

" Oufr exclaimed Lady Honoria, " and 
this within two steps of Birmingham tower !" 

Every one looked astonished at the utterance 
of a speech, to say the least of it, so impudent and 
misplaced ; while the divine chuckled, rubbed 
his hands, and whispered something in the ear 
of the good Lady Mary, who in reply added — 
'* Ay, and atheistical too." Even the good 
humoured Duchess looked displeased ; and Lady 
Knocklofty, rousing a little page, who lay half 
asleep on a pile of cushions behind her, said, 

" Goj my dear, into the supper-room, and 
tell Captain O'Mealy, that Mr. O'Brien is ready 
to attend him to the guard-house whenever he 
pleases." 

The sleepy page toddled off, rubbing his eyes, 
and told O'Mealy that he might return to the 
guard-room whenever he pleased. Captain 
O'Mealy, however, did not please to return till 



116 THE O'BRIENS AND 

he had finished a tumbler of punch royal, in 
which he was joined by his friend, Sir Phehm 
O'Flyn. 

" If you have served in the Emperor of 
Austria's array," continued Lord Muckross, 
*' which, for one so young, is a singular event, 
and for a student of Trinity College, I believe, 
an unprecedented circumstance, you proba- 
bly have seen my old friend the Marechal 
Lacy, and can give me some account of him ; 
and of that Prince of wits and preux^ the charm- 
ing Prince de Ligne, the boon companion of 
some of my gayest days, aye, and nights too."" 

" I carried the colours of the Prince's regi- 
ment under the walls of Oczakow,"'"' said O'Brien 
eagerly, "and had the honour of serving as his aid- 
de-camp in the last campaign. To the Marechal 
Lacy I have the honour to be related, and the 
happiness of being obliged. I owed to his pro- 
tection my rapid rise in a service, where all goes 
by privilege and influence. They were both 
well, when I left Germany ; the one ' le Doyen 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. Il7 

des Herosdu siecle,' the other the model and in- 
spiration of all the young military, for whom lie 
has done so much, both by precept and example." 
" I am enchanted to hear it," said the old 
Earl, warming to the reflection of his early 
reminiscences : for he had been the Adonis 
of Maria Theresa's Court ; and the imperial 
prude had even given hira the name of Le bel 
Irlandois, with a snuff-box, which he now 
proudly produced, exhibiting her formal fea- 
tures and powdered toupee, ornamented with a 
sky-blue ribbon, and a rose on her expanded 
bosom, as full and faded as her cheek. He 
continued, in a tone of great exhilaration, " Alt ! 
c'etoient des beaux jours V 

'« What an old twaddle !" said Lady Ellen 
O'Blarney, passing the box to Miss Mac- 
guire. 

" Twaddle ! She was beautiful I'** exclaimed 
Lord Muckross. " Beautiful, as she was clever. 
Your Emperor, Mr. OBrien, was a great man, 
but not so great a man as his mother.'* 



118 THE o'bRIEXS AXD 

A general laugh succeeded this observation. 
Lord Muckross pleaded his privilege. 

" I should have said, not so great a sovereign 
as his mother." 

" There are many in the present day, my 
lord," said O'Brien, " of a different opinion." 

'' Yes, the French democrats," said his Lord- 
ship, with whom O'Brien again lost ground, 
" who expect that the emperor will some day 
lay down his sceptre, like his great ancestor, 
and joining their convention, exchange his iron 
crown for a bonnet rouge,'''' 

" The emperor himself, my lord," said O'Brien, 
" has encouraged no such expectations ; for 
though less foolish than many of his royal con- 
temporaries, he has frankly declared, ' son metier 
a lui est d^etre roV Opposed, as he is, to the 
dull race of Hapsburg, laugh as he may at the 
follies of his aulic council, and disposed as he 
has been to partial reforms in the barbarous in- 
stitutions of his Gothic government, he is at 
best but an happy accident in a bad system. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS, 119 

whose defects he may ameliorate, but will never 
remove." 

" The government of Austria," said Lord 
Muckross, " is at least as good, as the wretched 
people for whom it exists deserve. But, I sus- 
pect, Mr. O'Brien, that you have hved more in 
France than in Germany, from the colour of 
your opinions ; for these are not the doctrines of 
the mlons of Vienna." 

'' I have only visited France, my lord, for a 
few months in my iray home," was the reply ; 
" and only remained there as the guest of a dear 
old friend and former preceptor, the now cele- 
brated Bishop of — — , one of the constitutional 
clergy of France.'' 

" You must have seen some hot work,'' said 
the Earl, " during your service in the Austrian 
army. Your emperor did not let the swords of 
his troops rest in their scabbards. He was, how- 
ever, sometimes more prompt, than prudent. 
The Turks beat you back pas a pas, in spite 



120 THE O'BRIENS AND 

of the united arms of Potemkin and Saxe Co- 
bourg, at one time^" 

" I had not the mortification of witnessing the 
defeat you allude to — I was then with my regi- 
ment at Florence. But it was my good luck, 
shortly after, to join the grand army, under 
Marshal Loudhon, at Belgrade, and to see the 
power of the barbarous masters of the Greeks 
crumble before a force at least one degree less 
barbarous than themselves." 

" Are you a disciple of the Greek cause ?'' 
asked Lord Walter eagerly; who had listened 
with much attention and interest, to the im- 
prudent but emphatic answers of one, whose 
ardour he shared, but whose misplaced frank- 
ness he regretted. 

" I am fanatically so, my Lord," answered 
O'Brien, smiling. 

" I wonder you do not volunteer your service 
to the Great Catherine,'' said Lord Muckross, 
archly; " you are quite in her line." 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 121 

" I have no great confidence in her inten- 
tions ;'■* said O'Brien. " A Russian autocrat 
may plan the erection of a throne on the borders 
of the Euxine ; but the partitioner of Poland, 
can never advance the cause of freedom and 
justice, nor the mistress of a nation of slaves, 
give liberty to other nations." 

" Liberty and equality for ever !" muttered 
Lord Kilcolman. 

" French atheism and philosophy," whispered 
the Archdeacon to Lady Mary. 

'' If you take the Greek cause out of the 
hands of Russia," said Lord Walter, " I fear 
you leave it hopeless." 

" I should hope not," said O'Brien. " There 
is a nation, which nature points out as the ally 
»f the Greeks, (resembling them in character 
and intellect), — a nation, which now strugghng 
for its own hberty, may one day assist in giving 
back to Greece the rights that called into 
existence her Pericles and her Themistocles, 
her Solons and Lycurguses, — a nation, which 

VOL. II. G 



122 THE o'bRIENS and 

having already annihilated the exclusive and 
pernicious privileges of its own worn out insti- 
tutions, may " 

" France, of course !" nodded Lord Muck- 
ross. O'Brien bowed assent. 

" How eloquent!" whispered Lady Knock- 
lofty to Lady Honoria. 

'' And how discreet,"" replied her Ladyship. 
" How he ' consults in all the genius of the 
place.' " 

'' One may be goaded to say anything, any- 
where," rejoined Lady Knocklofty ; " but it is 
delightful to see any one think so freshly, and 
speak so frankly, and so unlike every thing and 
every body else.*' 

" I am sorry to perceive, Mr. O'Brien,*' said 
Lord Muckross, '' that like many other young 
Irishmen of the present times, whose heads are 
as hot as their hearts, you are infected with 
doctrines of the new revolutionary school ; and 
though it always shews blood, when a young 
steed resents the bit, and kicks at the curb at 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 128 

first starting, yet it is necessary to take care 
that such a spirit does not degenerate into vice."" 

" In this country, my Lord, our spirit has 
been so thoroughly broken, that it is the spur, 
and not the curb, that is wanting. Those who 
have been for centuries under the yoke, and like 
the racers of the Roman corso, are hemmed in 
on all sides, may be trusted without bit or rider. 
It requires but a little hooting and whooping 
to drive them to the desired goal.'' 

" Nothing can save him, my dear," said Lady 
Honoria. " Tete de victime, entendez vous?^^ 

*' I suppose, Sir," said Lord Kilcolman, "you 
have returned here, for the purpose of offering 
your services in reviving that deficient spirit, — 
that spirit which has already produced such 
admirable effects in France." 

" I would do so. Sir, with all my soul," re- 
plied O'Brien, with uncontrollable petulance, 
" if I thought such services as mine could 
become available." 

"Jockey of Norfolk be not too bold !" muttered 
G 2 



124 THE o'briens and 

Lady Honoria ; while Lord Muckro&s, feeling 
for the perilous impetuosity of one so unguarded, 
whom he himself had drawn out, said, good 
naturedly, 

" Come, Mr. CBrien, I will not take advan- 
tage of a fervour kindled., I suppose, in the 
Historical Society of the University, where 
you young orators, I hear, sometimes say very 
eloquent, but very foolish things. I will venture 
to assert now, that you are the Demosthenes of 
that, or of some other debating society, where 
young people overthrow old empires and imagine 
new." 

"The 'Devir in Temple Bar, or the 'Black 
Boar,' in the Strand,*' said Lord Kilcolman, in- 
solently and laughingly. 

" My Lord, I have the honour of being an 
humble member of the society you mention," said 
O'Brien, turning to Lord Muckross ; " a society 
which, so long as it is permitted to exist, 
with Locke for its legislator, and Grattan for 
its model, will, indeed, assist in reviving that 



THE o'flaheriys. 125 

national spirit, and awakening that national elo- 
quence, without which, nations can have no po- 
litical existence, nor any adequate champions of 
their rights. I have also recently been present at 
another assembly, not held at the ' Devils,' or 
the * Black Boar,' but in the Jeu de Paume^ 
at Versailles, consisting of the representatives of 
the greatest nation upon earth. I was present 
when they swore never to separate, till they give 
a constitution to their country, founded upon 
the overthrow of those oligarchical privileges in 
church and state, which had been alike fatal to 
the independence of the king and to the rights 
of tlie people. I v/as present, also, at the de- 
molition of the Bastile, and I cannot help add- 
ing to this confession, the boast of having been 
one of those young men who gave the first couiy 
de hachet to the chains of the portcullis, which 
led to all that followed." 

By the effervescence of his looks and words, 
O'Brien had now so well " pointed his purpose 
to his hearers' hearts," that, with a very few ex- 



126 THE o'briens and 

ceptions, all admired the speaker, even though 
they disapproved the speech . A short silence 
ensued, which was broken by Lord Kilcolman's 
observing, in a half whisper to Lady Honoria, 
" He is come of a good school." 

" To try the bird, the spur must touch his 
blood," said Lord Walter to Lady Knocklofty. 

" Yes," said Lady Knocklofty, " and the bird 
turns out to be a young eagle." 

*' A young goose !" whispered Lady Honoria ; 
" and a goose more likely to betray than to save 
the Capitol, I suspect." 

" Come,'' said the Duchess, no longer amused 
by the conversation, and therefore now fully 
alive to its impropriety, '■' no more politics, 
for patience sake. Miss Macguire, pray sing, 
' Arrah ! will you marry me ;' ' La Marmotte,^ 
or any thing you please ; only sing." 

" Dear Duchess, IVe no more voice, than a 
corncrake," said Miss Macguire. 

"Nonsense! sing when you are bid, Kitty 
Macguire," said Lady Knocklofty, authorita- 



THE o'flahertys. IT! 

lively, and rising to break the circle and to draw 
off others from the quarry which (in the language 
of hawking) she had ruffed, but not cai'ried. 

" I cannot sing without my guitar," said Miss 
Macguire, to whom such imperious commands 
were familiar, as they were unresented. 

*• Do somebody get her a guitar," cried Lady 
Knocklofty, who, in the conscious power of 
greatness, expected to find every thing she 
wanted, every where she wished. 

"Do look for a guitar, Freddy Fitzjohn,*" 
said the Duchess. 

" Where shall I look for it ?" drawled out the 
little secretary, with his mouth full of sugar- 
plums, as in all the dignity of office, he sat 
apart from the group. 

" Look into the back-gammon box," said Lady 
Honoria, gravely. 

" Will this do," said Lady Mary O 'Blarney, 
drawing her fingers over the chords of a beauti- 
ful French harp, which, with its highly orna- 



128 THE O'BRIENS AKD 

merited itui, stood in a remote corner of the 
room. 

Its deep soft tones, even wlien touched by 
unskilful hands, brought to the preoccupied 
mind of O'Brien, a recollection of the air he had 
heard in the throne room. It also recalled to 
the Duchess the performer who had so finely 
played it, unasked and unrewarded. 

'' By the bye, what has become of the harpist. 
Sir James?" she inquired, languidly. 

" She has just slipped off, I believe,"" said the 
chamberlain : "a few minutes back I got her a 
glass of wine and some macaroons ; for she was 
very weary, and perhaps a little mortified at not 
being asked to perform again." 

" Poor thing ! don't fail to send her something 
in the morning — five, or ten guineas, or what- 
ever you think right. She sung that Italian air 
prettily, though she had a very husky voice." 

" Husky !" said Lord Muckross, a professed 
amateur, and presidentof thelrishPhilharmonics. 



THE o'flahertys. 129 

" The very finest contra-alto ! a quality of voice 
which has become extremely rare, even in Italy. 
But you all made such a noise, it was quite 
enough to confound her. Where did you pick 
her up, Duchess ?" 

" Don't remember at all,'' said the Duchess ; 
" so many send petitions to exhibit before ' her 
Excellency, at the castle,' that somehow or other 
I mix them all up together. I thought we were 
to have had the musical glasses, Sir James, or 
the harmonica, or something.'' 

" Mr. Cartwright, Madam, sent an apology 
to say he was ill; so I accepted this Italian 
lady's proposition, whose note I read to your 
Grace at your toilette, on your return from the 
review." 

" Oh, yes ! I remember — that is, I forget 
all about it." 

" It was simply to beg your Grace's patron- 
age, and permission to play at your party 
this evening ; desirous, of course, to be brought 
forward by your Grace's notice. It appears 
g3 



130i 

she is but just arrived in Dublin, and means to 
give concerts. 

" Well," said the Duchess, " we are all 
down, I suppose, for subscriptions ; but send her 
something all the same." 

" I really. Madam, do not know where to 
send to her. There is no address to her note, 
and her messenger waited for his answer." 

" Don't be alarmed," said Lady Honoria, 
" she will not let you forget her. Besides, there 
is her harp in pledge, which will be redeemed 
with ten dozen of tickets, and a request for 
your Grace's name, patronage, and protec- 
tion." 

••' What an odd looking old trot it is," said 
Lady Eleanor O'Blarney, " coming here in a 
coal-box bonnet, and black mode cloak. These 
foreigners are always such odd, ugly creatures ; 
don't you think so, Lord Walter?" 

" Not always," said Lord Walter, laughing. 
" This person, though disfigured by her dress, 
and buried under the shadow of her horrible 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 151 

bonnet and balloon handkerchief, seemed neither 
old nor ugly. Her eyes, when they glanced 
through the short, black curtain which shaded 
them, were most enchantingly fine; but as I could 
not speak Italian, I could make nothing of her."" 
At this moment a little page entering the 
room, cried out in a fluttered voice " the Lord 
Lieutenant f while the aid-de-canip on service, 
throwing open another door, the dinner 
party (those at least who, at an earlier hour 
had not left the table, gone home, or remained 
under it) came forth. They entered the draw- 
inop-room with a burst of noise and lausfh- 
ter, which called from Lady Honoria the 
invocation of " Mirth, admit of your crew !" 
Taking the offered arm of Lord Knocklofty, 
she led him to a sofa, with a vigilant precau- 
tion, of which the president of the privy council 
seemed to stand in need. The Duke mean- 
time hurried joyously, but not very steadily on, 
followed by his merry court ; his eyes sparkling, 
his cheek flushed, and his hair disordered ; and 



132 

beauty and inebriety combining to give to 
his fine person the air of the youthful Bacchus, 
chiselled by a Buonaroti, or painted by an Al- 
bano. It was in vain that his privy council 
endeavoured to look as sober as their calling. 
The keeper of the seals could not keep his legs 
— the attorney-general was served with a noli 
prosequi — the speaker could not articulate a 
syllable — and the King's solicitor suffered judg- 
ment to go by default ; while the chief baron 
(an old stager), rejected the admonition of his 
brother, who was also his register, with " be aisy, 
you omadaun^ ^'''^ and spouted out theatrically — 

** We are state drunkards — 

Who shows a sober eye's a traitor. 

And I arrest him in the name of the Viceroy." 

On the first announce of the Lord Lieu- 
tenant, Lady Knocklofty (who, under the pre- 
tence of examining the harp, had drawn O'Brien 
to the corner of the room), feeling the necessity 
of his instant departure (as his presence would 

* An Irish phrase for a foolish fellow. 



THE o'flahertys. 183 

have been a violation of the articles of her 
treaty with the Duke, and of all the forms of 
bienseance), gently drew him from the room 
into St. Patrick's hall. The spacious amplitude 
was lighted only by a single lamp, placed for 
tlie convenience of the servants, and by the 
silver beams of a bright full moon. Through 
an open door at the furthest extremity of the 
apartment, was visible the long, illuminated vista 
of the corridor, by which they had first entered 
the apartments, with the armoury intervening. 

" There is your route," she said : " I will send 
O' Mealy to join you, if he be not already gone ; 
but," she added, emphatically, " if he be, I 
think, Mr. O'Brien, I may with safety trust to 
your honour." 

" In the present instance. Madam," said 
O'Brien, laughing, " the trust is so trifling, that 
I think you may. But, in any instance, I hope 
you will believe, that one whom you have dis- 
tinguished by your notice, will never prove un- 
worthy of your confidence." 



134 THE o'briexs and 

" Fes," she said, gaily; " but you very 
young men have such odd ideas of honour. 
Besides, you are so indiscreet — so impetu- 
ous. You compromised yourself this evening, 
in a manner which, had you been my son, I 
should indeed have gloried in, but not without 
trembling." 

'' Your son ! Oh, Lady Knocklofty, what an 
incongruous ideal — But would you have your 
brother, or your friend, under such circum- 
stances, speak otherwise, than as truth and feel- 
ing dictated ; or truckle to the insolence of 
arrogant rank, and deny the principles by which 
he is ready to stand or fall ?" 

" All this is very noble and very fine, but 
very imprudent. I cannot, however, stay to 
dispute against qualities I admire ; were I 
to consult my own feelings and sentiments, I 
should not perhaps have you think or speak 
otherwise than you did. Strange as it may 
appear to you, Mr. O'Brien, though obliged by 
circumstances to live with those, whom I but 



THE oVlahertys. 135 

(she added, with a deep sigh, for she had be- 
gun to " enfiler la grande route du sentiment^'') 
" I must bid you good night, or good morn- 
ing. Yet, ere I go, Jet me gratefaliy acknow- 
ledge a debt, the sum of which is nothing less 
than life. I am aware it is not to be cancelled ; 
but this — give me your hand," — (and she placed 
a ring on his finger) — '' this, when you look on 
it, may recal one, whose will to serve you, you 
must never doubt, however feeble her power." 

" Good heavens ! Madam, how can you talk 
thus of a coYnmon act of instinctive humanity !" 
said O'Brien, in confusion, and retaining the 
hand, while he gently rejected the ring it pre- 
sented. " I cannot," he added, " indeed, I 
cannot accept of any thing so valuable, or 
rather so valueless, when compared with words 
so precious as have now fallen from hps 
which " 

" Valueless, indeed," interrupted Lady Knock- 
lofty, scarcely struggling to withdraw her hand. 
" Valueless, but for the sentiment it expresses ; 
for, see," and she held it to the lamp; " it is 



136 THE O'BRIENS AND 

but a single Lough Corrib pearl, set in Irish 
gold. 'Tis the family crest, with the family 
motto round the circle — ' Qui me cherclie, me 
trouve.'' You cannot refuse so Irish an offering 
— you cannot forget so sincere an intimation ;" 
and she again passed the ring on a finger of the 
hand which lay trembling in her own. — " And 
now,"* she continued, " never mind O'Mealy, 
but return to the guard-house, as soon as you 
see a clearance in the battle-axe hall. To- 
morrow must provide for itself! Meanwhile, 
remember, qui me cherche^ me trouve ^ and with 
the smile and air of the Roxalana she personated 
in dress, she suddenly disappeared, closing the 
door, with a violence that extinguished the light 
on the table, and left O'Brien in the vast, cold 
moonlighted hall. 

The freshness of its air was balm, its silence 
was repose ; after the heated atmosphere, and 
noisy and imposing circle he had quitted. In 
the distant vista light and bustle still prevailed. 
Battle-axes, footmen and pages, the uproar of 
announced carriages and chairs, — of servants 



THE o'flahertys. 187 

called for, or lords and ladies " coming dozcriy^ 
afforded an obstacle to O'Brien's immediate, 
unobserved departure, of which he gladly availed 
himself, to remain, for a little while, where he 
was. In a confusion of ideas, more rapid 
in their succession, than " the galloping of 
heaven's wings," he was glad to pause, and to 
tranquillize, if it were possible, the emotions by 
which he was agitated. The little wine he 
had drank (the more exciting to one who had 
hitherto lived " in the darkness of sobriety") 
— the eyes he had gazed on, — the ring whose 
circlet pressed his finger, — the promise that ac- 
companied it, breathing so sweetly on his ear, — 
the resulting exaltation of spirit and confusion 
of thought, all rendered the singular solitude in 
which he was placed, a resource and an enjoy- 
ment. Throwing himself, therefore, along one 
of those red benches,* (to obtain a place upon 
which, such sacrifices have been made of honour, 

* The privileged seats of the peerage, on (he birth- 
night and other court festivities, held in St. Patriok*s hall. 



138 THE o'briens and 

principle, and patriotism), he gave free course 
to that illusory, but delicious, train of reverie, 
which lends to feeling its highest tone, and to 
thought its brightest scintillations. As he lay, 
with his right arm pillowing his head, and his 
eyes turned upward, he unconsciously fixed 
them upon the superb and richly painted 
ceiling; where the sycophancy of the times 
had depicted the regal state of Henry Fitz- 
empress, who is represented receiving the 
homage of the subdued Irish chieftains, as 
they stood, spiritless and crouching, before the 
Majesty of English power. The full and 
cloudless moon poured through the lofty 
windows the full tide of its beams ; and the 
accidents of reflection gave a transient distinct- 
ness to the picture, that was strengthened by 
the deep shadows of the unillumined portions 
of the apartment. 

For some moments O'Brien, pre-occupied by 
tlie world within, almost "above the sense of 
sense," saw nothing, heard nothing, and felt all 



THE oVlahertys. 189 

that men feel under the double inebriety of the 
senses and the imagination. By degrees, as the 
moon shone more brightly on the frescoed story 
of Ireland's shame, he was struck by the sub- 
ject, although but indistinctly seen. He sighed 
as he gazed. The image was opposed to his 
present condition, with a mortifying contrast, 
which awakened the compunctious visitings of 
conscience; so goading to those in whom prin- 
ciple and passion are at variance. His feelings, 
his views, with respect to Lady Knccklofty, 
were so vague, such mere phantoms of fancy and 
of vanity, of gratitude and admiration, that they 
had neither character nor consistency. But the 
wife of the leader of the Irish oligarchy, had 
she not hinted that she did not participate 

. In recalling her words, his memory failed 

him ; the exhaustion of his spirits, the distant 
hum, the immediate silence, contributed to his 
abstraction, and thoughts became dreams. His 
eyes still fixed on the picture of Henry the 
Second, his imagination still dwelling on his 



14)0 THE O'^BIIIE^'S AND 

beautiful protectress,— his ideas by degrees 
faded, and he slept : if that could be called 
sleep, which, while it absorbed the corporeal 
faculties, and suspended the will, left the fancy- 
wild and energetic beyond its waking powers ; 
and bodied forth visions of such palpable form 
and plausible combination, that mid-day con- 
sciousness could scarcely have given perceptions 
more acute. 

From the chaos of incoherent images that 
attends the first slumbers of weariness, gra- 
dually arose a fairy fabrick, the Pomona 
bower, of which he had caught a view 
through the open door of the room in which 
he supped. It seemed all light and verdure ; 
and canopied the fair, majestic, and voluptuous 
form of Lady Knocklofty, at whose feet, he 
thought he lay, again receiving the pearl of 
Lough Corrib, and with it 

" Such honied words and smiles 
As made the gift seem dearer." 

Suddenly the flowers faded, the garlands fell, 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 141 

the lights grew dim, and the rude, dark walls 
of Birmingham tower, appeared in all their origi- 
nal strength and dreariness. The bower of love 
assumed its ancient aspect of a state prison. 
No longer at the feet of the lady of his vision, 
he believed himself chained down to a stone 
bench, above which appeared, in dark and 
smoky letters, the names of " O'Donnel," 
" O'Neil," " Delvin," " Lord Thomas Fitz- 
gerald," " Lord Desmond," and other illus- 
trious patriots, both of the Irish and English 
stock, who, by resisting power, had been in- 
carcerated in despotism's strongest hold. Pre- 
serving in idea the same uneasy attitude, in 
which he actually lay, his eyes were involun- 
tarily fixed upon the same grim figure, as in 
the pictured roof represented Henry the Second. 
Gradually, however, that stern countenance re- 
solved itself into the cold, phlegmatic features of 
Lord Knocklofty. His ancient armour was 
covered with the sash of St. Patrick. One ex- 
tended hand was armed with a dagger, which 



142 THE O'BRIENS AND 

was gradually and slowly directed to O'Brien's 
thick-beating heart ; while with the other 
he drew from the finger of his spell-bound 
victim's hand, his wife's most prized and trea- 
sured ring. O'Brien heaved and panted to 
resist or evade the murderous intent ; and still 
half in dream and half awakened by his suf- 
fering, he caught the uplifted hand and griped 
it firm and fast. Its death-like coldness chilled 
him to the heart. The prickling of a thousand 
arrows tingled through his frame ; yet still he 
continued to grasp the unearthly hand, no 
longer in a dream, but awake and conscious, 
though still motionless. He looked around him, 
and recognized every object. The light of the 
retiring moon faintly sketched the shadows of St. 
Patrick's banners on the floor. The glittering 
throne was still visible ; the hum in the battle- 
axe hall was heard ; still, in spite of these tokens 
of returning sensation, he held the hand. Making 
an efPort to move, the motion, slight as it was, 
restored the blood to its circulation; and he 



THE o'flahertys. 143 

perceived that the cold hand he clasped was— 
his own ; — the hand of that arm on which his 
head had pressed. The clock at that moment 
struck three: the whole baseless fabric of his 
vision had vanished, still however leaving a 
wreck behind, in his excited imagination. He 
started on his feet, rubbed his hands, and 
walked about the obscure and spacious hall, 
under the disagreeable influence, which a ter- 
rible nightmare always leaves behind it. Then 
resolving to proceed without further delay to 
the guard-house, he passed the battle-axe hall un- 
remarked, though not unseen ; and was proceed- 
ing to the lower castle-yard, by the state porter's 
lodge (instead of the passage by which he had 
entered), when a chair passed him, preceded by 
a tall, gaunt figure, wrapped in a long, dark 
cloak. 

The extraordinary height of this gigantic per- 
son, just sufficiently awakened O'Brien's curiosity 
to induce him to glance his eye under the stranger's 
broad flapped hat ; when to his amazement and 



144 THE O'BRIENS AND 

horror, he again saw or fancied he saw, that 
wild and weird countenance which had so often, 
in the course of the day, congealed him by its 
apparition. The figure strided rapidly on, and 
O'Brien unable to resist the impulse, was about 
to follow, when he was suddenly seized by the 
shoulder, with an exclamation of " I arrest you 
in the King's name." He turned and encoun- 
tered Captain O'Meal}^, who, though not tipsy, 
was just sufficiently elevated by his punch royal, 
to throw his natural humour and vulgarity off 
their guard. 

'' What a pretty fellow you are," he con- 
tinued, in an unminced brogue, passing his arm 
through O'Brien's, " to lade me such a dance. 
Sure, I've had the devil's own search after you, 
Lady K. desiring me to take care of you ; but 
sorrow ghost of you was to be seen nor heard 
either. So I thought you were carried off by 
the fairies. For, touch my honour, touch my 
life. I knew you were not the man to give 
leg bail for your surety. Well, you had the 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 145 

devil's own luck, Sir ; and owes it every taste 
to myself. I gave them th' whole history of you ; 
and first I butthered them up about you, and 
then I slither'd them down. Sir ; so that nothing 
would do, but you must be served up : so you 
see " 

" Have you any idea who was in that chair, 
that passed before us, just as you came up?" 
interrupted O'Brien, much preoccupied, and 
attending but slightly to O'Mealy's vulgar 
egotism. 

" Is it any idea I have ? Ay, have I, every 
idea in life. It was that poor cratur of a fur- 
reigner, that played so iligantly upon the harp ; 
though nobody listened to her, only myself and 
a few conishures. When I came down, a little 
taste ago, there she was standing in a comer, 
behind the futmen and the flambeaux, waiting 
for her sedan. So I did the genteel thing by 
her, as if she was a lady of quality ; and packed 
up her and her little instrument, myself, into the 
sedan." 

VOL. II. H 



146 THE o'bkiens and 

"Had she no servant with her?" asked O'Brien, 
with an affected carelessness, and fearful of draw- 
ing the attention of the captain of the guard to 
the mysterious person who appeared to have offi- 
ciated in that capacity, when the chair passed. 

" Sorrow, soul, or servant, or christian cra- 
tur.»' 

" And where was the chair ordered ?" asked 
O'Brien. 

" Why, have you a mind to be better ac- 
quainted with her too ? You are a pretty lad — 
at all in the ring. Why then, I think you have 
enough to do ; and if you mind your hits and take 
the ball at the hop, and keep the game in your 
own hands, devil a fear of you, but you'll prosper. 
Why, Sir, that handsome physognomy, and pale, 
penetrating eyebrows of yours, is as good as board 
wages. The little furreigner is a swarthy, poor 
cratur, and not worth picking out of the gutther, 
in comparison with them that .... Well, na- 
boclish, ' mum,' says I, ' budget,' says you, 
that's the talk, as the great Shakspeare says" 



THE o'flahertys. 1',47 

They were now at the guard-room door ; and 
as soon as O'Brien had shaken off the obtrusive 
O'Mealy, who mounted his horse to visit the 
guard and go the rounds, he drew near the 
light which flickered in its socket on the guard- 
room table; and throwing round a vigilant 
glance, with the feeling of a miser visiting 
his hidden hoards, he raised the ring, the pre- 
cious ring, to his eyes. At that moment the 
expiring lamp gave one bright flash, and dis- 
covered — not the pearl of Lough Corrib, with 
its pretty device — but a death's head on a dark 
onyx, with the well known device of the Jesuits 
engraven in black characters on its circlet — 

" Sub cruce latet." 



h2 



148 THE O'BRIENS AND 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE OLIGARCHS. 



And when we see the figure of the house. 
Then must we rate the cost of the erection. 

Shakspeare. 



Proudfort House was one of those magni- 
ficent mansions which, before the Union, were 
the town residences of the Irish aristocracy ; and 
which, since that fatal period, have been con- 
verted into public offices. For such have been 
the anomalies of that country, " where (Swift 
says) an honest man ought to be ashamed to 
live," that its official splendour has increased, 
in proportion as its resources have dwindled, and 
its business diminished. 

Proudfort House, at all times of the year, the 
shrine of place-hunters and pension-mongers, — of 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 149 

the needy and of the corrupt, was, — at that par- 
ticular season, which is the carnival of life, as 
of society, the rendezvous of all the rank and 
fashion of the country. Ireland, during the 
last quarter of a century has fallen far behind 
the rest of Europe ; but it was at this period of 
its active demoralization, more liberal, than it now 
is in its stultified degradation. Society, though 
corrupt, was joyous. Party threw no cloud 
over pleasure. Fashion took no note of faction ; 
and if many of the hereditary guardians of the 
country and counsellors of the crown — the first 
in rank as in talents — stood dignified and aloof 
from the Proudfort cabal and its chiefs; if 
they boldly entered their protest in the senate * 
against the scandalous measures originated by 
these political vampires, they did not suffer 
their patriotic feelings to interfere with social 
festivity ; nor, in that narrow and illiberal jea- 
lousy, which has since broken up society into 

* See the protest in the House of Peers, in 1790, signed 
by such names as Leinster, Charlemont, Moira, Portar- 
hngton, &c. &c. 



150 THE o'bRIENS and 

cliques and coteries, refuse to mingle on public 
nights in the balls, masquerades, theatricals, 
and ridottoes of their political opponents. The 
members of all parties then filled up the ranks 
of amusement ; and by encouraging trade, ener- 
gizing industry, and stimulating the arts, they 
enabled the country to make a better stand 
against its oppressors ; and^ for a while, to up- 
hold its struggling, but decaying manufac- 
tures.* 

But if wit and beauty discountenanced the 
domestic display of party violence, they had not 
to encounter the resistance of that dark bigotry, 
which now lies hke an incubus on the public 
pleasures. A feeble race of imbecile fanatics had 
not yet succeeded to a generation, whose vices, 
bold as their manners, did not permit them to 

* These remarks apply only to the political and social 
intercourse between protestant and protestant. At all 
times catholics rarely and difficultly obtained admission 
into what is called hon ton society. Party feelings were 
perhaps too rancorous at first to render much intimacy de- 
sirable on either side \ and eventually, those who were not 
seen in a particular circle, were deemed unfit for it. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 151 

veil their patricidal enormities under the sanc- 
timonious garb of religious hypocrisy. Even 
the harpies who devoured the vitals of the land, 
shewed more sense and more feeling for the 
people, than their heartless, brainless successors ; 
and if they helped themselves largely and im- 
pudently from the public purse, they had not 
yet exhibited the scandal of purchasing heaven 
at the expence of their impoverished country, 
— of congregating to suffocation round the 
itinerant declaimer, to squander their super- 
fluities upon foreign missions, — nor of overlook- 
ing the thousands perishing in their streets and 
their highways, to administer with profusion to 
the fanciful wants of proselytes at the furthest 
extremities of the globe. As yet, the gayest 
capital of Europe was unclouded by the gloom 
of controversial theology ; and the charities and 
the graces of life still lingering, where the sterner 
virtues had disappeared, were neither chilled by 
ignorant fanaticism, nor reproved by vulgar 
zeal. 

The intimates, the habitues of Proudfort 



152 THE O'BRIENS AND 

House, the daily guests of its lord, were how- 
ever, exclusively selected from the oligarchy, of 
which he was the leader. Strenuously occupied 
in the barter of power and principles, they ex- 
ercised an unrestrained rule over the less pri- 
vileged classes, engrossing all the offices of state, 
owning most of the property in the soil, and 
supplying from amongst their own cadets, the 
" nursing fathers of the church," (to use a phrase 
of archbishop King's) whose fosterage was more 
fatal to the interests and tranquillity of Ireland, 
than that of the olden times, against which so 
many acts were fulminated by early parliaments. 
At the head of this caste, in powder and in 
influence, stood the family of the Proudforts ; 
whose numbers, like the " race d Agamemnon 
qui ne Jinit jamais^'' seemed to increase and 
multiply, with the resources they extorted from 
the revenues of the country. Arrogating to 
themselves an exclusive loyalty, as " King's 
men," they mistook the subjection of the crown 
to their will, for their devotion to its possessor : 
and if a minister, offended by their pride, or 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 153 

scandalized at their greediness, hesitated to up- 
hold their political juggling, or questioned their 
right to a monopoly of place, they were as 
ready to turn against the sovereign, as against 
the people. More than once, a concerted 
soulevement of the whole privy council, a 
levee en masse, against the viceroy, marked 
their determination to suffer no minister in Ire- 
land, who was not of their own selection : and 
on one occasion *' seven of the eleven" con- 
stituting the Irish ministry, put the King into 
Coventry, and themselves hors du combat. 
Kings, however, like wits, have sometimes short 
memories ; and his majesty forgetting to call in 
those who had so foolishly gone out, resigned 
them to the original obscurity for which nature 
had intended them. 

The foundation of the Proudfort power was 
the Proudfort property : and this property was 
based on the church. The founder of the 
family had been the chaplain of King William's 
regiment ; and a succession of prelates, de pere 
H 3 



154 THE o'briexs axd 

enjils^ had added to a small original grant of land 
(made by the military head of the church, to the 
chaplain of the church militant), a succession of 
estates, each purchased from the ample dower 
of the establishment. This vast landed pro- 
perty, spotted as it was with boroughs, (close 
and rotten,) was the matenel of family influence; 
and amply fulfilled the prophecy, " that to him 
who has much, more shall be given." For the 
rest, the Proudforts, without one quality which 
naturally places men above their fellows, were 
destitute of every means for attaining to emi- 
nence, save the pertinacity which usually ac- 
companies the passion for family aggrandizement. 
They were indeed the happiest illustrations of 
what dogged dulness may effect, when unen- 
cumbered by genius to withdraw it from the 
beaten track of self-interest, or by sympathy 
jwith human suffering to distract it from the 
steady pursuit of personal ambition. Dull as 
the Dutchman from whom they were descended, 
tasteless, as they were talentless, they had yet 
given prirces to the church, and commanders 



THE o'flahertys. 155 

to the army ; and stopping short only where dis- 
tinction was to be exclusively acquired by merit, 
they had engrossed all places and all patronage, 
without giving to the Irish senate one orator, or 
to the Irish bar one advocate of eminence. 

The Earl of Knocklofty, the head and repre- 
sentative of this prosperous dynasty, was more 
distinguished by the family organ of self ap- 
propriation, than by any trait of individual 
idiosyncracy. Plodding, without an head for 
business; sensual, without a taste for pleasure; 
the gravity of his manner passed for wisdom, 
and the solemnity of his carriage for dignity. 
Always ready to scoff at public virtue as a 
phantom, he affected great respect for all the 
external forms of society ; and he talked with 
plausibihty of " the great bonds which keep men 
together."" Regular in his attendance at church 
on Sundays, and at Daly's Club-house, on every 
other day of the week, he prayed and played 
with equal devotion. But though religious and 
loyal in the extreme, a pillar of the state and a 



'^56 THE O'BRIENS AND 

corner stone of the church, he was, on certain 
points and morals, with which going to church 
has httle to do, as relaxed, as the members of 
his caste then usually were in Ireland. He had 
long survived the passion, which had led him 
into a second marriage with Lady Albina 
CBlarney, whose portionless rank, and power- 
ful beauty, had suited his ambition, and gratified 
his vanity. But his liberahty of the wealth 
which she knew so well how to distribute, and 
which gratified his ostentatious habits, and the 
pride he took in his handsome children, ob- 
tained for him the reputation of an excellent 
private character ; as if the selfishness which 
leads to public corruption, could be made com- 
patible with private worth. Living with mag- 
nificence, his table exhibited all that luxury had 
then invented, in a department which has since 
become one of the fine arts ; and his wines and 
his influence brought him a multitude of guests, 
who learned from his example, to enjoy, without 
remorse, those public emoluments which were 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 157 

purchased without restraint — by the ruin of the 
country. He had recently been elevated to the 
Earldom of Knocklofty ; and the higher dignity 
of a Marquisate was said to be reserved for 
those future services, which the proprietor of 
many boroughs can always render to the party 
of his adoption. 

The Countess Knocklofty was, by her social 
position, the great autocrat of Irish fashion ; and 
she presided over the bel air of the Irish capital^ 
as her husband ruled its political junta. Pre- 
serving all the beauty which does not exclusively 
depend on youth, (a passionate expression, a 
graceful tournure), brilliant, though no longer 
blooming ; her rank and influence gave her all 
the charms she had lost, and heightened all she 
had retained: for even beauty, in that little 
world called " the great," has no intrinsic value. 
It is the stamp of fashion that gives it currency; 
and with that stamp the basest metal is received 
\v ithout examination, while the sterling ore of 
loveliness, that bears not the mark of the mint, 



158 THE o'brtens and 

is rejected with disdain. Educated by a feeble 
and bigotted grandmother, with prejudices which 
passed for principles, and phrases which pass<»d 
for ideas ; and brought up in respect for forms, 
and in ignorance of reahties, she threw off ties, 
on coming into the world, which, being founded 
not in influence but in authority, had no hold 
either on her judgment or her heart. Launched 
from the romantic solitudes of her father's castle 
in Connaught, upon the bustle and temptation 
of the world, she brought into society the un- 
regulated romance of a retired education ; with 
all the headlong propensities to pleasure of a 
wilful temperament. Vain, credulous, and im- 
petuous, her vivacity was mistaken for passion, 
and her fancies for feelings. The reigning 
manners of the day, and the influence of her 
position, conspired to sanction the boundless in- 
dulgence of a disposition, as unregulated as her 
mind; and even the selfish pursuit of her own 
gratification passed for devotion to those, who 
were flattered by being distinguished as its 



THE o'fLAHEUTYS. 159 

objects. With men of the world, there is a 
shorter road to the heart than even through their 
passions — their vanity; and none ever took it 
with more success than Lady Knocl<:lofty. 

It is a maxim of French gallantry (and axioms 
in love, like dogmas in faith, are always numerous 
in proportion as the rehgion is doubtful,) that, 
" la femme, quand V amour est passion^ est con- 
stante ; quand V amour n'est que gout, elle est 
Itgere^ According to this canon, Lady Knock- 
lofty was the most passionless, as she was the 
most engouee of women. Yet her predilections 
and her preferences, such as they were, were not 
the episodes, but the history of her life. Pla- 
tonic or passionate, the fancy of a day, or the 
sentiment of a year, her flirtations or attach- 
ments were the business of her existence. " Ver- 
tueuse, elle jouit de ses refus ; foible^ clle jouit 
de ses remords^' Hitherto, borne out by that 
demoralization in the higher circles, which ever 
goes with despotic governments, and living on 
those terms of decency with her lord, which the 



160 THE O'BRIENS AND 

world only requires (for nothing can save an 
imprudent wife, but the dupery of her husband, 
— or his depravity), Lady Knocklofty, though 
blamed by some, suspected by many, and talked 
of by all, still retained the reins of society in her 
own possession ; and kept opinion in check, by 
having the whip hand, in the great career of 
rank, influence, and fortune. 

To preserve her Ladyship in this enviable, 
but critical position, which enabled her to pre- 
side over the largest house, and command the 
highest circles in the Irish capital, was the vigi- 
lant, assiduous, and not very disinterested object 
of her friend, monitor, and constant companion. 
Lady Honoria Stratton. More gifted, more 
accomplished, more corrupt, and more expe- 
rienced, than her noble protegee, Lady Honoria, 
was one of the many illustrations of that golden 
maxim, " that gallantry is the least fault of a 
woman of gallantry/"' The " vertu de moins'^ 
of Lady Honoria was indeed the only point in 
her character that had the semblance of ami- 



THE o'flAHERTYS. 161 

ability. But the frailty which, in some, indicates 
a susceptibility to *' loving too well," was in her 
the result of a necessitous poverty, which obliged 
her to love " too wisely."*' In risking her cha- 
racter, she calculated only on the profit and loss 
of a tender attachment; and with Werter in 
one hand, and Cocker in the other, she formed 
her estimates as much by the arithmetical con- 
clusions of the one, as by the high-flown senti- 
mentalities of the other. The world, however, 
always more apt to pardon the folly of vice, than 
its wisdom, had nearly thrown her beyond its 
pale, for the ruin she had brought on a young 
and popular Irishman of moderate fortune; 
when, luckily, her well directed coquetry at the 
cold phlegmatic vanity of Lord Knocklofty, and 
her knowledge of the world, as cleverly directed 
at the assumption of his wife, gave her an in- 
fluence at Proudfort House ; which opened the 
door of every other house in Dublin to her 
reception, and restored her to the caste which 
she had nearly lost by that which should have 






162 THE o'briens and 

been deemed an additional cause for banishing 
her for ever from its ranks. Beautiful and witty, 
bold and adroit, the naturally fine dispositions 
and brilliant qualities of Lady Honoria had been 
perverted in her earliest youth by a neglected 
education at home, and a depraved one abroad. 
Living on the continent from her fifteenth year 
to her five-and-twentieth with a libertine father 
(a poor Irish peer), in the refined but profligate 
circles of the French court, she married at that 
epoch (in the expectation of a reversionary title 
and large fortune,) the drivelling brother of an 
Irish nobleman, whose celibacy was deemed 
certain, till he wedded his cook ; when the birth 
of an heir blasted the hope for which Lady 
Honoria had made such sacrifices. 

Obhged by circumstances to live in Ireland 
— niched in a large empty house, in Stephen's 
Green, belonging to her brother-in-law, who 
resided habitually on his estate in Munster, — and 
conscious of her own superiority to those to 
whom her necessities obliged her to bend, she 



THE oVlaHERTYS. 1C6 

paid back the obligations her ruined fortunes 
compelled her to accept, by secret contempt, or 
by open sallies of wit and bitterness, which 
frequently purchased civilities that gratitude 
and complaisance might not have extorted. 
Admired by the men, and feared by the women, 
she used both as she wanted them ; and called 
upon to " desennuyer la sottise,'' she repaid the 
dinners she could not return, and the entertain- 
ments she could not rival, by a wit which was 
always amusing, though not always refined ; and 
a humour which was reckoned somewhat too 
broad even for the Irish court. 

A constant and welcome guest at Proudfort 
House, she gave a life to its festivities, and a 
style to its entertainments, which the taste and 
refinement of its owners were insufficient to 
confer. Flattering the dull vanity of the hus- 
band, and engrossing the confidence of the 
wife, she soon became a necessity to both ; and 
was frequently a mediatrix in disputes, which 
her cleverness and subtilty prevented from ex- 



164 THE o'bELENS and 

ploding, to the total rupture of the matrimonial 
tie, that would have involved the overthrow of 
her own interests. 

While Lady Honoria thus acted as premier 
in the diplomacy of the Knocklofty menage^ 
the Honourable Catherine Macguire was not 
without her utility in the domestic system of 
those, who by the very fortune which raises 
them, are disposed to depend so much more 
upon the resources of others, than on their own. 
The daughter of an aunt of Lord Knocklofty, 
who had run away with a landless papist lord, 
and had been ever afterwards thrown off by the 
family, the Honourable Catherine was received 
by her noble kinsman, as poor Irish cousins 
usually are — partly from pity, and partly from 
pride : and being destitute of that fine tone of 
feeling, which makes dependence misery, — and 
as highly endowed with that stout huckaback 
fibre, which stands the wear and tear of capricious 
favour and insolent pretension, she steadily kept 
the " even tenor of her way." False without 



165 



feigning, insincere without hypocrisy, she frankly 
shewed up to the world's laughter her present 
friends and her former creed ; and quizzed the 
Proudforts, and ridiculed the papists, with equally 
unsparing candour. To the proselyting humour 
of " the good Lady Mary" she was indebted 
for the new creed, which had been the passport 
to her cousin's protection ; and she abandoned 
the faith of her fathers, with a conviction quite 
as clear as that with which she had originally 
received it. Pleasant as she was heartless, she 
had already passed through the world's hands ; 
and had contracted from its contact, that simple 
hardihood of manner, which often gives to the 
hacknied the naivete^ that is the charm of the 
recluse. Sure to please, as long as she amused 
the solemn mediocrity of her kinsman and host, 
she was well aware of her tenure at Proudfort 
House ; and, resolved that it should be a lease 
renewable for ever, she silently inserted a 
clause of surrender, in case she should attain to 



166 THE O'BRIENS AXD 

the fee-simple of any other more advantageous 
possession. 

" The good Lady Mary/' by whose agency 
Miss Macguire had been induced to accept the 
thirty-nine articles, and a seat at Lord Knock- 
lofty's luxurious table, — to swallow the precepts 
of the sister, with the j)ates of the brother, — 
was a happy precursor of all the good ladies of 
the present day, who have come forward in 
such numbers " to justify the ways of God to 
man,"" to complete what the Redeemer had left 
undone, and, in the fulness of time, accomplish 
and expound that revelation, which ordinary 
Christians imagine to have been perfected some 
eighteen hundred years ago. She was the first 
to bring into notice an inspired work, generally 
thought to have been long well known : and she 
was the original inventor of the protestant dray 
for carrying converted papists on their road to 
salvation. She was likewise the first among the 
great to send out invitations to tea and tracts ; 



THE o'flahertys. 167 

and to open religious shops for go-carts mounted 
upon protestant principles, toys against tole- 
rance, and bible-only babies. It was in Lady 
]\fary'*s cheap repository, that emplo3m[ient was 
given to idle ladies of fashion,* at the slight 
expence of those humble dependents on their 
own industry for their daily bread, who are 
persons of no fashion ; and it was in her schools 
that education was first made subservient to the 
purposes of an insidious proselytism. Dull and 
mischievous, arrogant and interfering, she wais 
among the first to contribute and collect for the 
conversion of Asiatic Jews ; while the poor Irish 
peasant perished at the gates of the Episcopal 
Palace, unheeded, and the needy artizan fainted 



" She works religious petticoats : for flowers 

She'll make church histories. Her needle doth 

So sanctify my cushionets. — Besides, 

My smock-sleeves have such holy embroidery, 

Aad are so learned, that I fear in tioie 

All my apparel will be quoted by 

Some pure instructor." 

Old Play. 



168 THE O'BRIENS AXD 

under the windows of the metropolitan mansion, 
unreheved. In her domestic capacity, too deeply 
occupied in saving the souls of her neighbour's 
\)^ children, she had no time to attend to the com- 
forts of her own ; and, while driving about 
from school to school, to teach tenets with tent- 
stitch, and encourage the growth of piety and 
plain work, she gradually saw the objects of 
her natural affections disappear beneath her un- 
observing neglect. One of her children had 
fallen into a pond, another had fallen out of 
a window. The eldest. Miss Sullivan, who was 
thrown from unwholesome confinement into a 
galloping consumption, galloped off with the 
apothecary ; and the youngest, suffered to run 
wild from apprehension of her sister's fate, had 
been so much in the habit of trotting behind 
the coachman, that she trotted away with him 
one day to Gretna Green. Her three surviving 
sons, however, following in the Bishop's track, 
(the " milky way" of church promotion,) bid fair 
for the Bishop's fortune. They already en- 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 16& 

grossed the three best livings in the Bishop's 
gift. 

The bishop himself, who, as tutor to Lord 
Knockloftj, had won Lady Mary's heart, and 
as dean of St. Grellan had obtained her hand, 
was one of those " 'personnages de positicm, 
qui viennent toujour s au secours du vainqueur?^ 
He had wriggled himself into his proud eminence 
by siding successively with every party that 
prospered, and dedicating his various polemical 
volumes alternately to whig and tory. A 
Foxite to-day, a Pittite to-morrow — now a ca- 
tholic advocate, and now the apostle of catholic 
extermination — his true religion was a mitre, 
his political principle a peerage ; and knowing 
that the world, like the Baron in La fausse 
Agnes, " est toujours dans Vadmiration de ce 
qu'il n'entend pas,'''' he took for the subject of a 
work, which was designed as the key-stone of his 
fortune, a theme, which being beyond human 
comprehension, left no just measure of the intel- 
lect wJiich he brought to bear upon its mystery. 

VOL. II. I 



170 THE OBKIENS AND 

Having arrived at the object of his ambition, 
the phant candidate for church promotion stood 
erect upon the pediment of church supremacy, 
with a look that might be translated, " Sono 
Papa.'^ A little Sixtus Quintus in his way, his 
air became as papistical, as his infallible preten- 
sions : and whoever saw him mounted upon his 
ecclesiastical haquenee^ ambling through the 
streets of St. Grellan, saw the most faithful copy 
of an Italian Monsignore ever exhibited beyond 
the Roman corso: — all purple and pertness, 
pious priggeiy and foppish formality, with 
a beetling brow, and the best flapped hat that 
ever was perched upon three hairs of the erect 
head of a high, haughty, and overbearing 
churchman, — the genius of caricature could 
have added nothing to the picture. 

Lord Chesterfield has said, that " of all men 
who can read and write, a parson is, perhaps, 
die most ignorant." This apothegm described 
the Archdeacon of St. Grellan to a tittle. 
Ignorant of all but his own interests, his want 



THE o'flahertys. 17J 

of mvoir was well supplied by his savoir 
faire ; and the success of his well directed sub- 
serviency to the bishop, to Lady Mary, and to 
the whole Proudfort dynasty, proved that he had 
neither mistaken his means nor misunderstood 
his persons. The nephew of their law agent, 
Solicitor Hunks,-— the son of their chaplain and 
protege^ the late Archdeacon, — he had in his 
favour the habit of the Proudforts to provide 
for his family ; and he did not suffer that habit 
to wear out for want of frequent solicitation. 

Pertinacious, as men of limited intellects 
usually are, irascible, as churchmen are accused of 
being, and envious, as mediocrity ever is, he had 
viewed the young and hardy " engrosser of fame" 
and favour, the hero of the castle frolic, with a 
deeply founded aversion, sharpened by the sense 
of hereditary wrongs. O'Brien, as the son of him, 
who had contrived to embezzle a part of the 
archdeacon's family property, by embezzling the 
daughter of its richest member — of him whose 
legal knowledge had reduced the Archdeacon's 
I 9. 



172 THE O'BRIENS AND 

inheritance almost to his hopes in the Proudfort 
interest, — had claims on his hatred, which he was 
determined should not lie idle ; even at the risk 
of opposing the impetuous predilections of Lady 
Knocklofty. 

Such was the party, which, with the addition 
of Lord Kilcolman and Captain O' Mealy, as- 
sembled for dinner in the great saloon of Proud- 
fort-house, at the then late hour of six o'clock — a 
quarter of an hour before the lady of the mansion 
made her appearance. Miss Macguire, however, 
received, amused, and talked with the guests; 
while Lord Knocklofty, always silent and ab- 
stracted before dinner, walked up and down, 
occasionally assenting, by a nod, to the bishop's 
emphatic philippics against the bad spirit of the 
times, as illustrated by the volunteer review of 
the preceding day, the tumult at the Strugglers, 
and other signs equally portentous of a state of 
things, which called on every loyal and religious 
man to put it down. To this all agreed in their 
different ways ; from Captain O'Mealy's " 'tis 



THE o'flaheutys. 173 

true for you, my lord, for as the immortal Shak- 
speare says, ' the times themselves are out of 
sayson,' " to the pious ejaculations of Lady 
Mary, and the never-failing concordance of the 
Archdeacon with the sentiments of his superior. 

'' By the by, Albina," said Lord Knocklofty, 
turning short upon his wife, as she entered and 
flung herself in an arm-chair, with a very slight 
inclination of the head to her guests — " By the 
by, how have you disposed of your hero ?" 

" Disposed of my hero ?" re-echoed Lady 
Knocklofty, evasively, and looking for resource 
to her friend, Lady Honoria. 

" What ! has she got a hero de poche F" asked 
Lady Honoria, laughing. " Oh ! T suppose 
you mean the volunteer, who, under heaven, 
saved our lives yesterday. I hope. Lady Knock- 
lofty, you will assist me in paying the debt, by 
saying a word in his favour to the Provost ; for, 
of course, he will be brought before the board^ 
with the rest of the college boys concerned in the 
row last night." 



174 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" I believe," said the Archdeacon, " that is 
past praying for. The Provost can do nothing ; 
the whole affair being referred to the visitors. 
The Chancellor, as Vice-chancellor of the Uni- 
versity, has been long waiting to make an ex- 
ample of some of those young incendiaries, who 
are known agents of the Jacobinical societies, now 
so numerous." 

" And this very O'Brien,'^ observed the Bishop, 
" the leader in the riot, to whom your lady- 
ship imagines yourself so much indebted, will, 
most probably, be rusticated, if not expelled: 
but as long as the historical society is permitted 
to exist in the College, and Locke on Govern- 
ment to form part of the College course, you will 
have a hot-bed of sedition and a code of repub- 
licanism, whose influence is obvious.'' 

" Ay, and of atheism too, as the Archdeacon 
says," observed Lady Mary. 

'' I think," said the Archdeacon, " that the 
denial of innate ideas leads irresistibly to such a 
conclusion." 



THE o'flahertys. 175 

** I am quite of the Archdacon''s opinion,"^ 
said O'Mealy, pulling up his stock ; " I am, 
upon my honour; and so I believe is every 
loyal man in Dublin, in or out of College. For 
there is all the difference upon earth between a 
nate idaya, and an innate idaya." 

A general titter followed the assertion, and 
Lady Honoria demanded — " Now, honour 
bright, O'Mealy, what is the precise difference 
between a nate and an innate idea ?'"* 

"Why, Lady Honoria?" said O'Mealy, 
calling fearlessly on a stock of impudence which 
he knew to be exhaustless, '' an innate idaya 
may be any man's idaya ; but your ladyship's 
must always be a nate one, intirely, upon my 
honour." 

" Pas mal^^ said Lady Honoria, nodding her 
head approvingly ; while Lord Kilcolman cried 
out, " Hear him, hear him !" 

" You are aware, my Lord," continued the 
Archdeacon, returning to the charge, " that 
this Mr. O'Brien, who affected to stop Lady 



176 THE o'bRIEXS A-SD 

Knocklofty's horses, when they had stopped of 
themselves, is — '' 

" That is not true," interrupted Lady Knock- 
lofty, vehemently and haughtily ; " it is utterly 
false : the horses were quite unmanageable, and 
both Lady Honoria and myself would have 
been dashed to pieces, but for the interference 
of iMs Mister O'Brien, who had the humanity 
to risk his life, and save ours. Is it not true, 
Lady Honoria ?" 

" I'll schwear to that," said Lady Honoria, 
in the tone and accent of the Jew, in the School 
for Scandal. 

" Well, then," continued the pertinacious 
Archdeacon, "• this saviour of her ladyship's life 
is the youth, my lord, who, in the historical 
society, made a sort of killing-no-murder oration 
on the death of Caesar ; defending the regicide 
act of Brutus upon a great principle of popular 
right, applicable to all times ; taking occasion, 
apropos to nothing at all, to introduce an invective 
against those whom he called the Dictators of Ire- 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 177 

land, and sketching three illustrious characters 
high in the Irish government, as the triumvirate, 
who, with the same patricidal views as those of the 
Roman triumvirs, wanted only the courage and 
the talents to effect the same ends. The speech 
got into the opposition journal, which comph- 
mented the speaker with the title of the Irish 
Mirabeau, an imitation of whose eloquence, by 
the by, he gave us last night at the castle." 

" Indeed !" said Lord Knocklofty, pausing in 
his measured pace before his wife : '' and is this 
the person. Lady Knocklofty, whom you 
brought forward, as I hear you did, in so ex- 
traordinary a way, last night; availing yourself 
of the Duke's complaisance and good nature — 
is this the hero of your frolic ?"" 

" Pooh, nonsense I" said Lady Knocklofty, 
carelessly, " my frolic was every body's frolic ; 
and it was neither as improper as Lady Glen- 
more's froHc with the sweep ; nor as fatal as 
your lordship's, when you and your friends 
personated highwaymen, in the Phoenix Park, 
i3 



178 THE O'BRIENS AND 

to frighten the Ladies Butler; when you not 
only upset then* carriage and broke Lady Anne's 
arm, but shot one of the postilions by accident, 
and scared to death old Lady Castletown, who 
never recovered the fright. Archdeacon, you 
are like old Croaker, in Goldsmith''s "Good- 
natured Man;" you have always some stock 
horror, some conspiracy or sedition on hands. 
I wish they would make you a bishop, and then 
you would be quiet. Kitty Macguire, do ring 
the bell for dinner ; what are the people about ?'"* 

" AVon't you wait for the Chancellor .?"" asked 
Miss Macguire, while the Countess's sortie 
produced a momentary silence in all ; for even 
Lord Knocklofty's solemn haughtiness was at 
times borne down by his wife's vehemence. 

" Does the Chancellor dine here ?'* asked 
Lady Knocklofty, with a look of annoyance. 

" He proposed to do so an hour back, when 
I met him on the circular road," said Lord 
Knocklofty. 

" So he told me,"' said the Bishop. " I rode 



THE oVlahertys. 179' 

into town with him. He doesn't see the row 
of last night in the same point of view as the 
Lord Lieutenant, who considers it as a mere 
street brawl. He says that he has long had his 
eye upon this O'Brien, who hoisted the seditious 
flag in the park yesterday." 

" Who the devil is he .?" demanded Lord 
Knocklofty. 

Lady Mary and the Archdeacon both opened 
their mouths at once ; and the latter exclaimed, 
" He is the mischievous young scamp, who gave 
my father the nick-name of the arch daemon ; the 
son of Terence O'Brien, the present Lord Arran- 
more. Your Lordship may remember the fuss 
which was made about this scape-grace twelve 
years ago, when I discovered that notwithstand- 
ing his name having been entered on the books 
of the diocesan school, he was, for the greater 
part of the year, actually under the tuition of a 
foreign priest in the isles of Arran : and this too 
in the face of the statute, which provided that 
the son of an attorney shall be bred in the 



180 THE o'bUIEN'S and 

established religion, and made it felony for any 
catholic priest to keep a school."" 

" Well ?'' said Lord Knocklofty, impatiently. 

" Well/' said the Archdeacon, " a writ hav- 
ing been served, or rather sent by the proper 
officer to force this priest to appear before the 
constituted authorities of St. Grellan, the people 
of the islands, followers of these O'Briens, and 
bigotted papists, led on by one Shane, the son 
of the noted Mor ny Brien, and of one, the 
last of the Conn aught rapparees, surrounded 
the priest's house for his protection : and this 
Shane, being pressed by one of the king's 
officers, murdered him on the spot ; or rather 
caused his death, for the murdered man died 
within six months; and the fellow stood his 
trial, and was hanged at St. Michael's Cross in 
Gal way.*" 

" Well .?'' said Lord Knocklofty, still more 
impatiently. 

" Well, my lord, the priest having escaped 
to the continent, and the boy having shortly 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 181 

afterwards disappeared, and his mother dying 
(a sister, by the way, of those old catamaran 
Jacobites, the Miss Mac Taafs), Terence O'Brien 
came to Dublin to pursue his claims to the title ; 
where he spent his time and fortune in haunting 
the law courts, and searching the record and 
rolls offices. The boy had been sent to Doiray 
to be made a priest of ; but he suddenly re- 
appeared at Trinity College, where he entered 
as ajillus nob'ilis. As this happened just before 
I resigned my fellowship, I was struck with the 
name of Murrogh Mac Teig O'Brien on the 
books ; and on further inquiry, I found that 
this youth had passed the last eight years of his 
life as a soldier of fortune ; and has come from 
the continent warmed with the precepts of his old 
tutor, the ci-devant parish priest of St. Grellan. 
For the Abbe OTlaherty, you must know, my 
lord," he added, turning to the Bishop, " has 
become a French bishop, and is one of those who 
are called the constitutional clergy ; renegades 
to their king and their God, who have declared 



182 THE O'BRIENS AND 

that the property of the church is national pro- 
l^ierty ; and who have consented to the abolition 
of tithes. In a pamphlet dedicated to his friend 
Talleyrand, Bjshop of Autun, he has advanced 
on the authority of scripture, that the clergy 
are the simple administrators of the church 
wealth ; which was given for worship, and not to 
the priesthood. Such is the school, and such 
the precepts, to which the Irish university is in- 
debted for its new honourable member." 

" Le pauvre homme^'' said Lady Honoria, 
looking dramatically at the Archdeacon ; who 
was perspiring at every pore at the horrors he 
was relating. 

" And who is this courageous Bishop," said 
Lady Knocklofty, " who dares to sacrifice his 
own interests to the general good. What is his 
name ? Good heavens, how I should like to 
know him." 

" What nonsense you talk, Albina,'' said 
Lord Knocklofty. 

" When in Ireland," said the Archdeacon, 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 183 

'' he was called the Abbe O'FIaherty, and passed 
for a cousin of that famous, or rather infamous 
Count O' Flaherty, who, you may remember, 
my Lord, contrived to rob my father of a con- 
siderable part of his property, through the chi- 
canery of Terence O'Brien ; and who, received 
in Connaught as the champion of popery, 
ended by carrying off the foreign Abbess of St. 
Bridget's, brought over from Italy by O'Brien ^s 
Jesuit uncle, to reform the order in St. Grellan." 

A general laugh followed this narrative. 

" I was at Cambridge then," said Lord 
Knocklofty ; *' but I remember something of the 
matter." 

" Pray go on. Archdeacon,'* said Lady 
Knocklofty, now interested and excited ; "car- 
ried off the Abbess ?" 

" Yes, Lady Knocklofty ; or rather unfor- 
tunately, he did not carry her off, till he had 
scandalized the whole world, by taking her to 
the Abbey of Moycullen ; where he had built 
apartments for the celebration of his orgies, 



184 THE OBRIEXS AND 

which still attest, by their licentious pictures, 
the purposes for which they were fitted up." 

«* What purposes ?" asked Lady Hoooria, 
demurely. " What purposes. Archdeacon ? 
pray tell us !" 

" Lady Honoria," said the Archdeacon, 
" you will spare me the details." 

" Spare his blushes," whispered Miss 
Macguire. 

'* Suffice it to say," continued the Arch- 
deacon solemnly, " that all that was ever said 
of Caesar Borgia and Heliogabalus, and all the 
profligate papists and pagans that ever lived, 
did not exceed the life led by the Count and his 
French friends ; so at least I am told : for I was 
then a very young man, and such things were 
studiously kept from my knowledge by my 
father the late Archdeacon " 

" Le pauvre innocent !"" whispered Lady Ho- 
noria to Lad}'^ Knocklofty. 

" I am told that he actually assumed the 
habit of an Abbot, dressed up his companions in 



THE O'FLAHKRTYS. 185 

monk's tunics, and established a sort of licentious 
club, called * The Monks of the Vine.'' " 

" Something like the Monks of the Screw here 
in Dublin, I suppose," said Lady Honoria. 

" Oh, worse, worse a great deal. Lady Ho- 
noria. They exceeded in profligacy all that 
was ever heard of/' 

" Had they any six-bottle men among them, 
like our Cherokees T' demanded Lord Kilcol- 
man. 

" Lord Kilcolman, I know not what they 
had : the proceedings at Moycullen were for- 
tunately hid from the world. I believe the 
Count admitted but few persons at the abbey ; 
though, when he went out. he was well re- 
ceived ; for he was a most insinuating and 
winning man in his manners " > 

" He was indeed f said Lady Mary. " I 
was then almost a child ; but I remember he 
always put me in mind of Richardson's Love- 
lace." 

" And you, par hasard^ might have been his 



186 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Clarissa,'' said Lady Honoria, '^ if the mammas 
and papas had admitted him to Beauregard.'''' 

'" I assure you," said Lady Mary, evasively, 
" he was received and pushed on by the Clan- 
rickards, the De Burghs, and other catholic 
nobihty ; though my dear father refused to 
visit him for many reasons." 

" But from the time,"" continued the Arch- 
deacon, " when he abducted, or rather was 
suspected of abducting the Abbess (for it was 
given out that she was drowned, her veil having 
been found floating on the rocks at St. Grellan 
at the back of the convent, and masses were 
said for her soul in spite of the penal statutes), 
he was cut by all." 

*' Well," said Lady Knocklofty, " and how- 
did the romance end ?" 

" Oh ! the catholic church has a way of 
hushing up all its scandalous romances, as your 
ladyship calls this event. The Abbess was never 
heard of more. The whole circumstance was 
denied by those, whose interests required that 



THE o'flahertys. 187 

the truth should not be revealed. The Monks 
of the Vine dispersed. The Count returned to 
France, and was either killed in a duel, or 
assassinated in the Bois de Boulogne ; and his 
property was bequeathed in trust to some 
foreign agent, for purposes which, if inquired 
into, would, I doubt not, be found illegal." 

Here the announcement of the Lord Chan- 
cellor, and the order for dinner interrupted the 
conversation ; and objects of more immediate 
importance at that season of the day, were dis- 
cussed and digested, with a uniformity of 
opinion, unbroken by a single dissentient voice. 



188 THE o'briexs and 



CHAPTER V. 



O BKIEN HOUSE. 



Full of state and ancientry. 

Shakspeark. 



While the party at Proudfort House were 
assembled round the sumptuous table of its 
ostentatious host, the object of this recent dis- 
cussion (released from his durance by means, at 
which he himself blushed), proceeded to that 
lonely and desolate house, where no sumptuous 
table, nor brilliant guests awaited him. 

At the epoch in question, when every thing 
went by privilege and favour, and life and 
liberty were in Ireland at the disposal of a 
ruling caste; debts of a private nature were 
easily paid off, at the expence of public justice 
or public wealth ; and forms were daily violated, 
as the spirit of the constitution was outraged 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 189 

to answer some particular purpose of a powerful 
individual, or to get rid of some obnoxious 
opponent. O'Brien, at five o'clock of the day 
which followed his arrest, found himself at 
liberty. No charge had been brought (or 
rather was permitted to be brought) against 
him : and while the officious and boasting 
O'Mealy acted as the immediate agent in the 
affair, it was not doubtful to O'Brien, that the 
lovely and kind arbitress of his destiny, was the 
all-powerful Lady Knocklofty. 

O'Mealy having accompanied his protege to 
the gate of the lower castle yard, left him in the 
filthy defile of Ship-street ; after having dis- 
burthened himself of so much of .the tedjousness 
of his undisguised vulgarity of mind and man- 
ner, as excited new wonder, that one so below 
the mark of ordinary education, should have 
made himself the associate of those, whose rank 
was an assurance for their refinement. 

O'Brien, as he still smiled at some of the 



190 THE o'bBIENS and 

Captain's absurdities, recalled a precept which 
he had often heard repeated by his Colonel, the 
charming Prince de Ligne, to the young men 
of his staff and regiment, " Je veiLX que le 
militaire, qui a etc aussi aimable le soir, que le 
grand Condi Vetoit chez Ninon, soil d" aussi bonne 
heure a sa troupe le matin, que fut toujours le 
brave Turemic,'' Such were the maxims upon 
which O'Erien's mihtary education had been 
formed. But the grand Conde, Ninon, Tu- 
renne, and Captain O'Mealy, of the Royal Irish ! 

what a comparison ! ! He shrugged his 

shoulders, and sighed ; for he felt that this first 
sacrifice to patriotism, on quitting the service of 
a foreign despot, was not the least, as he was 
lieginning to feel, it would not be the last. 

Keleased from the coarse and vulgar garrulity 
of his companion, he hurried home to O'Brien 
House by those obscure ways, bye streets, and 
dirty lanes and courts, which Stanihurst and 
Ware have rendered historical ; but which are 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 191 

now the purlieus of a squalid indigence, that 
turns aside the eye of charity by the filth or 
vice which accompanies its wretchedness. 

Threading the disgusting mazes of the liber- 
ties, where epidemic maladies are perpetuated by 
lielpless, hopeless, irremediable poverty, his heart 
recoiled, and his senses sickened. Figures and 
faces presented themselves at every step, in 
which the impress of crime, or the traces of 
famine left scarcely a human feature : and this 
too almost in sight of the architectural cupolas 
and gilded vanes of the seat of that government, 
which was answerable for every combination, 
that had contributed to produce such an unpa- 
ralleled order of things. 

o 

To these painful impressions succeeded re- 
flections, rapid as his steps, on his own recent 
adventures, — the occurrences of the preceding 
day and night — his liberation — his liberatress. 
The ring so mysteriously exchanged for one not 
unknown, nor unconnected with his former life ; 
the perpetual apparition of that wild, and to his 



192 THE O'BRIENS AND 

apprehension, supernatural figure ; the fate 
too that awaited him at the college, where 
he well knew that he was already watched ; 
and above all, the annoyance which he must 
have occasioned to his father, who, after an 
absence of three months, had just returned in 
time to witness the part he had taken in the riot, 
ail recurred to his imagination. He was almost 
certain that he had seen Lord Arranmore at the 
gable window of the attic on the preceding even- 
ing ; and, that the paternal door had been closed 
against him in a moment of such exigency, was 
a proof how much and how deeply he had in- 
curred the displeasure of one, who had but too 
many annoyances to contend against. 

It was at this point of a reverie (which had 
more than once made him lose his way, and 
obliged him to apply for information as to the 
shortest cut to Watling-street), that he reached 
O'Brien House. It seemed to him to wear 
more than its usual air of sad and sombre dila- 
pidation. The evening was bleak and gloomy. 



THE oVlahertys. 193 

A drizzling rain was beginning to fall, and 
gusts of wind were blowing down the river, to 
which the solitary and isolated mansion stood 
singularly exposed. Almost all the window- 
shutters were closed; and some loose papers 
flaunting in the wind and hanging on the walls, 
intimated that an auction had taken place there 
since the previous night. With a sinking heart 
he tore down one of these advertisements, and 
could just make out from the fragment, the 
words " sheriff's sale — inch of candle — valuable 
antiquities— materials of the house to be sold — 
fine old carved oak chimney-piece." One of 
the old gossips of the neighbourhood, familiarly 
stopping and reading over O'Brien's shoulder, 
exclaimed, 

" Why, then, ihey had better take it down 
while it stands ; for sorrow long will it keep to- 
gether. See there, Sir, there's a beam that's 
green and soaked with the wet, giving way 
already. I tould th' ould woman that, a week 
ago and more ; and if you are a frind of the 

VOL. II. K 



194 THE o'briens and 

family, you'd be doing well to tell them the 
same." 

O'Brien thanked her for her information, and 
with a heavy heart knocked at the door. He 
had repeated his knock, before the v/indow in the 
gable was slowly opened, and a head as suddenly 
drawn in as it was put out. After the delay of 
a few minutes, the door was opened by Robin. 

" So, Robin," said O'Brien, a little startled 
at the appearance of the porter, not only with- 
out his livery, but without shoes and stockings ; 
" is my father at home ?'' 

'' My lard's not at home," was the mechanical 
reply, 

" Not at home ! why he arrived in town last 
night, did he not.^" 

" Ay, did he," said Robin; " but my lards 
not at home now." 

" Pooh !" said Murrogh, passing impatiently 
by him ; then suddenly stopping, as Robin 
closed the door behind him, he asked, '* Where 
is your mother ? where is Alice .^" 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 195 

" There,*' said Robin, pointing to a parlour 
on the left, which had never more than one win- 
dow unshuttered, for nearly a century. 

Murrogh turned in to speak with the scarcely 
more human, though more communicative Alice ; 
but his blood chilled, and he stood fixed to the 
threshold, as he gazed round him. Dark and 
desolate, the spacious empty room was only 
lighted by a single tallow candle, placed at the 
head of the corpse of old Alice, which was 
stretched on a mattress, and shrouded in a sheet. 
The sight of death, under all its forms, is dread- 
ful to the young, to whom life is an eternity. 
After a short pause, O'Brien demanded, 

'' When did she die r 

The graceless progeny of the old woman, as he 
stood coolly peeling and eating a turnip, an- 
swered, " Last night, shure." 

"Of what did she die.?" 

" I don't know, shure." 

*' She was alive yesterday ?" 

" Ay," said Robin, filling his mouth with the 
K 2 



196 

last slice of his turnip, and shutting up his clasp- 
knife, his only property. 

O'Brien, in equal disgust at the living and the 
dead, moved away, shuddering; and slowly and 
mechanically mounted the broad, old, creaking 
stairs. He was proceeding to the sitting-room 
on the first floor, when Robin, with more than 
wonted energy, sprung after him, and catching 
him by the coat, cried emphatically, " Shure my 
lard's not at home — no, in troth." 

O'Brien shook him off*, though almost tempted 
to believe him from his earnestness. He threw 
back the door of the drawing-room, and found 
it empty. It was a long, low room, which ran 
nearly through the whole of the front of the 
house ; save only where stood a dark closet, 
which lay at the further extremity, and led by a 
narrow passage to a flight of steep stairs that 
ascended to the attics. 

O'Brien entered the room ; the door of the 
closet was suddenly shut, as if by a blast of 
wind; but he heard, or fancied that he heard, a 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 197 

light retreating step. He flew to the door, but 
could not open it. 

** There is certainly, Robin, some one in this 
closet." 

" My lard's not at home any how," said 
Robin, with a dogged air; and O'Brien was 
again inclined to believe that he told trutb, and 
to think that his own gloomy and heated ima- 
gination had deceived him. Not doubting, how- 
ever, that Lord Arranmore would sleep (perhaps 
for the last time) in this miserable " home ;" and 
struck with the little or no anxiety he had ex- 
pressed relative to his son's late peculiar situation, 
he resolved to await his arrival ; and not to return 
to college, till the darkness of the night should 
shroud his own somewhat disorderly appearance. 
He had slept on the guard-house settle in his 
clothes (if that short feverish slumber he had 
taken for an hour after daylight could be called 
sleep) ; and the anxiety, fatigue, and dissipation 
of the previous night had impressed their traces 
on his countenance. Fortunately, a substantial 



198 THE O'BRIENS AND 

luncheon, taken with O' Mealy in the guard- 
room, rendered him independent of that refresh- 
ment, which his father's house could not afford ; 
for there " pale fast that with the gods doth 
diet" seemed to have established his reign. 

At no time, since the return of the heir of 
O'Brien House, had its appearance been suitable 
to the rank of its possessor. The greater 
number of its nests and closets, by courtesy 
called rooms, were utterly dilapidated and 
unfurnished ; exhibiting upon their walls, and 
in their fixtures, curious relics of the style of 
fitting up houses in Ireland, in former times ; 
when even the hangings were not permanent, 
when the walls were left bare and rude ; and when, 
on the removal of the family into the country, 
the scantiness of the furniture obliged them to 
carry away the carpeting, cloth, or leather, that 
covered out the brick and mortar, — and nothing 
but doors, windows, and chimney-pieces, re- 
mained stationary. Thus, however, it was, in 
the gorgeous reign of Louis the Fourteenth ; 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 199 

when a princess of the blood, and the greatest 
heiress in the world,* travelled from her house 
in Paris, to her chateaux in the provinces, witli 
her sumpter mules laden with the beds, on 
which herself and her court slept alike in town 
and country. Comfort and order are the pri- 
vileges of a free people ; and the French and 
the Irish, who had not then tasted of the 
blessings of constitutional liberty, were alike re- 
mote from all its accessary advantages: both were, 
even then, centuries behind England and Hoi- 
land, in all the accommodations of domestic life. 
The only room furnished in O'Brien House, 
was the great drawing-room, as it was pompously 
called by its lord ; though its dimensions alone 
justified the description, by a comparison with 
the rest of the apartments. Even this state 
chamber was destitute of every modern com- 
fort. No window closed, no door (and there 
were four opening into the room) hung firmly 
and freely on its hinges. All that an old, 
faded and moth-eaten tapestry carpet did not 
• Madame de Monlpf nsier. 



^00 THE o'^BRIENS AKD 

cover of the black oak narrow-ribbed floor, w as 
mouldered into rat-holes ; and nothing of the 
original fixtures remained whole and complete, 
but a superb and curious chimney-piece, of the 
famous black oak of the once celebrated wood 
of Shilelah, the shelter of so many rebel heads, 
and the despair of so many English chieftains 
of the Pale. This chimney-piece rose from the 
surface on either side, and canopied, on high, 
the spacious, open, and ungrated hearth. It 
was curiously carved ; and its delicate and 
laborious minutias were not unworthy of the 
chisel of Gibbons. It was crowned with the 
arms and supporters of the O'Brien family, 
surmounted by the royal Irish crown; under 
which was carved upon a label, and in old Irish 
characters, " Thou who madest heaven and 
earth, bless this house, which Murrogh O'Brien 
and Onor his wife caused to be raised in 

the year *' The date was worn out ; 

but it was a tradition, that the house had been 
occupied by the O'Brien family, since the reign 
of Ehzabeth, whose favourite, (for the maiden 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 201 

queen had always a pet Irishman), the Lord 
Thomond, her privy counsellor and president 
of Munster, was the Murrogh O'Brien men- 
tioned in the carving. This house was likewise 
the " lodging,"" whence the famous Lord 
Inchiquin (called the incendiary), the renegade 
General of Cromwell, had dated many of his 
letters; and lastly, it had been occupied by 
O'Brien, Lord Clare, of George the First's time, 
who died ^Marshal Thomond, and Governor of 
Alsace, 

The purchase of this mansion-house by the 
present Lord Arranmore, after it had been half 
a century in litigation, was among the items 
of uncalculated and ruinous expenditure, into 
\/hich he had been betrayed '^ par V amour de 
rantiquaiUe,'' (to use a phrase of Rabelais) ; 
and the only furniture he had thrown into it 
was so adopted to the genius of the place, that 
the withdrawing-room of O'Brien House, would, 
in the present day, have made the glory of a 
genuine collector; and have rivalled the glass 



20^ THE o'bRIENS and 

closet, blue room, and Holbein chamber of 
Strawberry Hill. There, had stood the famous 
harp of Brian Borru, now the choicest specimen 
in the Museum of the Irish University. There, 
too, was treasured the beautiful ebony crosier, 
tipped with gold, so powerfully wielded in the 
Abbey of Quin, by the celebrated O'Brien, 
Bishop of Killaloo, in Queen Elizabeth's day ; 
a bishoprick which (said a label attached to the 
crosier), " none could enjoy without the consent 
of the Mac-i-Brien,'"* the Tanist of the day. 
There, flaunted, " all tattered and torn,"" over 
an old Indian screen, the " rich foot-cloth of 
black velvet, trimmed up with gold and silver 
lace," bequeathed in the will of the great Lady 
Thomond, 1672, together with her " counter- 
pane of tawny satin, quilted with silken twist.** 
There, likewise stood much of the rich plunder 
of Malahide Castle, the cabinets and portraits 
of the Talbots ; given by Corbett during the 
time that most beautiful of the castellated resi- 
dences of the English lords of the Pale was in his 



THE oVlahehtys. 203 

possession, to his friend and brother officer Inclii- 
quin : together with such tables and chairs, sucii 
stools and voydores, buhles and buffets, as had 
gone out of fashion with the battle of the Boyne ; 
and have come in, as anti-revolutionary and 
loyal, during the late reaction of all that is old 
and useless, over all that is new and serviceable. 

Such relics, however, with their historical 
recollections, will always have the fanci- 
ful and imaginative on their side ; and the 
young student of the University, in the 
visits he had paid to his father's antiquated 
mansion, had examined them with intense 
curiosity and interest ; more especially the fine 
old portraits, in their carved oak frames, of the 
bold, brave, and beautiful race from which he 
was descended. 

Now, however, he was struck even to sorrow- 
ful amazement, on the life nerve of that family 
pride, so curiously mingled with his democratic 
opinions,— an amalgamation of incompatibles, 
which forms the weakness of almost all the 



204 THE O'UIIIEKS A>'3) 

liberal descendants of the great feudal families, 
both of the Scotch and Irish. A total change 
had been effected in the apartment, since he last 
had \isited it. The portraits of the Bishop of 
Killaloo, of Marshal Thomond, and of the beau- 
tiful Lady Mary O'Brien of King Charles's 
court, were gone. So were the exquisite crozier 
of the Abbot of Quin, the screen, the foot- 
cloth, and the counterpane of the great Lady 
Thomond, — relics which O'Brien had often seen 
his father kiss with pious reverence. The cabi- 
nets and curious carved altar-piece of Malahide 
Castle still remained ; but they were packed up 
carefully, and labelled, " purchased by Colonel 
Talbot, of Malahide Castle, duty to be paid 
by the purchaser." Nothing, of all the objects 
he had been accustomed to look upon with in- 
terest and pride, was there, save a corner cup- 
board, (or, as it was called, buffet), so incor- 
porated with the walls as to be immoveable, 
two arm-chairs on either side the fire-place, 
and an old table with twisted legs, (called, 



THE o'flahertys. S05 

from its hexapodal basis, a spider table). These 
were chalked " unsold." On the latter was a 
pile of very old books, with a label, '* sold for 
waste paper to Sheriff Vance, grocer, Capel- 
street.^ O'Brien sighed deeply as he looked 
over them. They were, an odd volume of Dug- 
dale's Baronage ; Spelman, much torn and de- 
faced ; Selden and Bracton complete, but soiled ; 
Howard's Popery Laws; a copy of the Penal Sta- 
tutes, and a volume of Collins, which was marked 
by a strip of paper, and interlined with red ink. 
The marked passage ran thus: — "■ It is a 
rule that an honour, or barony, or a tenure 
by barony, does not enforce a conclusion that 
the possessor is a baron of parliament." This 
conclusion was a point which Lord Arranmore 
had been toiling to overturn ; for though be 
had recovered his barren title, he had not esta- 
blished his right to sit in parliament ; the first 
Baron Arranmore never having complied with 
the writ, by coming in to take his seat. These 
had been the studies, and these the pursuits 



^06 THE O'BRIENS AND 

which had seduced Terence O'Brien from his 
industrious and prosperous calling, and had 
drawn him to sacrifice to pride of family, (a 
natural, as it was a characteristic folly), that 
independence which is the sole base of the best 
and noblest pride. For if wealth has its vices, 
poverty has its weaknesses ; and if the rich can 
often stoop to be mean, the poor are rarely ena- 
bled to be high-minded. 

'' What,'"* thought O'Brien, as he stood with 
folded arms, looking round him on the empty 
spaces left by the removal of his father's collec- 
tion, " what must it have cost him to part with 
these objects of his tastes, his research, and his 
pride ! 'Tis so much easier to part with ordi- 
nary essentials, than with the superfluities, with 
which the passions have connected themselves." 

It was evident that a sheriff's sale had taken 
place during the morning ; and O'Brien suppos- 
ing that a newspaper which lay on the table 
might contain some account of it, he took it up ; 
when to his surprise he found that it had con- 



THE o'flaiiertys. 207 

cealed an open volume of illuminated vellum, 
with a small ivory pallet, and a hair pencil 
in a glass of water. The colours on tlie pallet 
were still wet; and in the open page of the 
volume was accurately and beautifully drawn 
the antiquated chimney-piece, with its crown, 
arms, and inscription. The drawing was not 
finished, but the first outline and tints were laid 
in with the hand of a master. He examined the 
book in astonishment. It looked like a splen- 
did album of modern, modish, hterary frippery ; 
or, but for its freshness, it might have been mis- 
taken for one of those magnificent missals, from 
which the ostentatious piety of passed times 
loved to pray. 

The room, it was evident, had very recently 
been occupied by the elegant artist. There was 
part of an old wainscoat burning on the great 
brazen dogs of the spacious hearth ; and the 
ponderous leg of an old chair seemed to lie in 
store beside them, to replenish the embers which 
were now burning dimly. O'Brien looked into 



208 THE O'BRIENS AND 

the buffet ; and there stood a brazen candlestick, 
with a butt of one of those immense wax tapers 
used on church altars. It also contained that 
Irish 7nor^eau of patisserie^ called a Barneen- 
braec, an old-fashioned cruet of water, and a 
small flask of that genuine Irish cordial, (the 
curagoa of the O'Donnels, and the parf ait amour 
of the O' Neils,) Usquebaugh, — or rather more 
classically, " Uishge buy."* 

From all these evidences, O'Brien drew the 
conclusion, that his father was getting a drawing 
made of the family relic, which was now no 
longer his ; and that both himself and the artist 
he employed, would return, under cover of the 
evening, to finish a sketch so happily began. 
Unwilling again to put the stultified fidelity of 
Robin to the test, (who had evidently been bound 
over to secrecy, by some threat or reward, suf- 
ficient to preserve it) ; he was determined, more 

* " Uishge buy," the yellow water; from the saffron, 
which, being infused ia it, imparts to that compound its 
fine golden colour. 



THE o'FLAIIEnXYS. 209 

than ever, to wait the return of his unfortunate 
parent, in whose ruin his own was involved, but 
whose fate alone touched him ; and he again 
turned to the table, to the examination of the vo- 
lume, whose pure, rich, Roman binding of white 
vellum, ornamented with gold, with its silver 
clasps studded with Irish amethysts, so curiously 
contrasted with the dirty and ill-scented leather 
backs of Collins and Selden, and with the po- 
verty of all around it. On looking at its frontis- 
piece, which was beautifully illuminated with 
shamrocks and harps and rainbows, he read the 
following title-page : — 

The Annals of the Isles of Arran and MoycuUen, 

or the 

Green Book of St. Grellan ; 

done into English by 

The Abbot Malachi O'Flaherty, 

called 

Malachi an Leabhair, or, of the Book ; 

with Notes and Commentaries by 

The Right Hon. T. O'Brien, Baron of Arranmore, 

and illuminated by 



210 THE O'BRIENS AND 

O'Brien had heard so much of this book in 
his childhood, of its superiority over the Psalter 
of Cashel, the Annals of Ulster, the Annals of 
the Seven Masters, the Leabhair Gabhala, or 
Black Book of Hoath, and the Blue Book of 
Bally tore; and even over that great national 
record (so much prized and praised by all Irish 
antiquaries, from O' Flaherty to Valancey), the 
Annals of Innisfallen, that his curiosity had 
long been sharpened by the privation ; and he 
was now much pleased to light upon it. When 
Sir George Carew and Sir Henry Sydney re- 
ceived orders to destroy all the Irish manu- 
scripts they could find in the kingdom, this 
treasure of the bibliotheca Grellensis had been 
secretly conveyed out of the kingdom, and had 
been deposited in that great repertoire (beside 
things most valuable) of all the nonsense conse- 
d^ated by antiquity, — the library of the Vatican. 
From this depository it had lately been taken by 
a powerful member of the Roman church ; who 
though an Irishman by birth, stood better at 



THE o'flahertYs. 211 

the court of the Quirinal, than many of the con- 
clave ; and who, though an exile from infancy, 
was now returning to the land of his nativity. 

However different in temperament, opposed 
in opinion, or various in views the young may 
be, from those who give to their ductile minds 
their first impressions, — many of those impres- 
sions will remain indelible. They will even survive 
respect for those, from whom they were drawn ; 
and will cling to the n/ind with an habitual 
tenacity that sets reason at defiance, and loosens 
conviction from its strongest holds. The young 
O'Brien, an epitome of the regenerated age to 
which he belonged, going with its views, and 
animated by its spirit, a worshipper of La Fay- 
ette, a disciple of Mirabeau, partaking of all 
the " glorious faults " which distinguished the 
youth of his times, as well as of their merits, 
was yet, with respect to Ireland, full of the 
" vulgar errors of the wise." On those national 
subjects, which have so long led the Irish 
from the better career of national improvement. 



212 THE 0'*BRIENS AND 

and retrograded intellect, by directing its re- 
searches to the barbarous times, so falsely 
called heroic, — he was purely Irish. Know- 
ing nothing of modern Ireland, but her suffer- 
ings and her wrongs ; knowing little of ancient 
Ireland, but her fables and her dreams, his 
mind had been stored with popular and poetical 
fallacies relative to all that concerned her in the 
barbarous "days of her glory;*' and uncon- 
sciously partaking in %is father's prejudices and 
sentiments, while he had stood opposed to him 
in his political and religious opinions, — he was, 
upon many points, as visionary and as fanciful as 
him, whose illusions he now so keenly deplored. 
Deeply read in O'Flaherty, and in Keating, in 
O'Connor, and all the celebrated genealogists 
and senachies, ancient and modern, — and from 
his cradle the auditor of his Irish foster-mother, 
the famous wierd woman of the Isles of Arran, 
Mor ny Brien, — his memory and imagination 
nourished these early associations; and recollec- 
tions of family glory were the more fondly che- 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 2!l3 

rished, in proportion to the growing misfortunes 
and mortifications of his present strugghng posi- 
tion : for, to the young and the aspiring, the 
struggles which arise between poverty and pride 
are the most painful contests to which the human 
will can be subjected. 

Pleased, in a moment so suspenseful and anxi- 
ous, to have lighted upon any subject, that could 
divert his attention from the melancholy point 
to which it was naturally bent, he drew one of 
the old chairs to the table, and began the exa- 
mination of the sybil leaves of a record, which, 
besides being reputed the " brief abstract^"* of 
the history of the nation, was deemed the, best 
chronicle extant of the two rival families of the 
O'Briens and the OFlahertys, whose destinies 
and stories seemed so mysteriously interwoven. 

The first pages were vellum, covered with 
silver paper : they contained the armorial bear- 
ings of the O'Briens and the O'Flahertys, drawn 
with heraldic skilly and painted in the brightest 
tints ; and in rapidly turning over the gilt leaves. 



214 THE O^BUIENS AND 

O'Brien perceived that many of the adventures 
recorded of those families were illustrated with 
beautiful vignettes, admirably imitating the mo- 
nastic portraits and illuminations of ancient 
missals, with an art still taught in Italian con- 
vents, as an appropriate acquirement for those 
whose talents are only cultivated for the service 
of the church. The text was in a fine Italian 
hand, such as is writtenby the professional scribes 
of Rome ; who are equally expert in copying the 
legend of a saint, or in inditing a tender " biglietto 
d'amore.'" * The notes and commentaries were 
written, in off-pages, in the well-known office 
hand of Lord Arranmore. The whole appeared 
to be an improved and beautiful copy of the 
very ancient original, which had probably been 
restored to its consecrated niche in the great 
counters of the Vatican collection. 



• Mr. Davis, an English artist of celebrity, has taken 
the biglietto d'amore for the subject of one of the prettiest 
compositions that English art has produced in the country 
of the Raphaels and Guides. 



THE o'fLAHEETYS. S15 

While looking with a school-boy's eagerness 
over the glittering pictures, astonished by some, 
delighted by all, O'Brien found the grey light of 
a most sombre and rainy evening grow dim; 
and the wind, as it shook the windows, burst 
open the doors, and entered by every crevice, 
cranny, and broken sash in the room, rendered 
its desolate vastness so chill, that, trembling 
with cold, and desirous to read at his ease, he 
stirred up the embers, threw the old leg of the 
chair on the fire, lighted the bit of wax taper, 
and closed the rattling shutter of the window 
next the chimney. Then drawing his chair and 
table near the suddenly blazing hearth, and 
with his legs stretched upon the dogs, he began 
a regular perusal of 

Zf)t Annals of ^t. CFrellan. 



216 THE OBRIEXS AND 



CHAPTER VI. 

^ttttal0 of ^t. ^rcllan. 

Instructed by the antiquary, Time. 



Shakspearb. 



The light of antiquity and wisdom of past ages. 

Letter of J. K. L. 



Year of the world 500.— Great pace and 
prosperitie of Innisfail, or Irelonde.* Under 
God's providence, the Ballyboe of St. Grellan, 
aunciently called Croicli-Fuineah, or the " finall 
countrie,'^ being the last cantred of lande in the 
place, darting out into the great western sae, 
flourishes above the worlde; in salubritie far 

• " To give a regular account of the first inhabitants 
of Ireland, I am obliged to begin at the creation of the 
world." — Dr. Keating^s History of Ireland. 

The doctor begins by quoting a celebrated antediluvian 
Irish poet, " Cad aimsu an bleadha," &c. &c. " from the 
sixth day, when Adam first was formed." 



THE o'flahektys. ^17 

above Brittaine. Abounding in miJke and 
lioney ; also not wanting in fysh, foule, ne red 
deir. The people much given to learning and 
musick, great players upon the harpe, of lofty 
stature, and mighty comely. They multiply 
exceedingly ! 

A. M. 1525. — Arrivall of one Cesarea, a 
niece of one Noah,* who, rigging out a navire, 

* "Various are the opinions," says Keating, " concern- 
ing the first mortal, who set a foot upon the island. We 
are told by some, that three of the daughters of Cain ar- 
rived here several hundred years before the deluge ; and the 
old poet gives us this account : 

" Fri hingiona chaidhin Chain mar aon ar 
Seth mac Adhamh, 

Ad chonairch an Banba ar nus ar mabhair 
Liom anionthus." 

♦* The three fair daughters of the cursed Cain, 
With Seih, the son of Adam, first beheld 
The isle of Banba," 

Another poet, however, asserts that 
" Ceasar inghion Bheatha bhuain dalla Sabhuill mac 
aionnaill, 
An chead bhean chalma do chinn, an inis Banba- 
riandilion :" 

VOL. 11. L 



21S THE O'BRIENS AND 

cometh to seek adventures, and falleth on the 
coaste of Connemara, together with fifty faj- 
males, or gallads, or leadyes, having only three 
males on boarde ; one of whom was called Fintan, 
a great gramog,* or curinkey-|- of a fellow. 

1595. — Whereas, in this yeare of the worlde, 
Noah began to admonishe the people of the 
generall deluge to come, for their detestable 
sinnes, and more particularly the people of St. 
Grellan, in regarde of the arrivaull of Cesarea 
and her fifty fayraales, ladyes, or gallads ; and 
Noah continued admonishions for one hundred 
and twenty yeares, (while he builded himself an 
ark for him and his) which made the inhabitants 
of St. Grellan say it was all Tallagh-hill talk, 
till a poure down of rayne, and the overflowing 



'* Ceasarea, daughter of the good Beatha, 
Nursed by the careful hand of Sabhuill, 
Was the first woman, in the list of fame. 
That set a foot on Banba's rugged shore. 
Before the world was drowned.*' 

* A buffoon. f The leader of the war-dance. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS, 219 

of the great river Suck,* caused an universall 
floocle, and drowned them all ; in which per- 
plexitie of minde and imminent daunger, Fintan 
transformed himself into a saumon and swoomed 
all the time of the deluge in the Suck, which, to 
this day, is famous for its saumon fysh, called 
by the people, in regard of the bushoppes dues, 
"tithe fyshe." And the saide Fintan recover- 
ing his former shape, after the sayde deluge, 
lived longer than Adam, and had greate 
Shanaos -|- of the ouid times, which he toulde to 
his posteritie : so that of him, the common 
speech riseth to this blessed houre, " if I had 
lived Fintan's yeares, I could tel as much and 
more/' % 

* A river in Connaught. — A modern Irish epic begins— 

" Ye sons of Suck," &c, &c. 

f Shanads, genealogical gossipry, from " Senachy," an 
annalist. 

X The learned and revered Keating expresses some 
doubt as to Fintan living two thousand years ; because, 
he says, no authors of note have transmitted such an ac- 
count to posterity. He, however, adds, '* T must own there 

L 2 



220 THE o'brieks and 

1526. Ireland riseth out of the sae like a 
beautiful water-lily, or lump of Kerry-stone 
diamond. 

1800. Arrivall of three shippes in the port 
of St. Grellan, and one barque, contayning three 
hundreth men, and one small boy or gassoon ; 
l^eing the familie and followers of one Japeth, 
led on by Bartholanus, a greate sae captaine; 
greate skirmish and fierce battallle betweene the 
new comers and the ancient oulde Irish ; the 
former claiming a righte to the place, in respect 
of theire kin, and Cousine Cesarea, who con- 
quered the lande. 

The Irish den3ang the same, a greate bat- 
taille ensueth, and the ancient oulde Irish are 
driven into the Fassaghs of Connact province. 

1801. Greate pace and plentie in Irelandefor 
six months and more. 

is very good reason fcr me to believe, that there was a^'ery 
old man, in the time of St. Patrick, who lived some hun- 
dred years before, and gave him a particular account of 
the History of Ireland." But this man's name was Tuam, 
and not Fintan. — Note by the Baron O'Brien. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. ^21 

1802. Where God hath his churche, the devil 
hatli his chapell, for it seemeth that the countrie 
became uproarious, in regarde of the arrivaulle 
of the cursed seed of Shem, with their captaine, 
one Oceanus, who landed at the port of St. 
Grellan, and gives his name to the sae there- 
abouts, which has ever since been called Ocean. 
Greate bickerings and skirmishes bctweene the 
Giants and ancient oulde Irish, also the Bar- 
tholanian settlers: successe various betvveene 
laweful governors and new usurpers — the giants 
are slayne, and throwne into the sae; greate 
pace and plentie throughout the yeare. The 
ancient Irish multiplie exceedingly. 

1803. ]More new commers or transplanters. 
Arrivaulle of the Belgians in a fleete, well rigged, 
led on by Slangey or Slang, prevaileth over the 
Bartholanians ; but the Danans, a new colony, 
arriving, the Bartholanians forfeit their londe?, 
and the Belgians are driven into the Fassaghs 
of Connact province, — only Slang, who accepteth 



2^2 THE O'BRIENS AND 

a commission in the Irish militia :* his progeny 
flourish in the lande to this day. And now the 
Danans remayne masters of the sayde londe, 198 
yeares, 6 months, and 2 dais. 

Warres and uproares with the Belgians of the 
mountaynes, being frequent, in the neck of all 
mischief and hurli-burlies, in the yeare of the 
worlde 2828, there appeareth on the coast of St. 
Grellan, 120 shippes, being the fleet of them 
boulde invaders, the Kirca-Scuits, or Scote, or 
Scots, or Scytoe, or Scythians, from Scythia, or 
Milesians from Milesius (as Trogus and Marian us 
Scotus, do write), whose sons, Heber and Here- 
mon-f- did conquer the londe entirely, dividing of 
it betweene them, — Heber to South, and Here- 
mon to North ; but ambition, the mother of mis- 
chief, did not suffer them to remayne in pace, so 

* For an account oftheFionne, Erin, or Irish militia, 
established before all recorded history, and of which the 
great Fingal was colonel or chief, see O'Halloran, Mac 
Pherson, O'Connor, &c. &c. 

t See O'Connor's Dissertations on Ireland. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 223 

they put on armes, and to battaille they goe, 
Heber he being slaine by his own brother, and 
Heremon remayning cock of the roost. 

1100. B. C— Gathukis theArdruith, or Arch- 
druid, planteth the true religion ; the great idol 
of Croich Fuineah, or St. Grellan, thrown into 
the sae, to the entire moane of the ancient oulde 
Irish. And Gathulus presideth metropolitically 
under the sovereign pontiflp.* And now, He- 
remon, his conscience being sore pinched for his 
brother's murlher, he giveth great stretche of 
londe to the druids ; and the greate wood of 
St. Grellan, called Bally ny doire ; and the reste 
of the londe is parcelled out among the chief 
captains. And Con Maol, of the Dalcascan 
race, founder of the O'Briens, son of Heber, 



* The Gauls had a sovereign pontiff, or head of the 
Druids. The druidical, or Celtic religion, was the same as 
that of the old patriarchs. They worshipped one Supreme 
Being ; their temple was a consecrated grove j they believed 
in a future state of rewards and punishments j they offered 
victims to their god, and celebrated festivals in his honour. 
— See Universal History, vol. xviii. p. 351. 



224 THE O'crtTENS AND 

son of Milesius, settleth along the coaste of 
Munster, to the Isle of Arran ;* and the Hy 
Fflaherties, or OTflaherties, take to the moun- 
tains of Connamara, or the bays of the great 
sae, and found their kingdom of lar Connaught, 
or the Hy Tartagh, whereof Moy Cullen is the 
principal sate ; and the Hy Taafs (now Mac 
Taafs) being ever a pithfull sept, stop in the 
Fassagh,-)- between hill and coast. 

And now, as hath ever been in these king- 
domes, greate change and alteration, by usurp- 
ing and compounding among themselves, and 
by dividing of countrees, and skirmishes through 
other, and taking of preys of cattle, and forfeit- 
ing and reprizing. 

And now the druids rule the londe, and pro- 
phecy the greate power of theire order, and 
write their mysteries in a boke in the old Ogham, 
and depositeth it in the greate college of Mur 

* For the rest of the pedigree of the O'Briens, up to 
Noah, see General History' of Ireland, vol. i. p. 10. — Note 
by LonJ Arran more. 

f Fa?sagh, a desolate place, oj ^Taorlaud* 



THE oVlaheutys. 225 

Ollivan at Feamor;* and the people, sett on 
by one Kinge Cormac O'Quinn, a great scholar 
and heretic, demanded sight of the sacred boke, 
at which the chief druid did fume and chafe, 
saying it was an impious abomination ; and the 
sayd King Cormack O'Quinn, still conferring and 
confuting with the sayd druid, payeth dearly for 
the same ! 

Two hundred yeares before Christe, great 
uproares — druids taking the londe for their god 
Baal, and the people of Munster rising up 
against them. The wolves came down from the 
mountaines and devoured all the inhabitants of 
St. Grellan, the rest being carried off with the 
plague. The druids declareth it a judgement 
for their pestiferous sinnes. And now the race 
of the O'Briens, the Dalcascan kings of Munster, 
of the race of whom cometh Brian BorrCi, or 
Borreimh, king of all Ireland, flourish above 
the world, and begin the great Momonian war, 
Avhich is waged to thi;s blessed day : so that the 

* O'Connor calls this college "the celebrated mother of 
all our philosophical schools." 
L 3 



THE O BillENS AND 

realm, as it were, submitted to the O'Briens 
intirely, and who but them, according to the 
Mulaneries.* 

A. D. 390. — Christian religion beganne to 
roote in Irelande, as written in the Lyfe of 
Finn Lug,t saint and bushopp ; but not as some 
wilful men dreameth, by James the Apostel, 
neither by Patricius, Phaidrig, or Patrick,J but 

* See that great monument of Irish antiquities, the 
Codex Momonensis, or Munster Book, whereof I have an 
authentic copy. No regular chronology being observed in 
this work, which alone containeth the succession of the 
Kings of Munster, of the Dalcascan race, I take leave to 
supply the defect in my genealogical account of the 
O'Briens, from the (ime of Logan More Moghnuagad, in 
the 2d century, to 1541, when Murrogh O'Brien surren- 
dered the title of King of Munster to Henry the Eighth.— 
Note by Lord Arranmore. 

t This King is called, by a modern Irish historian, the 
greatest legislator of all our kings, as he was indisputably 
the greatest philosopher of our nation. It appears that he 
paid the penalty of his philosophy ; for Mr. O'Connor 
informs us, that by openly opposing the corruptions of the 
druids, and attacking the temporal power of their priests, 
they attacked him with a treasonable conspiracy, which 
cost that great monarch no less than his life. 

Mr. Walker, and most of the Irish antiquarians, call 
this king " the Irish Lycurgus." 

X Almost every province in Ireland claims the establish- 



THE o'flahertys. 227 

by the said Finn Lug, who builded him a cell 
in the isle of the Black Lake of O'Fflaherty's 
Mountain, which afterwards became a great 
Dominican friary, and is to this day, and will 
ever more. This friary became mother of the 
Abbey of St. Grellan, and of others in France, 
Germanic, Suavia, and Italic. 

The chief druid ordereth Finn Lug, sainte 
and bushoppe, to be burnt ; but he. Lug, 
warned of same in a dreame, as by a miracle, 
escapeth, and travels to Rome, where he is 
made bushoppe, and has the Ballyboe erected 
into a see by Pope Celestinus. He hastens back 
to Ireland with Saint Patrick, apostle and pa- 
tron. St. Patrick converts Queen O'Brien, of 
Munster, and Finn Lug, the Queen O^Connor 
of Connaught, the kings following. Now the 
chief druids beganne to quake, no longer backed 
by kings or nobles, and faileth to railling; and 
Saint Finn Lug holdeth great converse with 

niLnt of Christianity by its own patron and favourite saint. 
St. Kiaran is said, by Mr. O'Connor, to be the founder of 
Irish Christianity. 



2^8 THE O'BRir.V?) A'^D 

Duhbliach-Mac Logain, ardfileah or chief druld 
to the supreme king. He is converted, and 
composeth a hymn in honour of the christian 
rehgion. Druids, called magicians by Saint 
Patrick, are persecuted : they fly to the islands 
of Arran, and are protected by the clan Tieg 
O'Briens. Saint Patrick burns the bokes* in 
the college of Mur Ollivan, to the number of 
one hundred and eighty, as we are toulde by 
the learned Duald Mac Firbess : and now the 
whole island being converted, so that there were 
as many saintes as soules, they niulliplie ex- 
ceedingly ; and the cell or monasterie of Finn 

* It appears from the Life of St. Patrick, written by tlie 
Monk of Furnes, that the apostle of Ireland brought with 
him that destroying zeal which has distinguished the saints 
of all ages- He destroyed King Leoguire's gold and silver 
devils; asserting that the good king was a worshipper of 
images, and he threw the poor man's two beautiful daugh- 
ters, for the good of their souls, into a deep sleep, from 
Avhich they never awakened. He had also the power of 
turning meat into poison in the mouths of his enemies ; a 
power he frequently exercised, *' wherein (says the Rev. 
Jocelyn) we are sufficiently admonished not to offend the 
servants of God," 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 2^9 

Lug, in the isle of the Black Lake, alone con- 
tayning three thousand monkes, being of the 
first of the three orders established by Saint 
Patrick, called the most holy order, which was 
composed of three hundred and fifty regular 
bushoppes, all of them saintes, who drank 
nothing but water, and fed on nothing but 
herbes. 

200.— The O'Briens now lord it manfully ; 
and Eagan More, King of M unster, the great 
Momonican hero, makes war upon Con Caed- 
cathath, his cousin, who styles himself King of 
Ireland, and great murthur among the heroes 
of the O'Brien race, for divers usurpations in 
Munster and Connaught.* 

(Here O'Brien, in disgust at the sanguinary 
absurdities, and confused and barbarous details 
of the wars of his ancestors, was about to throw 

* For an account of this war, see O'FIaherty's Ogygia: 
It ended in a perfect reconciliation between the rival kins- 
men, till fresh disputes arising relative to certain duties of 
the port of Dublin, Eagan More O'Brien was surprized in 
his bed, and barbarously murthered in prison, l)y Con 
Caed Cathath. — Note by Lord Arraiimoie. 



230 THE o'buiens and 

aside the volume, when a beautiful vignette of 
the head of St. Grellan, the founder of his 
native town, induced him again to look into the 
text.) 

664t. — The saintes multiplie exceedingly, and 
the lande being overrun with them, many are 
sent into foreign coun trees on the mission of the 
Propaganda ; and Saint Grellan, a young novice, 
being ordered to Germanie by the abbot, is loth 
to lave the place. His heart being hardened, 
he refuseth to quit, and calleth the abbot, who 
was oulde and deaf, a Bod-haire* and is ex- 
communicated by bell, boke, and candle-light, 
for breaking the first rule of the churche — obe- 
dience — and is sent out of the island in a bot- 
tomless boat, and sees a greate star in the lake, 
and finds it was a toothe dropped by Saint Pa- 
trick two hundred yeares before ; and takes it 
for an omen, and by light of same, walks the 
worlde long and lone, bare foot and bare headed, 
through bog and brake, fern and fassagh, and 
ford and plash ; and reaching Croick Fuineah, 
* A deaf or stupid person. 



THF, o'flahertys. 231 

(now St. Grellan), wake and weary, lycth him 
down to die, sore suffering in sowl and sole. A 
deep sleep cometh on him, within reach of tide 
and floode, but the water retireth back on every 
side to the measure of four caracutes of lande, 
and left that place dry ever after, that is now the 
bawn or deer-close of the court of the abbey ; 
and in memory of this marvellous miracle, Saint 
Grellan builded him a cell, of which that rock 
was the foundation, and stands to this day, nigh 
to the ould druid's cormach, by name of Carig- 
ny-Grellan-an-Sanctha — the holy rock of Saint 
Grellan. Out of this cell grew the great abbey, 
or monasterium Crovense, now the greatest in 
the lande, of which St. Grellan was founder 
and first abbot, and builded a new city round it 
for the continual resort of Frinch, Allimandes, 
Saxons, or English, Picts, and Italians, and 
other barbarous nations, repairing there to be 
instructed in a strict course of lyfe ; and was 
buried here ; so that it may be called the store- 
house of learning and holiness for the christian 



2S2 THE o'bRIEXS and 

worlde, and generall sanctuarie of saintes and 
apostels. 

988. — And now the people of Connaught, 
headed by their kings and chiefs, and led on 
by the great O'Fflaherty, kingof lar Connaught, 
invaded the territories of the O'Briens, from 
West Munster to the isles of Arran ; and by 
way of bravados, cut down the famous tree of 
Maghadoire, under which the kings of the 
(3'Brien race were crowned. And it fell out, 
that Brien Borrii, now king of all Munster, 
stomached by this bouldnesse, saileth with a 
powerful army up the Shanon, and overrunning 
the western partes of Connaught, spoyled and 
laid waste the same, slaying O'Fflaherty, and 
Murtoch son of Conor, king of Connaught, and 
other princes, without distinction ; and retiu'ned 
home with the spoyle. The great Abbey of 
Moycullen, founded by O'Fflaherty, chief of 
that name, and Prince of Moycullen, for the 
order of St. Bridget, whereof his daughter, 
Bevoine O'Fiiaherty-ni- Brian was first Abbess ; 



THE O'FLAHEKTYS. 233 

and this name of Bevoine became of great note 
and sanctity in the family ever after, till the 
mishap of Abbess Bevoine the Second, in the 
sixteenth century. 

[O'Brien paused here in tlie perusal of the 
manuscript. The name of Bevoine O'Flaherty 
was familiar to his memory. Either it had 
found a place in some of the wild tales of his 
foster mother, Mor-ny-Brien, in the isles of 
Arran, or he had lisped the name in his infancy. 
The sound, as he now audibly repeated it, came 
upon his ear as the echo of sounds known, and 
half forgotten • — at once sweet and sad, the 
general character of old and broken recollections. 
He took up the manuscript and continued.] 

1120 — And now great descents and other 
trespasses by the O'Fflaheriies on the Clan Teig 
O'Briens of the isles of Arran, whom they bate 
back to the mountains. The Mac Taafs and 
the O' Flaherties fall to odds for a prey of 
cattle. Create cosherings and cuttings on the 
people. Danisli pirates spoil the lande, and 



S34 THE o'briens and 

put all to the sword, the rest carried off by the 
plague. 

1260— Murrogh O'Brien, chief of the Clan 
Teigs, prince, or lord of the isles, and near 
a-kin to the great king of Thumond, falls to 
odds with St. Grellan — greate cutting and 
coshering; the Abbot excommunicates him, he 
refusing his Easter oblation; he, Murrogh, 
layeth stone and faggot to the Abbey walls, 
cleaves the Abbot's scull with a hatchet, and 
carryeth off" greate spoyl to the isles. The 
O'Fflaherties taking advantage of same, come 
down upon the town, and plunder the people 
with fire and sword, who cry woe ! and ohone ! 
(anglice, alack ! ) and the Mac Taafs waiteth 
for a pounce at the pass of Glen Murrogh, take 
a prey of cattle from the OTflaherties; great 
skirmishes through other. 

1150 — And now Murrogh of the isles, being 
stricken in years, became sore troubled of con- 
science, in respect of cleaving of the Abbot's 
scull with his hatchet, pays an eric for the 



THE o'flahertys. 235 

Abbot''s head of 3000 cows, and maketh over 
in gift and oblation every caricute of lande he 
had won or held in the Bally-boe of St. Grellan 
to the Abbey, giving in lieu of the Abbot's 
head his best lands along the coast, also 500 
herrings, and 5,000 oysters from every buss 
or barque, boat or picear, breaking bulk on 
his head land on the coast of St. Grellan, 
called Knock-ny-huing, which are the best 
gifts in the bishoprick to ^his day, together 
with three holy crosses, brought from Rome, 
two embroidered vestments, for the Abbot, and 
a golden chalice. And so he took the cowl, 
and retired to a cell in the Abbey of Moy- 
cuUen, in the habit of the order ; where his 
tomb may still be seen to this blessed hour. 
He was callendered a saint by the Pope. 

1161 — Strange shippes neare the harbour of 
St. Grellan, thought to be English. The 
O'Fflaherties goe to armes, and gather on the 
coaste ; the strange shippes make off. The 
divill sett his foote after them. 



236 TUE O'BRIENS AND 

1162 — King Henry Fitzempress of England, 

having caste in his mynde to conquer ould 

Ireland, seeing it commodious so to do, and 

being invited by the Irish princes fighting 

througli other, gets a grant of the island from 

Pope Adrian, (bad cess to him, Amen !) and 

entering by force of armes, breakes the bounds 

of Ireland, according to ould prophecy, 

** At the creek of Bagganbun 
Ireland will be lost and won ;'* 

The invaders having no hope of the harbour 
of St. Grellan, as I have shewn. 

1175. — Munster submitteth (to the greate 
moan of the lande). Rorie O'Connor, king of 
Connaught, calleth a gathering of the chiefs of 
the prowence, layeth before them the dangerous 
estate of the lande : — for council and discretion 
are wont to stay hasty motion, and stop the 
course of rash device ! So to armes they goe, 
horse and foote, kern, and gallow glass, stockah 
and horse-boy, chief and tributary ; the king at 
their head, the OTflaherties bearing the banner 



THE o'lLAHEIlTYS. 23T 

of the province; which put the M'Dermotts in 
dudging, and the O'Briens of the Isles dis- 
puting the king's right, claymed of ancient pri- 
vilege by the OTflaherties of lar Connaught : 
and so they cross the Shannon, and preyed the 
country to the walls of Dublin, where lyeth 
encamped Earl Strongbow, with his Norman 
gallants, who were fine in their apparel, nor 
could endure service in maresh and border, like 
the Irish, nor brooked open and remote places, 
prefering a warme chamber and furre gownes 
to woodes and bogges ; standing upon the pan- 
tofles of their reputation, calling the Irish bar- 
barians, polling, pilling, extorting, and what 
not. 

And now the Irish chiefs, out of old grudges, 
fall to odds through others — the O'Briens against 
the O'Fflaherties — and are surprised by the 
Strongbonians,* who shew them small mercy ; 

* Speaking of this event, Harding, the admirable his- 
torian of Gal way, observes, " These unhappy dissensions 
were at all times the cause of their (the Irish) ruin." 



238 THE O'BRIENS AND 

many are slayne, and many cross the Shannon, 
back with King Rorie, who maketh his peace 
with the English king, sweareth allegiance, and 
holdeth the kingdom of Connaught ex sub eo ;* 
and so it was as ever more in the londe. 

1179. — English first sette foote in Connaught 
province. O Fflaherty plasheth his woodes, 
and raiseth a castle of stone in St. Grellan, at 
which the bards cry '' shame !" And Dermod 
More O'Brien, prince of the Isle of Arran, re- 
ceives this yeare twelve tuns of wine for pro- 
tecting the towns of St. Grellan and Gahvay 
from all pirates and privateers. Now this 
Dermod More was immediate ancestor of 
Terence Baron O'Brien, now of St. Grel- 
lan, but formerly of Moyvanie and Cluantes in 
Munster, and of Caoluisge in Connaught, with 
a Caput Baronicum castle, or battled house, 
raised not without king's licence in the liberties 
of Dublin, the capital of the realm, now called 
O'Brien's House. 

• This O'Connor was the last of the Irish monarchs; he 
died in the abbey of Cong. 



THE oVlahertys. 239 

King Henry III. seizes on the province, 
bestows it on one Richard de Burgho or Burke, 
head of the Clanrickards, who marcheth on St. 
Grellan, with English horse and foote, hght 
armes, jacks and sculls, and bows and arrows; 
and two-edged swordes, to the marvel and terror 
of the people ; but the Engli^ find ne dastards, 
ne cowards in the Ballyboe, but valiant men, 
stout hearts and handes, with horse and foote, 
and sling and sparth — the countrie faste with 
woode and bogge, and trenched and plashed. 
But of the towne and castle of St. Grellan, the 
English make small worke; the castle they 
crumble to the dust; and the townsmen being 
net-fishers, small craftsmen, and retainers of the 
abbot and bishop, are put to flight, the church 
alone is spared. Then was seen Giolla Dubh* 
OTflaherty More, issuing betweene two dark 

* Gialla, or Giall, was a great name in the O' Flaherty 
family ; but such ii the sweetness, copiousness, and great 
antiquity of the Irish tongue, that I know of no name in 
English to answer truly thereunto. Gialla or Giall ex- 
pressing manhood, or the state of man, in contradistinction 



^40 THE O'BIIIEKS AXD 

woodes, descending from his mountains ; his 
horse was fair, and ran as any stagge— he, tall of 
stature, well composed, and active, in counte- 
nance fierce ; in his right hande he bore a darte, 
which he caste from him in token of defiance, 
then seized his sparth from one of his captaines, 
he flew forth at the head of his chiefs and gallow 
glasses, so as to break the English arraie ! The 
Irish raise a shout ! — but the wary English, clip- 
ping them in betweene hill and sae, get them on 
the champaign countrey. And now, being man 
to man, great strife ensueth — the English charg- 
ing with their bows ! — the Irish hurl their slings ! 
Tlie English, with their accustomed art, gette 



to female, as one would say ; for Gialla or Giall, means a 
male-hostage, or pledge, man-servant, boy, or lacquey j 
baggage-driver in the army, armour-bearer, poet, chariot- 
eer, waiter, butler, or lower coachman, postilion, foot- 
man, runner, cup-bearer, groom, ostler, page, train-bearer, 
porter, confidant, secretary, plough-boy, sweep, or so- 
licitor, according to the word pJaced after it. Such 
is the copiousness of the Irish tongue." See the Sanas- 
gaoihlgesagsbhearla, or Irish English Dictionary, by 
O'Reilly, word Giall or Gialla. — Note by Lord Arranmore 



THE o'flahertys. 241 

the Irish betweene them and the sae, falhno: on 
them with their two-edged swords. The Irish 
being in tliis strait, choose to die like men, 
rather than drown like bastes — no vantage ground 
is there now — it booteth not to fly on any side ; 
they fight sore — no mercie, but dead blows ; the 
Irifih fall like leaves, within sight of their fathers' 
raths. The O'Fflaherty More is left in the 
midst of his enemies ; flourishing his sparthe or 
axe, swashing and lashing, like a lion among 
sheep, he backeth bravely towards the mountain. 
Some Irish, scattered among the bushes, raise 
the shout, and gathering together, come to the 
rescue; the EngHsh turn on them — the Irish 
make feint to rune away ; the English following, 
are bogged in low moor-ground, and being 
environed with marishes, forsake their horses, 
and fighting valHantly back to back, doe free 
themselves from their bottoms, and make close 
retrait. The Irish eagerly pursue, and charge 
them with their slings. One De Courcey, with 
his company, turn their faces, and fight a cruell 

VOL. II. M 



242 THE OBRIENS AND 

fight — the earth is strewn, the Suck runs blood ! 
Each claimeth the victory, but who got the best, 
there is no boast now made. 

The English gett off, under covert of night — 
the Irish that remayned, retraite to O'Ffiaher- 
ties* rath or fort in the mountaines of Moy- 
cullen, bearing the body of O'Fflaherty More 
on their shoulders; his mantle well rent with 
English arrows, the ouldest blood in the nation 
gushing from his heart. The monkes of the 
abbey come forth to meet them with reed and 
rush, and raise the '' ullaloo/' The abbot did 
solemnize his exequies with great reverence ; 
and to this day the people talk of the battaille 
of the pass of Glen Murrogh, where O'Fflaherty 
fell, defending his country : and no small blame 
was given to the Mac Taafs, w^ho kept aloofe, 
playing fast and loose, laving their Fassagh with- 
out watch or ward, standing on the pounce, to take 
a prey of cattle from the O'Briens of the isles, 
who were then fighting valliantly the good cause, 
in Munster, under O'Brien, Prince of Thumond. 



THE o'flahertys. 243 

A. D. 1240.— The English, masters of all the 
champaign country, built towers, castles, and 
forts, and churches. The realm at this time 
in pace— the chief in his mountains— the priest 
in his church— the souldier in his garrison 
— and the plowman at his plow. English 
and Spanish merchants settle in St. Grellan : 
charter of staple and murage granted, gate and 
town wall erected, and castle of stone and lyme 
builded. The town more English than Irish. 
The O'Fflaherties come down and scour the 
place. The O'Briens of the isles make a land- 
ing, and carry off greate spoyle. Great plague 
this yeare ; also, upon the neck of it, comes over 
one StefFano, with the pope's apostolick mandate, 
requiring the tenth of all moveables, to man- 
tayne his warres with Frederick, Emperor of 
Alemaine or Gcrnamie. The lords and laity, 
as well English as Irish, sayeth, " Nay, we will 
give the pope no tenths ; neither subject our 
locall possessions to the church of Rome." But 
the clergie, fearing the bulls of excommunica- 
M 2 



244 THE O'BRIENS AND 

tion, with grudging yielded ; the people send- 
ing after their money, bitter Irish curses ; they 
being all driven to the worst, selling their goods 
to merciless merchants to pay their tenths ; their 
cowes, hackneys, cadoes, cuppes, copes, altar 
cloths, chaHces, and aqua vitce. Father Thady 
IMac Taaf makes hard for the see of St. Grel- 
lan, but misses the cushion. The Kyng endea- 
voures to lay greate taxes on the Irish, to help 
him in his warres against the Frinch. Great 
polUng and pilUng of the Irish, which they 
could not brooke; so to warre they goe with 
the EngHsh,--the O'Neils of Ulster, O'Briens 
of Munster, O'Connors of Connaught, and 
O'Fflahertys of St. Grellan. 

1276. — Great slaughter of the Irish this 
yeare, and spilling of the ould blood — over- 
throw given to the Enghsh at Glendalory — 
Murtoch O'Fflaherty, a notable rebel, taken 
and executed — Thomas, Earl of Clare, slays 
O'Brien Roe— The Irish draw such draught, 
they shut up the English in Slew-Bany, and 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 245 

oblige them to cry quarter — Friar Falburn, 
B. of Waterford, Lord Deputy at this tyme. 

1280. — Rose cruell warres betweene the 
O'Fflaherties and the O'Briens ; great slaughter 
and bloode-shed ; also, between the Mac Der- 
motts and O'Connors. The Mac-an-earlies* 
overrun the country with fire and sworde. And 
now the Enghsh lordes and gentilmen begyning 
to inchne to Irish rule and order, certain sta- 
tutes are made for the preservation of English 
order, " that no Enghsh subjects should make 
alliance by altarage, or fostering wyth any of 
Irish nacion; nor no Englishman to marry an 
Irishwoman, on pain of forfeiture of lands and 
tenements, with divers other statutes for benefit 
of that Enghsh nacion." 

This yeare Monica Mac Taaf granted in 
Frankalmoigne to the cathedral of St. Grellan, 
3 void pieces of ground, her jointure lande and 
orchard, and her right to a mill on the river 
Suck, she retiring to a nunnery. 

* The earl's sons, the factious sons of the first Earl of 
Clanrickard. 



246 THE O'BRIENS AND 

1331. — This yeare, greate rebellion in Con- 
naught ; ringleaders cut off every where. Great 
skirmishes betweene the OTflahertles and the 
O'Briens. Great slaughter of the mere Irish 
(by the English of Leinster), in Connaught. 
A dearth ensueth, famine killeth where the 
sworde spareth. 

1336. — On St. Lawrence's day, the Irish of 
Connaught discomfitted by the English ;* were 
slayne three thousand Irish. Great variance 
betweene Fitz-Ralph, Primate, and the four 
orders of begging friars. Great storm e ! wolves 
come downe from the mountaines and devoure 
the abbot's deer ; he maketh offering to the 
three jewels of Ireland, St. Patrick, St. Bridget, 
and St. Colomb ; buildeth a stone fence, by an 
English mason of the towne; deer never de- 
voured after — praise be to the three jewels ! — 
Greate garboils in the churche. Bushoppe of 
St. Grellan claimes the tithe fishe and woode 

* The defeat of the Irish, led on byTeahhm O'Connor, 
at the battle of Athenry, established the English power in 
Connaught. 



THE o'flahertys. 247 

landes. Abbot of Moycullen proveth that the 
O'Briens gave ten acres of woode and stony 
orrounde, in 1210, for ever in fte soccage, not in 
capite ; also any black rent thereupon ; also five 
hundred herrings, and five thousand oysters, 
from every buss or barque, boat or picar, break- 
ing bulk on his head-land on the coaste of St. 
Grellan, called Knock ny Huay. Bushoppe 
showeth a grant of the Pope for the same — they 
fall to odds. The OTflaherties back the abbot, 
the townsmen goe with the bushoppe, who is 
backed by the Earl of Ulster, and English 
troupes from Gal way. Bushoppe wins the day, 
and gets the oysters to this blessed houre. 

1400. — Greate oblations come in to the Abbey, 
and tributary offers from the great Irish families 
of the ould blood. Eel w^eir built. Holywell 
much resorted to. 

1490.— Father Paddy Mac Taaf, a purveyor 
and a fine birder, brings down eighty curlieus 
and fifty rails in one day. Great goss hawk at 
the Abbey, called '* the Prior," dies of a surfeit. 



248 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Greate disorder among the monks. St. Grellan's 
rule lost. Monks reformed by the friars of 
strict reformance of the Black Isle. Great glut 
of oysters this yeare ; the Bushoppe translated to 
heaven after supper one night, which reminded 
the people of the goss hawk. 

The Mac Taafs take English order, and goe 

in, doeing homage, and taking grant of their 

landes, before the Lorde Walter de Burgo, in the 

Castle of Portumna— also one of the O'Briens 

facit Jidelitatem et homaglum, 

1530.— The O'Fflaherties refuseth all par- 
lance with the Lord President, denying English 
laws and statutes,* with great abusion of re- 
proache for suche as take English rule, and 
order, and habite, and tongue, saying in the 

* ** So frequent were the breaches of public faith, and the 
insecurity of any pardon granted to the Irish, that they 
became hopeless, and maddened into resistance : for many, 
who were received into protection, without being guilty of 
any new crime, and without a legal trial, were afterwards 
condemned and executed, to the great dishonour of her 
Majesty, and discredit of her laws." — Manuscript in Trinity 
College, Dublifl. 



THE o'flahertys. 249 

teeth of the sayd Lord President, " that it be 
oone of the destructions of the Irish, their never 
being threwe to each other, but selhng themselves 
ever, and their mother lande, for title, and place, 
and power; — as the oulde Earle of Tyrone, 
O'Briens, Earles of Inchiquin, Macarthys, Earls 
of Desmonde, O'Connor, and others; but as for 
him, he would stick, as his father had done, to 
the ould Brehon law, mantle, glibb, and crum- 
hal ;" and so he retired to his mountaines, and 
raised a fine pile of defence, a tower and rath, 
(now called a bawn). 

1534. — Lord President, at the head of his 
bandes, with the banner of the province, six 
score kernes, and their captaines, a score bat- 
taille-axe, and little guidons, and a hosting of 
the men of Gal way, joyned by the Mac Taafs, 
attack the OTflaherties, and take the towne of 
St. Grellan. O'Fflaherty escapes to the moun- 
taynes — three of his sones killed — the towne of 
St. Grellan is bound in bond of recognizance, 
to observe the kyng's lawes, and pay obedience 
M S 



250 THE o'briens and 

lo the English governor ; Lord President to 
receive fee-farme and cess of the porte ; (oysters 
and herrings secured to the bushoppe) ; no 
black rent to be paide to any Irishman ; the 
President, for eight days, is to cut passes through 
the woodes adjacent to his majesty's subjects, 
and to cleare the mountaynes, so to rid the lande 
of the wilde Irish ; and the President giveth 
regrantes of the Abbey landes to our lord, the 
abbot, also confirmeth the domayne of the 
bushoppe (both Englishmen) ; together with 
sock, sack, and toll, and judgement of fire, and 
water, and iron, andtryal by combat and juris- 
diction of the gallows and pitt to one Kenelm 
Hunks, an Englishman, and scout-master of the 
province; to whom the low landes of the O Ffla- 
herties, being 4437 acres, with rents of 512/. 
sterling, are also made over for his good services. 
1536. — The O'Flaherty taken in armes by 
a hosting of the lord- president, and a quest being 
passed upon him, he was condemned to death, 
and the provost and officers led him to death. 



THE o'flahertys. 251 

And he, dying stout-hearted, cursed his pos- 
terity, who should learne Englishe, sow corn, 
or build houses, to invite the English. He was 
succeeded, according to the law of tanistry, by 
Giolla O "Flaherty, his nephew : a powerful man 
he was, dark of aspect, and strong of arme, 
of great valour, and eminent piety ; so that he 
re-edified and re-endowed the abbey, now fallen 
to decay : saying he would build for God, and 
not for man. He was a zealous and faithfull 
childe of the catholick church. 

1540. — Now heresy gaineth footinge in the 
londe: provost Hunks professeth it, and saying, 
" the king is pope," is excommunicated by the 
abbot. One Browne, an Augustinian friar, de- 
nyeth the pope's supremacy, and is made arch- 
])ishoppe of Dublin ; being the first of the clergy 
who embraceth the new heresy. 

1545. — Dissolution of monasteries proclaimed 
by the lord-president ; great hostilities and stir- 
rings ; Abbot escapeth to the Isle of SJattery ; 
Bushoppe conformeth, and so keepeth his owne. 



252 THE O'BRIENS AND 

1547. — New heresy established by proclama- 
tion ; the fine ould abbey church plundered of 
relics and images by English souldiers, and 
monks put to the sworde.* The abbey landes 
annexed to the see of St. Grellan. 

1551. — Mass restored by her most sacred 
majesty of blessed memory. Abbot and monks 
ijeturn to the abbey. 

The abbot, an OTlaherty, made bishoppe of 
St. Grellan; an English garrison received by 
the queen's order ; grant of immunity to the 
burghers thereoff. Giolla O'Flaherty keepeth 
quiet in his castle; endoweth the nunnery of 
Mary, John, and Joseph, with foure cantreds 
of mountaine lande, placing his daughter Bea- 
voin O'Fflaherty therein, as abbess, who receives 
a cross for the head of her crosier, from the 
Pope, contayning therein a bit of the true cross, 
which, to this day, is sworne upon. She was a 
fine and lovely lady, a great alms-giver from 

* See Theatre of Catholic and Protestant Religion ; also 
" Currey's Civil Wars." 



THE o'flahertys. 253 

her childhoode up, pre-eminent in learning and 
hospitality, and one who may be calendered for 
a saint, when her time cometh. 

1560. — Abduction of the Abbess of Mary, 
John, and Joseph, by Murrogh O'Brien, chief 
of the Isles, whocarryeth her off, she being on 
a pilgrimage to St. Patrick's Purgatory. And 
now greate strife and hurly-burly between the 
O'Fflaherties and the O'Briens ; no tidings of 
the abbess for a year and more. Giolla O'Ffla- 
herty attacks the Isles, and after much strife 
and uproarious contintion, expels the Clan Teig 
O'Briens, man and baste, and carries back his 
daughter, the abbess ; that is, her dead bodie, 
to jVIoycuUen, where she lies in a faire tomb, 
in the new chauntrey of the abbey. And a 
great cliree was raised over her by the women of 
the Bally boe. The story runneth, that she being 
much beloved by the said Murrogh, her abductor, 
and loving him much, from early youth, was 
forced to her veil and vow by her father, who 
hated the O'Briens, after the ould grudge. 



^54 THE O'BRIENS AND 

And willingly went she with the said Murrogh 
to his Isles, where they were married by a Fran- 
ciscan ; for he, Murrogh, was of the ould de- 
scent, tall and dark-eyed and very comely, as 
the Dalgaiscan or Milesian race ever were, and 
a goodly gentleman, and of the sword, and heir 
to many subtracts of gentry ; and had been sent 
more than once to bridle in the insolence of the 
O'Fflaherties, in ruffling times. He was, in his 
youth and prime, when first he beheld the most 
fair and lovely Beavoin, in the church of Mary, 
John, and Joseph, on an Easter day. And 
was called Murrogh na Spaniagh, from having 
been a sword and buckler man of the King of 
Spain, and fought valiantly against the Moors 
in Pagan lande. And the story went, that the 
Lady Beavoin was slain in his armes by her own 
father, who sought and found her within the 
walls of Dan ^Engus, the rathe or fort of the 
O'Briens of Arran and what not. — Be that as it 
may, the O'Briens of Arran never flourished 
after, as will be seen in history ; the OTfla- 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. ^5 

herties holding possession of their islands of 
Arran, until the Queen, on pretext, backed by 
pike and gunne, did claim said isles, and get 
them : which sheweth what doeth ever come of 
meddhngwith Godde'^s own. 

And here it seemeth notable to mention the 
ould Irish prophecy in regard of the O'Briens 
and the O'Fflaherties, that love and religion 
would ever be fatal to them ; till the cross, first 
planted in the land by St. Grellan, should rise 
triumphant by Godde's grace, and by the strong 
arme of the O'Briens. For it is well known 
that Heaven did openly manifest its favour to 
the great Aongus O'Brien at the battle of Ive- 
leathian, — a sword falling from a cloud at his 
feet when he was sore pressed ; with which he 
won the victory, and killed with the same sword 
the usurper of his crowne and kingdom, Mog 
Muagad ; and hence the crest of the O'Briens, 
a naked arm issuing from a cloud, brandishing a 
sword, all proper. Motto — " Vigueiir de dessus."^ 
And further goeth the prophecy of him shall re- 



^156 THE o'briens axd 

store his church and sept, an Irish distich, which 
done into fair English e, thus inditeth : — 

" Midst iEngus foilorne 
Shall th' O'Brien be borne ; 
And bear in his face 
The mole of his race." 



Here O'Brien laid down the MS. which he had 
read with rapidity. He smiled to think how 
readily the accidents of his own birth and person 
might, in darker times, have been turned to the 
account of party, by the influence of superstition 
or craft, as in the instance of O'Donnel Baldearg. 
For the rest, the impressions made were very 
different from those which similar records, tra- 
ditionally learned in childhood from the story- 
tellers of the isles of Arran, and confirmed by 
Keating and O'Fflaherty, had awakened. In the 
fables of national vanity and poetical hyperbole, 
he had then seen only a race of saints and heroes, 
perfect as the types of the martyrology, and ideal 
as the chiefs of Ossian*s poetic strains. He now 



THE o'flahertys. 257 

saw them as they were, a barbarous people,* 
checked in their natural progress towards 
civilization by a foreign government, to tlie 
full as barbarous as themselves ; their boasted 
learning, a tissue of monkish legends; their 
government, the rudest form of the worst of 
human institutions — feudality ; their heroes, 
bold, brave, fierce, and false, as men, acting 
under the worst political combinations, and the 
most vehement of human passions : constantly 
opposed in domestic quarrels, to the destruction 
of their common interests, and always op- 
pressed, because always divided. Still he saw 
them valiant, proud, and spirited ; liighly en- 
dowed, full of that creative imagination which 
constitutes genius, and animated by those strong 
passions which anticipate time, and lead to social 
advancement, by prompt decision and uncalcu- 
lated innovation. 

In the story of Murrogh O'Brien and Bea- 
voin OFlaherty, there was something that 

• Barbarous as the rest of Europe, in the dark times 
which preceded the glorious middle ages of the south. 



258 THE o'briems and 

touched and even affected him ; rudely and 
simply as it was told. What a world of feeling ! 
— what struggles of passion and piety ! — of pre- 
judice and predilection ! — what incidents and 
adventures, in the church of St. Bridget, in the 
wild fastnesses of Moycullen, on the turbulent 
Atlantic, and the rocky isles of Arran ! The 
destiny also of the two families, thus engrafted 
on the history of a country, and inteiwoven with 
its wrongs ! For the false combinations of a 
barbarous legislature nourished the provincial 
and municipal feuds, and cherished by persecu- 
tion the institutions which so often quenched 
" those best of passions," love and patriotism. 

It was curious to observe the same system 
still re-producing the same effects. His devout 
grandmother, Onor-ny-Flaherty, the origin of 
his own present adverse state, the victim of love 
and of a devotion equally ill-regulated. Rory 
Oge, the clan Tieg O Brien of his day, — and 
again the mysterious rumours of the abduction 
of his aunt, the Abbess of St. Bridget, by the 
accomplished but profligate Count O'Flaherty ; 



THE o'flahertys. 259 

which he had so often heard alluded to in his 
boyhood, but which his father, rather evasively, 
than positively, denied. His granduncle, too, 
the Abbate O'Brien ! the awful object of his 
boyish recollections I his father himself, writh- 
ing under some " compunctious visitings of 
conscience," connected with the religion he had 
abandoned, and to which he afterwards relapsed ; 
— the perversion of his talents under the pressure 
of national prejudices, nurtured by national 
wrongs — his misfortune, his ruin, his long and 
mysterious absence — the inheritance of misery 
he had purchased for his son — a pauper no- 
bility — the perpetual struggle between pride 
and indio;ence ! — all these convictions crowded 
on his mind, and sunk him into the deepest 
despondency. He threw himself back in the 
old and creeking chair, and covering his eyes 
with his hands, yielded to impressions of 
wretchedness, which come with such fearful 
force when the spirits are previously prepared 
by malady or their own depression, to exaggerate 
circumstances in themselves baleful and dis- 



260 THE O'BRIEN'S AND 

astrous. He sighed deeply and often,- and 
once he thought he heard his sigh re-echoed — 
and so distinctly, that he started on his feet 
and listened ; but all was silent, save the pat- 
tering of the rain against the windows, or the 
beating of the wind against the old gables. 

He again, therefore, took his seat, and was about 
to resume the old chronicle, when at that mo- 
ment, either the rattling of wind in one of the 
apartments, which opened into the sitting-room, 
produced a singular noise, or somebody moved 
within. O'Brien arose, and advanced to a door 
exactly opposite the place where he sat ; but 
it was fastened. Believing that the move- 
ment (if any other than that by which the 
increasino; storm shook the old edifice, and more 
than once brought the old woman''s wai'ning to 
his memory) was occasioned by Robin, who 
kept his sad vigils below by the bier of his 
grandmother, he again stirred up the fire, 
trimmed his wax-light, and re-assumed the 
annals. In turning over the leaves, he per- 
ceived that two pages enveloped with silver 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 2()1 

paper, had stuck together. He opened them 
with some difficulty, and discovered a superb 
vignette, the chef d'oeuvre of the book. It ex- 
hibited a faithful view of the Gothic archway 
of the Convent of Mary John and Joseph at 
St. Grellan, as he had last seen it in his boy^ 
hood. Within its deep shadow stood a woman 
in a religious habit, her head turned back, as if 
taking a last view of that altar (faintly sketched 
in the remote perspective) to which she had 
vainly vowed the sacrifice of all human passions. 
Without the arch, and leading her by the hand, 
with an apparently gentle violence, stood a 
young man in the Irish habit, as it was worn 
in Connaught in Elizabeth's time, in spite of 
laws and statutes forbidding truis and mantle, 
glib and coolun. O'Brien was struck by the 
bold outline of this figure, sketched as it was 
upon the sunny fore-ground, " a colpo di pen- 
nello,^^ after the manner of Salvator Rosa*s 
strong, but careless figures. All but the head 
was a mere sketch ; but that was a finished 



262 THE 0''bRIENS and 

miniature. It was full of beauty, both in ex- 
pression and colouring ; and it seemed the high 
wrought copy of some original model, tinged 
with the idealism of the painter's fervid fancy. 
It was too much in nature, not to be a portrait, 
for there was even a dark mole upon the cheek, 
— but it was too beautiful, not to have received 
some of that " purple light,'' with which genius 
knows how to embellish truth and nature. As 
he held the picture nearer to the light, he 
thought he had somewhere seen such a face. 
The mole, too, the O'Brien mole, like the cross 
of the O'Donnels ;* such a mole as he himself 
had on his left cheek I He paused, and looked 
again ; and blushing deeply, though alone, he 
at last recognized his own flattered resemblance. 
Amazement,, the most profound, — amazement 
even to an emotion that quickened his breathing, 
and accelerated the pulses of his heart, took pos- 
session of every sense. Who was this charming 

• A mark said to be common to the members of this 
family. 



THE O^LAHEIITYS. 263 

artist, whose exquisite skill and delicate flattery 
had substituted his head for that of his celebrated 
ancestor, Murrogh-na-Spaniagh, one whose va- 
lour and heroism were on record, and who had 
died the victim of both, in the war of the Earl 
of Tyrone ? 

In assigning this introduction of his own 
resemblance to paternal vanity, he was still at a 
loss as to the ingenious painter who had taken so 
perfect a likeness, for which the original had ne- 
ver sat. Conjecture was vain ; this little incident 
belonged to the mass of mysteries, in which his 
father had shrouded all his actions. Still such 
is the unconscious influence of self-love, that 
O'Brien took up the manuscript with a new 
and deeper interest ; but in replacing the vig- 
nette, he again unconsciously examined it with 
increasing accuracy. Details came out in the 
scenery, with which he was well acquainted. 
Every thing was clear, but that which he 
most wished to behold ; for the face of the 
erring abbess was shrouded in her veil. His 



264 THE OBRIENS AND 

excited imagination, however, lent to tliis vic- 
tim of bigotry a charm, beyond that of mere 
mortal beauty, a charm which high wrought 
enthusiasm and deep seated passion ever give 
to the countenance and figure they animate and 
inspire. 

Under the influence of particular impressions, 
accidentally given to a mind the most imagina- 
tive, O'Brien had formed an ideal model of female 
influence, arising out of a position which placed 
the object beyond the reach of man's pursuit, 
and therefore the more irresistibly attractive. 
Such a character, formed to lead, to overrule 
all within its sphere, he suspected, he believed 
did exist, hiding beneath the religious scapular 
and vestal's veil, energies and talents that are 
rai'ely found in women divested of strong pas- 
sions and vehement affections. He believed this 
highly endowed and enlightened being, with 
powers misdirected and overwrought, was but 
an accident in a system, an agent in a cause, 
which blasted and perverted all that fell within 



THE o'flahertys. 26e5 

its sphere. He imagined for a moment such a 
woman drawn off, and induced to abandon the 
gi-eat object for which she had been reared, and 
to which she had been devoted. He imagined 
in the invisible Abbess on whose veil he now 
gazed, such a woman— and the man I — He 
sighed ! What were a thousand Lady Knock- 
loftys to such a being ? 

He again took up the manuscript and read ; 
but read for a minute with distracted attention, 
until gradually falling in with the subject, it be- 
came again deep and concentrated. 

****** 

(Annals resumed.) 

1 560. — And now, Murrogh O'Brien gets a dis- 
pensation from the Pope, making his marriage 
lawful with the Abbess of Moycullen ; and his 
son, Murrogh-an-Urlicaen^ (Murrogh of the 
curly head), their issue legitimate. And of this 
issue of Prince Murrogh, of the isles, and Beavoin 
O'Fflaherty, comes the family of the present 

VOL. II. N 



^66 THE o'briens and 

Terence O'Brien, late of St. Grellan, Esq., and 
claimant of the title of Arranmore. 

1570. — Mass again put down. Litany or- 
dered to be read in English, in the cathedral of 
St. Grellan. Popish images and relics to be 
removed. Every catholic not going to church, 
to be fined. The cathedral walls painted white. 
Scripture texts wrote on the same "in place" 
(sayeth the ordinance) "of idolatrous images:" 
great and sore persecution of the pore cathohcs, 
townsmen, and burghers, English and Irish. 
Abbot flies to Arran isles. Monks driven into 
boggs and fassaghs by English souldiers. A 
large bible sent down to be placed in the midst 
of the choir of the cathedral church of St. 
Grellan, to be read by the people, on penalty : 
(none reading English in that tyme, save the 
genteels, and few of them.) Castellated house 
built for the new prelatical bishoppe, called a 
palace, the ould castel, or mess, in the close, 
being much decayed. And now the Queen 
being insensed of the outrages of the O Fflaher^ 



THE o'flahertys. 267 

lies on the O'Brien's isles, a commission is issued 
showing that the sayd isles do belong neither to 
O'Brien nor to O Fflaherties, but to her majesty 
in right of her crown ; so, by her letters patent, 
she bestoweth same isles upon an English cap- 
tayne and his heirs, so that he would mantayne 
there twenty English soldiers. The county and 
towne of Galway and Bishop of St. Grellan 
memorial the Queen in behalf of sayd O'Brien, 
Lord of the isles since the Milesians, but in 
vain ; and the Mac Tiegs still claim these as 
their patrimony, and will evermore, to the ind of 
time and after. 

1590. — And now the O'Fflaherty being ac- 
cused of declaring against the Queen's supre- 
macy, saying "she was no pope;" and not 
obeying the proclamation, and refusing to come 
in, at the raihmore of Mulloghmaston ;* and 

• The English published a proclamation, inviting all 
the well -affected Irish to an interview at the rathmore, at 
Mulloghmaston, engaging, at the same time, for their se- 
curity, and that no evil was intended. In consequence of 

k2 



268 THE o'beiens and 

also accused of saving and succouring the crew 
of a Spanish bark, wrecked on his head lands ; 
and he holding off with delays and delusions to 
answer these charges, the Lord President or- 
dered the warre to be prosecuted gainst him, 
and a hosting to ride forth into his mountains : 
and so his territory was plundered, his tower 
taken, and he hunted into the woodes. And 
now the people of Connaught are sore driven 
by their English Lord President, Sir Ri- 
chard Bingham : the sheriffs, and other officers 
following his example, enter county and town, 
barony and Ballyboe, and burgh and bishop- 
rick of St. Grellan, with large bodies of armed 
men, pillaging, polling, violating, and murther- 
ing, where they list, and other barbarities as 
" were sufficient to drive the best and quietest 

this engagement, the well-affected came to the rathmore 
aforesaid, and soon after they were assembled, they found 
themselves surrounded by three or four lines of English 
and Irish horse and foot, completely accoutred, by whom 
they were ungenerously attacked and cut to pieces, and not 
a single man escaped. — See Curry's Civil Wars. 



THE oVlahertys. 269 

state into a sudden confusion."* So that by 
famine, sword, and plague, the people are 
brought to such wretchedness as any stony heart 
would rue the same ; out of every corner of the 
woodes and glynnes they came creeping forth 
upon their hands— their legs no longer bear 
them, — they like anatomies of death — they eat 
dead carrion, sparing not to scrape dead car- 
cases out of the graves. If they found a plot of 
shamrocks or cresses, they flocked unto it as to 
a feast ; and the oulde chief O'Fflaherty flying 
into the woodes, was there in a cabin slaine, his 
head cut off" and sent to the Lord Deputy, 
having only a friar and horse-boy with him. 

And now the O'Fflaherty, (his son,) is forced 
to come in. Though at the head of a powerful 
body of kernes and gallow-glasses, he submitteth, 
and surrendering all his possessions, received them 
back by letters patent, that same yeare, reciting 
that, '' although the queen and her predecessors 

• The Lord Deputy Mountjoy's own words. 



270 THE O'LEIENS AND 

were the true possessors of the premises, yet that 
RorieO'Fflahertyandhis ancestors possessed them 
unjustly against the crown ;" and he being truly 
sensible of same, the queen accordingly granted 
to Sir Roderic, chief of his name, by the service 
of a knight's fee, all his manors, lordships, and 
domaines, with a proviso of forfeiture, in case of 
confederacy against the crowne. He rendereth 
the queen a greate service ; is made colonel in 
her army ; is knighted, and builds a noble castel 
of tenure, adjoining his old tower, with flankers 
and donjons. 

1603. — King James, of the ould stock, (Mi- 
lesian born), his access to the crowne ; long life 
to him ! Great rejoicings ; fires on every rock 
and rack in the Ballyboe; light on the top of 
O'Fflaherty's tower— seen six leagues off at sea. 
Irishry received into protection, which breeds 
much comfort and security in the hearts of men. 
Sir Roderic OTflaherty elected a free man, he 
bearing scott and lott ; sits in Parliament ; dis- 
putes precedence with Colonel Teague O'Brien, 



THE o'flahertys. 271 

which is adjudged to the former; they fight 
near I&od's Chapel,* in Isod's Park ; both are 
wounded. 

1617. — Proclamation, for banishing the popish 
regular clergy, made in St. Grellan ; great moan 
and marvel thereat. Sir Roger O'Fflaherty 
censured in the Star-chamber of Dublin for 
speaking slightingly of the King's supremacy ; 
retires to his castle in the mountaines. 

1623. — Proclamation requiring popish clergie, 
regular and secular, to depart the kingdom, 
forbidding all converse with them ; great moan 
through the Ballyboe ; the Abbott of Moycullen 

holds his ground, backed by his sept. 

1636. — Convent of Mary, John, and Joseph, 

of the order of St. Bridget, and other religious 

houses, seized to the King's use. 

1641. — Great Irish rebellion put down by 

the King's forces; in the heat of which, starts 

up one of the clan Tieg O Brians to claim the 

Island of Arran, 

* Now chapel Izod. 



272 THE O'BRIENS AND 

1645. — Great rebellion in England ; King 
murdered. 

1649. — Parliament forces overrun the lande ; 
great murther of the Irish ; country burnt about 
Leinster — two thousand fires at once, seen from 
the steeples there; great plague and famine; 
meeting of chiefs, lords, burghers, and corpo- 
ration of St. Grellan, and lar Connaught, and 
Galway — resolve to remain faithful to the King's 
majesty. Sir Murtoch Na Doe O'Fflaherty 
raises a corps of two thousand men of his own 
people to join the royal forces ; but he refusing 
to truckle to " the excommunicator,"* and being 
a great catholic, got the name of "the Ma- 
rauder ; " and lending his aid to the Lord Clan- 
rickard in the King's behalf, kept his majesty's 
foes at bay, and often cleared the Ballyboe of 
the thieving Roundheads, but would join no 
foreigners. 

• The Pope's nuncio, Cardinal Rinuncinni, so called. 
The catholic loyalists were divided into two bodies ; the 
smaller, under the Pope's nuncio, were called the excom- 
municators ; the others, adhering to the King, but resisting 
foreign influence, were named marauders. 



THE o'fL.AIIERTYS. 273 

Battle of Knock na Clashy — the last ever 
fought between loyal Irish and English rebel. 
The Parliamentarians win the day ; old Sir 
Murtoch leaves three of his fine young sons 
dead in the field ; the youngest Bryan, the 
Tanist. joins the King's standard in foreign parts. 
The town of St. Grellan blockaded by Crom- 
well's troops under Coote and Stubbes ; towns- 
men resolve to sell their lives dearly ; famine 
rages ; two vessels laded with corn getting into 
the harbour, are pursued and taken by the Par- 
liamentarians. Proposals now sent to the be- 
siegers ; town surrenders to Colonel Stubbes ; 
articles being signed, are all violated. Colonel 
Stubbe preaches a sermon on God's mercy at 
the upper four corners. Surrender of the town, 
followed by a great famine and plague. 

1653. — The military governor (a great saint 
and preacher), under pretence of taking up idle 
persons, " who knew not the Lord," makes 
excursions nightly into the woodes, mountaines, 
and country; seizes a thousand persons and 
n3 



274 THE o'briens and 

more, without respect of rank or birtli, and 
transports them to the West Indies^ where they 
are sold for slaves. Contributions raised, to the 
entire ruin of the towns-people ; bible explained 
in the parish church, idiich is stripped of all 
ornaments ; fifty catholic clergie, caught in the 
woodes, are shipped for the West Indies. 

1654. — Petition from the English protestants 
of the towne to the council of state, that the 
mayor and chief magistrates should be English 
protestants, and the Irish or papists removed : 
ould corporation disfranchised; English soul- 
diers made free men ; orders issued, for all the 
popish or Irish inhabitants to leave the towne, to 
provide accommodation for English protestants. 
The St. Grellaners, driven out of the towne in 
midst of Avinter, — herd in ditches and poor cabins 
in O'Fflaherty's mountains. The town now a 
great barrack ; houses fit to lodge kings fall to 
ruin. O'Fflaherty's country portioned out to the 
Parliamentary souldiers. Mac Taaf 's fassagh 
sould to adventurers. Prelatical church or cat he- 



THF o'flahertys. 275 

dial converted into stables for dragoons ; chalices 
used as drinking- cups ; the lead of the ancient 
ould abbey of jMoycullen made into cannon-balls ; 
the choir turned into a brewery ; and Abbess 
Beavoin's Cross, without the town, turned into a 
gallows. Bishop's verger hanged for decorating 
the cathedral church with holly and ivy on the 
nativity of our Lord. Parson Hunks fined and 
imprisoned for celebrating the mass done into 
English, on same blessed day ; great meeting- 
house erected for " the service of God," de- 
frayed by applotments on the papists ; O'Ffla- 
hertie's silver tankard, and great salt-cellar, with 
a cover, seen on the English governor's table. 

1655. — Court of inquiry held to try a young 
gentleman, one Donogh O'Brien, of the clan 
Tiegs, found hiding in the caves of Knock Na 
Huay. under the fort of Dun ^ngus, in the great 
Isle of Arran, he being accused of murdering four 
protestants in the rebellion of forty-one. Proves 
he was not then born. Is condemned and cxe- 



276 THE O'BRIENS AND 

cuted same evening by torch-light, all the same, 
at Abbess Beavoin's Cross. 

Now the story ranne that he was the O'Brien 
Mac Tieg, who was the direct descendant of 
Murrofjh O'Brien and the Abbess Beavoin O'Ffla- 
herty, and that it was remarkable that he was 
hung upon the fine ould cross, erected by O'Ffla- 
herty Dhu for the peace of his daughter's soul, 
(the Abbess of St. Bridget,) at the four ways ; 
and upon St. Grellan's Eve, above all nights in 
the yeare ; and what was more remarkable still, 
that the said O'Brien was afterwards seen in the 
Isle of Arran, and swore many of the ould fol- 
lowers of the family upon the head of the Ab- 
bess's crozier to be true to the ould blood, and 
so sailed for Spayne. 

1656. — Order issued that the governor of St. 
Grellan do forthwith remove thereout all Irish 
papists, and that no Irish be permitted to inhabit 
therein, (unless disabled to remove through 
age or sickness,) so that now no Irish are per- 



THE o'fLAHERIYS. 277 

mitted to live in the town, or within six miles 
thereof. 

1660. — Restoration of the king's majesty; 
great rejoicing — fires on every rock and rath in 
the Ballyboe. Many of the new settlers quit 
the place— old natives hold up their heads. 
Kinjr orders the Lords Justices to restore the old 
natives to their freedom and estates.* Great con- 
tintions of the new settlers and ould inhabitants. 
Lords Justices turn a deaf ear to king's orders, 
who was said to have the two ways with him. 
Some of the ancient inhabitants flock to the 
town, but are expelled. Bishop and Abbot re- 
turn together in a herring-buss— the one to his 
abbey in the mountains, the other to his palace 

* *' The catholics of Ireland, in the great Rebellion, 
lost their estates for fighting in defence of the king," 
(says Swift) " and Charles the Second, to reward them, ex- 
cluded them from the act of oblivion, and issued a procla- 
mation, IGGO, * That all adventurers, soldiers, and others, 
in possession of manors, castles, houses, or land, of any of 
the said Irish rebels, should not be disturbed in their pos- 
sessions,' " 6cc. &c. 



278 THE o'briens and 

in the town ; they fall to odds about oysters and 
herrings. An inquisition taken, which finds that 
the abbey lands were vested in the crown in the 
reign of Henry VIII. The ould Abbot and four 
monks maintained in the ruins of the abbey by 
voluntary oblations. Old natives give security, 
backed by Lord Essex, Lord Lieutenant. Seme 
permitted to return, but driven out again by the 
corporation. Colonel Sir Bryan O'Fflaherty, 
the marauder, a great crony of the king''s, and 
kinsman by alliance to the Lady Castlemain, his 
most sacred majesty's concubine, (being one of 
" those specially meriting favour,* and without 
further proof to be restored,") repossesses his 
estates; and the adventurers, or English settlers, 
removed thence, were reprized in forfeitures 
upon the estates of the Hunkes, and others 
manifesting rebellious intentions against his late 

* " • Who have, for reasons known unto us, in an 
especial manner, merited our grace and favour.' Among 
these favoured persons were Lord Taaf, Sir Brien O'Flaherty, 
and a hundred others." — See Irish Statutes, Charles II. 



THE OFLAHERTYS. J^'JO 

majesty ; also on tlie estates of some of the 
O'Briens : they being "Irish popish rebels of the 
confederate aimy, over whom his majesty hath 
obtained victorie by his English and protestant 
subjects." Sir Dermot returns to Moycullen, to 
the great joy thereofF. Repairs the ould abbey, 
and fits up the place for his own residence. 
Clears the pass of Glen Murrogh, so that my 
Lord President's coach drives within one mile 
of the stone gate of the outward court, on the 
occasion of the young Tanist's birth. Great 
doings, and the ould hospitality. Silver tankard 
and great salt-cellar, with a cover, found in a 
bog and restored to the family. Colonel Sir 
Bryan OTflaherty, in consideration of his ally- 
ance in bloode to the whole towne, he and his 
posterity shall hereafter be freemen of the cor- 
poration. Great discontent of the townspeople ; 
they mortgaged most of the corporation landes 
for several sums of money, which they handed 
over to the Lord Clanricarde for the king's ser- 
vice. After restoration, said loyal mortgagers 



280 THE o'briens and 

were found to be forfeiting persons, the premises 
vested in the king under act of settlement, who 
granted the entire to a fair lady,* widow of one 
of the grooms of his chamber, and this was the 
entire ruin of the town. 

1686. — His most sacred majesty James II. 
proclaimed ; all the ould natives and ancient in- 
habitants flock back to the town, without let or 
hindrance, and are restored to their properties 
and freedom. And now returns the O'Brien, 
chief of the clan Tiegs, from Spain, and recovers 
lands and fiefs, through the king's justices, and 
has good effects in Clare and elsewhere, and 
prepares his claims to bring before the Lords 
Commissioners of the High Court, established to 
that intent. The catholic clergy reclaim their 
respective places of worship. Abbey choir re- 
paired, and windows sashed. 

1690. — Great protestant rebellion, headed by 
the Prince of Orange. Protestant inhabitants 

* AMrs. Hamiltou, 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 281 

of St. Grellan sent out of the town to the north 
suburbs, for better security thercofF. The friars 
of St. Grellan supply stores and other materials 
for the fortification of the town. Colonel Sir 
Roderick O'Fflaherty raises a regiment among 
his own people for the king's service. Great 
preparation in the town. 

1691. July 12.— Battle of Aughrim— all 
lost. The town of St. Grellan surrenders; 
English army burn the suburbs ; the old natives 
and inhabitants quit the towne ; papists dis- 
armed. The prior of St. Francis flies to Spain, 
leaving one of the community to preserve the 
order in the town. The ladies of Mary, John, 
and Joseph, sent upon the Shaughraun^ flying 
to and fro, like doves in a dove-cote before a 
hawk. 

1691. — A large frog found in the fossee of 
the old castle of St. Grellan (now the jail), the 
first ever seen in the province since the time of 
Saint Patrick. 

1691. — King William's army plunder and 



282 THE O'BRIEXS and 

murder the poore Irish at pleasure, in spite of 
His Majesty's declaration ;* and many protes- 
tants and officers of the King's army who had 
more bowels and justice than the rest, did abhor 
to see what sport they made to hang up poore 
Irish people by dozens, without pains to exa- 
mine them ; they scarcely thinking them human 
kind : so that they now began to turn rappa- 
rees,-(- hiding themselves in the bog-grass of the 
Mac Taaf's fassagh, and in glens and crannies 
of O'Fflaherty's mountaines. And others of 
the better sort of papists, being driven out of 
the towne to go upon their keepinge, turn rap- 

* The wise and benevolent intentions of King William, 
with respect to Ireland, were frustrated at every step by a 
faction, and by the licecitious and disorderly rabble of 
foreigners who formed the greater part of the army. — See 
Harris's King William, and Burnet's History of his own 
Time. 

f " Those who were then called * rapparees,' and exe- 
euted as such, were, for the most part, poor harmless country 
people, that were daily killed in vast numbers, up and 
down the fields, or taken out of their beds and shot imme- 
diately." — Leslie's Answerto King's State of the Protestants, 



THE o'flahertys. S83 

parees, being forced to unquiet means. And 
before the woods were destroyed, or the moun- 
tains were cleared of their heath and under- 
wood, nothing was commoner than to find many, 
who from too much melancholy, grief, fear of 
death, and constant danger, being turned in their 
brains, did run starke, or live in tatters, subsist- 
ing upon herbs, berries, wild fruit, and the 
like.* 

[O'Brien paused, — he thought he heard the 
lock of the door turn. He listened; but all 
was silent, save the pattering of the rain against 
the windows, and the blowing of the wind in 
sudden gusts. He felt he was nervous, and 
again read on.] 

.... subsisting upon herbs, berries, wild fruit, 
and the like ; which gave occasion to the report 
of there being wild people in Connaught pro- 



* Of rapparees killed by the army, or militia, one thou- 
sand, nine hundred, and twenty-eight; of rapparees killed 
and HANGED by the soldiers, without ceremony, one hun- 
dred and twenty. — Dean Story. 



284 THE O'BRIENS AND 

vince, and more particularly in Connemara. 
And wild indeed were they, in these troubleous 
times, and down to the present ; and when one 
of them was taken, which was very difficult to 
compass, by reason of their great nimbleness, 
exceeding even that of the common game, it 
would be with long and extraordinary care and 
management that they were brought to their 
senses, and sure were they ever to remain 
affected, or light. 



THE oVlahertys. 885 



CHAPTER VII. 



THE RAPPAREE. 



By my troth, I will go with thee to the land's end. I am a kind of 
burr, I shall stick. 

Old Play. 



O'Brien had dropped the annals of St. Grel- 
lan. There was a moisture in his eyes that 
obscured their vision, and for a moment ren- 
dered the perusal impracticable. The last 
passage, which he had twice read over, as the 
timid recur involuntarily to the objects of their 
fears, had deeply affected him, both by a general 
inference, and by a particular instance. There 
was something in its graphic delineation, which 
almost realized the wretched outlawed Irish 
gentleman, and the hound-hunted Irish peasant 
of Cromwell's time. It had touched a nerve in 
his heart, which vibrated painfully to the im- 



286 THE O'BRIENS AND 

pression. Twice he had passed his hand across 
his humid eyes, and pshaw'd and pished away 
his womanish sensibility; and, determined to 
read no more on a subject, which, combined with 
the heavy storm without, and the dreary deso- 
lation within, was unfitting him for the interview 
he awaited with his unfortunate father, he was 
about to amuse himself with the vignettes, when, 
in the next page to the melancholy description 
that had so deeply aifected him, he found its 
illustration, in the full-length drawing of 

A rapparee. 

Or wild Irishman, 

Of the 18th century. 

It was evidently a portrait, being marked by all 
that truth, which a close copy of nature alone 
preserves. It represented a man in rude, vigor- 
ous senility. The figure was gaunt, powerful, 
and athletic ; but the countenance (the true phy- 
siognomy of the western or Spanish race of 
Irishmen), was worn, wan, and haggard, and full 
of that melancholy ferocity, and timid vigilance 



THE O FLAHERTYS. x8 i 

of look, which ever characterizes man, when 
hunted from civiUzed society ; or when in 
his savage, unaccommodated state, ere he has 
been admitted to its protection. A dark, deep, 
and sunken eye, with the Irish glib, cumhal, 
and prohibited coolun, or long, black, matted 
lock, hanging down on each side, added to the 
wild and wierd air of a figure, still not divested 
of manly comeliness. The dress, if a garb so 
tattered could be called a dress, was singular, 
Jt was that still worn at the time, by the natives 
of the isles of Arran : a frieze jerkin and truis, 
a conical cap of seal-skin, and the brog, or 
sandal, fastened by a latchet. From the shoulders 
fell a mantle, folded across the breast with a 
wooden bodkin ; the whole giving a most per- 
fect picture of a toild Irishman^ as he was called, 
and exhibited on the stage in his traditional 
dress and deplorable humiliation, from the time 
,of Charles the Second almost to the present day, 
— from Teague to Paddy O' Carrol. 

Here again O'Brien, as he gazed sadly and 



288 THE O^BEIENS AND 

intently, recognized the resemblance of one, 
once dearly loved, and still deeply lamented. 
Although apparently worn by time or suffering, 
the strongly marked countenance, the gigantic 
figure, the form and attitude, recalled his earhest 
friend and foster-brother — the Chiron of his 
infancy and childhood — the man who, in nature's 
own gymnasium, had taught him to climb, to 
run, to dive, to swim, to sling, to wrestle, and 
to hurl, — the man to whom he was indebted for 
that strength, agility, and adroitness, that robust 
and unalterable health, which had served him 
so materially in the arduous profession he had 
afterwards adopted. 

As he now gazed, in wonder and in pity, on 
this fine representation of a fine and noble animal, 
degraded into savagery, he recollected, with 
deep and dire emotion, the last moment in which 
he had seen the person, who had given the mode) 
of this characteristic picture. It almost maddened 
him, even at such a distance of time, to remem- 
ber the hour, the scene, the event. He had full 



THE oVlahertys. 289 

in his memory the dauntless, bold bearing of a 
being so loved, when led from a mock trial to 
instant execution, " unanointed, unanneaM"" — 
his cool and careless eye, the look of stoical in- 
difference he had worn, until he saw pressing 
through the multitude his mother, leading by 
the hand a youth — a mere child. Then, indeed, 
his countenance had changed ! O'Brien saw him 
turn his head, and hastily assist the executioner 
in the horrible preliminaries of his ignominious 
death : he saw the fatal cap, the rope — but he 
saw no more ! Even now, at the distance of 
eleven years, he sickened, as he had sickened 
then ; he felt the same fainting of the heart, as 
when he then fell senseless into the arms of the 
stern, tearless, and inflexible Mor-ny-Brien. 
The recollection suffocated him with emotion, 
he flung down the book, and rose to change the 
subject of his thoughts. But suddenly he 
paused, started back, shuddered. Doubting his 
senses, and as one spell-bound, he stood fixed, 

VOL. II. o 



290 THE o'beiens akd 

gazed intensely, and breathed shortly, but spoke 
not — for before him, on the threshold of the door, 
stood the object of his melancholy reminiscence, 
the awful original of that fearful and affecting 
picture, which had curdled his blood even to 
look upon. It was indeed '" the rapparee," not 
as he had seen him in the prime of manhood, 
but the same in form, in dress, in attitude, as 
the vignette represented him, and in that half- 
crouching position, the habitual posture of vigi- 
lance and fear. 

" Shane !" exclaimed O'Brien, after a long 
pause, tremulously and doubtingly ; "can it be ? 
— is it? — Gracious God !" 

With a spring, like that of a wild beast 
restored to its ravaged young, Shane darted 
forward; and with a stifled burst of sound, 
which resembled the last whining howl of a 

o 

dying wolf, — a sound such as those only emit, 
who have learned to " cry Irish," fell at his 
feet. 



THE o'FLAHEPcTYS. 291 

Clasping the knees of O'Brien with his huge 
arms, he fixed his upturned eyes on his face 
with such intensity, such wild tenderness, as 
made its object shudder. O'Brien bent down, and 
embraced his foster brother and hereditary clans- 
man, with all the earnestness of affection. It 
was a full minute before he could speak, or 
address him. 

" Shane,"" at last he cried, " you live then ? 
Y'ou are the person who has haunted me of 
late, who came to my rescue last night ; you, 
whom I thought I had seen murdered ! whose 
horrible fate first drove me forth a wanderer ?" 

" Ay, Musha ! Shane I am ; poor Shane 
a vie! Shane-na-Brien, who was hanged at 
Michael's cross, as was the fader afore him, 
for th* ould cause, praised be Jasus and his 
blessed moder, Amen ! And the mark's left 
on me to this hour shure, like Moran's collar."* 

* See O'Halloran's Antiquities of Ireland, 
02 



5292 THE o'bkiens and 

He bared his neck, as he spoke, and shewed 
a black circle, discolouring its muscular surface 
like a collar. O'Brien still bending over him, 
his hands clasped in his iron grasp, smiled on 
him through his swimming eyes, but strove in 
vain to speak ; while Shane, gazing on him 
with ineffable tenderness (for a visage so stern 
and wild), seemed wholly lost in the enjoyment 
of the meeting. At last, looking fearfully 
round, he dropped his deep guttural voice, and 
asked in a low mutter, " Have you Irish ?'' 

" Not enough to converse with you," said 
Murrogh. " I have almost lost my Irish, 
though I still understand it." 

'• Ay then," said Shane, still more wildly 
and vaguely, looking around him, with what 
seemed habitual caution ; and then again fixing 
his eyes on the face of O'Brien, CQ3vering timidly 
towards him, and muttering a phrase of Irish 
endearment, as if to disarm his apprehensions. 
He sighed deeply, exclaiming, " Och ! the great 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 293 

joy ! and do I touch you again, my Voiirneen 
Urlicaenr'* 

" You must rise," said O'Brien : " I cannot 
speak to you, while you keep this degrading 
and painful attitude. Pray rise, Shane ; you 
must, you must indeed !" 

" Huisht ! huisht ! a vie,'* said Shane, evi- 
dently confused and wild, and with a mind as 
wandering, as his affections were concentrated, 
" Huisht ! I wid not throuble you long. I'll 
only look on ye a vie for a taste, and just 
touch your little cruheen^ once again, and then 
I'll be off to the mountains the night, and nivir 
throuble you more — no, troth and fait, only 
pray for ye on the knees of my heart. '** 

" Trouble me ! Oh, Shane, how you mis- 
take me ! indeed I am rejoiced to see you — 
amazed, but still rejoiced. But after what 
passed last night, you are not safe here." 

*' Nil, nil^^'X said Shane, shaking his head. 

* My darling, my curly head. f Your hand. 

X No, no. 



THE BRIENS AND 

" Much as I desire to know by what means 
that life has been preserved, I dread to endanger 
it, by detaining you here a minute. You are 
not safe, Shane, here — I must repeat it." 

"iVi/m,"* sighed Shane; '' and am like the 
fox of Mam Turk, hunted from his lair, with 
the arcli-ghaid-f at his throath, and the pack at 
his traheens, aye indeed." 

" What could have brought you here, my 
dear Shane ?''' said O'Brien, gently forcing him 
to rise, and drawing forward one of the arm 
chairs, to induce him to sit down. But Shane, 
leaning against the old chimney-piece, as cha- 
racteristic as one of its own supporters, re- 
jected the offered seat, while O'Brien resumed 
his own, 

" And what brought me here .^" repeated 
Shane. " Och ! Musha, what but yourself, 
ma vourneen. Shure it's little Shane thinks of 
life, in regard o' that ; and have kept watch and 

* I am not. 

t The hound which first scents the morning dew. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 295 

ward upon you, since I first seed you in the 
great scrimmage yesterday ; and was in th' 
ould daoire* and you took me for an arracJi^f 
Musha, I'll engage ye did, and th' ould 
chree ' lambh laidre ahoo.^ ''J 

" The sound of your never-forgotten voice, 
the family war-cry, and your strange appear- 
ance, did indeed sorely amaze, confound, and 
agitate me. I knew not what to think of it." 

" Ay, Musha," said Shane, with a half 
yell'd laugh, that gave to his visage an expres- 
sion more grim, than even was natural to it — 
" and wouldn't shew mysel for fear to shame 
yez." 

" And whence came you, my dear Shane, — 
from Connaught ? ' 

'' Ay,*" said Shane. 

*' And how did you find your way ?" 

" Och I I followed the track of thim that 
led." 

* Oak-tree, f A fetch, or ghost. 

X The strong hand for ever. 



296 THE o'bRIENS A^B 

" And who were they ?" 

Shane rubbed round his shoulders, and 
answered, evasively and smilingly, from an old 
Irish song — 

*• Che shin ? Gudae shin 
Nogh wanneen shae gho.''* 

" But how did you know I had returned ?" 

'' Och ! I dramed it," replied Shane, " ay, 
indeed." 

"" When did you arrive in Dublin ?" demanded 
O'Brien, perceiving it was in vain to ask, what 
Shane chose not to tell. 

" Och ! Jasus be praised, yesterday, — and 
saw you afar off, a great Ge7idreanairc,f and 
knew ye by the knocking of my heart, and the 
mole on your cheek, and the eyes, and your 
mother's smile, agrah !" 

" Then, you had just arrived by the Phoenix 

* " What is it? What is it to any one, whom it doth 
not concern ?" 
t Officer, hero. 



THE o'fLAHEETYS. 297 

park, when I passed you under the tree at the 
head of my corps ?'"* 

*'Arrah! Musha, * that's it inth'ely!" said 
Shane, gradually cheering up : " and never lost 
sight of you after (sorrow sight), till this blessed 
minute, Jasus be praised, and found you in the 
Cean €orrah."f 

" You have learned to speak English 
fluently," said O'Brien, " since we last parted 
— but surely not in Connaught?" 

'' Nihil; but were it was well taught, shure." 

" And where was that, Shane ?'' asked 
O'Brien, almost amused. 

" Och, in Rome !" 

'' In Rome ?" repeated O'Brien, with incre- 
dulous astonishment. 

" Shure enough, and larned it of the Irish 
Dominicans of our Lady of Peace." 

" And what could have brought you to 
Rome, Shane ?" 

" 3Iea culpa, mea maxima culpa,'' exclaimed 

* Arra, or arrah : I pledge myself, 
f Cean corrah : " The Chief's House." 

t^ o 3 



J^8 THE o'bRIEXS and 

Shane, striking his breast with a terrific force ; 
while a slight convulsion passed over his grim 
features ; and he muttered with great rapidity 
and confusion some penitential prayers. Then 
suddenly assuming his wonted manner, he said, 
witli a smile, 

*' A great place it is." 

" Then you went to Rome," said O'Brien, 
with increasing amazement, "on a pilgrimage 
of penance ?" 

"• Ay, in troth : and the jubilee, and the 
Santa Porta, and the thrue cross !'"' And he 
drew from his bosom a string, to which one of 
those reliquaries was suspended, which are 
supposed by the faithful to contain a bit of 
the cross. 

" And how did you get to Rome ?" said 
O'Brien. 

" Och ! shm-e the grace of God and the 
blessed Virgin : and overtook in my corricle,* 

* These boats, made of wicker work, covered with hide?, 
are the only kind that could live a moment in the violent 



THE o'flahertys. 299 

a Gal way merchant bound for Leghorn ; and 
begged and prayed my way to the holy city. 
And shure,"" (he added, rubbing his hands 
suid turning their palms to the fire) — " our 
own cousin is suparior, father Kelly : and 
might have my bit and my sup to this day 
at our lady's of pace, only for ould Ireland, and 
the great yearning, ay troth." 

" But how did you escape from — from St. 
Michael's cross ?"" 

*' Och !" said Shane, cowering closer to 
O'Brien ; " Sure my moder wore the girdle 
dear, and see, here it is :" (and stripping back 
his ragged jacket, he displayed a small leathern 
belt, wrought over with Irish characters)* 
" and when they left me in great haste, the 
rain falling, and the storm blowing, and I like 

surf that generally beats on this shore j and it is astonish- 
ing what a sea they will venture to encounter. — See Survey 
of Clare. 

* Sir John Harrington observes, " It is a great practice 
in Ireland, to charme girdles and the like ; persuading 
men that, while they weare them, they cannot be hurt by 
any weapone." 



300 THE O'BRIENS AND 

the branch of a withered tree, Mor-ny-Brien 
cut me dowiij wid her own two hands and the 
help of God : and she reigns in glory with Christ 
and his mother this day, she that bore and saved 
me, in nomine patris et JiUi — Amen. Shure no 
harm could come to me while she lived — the 
last of the Binieds !* And she it was cut me 
down wid her own hands ; and in the caves of 
Cong, with fire and water, and the sign of the 
cross, gave back a pulse to the heart o' me, and 
breath and sight ; and the first word I spoke 
was an ave, and the next was a curse on the 
inimies of me and mine, to the ind of time. May 
the screech of the morning be on them, soon and 
often ! — May the evil eye open on them every 
day they sae light ! — May they never know pace 
nor grace in this world or the next ! — May they 
die in a lone land, without kith or kin to close 

their eyes ! — May they " 

" Hush, dear Shane," interrupted O'Brien, 
more shocked and alarmed by the expression of 

* Wise women. 



THE O'FLAHF.RTYS. 301 

insanity, that was gradually distorting his hag- 
gard features, than even by his wild impreca- 
tions. " Remember you have triumphed over 
your enemies, since you hve and are here — 
changed, indeed, since we last met in the isles of 
Arran, but " 

" Och, the sorrow much," said Shane, bright- 
ening up ; '' only in regard of the glib, and 
coolun, and cumhal ;" and he stroked back his 
long, matted locks from his visage, and roughed 
the stiff tufts which bristled upon his upper lip ; 
" and that's to hide me from th' inemy, since I 
corned here. For the heart o' me was in the 
place, and would rather be famished at home 
nor feasted far away ; and be hanged in the midst 
of my people, nor have the stranger close poor 
Shane's eyes in a foreign land." 

" But where, and how do you subsist .f*" 
asked O'Brien, his interest increasing with his 
compassion, and his early associations returning 
in all their ancient influence. 

*' Where is it. ^ and how.? Och, Christ is good, 



302 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and his holy mother, Sancta Virgo Maria ! — 
But the paper * is still on the church door at 
St, Grellan to this day, the blood-money for the 
informer ! — But who would inform against a 
Brien ? Not the clan Tiegs of Arran, nor the 
O'Flalierties of MoycuUen; and so keeps by 
times in the isles, and by times in the mountains, 
and sleeps where the fox has his hole, and the 
eagle his nest ; and never lays head under 
sliingled roof, nor goes near town or townland, 
nor where the Sassoni keep crock nor pan ; 
nor where the traitor leaves the track of his 
traJieens.'" 

" But how do you subsist ? — I mean, how do 
you live ? I know there is shelter in the hills 
and fastnesses of Connemara for the hunted and 
the persecuted ; but I remember when you fared 
well with our dear and excellent Abbe in the 
isles, and when your mother's hearth gave hos- 
pitality to all who needed it." 

* The proclamation of a reward for liia apprehension. 



THE oVlahertys. 303 

" Ay," said Shane, his countenance assuming 
great tenderness of expression at the recollections 
of his insular home, " Ay, and the cabin down 
by the cromleck, and the cow in the bawn, and 
St. Endeas' Cross, and the ating and the 
dhrinking, and the puffins, and the sunfish, and 
the uishge, and the meed. And now the great- 
grandson of Con-na-Brien Mac-na-Reagh, who 
built the first stone house in Arranmore, and 
killed six oxen at Holy tide for all who came, to 
be a poor wild shular man,^ without cot or 
cabin, only for the christians that throw him his 
bit and his rag. But what moan in that ? God 
is good ; and the poorest has a soul to be saved ! 
and there's berries on the bramble, and cresses 
in the ditch, and wather in the ford ; and is not 
that good enough for the wild Ixhh. giocah ?"-f* 

The bitter smile, and sharp tone with which 
this was uttered, went to the soul of Murrogh. 

" And has this been your lot, my poor friend?" 

* Wanderer. t Vagabond, or outlaw* 



304 THE O'BRIENS AND 

he asked, with a sigh ; " you, whose mother's 
plenteous board — my dear foster-mother — is it 
possible that they, who are honest enough not 
to betray you, would refuse to reheve your 
wants ?'^ He paused, and then added, " I re- 
member when the scullogs of Connemara were 
noted for their hospitality, and their door was 
never closed against the stranger." 

" The scullogs?" said Shane, sighing, and 
coming gradually to himself ; '' but it's not 
now as in th' ould time ; and when the poor, 
wild shular comes to the bawn, the curs bark, 
and the garlaghs cry : and then, a vie, the pride 
of the Briens 'bove all — " 

His voice faltered, and he dashed the big 
tear from his eyes, with that deeply ejaculated 
" Ochone ! " of Irish grief, which none but an I rish 
bosom can heave. He wept not, however, alone. 
O'Brien covered his face with his hands and 
wept too, but not fairly and frankly ; for youth, 
in its mistaken pride, blushes for the feelings by 
which humanity is most honoured. Still the 



THE o'flahertys. 305 

emotions he struggled to conceal, were not un- 
observed by one to whose lone and unrecipro- 
cated feelings such tenderness was bahn, — by 
one, whose temperament, made up of all the 
warmer and more vehement affections, was coun- 
teracted, but not wholly hardened by habits, 
which necessity alone had rendered savage and 
ferocious. 

" Come, come, Shane," said O'Brien, rising, 
and taking his huge hands kindly in his own, 
" 3'our trials, your sufferings are now, I trust, 
nearly over. Had my father known your situa- 
tion -but till within this last year, he has not 
I understand visited Connemara since my mo- 
ther's death — now, however, come what may, 
while I live, and have hands and strength to 
labour, you cannot want. With respect to 
your past afflictions, I am sure, a life so mira- 
culously saved, will not again be taken (even if 
you were recognized) upon the old accusation. 
But then, the adventure of last night was one 
of no small peril. That it was on my behalf 



306 THE O'BRIENS AND 

too and yet, even with all this, I am so 

rejoiced to see you, so delighted to see you 
alive, my dear old friend, that, for the moment, 
I can admit no other feelings." 

" Why then, are you, machree," said Shane, 
with a burst of sobbing joy, " are you glad to 
see your poor ould Shane, your foster-brother ? 
And you too, a lovely fine uasal,* and a great 
scholar and captain!" Then dropping on his 
knees, and taking from his breast a bog- wood 
rosary, he repeated, with wild and fanatical 
vehemence, and in hedge Latin, ' Ave Maria, 
gratice plena : dominus tecum. Benedicta tu in 
mxdieribus, et henedictus fructus ventris tui Jesu^. 
Sancta Maria, mater Dei, ora pro nobis pee- 
catorihus, nunc, et in hord mortis nostrcs — 
Amen.'' " 

" And now," he said, putting up his rosary, 
and starting on his feet, " that's all I wish or 
want ; and won't trouble you more, machree, but 

^ A gentleman. 



THE oVlahertys. 307 

just go back to th' ould place, light of foot and 
heart. Ay, troth ! and that this blessed night, 
or early the morrow, any how." 

" Indeed, I think it would be wisest to do so : 
and die sooner the better. But, Shane, there is 
some one else here as interested, at least, almost 
as interested for you as I am :" and he was 
about to open the annals, and inquire, who was 
the delightful artist who had given them so high 
a value, when he was struck by the sinking of 
Shane's head on his bosom, and the dimness of 
his eyes, still fixed on himself. 

" You are not well," said Murrogh, anxiously ; 
" what is the matter? You seem faint and 
weak ?'' 

" The heart of me is wake," said Shane, 
smihngly, " that is all, shure.'* 

" Weak, Shane, your heart?'* 

" Och^ wurristrool it's only in regard of the 
place, and the thick air, not all as one on the 
hills of Connemara. And there's no cot nor 



308 THE OBRIENS AND 

caban here, only great houses and castles, and 
the door shut, neider hob, nor hearth, nor bit, 
nor sup." 

'' You are faint from hunger, then ?" said 
Murrogh, with a suffocating sensation of intense 
sympathy. 

'* Thah^'^ said Shane, whose English seemed 
exhausted with his spirits. O'Brien flew to the 
buffet. The cake and the usquebaugh were to 
him, at that moment, as the spring in the desart. 
He held them forth, and Shane snatched at 
them eagerly, and devoured them voraciously. 
Cheering up gradually, imder their nourishing 
excitement, he exclaimed, at intervals, as he ate 
and sipped, " Agiis ne barneen hrcec. Agiis 
ne uishge huy.'"'\ 

" It is all I can find," said O'Brien, delighted 



* It is ; yes. 

f *' Barneen brsec," spotted cake, a cake with currants 
in it. " Uishge buy," yellow water. Buy is the box tree, 
whose wood is yellow. 



THE o'fLAHEKTYS. 809 

to observe the effects of the small portion of 
nourishment produced ; and now wholly en- 
grossed by the object of his affections, his cares, 
and anxiety, to the total exclusion of every 
other idea. " Sit down," he continued, " sit 
down, dear Shane, and do not hurry yourself;" 
(for he was fearful that the ravenous manner in 
which he ate, would be injurious to him). He 
threw the last fragment of the old wainscot on 
the fire, and drawing his chair closer towards it, 
he contemplated with satisfaction the gradual 
kindling of Shane's eye, and the deepening 
colour of his wan cheek. Shane, having now 
drained the flask to its last drop, seated himself 
at the hearth, after the old Irish fashion, his 
legs drawn up (till his knees were almost on a 
level with his chin), and clasped by his gaunt 
arms ; exhibiting the attitude of those, who in 
castle or caban " sat waking and watching over 
a coaP' till the dawn should lead them to prey 
or poll some " enemy's country," or till the 
tale-teller should lull them to sleep after the 



310 THE O'BEIEXS and 

wolf chace, by such " rambling stuff" as his 
wild fancy suggested. 

This last specimen of the Rapparees of the 
eoi'lier part of the last century had the true Irish 
spirits, formed for every excitement, to madden 
into riotous gaiety, to sink into gloomy de- 
spondency. Intoxicated alike with joy and 
usquebaugh, basking in the red blaze of the 
fire, he now sat, the image of savage felicity ; 
his eyes glistening, his accent chuckling, and 
his haggard features distorted by a play of gaiety, 
which rendered their expression still more wild 
and fierce. 

" As you now sit and look on me, Shane,"* said 
O'Brien, gazing intensely upon him, "}^u 
recall at once the days of my happy child- 
hood, '* 

" Thali,'' said Shane, rubbing his hands and 
smiling. 

" My foster-mother, and every corn» 

of the cabin near Dun ^ngus." 

^* Musha thahj" said Shane, with a chuck- 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 311 

ling laugh, and smoothing back his long, lank 
coolun, 

"She was a strange creature,'* continued 
O'Brien ; " her mysterious disappearance from 
the Isles of Arran was never accounted for." 

Shane nodded his head in token of assent, and 
ccrapressed his lips. 

"She never settled after," said O'Brien; 
" there were some wild tales circulated of her 
being met in the mountains of Moycullen, by 
wayfaring people ; you, Shane, have doubtless 
heard the story about the ruins of the 
abbey?" 

"She died a great saint,"** said Shano, eva- 
sively, " pace to her soul, and glory to her me- 
mory. Amen." 

O'Brien observing that the subject agitated 
him, changed it ; and added — " Mor ny Brien 
was greatly gifted ; her memory was miraculous, 
and her voice most melodious.'* 

" Thah /*' (exclaimed Shane, his stem fea- 
tures relaxing from their temporary compression) 



312 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" clarsQgh ?ia vallagh^ she was called far and 
near — ay, troth " 

*' Which means the harp of the village^ if I 
remember right?'' 

" Musha, thah r said Shane, much pleased ; 
" and hears her voice in the mountains to this 
day, when the wind is asleep, keening th' ould 
moan !" * 

The tears suddenly started to his eyes, and 
rolled down his haggard cheeks in big drops. 

" With what delight," said O'Brien, " I used 
to listen to her stories of the tribe of Dalgais, 
and the feats of the heroes of our family — of 
Cas, son of Conal of the swift horses, and of 
Fionne Mac Cumhal " 

" Agus Ossin," said Sh^ne, suddenly bright- 
ening up, and shaking back his coolun, and 
wiping his eyes in his hair. 

" Yes," said O'Brien, " I remember the 
effect of her Irish Cronan, that began ^ Corloch, 

* The Lamentations of Connaught. — See Walker's His- 
tory of Irish Music. 



THE oVlahertys. 313 

haughty, bold, and brave,' and Cucullin's chal- 
lenge to him. You remember that, Shane ?" 

*' Thah /" said Shane, swinging backwards 
and forwards his gigantic frame, and cheering 
gradually up. " Agiis an Moira Borb."^ 

" Yes," said O'Brien, rather in soliloquy than 
in dialogue, and wholly borne away by the sub- 
ject, which now called up, not only past, but 
present associations; — " that tale of Moira Borb, 
the Irish enchantress, the Irish Armida, is a 
strange coincidence with Tasso. There is some- 
thing in it even more than coincidence — 

' Air apparir della belta novella 
Nasce un bisbiglio!' " 

" Anan !" said Shane, staring. 

" And there was a spirited controversial dia- 
logue, too, between St. Patrick and Ossian," 
continued O'Brien, " which she used to sing to 
a wild strain." 

" Oss'in agus St. Phaedrig^''^ repeated Shane, 
making the sign of the cross. 

VOL. II. P 



SI 4 THE o''bRIENS AXD 

" And that sweet old air, of which the burden 
was, * I am asleep, do not awaken me.' " 

*'' Ta mi mo hoolah, na dushame,^^ interrupted 
Shane, now not touched, but rapt. 

" And Carolan's receipt, sung by old Do- 
nogh ?" 

'' Ay, Musha^"" chuckled Shane, " a great 
ahra* Donogh an abhac,'\ a great gramogT % 

" There are no impressions like those of early 
childhood," said O'Brien, " particularly when 
received in such scenes, and with such people." 

" Nil," echoed Shane, who was now thinking 
in Irish, and so spoke it. 

" How well I remember," said O'Brien, 
" going round St. Angus's Cross on my knees.' 

" JEngus a Naoimhe,'''' % said Shane, blessing 
himself instinctively at the name of his patron 
saint. 

" Does Conlas's rath still stand ?''"' said O'Brien. 

'^ Och, Musha, to the fore," replied Shane. 

* A song. + Donogh, the dwarf. 

X Buffoon. § ^ngus of the saints. 



THE o'FLAHERTrS. 315 

" And still blazes, I suppose, on the first of 
May, with many a merry bonfire?" 

" The Bel tean, * Musha, ay." 

'* What has become of that curious, long, 
twisted wand, which used to stand in the corner 
of your mother's hearth P" 

" The slahanDraodheath 9'' f asked Shane — 
" Abbess Beavoin*s crosier ?" 

O Brien started at the mention of a name that 
had so recently and so powerfully interested 
him. 

" Och, thim has it as has a right to have it," 
said Shane, mysteriously. 

" I suppose you have not one story-teller, one 
Sceadluidhe, left in Arran ?" 

* Bel's fire. 

t The druids* staff. The use of the crosier is said to 
be derived from the augui's baton, and this probably 
(being of Tuscan origin) came from the East. The druids 
likewise used the crosier; deriving it, in all likelihood, 
from the Phoenicians. Hence it has been thought, by some 
antiquarians, that the introduction of this article of furni- 
ture into the Christian church, came directly from the 
druids. 



316 THE o'briens akd 

" Virgo Maria ! Ay, plinty," replied Shane. 
" Agus ould Fergus, the clashmanaigh.'' * 

" Indeed ! those Arranites never die ; one 
is tempted almost to believe their fables of 
longevity." 

" Shure the bed of Coemhan,"*t said Shane, 
emphatically. 

" How well I remember/' said O'Brien, 
stretching out his legs, and folding his arms, 
while his countenance exhibited the imaginative 
influence of his memory, and all its thick-coming 
fancies — " How well I remember your mother 
placing me on that rocky bed, to recover me 
from my lameness, and the severe manner in 
which she was rebuked by the Abbe OTlaherty, 
for her attachment to such superstitious cere- 
monies." 



* The jester. 

t The bed of St. Coemhan, much famed for its mira- 
culous cures, through the mediation of the saint, of in- 
firm persons, particularly the lame and blind. — Transac- 
tions of Royal Irish Acad. vol. xiv. 



THE O^FLAHERTYS. 317 

" Ay, in troth,'' said Shane, stirring up the 
embers with a brand. 

" You remember, too, I dare say, Shane, how 
I got that lameness?" 

" Agus the puffins," said Shane, laughing, 
" and the clifters ! and great sport that night ! 
And you a doimy cratur, not that high — no, in- 
deed — avic Machree /" 

" Good God ! what a scene ! what magni- 
ficent desolation ! what a subject for a Salvator ! 
1 see it all now. We stood on the summit of 
the cliffs, looking down the almost fathomless 
precipice, suddenly illumined by a beautiful 
aurora borealis'' 

" Ay," said Shane, rubbing his huge chopped 
hands. 

" You let me down by a rope, tied round 
my middle. I remember its pressure, and my 
swinging in mid- air, till I reached the strand 
below ; I now hear the flutter of the puffins." — 
(Shane made a noise, imitating the flight of the 
birds.) — " You followed ; I see you now, half 



318 THE O'BIIIENS AND 

way down. If the rope had broken — it makes 
my head reel to think of it ! There is a reckless 
hardihood in children, the result of ignorance, 

that certain it is, I would not now do what 

I then did so carelessly — nothing could tempt 
me." 

" JVa^n, naenr said Shane, shaking his head, 
and evidently rather guessing than understand- 
ing, the abrupt apostrophies of his quondam 
pupil. 

" But you were then my guardian angel," 
added O'Brien, smiling kindly, as, borne away 
by that vehemence of feeling (the virtue and 
the weakness of an ardent and impetuous tem- 
perament), he stretched forth his liand to the 
rapparee — " And you are still," (he continued, 
" at least you would be, a barrier between me 
and harm." 

" Ay and troth," said Shane, with a growling 
fondness, " and the heart's blood would flow 
for you every dhrop and mille* welcomes." 
• A thousand. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 319 

" Of that I have no doubt ; I can have no 
doubt of your devotion, Shane ; but, I fear it. 
Your desperate efforts in my behalf last night, 
your being now in the very neighbourhood of 
the military whom you attacked." 

'' The hoddah SassoiiiV^ ^ exclaimed Shane, 
fiercely, his whole countenance assuming a fero- 
cious expression, darkling, glowering and dis- 
torted. " Croisha na Chrishlayf an they Avid 
tiche an hair of your vourneen urlacaen^ or blink 
an eye agen ye;" and he seized a carbine, 
which, on entering, he had deposited against the 
wall ; and which O'Brien now, for the first time, 
observed. 

Heart-struck at once by his devotedness, and 
by the insane vehemence with which it was 
manifested, he threw his arm over Shane's 
shoulder, and said, in a soothing tone, " But I 
trust, my dear Shane, there will be no further 
occasion for your gallant and affectionate inter- 
ference. My only fears now are for you. Are 
♦ The Saxon churls. t Cross of Christ. 



320 THE o'brIKNS AMD 

you aware of the risk you raa in entering the 
Castle last night ? I am sure I saw you there." 

"Are you, a-vic !'^ said Shane, now affectedly 
pre-occupied in piling up the embers. 

" You were followed by a chair so closely 

that Have you any knowledge of the person 

who was in it ?"" 

" Soldier, that is your prisoner," interrupted 
a voice from the further end of the room. 
O'Brien, with the rapidity of lightning, threw 
himself before Shane, who, starting on his legs, 
levelled his piece over O'Brien's shoulder, with 
the look of a wild beast, hunted to his den, and 
eager to protect its young. A file of soldiers 
now entered, halted by command, and drew up 
in line ; while a civil officer, who accompanied 
them, stepped forward, accompanied by three 
gentlemen ; and O'Brien beheld with consterna- 
tion. Captain O'Mealy, Lord Walter, and Lord 
Charles. 

There was a pause, a silence. Amazement, 
and a still deeper interest sat on every counte« 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 321 

nance. But, on the face of O'Brien, as it paled 
and reddened, as his eyes dimmed and flashed, 
as his compressed lips quivered and refused all 
utterance, was exhibited an emotion, in which 
every passion, save fear alone, had its share; 
while the deepest and direst mortification of 
wounded pride, at the exposure thus made of 
his forlorn and ruinous home, and at the strange 
position in which he was discovered, was almost 
the least easy of endurance. 

He was about to address the intruders, with 
all the temper he could affect, but observing 
that when the civil officer was advancing to- 
wards him, Shane cocked his piece, he snatched 
the murderous weapon from his hands ; and 
speaking to him as well as he could in Irish, he 
invoked his discretion, and observed to him, 
that resistance could then only aggravate his 
danger. Shane threw around him a terrible 
glance ; then letting fall his eyes, and shaking 
down his long locks, he drew his tattered mantle 

P cS 



522 

around him, and stood the image of sullen, silent, 
and ferocious despair. 

O'Brien, drawing up, and assuming a look 
and tone of haughtiness, but ill-suited to his 
wretched situation, addressed the civil officer — 

" Who is it, Sir, you look for here?" 

" This person," said the officer, " whom we 
find with the very carbine he violently took 
from a soldier of the Royal Irish brigade, last 
night, and with which he fired at this gentleman 
who commanded the party." 

" You are certain of his identity ?" said 
O'Brien. '* You can swear to his person ?'^ 

*' Yes, I think I can," replied the officer, 
smiling ; •' it is not easy to mistake him. I 
saw enough of him last night in the fray of 
the Strugglers, and at the rescue of yourself, 
Mr. O'Brien, out of the hands of the police. 
He has been traced this evening to this house, 
and seen entering it over an old wall in the 
rear, not an hour back." 



THE o'flaheetys. 323 

O'Brien then turned coldly and haughtily to 
the gentlemen, and asked, " And to what cir- 
cumstance, my lords, am I indebted for ycur 
presence, at an hour somewhat unseasonable, 
to say the least of it?" 

" Oh !" said O'Mealy, winking at his com- 
panions, " we were sure of finding you at home : 
as Lockit says, ' the Captain's always at home,' 
and so .... " 

Lord Walter here pushed back his vulgar 
associate, and taking off his hat, said, *' Mr. 
O'Brien, our intrusion is indeed unseasonable, 
but it was as utterly unexpected both on my 
part, and that of Lord Charles. It requires 
explanation and apology. We had not the 
slightest idea of your being in this house, when 
an idle curiosity tempted us to enter it. Hap- 
pening to dine to-day at the mess of the 
Prince's Own, with Lord Charles, where Cap- 
tain O'Mealy came after dinner, (on a message 
from Lady Knocklofty, to join her at the ball 
at the Rotunda), an account arrived that the 



3^4 THE o'bjitexs and 

unfortunate man now before us, had been dogged 
to an old house in this neighbourhood. The 
strange description given of a genuine wild 
Irishman, and of the almost super-human feats 
he performed yesterday, (of which Lord Charles 
was a witness, and, but for you, would have 
been a victim), induced us to accompany O'Mealy 
and his party, on our way into town. I 
have no doubt," he added significantly, and 
taking O'Brien's reluctant hand, which he 
cordially shook, " that a similar curiosity has 
likewise led you here. But since we can none 
of us be of service, and since we have fully 
satisfied our curiosity respecting this Irish 
champion, I think. Lord Charles, we had better 
proceed, and not keep Lady Knocklofty's horses 
waiting this tremendous night." 

" I think so too," said I^ord Charles, hesi- 
tating, and rather sideling towards O'Brien, to 
whom he had taken oflP his hat, and recognized 
him by a surly bend, which O'Brien had as 
sullenly returned. " We are destined," he con- 



THE o'flahertys. 325 

tinued, " Mr. O'Brien, to meet under singular 
circumstances." 

" I can have no objection," said O'Brien, sig- 
nificantly, " to meet Lord Charles Fitzcharles 
under any circumstances.'" 

*' Come," said Lord AValter, taking his 
friend's arm, " let us be off, we can be of no 
use here, and " 

" Stay, for the love of the Lord," interrupted 
O'Mealy, catching Lord Walter's sleeve; ''wait 
a'minute, and 'pon my honour I'll be with you, 
before you can say Jack Robinson. Sure, you 
would not lave me to walk to the Rotunda in my 
silks, pumps, and white kerseymeres : and I to 
lade off the first set to the tune of Money Musk 
with Lady Mary O'Blarney ? — Pace officer, 
where are you ? Soldiers, surround your prisoner. 
We'll deposit him, for the night, in the barrack 
depot. Serjeant, take charge of this carbine ; 
it is hanging evidence. Mr. O'Brien, my dear, 
upon my honour and conscience, as a gentleman 
and a soldier, it greives me greetly to sae you in 



626 THE o'briens and 

such a situation, it does 'pon my honour ; and 
shut up at this ' witching time of night,' as th' 
immortal says, coshering and colloguing with 
that murdering ruffianly Irish giant there, to 
whom Magrah's skeleton in the 'natomy room 
of your college is but a fairy. I beleive, pace 
officer, that is, I am afraid, we cannot well be 
off arresting Mr. O'Brien too, till he can give 
an account how and why he was found here, 
a party concerned in this den of thieves and 
robbers : for that's what it is, beyond all doubt, 
or I am greatly mistaken. And you'll mind, 
Mr. O'Brien, that no later than this evening, as 
the castle clock struck a quarter to six, just as 
we parted at the gate, you told me you were 
going to O'Brien House, to my lord your 
father'*s : and it was my fullest intention to 
tip you the pasteboard, and give you the pro- 
voke to a mess-dinner before night. Instead of 
which, I find you here, to my intire surprise, 
in a murdering, ugly, ould ruin, sated, quite 
at home, with your book and your bottle beside 



THE o'flaiiertys. 327 

you, and cheek-by-jowl, with your pot compa- 
nion there. And you, Mr. O'Brien, that pledged 
me your solemn word of honour, that you knew 
neither act nor part of . . . ." 

" Hold !" exclaimed O'Brien, in a tone that 
made O'Mealy step back some paces. For thus 
exposed in all his penury, — pride, rage, and 
indignation, gave an almost super-human ex- 
pression to his countenance. There was in his 
look and voice something stunning, which 
startled even the animal courage of O'Mealy. 

" Hold !" he said. " Stop there. Whatever 
may be your idle suspicions,, founded in ignor- 
ance, and expressed in all the insolence of your 
temporary authority, give them no further 
utterance. You must believe, you dare not 
doubt an assertion, to which I have pledged 
my honour." 

" Be aisy; be aisy, now, my dear fellow," 
said OMealy, with a cajoling and humorous 
tone. " Now, I just ask you, fair and quiet, 
did you not give me your word, or what came 



328 THE o'briens and 

to the same thing, assured me that you knew 
nothing of that rebelly thief?" 

*' Nor did I then, Captain O' Mealy : I was 
utterly ignorant of his existence. Not an hour 
since.. I most unexpectedly found in this poor 
unfortunate man, an old friend, and faithful 
follower of my family. My long absence from 
Ireland, and my belief of his death, prevented 
me from recognizing him, in the frequent and 
strange rencontres we had yesterday. For the 
rest, let me suggest to you, and to the civil officer, 
under whose authority you doubtless act, that 
your prisoner is not quite sane ; that he acts 
under the influence of strong mental derange- 
ment ; and that his hallucination will, I trust, 
not fail to acquit him of the matter with which 
he may be charged. And now, Sir,'' he con- 
tinued with an evident effort and struggle of 
the mind, " with respect to this old house, which 
you have been pleased to name a den of thieves, 
it is, and has been for nearly two centuries, a 
family mansion ; and though, since I last saw 



THE o'fLAHEIITYS. S29 

it, it has been dismantled and dilapidated, it 
was once the residence of my ancestor the great 
Earl of Inchiquin, and is now his lineal de- 
scendant's, my father's house." 

" Well, my dear fellow," said O'Mealy, good 
humouredly, " laste said is soonest minded ; 
and as to the ould house, if I have hurt your 
fine feelings, upon my honour I am heartily 
sorry for it ; and I can say no more. But I 
suppose, the pace officer here will expect you 
to find some surety for your appearance for all 
that, in regard of your being found cheek-by- 
jowl with this Fin Macool here." 

" Certainly 1 shall, Captain O'Mealy,'' said 
the officer. " And Mr. O'Brien, you had better 
accompany me at once ; as it may be difficult 
to procure two sureties at this hour, and the 
night so bad." 

" There can be no difficulty whatever on the 
subject,*" said Lord Walter ; *" I offer myself 
for one bail." 

" And I," said Lord Charles, « for the 



330 THE O'BRIENS AND 

other ; if Mr. O'Brien will do me the honour 
to accept of me." 

" I am much flattered," said O^Brien, frankly, 
and with much feeling, " and will gratefully 
accept of both, if it be really necessary." 

" A friend in need's a friend indeed," said 
O'Mealy. " Did not T tell you, my dear 
fellow, you were born under a lucky star? 
Ton my honour I did. It's worth while 
gitting into a scrape, to have lords' and dukes' 
sons going bail for one, — it will cut such a dash 
in the papers. But we must keep moving ; for 
Lady Mary is watching for me, I'll ingage, — 
so, sarjeant, do your duty." 

The gentlemen drew back, and gathered 
round O'Brien at the fire-place, intreating him 
not to interfere. The soldiers moved forward 
upon their prisoner ; who, firm, erect, and 
drawn up to his full gigantic height, stood 
like a fixture of the old building. He had 
imperceptibly, and step by step, drawn back, 
(followed by his guard), till he now stood in 



THE O^FLAHERTYS. 831 

front of the pannel-door which led to the back 
stairs, and which was then half closed. When, 
however, two soldiers, perceiving his immove- 
able firmness, seized him by the shoulders 
to drag him forcibly away, his countenance 
darkened, his eyes flashed, and by a sudden 
spring he dashed them on one side, sending 
them reeling for several paces ; and with the 
rapidity of thought he darted back and closed 
the door upon his retreat. Others of the military 
now rushed forward to force an entrance and 
pursue the fugitive ; and thus, precipitating 
themselves on one spot of the rotten floor, the 
fatal and natural consequence ensued — the floor 
gave way. The awful, terrible, and dinning crash 
which followed was rendered more horrid and 
astounding by the shrieks of the unfortunate 
men, who sunk with the mass of rubbish into 
the yawning chasm, mingling with the report 
of their fire-arms, with the din of the still faUing 
building, and the roar of the storm without. 
The shock given by the fall, caused an universal 



532 THE o'brieks and 

vibration to the whole building : rafter after 
rafter gave way, and beam after beam. A 
chimney, which fell through the tiled roof, 
spread increasing destruction. Gushes of thick, 
suffocating dust filled, for a time, the horrible 
abyss, and almost stifled those who still re- 
mained on a fragment of the floor, which 
extended a few feet beyond the great chimney- 
piece. These were the two lords, Captain 
O* Mealy, O'Brien, and the peace officer. 
Amidst the horror and consternation of ah 
event so fearful, bricks and tiles still falling 
— doors, windows, and shutters rattling in 
the storm, both within and without, they still 
preserved sufficient presence of mind to recog- 
nize their danger, and the possibility of escape ; 
while the cry of " Faer ghim, faer ghim, Agus, 
keep to the fire-place," issuing from beneath the 
window near which they stood, convinced 
O'Brien that Shane was safe — a conviction, 
that cheered him into hope for the safety of 
himself and those around him. 



THE o'fLAHEUTYS. S3S 

When he could make himself heard, (for the 
light being extinguished, he could not be seen,) 
he begged of all to stand quiet, and remain 
where they were. The hearth which they 
occupied, he said, was supported by holdfasts, 
lately erected, and the beams of that end of the 
floor were fresh and uninjured. He then made 
to the window next the chimney-piece, threw up 
the sash, and shouted for assistance. The build- 
mg was already surrounded ; men with lanterns 
and flambeaux were visible at a little distance ; 
and the glittering of arms also shewed that some 
of the soldiers had escaped, and that others had 
joined them from the royal barracks on the other 
side of the river. A lofty fi'gure, much above 
the stature of those around him, forced forward 
through the falling bricks and tiles, and fixed a 
ladder against the window. 

The gentlemen descended in safety, O'Brien 
ast ; but scarcely had he reached the earth, 
when he saw himself in Shane's arms. "Away ! 
away !" he said, extricating himself from the 



334 THE o'briens and 

embrace. At that moment, the part of the 
building they had just left, fell in, with a horrible 
crash, and the chimney-piece, the fine monument 
of antiquity, was precipitated with it into the 
ruins. Still the outward walls held together ; 
and by the light of the flambeaux, the back 
stairs were seen hanging as it were in the air, 
like the geometrical staircases of modern times, 
without visible support. 

When the cloud of dust, formed by the last 
fall, had somewhat subsided, and the house 
could be approached without imminent peril, 
O'Brien (satisfied that Shane had escaped), busied 
himself in giving rehef to the sufferers by this 
fatal event. He thought of poor Robin, buried, 
doubtless, with the corpse of his grandmother, 
beneath the ruins. He rushed on through dust 
and lime, followed by the humane and the 
courageous ; and was soon joined by a party of 
pioneers, whose pick-axes and spades were of 
infinite use. Many of the soldiers, who had 
fallen through the floor into the hall beneath, 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 

were wounded ; but all, though nearly suffocated, 
escaped with life, and were carried off by their 
comrades. Two dead bodies alone were dis- 
covered, on which the coping-stone of a wall 
had fallen. By the glare of a flambeau, were 
discovered the mangled remains of the unfor- 
tunate Robin, beside those of the deceased Alice. 

While O'Brien was thus penetrating into the 
interior of the building, Lord Charles, Lord 
Walter, O'Mealy, and the constable, were fully 
occupied without, in preserving order and keep- 
ing out the crowd, which, in spite of rain and 
wind, had assembled from the neighbouring 
purlieus of the barracks and of Watling-street. 

Every blast of wind still continued to shake 
the wreck of the ruined fabric ; and O'Brien, 
believing that the walls would soon follow, was 
himself retiring ; rejoicing that amidst the sad 
events of the night, his father had escaped; 
when, as he stumbled over heaps of rafters and 
lime, the faint shriek of a female voice caught 
his ear. Astounded, he paused, turned round. 



336 THK O'BRIENS AXD 

looked up, and doubting the evidence of his 
senses, beheld a female form standing on the 
still suspended stairs, between which and de- 
struction there seemed to be but a moment of 
time. 

The nodding ruin now received a terrible 
shock, from a burst of the increasing hurricane. 
The crowd fell hurrying back ;— O'Brien plunged 
di^eper and deeper within the walls, till he stood 
beneath the perilous staircase, which rocked like 
one of rope. 

'' Spring down at once,*' he said, opening his 
arms to receive the trembling person, above 
whose head, fragments of the roof were faUing, 
tile by tile. As he opened his arms, she half 
bent forward, as if to leap ; when, from the 
other side, the cry of " Faer gliim ! faer ghim r 
arrested her attention ; and springing down, with 
the light dart and hardihood of a bird, she was 
received in the arms of Shane. At that moment 
the whole pile fell in, with a tremendous roar ; 
and O'Brien, with his arms folded over his head, 



THE 0*FLAHEIlTVS. 387 

sometimes beaten down, and again plunging 
forward, scarcely credited his senses, when he 
again found himself beyond the reach of danger, 
surrounded by the Lords Walter and Charles, 
CMealy, and a multitude of people. 

The gentlemen endeavoured to carry him 
from the spot, and to persuade him to accom- 
pany them into town, as nothing further now 
remained to be done : but he was under power- 
ful excitement, and fearful that Shane, and the 
object of his humane and perilous exertions, were 
buried in the ruins. As soon as he had recovered 
breath and strength, he made known his fears 
to the bystanders. His mind, however, was set 
at rest by one of the crov/d, who assured him 
that a tall man, carrying a woman in his arms, 
had passed him at the Ferry slip, and by this 
time was on the other side. Fortunately, 
this information was given, out of the hearing of 
O'Mealy and the peace officer; and O'Brien's 
heart, though still thrilling and palpitating, was, 
as far as Shane was concerned, for the present 

VOL. II. a 



338 THE O'BRIENS AND 

at rest. He now accompanied the gentlemen, 
walking arm in arm with Lord Walter, towards 
Lady Knocklofty's carriage, which had drawn 
up at a short distance, under the shelter of the 
forte cocliere of Moira House, while curiosity 
had detained the footmen at the scene of recent 
action. 

As neither the dress of the party, nor the state 
of their spirits, permitted them to join the ball at 
the Rotunda, Lord Walter proposed to O'Brien 
to set him down at the College ; but he declined 
the offer, on the plea that the condition of 
his clothes, (covered with the dust and rub- 
bish of the ruin, and drenched with rain,) 
would render a walk safer to himself, as well 
as spare the delicate silken hangings of Lady 
Knocklofty's vehicle. All that he could be pre- 
vailed on to accept, was Lord Walter's great-coat. 
While he was drawing it on, Lord Charles, 
putting his head out of the carriage window, 
observed, in his languid way, 

" Mr. O'Brien, you have said, that you could 



THE o'flahertys. 339 

have no objection to meet me under any circum- 
sstances: will you allow me, then, to cut ceremony 
short, and make you a proposition for a meeting 
to-morrow ?" 

" Undoubtedly ;'' said O'Brien, coming closer 
to the carriage window, " when and where you 
please." 

" Well, then," said Lord Charles, " the when, 
six o'clock, and the where, at our mess dinner ; 
with Lord Walter for your second, and our 
friend O'Mealy for mine: and then, with glasses 
charged to the brim, 

* Lay on, MacdufFj 
And damned be he who first cries, Hold, enough.' 

I know this is not your Irish way of settling 
differences. But, hang it, — whatever an Hiber- 
nian may think, I have no great gusto for tak- 
ing away the life of a man who has saved mine." 
" And who," said O'Brien, returning the 
cordial shake of his hand, *' must ever value his 
own the more for the success of the effort. I 



340 THE o'briexs and thk o'flaheutys. 

accept your challenge, my lord, as frankly as it 
is given." 

" Upon my honour, this is a mighty pretty 
quarrel as it stands," said O'Mealy, " as my 
friend, Sh- Lucius, has it. So I shall not say a 
word on the subject, only that I'm glad to be a 
party concerned.'' 

Lord Walter now 'shaking the hands of both 
the young men, expressed his satisfaction at the 
termination-of an affair, in which both, or neither, 
had been in the wrong. The carriage then 
drove on, to set down tlie gentlemen at their 
respective homes ; and O'Brien, as the College 
clock struck eleven, entered the gates of. Alma 
Mate7\ 



EKI> OF VOL. II. 
