The English in Italy

Constantine Henry Phipps Normanby (Marquess of)

PREFACE


From the sheets of the first and
second volumes of this work, which
have reached the author in his foreign
abode, he perceives the havoc made in
those few Italian phrases that he has
ventured to make use of—errors
unavoidable, no doubt, in the very
un-Italian air of the British metropolis ;
and which must be charged more to
the carbbedness of his own hand-
writing, and the wilfulness of compo-
sitors, than to any neglect on the part

of the gentleman who has been good enough to charge himself with the correction of the press.

As the author has thought it necessary to preface the work with this sort of protest, he may as well take the opportunity of adding, that he lays claim to no merit of invention for the incidents contained in the following pages, they being almost altogether the fruits of observation, during a residence of several years in the Peninsula. The pencil of the writer, he declares, has been confined to sketches from the life; and if imagination have here and there superadded her colouring, it has merely been to the decking forth, not to the superseding of truth.

August 4, 1835.





L'AMOROSO.

CHAPTER I.

For some years even of the last century I knew Euston Park and its inmates, two generations of them; and never did the sun rise upon a lovelier or a happier spot—moral and rural beauty were there united. It was situated in one of our southern counties, and had been in the possession of the Eustons beyond the memory of parchment—a race unillustrated, save by its long duration in the same unvaried state of affluence and content. The unaspiring, and at the same time unsinking evenness of their forB %



tune, was the great and singular characteristic of the family; and whilst of their neighbours many rose to fame, or faded to extinction, the Eustons alone, untempted by the honours of a court, the gains of commerce or profession, kept up the old family mansion in a state always becoming their rank and the times. Even the title (for the Eustons were baronets) had been forced upon one of the family in the reign of the first Charles, and Sir Gerard, as well as his posterity, wore it with more comfort, as they observed, for having paid for it in solid gold. This peerage of the English Commons they looked upon as their own, and, like Sebright or Bacon, any one of them would no doubt have scorned an elevation to the honours of the higher peerage.

In the year 1808,1 remember visiting Euston Park. Its then possessor, Sir Thomas Euston, married perhaps at the commencement of the century, was surrounded by a lovely, rising family. Three boys there were and a girl, beautiful, as English children of rank ever are, noble, ingenuous, full of frolic, of promise, and of health. How delightful an object does such a family present to the young contemplatist, upon whose vision life has not yet cast its sombre shade, and whom experience hath not yet taught to descry the sear foretokened in the bud! How can I ever behold such without a sigh and retrospect to that little -group ! The eldest of his boys, Sir Thomas lost by the unruliness of a favourite horse; and in the same year, whilst letters were on their way to recall the remaining hopes of his family, the one was cut off by a fever at Lisbon, and the other in the field of Orthes.



Sir Thomas Euston was stunned, and quite unmanned by this triple blow. It was the first time for a long course of centuries, that the family was without a lineal heir; but Providence had dealt it, and nought was left but to submit. Sir Thomas did perhaps too much so: for from the bustling, active character that he had been, he at once became indolent, timorous, moody, and seemingly alive to no consideration save his late loss, and his surviving daughter. Lady Euston I shall defer pourtraying: she was in fact little more than that common compound of weakness, that goes to make up three-fourths of man as well as of womankind. She was a mother little calculated to command the respect of a petulant and vivacious daughter, and extremely unfit to guide the young female through any of those trying scenes of life, that do beset young maidens early. Thus it was, that the young Matilda, as she grew up, acquired gradually the command of her mother, by that law of nature, which in despite of age, subjects the weaker to the more energetic spirit, and almost of her father, so great was the baronet's increasing apathy and abandonment, and so much were all his thoughts concentered in the indulgence of his only child.



Why need I describe to my readers a lovely English girl, fair, graceful, tall? Every quality personal and mental luxuriated in her, from the blood in her cheek and the clusters on her brow, to the spirit that beamed in her eye when glad, and was replaced by a tear in the first moment of emotion. But Matilda's, however secure it might seem in health, was not the kind, the specimen of youth, that age contemplates with pleasure. Delicacy was the prevailing expression even of her person, and her traits of beauty, like the farinous colours of the butterfly, seemed perishable and frail. One dreaded to see loveliness and vivacity borne into the world upon such slender wings. The mind of Matilda corresponded to this exterior promise of her person ; it was of most delicate texture—buoyant, timid, sanguine, and yet often steeped in that sobriety of mood, that demands but the common causes of life to become despondency. Fearfully susceptible, her feelings seemed spun of the gossamer, and yet strung as tightly as such subtle thread would allow. The mere caprices of childhood in her assumed the bigness of passion, and such was even her infant agitation when shaken by anger or moved by pity, that even a rigid parent could not have visited her paroxysms with the neglect or the punishment that generally follows such. Lady Euston was not that rigid parent, and Matilda was an only child —but to do her, as well as other mothers, justice, it may be asserted, that many an infant is born what is vulgarly called a spoiled child, to a degree that the utmost indulgence can scarcely render worse.





Such was the case, it is to be feared, with Matilda. And in the positions that her brothers' death had left her, an heiress, the only hope of fond parents, it was not to be hoped or expected that such propensities would be strongly or effectually counteracted. Still, in the pure atmosphere of English life, this indocility of the young maiden could not be looked upon as materially pernicious, her passions grew ungovernable to be sure,—but then the object they aimed at, the motives that inflamed them, were innocent; and





all that was virtuous, strict, and pure, was as much before her eyes, and as much revered, as if Matilda had been the best tempered of girls, and most docile of children.

When youth begins to find its will powerful and effective, it dearly loves to exercise it; and Matilda, when she found her first whim listened to, remained not long without another. These desires at first were simple and natural enough— to attend such a ball—to visit such a watering place—the possession of a trinket—of a horse— and in nothing was she thwarted. A mind of less feeling would have made undue use of this ascendency over her parents; not so Matilda— she was satisfied with the occasional excitement of these little sources of variety, and in the main her life at Euston Park was passed in happiness and content.

With years, however, sprang up naturally in her mind a deeper and more serious source of excitement. Like all fine-strung minds of sensitiveness and passion, Matilda's was early visited with dreams of love: she read much, and with ardour, and thence might have imbibed premature feelings of tenderness, but her own spirit was of itself sufficient to produce them, precocious as it was rendered by sensibility and imagination. Situated as she was in the world, it is not to be supposed that she could rest unsought by swains, willing to respond to these her springing sentiments; and some approached Matilda more attracted by her beauty than her wealth. These the maiden's penetration easily discovered, and one of them especially she selected, the worthiest of the throng, to whom if she did not give her heart exactly, yet she regarded him with feelings, nearest to those which she longed to feel excited in her breast. The true, deep feelings these were not; but love throws his shadow far before him, and oft overcasts the heart with it, as a faint foretoken of him, ere he comes to occupy it fully with his own agitating and proper presence.



This faint first essay of love, if I may so coll





11

it, was in Matilda's breast as warm a passion perhaps, as the full feeling in the breast of more temperate minded females. We may therefore pardon both her and her lover for mistaking the fictitious for the real. And never was youth made more happy by mistake, than Ralph Maxwell was rendered by this. He was the sou of a neighbouring gentleman,—Matilda's equal in birth, and one who, if not from possessions, at least from expectations, might aspire without presumption to the heiress's hand. Such an event, however, though encountered by no visible difficulty, was still necessarily deferred, even the consideration of it, from the youth of the parties. Ralph Maxwell pursued Matilda many months, a constant and enamoured lover, and, excepting some unaccountable fits of coldness that might have been construed as both caprice of affection, the maiden smiled upon the youth, and no enemy appeared except time, to the completion of his wishes.

In the mean while it so happened, most unluckily for the peace of Ralph, that the power of Napoleon became as by a miracle dissolved ; war was declared at an end, and the Continent opened to our insular curiosity. The minds of Englishmen being accustomed to contemplate the rise and fall of empires, and to hang upon the fate of armies, could not resign themselves at once to the dull and newsless state of peace, without seeking to supply the means of excitement which they had lost by some other as absorbing. Foreign travel alone appeared to supply this void, and all who could, or deemed they could, afford the gratification, rushed to enjoy it. At first it was but the higher orders who ventured to taste this long forbidden cup— even the rich commoner feared in the commencing days of peace to make so bold a step as that across the English channel—but as the few noble avant-couriers of English wholesale emigration returned, lesser men and lesser fortunes took courage, and sped to Calais, ashamed of their former backwardness and fears.





Forward and enterprising as had been the wishes of Matilda, even she did not dare to conceive the hope of visiting France or Italy, till upon spending an evening at Lady Bedesmere''s mansion, her Ladyship expatiated on the novelties of foreign sights and society ; on such a subject it then required as little eloquence to be interesting, as it now requires much to be new, and Matilda from the very first sentence was a lost listener. This absorbed attention but encouraged her Ladyship to continue and enlarge upon the topic, and poor Matilda was henceforth in a new world. As she stepped into her father's carriage, she actually looked to see if the horses were four, bestridden by these postilions, and these jack-boots, of which she had just heard so much ; and for the first time she repined at returning to the common English abode of Euston Park.

That very night it was decided in Matilda's mind, that her parents and herself should travel, and should set forth immediately. She did not



speak all the way home, and after arrival did not sleep, accusing herself for not having already persuaded the old folk and arranged their departure—in dreams she already visited the desired shores, and fancied them—any thing but she afterwards found them.. Matilda entered the breakfast parlour on the following morning with an unusual flush, that alarmed her anxious parents : the alarm but the more favoured her intentions, and disarmed Sir Thomas and his lady from opposition—in the end inevitably to prove useless. The old however always combat instinctively all ' sudden resolutions, and Matilda spent the whole day in expostulation, and she satisfactorily gained her point. Sir Thomas promised to think of it, and this promise, the consequence of which Mada well knew, satisfied her of the event. " And poor Ralph, what will he say when he hears of this ?" urged Lady Euston to her daughter.

" Ralph, mamma,—I know,he will be delighted, as I am myself, at the thought. 'Tis parting to be sure,—but then, you know, we'll write—what delight—every day; and I shall have so much to tell Ralph. I long to see him, that I may tell him." Lady Euston herself, feeble powers of penetration as she possessed, could not avoid here fathoming the little depth of her daughter's affections. She sighed, and merely observed, that Ralph Maxwell was not likely to be so suddenly delighted.



That young gentleman was not long in learning the fatal news, that struck prophetically a deathblow to his hopes. He hurried to Matilda, reasoned and raved with her; but the idea of travel rose paramount in her mind to that of love, and she saw no reason why one happiness should preclude the other. In the sincerity, but moderate ardour of affection, she soothed the fearful anxiety of her lover, mocked at his forebodings, and laughed him from the frenzy of disappointed, at least of contradicted, passion.

" Ah, Matilda, if you loved, as I do, you could not be thus overflowing with delight at a project that separates us, and leaves me repining, and behind."



" Say, if I feared, Ralph —I love with confi dence,—I a woman—how much more ought you?"

" To love with confidence is not to love, Matilda. Every word you utter inspires me with distrust."

"Nay, if you wish to quarrel, Ralph—But see, is it not natural? We both love, and both are grieved at parting, even at this momentary parting, to meet again with new sources of delight. You are the stationary, and must weep. I have read so, Ralph. Motion and novelty await me, and dry my tears, even when my heart reflects to thee."

With this rational consolation from his mistress, young Maxwell was forced to rest contented, his spleen still continuing to vent itself on frogs, Frenchmen, and every continental thing, animate or inanimate.

Sir Thomas offered no opposition to his daughter's wish; on consideration he even thought it delightful, likely to be productive of amusement and distraction to himself, of health to all, and of instruction and improvement to Matilda. Arrangements were not long in making, nor passports in procuring, and a month had not elapsed since Lady Bedesmere's hint, when the Euston family, well provided with valets and couriers, rolled along the Kent road to Dover in their travelling equipage.





CHAPTER II.

The placing of her foot on Calais pier, simple as was the action, communicated to Matilda a stronger sensation of pleasure than perhaps she had ever experienced. Ralph Maxwell, England, and Euston Park, vanished with all her regrets; a curtain seemed for her let down upon the past, and another drawn to disclose the novelty of the present and the future. Here I am, was the extent of her reflections, but what a circle of delight stretched around that little centre! So great was the overwhelming pleasure of the consciousness, that even all the strange objects that surrounded her seemed not to attract her attention. One's mind in such an hour is placid with excess of enjoyment, and rests, like that most oriental of all insects, (in despotic and every other sense of the term,) a spider, quietly contemplating the cunning woven net work that imagination spreads around. Such a state is the nearest waking approach to the sweet absorption of a dream.



" After Calais nothing is strange." The Eustons arrived in Paris, eagerly sought, and with some difficulty obtained, an entree into French society, of which they endeavoured to constitute themselves members, by imitating at first the modes of dress and address: they soon found this was not enough, and the conversational persiflage of high-bred Parisians was assumed, at least affected. This imitation of their French acquaintance, on the part of Matilda and her mother, commenced to be sure with ribbons and trifles, and Sir Thomas did not deign to protest against such whimsies; .the studious assimilation however soon extended beyond garb ; and in a little time our female travellers began to take the French as models in feeling as well as in taste. The French female was soon discovered to be more a woman of the world, more approaching the ideal of bon ton and fashionable ease. Topics, words, allusions, that at any former period would have made the blood rush to the cheeks of either mother or daughter, began to steal out, and to be borne in the conversations. The line of decorum was suddenly extended, and, as usual in such cases, extended somewhat beyond that from which they copied. All this seemed manifest self-improvement to Matilda, and refinement to Lady Euston; while Sir Thomas, for to do them the justice, men adhere longer to honorable prejudices, was left alone, and over argued in his old ideas and protestations against the new, by the now polyglot tongues of his wife and child.



I need not give in detail the revolution effected in our young heroine's taste and ideas. It was gradual: at first she admired France and the French for this quality and that perfection, but the conclusion of her argument always coincided with the burdens of Sir Thomas,—there was nothing like old England ; but even these sacred reservations of patriotism by degrees wore away, and soon the exclamation was, " If it werVt for poor Ralph, I did not care, if [ never saw England again." Poor Ralph, then, was the only remaining link left of the chain that bound Matilda to her native soil, and how frail that surviving link was some time since has been seen. It was far weaker now.



One winter afforded the ladies quite sufficient of Parisian society. Indeed, a similarly short space seems universally to content all English adventurers in that foreign region; to us the fashionable, and all society in France, is a kind of polar realm of discomfort. The smile of never-setting sun-shine is always glistening on the polished surface, but its ray is far more dazzling than cheering. We cannot make ourselves at home in so strange a place, where we are at best received with a gaze of curiosity and mistrust. The utmost that can be done is to make oneself comfortable for a single experimental winter, and then sail, upon the breaking up of the frost, to more congenial seas and climes.



There is a facility of amusement about the French, quite unenjoyable by the English, and inconceiveable to them. Ourideasof good fellowT ship and society are substantial—we like to be excited and entertained highly when we come together. But to be dressed, and to go out, and to chat, is enough for the Parisian dame; she looks neither for feasting, nor wit, nor yet for any intellectual intercourse—she will dress in all her jewels to appear at her friend's soiree—when she and all the company will feel themselves sufficiently amused by a child set to dance, or to prate with naivtte—this with a sorbet or an ice contents her. She is the most amuseablc being in life. Not to the Englishwoman. And one, I believe, cannot be found disinterested,



and at the same time experienced on the point, that would not pronounce the choicest French society a. bore.

Towards the close of winter, Lady Euston and Matilda began to be of this opinion, and to slacken very much in their ardour for bal and soiree. The carnival fatigued them to satiety, and incited their restless imagination to divine other sources of delight. Sir Thomas, without having partaken of their early pleasures or enthusiasms, was equally tired with them of the French metropolis, and it soon became agreed, in consequence, that with the first swallow, their migrating steps should be directed to Italy, in order to explore that hitherto untasted mine of novelty and excitement.

The travelling carriage was again in motion, to the delight of Matilda. As she traversed the flat waste of France, extending in desert unpicturesqueness, comparisons with the lovely and varied landscape of England, could not but in,

x

trude, in spite of the gathered mass of prejudice that now encrusted her pure English feeling; but a passing sigh to Ralph and Euston Hall concluded the retrospect.



The mere consciousness of journeying southward would have proved on the occasion, a counterbalance even to real sorrow, if such there was. But no dead weight of the kind was on the light heart of Matilda, who abandoned herself with all the elasticity of youth to anxious expectancy and anticipation of the scenes she was about to visit.

A knowledge of the facts that I am about to relate, prejudices my mind, I fear, and leads me to depreciate, or treat slightingly, the motives and effects of foreign travel. Perhaps so — I confess it—but alas! have reason to entertain these opinions : they are confined, however, to the social consequences of travel, and the baneful influence that a too unguarded and free intercourse with the inhabitants of those more relaxed countries, ever has on the pure and morally unarmed youth of Britain. It is this alone that call* forth my spleen; but to the enjoyment of nature in these her sublimest scenes, I cannot either be blind or adverse. No sensations are at once so ennobling and delightful; no pleasure so rapturous, and at the same time so lasting, as the view that imprints itself on the imagination, and at once eternalizes itself in the memory, accompanied with the host of feeling and ideas, to which it gives birth. If any thing short of misfortune can awaken and arrest the apathetic, the degenerating mind, it is this intercourse with nature's grandeur; it is when awed by the immensity of her works, or when touched with the beauty of them, that we throw off the weight of self-flattery and false content, and become excited into that pure state of energetic consciousness, so friendly to self-knowledge, to exertion, to amendment.



The sensibility of Matilda proved all this; in the splendid scenery of the Jura, and of the mightier Alps, her mind flung oft' for the moment much that was pernicious. She was

Vol. i. c



moved, excited, interested—the enthusiasm of the English girl was rekindled—nay, the 4ide of her patriotism flowed again, and on beholding the cultivated Genevese valley, with its verdant little pastures and enclosures, the thoughts of Matilda recurred so tenderly and forcibly to England, that the tears of pure sentiment once more fell from her eyes.

Her resolutions then were perhaps worthy of record, but I have already perhaps been too didactic, and therefore hurry on with my tale. Our English family passed the Alps, having delayed however in Switzerland until the spring had advanced into summer. In Milan, and in Venice, they tarried a little, but the heat of the climate they found to incommode them, and Sir Thomas especially seemed to suffer much from it. The time had been ill chosen ; but navr, upon the far side of the Alps, to return seemed timorous and fickle. The baths of Lucca were recommended to Sir Thomas as wholesome and restorative, and their neighbourhood as the best





summer residence he could choose in Italy. Thithei then they hurried across the Appenine; and symptoms of Sir Thomas Eustpn's declining health increased during the journey to an alarming degree. He arrived at the recommended spot, and for a while rallied. But 'twas in vain; even in Euston Park his shaken spirit would not have long survived under the languid malady that pressed on him ; and the fatigues of travel, with the change of climate, hastened the catastrophe most probably but a little space. On his death-bed Sir: Thomas called his daughter to him, and as Matilda knelt and wept upon her dying parent's hand, he thus addressed her:—

" My child, my only child; I leave you in A foreign land, and that is the only thought that now embitters my last hour. Would to heaven, Matilda, that we had never quitted our .pure English home ! For I have long observed :how much you have been changed—not materially, I trust. I hope, and thought not, and in my apathy left you to yourself. But this is the last hour that I have left for speaking. Hear me, Matilda, and treasure up my dying words. You have given yourself up to foreign modes and foreign feelings—they are not such as will render an English woman happy, at least not with an English husband—and heaven forbid you should ever be united to another I You have adopted them from whim, but such imitation is contagious; people begin with adopting a part, and they end by adopting the whole. It has been so with you, Matilda; your very English blush has long ceased to flush your cheek with innocence. And deeper still, my child, I fear, the canker has gone. Your 'religion, your duty towards your Maker, that God, whom I am about to meet, and whom you must meet also in your time, how have you neglected it—been shaken in it, in these lands of either bigoted superstition or fashionable incredulity ! Recall your steps, your thoughts, my child, or peace cannot attend you in this





world, nor be hoped for in the next. It is my last request."

The Baronet blessed his daughter, and the tears of parental affection and filial sorrow were mingled on the couch.

A few hours after Sir Thomas Euston breathed his last.

A near male relation, who had been summoned from England upon the first appearance of dangerous symptoms, arrived to superintend the conveyance of the body to England. The worldly affairs of Matilda were entrusted to the same friendly care and arrangement. And it was so settled, that the widow and her daughter should remain for some months at least in Italy. Lucca they immediately left, and while the remains of Sir Thomas were on their melancholy route to England, Lady Euston and her daughter directed their steps still further from their native country, bending their course to Rome in the first instance, and after a very short delay in the imperial city, to Naples.





CHAPTER III.

" Bella Napoli, oh quanta, i prim! di !

Chiaja, c il Vesuviu, e Portici, e Toledo

Coi calesctti che saettan li;

E il gran chiasso e il gran moto eblo ei ve do,

D'altra vaata cttt&finor dfgiano.

Fart si che fuggon Tore e non m'aweilo.



Tiros could the sight of Naples call a flow of comic spirit into the breast even of the sullen -Alfieri. Upon the English travellers of the present day, so willing to be pleased and prone to be delighted, in this unlike the Smelfunguses of old, the residence at Naples, its crowd, its bustle, the prospects of it and from it, form, with the exception perhaps of Rome to the classic vistor, objects of more interest and delight, than the rest of Italy contains. After imperial Rome too, the traveller is in fancy apt to underrate the magnificence of Naples; and he pursues his journey southward more to enjoy the climate, the view of Vesuvius, perhaps, and of the Bay, than for the sake of visiting the loveliest and most regal city of modern Italy. To Matilda this pleasing disappointment, that generally strikes the traveller on the sight of Naples, was even stronger, from her having, very justly indeed as an unlearned female, thought Rome a hideous place ; and she did not think to be compensated in Naples, as far as she could judge from the comfort or luxury that she experienced on the road thither. The nearer she approached the capital of southern Italy, th« rude rural beauty, that had rendered part of the route so delightful, utterly disappeared, and for the many tedious miles that the carriage rolled over the flat surface of Campanior, the disgust was thickening in the minds of the travellers, and creating that best possible state of feeling for unexpected beauty to burst upon.





In obedience to the tasteful courier, the carriage approached Naples by King Joachim's new road, and without the least warning or glimpse of previous beauty, the sweep of a few seconds brought them full in that commanding point of view, beneath which extends all Naples, its castellated heights of precipitous descent, yet clustered all the way down, with white rows of streets and palaces, amphitheatrically piled—at their foot lay huddled together the houses of the lower city ; beyond the ample bay extended to the distance; while to the left arose Vesuvius in unassuming grandeur, not a curl of smoke could be perceived upon its summit—there it stood in calm, like a despotic monarch in his court, smiling and at ease,—the very vineyards clustered up the mountain side, and man even feared not tobuild, reliant on its smile. Matilda shuddered at their hardihood, who thus could pursue the ways of gain and life on the volcano's side.

But above all these objects of wonder and beauty, in which Naples and its vicinity abound,





perhaps the most astounding is—its main street— the Toledo. Not for its beauty—it is a filthy place, nor its size, for though long perhaps and large as any of our streets, there is nothing in this to excite one's wonder. But it is the restless crowd, that never once in the twenty-four hours cease to fill and move throughout the space— the guard of idleness is regularly relieved there ; if the beau be not lounging, the mechanic is there eating his maccaroni or his water melon alfresco ; even in the mid and morning hours of the night, when all other cities are hushed in slumber, the Toledo is not empty ; and morning, noon, and night, the stream of human life flows through it, as its chosen bed. It would serve as a vestal's temple to the goddess of life—her lamp is never extinguished in it.

Lady Euston, however, and her daughter were directed in search of an abode far beyond this quarter, so unrivalled in its noise and crowd. It was in the elegant retirement of the Chiaia that apartments were prepared for them. The scen£ Seemed Elysian to Matilda, whose heart, deeply shaken by her fond father's death, and weighed down since, here felt all despondency flit from off it at once. "If life were but this," said she, as she leant forth to contemplate the scene, " the pleasure and enjoyment of it could content me.'1 Matilda thought this compromise would be generous on her part:—" A well-dressed beef-steak and a bottle of wine will satisfy me at all times," said the young soldier, setting forth to commence his first campaign—and the reflection of Matilda was formed with an equal pre-science of future suffering. The day was not distant, when to enjoy that scene for even a single hour with the self-same feeling that then contented her, she would have given all that she possessed.



But I anticipate. Society is no preserve at Naples, and the Eustons were of course admitted into all. Their compatriots they met once a week or fortnight at the ambassador's parties; but here there was too much gravity kept up, and the company was of too mingled a kind to be attractive. In the 6rst years of peace our envoys were obliged not to be over particular, and the parvenu, that could afford a coach and four, and a secretary of state's passport, jostled himself into company that he had shrunk from at home. To descend in Italian society was venial, for that was seeing life, but in mere English vulgarity there was not even variety to recompense. There is more than this, however, in the reason that always causes English to avoid English abroad—" an Englishman to be sure does not travel to see Englishmen ;" but this antipathy that makes one recoil from a countryman requires further explanation. And it is this: we all travel for vanity, for the sake of being and having been in such a place; hence jealousy against those who share, and consequently lessen the honour. Those are vulgar feelings to be sure; but we are much mistaken if they do not at times even actuate the high-born.





It was even inconceivable to Matilda herself, •why she should frown upon her young compatriots. She did so. Foreign address, foreign adulation, foreign enthusiasm captivated her. Italy too was the land of the arts, and Italians alone understood the finer feelings inspired by those intellectual sisters. The verses of Tasso had ever been familiar to Matilda; she knew of no English poetry that touched the heart, without a smack of foreign in it. Byron was a selfadopted Italian—the muse of Moore revelled either in oriental or occidental fancy, and the northern scenes of Scot, so flexible was her geography, she placed in the same poetic latitude, at least with those of Ariosto. Of Italian music, too, Miss Euston had become a rapturous admirer : her mother had of course a box at St. Carlos, overflowing each evening with crowds of critical amateurs, and the comparative merits of Davide and Nozzari, of Cimarosa and Paesiello often disturbedher rest. Shemade themost vigorous efforts also at comprehending the occult merits and excellencies of the art of painting ; but this lay altogether too deep for her, and on this point, at least, Matilda was doomed to reluctant ignorance.



Whilst Matilda devoted herself with enthusiasm to these thoughts and pursuits, Lady Euston was almost equally immersed and delighted with the mysterious whispers, and chiacchera of Italian society. As despotism has ever ruled the unhappy land, and condescends even to punish an unguarded expression, society has the air of crouching under the tyrannic rod; none speak freer or bolder than its members do on all points perhaps,—but this very freedom is used with precaution, in corners, in select groups, in close curtained opera boxes. Nothing can be said to make a noise at Naples; for were the news but thathis Majesty had caught a sore throat, the profound secret would be circulated in a whisper from princess to duchess, from duchess to countess, and so down through all the graduating orders of the state, till it reached Pulicimil!o, who would perhaps communicate it to his audience in his own sly ribaldry.



All this mock importance, that gave an air of intrigue to the mere chit-chat of the day, delighted Lady Euston. And scarce did she fail a day in visiting a gossip of this school, the Principessa Caradori, (to degrade the word princess by making it stand for a Neapolitan title so common, I could not think.) The Principessa had been an intriguante at court in the days of Queen Caroline and her dear friend Lady Hamilton; and she had not since ceased to practice the arts she had learned in so perfect a school. Independent of the petty manoeuvres of the day, of which she was deeply cognizant, her memory was a mine of anecdote and intrigue,—how interesting, 1 need not say, to greedy English ears, to which foreign scandal is almost more piquant than domestic. Here was a new school for Matilda; quite another kind of principle, of virtue, of honour, from that she had been taught to reverence, had actuated



the real heroes and heroines of the Principessa's tales. Yet the gay dissoluteness and dexterous intrigue of the one she could not but admire, and could scarce help envying the passionate, though fickle hearts, joined with the powerfnl fascinations of the other.

The Principessa's palace was one of the best attended at Naples. From former connections she was of course well with the court, and her interest there was now greater than ever, from her being the bosom friend of La Partana, the king's mistress, or rather wife by a left-handed marriage; the royal ministers were always seen at her conversaziones, and Medici himself was in the habit of enjoying there his game of whisk, as he called it. If the cavalier minister be not a better calculator in finance than he is at whist, he makes but a blundering hand of the revenues of the kingdom of Naples. Still his heavy visage is an honest one.

The public society at the Caradori palace was brilliant; the select circle was delightful, even to Matilda, quiet as the amusement might be—a little gaming, a little music, chiaccliera, much intrigue, for what is Neapolitan life withoutit ? The charm, however, consisted principally in the familiar tone that reigned throughout it;—the ease, the infantine good humour, and forward feeling, to which every one gave themselvesup. The freedom of manner and conversation was such, as would have shocked either Matilda or Lady Euston a year previous, but it was the current coin of the society they had long been in, and it was only what it passed for, not the superscription that they now regarded The conversation was the very opposite of that persiflage which had disgusted them in French society—it was either deep, serious, argumentative, impassioned, or else it was trifling and silly, even to the verge of extreme folly. The French blend these qualities; they are always light in tone and in the turn of conversation, even when the remarks are profound—they are ashamed of feeling, even when agitated by its workings, and





let it escape but under a proper guard of the comic, to defend it from ridicule. On the other hand, they never give themselves wholly up to mischief, and never let fun degenerate into buffoonery.

The Italian on the contrary is in extremes. He is utterly without vanity, consequently without the petty notions of reserve, and pursues his mood, whether it be of feeling or of humour, to its farthest point. Excited, aroused, he is the ancient Roman, or the ancient Samnite, full of fire, energy, and all the sublime of passion ; when relaxed, amused, as he is unprompted by vanity to preserve what other people call dignity and self-respect; he dwindles to the modern Pulieinello, and thinks that in the demeanor of private life there can be no debasement:—as to his public or political character, he is what circumstances have made him, a non-entity. What constitutes patriotism and public spirit in our happier land is complex feeling, an aggregate of subtle, links and bonds that prevade all the members of a country, lead to and from eveiy breast—a concussion given to any part of which is, like an electric shock, " felt along the line,"' and communicated to all. It is not the simple energies of each spirit considered apart, that with



•

us constitutes the noble whole of our liberty and independence; it exists but in the bond that unites us, the connecting atmosphere of opinion that surrounds and connects us. The illfated subject of southern governments knows nothing of this far-spread sympathy—to public life or feeling he does not exist, and the propensity to patriotism, finding itself a singularity and a solecism, unfashionable and unpracticable, sinks into shame and disuse. There man is an isolated being ; bound to his fellows by no tie of interest—the interlacing bonds, by which humanity would connect itself, is ever and anon cloven asunder by the sword of despotism. It is but the finer and tender links of love and private passion that are there allowed ; and the vehemence of the south, forbidden to invest and mingle itself in party and political interests, throws itself all into these finer feelings. Forbidden to dream of ambition, the Italian devotes himself to love—it, is the only vent that his enthusiasm is permitted—and to love alone he rushes with all the ardour of undivided spirit.



Matilda could not. but perceive this bright side of Italian character—the ardour with which the Italian pursues and worships female beauty, in the first impulse of his heart. The fickleness, the coldness, immorality, and worthlessness of that heart, once recovered from this first impulse, she did not as soon descry. Amongst the gayest and most assiduous visitors of the Caradori palace, Matilda had remarked, and and been remarked by, the Conte D'Avellino. He was a youth of the most prepossessing appearance, noble, frank, enjoue.—was a soldier, had attained the rank of Colonel in Napoleon's, at least in Murat's wars, which fairly entitled him to the Bourbonic rank of General, which he bore under Ferdinand. With all the air and fascinations of a man of gallantry, D'Avellino had by Do means the character, although he enjoyed, perhaps, more of the reality, than half the dull cavaliers and patiti, that publicly attached themselves to this or that dame, with all the slavery and courtesy of married life, affecting and allowed to affect the appearance of an intrigue, and content with that appearance. D'Avellino was too French, too spirited, independent and passionate, for these humdrum intrigues of the old school. The slavery of marriage he thought bad enough, but to burden one's self gratis with all its pains and none of its privileges, was a penalty, which the young Count was resolved not to pay, even in obedience to fashion. Accordingly a certain number of minutes was the limit of his stay in any fair one's box or boudoir—in society he went his rounds, and was ever in motion, lingering behind no one's chair, picking up no gloves, and keeping seemingly aloof from the space of fascination.





For reasons best known to himself, but very natural, his countrywomen did not delight him. The Neapolitan ladies were never famed for beauty, and even the species that does prevail is coarse; they have the souls for imbibing love, but not in general the persons that inspire it. Hence through the rank of married and unmarried, D'Avellino had passed heart-whole : of the former he could discover none calculated to fix him or call forth the energies of his affection ; and the latter would as soon have dreamed of ascending the throne, as inspiring a gallant with any passion for them. Girls in these countries are mere cyphers, till marriage places an unit at their side, and straight they are metamorphosed into value.





CHAPTER IV.

The blonde and novel charms of the English girl at once attracted the attention of Avellino. The na'ivet6 too, the mirth, and freedom in which she indulged, compared with the mute air of convent boarders observed by the young Italians of her age, gave the Count further opportunities of judging. He addressed his passing attentions frequently to Lady Euston,—for to accost her daughter, except in the ceremonious request of her'hand to a dance, and an adieu as ceremonious on reconducting her to her mother's side the moment that the dance was finished,— any further attention he would have looked upon as unpardonable rudeness, and consequently did not attempt it. The blithe Matilda understood,



and would understand, none of this etiquette, and her remark was sure to interrupt the dialogue between Lady Euston and Avellino. The Italian mistook at first such behaviour for a challenge, but he soon saw that it proceeded from simple, innocent nature. The light tone of Matilda's English voice, unfraught with that rude earnestness, with which the Italian female pours forth her words, was a further charm—even her mincing mispronunciation delighted him, as she closed her mouth upon the full sounds, that would have stretched Italian jaws to their widest interval, or strained their rotund vowels through her delicate teeth.

D'Avellino soon became a constant visitor at the Chiaja, almost indeed an inmate; so idle and abandoned to pleasure is the life of a Neapo

|

litan, that he has no reserve of time, but bestows it all where his heart directs. For this reason Italian intimates are to most English insufferable, since the time we do not give to occupation, we love to give at least to retirement. The time too



of an Englishman's day is minutely portioned out, marked and watched—the hours of an Italian arc all in one—he does not even think the twentyfour worth dividing, but counts them, as he spends them, in the mass. For days together the Count would drop in upon the Eustons at noon, forget all duties and intentions, lounge or accompany them in their walk through the Villa Reala, or their drive upon the Mergellina—the evening found him at St. Carlos, or perhaps elsewhere with them, whence accompany ing them home, he would sit the live-long night in converse with them alone, regardless of the hour, looking out perhaps upon the moonlit-bay, engaged with Matilda in the labyrinths of passionate converse, or enjoying, on the piano, the realized feeling

of the compositions of Rossini or Mozart.

• Propinquity, propinquity, repeat the Tales of

Miss Edgeworth, is the great parent of love;— no doubt it is, of these predilections, which the northerns nick-name so; but the heart of true passion retains itself for a congenial object, and to it



propinquity is often but the parent of disgust. But when two such hearts are brought within the action of each other's beatings, then indeed propinquity will suffice to kindle up the mutual flame. An intimacy of the kind, we have described, could not long subsist between such beings as Avellino and Matilda, without being productive of its natural effects. The persons of both inspired each with all of the passion that form can inspire, and the sentiments that even more and more freely poured forth each succeeding day of their intimacy, brought to its highest degree their enthusiasm for one another Lady Euston did not interfere; she would not fright away a cavalier, whose attentions evidently procured her and her daughter consideration in society. Besides, the Count was a man of family, of property, and she saw no reason that confined the choice of Matilda to her countrymen. Poor Ralph Maxwell was equally forgotten by both mother and daughter.

Like a delicious dream, the brief Neapolitan

VOL. I. 1)



winter rolled over Matilda^s head—the bold patches of snow no longer dared to rest upon the burning side of Vesuvius—and the damp scirocco ceased to bring its three down-days of rain. From her window in the Chiaja, Matilda marked the vines grow green on the delicious sides of Pausilippo, and every shrub that tenanted the hanging gardens, from the summit of the Vomero down to the sea, began to display the livery of approaching spring. During the cold and damp of winter, the Eustons had deferred visiting many spots of interest in the vicinity of Naples, until the season would render the walk or drive there agreeable, not only by its dryness and mildness, but by the encreased beauty which verdure would add to the scene. Their excursions now became frequent, and Avellino was ever the guide and companion of the day. More distant trips, such as to Paestum and Caserta, they still deferred —but to Herculaneum and Pompeii on one side, and to Puzzuoli and the bays round Baiae on the other,theirconstantsteps werefrequently directed.



Amongst other places that Matilda had not yet visited, the tomb of Virgil was one—the more singular, as it was almost discernible from her window. But similarly as the possession of a book has the effect of precluding us from opening or enjoying it, so an object of the kind within our grasp is generally left untasted to the last. One evening that Avellino, with Lady Euston and Matilda, had strolled out to take a turn in the Villa Reale, the latter proposed quitting the dull parade, and walking for variety towards the grotto. In obedience to her whim, the steps of the party were turned thither. " Suppose," proposed Matilda, " we ascend the hill, and visit Virgil's tomb. I declare, I am always ashamed when my sight-seeing countrymen ask me how I like it, to say I have not been there, and it so near. It looks like a want of taste."

Prompted by this very unworthy motive, Ma, tilda, supported on the arm of her obsequious lover, and followed by Lady Euston, began to ascend the steep path that winds through the vineyards of Pausilippo to the eminence, where stands the tomb of the Latin poet. 'Twas an ascent, to a female, of some difficulty; but the pauses of repose were well filled by turning to gaze upon the far sweep of the bay bounded by the hills and orange-crowned rocks of Sorrento. They at length reached the gate of the vineyard leading to the tomb: the Ciceroness was employed in doing the honours to some other visitors. She soon, however, got through her part, and hurried to admit our party.



The tomb of Virgil, a simple, low-vaulted building, half tower and half hovel, once rose by the side of, and upon a level with, the Puzzuoli road, which at that very spot entering the mountain, by a subterraneous grotto or funnel, traversed it to the opposite side. It now stood some half hundred feet above the present way, which time and excavation had sunk. Thus impending over the road, the tomb occupied an isolated mound, at the side of which, but apart from it, rose the vineyard they had passed. Matilda stooped and entered the celebrated sepulchre, but felt little awed or touched by the place. On emerging she was by far more struck with the beautiful seclusion of the situation, charmingly contrasted with the noble view that it commanded. Exploring further in this lofty nook, Matilda was surprised to find herself in a little English burying-ground, as some score of tombstones told, all graven in her mother tongue. The heretic dead, that of course were not allowed the sacred covering of the cemetry, here rested their last rest, far from their native land. Matilda was moved; it was a scene to touch an English heart. She looked at the memorials of the dead—they were mostly of the young—many, no doubt, who, in search of health had journeyed to this genial clime, and fovfnd the fate they fled from—others who in the prime of hope had travelled, and returned no more. "Ah!" exclaimed Avellino,and "art thouhere?" The Count was contemplating a marble slab.





" What—of whom is it you speak ?" asked Matilda.

" Povero L , a compatriot of thine, Matilda, a rich banker's son of London. I knew him. He became passionately attached here to

La , and died for love. He literally starved

himself."

" She forsook him," said Matilda, " after a world of vows—did she not ?"

" In truth she did," said Avellino.

" The murderess P Matilda breathed forth, jather than spoke.

" Ma come, 'tis a thing of every day ; "'twas a silly trick to die for it."

" And in this famed land of passion, Count Avellino, do people never die for love ?"

" Qualche volte, Signore, si fa matto per amore, ma morto mat. Folk sometimes become mad for love, but die never."

Avellino was jocular, and did not perceive, until he had already spoken, that Matilda was serious, even to emotion. His observation was evidently out of harmony with her thoughts and mood.



" Ah, Count, your southern love is a wild, frenzied deity, a maniac still, too wise to harm himself. In England, Avellino, hearts break, and are broken silently." And, for the first time for many weeks, Matilda thought on Ralph.

"Yes," replied the Count, unconsciously driving deeper the self-stricken poignard, " but England is the blest land of pure and mutual first-love, here forbidden and rendered impossible by the curst habits of our country. For an Italian dame and husband to wander from each other's side, is necessary, if they have hearts, and is foreseen.—But who, blest with English affection," and the Count pressed warmly the hand of Matilda, while the recollections that his words brought up, sent every flush of blood from her cheek, " who could waive that honour or forsake that love, for all the beauty or passion this clime has to bestow? "



Matilda was near fainting at the deadly compliment. Avellino still grasped her hand, which lay motionless in his, so paralyzed was every sentiment. After a moment or two, however, she recovered, looked up, and instantly uttered a frantic shriek, that appalled Lady Euston and the Count, to both of whom the cause was undivinable.

Avellino perceived a young man, apparently English, standing near, and looking at the party ; but he could scarcely tax him as the cause of Miss Euston's fright. He was so. It was no other than Ralph Maxwell. Lady Euston after a while recognised him, but with difficulty, so much was he altered.

Continued reports of Matilda's gay behaviour and estrangement from him, had made their way to his ears. The world is kind in affording wings to evil tidings. But the relaxing at first, and final cessation afterwards, of Matilda's correspondence, told sufficiently the truth. Tied to the oar of a profession, he could not forsake it when.





he wished, and fly to remonstrate with Matilda. He allowed, that the present novelty with which she was surrounded, might distract for a short space her affections, but he relied still upon her affection, and deemed it not within the range of possibility, that she could think of bestowing her hand upon a foreigner. The truth, however, —the news of Avellino's intimacy and hopes, at length awoke him. Worn somewhat by study and repining, the spirit that urged him across the continent was greater than his strength. Night and day he journeyed on, heedless of fatigues and of the fever, that such agitation of mind, joined with incessant motion in a close carriage produced, and he was literally borne from his chaise to a sick bed in an hotel at Rome. Six weeks of mental torture and physical agony detained him there, and in the first hour of seeming convalescence, Ralph made an exertion, sprung from his couch, and ordered himself to be dragged to Naples. He had but the day before arrived. That afternoon he had passed the gate



of the Eustons' hotel; his heart, wrung with anguish, failed him at the entrance; he was yet unable to the task of meeting his faithless mistress, and now had passed on to soothe his fevered head and distracted mind among the green declivities of Pausilippo, when an ominous fate led him to the little burial ground of his countrymen, there to meet once more with Matilda.

" Good heavens, Ralph Maxwell!" cried Lady Euston, " where did you drop from, to frighten us so ?"

Matilda opened her eyes, but it was to close them in the same swoon, on beholding again the countenance of her old lover.

" My countenance is unwelcome here," said the faint, sick youth, as he trembled.

" At any other time, Ralph, but this moment—it was so sudden—and my daughter so exceedingly nervous—"

Young Maxwell withdrew without a word. Avellino marked his stay and departure with alike astonishment. Matilda recovered, and by the aid of Avellino and her mother, regained the hotel, without uttering a word. On reaching home, she retired to her chamber, and Avellino, amazed at the scene, the whole mystery of which, however, he in a moment unravelled, took his departure.



A few steps from the hotel portal, he was fiercely accosted by Maxwell. The Italian listened to the angry question, and menaces of the young Englishman, uttered in a tongue he did not comprehend.

" Basta" cried the count, " Siamo rlvali— 'tis enough, we are rivals, you seek a quarrel,— there is the number of my house;" and he stretched forth a card of the Avellino Palace, Strada Infrascata.

Maxwell clenched it, as if it were already the forfeited life of his antagonist, and for the present the rivals parted.





CHAPTER V.

Maxwell did not slumber over his rage and vengeance. A young countrymen of his waited on the Count,, who was willing to give immediate satisfaction. But to the use of any other weapon than the sword, neither the Italian nor the friend he had chosen would listen. The Count said, he was a soldier, and could use but a soldier's weapon, the sword; pistols were but for brigands and sbirri. This insult was unnecessary; the challenged had every right.to select his weapon, and Maxwell, though as ignorant of sword-play as a child, was obliged to acquiesce.

On the following morning the antagonists met, and proceeded fuori grotta to decide their quarrel. They stripped, and scarcely took the ground, when Maxwell flew at the Count; his lounge, or rather his rush, was parried, and in the act, the finger of the Englishman was pricked, and a tiny drop of blood made itself visible. " Blood is drawn," said the Italian's second, " enough, enough, the combat is ended." Maxwell was not so easily contented, and insisted on continuing. Avellino wanted neither courage nor generosity, and continued the defence, unwillingly, on perceiving the utter want of skill of his adversary, to make use of the advantage that was in his power. At length the arm of Maxwell fell exhausted by his side; Avellino still took no advantage, but whipped the air in laughing derision with his sword.



" Curse your foreign weapon," cried Maxwell, in a rage, striking at the same time his sword against the sod, and shivering it into a thousand pieces. " I am but a child, so armed before you, and you see it. Take your advantage, Count Avellino, or permit me the weapon of my country."



The Count sheathed his sword, made his bow, and was about to take his departure coolly, When Ralph, who had lost all- patience, seized him roughly by the person, and in the most frenzied language of injury provoked him to abide the fairer trial of fire-arms. Inspired by the victory he had already gained, and provoked at the rudeness of his antagonist, Avellino consented : pistols were sent for. When foreigners make use of such weapons, they always cast lots for the fire, as they esteem it a ridiculous waste of blood to risk two lives at a time. But even through this rule the fury of Maxwell broke :—they both took their ground. Avellino, at the moment of fire, cast his pistol down, as a weapon that he scorned to use, and received his adversary's fire, which took effect. The Count fell. The few witnesses were in consternation— so fatal a termination to a duel had not been known in Naples for many years. The Count D'Avellino was borne to his palace; and Maxwell, whose deep-stirred vengeance was scarcely slaked by the sight of his rival's blood, returned with his friend to the city.



The story of the rencontre between AveUino and the young Englishman soon flew in whispers through Naples, and that in such progress the circumstances should have been exaggerated and distorted, was to be expected. Even told simply, the impression left by it upon a hearer would be favourable to Avellino. But gathered and conveyed by Italians, all interested in behalf of their countryman, a noble and a general favourite, their earnestness and superlatives swelled the event into a deed of diabolical vengeance on the part of the Englishman, and of unexampled heroism on the part of the Count. There was truth enough, unfortunately for Maxwell, to afford a basis to the exaggerated account. The Eustons had separated themselves previously from all English society, which they affected to hold in abhorrence. And consequently, whilst reports of Maxwell's sanguinary vindictiveness, poured in upon the astounded ears of the Eustons, accompanied by enthusiastic comments on the noble behaviour of the Count, contrasted with that of his rival, the mother and daughter had shut themselves out from hearing the other side of the question from testimony less interested than that of Ralph himself. And him, since the rash duel, Matilda had invariably refused to see. The accounts she heard could not, she observed, be all false; yet the smallest part of the conduct reported by all was unpardonable. Alienated from him in heart, Matilda mistook such feelings for anger at his interference, and made such their pretext both to herself and others. In vain Ralph Maxwell wrote— his letters were returned unopened. In vain he besought by every means an interview, one half hour, one moment for his exculpation—Matilda would not. He besieged their hotel in the Ghiaja—he but kept the Eustons prisoners, for they never stirred out. Sick at heart, Ralph gave up his assiduity. Sinking in health, the Neapolitan physician ordered him to choose his





residence in some lofty position of the city. He with difficulty procured a chamber on the summit of the Vomero, where his consolation was that his window commanded the Chiaja far beneath it. Matilda's dwelling he could no more approach, but pining in his solitary chamber, the eyes of Ralph were ever directed to the mansion, which he had learned to distinguish. The live-long day he gazed fixedly down upon the street—he neither marked its gaiety, nor heeded its bustle, and the strings of carriages that rolled in continual succession were unnoticed by him till the hour, when one of them was likely to contain the faithless Matilda. Evening came,—the crowd dispersed, the fisherman turned his sail homeward, and dragged his boat upon the beach —still in the darkness of night, Ralph could distinguish the one lamp before the Eustons'1 portal—in moonlight, the more frequent, he could discern as in the day, although more generally at that hour he ventured to approach the Chiaja, and was accustomed to pass the solitary hours of night, often pacing before, and gazing up at their casements, from whence Matilda's eye never marked him, within which her fickle heart had almost ceased to pity or recur to him.



Meantime Avellino, too, forced to taste the bed of sickness and of pain for a space, carried with him there to cheer him the full sympathy of the English maiden. Accompanied by the Principessa Caradori, the Eustons even visited the Count, and there for the first time, with a full smile, Matilda listened to the ardent prayers and passionate protestations of Avellino. His wound, though a lingering one, had not proved dangerous, and the surgeons promised convalescence in a very few weeks. Every pale look that Matilda observed in Avellino, every pang her sympathy imagined him to feel, increased at the same time her affection for him, and aversion to Maxwell. Her heart no longer wavered, but resigne"d itself with enthusiasm to him, who loved and had suffered for her, and who at the same time had shewn, what even she deemed unItalian, generosity towards a rival whom she once had liked.



Time, and its portions of weeks and days— that heartless machinery, that rolls forth human events—brought fresh health to the cheek, and fresh hope to the heart, of Avellino. From Ralph it gradually withdrew the powers of life. Why need I paint what all have witnessed, and if witnessed, never forgotten—the effects of slow consumption—the pale, yet flushed cheek— the sunken eye, the heaving respiration ? Still some days he would rally—and life in that genial clime, like an expiring lamp in the calm and breathless air, still lingers in a faint and nickering flame, till the very last drop of its cruse is exhausted.

The poor peasants that inhabit the summit of the Vomero, soon became acquainted with the history of Maxwell; and these rude people, who far from having any of the Italian servility so generally represented about them, were rough



and churlish even to ferocity, yet never passed by lo speltro giovene, the spectre youth, as they called him, without a salute, and look of commiseration. The worn and woe-begone lover, an object of ridicule and jesting to the boors of other countries, was here respected, adored, and pitied by hearts that knew his malady. Even in the lowest classes of Italian life there is an experience, a knowledge of those fine feelings, even of their refinements, that with us are limited to the perception but of the higher class, and even but of a small portion of that higher class; and it is this which constitutes the poetical taste of the populace, and renders -them, even in rags and poverty, fitter and fairer admirers of the strains of Tasso and Ariosto, than any of us, however refined by habits of critical reasoning and study.

It was now drawing near the end of May, and the scorching hours of noon were wont to consign the population of Naples to repose. It became impossible to stir out, except for a short space in the morning, seldom taken advantage of, and the cool of the evening, which in fact was a kind of morning hour, when the world of pleasure at least rose to its amusement. It was then the cooling flags of Naples began to resound to the noise of moving vehicles, then the everlasting babble of the city arose as from the joyous festivity of an eternal holiday—the music and song vied even with this babble of conversation. In tower and street, in balcony, and almost from every palace window, now thrown open to the breeze of night, the sound of the gay guitar was heard in concert with the voice, or more boisterous music was heard to echo to the dancer's feet.



In the lofty suburb, however, where Ralph resided, the scene and time were more solitary, broken in upon, at most but by village festivity ; although when this was silent, the hum of the most noisy of all cities reached even to his distant abode. Here Ralph used to wander forth, not looking to the Chiaja: his pangs were



hastening to an end, and in the resignation of despair he resolved to await his final escape from them and life, without adding by unavailing obstinacy to his tortures. For this reason his moonlight wanderings were through the vineyards of Pausilippo, down to the ruin-scattered coast of the sea. The mouldering palace of Queen Joanna was here his favourite haunt—he loved to creep within its walls, and look forth from its ruined windows full upon the Bay, the dim Vesuvius in the distance, until the white habitation of Resina beneath it, built and relieved upon the black lava bed, shone a snow white streak beneath the moon. The billows beat into the ruined palace under him, and at times a mightier wave would strike the old brick buttress of the fabric, and shake it to its foundations. He frequented it as a monument of female perfidy, for there, perhaps from the window where he stood, the perfidious Joanna destroyed a confiding husband.

Thitherward one evening he was directing his



steps, when unusual lights in that story of the house occupied by the Eustons, (the house was that next to the one in which Saliceti narrowly escaped being blown up, and where General Frimont lately resided) struck Ralph. He turned towards the Chiaja, and found upon approach that he was not mistaken. The lights of festivity gleamed from the apartments, and as festal sounds were heard to issue loudly from them. He stood awhile beneath, and listened to the noise of so many happy voices. He thought he could even distinguish Matilda's—he did not know what were her resolutions respecting Avellino. He had withdrawn himself from every friend, and affected now an utter carelessness as to Matilda's fate. He had been resigned; but at this moment curiosity and anxiety urged him. He entered the portal, hurried up the open stair, entered the outer hall that led to the scene of festivity, and gazed in upon the crowd. Matilda was engaged in the dance, joyous and gay—Avellino was her



partner. Ralph Maxwell saw, and smiled— no passion more tempestuous shook him—no tear bedewed his eye-lid, and his heart scarcely swerved from the regular, faint beating with which it journeyed to repose. He looked his last farewell of Matilda—she saw him not—and for this time, at least, he resolved to be generous, and would not break upon her gladness. He retired, passed through a chamber, through another, and found himself by mistake in the inner corridore. A chamber door was open —something prompted him. And on looking in, it was evidently the chamber of Matilda. He recognized some little English trinkets, anil mournfully; for every thing else—the very atmosphere of the room was foreign. There was a little turquoise ring upon the table—he himself had given it her. He seized, kissed it, and at last, to his relief, did shed a torrent of tears. Ralph tore from his bosom a locket that contained Matilda's hair—broke it open—was about to take out all the lock, but sighed, and took



but half. This half he placed with the little ring—took a stray piece of paper—wrote on it l( the murderess!" Matilda's own exclamation— folded in it hair and ring, thrust the little packet into the drawer of a dressing-box that was open, and departed.

That very night Ralph's heart felt lightened, as he journeyed home. His very strength seemed in a degree restored. On his bed a sweet and sound repose awaited him, and he awoke in the possession of vigour and unusual spirits. Hope even began to relumine his breast,—not hopes of Matilda, but some connected with ambition. And old dreams, that had been long excluded from his mind by the one all absorbing feeling, now returned. Thus passed the day.

In the evening Ralph as usual wandered out, a little fallen in spirit from the elation of the morning, but still calm and not despondent. He descended the side of Pausilippo, gazing on the vineyards and orange groves that surrounded him, but felt himself, as he proceeded,, too weak to proceed so far as the coast, on account of the laborious ascent by which he must necessarily return home. For this reason he turned to the left amongst the vineyard paths, and unconsciously took the one leading to Virgil's tomb. He was surprised on finding himself so near it; but being there, he again entered the vineyard in which it was. The vendemmiatore% that owned it, was himself at work, and with him, at first, the youth entered into conversation —a circumstance that gladdened the old man, who knew Maxwell's state, and judged this wish to converse, as it is in lunatics, a favourable symptom.



Ralph entered the little burying-ground, where he had seen Matilda, and looked forth again on the enchanting prospect that had at first attracted him. The sun had already sunk behind the promontory of Pausilippo, but its horizontal rays still shone on Naples and on the bay, which glowed beneath the lustre of the setting luminary. It was a breathless evening.





All Naples seemed reflected in the still ocean that laved it—the Castel D'Ovo with the dwelling-crowned clifrs above it, were stilly repeated in the water. Near, the bay shone in gold and crimson streaks—afar sea and sky were confounded in a bright but indistinct yellow, so that the distant isle of Capri seemed almost floating in the heavens. The gloomy sides of Vesuvius were crimsoned with the beam, and the mountains o'er Castel la Mare and Sorrento were lit up in patches of similar brightness, each white village at their bases conspicuous, though minute. It was a scene at once so vivid, yet so full of repose, that the contemplator was at the same time lulled and excited,—Si vedc Napoli, e poi more.

Ralph Maxwell was lost in the scene, and sat for some time immersed in his contemplation, when his attention was directed to the Chiaja beneath him by the sound of trumpets, the noise of carriages, and all the tumult of a brilliant procession. He looked—the line of carriages drew up at the very hotel, and entered one by one. He started up—" What is it ?" demanded he of the man of the vineyard. " Un sposalizio mi pare," was the reply; " 'tis a wedding procession."



Ralph Maxwell was struck prophetically with the truth. He sunk, and never spoke word after. In twenty hours from that moment, his remains, uncoffined and unknelled, were borne to the very vineyard where he had fallen, and buried with some of his unfortunate countrymen in that, not all unconsecrated spot.





CHAPTER VI.

The gay procession was indeed the wedding of Matilda and Avellino. At the very moment in which the over-racked heart 01 Ralph Maxwell gave up its last sigh, the blushing but happy Matilda, supported on the arm of her Italian husband, and encircled by an admiring and envious crowd, tripped lightly, though tremulously, to the festal board. The Italians had not learned, as the French already have, to imitate us in our happy arrangement of a wedding-day, by which the most interested part of the assembly are allowed to be borne off to the solitary delight and freedom of each other's society, whilst the jovial witnesses are permitted to make amends over the good things of the table, for the feast of sentiment and passion which is either past, or not yet prepared for them.



Seated together Avellino and his bride were doomed to endure at first the homage and congratulation of the crowd; anon the jests, and throughout the sickening riot, with which they could not sympathize. But, as the guests and witnesses of such festal scenes should do on such occasion, we will abandon the happy couple to their tender thoughts, and turn our attention to another quarter of the saloon.

There sate, the Principessa Caradori, in all the pride of rank, surrounded by that little cortege or band of chatterers) which though changing its members every instant, still never abated its number and crowd, around her person. The Principessa was, at least by a score of years, past even the waning age of her beauty: woman as she was, by this time she was aware of the important fact, and as personal attractions are a necessary and peremptory requisite of attraction for an Italian palace or circle, the Principessa supplied the void which the defalcation of her own charms had occasioned, by an amiable and lovely friend, the never-failing attendant upon her, whether beneath the canopy, where she presided over the routs of the Palazzo Caradori, in her Loggia at St. Carlos, or as at present honouring by her presence the festivities of a favoured acquaintance. This lovely shadow of the princely, but now forbidding dowager, was the widow of a Sicilian noble, the Baron Pernella, who had lost both property and life by sillily meddling in the conflict between revolutionary and loyal interests in Sicily. The Baroness was seldom known, however, except as La Pernella, or La Bella Pernella ; and those who had paid their regular and daily compliments to the Principessa for many revolving years, ever since the tribute of such praises could have the pretext for being sincere, were ordered, much in the way that a gentleman of property would order his tenant to deliver his rent to this or that agent, to transfer their adulations from the Principessa to her dear Pernella; still, on the score of health, good looks, and expression, all that still could with decorum be withheld from the attendant, was rendered, in despite of her remonstrance;, to the principal.





La Pernella was the very perfection of southern beauty. Dark—her glossy hair defied the eye to find a shade approaching to the brown—her complexion with the sun's strong impress on it—'twould have been swarthy, but for the extreme delicacy of its texture, and the velvety fineness of its sheen—her " oriental eye" was deep and full, like a well viewed by moonlight, shining dark, while all around is fair. Her person—but that was low, and perhaps had too much of the embonpoint :—she was not the fair being whom we love to see or to imagine tripping over the ballroom or the gr'een, but one whose face and bust we hang upon and are enamoured of, independent of the rest of the person, or even of the soul that animates it. In that perfect countenance, that Very ideal of luscious loveliness, there was no expression, save that of simple beauty alone—no fire





beamed from that capacious eye—no feeling played about that dimple-set mouth—that brow, that lip, were immoveable, unused to express feelings of anger or disdain. She was just that foreign creature that I have heard the young travelled English describe as full of fire, but who really was the loveliest and most languid piece of still life that ever fascinated the sensualist.

Such was the nearest and never-stirring attendant on the Principessa, who, in her desire to see company around her, was so little vain, that she gave due credit to the charms of her favourite for the crowd of admirers that swelled her following. Whether this fascinating personage had herself ever suffered what she was daily inflicting, is yet to be developed. She was at this moment listening to the Principessa, commenting upon the beauties of Avellino's English bride.

" Ma guel sangue,n said the princess, " what

blood !"—by which she meant Matilda's English

colour, which if deserving admiration, now after

supporting an Italian summer and winter, what must it have been in the pure shades of Euston Park !



" For my part," said a patriotic amateur, " I like not the azure, the milk-white complexion of these English women ; give me the mellow flesh (carne was his word) that warms me even on Venetian canvas,—there is something generous* luxurious in swarth," (my translation, I fear, In conveying the expression, exaggerates the indecorum,) " that the lilies and roses of their northern complexions can never arrive at. I own I thought Avellino a fellow of more taste, than to allow himself to be caught by this fairy, whilst—" and he looked at La Pernella, whose beautiful lip protruded with a slight expression of pettishness at the remark; " but," continued the speaker, " Ioro (Tlnghilterra,—the gold of England rules the world, and why not a young Count's heart ?"

" Nay, Don Antonio,"* said the Principessa,

* The title of Don, instead of the Italian one of Signore, still prevails at Naples, one of the many during relict! of their Spanish regime.



*' leave your Gallicism for one night, and render justice to Avellino's choice."

" Ay, but these English begin to swarm upon us, and if their heavy pursed lasses bear away our gallants, what will become of our maidens ?"

" Via,'1'' said the Princess, " our good king will establish monasteries for the maidens, where they will be taken care of as of old. And as for ;the gallants, they will not be lost. Think you an English wife more fascinating than an Italian, or that our noble bridegroom yonder, enamoured, .as he looks, will be more than a few months lost to society."

La Pernella pressed her pretty lips between her teeth, and her black eyes at the same time glistened at some internal thought.

" Ha, those blue-eyed northerns," continued Don Antonio, " esteem a husband their monopoly, and the first eve that Avellino strikes his guitar beneath the windows of some fresher beauty, he will have this fair-haired wife at his heels-, clamouring for conjugal rights and broken vows."



All present laughed at the bare idea of such preposterous conduct. Some kindly observed, that she would learn ; others more kindly, that they would teach her.

" A bad world this," said the Princess, "mac'e consolazioneper tutti, there's consolation for all."

" Farebbe un bel libretto per nostro Rossini" said the Monsieur B., " 'twould be a delightful subject for an opera. We have il Turco in Italia, FItaliana in Algeri. What would you say to I'lnglesina iti Napoli ? What a fine duet Rossini, who intones so well the comic anguish of jealousy, would create between our Italian husband caught intriguing, and our simple English wife pursuing. It might be made, too, a delightful satire on those Miladies that uphold their northern melodies; and the contrast would be amusing, if the fair Briton was made to pour forth her reproaches in the prosaic, timorous strain of her own island, the Italian gallant responding in the rich and varied melody of the south.''



" Ah que c'est, une idee charmante, Monsieur leMelomaneFrancais" said the Princess, " give it to Ventignano, he'll make an operatic tragedy of it." And a laugh followed at the expence of the noble tragic opera poet.

As other guests succeeded to the Principessa's immediate circle, Don Antonio and the Melomane passed to some other divinity, inferior perhaps in dignity, but similarly enthroned and attended by a devoted set: a most convenient mode of rotatory conversation, especially for Italian beaus, who are not overstocked with information or fertility, as one observation or one jest, will thus afford being told and enjoyed twenty times of a night;

" Ma non e possibile,'" said the sweet Pernella, pronouncing that sweet word, and taking the opportunity of an interval to address the Principessa, " it is not possible that any lady could think of keeping her lord's affections to herself for any space of time."



" Scarcely possible., when you deny it to be so, my sweet Pernella," replied the Principessa.

" Vedremo" said Pernella, evidently shocked at the preposterous monopoly, and determined to oppose it in good time, with all her powers of fascination.

" More specimens of English loveliness!'" exclaimed the Principessa, recurring to her argument, as the beautiful daughter of the

quondam English minister at Naples, A ,

entered the room.

" The fair cygnets of as black a swan," observed between his teeth a cavalier.

" Hush, hush," said the Princess, who dreaded hearing in her circle an insinuation even against a minister twenty years in his grave; " here comes our Irish commander in

chief, General C ."

And General C——— did approach to pay his respects to the Principessa. All who were of the dame's confidential acquaintance retired, lest they might interrupt the conference between the courtier and the courtly dame.



The circle being thinned, and the common points of chiacchera discussed, the Princess

ventured to ask the general, if there was any thing new.

" II Re—the king," said the general.

" II Re" echoed the all attentive Principessa.

" Va dtta caccia domani, goes to hunt to-morrow," informed the general gravely.

" For certain ?" said the dame, anxious to learn the certainty of so important a fact.

" Mia parola, e il Console d'lnghilterra cottiii -•—upon my word," reiterated the general.

And every eye and ear in the saloon were directed to the spot where their high heads were employed in such grave communication. More than one long eared personage pretended to have overheard ail, and whispered about, that England was about to make a present to Napoleon of the United States of America. This was a sad puzzle, as none of the listeners knew enough either of politics or geography, to havte ever heard of that puissant continent. And they consequently remained in considerable doubt as to the position of the great Emperor's future realms, till some one boldly took upon him to instruct them, and said, the said states were a few miles to the southward of Morocco, which proved highly satisfactory.*



General C and the Principessa had in

the mean time sunk from the grave mention of his majesty's name, and hunting party ; and the rigidity of their brows, becoming gradually relaxed as they changed to a lighter theme, the retired members of the knot thought they might congregate again. The general was just entering into a full detail of a circumstance that agitated Naples, more than ever did revolution or invasion, moral or volcanic eruption. And as

* I hope no reader will set this down as over charged. The author has known a captain in the French service> quartered too in a civilized and delightful town, on the banks of the Seine, demand, " Et ou diable, sont cet Etat, Unit ?"



the circumstance was strongly descriptive of the state of morals in that lovely city, I shall, instead of telling it in the general's words, narrate it myself by way of episode.

The Abate Ciappe was as gay and gallant a gentleman as ever wore that dubious title and the petit collet. He was one of those sensualists, however, who are so more from vanity than propensity, and to show how minor passions will at times gain the end as successfully as fuller and more worthy ones, Ciappe's selfish gallantry had seldom or ever met with a repulse. The Abate's delight was not in any individual enjoyment, but in the sum; and accordingly to have the full measure of this, he kept a written account of his intrigues, specifying the parties, how gained, their characterj anecdotes respecting them, the money paid, et cetera. In this manner, I am almost ashamed to relate, the whole female world of Naples came into Ciappe's books; and, as it was not beauty that moved him, but a whim resembling that of Don Giovanni; from whence I pose he took the hint, to add another name el suea lista. He went systematically and successively to the task that his vanity had set him, and spared neither pains nor money to effect it. At the eve of an industrious life, Ciappe's complacent reflections looked over every rank and order in Naples, from the Princess to the Bourgeoisie, and could say to each,—" thou art in my books."



Ciappe, I dare say, was not the first of these sensual Doddington's; however, his diary and himself were not doomed to pass to the oblivion they deserved. It happened unluckily for the Abate one night, that a cavalier, on emerging from the terzo piano of a house in one of those steep and narrow streets that descend, or rather fall, from the heights of St. Elmo, down to the Toledo> was encountered by a bravo-barber, who seized him by the shoulders, ere he was aware; deliberately pulled off his cravat, as if he was about to shave him, and then cut his throat with a razor. Not a stiletto was in the case, to preserve even the romance of the story: the truth is, as it is told.



Ciappe was known to be the cavalier's rival with the dame, and on the barber's (who was caught) being questioned, and at the same time tortured to confess who instigated him, he said, as they had put into his mouth, Ciappe. This was testimony enough, and poor Ciappe was condemned to die. The fact was, that the barber had been mad, and his cutting of the throat was a frolic; moreover Ciappe was a man likely to cut a throat for no woman. The court after condemnation became convinced of this, and he would certainly have been spared,but the police in seizing his papers, had laid their hands also on the Abate's diary. It was a document ex* tremely curious and interesting, and the gentlemen superiors of the police speat hours in laughter over its contents. The circumstance got wind —it ran in whispers around Naples, that the Abate Ciappe had kept a journal of all his bonnes fortunes. A thousand females and upwards were aghast; they communicated their fears to one another—'twas easily done; they read a similar disaster in each other's countenance. A league was formed between the unfortunate Abate's army of mistresses; some from their palaces, others from behind their counters; the latter, be it remarked, ten times as vindictive.



Ciappe's liberation was already resolved upon, when a deputation from the frail assemblage of fair, waited on the minister, and demanded peremptorily the Abate's journal and his head: a revolution was threatened in case of denial. The minister knew too well the irresistible influence of all the wives of Naples; he instantly conceded the point. The dreaded journal was given, and the poor Abate, the deserved victim of his licentious vanity, suffered under the guillotine for a crime that he had never committed.



This was the subject that interested the groupe around the Principessa, for a considerable part of the evening; it might well, and did, indeed, deeply interest some of them. It is narrated at length, chiefly to depict the state of that society of which Matilda had this day become a member.





CHAPTER VII.

For at least a week subsequent to her marriage, Matilda was the happiest of brides ; she gloried, she exulted in her choice. " What Englishman could love like the adoring, impassioned Avellino! What northern spirit could still glow, as his does, with an increased and more ardent flame ! Here have we been inseparate these seven long days, and one cold, rational English hour we have not experienced. Ah ! my soul was born to dwell in this sunny clime. Sweet land of the south, I love thee: not for thy cloudless skies, and days of eternal sunshine, but for the soul of (lame that animates thy sons, the native enthusiasm that renders them alone the only fit worshippers of beauty, in women or in art."



Matilda felt, but did not take the trouble of either examining or understanding what she uttered. Certainly it was not the kind of sentimental soliloquy, that, sentimental as she had ever been, she would have uttered in England. There a mere worshipper of external beauty " in women or in art,'" she would have shunned with a blush, or contemned; but since her residence in Italy, the philosophy of the arts, and their popular jargon had taught her toconsider as sentiment, what her English mind would have regarded but as sensual. The tone, perhaps the feeling of her mind, was equally pure in expressing one sentiment as the other; but it is often by language, and unmeaning language, too, that the thoughts begin to grow corrupt.

It must be owned, however, that the love of Avellino for Matilda was ardent, was enthusiastic, was all that could fascinate and delight the happy female who was the object of it. If the deep-rooted habits of his country were likely to render him hereafter a husband that would cause sorrow and uneasiness to such a wife as Matilda, he at least foresaw not the necessity, the possibility; he loved, and had no thought beyond that love, nor had Matilda. Passion, in its plenitude, was poured like an overwhelming tide over both their souls, covering the light herbage, as it were, of minor thought and habitual feelings, which, nevertheless, as that tide ebbed, re-appeared in all their strength. As lovers, they were not struck by the contrast between their national habits, or by the wide interval that separated their opinions on the greatest as well as on the slightest topics. Love, ready to yield up every consideration to itself, reckoned upon a continued and mutual self-sacrifice during the whole course of their union. But as the first heat of passion passed away, a life of continued restraint could not but become irksome; Avellino, who, before, had been impelled to respect the sensitive modesty, for example, amongst other English prejudices of his wife, began soon to look upon such feelings as childish and unbecoming the scavoir vivre of the Countess Avellino. His general conversation, and frequently his express ridicule, was turned to crush, to obliterate this, perhaps, over-refinement. Consequently, if his reasoning did not convince, or his ridicule not shame her from such ideas, his sentiments strongly jarred with hers; if he succeeded, he but destroyed the delicacy that forms the charm and defence of the English female; while he could not replace it by the independence, the worldliness, and all that petty diplomacy of the heart, with which foreign females know so well how to draw around them the circle of respect.





" At Rome do as the Romans," said Avellino to his Countess one morning not long after their nuptials, as he was urging her to comply with some form of Neapolitan etiquette, that Matilda thought preposterous, and with all her Italianism recoiled from with uncombatible disgust and

VOL. I, F



shame. It was the receiving of visitors, ere she had risen, or some such free custom of foreign life.

" Nay, my dear Avellino," replied his Countess, " do let me remain English, at least in these things."

" Yes, to be called a precieuse, and a mockmodest through Naples, and I thy husband condemned to share the ridicule for suffering it. No, dearest Matilda, I love thee, respect thee for this delicacy; but it is here misplaced. You have chosen to be the wife of a Neapolitan,—be one —imitate my country-women.'"

" You are not serious, my dear Avellino," said the Countess smiling.

" In truth 1 am," said the Count, smiling in his turn, " not that I recommend servile imitation. There are good wives in Naples, Matilda, for all you hear and see. And even if they are not, per Glove" here the Count turned from his lady, andmuttered, unheard by her, " it is better to be even bad than ridiculous,"





Capable of uttering, even in half-earnest, and to himself, such a sentiment as this, it may be imagined how oft Avellino, in the midst of all his love for her, both hurt and disgusted his English bride. Nor was this wide contrast between their habits and character confined to trivial points:—the religious principles in which Matilda had been brought up, however covered over by the politeness and conformance necessary to a foreign life, had been early and deeply sown; and however silent they slumbered beneath ~ the time of her joyous youth, they were far from being eradicated or extinct. Avellino, like every well-born Italian, contemned, almost with reason, from the effects and samples of it before him, the very name of religion. This was a point of difference between the married pair, likely every day to prove more serious; as the weaker one, who believed, advanced farther into the vale of years and sorrows.

In moral feeling, there was as wide a contrast,

as in religion, between Avellino and Matilda.—



But as they did not argue upon such abstract topics, it was left to the slow progress of circumstances to unveil the discrepancy. From time to time a small corner of the curtain was drawn up, and disclosed to each a glimpse, that they were not altogether suited to each other. Bat love still reigned triumphant in their united hearts, long in despite of such petty differences ; and such was Avellino's affection, and Matilda's devotion to him in return, that had she not from her earliest years known and been accustomed to witness pure English domesticity in her parents' abode, she would perhaps have become reconciled to the fond, though inconstant attentions of an Italian husband, and to the undomestic comforts of an Italian menage. Had she not remembered Euston Park—had she not known the uninterrupted union of " wedded love" in England—and had not all her airy castles, her ideal scenes been framed upon a model of English bliss, then might the Countess have resigned herself contentedlv to the very acme of Neapolitan



bliss, that she enjoyed — a palace — wealth — so^ ciety — consideration — and an adoring husband, when it so happened that the Count partook of his beloved wife's society.

But at Naples the Count was obliged to live as a Neapolitan — so he would have pleaded : and to bestow his evenings on the Countess, or even to appear too often in the day by her side, was a solecism of which he could not be guilty. The affectionate Matilda expostulated with her husband on account of this gradual and growing neglect ; but the reply of Avellino was so ardent and fond, yet at the same time so rational, as he pleaded custom, etiquette, the silliness of combating national ways and prejudices, that Matilda hushed her sighs and murmurs, and. mocked the tear that involuntarily swelled Jier eye-lid.

" What, Matilda," he was wont to argue, " would you have us regularly fill your box at St. Carlos with our own domestic selves, and attract the eyes of all the world to us, as if we were Pulicinello and his mistress? Why, we should be more alone then than on the top of Vesuvius—what beau would venture in, when he should address the Signora Contessa but within the hearing of the Signer Conte? And what would all your female acquaintance think of my not paying my respects to them ?"



" But I am quite unprotected, my dear Avellino, and wander about alone through theatre and assembly, as if I were not loved nor wedded."

The Count smiled, as he had done for the twentieth time at this very same plea and expostulation. For an answer he was not at a loss; the thought, the ready answer was on his tongue, and to a fair compatriot he would have spoken it without reserve, but he dreaded to utter such to Matilda.

" And why are you so left alone and unaccompanied, Matilda ? "

" Because Avellino abandons me," replied the simple Matilda.

" No," said the Count smiling, " but because the Countess Avellino frowns as darkly, as her fair brows permit, upon every idle simpleton that ventures to approach or accost her. You are called, my love, la bella Medusa, so petrifying is the look with which you receive the slightest homage or attention."



" And do you, Avellino, disapprove of this reserve, in a city, where, as you have described it, every fool builds upon a lady's glance."

" They build in the air, too, for that matter," said the Count. " Would you set such impertinents at defiance, it is not to be effected by frowns, for those betoken dread, as though you valued them. Assume, Matilda, instead of those girlish bulwarks of defence, the cold and courteous smile of ease and apathy. Hear all these talkers, permit them to approach—amongst them you may find one or two intelligent and amusing "—

"Well, Avellino," said the Countess, as her husband paused.



" Then you will not have to complain of being alone."

At this moment Matilda felt the first real pang since her marriage; she said nothing, but Avellino perceived immediately, that guarded as he had been, he had still ventured too far. " Surely I, Matilda," continued the Count fondly, " can never entertain a thought of jealousy."

" / should be sorry to be able to say so," burst forth with pain the tremulous voice of the Countess.

"And why, Cara?"

" Because I would never cease to love, Avellino ; " and Matilda flung herself in tears, and overcome, upon the breast of her husband.

Such were the matrimonial scenes that frequently occurred between the wedded lovers. Matilda recoiled and shuddered at the thought <—at the adoption of a cavalier, recommended too by her husband, her Avellino. It was





evidently to this that his hints and wishes pointed, and although the Count did really desire, from a view to his own personal liberty and convenience, to see such a servitor at the Countess's side, his ideas of the office, and the connexion, were such as might be contemplated by the most honourable husband. But the English girl could never look upon the proposal in this light; the line of propriety, dividing right and wrong, was in her mind strongly drawn, aad the graduating marks of lesser division unestablished and unknown. Even her long residence in Italy had not shaken her abhorrence of a custom, the decorous, and even rational side of which she could neither regard nor understand with the Italian.

When left alone after this conversation with her husband, the Countess felt, as if she had awakened to painful life from a long and pleasant dream. " Avellino recommend a male companion by my side, more intimate to all appearances than he himself—and from him, too,, this advice to come!" At that instant she thought more regrets than she dare utter, and burst into a flood of tears. Poor Matilda! her self-respect was sorely hurt, her idea of her lord's love impaired, and that impassioned soul, which she had worshipped as a God, she began to think no longer animated by god-like sentiment. Sorrowstricken, as she was, at the discovery, the simple Countess saw as yet but little: her husband's delicacy she could not but entertain an inferior idea of, but all she attributed to national customs, to prejudices insurmountable. His love she did not question that she could not doubt. Yet most females even unacquainted with Italian life, would have had foresight enough to conclude, that the loving husband, who recommended an innocent cavalier to his lady, himself entertained the thought of acting such to some married fair.



The deepest rooted feelings, however, if uncountenanced by those around and in habitual converse with us, soon become shaken. Lady



Euston surpassed her daughter far in the mania of Italianizing herself: the Countess's French femme de chambre, a self-constituted counsellor, not to be silenced, was load in behalf of all those freedoms and ways that shocked Matilda, and even at times threatened to quit the service of so solitary and unfashionable a dame. The example and raillery of all her dear female acquaintance urged the Countess to compliance; they represented the custom in all the colours of convenience and decorum, and argued with some truth, that the only means of supporting a virtuous character in Naples, consisted in thus sacrificing to its prejudices, and establishing a pure and intimate connection with a man of intelligence and honour. The frincipessa Caradori herself urged her young friend to the step, certainly from no wish to corrupt her; but knowing Avellino, and the habit of all Italian gentry, she foresaw certain misery for Matilda, unless she conformed to the Italian ways both of acting and thinking in these matters.



" Why may I not remain as I am," said Matilda, " lonely 'tis true, more so than I ever hoped to be as the wife of Avellino, but still all his. Alone I can support his absence, which perhaps is necessary, but the attentions of another, not to speak of all that is revolting and offensive in the idea, would but mark and make me feel the stronger this neglect, that fashion, it seems, prescribes my husband. No, my dear Principessa, urge not this advice. I will remain even as I am.''

" But, daughter of mine, as 1 may call you," replied the Princess, " you are not yet acquainted with the inconvenience, the impossibility of remaining thus alone. You are scarcely a year married, and for that space our male world respect the nuptial tie. Henceforward you must expect and be prepared for importunities;"

" Importunities, Signora!" said Matilda, " I shall instantly give up the name of any such audacious ruffian to my husband. Avellino will avenge the insult and chastise the insulter."



" What! for paying homage to his lovely wife ? He would be the busiest man in Naples, I promise ye. The Count, believe me, Matilda, will not trouble himself with these every-day occurrences. It is to yourself^ to your own conduct, that you are to look for protection. Nay, my dear girl, do not weep."

" If my husband will not defend his own honour," cried Matilda, "how can he hope me to respect it ?"

" There again $ you English are always in extremes ; you are absolutely ferocious, and will not hear reason. The counsel I give you, is the only step that can defend the honour and virtue, which, my dear Countess, you might prize quite as much without being so outrageously sensitive. A husband here is no protector in trifling matters; our customs so will it—with but him you are alone. And the world seeing you alone, will deem you open to be won, your heart in fact to let; there will be no end of attempts, intrigues, and quarrels: and Avellino, had he a hundred lives, could not raise his arm against a multitude. But support yourself once upon the arm of a received cavalier, be he staid, and old, and hideous as you will, that moment will persecution cease."



" And my loss of character is thus to purchase my immunity from insult?"

'.' Your character is neither lost nor perilled by the act, my pretty precieuse. What matterof-fact creatures ye are. I thought that the sentimental daughters of the North believed even in Platonic love."

" 'Tis at least seldom practisedj" said the Countess drily

" We Southerns understand these matters better—without arrogance I say it. We know what passion is, our clime can answer for it; and in our hour of youth have hearts as agitated by its impulse, as heart can be. But such highwrought feelings do not endure—they were never intended to endure; and this is the absurdity of your matrimonial idea in the north, to perpetuate, not the passionate feeling of love between united spouses—that were impossible —but its semblance. A couple, once loving and beloved amongst you, think it their duty to continue so for ever—and dutifully they do continue the sweet semblance. We, on the contrary, are content to follow nature: we know that passion must subside—we are prepared for its decay, and supply with the less violent but still soothing sentiment of friendship, the void that has been left by love."



" And why, if passion must die," said Matilda, " cannot the same dear husband, I will say, who was the object of love, be afterwards the object of friendship and esteem ? "

" My dear Matilda, I need but refer you to the most vulgar maxim of Rochefoucault for an answer. What! two beings, that have experienced and exhausted together all the depths of passion—they to taste after the delights of friendship ! No, my sweet Englishwoman—they might perhaps live in the distant, decorous





112

friendship of your compatriots. But how can the once adoring husband stoop in his day of apathy to that feeling of anxious respect, to those thousand little attentions, that a friend delights to pay ? Impossible—the sexes (I do not speak wickedly my pretty saint) have need of one another ; they are happy to breathe the air of the same apartment, and be taken notice of by each other, without a thought beyond. It is to gratify this pure, this simple wish of nature, that Italian reh'nementhasinventedtheorderofcavaliers. They have their laws, Matilda, rigid as the Trappists ; —and such intimates are less to be feared by us than passing intriguers. Besides, my dear Countess, asa crowning argument, thereis absolutely no doing without one. You'll be obliged to choose. An Italian family without a third power in it, would be like your government, as it is described, was it without a third estate, both—but you ai-e no politician."

u No" said Matilda, " I am nothing—I know nothing—nothing but that I am wretched."





CHAPTER VIII.

Meantime Matilda's " impassioned Avellino''1 had fallen into the oft-tended snare of la bella Pernella. For a long time the powers of fascination had been exercised to subdue the Count; but all the admiration that he could afford to la Pernella, previous to his attachment to Matilda and subsequent marriage, was too trifling to permit her to think of sacrificing the least in return. Avellino's heart then bounded towards a loftier goal; which once arrived at, the fair Baroness expected the natural consequences, and resolved to catch the Count's heart at the rebound. In this she perfectly succeeded.

Avellino's affection for his wife declined, not from satiety of possession—they know nothing of the heart, who attribute inconstancy to that vulgar and futile motive,—but the jar, the want of sympathy between them in all the minor considerations of life. An Italian has one ideal for the nymph he would woo—he has another for the woman that is his wife ; and Matilda, perfectly as her character filled the former—to be, or shine an Italian Countess, she had neither knowledge nor ambition. Months had passed since she had been a married dame, still she was the same fond girl ; her every thought turned upon Avellino, and not one upon the world—she was even more a girl since their marriage than before, indulging in complaint and mild reproach, instead of the command with which she had treated Aveilino as a lover. Qn every point and topic, serious or trivial, as I have observed, they were at variance—if Matilda covered her opinions in silence, she appeared to her husband either dull or sullen—if she spoke them forth, she revealed still more the interval that separated their characters—temper was lost on both sides—often they parted irritated against each other—and then the reconcilement was a scene. For the first and second time these scenes seemed delightful renovations of love—the very quarrel seemed worth having for the conclusion sake—but the repetition of them soon became irksome, and destroyed the charm, and disgust grew to be the prevailing feeling with which they parted, whether in anger or in love.





All these symptoms, however* were gradual in their progress, and a full year and a half had passed since their marriage, ere this advanced stage of love's declension had arrived. Avellino's absence from his palace, his desertion of the Countess, at first was in obedience to fashion, to propriety; there wasnow no need of the pretext. With flushed cheeks and fretted temper he quitted it often of late, to seek consolation—where better than in the Caradori palace, from his ancient and tried friend, the Principcssa. and from his dear friend, the fair Pernella ? La Pernella, as she has been described, possessed that kind of beauty and attraction most likely to win the heart that rebounded from Matilda. She was the very contrast of the lovely Englishwoman, not only in personal traits, but in character. Matilda was tender sensitive, spirited, and vivacious—Pernella soul-less, mild and apathetic. In truth she would have been cold, nor known perhaps the sentiments she so experienced and inspired. But in the south, although women may be without souls, without hearts they never are ; and although every other feeling be extinct, the one grand one that prevails, is to be found throughout all ranks and dispositions. Love like the wall-flower, will take root and bud forth there in any cranny ; if the soil beneath be not generous enough to impart to it the fitting moisture, it .will imbibe from the air and the dew of heaven sufficient whereon to thrive and flourish.



The winter and spring of the second year of Matilda's, " wedded bliss" passed on, though of that bliss those seasons might already be denominated the autumn. Still the Count and Countess lived on together, healing each breach as well as might be done, and latterly avoiding scrupulously all causes of dissension. During that period Matilda lost her mother, an event of little importance either to her fate or the reader's attention. Still she felt the severing of that only link that bound her to her native land, and reminded her of it with more poignancy; now that her vain regrets were more often turned thither, than they had been in the days of her unalloyed happiness. To dissipate the grief, real and decorous, with which she mourned this event, the Count and Countess were invited by the Principessa Caradori to spend some burning weeks of summer at her castle in Calabria, and the Count, whose estates lay in that province, urged the necessity of his visiting his property as an argument with Matilda, who on many accounts was rather unwilling to accept the invitation. Avellino, however, by the plea of business and his interest, prevailed; and they set forth accordingly for Castel Luzzi, as the mountain residence or fortress of the Principessa was called.





The total want of inns, the scantiness of accommodation and provisions along the wild road they had to traverse, prevented the several parties that were to unite in enjoying the festi^ vities and hospitality of Castel Luzzi, from making the journey together. Ten travellers would have created a famine in any of the villages; and the rich convents, those delightful Christian Caravanser as of the good old times, had been so much diminished during the reign of Joseph and Murat, that these stages of repose could no longer be reckoned upon by the Principessa or her friends. In consequence the several parties bent thither, each by itself, and with proper intervals of time and distance between them.

Removed from the dissipated scene of Neapolitan life, alone traversing the beautiful shores of the Mediterranean, Avellino and Matilda felt their mutual affection rekindle. The sublime scenery of nature was before them, the petty, fretful topics of society and their fashionable friends for the time removed, and their minds seemed once more awakened to congenial feeling. Had the journey lasted, Avellino would have forgotten the bewitching Pernella without regret, and Matilda been once more mistress of the warm but fickle heart of her husband. But a few days brought them to Castel Luzzi, and Avellino, on replunging into Italian society, laughed at the absurd idea of falling in love a second time with his own wife. The never-failing Pernella was of course by the Principessa's side; and Don Antonio, whom the reader has heard to speak, was of the party. There were, moreover, crowds of nobles from the Prince to the Baron—no difficult collection in that most titled land—poets and musicians, et hoc genus omne came in scores to entertain the company—nor were there wanting guests, eren noble guests, to act Pulicinelli for general amusement, and who grimaced for their dinner, much in the way that English wags pun for theirs in our humour-loving land.





Amongst the invited, Matilda was surprised to discover a countryman of her own, whom curiosity had induced to accept an invitation to these Calabrian wilds. He was a gay young noble, Lord Spottiswood, travelling in Italy, seemingly to complete his collegiate and political studies by perfecting himself in connoisseurship and gallantry. Matilda was surprised to meet a countryman in Calabria; his Lordship was doubly astonished to meet a lovely English woman not only there,—but there as an Italian's wife. With all his fashionable nonchalance, both of heart and manner, Lord Spottiswood actually blushed on being first made acquainted with the story of Matilda; and although too polite to show the contempt and pity he felt for her degradation, such were the only feelings with which he could behold her. The Countess however, guilelessly and involuntarily approached her countryman, for whom, as such, she would have felt but alienation a few years since ; and he, on observing the understanding between the Count and La Pernella, felt all indignation subside into pity for his fair compatriot deserted.



It is a strange propensity people have always to fall into pairs; it is, however, an universal one; and the two, who are last in exercising their choice, are in a manner compelled to come together, and act the amiable to one another. In general this union of two pis oilers is a very dismal companionship indeed; in the case of Matilda and Lord Spottis wood it proved agreeable in the extreme. At first the young Lord, who like all Englishmen, looked for instruction even in amusement, would ^have preferred to attach himself to an Italian belle, but these in a made country party, were of course occupied, and on the first general excursion, his arm and Matilda's remained vacant for one another.

Vol. i. G



Supported by her accomplished countryman, Matilda marked her husband by the side of La Pernella. She had long noticed his attentions towards that artful and lovely personage, and the little that she had ever perceived was sufficient to destroy her last solace,—her confidence in Avellino's affection. Tortured with jealousy and suspicion, still she would not credit all the truth, and excused, while she watched, the intercourse and smiles, in her presence guarded, that passed between her husband and the Baroness. From the moment, however, that she accepted the arm of Lord Spottiswood, the Count seemed to grasp at the pretext, and his assiduities in paying his court to La Pernella, were no longer restrained by her humour or her presence. Pernella seemed even to glory in the display of her conquest before the unhappy Countess, and more than once affected an understanding between them, as if they were both engaged in a similar game of intrigue.

This was the final, the death blow to Matil





da's peace. She had been long wakening to the horrors of her Italian existence; this was the frightful assurance of its truth. So soon had languished that " impassioned love," whose fervour no English heart could equal; so brief, so passing did the affection prove, to which she had sacrificed her home, her country, her every idea of comfort and of happiness. The dreadful truth had burst, however, by degrees upon her—she was in a degree prepared for the coldness, the infidelity of Avellino, and therefore her heart did not break utterly, deeply as it was stricken, nevertheless, on beholding the certainty of what she must have foreseen. Her jealousy was a complex feeling; not only was it disappointed love, that torture to which the heart can find no equal, but to this was joined the deep and ever-rising self-reproach of all she had sacrificed, of how much she was degraded ; and she looked upon Avelliuo not only as one faithless, but ungrateful.

It was now too late for reproach—Matildnf



felt so. Neither did it become her pride: on minor points she could have used entreaty ; she had ever been throughout indeed the submissive wife, but disjoined affection severs all other ties, and Matilda felt herself alone, abandoned to her sorrows and her pride. For this silence, this solemn demeanour in his wife, that marked a consciousness of the truth, and no more, Avellino was not prepared—it alarmed him. He even sought discussion—he explained, exculpated himself. Matilda seemed as apathetic as the most abandoned, to her husband's innocence or guilt. She used neither reproof nor tears, and Avellino felt even awed before the silent dignity of wounded love and pride.

Lord "Spottiswood also felt deeply interested for Matilda. He saw, and was proud to see, his countrywoman in one of the most trying positions of life, contrasted with the females around her—heart-stricken with disappointment and •with grief, yet disdaining to display it—scorning to vent it in reproach, or, as an Italian wife in the same predicament would have done, to take the vengeance that vice and self-degradation' offered. As a friend, in so delicate a case he could not offer himself, notwithstanding the plea of country; still every distinction and alleviation that his converse or attentions could bring, he delicately proffered. The Countess did not repel his friendly advances, and much as she disdained to imitate her husband by endeavouring to excite in his breast feelings similar to those which she experienced, still to repulse altogether the friendship of her countryman would seem, she thought, a vain appeal to Avellino's generosity.



In the midst of those smile-covered scenes of intrigue, of love, and jealousy, the Principessa proposed to her guests a visit to the ruins of Sybaris, not very distant from Castelluzzi. A more apt or congenial pilgrimage she could not have chosen for them, and thither accordingly the whole party set forth, leaving the castle and its surrounding orange groves long before the



hour of sunrise. So occupied has the reader been held by the love and disappointment of Matilda, that Castelluzzi even has passed without description: a few strokes suffice to bring its scene before one. A lofty range of A pennine stretched from north to south in the midst of the narrow peninsula; half way up the mountain, though upon an eminence so detached from it as not to be commanded, at least by such Artillery as was brought into play before the invention of gunpowder, stood the castle, worthy of illustrating the story of the most warlike and feudal of Sicilian romances. Still its bright battlements basking in the sun, and its towers raising themselves to view with some difficulty, truly, from the woods of fragrant orange trees in •which they were embosomed, suited but the softer side of the romantic. Beneath it lay gray, glistening groves of olive, whilst above, withthe exception of a few scattered and ragged chesnuts, the mountain reared itself bare and bald up to the herbless summit.. But the spot itself was not the charm ; it was the fresh and healthful breeze that streamed upon those heights, undisturbing the sluggish vapour of the plain below—'twas the prospect extending south and west, to Eufemia, to Sicily, and o'er the sea, the calm blue waters of which were studded with the Lipari isles. The nearest of these was Stromboli, an object of interest to which the morning out-look was always turned, as it is from Naples towards Vesuvius, to mark if one'svolcanic neighbour meditates any change or convulsion to break the listless languor of the passing time.



From it being thus situated, the range of Apennine, on the side of which arose the towers of Castelluzzi, shut out the east completely from the view, and the sun had risen always for a considerable time before its ray could peer over the mountain top down upon the castle. The great object of the present expedition was to see the god of day rising from that eastern sea, of which the unexploring guests





128

of Castelluzzi had not as yet obtained a glimpse. It was owing to this that they set forth at so early an hour, to the great discontent of many of the guests, who vowed that such inordinately early rising was a most unfit mode of beginning a day to be devoted to the memory of the aneient Sybarites, and to a contemplation of their abode. But even the remonstrances of these murmurers were turned to superlatives and exclamatives of admiration, when having passed the gorge of the Apennine, the east, then indeed the glorious east, burst to their view, illumined as yet but by heralding rays of the sun. It was the famed gulph of Tarentum that lay before them. The sun rose beyond, and almost at the very point of the Japygian promontory, and some believed they could descry the summit of the Albanian hills intercepting the bright disk as it rose. As the shore of the Tarentinegulph became all around marked and discernible, the eye of the antiquarian could discover the ruins or remains of its once celebrated cities.





Opposite was Tarentum, nearer Heraclea, and to the south the view extended to Crotona and Calypso's island.

Lord Spottiswood was enchanted, and Matilda forgot for a space her jealousy and sorrows, as she gazed upon the scene. Avellino and the constant occupant of his arm, the fair Pernella, •were near the Countess at the moment; they were even within hearing.

" Is it not beautiful, my fair idol ?" said the Count.

" What is beautiful ?" replied the Baroness, who like her compatriots, prized little the rural beauty that her country abounded in; " is it the sun, and the sea, and the cold morning— what sentiment, I pray you, could such a scene excite at such an uncomfortable hour ?"

" Does not that sunrise give birth to glorious sentiments ?"

" Glorious sentiments! my dear Count,—pray, what do you mean ? Such are for general officers of his Majesty's guards like yourself^ I know them not."



Matilda's heart beat high, as she overheard the conversation. Ah ! 'twas not thus, thought she, that my heart and taste responded to Avcllino's.

" The charms of moonlight," continued the Baroness, " I understand ; especially if seen-from the deep window of a gay saloon, with mirth on one side, and nature on the other.—I like the latter vastly ; but to be forced to enjoy it, and that too before the night blast has lost its chill, is too sublime, too romantic for me. Yet with you, Avellino, it is tolerable," added La Pcrnella, doing away by her tenderness the ungracious effect that her want of sympathy in enjoying the picturesque might have produced upon her cavalier.

The Countess saghed, and Spottiswood silently made his comment, which was, that simi- larity of habits and ways of life are more neces



sary than even congenial feeling, to render the union of the married lasting and happy.

An agreeable ride down the steep descent of the Apennine, and along the rude shore of the gulph, brought them to the celebrated Sybaris, the ruins of which, basking beneath the ray of morn on the brink of the Mediterranean's still surface and unencroaching wave, formed at once a fit grave and emblem of the Epicurean city. The curious and the learned here found various objects of research. For the Princess and her Sybarite friends, a tent was pitched on a green sward, that stretched to the very brink of the sea. Matilda and Lord Spottiswood seemed both willing to escape from the idle gallantry and chiacchera of the tent, and enjoyed the scene, seeking no particular object with the antiquarian party ; but content with the ensemble,—with these almost obliterated ruins, unostentatious like their founders,—that bay that had borneso many Roman and Grecian navies, and those white specks, that marked the once proud cities &f Magna Grsecia, in which Pythagoras taught. Lord Spottiswood was familiar with all the springs of association connected with the scene;— without pedantry, he explained them to Matilda, who felt not the less delighted for being ignorant of the names and times that rendered this scene so glorious. The obscure and even un^ identified relic of antiquity is as much revered, and perhaps more, than when the Cicerone has exerted his antiquarian skill thereon, and baptized it with some classic name. Who that looks from the Capitoline hill down upon the Forum, feels his delight a jot enhanced by having pointed out to him the Curtian lake, or the very spot where the famed fig-tree grew ?



As Lord Spottiswood and Matilda sat but a short space removed from the tent, beneath the shade of two or three pillars with their deepentablature, the gay converse of the party within reached their ears. It was some such as bh generally the common tenor of Italian conversation, and Matilda could have listened to it if alone, without perhaps heeding it. So might Lord Spottiswood in a similar situation. But they were together, both English ; and at its brutality each blushed for the other, and Matilda for herself, as well as for her countryman. The blood still flushed in their cheeks, when a sudden gust of wind from the Apennine swept through a neighbouring orange grove, and almost deluged them with the perfume. It was impossible not to have been struck with the contrast, and Lord Spottiswood, almost involuntarily recited that beautiful paragraph taken from Goethe by Byron, which forms the commencing stanzas of the Bride of Abydos:—



" Know ye the land, where the cypress and myrtle,

Are emblems of deeds that are done in their clime--

Where the light wings of Zephyr, oppressed with perfume,

Wax faint o'er the gardens of Gul in her bloom;

Where the citron and olive, are fairest of fruits,

And the voice of the nightingale never is mute;

Where the tints of the earth, and the hues of the sky.

In the colour though varied, in beauty may vier





And the purple of ocean is deepest in dye;

Where the virgins are soft as the roses they twine,

And all, save the spirit of man—"



and his Lordship paused with contemptuous emphasis,

" is divine."

" You forget, my Lord, you speak to an Italian—at least, to an Italian's wife," said Matilda.

" Not all Italian, my fair countrywoman; whatever it may have heen, this moment your heart beats English, I'll be sworn.'"

" You are wrong, my Lord,—imprudent,— nay, unkind, to awake these feelings now. My choice is made; 'twere even criminal now to question the wisdom of that choice."

" You must not suspect me, Countess, of so foul a meaning. The heart, too, is empowered to make exception toils own rules: Count Avellino has warmth, spirit, sincerity—but the others, must you not contemn them ?"

" They are the compatriots of my husband," said the Countess.



Lord Spottiswood by no means excluded that husband from the contempt he professed for the whole Italian race. But it was delicate ground to tread on. He was silent. The Countess read his thoughts.

" Youmistake Count Avellino,"said Matilda; " it is merely the habits of his country and its forms that he indulges in. You knew my father, you knew my friends. You must not tell them I am wretched. Indeed I am not;" the tears were bursting from her eyes.

" I would that your friends were witnesses of your happiness," said Spottiswoocl, who did not shrink from inflicting what bethought a merited* pang upon his countrywoman. He had known Maxwell, and felt a strong impulse and desire to be the avenger of his fate, not upon the cruel cause of it, but upon Avellino, whom the Englishman's manliness more than his justice, accused and looked on as the proper object of that vengeance. Still, as the husband of Matilda, Spottiswood respected his life.



To the ironic wish the Countess Avellino could reply but by tears. Spottiswood felt that he had urged his vengeance too far, and endeavoured in every way to pacify and to calm his countrywoman. His assiduities were descried by the merry party in the tent, and watched for some time by them with considerable interest. " She learns," said the Princess. " I knew she would," cried La Pernella ; " I give ye joy, Count. Ye are a Neapolitan pair of spouses at the last. So ridiculous of her to affect to be better than her neighbours, and hold out so long ! But an Italian less than Avellino she scorned ; ye are too decorous gallants, countrymen of mine, for these English spouses. They want a downright lover, such as their own country can afford. And perhaps they are right, Count. What say you, Count Avellino ?"

But Count Avellino was for the moment unItalian enough to seem not to relish the joke by any means: he was even so preposterous as to look grave, and even angry on the subject, which increased the excellence of the joke tenfold to the ruthless Sybarites.



" Do but look at him,'" exclaimed La Pernella,' piqued at the interest he displayed in his wife'sconduct.

" My dear Count," said the Principessa, " pray, do not treat us to a scene Anglaise in the ruins of Sybaris. I declare it would be a joke too good to escape San Carlino."

Avellino did rush forth, in despite of the ridicule. The Countess rose to meet him ; and her tearful eye was bent to mark if his approach might be construed into kindness or returning affection. His angry brow revealed his resentment ; but he went no further. The scene, that the Principessa had deprecated, was too ridiculous before such witnesses as those present to be attempted by an Italian in his senses. The calm and innocent look of the Englishman too, was sufficient of itself to have disarmed suspicion.

The Count at the least continued to smother his : he smilingly took once more his place by the lovely Baroness, who seemed to Matilda to be now for the first time since their acquaintance excited ; her eye glistened with delight, and her smile with the most gratified malice. To those who were at liberty to discuss it, the little adventure formed a fruitful subject of mirth during the progress home to Castelluzzi, where, after winding slowly up the Apennine, and passing once more its gorge, the gay party returned.





CHAPTER IX.

During her return Matilda was more than usually gloomy ; she had perceived Avellino's resentment, and was not artful enough to rejoice at any symptom, however painful, that denoted a still lingering spark of love. She but felt the jealous and tyrannic nature, that pursued its own reckless pleasure regardless of the pangs it cost her, yet at the same time alive to the semblance of similar neglect offered to itself. Lord Spottiswood, too, was reserved; and strongly as his British pride, and his former friend ship for the unfortunate Maxwell, prompted him to interfere, yet he knew any such attemp on his part now would be dishonourable, as well as ruinous to the happiness of his country woman. Perhaps he was urged on by a deeper feeling ; and certainly we cannot long look upon lovely woman in any state of life as an object of interest, without feeling deeper sympathy in her fate and fortune, than the mere impulse of generosity could give birth to. The complexion of the young Lord's feelings mattered little, however; honour, what he owed to the national name, to himself, and to Matilda, excluded frcm his mind any ulterior views, save those of the purest friendship. Matilda felt the same for him, and without the danger or approach of more; her heart had fulfilled its turn of love, of flattering, and of pain, and sorrow and regret possessed it utterly, to the exclusion of every happier feeling. Its spring had passed, its blossoms flowered and faded, and its tendrils taken their clinging grasp—these might be torn and withered—more it had not the spirit to put forth or produce.



Avellino, however, did not deem the heart of his Countess altogether so seared, so indurated against the future darts of love. He boasted that he knew the fickle heart of woman : he maligned the sex, and judged, from his own selfishness and fickleness of theirs. That the affection of his Countess should be estranged from him, he knew was likely, was just; and from the not erroneous ideas that he entertained of woman, in the vulgar state of nature to which she is reduced at Naples, he concluded that it would be impossible for his deserted wife to resist at once the desire of retaliation, and the assiduities moreover of a compatriot. This, too, was the bitterest thought. Avellino hated the English. He had often sought to assume his place amongst them, as a semi-Briton, from his marriage with Matilda ; but his sagacity could not fail to discover the inferior estimation at which he was rated by the proud insulars. Latterly, too, the Countess's ebbing favour towards her country irritated him, although he knew himself the cause. Maxwell was not forgotten, and that triumph served but to exasperate his pride.





He had recommended a cavalier to his Lady, and wished her to adopt that custom—but then he had an Italian in his view, one of those cameleon-gallants of his country, who, in despite of the boasted heat of their blood and vehemence of their passions, are content to live on air, and to exist on the favour of a smile. Even if not, they had that character: but a countryman of her's—an English gallant—who would be an actual, earnest lover—his character would be lost, Neapolitan pride scandalized by the concession—he would be hooted from society.

" A prince had reconciled"

the polish Count in Mazeppa " to the thing"— but an Englishman—Avellino foamed with rage and actual jealousy at the idea, and, we may well suppose, the converse of the fair Pernella, during the return to Castelluzzi, was not much calculated to improve his temper.

" Ebbene" said Avellino, after having paced for some minutes, silent and moody, the Countess's dressing-room, " thou hast become reconciled to our Neapolitan customs, and at last taken to you in good earnest a cavalier.'"



"You are wrong, Avellino. My wish to remain solitary has in no wise changed. But what is left for me to do in excursions such as these, except to take the first vacant arm ? "

" Nay, I don'tcensure—I'm not angry—'twas I who recommended the thing. Only 'twas ungracious, Matilda, in you to oppose our prejudices so violently and long, to surrender them upon meeting with the first young English noble that pleased your fancy."

" You wish, then, that I should not suffer myself to be addressed by Lord Spottiswood."

" I wish to make any such fool of myself and my wife ? Not I—-I would not controul your humours."

" Nay, Avellino, you are angry, are hurt. Speak your bidding, angrily if you will, but without a sneer, and I will do it. You know me not, Avellino. What, that tended to your peace and honour, would I not dp—what not sacrifice, at one W9rd of thine, if that word were but spoken in affection ?"



" Auch ! this is sentiment, Madam—we are too old for scenes*'"1

The Countess could not reply, except with tears.

" And you are jealous too, I suppose, Signora Contessa,1' continued the Count.

" Have I ever said so ?"said Matilda, raising her weeping eyes, and regarding her husband with that calm dignity, that he so much abhorred and shrunk from.

" You have looked it." ^

+ ^*^.

" Then the consciousness of a causMry in your own breast, Avellino, for I have never lofllfed towards you with resentment."

" I wish with all my heart you did. It would be more tolerable than that Enghsh pride that of late I see impressed on your countenance, the same as on those haughty countrymen of thine. Why, every fopling of them in his straight-laced sides and embroidered jacket, struts a king, and we, it would seem, the slaves, whose vulgar revelry they deign to visit. By heaven, I detest the entire race, and this sword—but they fear to use in their honourable quarrels a soldier's weapon.''



Matilda put up her hand to check the Count in the insults he was offering to her country. Although the Englishwoman felt not for herself, she felt for that, and her cheek flushed, and her ear tingled with rising resentment. At any former period she might have smiled at this vent given by her husband to angered prejudice, but at present it recalled too^ many comparisons and regrets, and the submission that her spirit shrunk into beneath her own present wrongs, it needed but a pretext like this to throw off, and indulge in open bitterness.

" But no matter," said the Count, " this Lord I cannot suffer—his hearing, even in the distant corner of a saloon offends me. By the side of

Vol. i. H



my wife, it is torture—-it is not jealousy, 'tis deeper,—bitterer still."

" It is not jealousy, then, you feel?" observed the Countess.

" No, Signora," replied the Count with a smile.

" Hurt vanity is as bitter to some souls as hurt affection," said the Countess, " but thine, Avellino ! "

" But ! leave sentiment. This lord—this Spottiswood—but why do I talk ?—now you cannot behave with marked coldness towards trim—that would set tongues busier still. But come, Matilda, let us be friends."

" Friendship then be it, Avellino, if you will,'' said the Countess with a sigh.

" Or call it love. But to be rational—a cavalier like this Englishman, would not be tolerated at Naples, and for an hundred reasons— he is not to be trusted—he knows not the mysteries, the ways, the delicacies of the station.—





Choose an Italian, if you will; I am content, nay, urge you to it; but a milord at your side is what I, what no one, would suffer."

Matilda assured her husband that there was no need of his admonition ; that of any one, even of Lord Spottiswood, she had never thought of in the light he hinted. The Count taxed her respecting the tears that she had shed, apparently under the influence of Lord Spottiswood's eloquence, in the visit that day to Sybaris. She did not explain the true cause, which could but increase the Count's resentment, and her evasions had perhaps a stronger effect than the truth, which from delicacy she avoided. However, he was for the time pacified and re-assured, nor during the remainder of their stay at Castelluzzi, did a look or word of discontent on his part interrupt the friendly intercourse that necessarily subsisted between the Countess and Lord Spottiswood. His own attentions to la bella Pernella were in the mean time increasing; and p.ll the mutual regards and etiquette of a regular liaison, came to be established between them.— What charms he found in such, superior to the pure and glowing happiness he had experienced in the love of Matilda, it is beyond my skill in human nature to discover. The marriage tie in these countries is not the sacred, indissoluble bond; that kind of despotic law, which' it is sweet to transgress. Intrigue there has not even the charm of being esteemed a sin,—it is an every day and a vulgar occupation. On comparing the charms of Matilda and her successful rival, there was not the superiority that would excuse fickleness ; and if the minds, the hearts were balanced, Avellino would have not so chosen—but t'was not love that led him astray, nor fickleness, nor even disgust at the discordance that certainly did exist between the habits and opinions of the Countess and his own;—it was the custom of his country to wander, and he wandered, were it but for fashionsake.



The CountessAvellino suffered all that she saw



and felt in uncomplaining and submissive sorrow ; reproaches were unavailing, and she knew no one to whom she could have recourse for advice or consolation. She had formerly shunned every English female friend, and having acquired the character of this anti-patriotic whim, for it was not deeper or more lasting, the ladies of her nation, that joined this year the gay society of Naples, drew back from the intimacy, that now she would have been delighted to seek. From Neapolitan females she could expect no sympathy whatsoever, nothing beyond ridicule for misplaced sensibility, and such counsels as caused her to shudder. Even those signs of pining sorrow, that escaped in despite of her care in society, drew down upon her the raillery of all. •A friend from such rank she could not choose— oh ! how she longed for the society of one, of any of her own country play-mates—the mere tie of language would be sufficient to allow her to pour forth her sorrows into the bosom of a compatriot. She reflected on her hastily formed contempt of England, her past alienation from its sons and daughters: so far back in the path of painful regret, as to the memory of Maxwellj she would not allow her mind to revert—that were a torture too insufferable. And even shunning it, there was punishment sufficient in the retrospect, for that outrageous liberality and almost denegation of country into which she had fallen, and to which too many of her fair countrywomen are prone.



Lord Spottiswood, in whose conversation Matilda at times forgot her now melancholy, but chosen exile, increased the bitterness of those regrets, as redisplayed, unconsciously to himself. the pure nobleness of English feeling, in strong contrast with the worn and selfish apathy, evinced by all the others that surrounded her. A deep disgust of Italian character grew upon Matilda, extreme in proportion to the enthusiastic partiality with which she had been forraerly borne towards them; and its progress began to undermine even that love for Avellino, which he himself so flagrantly contributed to shake. She had been abandoned, slighted—and she felt it both as a woman and an Englishwoman— national feelings were summoned, as usual, to conceal as well as increase personal ones, and the private quarrel of her heart she engrafted on patriotic sensibility. Every source of pleasure was for her dried up—the sky, the landscape, the genial climate of the south, the delicious moonlight of Calabria, the orange groves that filled the atmosphere with perfume—from all these she turned now with disgust—they were Italian. How changed, alas ! in sentiment, from the hour, when leaning in the first moments of travelled enjoyment from her window in the Chiaja, she exclaimed, " This for an eternity, were happiness sufficient." The scene around, the mere external world, is all that youth requires and looks to for delight, but the stings and sorrows, and the pangs of disappointment, are felt as much beneath the citrons or the palm tree's shade, as under the vulgar verdure of the English elm.





One love, say seme maxim writers, can be dispelled from the human heart but by another. It was not true of Matilda; for fast as her affection for her husband faded, or became converted into feelings of an opposite kind, I doubt if any other affection took its place. If there were such, it was at least too weak, and too controuled to influence her conduct, or be mentioned in this her history. Still the decay of her only affection allowed more warmth, than her heart could otherwise have spared, to mingle with her friendship for Lord Spottiswood. The Count did not prohibit Matilda's intercourse with the young Englishman while at Castelluzzi, and the manner in which he had chosen to notify his displeasure at the intimacy, was not that best calculated to produce an obedience to the spirit of his command. Disobey she did





not, and consequently her friendly intercourse with Spottiswood was kept up.

At Castelluzzi the revolution we have briefly decribed, took place more gradually in the heart of Matilda. The Count's open and insultant inconstancy, accompanied by imperious jealousy, avowedly not that of love, but of vanity and national prejudice, had at last its natural effect. .Avellino was no longer the worshipped of her idolatry, no more than Matilda was of his; and the fourth act of Italian matrimony was completed. The Countess pined, 'tis true; but her sorrow became capable of dissipation, of forgetfulness; and even in its paroxysms it proceeded more from regret, ennui, vexation., a consciousness of exile and of self-sacrifice, than from the veritable pangs of jealousy and disappointed love.

The heats of autumn had by this time abated, the delights of Castelluzzi Ijad been exhausted, there remained actually nothing more to see or to say, and both the fair and their cavaliers began to despair of entertaining each other much longer, without the gossip and distraction that the metropolis afforded. Thither, then, were the steps of the princely hostess and her visitors turned, after they had staid to witness Calabria's scanty vintage, and graced with their presence the rural feasts consequent thereon. The Count and Countess Avellino returned to Naples, very much improved, as Neapolitans would say, in matrimonial feeling, and scrupulously avoiding, by the extreme of civility towards each other, during the journey, the most remote approach to a scene.



As I am not treating my readers to a romance* nor allowing my imagination to stray a bowshot beyond the confines of truth, they must be contented with the few facts that'fell under the eye of experience, and the observations that spring from having witnessed them. Were not this the limited aim, prescribed to himself by the writer, it may well be supposed how difficult he would find it to refrain from introducing scenes of banditti, assassinations, woes, and a-11 those truly common-place incidents of Italian life; but as no such incidents befell the unfortunate lady who is the heroine of this istory, the reader must not expect them either as episode or interpolation; and if truth be niggardly in supplying me with incident, I shall certainly not borrow it of imagination.



This excuse we thought necessary for the fact, that Avellino and his Countess, together with the Principessa, and her whole party of guests, actually both made their journey to and from the extremity of Calabria, without encountering accident or brigand. They were neither robbed nor murdered, and in a few days were moving in their accustomed routine of gaiety and gallantry at Naples. The Countess herself even, whether it was retaliation, or really ameliorated spirits, or but resolution to assume them, seemed more than usually ready -to mingle with the festive crowd. Elle y promenait ses deyouts, she walked her disgusts there, as the French would say, more from a determination not to grieve, than from any wish to be gay. Lord Spottiswood, too, mingled in those circles, and seemed not inclined to forego or break off his intimacy with Matilda, who, on her part, from Avellino's subsequent silence^ began to deem his momentary choler against Spottiswood to have subsided either into apathy or absence of suspicion. Such reasoning at least satisfied her now; and her conduct exasperated Avellino, who looked upon it as flagrant retaliation. With this idea he resolved not to afford her the satisfaction of witnessing his resentment; he repressed all reproach, and coolly waited for an opportunity to interfere, and remove, by more violent means, this English attendant upon his Countess.



The circumspection, however, or rather the good conduct of the Englishman, did not afford him the opportunity he sought, and the Count's impatience was at last compelled to have re* course to the straight forward act of calling at Lord Spottiswood's apartments. His Lordship was rather surprised at so unusual a visitor.



" You are astonished, no doubt, my Lord, at this unusual visit," said the Count; " you might, however, upon some reflection, divine perhaps the motive."

His Lordship, in reply, merely threw open his hands and arms that were folded before him.

" Do you make any stay at Naples, my Lord ? "

" The winter, perhaps."

" I am sorry for it."

" As how ?" said the astonished Spottiv wood.

" Simply this; your attention to the Countess Avellino, if continued, render it imperative on me to "

" To do what, Count ? "

" To remove you, Sir, without causing myself to be laughed at eternally; and either challenging you, or forbidding you my house, would have that very unpleasant effect."



" I regret, Count Avellino, that your inclinations are so thwarted; much as I know the motives that prompt you to any such unpleasant resolutions groundless. The Countess seems to me the most virtuous of her sex."

" Oh ! a paragon—not a doubt of it ; I wish to the Lord you had her."

" Count Avellino ! "

" Si—Lord Spottiswood, I repeat my wish, if that could be come at honourably ; but fate and fame decree the thing impossible; another^, at least your's, she cannot be, without my shame, and therefore mine she remains. I say thus much, to show you, that it is not any jealous feeling that urges me to break in upon you. For my wife, Sir, I care not a fig—not a fig, Sir; do you hear me ?"

" For my countrywoman's sake, I am stricken with sorrow at your confession: but to what may thus emphatically impressing on me your carelessness for an unfortunate Englishwoman you have married tend, unless, Count, to insult me?"



" You misunderstand me. A quarrel we must both avoid; I for my own sake, you for the Countess's. As to our courage, that's easily proved upon the first wrangler; therefore an insult is far from my thoughts. I would but show that it is not selfish passion that prompts me to separate Lord S.pottiswood from the Countess Avellino; it is my honour that demands it."

" I should not have deemed the motive of affection more selfish than that of your private honour, Count Avellino; but distant nations have different opinions on these points. Prevent me from seeing the Countess, of course you <can; I will even quit Naples at your bidding, rather than injure her fair reputation by an open tjuarrel, or rather even than draw down upon 5ier one frown from her husband. But these suspicions of yours, Count, are idly conceived; they are groundless, utterly so, upon mine honour."



" Do not swear, my dear Lord; what you have just now promised sets my mind perfectly at rest. Suspicious I am not in the least, nor jealous, thank Heaven, more; but Naples is not so apathetic to other's injuries."

" Never have my attentions exceeded mere courtesy,'" continued Spottiswood. " There is not a chattering pair, one lady and cavalier in Naples, that do not indulge, openly, in ten times the freedom of intercourse that I have ever permitted myself to dare towards the Countess Avellino."

" I know it, I see it," said the Count, " but the character of those you mention, are not injured by those freedoms. The connexion is formed according to etiquette — the cavalier is of this country ; he knows his place, its delicacies. All is forgiven then. But with you, a stranger, an Englishman, the same allowance is not permitted. It would be a breach of all decorum for an Italian lady of rank, like the Countess Avellino, to be on such terms with you. She may, she must choose a more worthless servitor perhaps. But, you know, in all codes, to sin according to law, is not to sin."



There was no refuting arguments, so calmly and rationally urged, and such was the effect^ that Spottiswood forgot even his hatred of the Count, so perfectly had the Count veiled a similar and reciprocal feeling towards the young Englishman. To carry his point, and remove an obnoxious suitor without eclat, was the aim of Avellino, and although he did not want the courage to defend his honour in a more manly way, dissimulation was the safer and more politic weapon.

Lord Spottiswood resolved at once to accede to the Count's wish, and retire from Naples. He did not hesitate a moment, even to compromise his pride, that he might secure the Countess's fame and happiness untouched. He was attached to Matilda ; perhaps he loved her: but his own pleasure, derived from her society, he could not put for a moment in competition with her domestic peace. He resolved to take his departure without an interview, which, if it took place, must, he knew, lead to explanations that were better avoided ; to a scene, and perhaps to a betrayal of sentiments, on his part, that he now wished to hide even from himself. Still it was a pang to leave her thus unprotected, for mysteriously his mind misgave him respecting even the honourable protection of his wife by Avellino; he, too, her only English friend. He adhered, howevetj to his resolve, and set forth for Rome, signifying his departure to Matilda by a few lines, a fragment of which ran thus:—



" Pardon me; I cannot but feel interested

for my countrywoman, unprotected, I may say,

in a land where women, like men in our island,

are independent beings, running a career by

. their husband's side perhaps, but never linked with him in sympathy or feeling —where the two sexes seem most distant, most removed in reality from the support of each other, when the ties of heartless gallantry seem most to unite them. I see it. An Englishwoman was not formed for such a life: yet you may be happy ; it is my fervent prayer. Should it not be so, in an extreme, in any case, reckon upon a devoted friend in



fl SPOTTISWOOD.'"





CHAPTER X.

Matilda was surprised and pained at re* ceiving Lord Spottiswood's notification of his departure. Her heart was not interested perhaps; but her comfort, her vanity, and every feeling short of passionate affection was. Excluded from Italian friendship by her English prejudices, as she had excluded herself from English society by affecting Italian taste, the loss of one friend was seriously felt by her ; and that, too, a countryman, whom, for the same reason that Avellino could not tolerate his presence, his Countess was pleased to have by her side in the midst of Italians, who were, and felt themselves less noble. From increased fami» liarity too, the Countess had adopted a line of intercourse with Spottiswood, similar to that used by a chaste Italian dame to her favoured cavalier. And she thus involuntarily and almost of necessity fell into a habit, that she had till now, and even now, abhorred in principle; but which corresponding habits of neglect on the part of husbands, have rendered necessary even to the most rigid of the female sex in Italy, Possessed too of the ear, and intimacy, the support and cheerful spirits of a devoted comparnion, the Countess Avellino had been better able to combat the anguish and torture of a disappointed affection, and to overcome the paroxysms of melancholy despair, fond of promising to itself its own eternal duration. In the company of Spottiswood, she had learned to smother, to smile over those feelings, however deep and painful, and from having thus acquired the mastery, she soon came even to mock them and sport with the very anguish under which she pined. Hence the tone of mingled badinage





and feeling, of confidence and counsel lightly given, and received without even the appearance of importance attached to either ; hence a mutual understanding, that rendered one necessary to the other, and a tenderness not encroaching, at least not seeming to encroach, on the line of respect, beyond which lay affection, due elsewhere—this was the perfection, the very exemplification of the connexion between a married dame and her cavalier, the idea of which had been so abhorrent to Matilda. To it she had become reconciled under the specious title of friendship with Spottiswpod. The agreeable, the soothing intimacy was formed, and some unaccountable circumstance, some invisible agent, breaks in to deprive her of her only friend.

A woman, with her quiver full of suspicions, will be sure to cast some of those darts towards the right object. Some one must have interfered to urge Lord Spottiswood to so abrupt a departure. She remembered Avellino's paroxysm of jealousy at Castelluzzi, his remonstrance and imperative command there, not reiterated since his return to Naples. He it must have been, that has urged Spottiswood away—but how, on what plea ?—Spottiswood an Englishman, a man of courage, and hating the Count. Her fancy conjured up duels, assassinations, arrest, a forced letter, a thousand stratagems, that jealousy might put into effect in a despotic and misruled kingdom, But all proved idle.—Lord Spottiswood was at Rome, she heard, gay and mingling with the world,— Avellino the same at Naples. Perhaps 'twas fickleness—and her insipidity had wearied the friendship of Lord Spottiswood, as it had ceased to attract the love of Avellino. She wept the fate of woman, the ungratefulness, the cruelty of man; but the heart cannot break twice; hers had outlived the affections of her husband, and might well endure the forgetfulness of an acquaintance,



It has been said, and written too, and is moreover, I believe, the general creed of rcn mancers, that ingratitudes and disappointments of this kind sour the spirit, and render it only fit for the cloister or the hermitage. The fact is not so—the most amiable, the most gay, the most benign, have been rendered so by crosses and disappointments ; they have been smoothed and rounded by fierce and continued collision with circumstances, into an even state of apathetic good humour. No, depend upon it. fair readers, the shortest and most effectual method to become " of the world" a man or a woman, is to be terribly crossed, jilted in love, cheated in friendship, and in a similar way to suffer the searing iron of life to pass over each tender feeling one by one ; the nerves once burnt up comfortably, you never feel a twinge after—you are adamant, brass, what you will—the recollection of the feeling you once had, will enable you to feign still to possess it when necessary, and you are no longer troubled with a sensibility, of which the only comfort is, that in silly youth, we can be a little proud of being possessed of it. The passions form life's alchemy ; we look for gold during the sanguine experiment: we find but dust in the end, 'tis true, but we have gathered wisdom.





Such was Matilda's progress in feeling. The heart is like that impenetrably-mailed animal we read of, on whom a blow, if not precisely of fatal force and direction, strikes vainly and rebounds. She had borne, she had outlived the loss of Avellino's love. When that did not subdue her, she was indurated against the attempts of fortune. She became " a woman of the world," and began to view every thing in quite another light from that in which she had been wont. That epicurean clime, too, might have had its influence upon her; but the cause lay deeper. She cou.d no longer look for happiness in the pure gratification of her heart's impulses. Affection was turned from her,— offspring, with all its tender occupation of delight and solicitude, was denied to her. Separated from English habits, she lost a rememVol. i. I



hrance of her country, of its peculiar view of happiness, its strictness, its religion; she resigned herself to surrounding circumstances, and example overcame her disgust necessarily for the only society in which it was in her power to mingle, and abandoned herself in a lainser aller absence of purpose, to the same course of pleasures, at least of pleasure-seeming occupation, in which she saw others around her sedulously engaged. Lost to virtue she was not, but she became insensible to much that was adherent to its spirit—to true delicacy; and the Countess Avellino thenceforward, for some time, was no longer the English Matilda.

In thus conforming gradually to the habits of her adopted country, it is not to be supposed that the Countess resisted longer the example of her acquaintances,—the wish even of her husband, in selecting that indispensable to Italian life,—a cavalier ; and all Naples was amazed to find the choice of the fair English woman rest upon Don Antonio Dei Bari, a noted Muratist,





and detester of English influence and English persons. It was not credited, till Don Antonio had been observed three nights successively in the Countess's box.

" How !" exclaimed the Baroness Pernella, " is this Don Antonio that could not abide the milk-white complexion of the northerns ?"

" Sympathies and antipathies, mia cara Pernella? said the Principessa, who was profound in the knowledge of such mysteries, " run always in a circle, and, like the ridiculous and the sublime, there is but one step between the extremes of either. For instance, here is Avellino, who was enraptured with his fairhaired bride, whom he abandoned speedily for charms the very opposite of those which he so lately adored."

" True, Principessa," replied the Baroness;

" but there were two objects in that case; and

when a gallant flies from wife to mistress, he

puts as wide an interval between them as pos





172

sible; but Don Antonio's was a theory and code; see how practically he abandons it."

" Now, if it were not totally against etiquette, and contrary to the rules of our sweet amorous society, to use raillery or illusion in a cavalier servente case, we would have a week's theme of jest and irony against Don Antonio. But a cavalier case it is, established quite," said the Principessa, "and I give you joy at last, Count Avellino."

And the Italian husband coolly returned his grazie for congratulation, that would have set the man of any other nation under the sun beside himself with indignation. Avellino felt not a particle of the unpleasant feeling that had stirred his blood in the ruins of Sybaris; he even felt pleased at the Countess's conformance with his country's habit, and with the prospect that it would render his life more agreeable. Her choice, too, coincided with what would have been his own. Don Antonio Dei Bari was his friend, known to him long, and esteemed as a man of high Neapolitan probity, (I leave my readers to unriddle the expression for themselves), grave, shrewd, and sensible, a little of the cynic, and with n knowledge of the world,— such as it is understood at Naples—not to be surpassed. He was the .very man, in short, that he should have desired to see established as the Countess's companion and attendant. Don Antonio was most capable of advising, instructing, and protecting her; and the Count felt an enormous weight and responsibility removed from him, as soon as he perceived that his friend had



attained that station in the Avellino household

t

to which he aspired. He welcomed Don Antonio at his palace with the ardent grasp of confidential friendship. The Count and his friend were, the one satisfied, the other delighted ; and the countenance of Matilda, now lit up with an unchanging, but apathetic smile, seemed to express equal content.

Matilda's worldliness, or whatever other name



by which we choose to call the late change wrought in the character of the Countess Avellino, had reconciled her to the sufferance, to the partial enjoyment even of Italian society. No time, however, could overcome her internal hatred and disgust for a people, to one of whom she could not but look upon herself as a victim. Her judgment, therefore, was left unbiassed and undisturbed by any feeling of attachment in the selection of the requisite cavalier; and her choice fell upon one for whom she always had, and still did, entertain rather a personal dislike. Perhaps it was a latent impulse of virtue that prompted her to such a preference, or perhaps, she saw in Don Antonio's rough adroitness the fittest counsellor and protector through this little world of licentiousness, and insult, and intrigue, that she by this time found Naples to be.

In every step one takes at Naples, traces are discoverable of the Spanish rule that this southern part of Italy so long endured—names, etiquette, dialect, and an hundred customs reveal the close connexion that subsisted between it and the opposite Peninsula. Many visages are of the Hidalgo cast, and even character at Naples betrays the same origin. A strange and incongruous mixture would seem to be effected by joining Spanish gravity to Italian buffoonery —but that these propensities are joined in most Neapolitans is no less true. In their converse the opposite qualities predominate by turns, and in their actions, although the events of late years have tended to display them as mere poltroons, without courage, patriotism, or dignity, there still exist*, especially through the middle order of gentry, strong marked features of independence and national spirit. From the actions of the present risen generation in Europe, nothing can be predicated—the ranks of life so far advanced, may be swept off the board without consideration—they are us&s, the creatures of time and power, whatever that may be, —it is from the rising race, that judgments are to be formed, and different judgments too. A century will not pass away ere the Neapolitans will have washed away the ignominy.





Don Antonio Dei Ban was one of those Neapolitan characters, with the strongest infusion of Spanish pride, gravity, prejudice, and reserve;—the Neapolitan seldom broke forth in him. He was respectful, courteous, chivalric even, especially in his sentiments, owing more perhaps to his connexion with King Joachim, than to his Gothic blood. And this, which might have been a very powerful cause of the Countess Avellino's esteem, was heightened by his saturnine temper. Don Antonio was a disappointed courtier. He had been one of the chief counsellors of Murat, and was of course a Count, a Marquis, or some such noble of modern date, which I forget exactly, and so did he—his patronymic of Dei Bari being, he deemed, nobility sufficient. He had not been one of the fatal causes of the fate of his ancient sovereign. Murat from his retreat,—when he was debating which was preferable, a descent on his old doini





nions, or retirement to America,—dispatched to Naples his faithful black follower Othello, as he called him,—from his conspicuous colour and known features, the very worst emissary the imprudent Joachim could have sent. Othello was seized, his letters taken, and those high personages to whom they were addressed, compelled by the police to write a reply which they dictated, to Murat, encouraging him to land at a certain place in Calabria, where all should be prepared for his restoration to the throne. The unsuspecting Joachim fell into the snare; he landed with a few followers at the appointed part, and was soon disposed of. Don Antonio alone held out against the menaces of the police, and refused to ensnare his ancient patron. Strange to say, that government, so vindictive to its most insignificant enemies, did not visit with any punishment the obstinacy of Dei Bari.

Such was the chosen intimate of Matilda, and Naples gave her profound credit for the wisdom of her choice. Her importance in her adopted country rose, she was surprised to find, immoderately, from the step, and the wise step she had taken, and the Countess found herself, thenceforward, admitted into the very sanctorium of Neapolitan life, where the general intrigue and respective interests of all the members were canvassed with a freedom and a frankness that amazed her. There seemed a freemasonry of womankind established in the city, and she certainly marvelled at its mysteries, even if she could not admire them.



More estrangement still from Avellino was all this, and the thought had ceased to be a pang to Matilda. Don Antonio's presence never failed at her morning collazione, and from thence till night his time was at her disposal. It is almost inconceivable that a grave and serious character, such was Antonio's accustomed too, to interest itself in political and patriotic considerations, could give up his time and his inde*»endence to a kind of slavery. But the doles J5»r niente is the supreme bliss throughout the land, from statesman to lazzaroni—the last returns willingly even from gain to his sack or his tub, and the former to the as idle lounge of a boudoir-, with the same relish of escape from evil. The universal doke of an Italian's far niente is female society; and that admits of many very different modes of connection. Youth, and after-manhood looks for passion—but, in spite of the boiling blood and fervid passions of the clime, this is not the prevailing link. In general it is of purer, chaster kind; and Italian life, so corrupt in the mass and in principle, is not by any means so much so in practice as is supposed. The Prince of Castelforte's attachment to Corinna, sketched by De Stael, and limited to the simple wish of daily beholding her, and passing a few languid leisure hours in her company, may lie taken as a very fair type of the greater part of these liaisons. Which are, moreover, courted with perseverance, and undertaken with zeal, by men of the greatest and the gravest talent, far superior to the by-gone race, that Alfieri has satirically depicted, and fiercely apostrophized:—





" Tu sei d'ltalia un speziale augello:

Non, ch'oltre 1'AIpi il marital costume

S'abbia tra ricchi pift securo ostello;

Ma il lungo inveterar nel tenerume,



Che in noi doppia il servaggio in cui si na ei.

Pur tuppo £ tutto Italico marciume.

Nostro £ il morir d'anni sessanta in fasce ;



E, omai sdentati, balbettar d'amore;

E aveme, scevre dei piacer, le ambasce.

Ma, dal cospetto mio vattene fuore,



O tu ch'effetto set, piil che cagione,

Dell' odierno Italian fetore."

// Cavalier Sefoente Veterano.

This, as well as Parini's similar sketch of a Lombard gallant, may have been, and were no doubt true in their day. But foppery is a thing, that with the revolution has vanished utterly from the continent; even coquetry and flirtation are seriously carried on, and the cavalier servente tribe, are neither the superannuated fops of one poet, nor the effeminate beings of the other—the most sensible and talented of the nation are to be found at present amongst the profession of the cicisbic art.





CHAPTER XI.

For some time the established intimacy between Don Antonio and the Countess Avellino existed, without the even tenor of courtesy and confidence being interrupted. The Countess was convenienced by those attentions that her husband could not, and would not afford her, and gratified by the society of a man of sense respectfully devoted to her. Don Antonio, on the other hand, was repaid by being guaranteed against erinui, possessed of a sure retreat from solitude, and by enjoying all the lighter pleasures of domesticity, without the pain or burden of an establishment. He was, moreover, the chosen friend of a lady of rank and fortune, and this imported. These advantages, and no more, had he promised to himself: he knew the strict rules and delicacy of his station, and never contemplated the breach of them. But in framing these resolutions, this line of conduct, Don Antonio had calculated on approaching and being permitted to the intimacy of a woman, such as he had known women, an Italian, by this time passionless, or if impassioned, so with calculation and finesse—a creature, moreover, ignorant, uninfor.fned, except in the primer of intrigue, and possessed of none of those fresh impulses and emotions, so early nipped by the precocity of Italian life. In the society of such a being, much as he might become attached, he felt himself secure; he could look down upon the object of his attentions as upon a lovely child, and be content with her agreeable prattle.



But the English woman, Italianized as she had been, was far from answering the preconceived idea of Don Antonio^s. Her feelings were those of pure nature—her thoughts bold, free,



and original, all qualities exaggerated to him, who had never experienced them in females. In general, and from habit, certainly, she indulged in the light, ins&uciante, satiric vein, that prevailed in society; but in more unreserved hours, Don Antonio perceived to his surprise, that the petty malice, vanity, and apathy, that this tone betrays, were by no means natural to the Countess. He found her on the contrary, to be amiable, generous, enthusiastic, and to possess all the freshness and purity of northern feeling, combined with the force and impetuosity that distinguishes the southern. This was novel, piquant. There seemed to him something unearthly, angelic, in the noble sentiments, desires, regrets, that at times escaped Matilda. He admired, he worshipped. How did his wonder and admiration at once increase, when he perceived, that the neglect of Avellino actually preyed upon her,—that she pined under the consciousness of his lost affection. To weep for a lover was natural, thought he—but that



lover a husband. It was a phenomenon unseen in his experience, undreamed of in his philosophy. What a heart of feeling, what a soul of truth ! thought he—it were indeed a prize worth the winning. He dispelled the idea with indignation—it returned, however. Every day disclosed some new trait in the Countess's character that enchained him more. Her beauty even, of which he had been but a cold admirer before, wore now to him loveliness, such as he had never contemplated. That complexion, those features so suited, so harmonized with those pure feelings. He gazed upon her for hours, and forgot his duty. He failed in reproducing fresh topics of converse, when he had such not exhausted, but neglected. He had but one thought, and eloquent as he could have been upon that, he was distracted, confused upon any other. Matilda thought that Don Antonio was tired of her society, as Avellino, as Spottiswood had been. Alarmed at the idea of being utterly deserted, she redoubles her smiles, her



amiability, and excites her powers of converse and fascination. She pours but oil on the flame of Dei Bari, and drives him, more than once, in the tortures of an internal struggle, from her presence.

This honourable dissimulation on the part of Don Antonio, could not long continue, as deep passion had taken possession of him ; and on the terms that he lived with the Countess, it was impossible, even with the most determined resolution, to keep the flame that consumed him secret.

" Do ye ever love twice in England, Matilda?" said Antonio, interrupting a silence of late frequent between them.

" As elsewhere, I believe," said the Countess, but with an unpleasant recollection.

" Our French apophthegm writers, so much in vogue, say no to the possibility—what sayest thou ?"

" The possibility of what ?"

" Of loving twice, Matilda."



" I have never tried, and know not," said the Countess lightly.

" Perhaps thou woulds't like to try."

" Ah, no! no, in truth, Antonio;" and the sigh with which this was uttered, came like a north wind upon the hopes of the questioner.

" No, I agree with you; I can conceive it well—the first true links of the heart broken, it scorns to form a second and a feebler tie. Yet still, methinks, from tenderness, from pity, the fair might look smilingly on the suitor that she did not absolutely adore, when she knew, that to withhold that smile were to obscure his happiness for ever."

" That would be very considerate indeed !" said Matilda; " our bella Napoli abounds in traits of such amiability. But I did not expect they would have met with Antonio's approbation."

" Indeed ! have I then been so rigid ?" " Si, si—have not your continual declamations been against the weakness of woman— against the utter want of force in her character —against that passive facility which permits, though it would abhor, to seek vice ? How long have these been thy themes, thou cynic P''



" I fear 'tis the truth, and I suffer now the penalty. "Tis always so: the cynic shuts the door of humanity behind him, as if in feeling there were no return.'"

" And hast thou experienced such return ? Art thou converted, thou very Diogenes of the bean monde ?''

" Even so."

" Maraviglia.'"

" And canst thou be surprised, fair Countess, if my long entertained prejudices against women be overturned—if I am forced to believe in the purity and perfection of the sex ?"

" Wonder I do most amazingly, Antonio; why should / not ?"

" What ! the saint marvel at her own miracles ?"

" Nay, Antonio, flattery makes no part of friendship like to ours. Was it not even a law to that effect ?"



" Quench not my enthusiasm by the mention of law ! Nan sous i spiriti eke si intenJono sopra tutle le legge ?"

" Maraviglia di piu—more cause of wonder —thou preacher of submission to every by-law of society; and what enthusiasm, may I ask Antonio, have you found at last ?"

" Quello d'amore, Matilda—that of love, to make a brief confession."

" And for whom ?" said the' astonished ('ountess.

" For thee, Matilda!"" and Don Antonio flung himself at her feet.

The unfeigned amazement and resentment of the Countess was extreme. Her fulminating regard almost stunned Antonio, who was not prepared, he would have said, for the outrageousness of English virtue. He endeavoured by every means of excuse, submission, and prayer, to deprecate her wrath ; but at that time he found it impossible. Antonio was compelled, at last, to retire from Avellino's palace, stung with disappointment, and cursing in his heart those northern prejudices that interpreted the highest compliment rcan could pay, into an insult; and that preposterous chastity, which, not content with denial, resented, forsooth, the addresses of a suitor.



In the first moment of her indignation, Matilda had determined on breaking utterly with Don Antonio, acquainting Avellino with his audacity, and thus triumphing over her husband's predelictions for the habits of his country. But as passion cooled, and resentment subsided, the serious consequences of such a step frighted her from the extreme resolution; besides, the intentions of Antor.io, though to her evident, yet might easily be excused by him on the assumed warmth of decorous gallantry. She felt, too, somewhat, inclined to pardon audacity which the national prejudices of her cavalier allowed: even although, in his position, the laws of deli



cacy and friendly confidence had been broken through. She hoped, that the rebuff already given, followed by a marked displeasure and reserve in private, might serve to extinguish the impertinent hopes of Antonio, and at the same time allow the intimacy to continue on its former footing.

Admission was not denied to Don Antonio on the following day, and no consequences seemed to follow the confession of his affection, except the painful reserve manifested in the countenances of both. Antonio recurred to the usual topics of their converse; and as he avoided to touch the offensive theme, the Countess deemed him a penitent, and no longer restrained her smiles. This interval lasted a few days; but Matilda reasoned vainly—the passion of Antonio was not so easily to be extinguished or repressed, especially when his flame was supplied by the continual fuel of her presence and conversation. He dared again, though in a covert manner, to renew his solicitations: the same indignation and



repugnance manifested themselves on the brow of Matilda. Still she could not shun or withdraw her presence from him, lest the suspicion of the public and of her husband should penetrate into the breach made by such a quarrel. She even became habituated to the addresses of Antonio, veiled, as they were, in the tone of jesting and light complaint; and they were left often unrepelled by the carelessness and apathy of the Countess. Don Antonio attributed, however, this abatement in ferocity, as he called it, to other causes, and deemed, that his perseverance had, at length, succeeded in making some impression upon the heart of his English mistress. Thus emboldened, the passion of Don Antonio, more irritated than repressed by the checks it had suffered, incited him to a new attempt. It called to its aid all the vulgar maxims respecting the weakness and dissimulation of women, that he had often found true. The signs and tokens upon which affection builds, are so numerous and so trivial, that in this respect,



almost any conclusion can be drawn from any conduct, and here self-flattery knows no bounds. Antonio without difficulty plumed himself into confidence—he determined to shrink no more, like a boy, beneath the frowns of the Countess, that could so easily be affected, and resolved, that if foiled, it should not be his timorousness that incurred the reproach.

The scene that this new resolution of Antonio's produced, I shall not describe. It was not of long duration. The voice of the Countess commanding him to leave her presence, was audible even to the domestics of the family, who were far too Italian to interfere. The consequences bore witness to a quarrel and some grievous cause. The Countess shut herself in her apartment, and Don Antonio descended the staircase of the palace, giving vent to imprecations, and ejaculations of rage and disappointment.

Count Avellino returned to his home at the very moment of that hush in his household,

VOL. I, K



which generally succeeds a scene of any kind. He perceived in this, and in the countenance of his valet, that something had taken place, and hurried instantly to the apartment of the Countess. He found her in tears. He had often found her so in retirement, even when in society her countenance had but just worn its accustomed smile.

" What is the matter now, Countess Avellino ?" said the Count. The question was repeated ere it was answered.

" I have been insulted, Avellino." " How—by whom ?" cried the aroused Count.

" Don Antonio dei Bari."

" He—impossible."



" He has grossly insulted me, and you too, Avellino," said Matilda.

" Ha—t'hafatto Vamore, he has made love to you, I suppose," said the Count with a smile.

Matilda looked up incredulously, as if she would have asked—is this my husband ?





" Is this all?" continued he. " Entente— think nothing of it—laugh at him. Though he is wrong by the bye,—in his place. But how cursedly fond ye English are of scenes. Ye continue to find cause for emotion in the commonest events of life.'"

" Is it thus, Avellino, you speak of an attempt upon the honour of your wife ?"

" An attempt by word, yes. It is what every one must suffer, must expect. You were wrong to acquaint me, very wrong—it is your own affair altogether, not mine. Per Dio, if husbands were to interfere, to punish every pretender of this kind, Naples would be an everlasting seat of war."

The Countess was mute with indignation, at the calm of her husband.

"And you will not resent this conduct of Dei Bari's, Avellino ?"

" Not I; your frown seems dark enough. Exile him from your presence for a whole day, nay, a week, if you wish."



" Ah ! Avellino, these were not your feelings towards Spottiswood. Had my countryman been my friend, this insult had never taken place; if it had, I would at least have found an avenger in him."

" Cento diavoli," exclaimed the Count, losing courtesy, as well as patience, " do you beard me with his name? If I ever meet that mi Lord once again—" and his hand assumed the clench of phrensied vengeance. " With him there would have been none of these scenes, these quarrels,—I should not have been made a confidant in that case,—oh no,—all would hav been smooth with the Englishman. But the inouthcourting of an Italian is offensive forsooth. I know Antonio, Madam, I have known him from boyhood, and would trust my life, my honour to his keeping. This is but prejudice—but—"

" It is enough, Count Avellino,—I understand your insinuation,—I appealed, a wife, to a husband's protection.—Heaven has heard the answer.''



" I wonder, you talk of heaven," said the Count with a sneer, " there are no English saints there that I have heard of—would your patriotic heart worship where they were not '("

" This is too much, Avellino," said the agonized Countess, " I have borne aH from you patiently and long,—neglect, infidelity, ill humour. But to be thus treated, sneered at, in the very moment, when your wife, a poor insulted stranger in this land, flings herself upon you, her husband, for protection, is beyond the power of sufferance. Oh! England, oh, my father !" cried the Countess, as she sunk in tears upon the couch.

Count Avellino left his wife thus, simply telling his valet to send Matilda's waiting-woman to her mistress. He considered this merely as of those half-quarrels, that frequently took place between them, and in which he was always harsh both from premeditation and growing dislike. With Don Antonio he was determined to expostulate, however, although he would not gratify his Countess, by even letting her know that determination. Let not my readers suppose that by this, we would depict the general conduct of Italian spouses,—far different indeed is their general demeanour,—they seldom rule in their palaces—but the history of Avellino differed somewhat from the ways of his countrymen, and is moreover from the life.



As the Count in his drive down the steep Strade Infrarcata, deemed this scene to be nothing more serious than what had often before occurred, he much miscalculated the feelings of Matilda. She was indeed cut to the soul. Her hopes of affection returned on domestic happiness, long had vanished, but peace, and an unreproached life, she had not despaired to look forward to. She at least beheld in Avellino a friend and a protector—he now proved neither —he, on whom she had bestowed her affections, to whom she had sacrificed her country, mocked at her complaints of insult, even answered her with a suspicious and misdoubting sneer,—wo



man, she felt, could sink no lower. And on touching the lowest point of humiliation, her spirit, that had sunk so far with resignation, sprung up and roused itself to bear no more, to vindicate its wrongs. " What ! suspected !" thought she, " and at the very moment when— by Avellino too !" Some extreme step she was bent on—she thought of flying at once from Naples and Avellino—the impossibility of escape without friends or support. The danger struck her instantly. " I have no friend," said she, " but any compatriot would be that to me in distress. I will appeal to one—Spottiswood—he cannot forget me—he will not refuse to befriend me in this emergency."

And without allowing pause for reflection, she sate down, and addressed a few lines to Lord Spottiswood, directing them to Rome, and instantly dispatched the letter.





CHAPTER XII.

Foil several days the Count and Countess Avellino did not meet; he was lost in amusement and dissipation, ignorant of the frenzy of the Countess, and forgetful of the cause. She retired, shut up with her sorrow and her resentment, feeling those sentiments, with the recollections of her former years of peace and hope, contrasted with her late years of endurance and grief. The causes were all too deep to allow her to be fickle: and as she grew more calm, her resolution to fly from Naples, at least, to separate from Avellino, grew but the more fixed and unshaken. In all her former repinings, she had kept a check upon her thoughts, prevented





them from recurring, as they were prone to do, to her native country, and avoided those vain regrets that could tend to nothing, except to render her more unhappy. Now, however, she gave loose to every recurrence, every regret of the kind—she recalled England, the days and haunts of her youth, her parents—above all, her dying parent's words, and the bitterness with which she confessed that her disobedience to that dying request had led to all her misery, was indescribable. It was a merited, a selfearned pang; and she held it to her view as the ancient heroine contemplated, with a horrid pleasure, the dagger and the poison-cup, that was at once about to punish her frailty and avenge her wrongs.

In this self-infliction of punishment, the mind, however, has its reserve—it is often merciful to itself, and spares the extremity of torture. The thoughts of Ralph Maxwell, his fate, and her ingratitude, Matilda still repelled; that would have been too much for her dist racted mind : it would have caused her to look upon her present sufferings as a retribution too justly merited; and she recoiled from the contemplation, as the only pang that her selfishness could not resign itself to endure.



She attended the arrival of Spottiswood with impatience. Without advice or protection, she did not know how or whither to direct her flight; and she depended on the chivalrous feelings of the young English noble, even if she could no longer calculate upon his friendship.

Every carriage wheel in the court, every step upon the staircase, Matilda expected to be his, so eager had become her desire of escape. Once she heard some ascending steps, she listened to them with presentiment, and her heart palpitated with anxiety. They crossed the sounding oaken floors of the palace halls. Was it Spottiswood?—The door opened—those who entered were her husband and Don Antonio.

" I bring you a suppliant, Countess Avellino," said the Count; " one who regrets that he should have been led by his admiration for you, expressed in the gallant warmth of his country, to offend or wound your delicacy."



" Allow me, Madam," said Antonio, " to offer my humble apologies."

But Matilda turned from him in contemptuous anger towards her husband.

" Is it not enough, Count Avellino, to have answered me with a sneer, when I applied to you for protection, without forcing my insulter again into my presence ?"

" Do you think of that still, for heaven's sake,'' said the Count gaily.

" Never shall I forget it."

" E tragedia questo! this is tragic," said Avellino.

" Be not inexorable, Countess," said Don Antonio: " Avellino can answer that I would qot have dared, intentionally to offend; he trusts, and will answer for my honour and friendship."

" I see that my husband is ready to do so; and therefore, for the future, I shall beware to choose my friends by that husband's counsel. Jndatevi, Signor. A man would have avenged, not re-insulted me."



" Che belle cose .'•' said the Count; " how delightful, pleasant, and agreeable. fo son codardo, tu arnica mio, briccone—la Conlessa regna, Andiamo—I am a coward, it seems— thou, a scoundrel, Antonio—'tis the Countess's edict—let us begone. But, mark me, bella Inglese, proud as you be—this palace, is that of Avellino, open to his friends."

" Be calm, Avellino," said Don Antonio; " engage in no angry words on my account. I am gone from ye—from Naples. Farewell!" He pressed the Count's hand; and bowing respectfully to the Countess, Don Antonio withdrew, beneath her unrelaxed and unforgiving frown.

For some time the Count remained silent, his arms folded, and as if giving himself leisure to contemplate the new character that his wife had assumed. Matilda gazed upon the husband she once had loved, and in the midst of her disgust, alienation, and resolutions of flight, she felt shaken by returning tenderness. What! if another trial would regain his confidence, his kindness at least, if not his heart. Matilda abruptly flung herself at Avellino's feet—he was amazed.



" Hear me. Avellino, this once," said Matilda. " You loved me; Heaven and yourself can tell how I answered that love. You vowed to me a lasting affection, and to that vow I sacrificed myself, all thoughts of my native country, of my friends. You grew neglectful soon, too soon, Avellino, yet I submitted;—you were unfaithful, yet I upbraided not. Cold at last, and often unkind—did I repine, unless inwardly? Ah! Avellino! as your heart became cold and steeled against me, recollection of past times, duty, or some similar feeling, might have counselled you to preserve some shew of kindness and of affection towards a stranger,—a friendless, exiled stranger, like myself. At your request I chose a friend—necessarily intimate. He insults me. I fly to my husband for protection. How did you comfort or protect me, Avellino ? with a sneer, a doubt—a cruel doubt. You will not hear me, nor believe me. You meet him in friendship, credit his tale, and bring him to insult me further. Ah, Avellino! is this kind, is it honourable, for you know that feeling, even in Naples? Answer me,—say but that you feel the truth of what I plead, and then smile upon Matilda "



The lip of Avellino quivered with anger—with fretfulness, but no smile of returning affection responded to the prayer of his Countess.

" You once loved Matilda," still urged

she.

His brow was still dark. Although half subdued, he felt still ashamed of yielding; and for what purpose ? for an hour of faintly-relumed love, speedily about to relapse into wonted disgust and apathy. He felt a pride in remaining unmoved, and was ignorant of all that depended on the denial of that smile. Above all, he wished to conquer what he deemed the Countesss unreasonable obstinacy.



" You will receive Don Antonio," said he, calmly, and with unaltered expression.

" Never," replied the Countess.

" Buona sera dunque,—I wish you, then, a good evening," and the Count departed, leaving the Countess still in the attitude of supplication, to which she had sunk.

" No; not one token—not one lingering spark of love is left!" ejaculated Matilda as she rose She pressed her hand to her throbbing brow, and paused an instant under the consciousness of her bereft condition. " This palace, too, is Avellino's, I have been reminded, open to Antonio. Then am I no longer its mistress—no longer Avellino's ?" and she hurried to her apartment, under the impulse of some sudden resolution; this seemed to be immediate flight. She dragged and flung open her cabinets and drawers, for the purpose of selecting a few necessaries that were indispensable. She turned over all with many a pang; her bridal dresses, those of her unmarried state—every object linked with a thousand painful recollections, and at intervals she paused—not to weep, for she,wept unconsciously and unceasingly—but to wipe away the flood of tears that had fallen from her eyes. At times, too, she prayed, but never swerved in her resolution. As her trinkets were the most portable and valuable portion of her little stock of wealth, she resolved on carrying away all of these, and for this purpose she turned forth the cases where they lay ; many of them were untouched. During this search, one little parcel fell forth that arrested her attention; it was the torquoise ring that Ralph had given to her, and that she long had thought lost. Folded up with it, too, was the lock of hair,—her own; she knew it, and beneath, " The Murderess," was written in that well known hand. It dropped from Matilda's hand—she feli insensible beneath this last blow—Ralph Maxwell was avenged.





When the unhappy Matilda once more opened her eyes, the confusion around her awoke her to her resolution. " Can misfortune," thought she, " have yet another cruel arrow in store for me ? the quiver ought to be exhausted.'" She at length succeeded in completing her little arrangements, and making up a parcel not too bulky for her feeble arm. There was no domestic whom she dared to trust; and throwing a cloak around her, Matilda slept in stealth through those splendid halls that she now fled from, flew down the stair-case, and in an instant was in the street. It was evening. The crowd was issuing, each family from its respective mansions, down to the Toledo, and the promenades of the city. In that tumultuous and crowded population, which, in careless inattention to every thing that is strange, rivals London itself, none noticed Matilda, much as she dreaded and suspected observation. Arrived in the Toledo, she followed the stream, whither she knew not. Irresolute, distracted, she could have sat down and wept, but the crowd still hurried on, and she was borne with them to the square of the royal palace, where she was left free of the pressure, to decide on the future direction of her steps. She turned them from the city towards the sea; and the delicate Countess, exhausted by that street walk, leaned upon the wall commencing what is called the Strada di St. Lucia.



She looked forth upon the bay, its shore marked by the curved line of foam, on the brink of which arose the lively, white, sparkling suburb of Resina, Vesuvius towering over it; the mountains of Castellamare and Sorrento seemed basking in the same evening sun that she had first marked in happiness, and since unchanged, through the raging gradations of her misery. There was no time now for such refinement, even of despair; her incertitude, her helplessness, called for some resolve ; she knew not where, to whom to apply, and she already began to regret the hasty step sne had taken, without even awaiting the arrival of Spottiswood, when the dear sound of her country's tongue startled her. Though vulgar, it was to her more welcome than the blandest Roman dialect. She turned, and perceived the voices to be those of a joyous knot of British tars, returning from an exploring visit to the lovely Naples, whose boasted charms they were deprecating, and displaying, at the same time, manifest contempt of its inhabitants. It occurred at the moment to Matilda, in her perplexity, that she was known to the captain of a British vessel then at Naples : he might afford her a momentary refuge—these men might guide her. She addressed the sailors in their native tongue, and they were too much flattered by that mere act, to refuse any request she might make. She begged to be conducted to Captain



• ; the tars willingly complied ; and in a

few moments put off from the shore of that land that had been to her the eventful scene of so much misery: she stood upon that detached, but no less true portion of British soil, a man of war. Captain - promised the Countess every protection that was in his power to bestow, consistent with his duty, and the respect that he was in such cases obliged to pay to the authorities of the country off which he cruised.



Lord Spottiswoocl, in the mean time, had hurried to the urgent summons of his countrywoman. He had been farther off, however, than Rome, and he was consequently prevented from reaching Naples, until the very day upon which Matilda had been driven to the hasty resolve of flight. His Lordship lost no time, notwithstanding the former conversation between him and Avellino, in proceeding to the Strada Infrascata, where his call was the occasion of first making known to the domestics the disappearance of their mistress. Lord Spottiswood was stunned on hearing of the Countess's flight — flight it was ; she had taken with her no servant — her apartment was confusion— every thing open and in disorder. At the palace there was no pretext or reason for Spottiswood's delaying, and he withdrew to his hotel, to ruminate on the fate of the Countess; for he instantly suspected that she had been made away with by the villany of her Italian husband ; when, in the steep descent of the street, he met the Count Avellino himself.



" You here, my Lord Spottiswood !"

" I have just returned from the Avellino Palace, Count: the Countess is not there—is not to be heard of; none can tell whither she has gone."

" Indeed ! my Lord. I hear these strange tidings from the man most proper to convey them.'"

" How, Sir?"

" From the seducer himself, I doubt not."

" Me! I am but this hour arrived at Naples."

" Seasonably, too, it seems: and for what purpose, my Lord ? Was it to acquaint Count Avellino that his wife had fled from his palace and protection ? "



" This anger and suspicion are well assumed, Count Avellino. Your Countess has disappeared: she was unhappy—friendless. But / will be the friend to see whither she has been conveyed, and how disposed of? "

': Kind, generous, frank Briton," rejoined the Count, with a sneer. " No doubt you will see whither your countrywoman has been conveyed, and how disposed of. But, mark me: although an Italian husband, I am one of the old school, Sir, not the new. We part not here."

" I should be sorry to think we did."

" To-morrow, then, we meet; but that shall be arranged."

The Count and Lord Spottiswood separated for the time, each inflamed against the other; the Count certain that he beheld in Spottiswood an Englishman, (that was the galling thought,) the seducer of his wife ; Lord Spottiswood believing Count Avellino to be the assassin or the gaoler of his unfortunate countrywoman. No traces whatever of Matilda were discoverable, although the emissiaries of Avellino, joined with those of the police, searched Naples in quest of her. Nought was left to Avellino, except thoughts of vengeance, in the anticipation of which the live-long night he fearfully indulged.



Whilst these mistaken resentments were thus boiling in the breast of an English and Italian noble against each other, the innocent, at least the unthinking cause remained on board of the

, a prey to a thousand conflicting feelings

of doubt and anguish. Towards evening the vessel got under weigh, and this circumstance, eager as she had been some few hours past to escape from the Neapolition land for ever, now seemed to sever her from all that was dear. Her fears, however, in this were consoled. The

merely bore out from her station before

Naples, to take up a more secure anchorage in the bay of Baias, not far distant. As the mighty vessel, scarcely wafted by the light breeze of evening, slowly and majestically seceded from the city,—Matilda cast a last, painful look upon that lovely shore. The groves of the Villa Reale, the splendid line of the Chiaja were before her—what scenes they recalled, what unbounded happiness, what an unbounded promise of more—alas ! Pausilippo too was not without a glance, but she shuddered to look towards the little cemetry, where Ralph, the murdered Ralph, lay buried. Upon the heights of the city afar, crowned by the castle of St. Elmo, stood the Avellino Palace; there was her husband—how affected by her departure, gladded, grieved,— she knew not, and yet feared the former. What a life of thought and pain did the unfortunate Matilda live through in that one night! She afterwards became unconscious from distraction, till the rippling, flashing wave upon the vessel's side reminded her at once of her flight and her place of refuge.



The morning's sun shone upon the far-famed gulph of Baiae, with its shore of mighty ruin, and its host of glorious names and recollections



huddled together into a mean and insignificant •space—the vessel of a far island then the most stupendous object of the scene. Yon lake, that once contained a Roman navy, the whole fleets •of the masters of the world, would scarce contain that solitary ship of Britain. The Countess Avellino stood upon her lofty deck; and although her pale cheek bore witness to the anxious and agitated night that she had spent, still she calmed •emotion before the eye of strangers, and even, pointed out to her gallant countrymen those ruins and temples, new to them, but with which she had been long familiar. She was thus engaged in showing to them the remains of the temple of Serapis at Puzzuoli, when a company of horsemen were observed to issue from that town, and gallop along the beach towards Baiae. It was a circumstance not calculated to excite attention, except in a breast so full of anxiety .as Matilda's. She abruptly ceased to perform the office she had undertaken, of describing the distant ruins—those horsemen seemed to

VOL. I. I



attract her whole attention. They continued their, course as far as the Lucrine Lake, when turning suddenly to the right, they disappeared between the little gorge in the hills, that leads to Avernus. Matilda sought to follow them with her regards, but their further motions were concealed by the intervening hills.

Matilda could not account for her agitation, the interest excited in her by a troop of cavaliers, any of whom she could not distinguish. But interest of this mysterious kind is so communicative, that those around the Countess partook of her feeling, and stood looking towards the spot where the party had disappeared. Thenattention did not seem vainly attracted, for soon after a couple of shots were heard, and at the same time, in that direction.

" I knew it," cried the Countess, distracted— " I foresaw it, but too late. Heaven forgive and pity me! It must be thus. A boat, a boat, my friends; set me ashore yonder, I entreat you, as an unhappy countrywoman."



The Countess was instantly obeyed—a boat manned, and accompanied by an officer, she was rowed to shore in the direction of the Lucrine Lake. Then disembarking, the Countess hurried, afoot, distracted, along the path that she had seen pursued by the horsemen. Their steeds she met, held by some peasant children, whose pale faces and trembling limbs foretold a disaster. Supported by the Lieutenant that accompanied her, and with a speed inconceivable to him, the Countess proceeded, until she reached the circular vale or basin sunk in the hills, in the midst of which reposes the famed Avernus. Not far to the left, and near the Gulf of the Sybil, were the dismounted cavaliers grouped together, as if around a fallen man. A duel had certainly taken place.

The Countess rushed at the first glance towards them. The group opened at the approach of the maniac, as they almost thought her, and disclosed to her view, extended by the brink of Avernus, tne dying AveUino. All mortal aid was useless. The expiring Count seemed to recognize his wife; a faint smile was the recognition, but whether it was that of forgiveness, or of hate, lay buried with him. It was the arm of Spottiswood that dealt the blow.



I will not detain my readers with a tedious epilogue,—Matilda outlived this fatal scene; her lovely countenance, on which, as becomes it, is imprinted a settled melancholy, is at times to be seen in London circles—Her fate a striking, and, it is to be hoped, not a useless example to the British fair, who learn, in their enthusiasm for foreign climes and habits, to .contemn the domestic virtues of their country, —who mistake the mere charms of novelty for sources of lasting happiness, and who blush not to forfeit the name of English women, in yielding up their hearts and hands to the fickle keeping of a stranger.

THE END OF J/AMOKOSO.



IL POLITICO.





IL POLITICO,

CHAPTER I.

The exact year it would be too precise to mark, but it was certainly between those of eighteen hundred and fifteen, and twenty-five, that Lord Tara turned the shafts of his caleche towards Italy. Although an Englishman by birth, feeling, education, and even by property, he was nevertheless an Irish peer, and in consequence was not distracted by any duties in the Upper House, from pursuing his plans of amusement and travel. Lord Tara, however, like many of his rank, was not the less a politician for being deprived of political occupation i educated at our scientific university, he had! sufficiently imbibed from his classic studies theprinciples of Whiggism, and these he professed in his very nonage so zealously and loudly, that a noble relation urged him, the moment that his years permitted, to try his powers as a speaker in the House of Commons. Here he spoke, for diffidence was not his foible, and fluently too,, but whether it was that the views of the young statesman were not mature, or that his arguments were not new, his harangues after a- little time were greeted with coughs, whispers, and other signs of inattention, most dispiriting toyoung ambition, and furthermore, in despite of" his lordship's hints to the gentlemen reporters in the gallery to " give him at full length," hebegan to find his political lucubrations of the preceding evening woefully shrunk up. in thecolumns of the morning- papers. Hence arosedisgust in the mind of the young orator. During the rural festivities of the next recess,. Lord Tara hinted to his uoble relative his in*. tention of resigning. He was coldly pressed in return to try another session, but so coldly, that he persisted in his determination, and was soon announced as having accepted the Chiltern Hundreds.





Thii trick of fortune, for according to Ixxrd Tara it was nothing else, had an effect contrary to that which any one would have expected. Far from rendering him disgusted with .politics, or dead to public affairs, the disappointment seemed rather to have increased the interest he took therein, but the ill success which he had met with in the House, turned him utterly both against it and its leading parties. Hence his lordship's declamation, in clubs and at dinners not discontinued—for to give up that, he would not have accepted the Chiltern Thousands, as an Irish member once observed—assumed a deeper party tone—he talked of much needed reformation in that House, that impudently called itself a representative one—rotten boroughs and corruption were as familiar to bis mouth, as to that of Mr. Orator Hunt, before that statesman abandoned politics for roasted corn and shoe blacking—annual parliaments and universal suffrage even were at times his theme. In short, his lordship's politics, having been nipped in their natural budding by the cold, frost of the House's neglect, sprouted downwards in a radical direction with a vigour trebly reinforced by spleen.



In short, Lord Tara was of that class of men, in which " merry England" hath always abounded, namely, malcontents. Had he not stood in need of listeners, he would have been a misanthrope ; but that want stood him in the place of philanthropy, and bound him to his fellows. Mankind he loved, he averred—such love being the only excuse he had to offer for meddling eternally, not only with things that nowise affected him, but of which he really understood nothing. Were you to believe him, he was the very essence of philanthropy, devoted to the love and service of the human race, and all he complained of was, that in England there was no place for so general a benefactor—that his intentions were misconstrued, thwarted, or ill received. England he adored, but then the taxes were oppressive and intolerable—his lordship was a batcbelor, in the enjoyment of about six thousand pounds per annum. The constitution he revered, worshipped—but corruption and borough mongering had defiled it. He could not endure the sight—he could not sit in a bought parliament—he could not interest himself in the hopeless cause of true liberty in England ; and Lord Tara therefore resolved to emigrate, to withdraw his presence, eloquence, and expenditure from an ungrateful country, and to devote them to the service of some nation, that could appreciate them better.



Behold then his lordship a liberal, embarked for the Continent. He hies to Paris, delivers his credentials, talks as wicked jacobinism as his bad French will permit, and is straight admitted into the liberal coteries of the French capital. Here my Lord Tara has not improved his situation; for of his new companions all seemed inclined to talk, and none to listen, whilst even the mildest of the party fairly out-Herod him in furious declamation. What he has thought extravagant liberality before fades into insignificance now ; and the depths in jacobinism that he has never reached, extend beneath his view so far, as to convince him he is as yet but a neophite. In England he had often ventured in a few sure companies to put forth a little jocular deism; in France he found this to be considered as mere bigotry. At home, he did not scruple to uphold the right of resistance— abroad the right of each individual to avenge his own wrong or the state's by assassination, was a principle as familiarly admitted. Our Englishman was thus thrown completely into the back ground, a position, which however his due, he was by no means contented with. And there was moreover a circumstance, that disgusted him still more with his new associates, and led him to suspect the pure basis of their liberality. This was, that while they permitted him to declaim against kings and tetrarchs, they always contrived to win his money. Now Lord Tara was fond of listeners—but to pay an audience, and to go abroad for the purpose, seemed too hard a bargain ;—a good cook and claret had procured him as docile and respectable a selection of ears at home. France too, as Lord Tara observed, was use in the love and pursuit of liberty; she had made a desperate effort for it some thirty years ago, and, however unsuccessful it had proved, she still claimed credit for an attempt that she had never followed up or succeeded in, for being the most liberty-loving land upon the globe. This he felt now inclined and prepared to deny ; he was in an ill humour with the country, not more likely to appreciate his political talents than his own had been. France and England Lord Tara declared to be both alike worn-out, exhausted soils, incapable of suffering experiment, or being brought to perfection; and he turned his eyes around, for, in a political sense, a more virgin soil to reclaim and cultivate.





Italy seemed to offer the very aspect he sought, and to possess all the requisites necessary for becoming the object and theatre of Lord Tara's zeal. Thither then, as we observed, he turned the shafts of his caleche. For a short space his lordship tarried at Geneva, in predetermined admiration of that little, timorous, scientific, theoretic republic, but as he was skilled in neither botany, religion, education, or novel reading, he felt far from at home in the society of its over-informed, and over-civilized inhabitants. So that on he still pressed, scarcely allowing himself time to scribble a distich in the Chamounix Album, or to embark •with English scene-hunteresses on the Mer de Glace. He had determined to enter Italy by the Mont St. Bernard—that was the road taken by Napoleon—and Napoleon, be it known, was the present idol of Lord Tara. Why, Heaven knows—for the same reason it is to be supposed that all our sons of liberty took violent affection for the despot, covering their misplaced admiration by the pretext that he was the fils de la Revolution. Englishmen, however, are such universal grumblers, that they are sure to find fault with every thing present or existing— nothing short of death, physical or political, conciliates their favour towards a hero—and had half of the laudators of Napoleon been allowed to traverse his empire during his reign, and pen their tomes beneath the shadow of his sceptre, not a doubt but that he would have had his share of the spleen, so liberally flung by our Smelfungas and Smelfunguses on ruling powers, no matter how or where encountered.



It is necessary too, for an universal grumbler, to have, were it but for contrast, a spark of attachment and enthusiasm for some one object. And a person, a name is by far the most convenient thing for such grim anchorites to worship—abstract virtues, qualities, liberty, virtue and such like, are far too unsubstantial—and the crowd of political votaries, that never could be bound together in one cause and party by any reverence they could pay to liberty, are effectually linked by attachment to such a name as Napoleon's. In politics, as in religion, mankind are prone to image-worship—superior beings may adore the invisible deity, but the crowd, however pretended followers they may be of the most spiritual and exalted creed, must have well moulded and richly adorned wax and marble to kneel down before. 'Tis thus the political theorist cherishes the essence of liberty; the mob chooses itself a hero for a master, and on the merits of that choice thinks itself free.



Without wishing to sink Lord Tara altogether into one of this mob, we may state, that without suspecting that he swerved in the least from his liberal principles, the Irish peer had grown a declared Bonapartist. And his rhapsodies during his journey upon his new idol's superlative merits, as a road-maker, might have for eloquence formed a companion to those volumes of essays, styled Eloges, so popular in France. Indeed this is the general topic upon which British travellers, who are admirers of Napoleon, expatiate—too ignorant in general of the sciences either of the statesman or the soldier to appreciate his true merits, they make his fame depend, as that of Colley Grattan deservedly does, upon his Highways. They pass the Adda and Bormida, without once reverting to the heroism and warlike genius displayed upon the banks of these streams so celebrated in military annals; but the Simplon road never fails to call forth their tribute of admiration to the imperial engineer—" C'est une espece d^approbation bien Anglaise? observed a French traveller, who overheard some of these British .panegyricks on Napoleon—*' it is a very English sort of approbation this—those mad travellers never see a league distant from their route—in. the Emperor Napoleon they descry but a sublime road-maker—in France, they remark nothing so strange as our postillions and their boots—and they regularly form an estimate of the civilization of the countries through which they pass, from the manners of the inn-keeper and the waiters that attend them, whilst the beauty of the female population is as summarily gathered from the visages of chambermaids and passing peasants."





There is a great deal of truth in the Frenchman's account of the mode in which our travel* ling gentry glean amusement and information, and make those profound comments and reflections that are sent forth to enlighten the British nation, with respect to the state of foreign countries. We are the veriest roadsters that ever put hoof to travel—a discursion from the beaten track either of journeying or research, would demand too great a sacrifice of comfort and dignity, and, in short, is not to be expected from us.

Lord Tara, in obedience to this English trick, followed Napoleon's path across the Mont St. Bernard. At the Hospice he stopped a day, pestering the monks with questions about a man whom they now, even elevated as they were above the kings of the earth, dreaded' to speak of. He clambered to the spot where Napoleon had nearly broken his neck, and eyed it with more awe than he did the avalanche that toppled over his own head. His lordship partook of the brotherhood's nowise scanty fare, and having sufficiently breathed the free, exhilarating atmosphere of seven thousand feet of altitude, he descended to the enjoyment of the beautiful Val d'Aost, encreased by the novel conscious, ness of treading the Italian soil.



Lord Tara was no lover of rural beauty, as may be supposed from what we have already spoken of his pursuits and predilections; but here the scene was too powerful for his apathy. As he quitted the eternal snows of the Alpine summits, and marked in his descent the long gradation from all that is harsh and savage in nature, to all that is lovely and luxuriant. He could not but withdraw his thoughts a space from his favourite theme, to give them up to the enjoymeat of a scene and an hour, both unique on the globe and in his life. On the summit he trod the glacier and the imperishable snow—lower, the dun soil, refusing vegetation,



scorched and withered both by snow and frost

a furlong further down appeared a few ragged firs, the vanguard of vegetation, standing few and perished on its verge, where the barren realm began—and still receding from them, the forest • ranks appeared thick and healthy in height and • foliage, like the mass of a collected army. Rocks and torrents then skirted the way, and the herbage grew gigantic from each clift pf the mountain side, as if to make itself amends for being blighted upon the summit. Then too, the prospect of a whole kingdom began to extend, visible beneath ; at first a blue, indistinguishable waste, like a still, hazy ocean, till a near and more near approach, enabled the eye to mark out hill and valley, lake, river, forest, and all the • varied objects of an outstretched realm. At last the Alps themselves receded, and the plain was reached, rich with trailing vineyards and majestic trees, and the eye recurred with a new pleasure to admire in the ensemble the sublimities which, in the descent, it had one by one, and, as it were, face to face, enjoyed.



Such a scene as this, fallen upon in any country, and unconnected with a single heroic image or historic association, would fill with delight, even to overflowing, the most senseless beholder. But it was the bulwark of Italy that Lord Tara •scaled—this was her ancient soil, that he for the first time trod—and association was too strong for the simple enjoyment of natural beauty—to a man of real feeling, the excess of such pleasure would have been delirium. To Lord Tara it caused a sensation so unusually strong, as to amaze him. He attributed all to his treading the classic land of liberty ; and Scipio and Hannibal for the moment drove all thoughts of Napoleon, fairly from his head. .1



Could the carabiniers or police of his majesty, the king of the Sardinia*, have pryed into the ferment of ideas in his lordship's brain, they •would with justice have refused him entrance into the again regal territories of Piedmont; what is more singular, had they accurately searched his person and portejcuttle, they would have been as little inclined to allow him ingress. But suspicion was not then afloat: the old rulers of northern Italy, the Austrians and the race of Sardinian monarchs were quite ban hommiecal in comparison with the dragons they have since been. You might have then entered even Milan without having the fingers of a policeman thrust into your pockets; and an idle Briton might have wandered round the fortifications of Peschiara or Mantua, without exciting any dangerous suspicion. The name of a Lord Anglais, that stared them at the head of the Castlereagh jirman, was bowed to by the police, and mi lard passed with papers and communications about him, enough to have made him acquainted with the inside of an Hungarian prison in the year eighteen hundred and twenty-five.



What those papers were, with which Lord Tara had incautiously burdened himself, I cannot exactly say, but he was weak and vain enough to make himself a kind of agent or courier of a society of continental masons—an accommodating sect of brotherhood, that can be Orange in Ireland, and Jacobin abroad, under the pretence of professing the same fundamental principles. If Lord Tara's errand and despatches were deep and dangerous, and partly they were so, it was without his being thoroughly conscious of it; he being nothing more than a revolutionary amateur at most, whose place and fancy it was neither to peril his neck. But folks will encounter as many dangers for vanity sake, as for nobler purposes: and vanity, with an eager desire to dabble in the agitated water of continental politics, were at present the sole actuating motives of his lordship's conduct.





CHAPTER II.

As our traveller emerged from a break in the lesser Alps, and beheld the plain of Turin extend beneath and before him, bounded by enormous mountains, but level as a bowling-greenitself, he could not but admire the contrast, remarkably striking indeed throughout all Lombardy, of an extensive Alpine range, with a plain as extensive. This may not exactly be the case at Turin, where the level that joins the foot of Alp and Apennine is not as yet uninterrupted; but the contrast is more marked, because the mountains surround the plain. Throughout this plain, rich and verdant in summer, as it is eternally snow-covered in winter, winds the ample stream of the Po, and at Turin the king of rivers, according to classic authority the " Flwoiorum vex Eridanus," is spanned by a bridge worthy of it, for which it is indebted to Napoleon — a circumstance of which Lord Tara was not ignorant. As to the metropolis of Piedmont itself, it is nothing more than an overgrown chess-board, as square and regular in its lines and compartments as that well known little model can suggest. By a fantastic eye too, its buildings might be fancied the men of that famous game— its extensive range of palace might be king and queen— its cathedral and church spires, bishops — its castles will do — and knights are to be had ready mounted — and to carry our comparison, perhaps further than good taste will warrant, if all be true that stories tell concerning the Roi des Sardines and hia consort, check-mate is the universal issue of the game.



Lord Tara, however, was a beholder too solemn and sedate to have any such grotesque

VOL. I. M



idea suggested to him by the sight of Turin. On the contrary, he seriously admired the regularity and straightness of its streets, and could not help observing, what a noble space the grand piazza offered for a popular assembly, if the old mis-shapen fabric of a castle was taken away from the midst of it. As from the windows of the apartment that he had chosen, Lord Tara was enabled to behold this spacious square, he was sadly offended by observing that more than half the population were soldiers,—the monarch's mania was a military one, as is generally the case with petty potentates, and his only desire seemed to be to convert as many of his subjects (nobly formed men, by the bye, especially in the more northern part of Piedmont) into grenadiers, as his treasury could possibly afford to pay—nothing could equal the stuffed chests and bebeavered sconces of his guards—and so guarded was he, poor monarch, that he abdicated one day without a sword being unsheathed in his quarrel; a circumstance that has made his successor and brother put faith rather in his counsellors and allies, than in his own men of war.



The visit of Lord Tara to Turin, was previous, however, to the abdication of Victor Etnanuel, who still reigoed securely and not unamicably upon his throne; and at his court Lord Tara took care to be present, not from any love or respect that he bore to Italian monarchs, or to the Amadcus family, but knowing that the best possible place in continental kingdoms to find and become intimate with liberals and hidden revolutionists, is ever the sanctorium of the court itself. In this Lord Tara was of course right; independent of introduction, his lordship soon formed acquaintance with those leading men, who have since distinguished themselves upon that theatre, the young St. M., Santa R., &c. and even Carignan, that cunning and imbecile boy, spoke freely with him- on tlie liberty he wished to Piedmont.

In St. M**, he found a youth of fire, of much vanity, and of perhaps equal talent—in



»

Santa R. at once the most amiable, and most profound of philanthropists, too pure a spirit, however, for the Machiavelism of modern times, and more fit to wield the pen than the sceptre. With a truculent visage, worthy of the shoulders of Tiberius, the soul of Pliny animated Santa R.; and full of friendship and admiration for him, as well as indeed for the others of his party, Lord Tara himself could not help exclaiming, " Liberty ! if these be all thy supporters, thou standest in this age but a sorry chance." Much has been said and written against the black treachery and false-heartedness of Prince Carignan—but what was to be expected from a youth of seventeen—with the power of France on one side of him, and that of Austria on the other,—is it to be wondered that a stripling, blindly instigated to defy the power of both, should have faltered and fled from a position so perilous. No blame attaches to ihe irresolute boy, or little—the consequences of his defalcation must be attributed to the wise heads, who relied, for revolutionizing and giving liberty to their country, on the weak co-operation of a boy, instead of carving it at once with "red, right hands," grasping the end they sought, or at least not dishonouring the cause by survival.



But Lord Tara's knowledge of these personages is merely mentioned here en passant. It was but the winter of nineteen-twenty, and the seeds of revolution germinating in Naples had not yet given any signs of bursting forth. Folks talked largely at Turin, and at Naples, and throughout the Peninsula, as they do at this moment, whenever an opportunity is allowed, to vindicate themselves from seeming contented under a foreign yoke, and to shew, to the stranger especially, that if slaves, they are at any rate the

" Servi ognor frementi."

No government was ignorant of these wicked words, and no governor heeded them, glad perhaps, that discontent should so harmlessly evaporate through the safety valves of idle speech. The popular commotions, however, of 1821, and 1822, have deprived them of this security, and Italian society of all kinds has been since over-run and thinned by hosts of informers.



Lord Tara made stay at Turin long enough merely to take up the clues of those liberal and revolutionary understandings that pervaded the Peninsula. No particular occurrence befel him during his residence there, which lasted for a shorter period, from die Frenchified feelings, manners, and language, that universally prevailed. Lord Tara felt that Paris even w« preferable to a vulgar epitome of it; and bidding adieu to his friends, with the hope of soon meeting them in nobler and more eminent positions, the peer bent further on his course to Milan.

He could not repress an involuntary shudder as he crossed the Ticin into the dominions of Austria, and marked the dark ensign of her twonecked eagle. The Emperor Francis was then the bugbear of liberalism, as his brother Alexander, from having been its hero, has since become: the Lord of the Russias, having, in despite of his philanthropy, found out with Joseph the Second, que d'etre royaliste, c'est son metier. At that period, however, he was still considered the Timoleon, the Themistocles of his age, a despote malgri lu'i—a character that Madame de Stael had preached him into, and then preached him to Europe as. Prodigies of his liberality were recorded in Italy—even at Laybach he was confidently asserted to have interceded for Neapolitan liberty, and when Ferdinand, the father of reigning princes, went down on his knees to him, (as the popular report tells the story in its peculiar style), Alexander spurned the suppliant monarch, and bade him go home, and keep his sworn word with his people. These delusions have of course vanished long since, but perhaps similar stories, all as likely, are now related with the same confidence of Charles the Tenth. Francis of Austria was the ogre, whose tyranny was then contrasted with the liberality of Alexander; the iron-framed, square faces, and white uniforms of the German troops, inspired Lord Tara with horrors and misgivings. Hulans and Hungarians, Croats and Pandours, were associated in his mind with all the barbarisms of Turkish warfare, violence, and plunder; his thoughts ran upon the desperados of the old German wars, the black bands, those half freebooters, half soldiers—and not a sentinel did he pass without fancying himself beneath his guard, condemned to the cruel sufferings of a Trenck. Oppressed with all this train of horror that his fancy conjured up, Lord Tara approached Milan.





No eminence afforded him the same opportunity of beholding the capital of Lombardy, that he had enjoyed on approaching the chief city of Piedmont. Milan lies in the midst of the unbroken Lombard plain, with all the cities of her dependence concealed from her view by no intervening irregularity of ground, by nothing except the feebleness of man's vision; and a telescope of sufficient magnifying power would enable a beholder, from one of the steeples, to trace the course of the Po almost from Pavia to Ferrara. The Alps rise to the north; it is true, felt more inconveniently at Milan than they are seen ; but although their snow-topped peaks and masses are visible from the city, looked down upon from them, the imperial city would be distinguishable from the plain in which it lies.



As Lord Tara did not enter Milan by its Imperial side, and through the Corso Orientale, he was not so struck by the beauty of this famed capital of a romantic Duchy—romantic, I say, for its annals partake more of the wild and imaginative character of romance, than the matter-of-factedness of dull history. In its earliest days we find it the seat of imperial magnificence,and when, with the other cities of the classic peninsula, it emerges from the slavery and oblivion of the middle ages, we find it armed and vindicating its rights against the very trans-alpine emperors, of which it is now the strong hold and the seat of power. Under the Visconti we meet it again in splendour at least, if not enjoying liberty; and then the Sforzas, the rival claims of the French and Spanish monarchs, the rash gallantry of the Bourbons, and the wily policy of the House of Austria, are all associated, above all other spots, with Milan, as the fair object of their strifes and fluctuating conquests.



There is no city in Italy entered with such pleasurable feelings as Milan : a gloom must chill him that embarks for the Queen of the Adriatic, and every reality and recollection connected with Venice is sad. Rome approached, demands the sober mien and feelings of the pilgrim. Naples morally disgusts us, such is the degraded state of the population; and the Tuscans are too conceited, pragmatical and cunning to allow our natural predilection for " the city of the Arts" to take its due course. Turin, besides, is a French town, and Milan consequently may be considered as the first truly Italian city that travellers enter; and there rs much in these first feelings.



Lord Tara, however, thought otherwise: the present in his imaginative mind predominated over the past, nor could all the historic glories of Milan interest him, occupied as he was by the sight of the Imperial troops that thronged her streets and squares. And certainly to onC who did not like to be reminded at every hour, day and night, of the imperial majesty of the Austrian Caesars, Milan was a troublesome^ abode. If Lord Tara stirred out, the hated uniform appeared to his view in all its varieties of white dress and gray undress, the green Hulans, the crimson patttalooned Hungarians, and the drab jackets of the cannoniers. In equipages, too, the long-faced, square foreheaded, old followers of the Archduke's court, were not to be mistaken. The Italian was justled from his own streets, and in the din of the public piazza, his silver-toned language was



overwhelmed by the angry gutturals of his present masters.

If his Lordship to avoid these unpleasant sights and sounds, immured himself in his apartment, the sound of the " barbarian drum" and " ear-piercing fife," was sure to reach him. Such a life of noise and parade is that of the Austrian soldier, that a few thousand men converts an Italian town into the semblance of a camp. To revenge himself, Lord Tara began to ponder on the most practical mode of driving these said Austrians from Milan, much in the way that one of our ingenious bankrupts at home sits down, after having ruined himself, to devise expedients for paying off the national debt.





CHAPTER III.

• A Fortnight sufficed to make Lord Tara free of the confined aristocratical circle of Milanese society. He found them haughty, elevated high in self-opinion, and consequently in demeanour; for in a country inland and uncommercial, where the middling orders have no opportunity of forming an aristocracy of wealth to vie with that of blood, the line that distinguishes the lower orders of society is necessarily much more distinct than in other nations. The Lombard noblesse, are thus in general haughty, and wealthy in proportion, from peculiar circumstances relative to monopoly of cultivation, beyond the power of legislation to obviate or



remedy. But within the limits of this outward circle of hauteur, into which, both as a stranger and a man of rank, Lord Tara was enabled to step, he found that amiability, ease, and familiar manners, which the great always indulge in toward* their equals, but in Milan more so than elsewhere; as from the small number of noble families, bound together too by the oppressive and changing rule of foreign nations, such frequent inter-marriages have necessarily taken place, as to communicate to the whole society the air and manners of one noble and extensive family.

With this society Lord Tara became quite enchanted. There was in it none of those gradations of rank and importance, that distinguish the different tiers of the English aristocracy. In England the spirit of society, in despite of the innate liberty of the people, is essentially feudal; there few or none are equal—superiority or inferiority jis marked in every one's pretensions or behaviour ; and our Irish peer had frequently found himself treated in that land "of equality with an air of superciliousness and condescension, by a British grandee of a higher class, that distanced him quite into the commoner. In Italian society there was none of all this,—even if there were, my Lord Tara might speak unbonnetted to any Prince of continental sounding—but there was none. The line once drawn between the aristocracy and the class of roturiers—all on the farther side were brothers and equals. The Prince affected no state, and the Baron was put to no trouble or expense in the way of imitating or rivalling his mightier or his wealthier brother. The Italians have one great characteristic, they are not vain; and to this may be traced the greater part of the habits that distinguish them from their neighbours, from their north-western neighbours at least.



People wonder why Englishmen travel. Do they not consider the bounty held out to us solidly ana mora Iv to go abroad. The exchange is always in favour both of our purse and character—we gain by going abroad. Our income increases and our weight in society. Need we seek for reasons in addition to these, in our spleen engendering climate, and the flesh devouring habits of the land. Lord Tara felt himself in a land, a civilized, wealthy and renowned land, where he was the equal of the primates of the country. It was motive sufficient to establish him at Milan, even if his love of political discussion and project had not influenced his determination.



But every further inducement was held out to him to stay. For five and twenty vears Italy had been shut out from England, an interval to the present generation tantamount to an age; and when the dyke of separation was taken away, English habits and Englishmen, holding the higher level in civilization, inundated Italy. Twenty years had been a time long enough for them to have been imitating France—they wanted a new model, each in his several pursuits, and England, as of old, in the days of Alfieri, the fairy land of those good people, who sigh after constitutions and race-courses,



offered itself to their wishes ; an Anglomania raged throughout the peninsula, especially at Milan. The males dreamt of nothing but England ; the politician talked of our parliament and constitution ; the cavaliers of our steeds and jockies ; the dandy of our coats and tilburis. Whilst the females, to do them justice, remained constant to their old habits, and shewed no sort of inclination whatsoever to pro.pose to themselves English dames as models for their imitation. Lord Tara became consequently a sort of idol at Milan. He was looked up to as a politician, a profound one, since that he spoke upon the subject much and warmly; and this was balm to the wounds that his countrymen at home had inflicted upon his vanity and self-esteem. He became a man of reference at Milan, to decide on the cut of coats, constitutions and horses' tails; as on all these points British taste was declared by the good Lombards to be unquestionable and supreme. " Now, my dear Tara," would Count C. cry, the whole mob of Milan staring in amazement at the horse under him without a tail, the only one they had ever beheld in such a predicament, " what do you think of this mare ? Does not she look as if she were turned out of Tattersall's ?"



" I wish, my Lord Tara," quoth another Count, " that you would forward this sketch of a federative republic to London, and get my Lord L.'s opinion upon it. And pray get me, at the same time, the drawing of a steam boat; I should like of all things to establish one upon the Po; it would tend much to the enlightenment of this enslaved and benighted Lombardy."

Thus was Lord Tara the very Magnut Apollo of the noble Casino at Milan, laughed at certainly from time to time by his Italian friends, as often as they recovered a fit of good sense; but this being not very frequently the case, his reign, for it was a kind of one, proceeded smoothly and agreeably.

Domiciliated as Lord Tara was thus induced to be at Milan, it is not to be supposed, but that in the circle of his noble acquaintances he would •elect some one particular friend or family, as the object of his intimacy. Fall we ever so much amongst strangers, some few amongst them will come to be considered less strangeri than the rest. Friendship, like man, can adopt itself to circumstances; it can pitch a tent momentarily and be happy, where it is forbidden to tarry or to build. The mansion towards which, in Milan, Lord Tara turned most often and most willingly his steps, was the Cam Lecco, The Marchese Lecco himself was a man blessed with all the sources of happiness that providence can bestow—wealthy, even above the wealthy class of Lombard proprietors, married to the most beautiful of women, and amiable withal, and surrounded by the family that an Italian desires, a son and daughter. Of these anon.



The Marchese Lecco was old enough to remember the ancient established state of thing* in Europe, before revolutionary principles and feats had changed the face of the whole continent ; for even when the form of government was not overthrown, the rulers and laws not altered, the habitual thoughts of the people had been effectually swayed, and the moral revolution was general at the time, even although the polical was not. The Marquis had risen into youth whilst these principles were disseminating, whilst they were yet fashionable and entertained but by the better orders, before they had been com.municated to the people, and vulgarized by the communication. That the youth of that day should have been revolutionary and democratic is not to be wondered at; the attractive writer* and preachers, the talent and manners of the time leaned that way ; nor that the young Marquis, ardent, spirited, and vivacious, should be one of those Italians, who stretched the hand of fraternity to their trans-alpine friends. It is known how speedily those wishes were met by the victorious entry of Bonaparte into Milan, and subsequently fulfilled, at least in seeming, by the establishment of the Cisalpine republic.





Although so young, the Marquis Lecco became one of the members of this revolutionary government; the brief exercise of which functions, long enough to delight, but not long enough to satiate him, gave him a taste for rule, at least for political liberty, which never abandoned him altogether. He was one of those patriots, whom the Congress of Lyons struck with despair and disgust, and the act which conferred the sovereignty of Italy upon Napoleon, put an end to his admiration of the French and their chief.

Since that period, the Marquis had lived retired from public life, in the midst of his family, enjoying the dolce far niente of Italian life, that the rulers of Italy seem so anxious to secure and perpetuate to their subjects. The political aspirations of the Lombard noble, though not altogether extinct, yet slumbered without any signs of life, until the fall of the French Colossus in fourteen aroused him from his affected torpor. He was a member of that senate, which proposed to choose Eugene Beauharnois for their king, proclaiming at the same time a limitation of the regal prerogative, and a kind of constitutional government. Thwarted in this, both by the opposition of the lower orders and the apathy of Eugene himself, the Marchese regarded the Austrian Government with hatred, and was in turn watched by them with jealousy. The new power, however, being established, the Marquis relapsed again into retirement, and despairing to see in his generation, a scene opened for his political exertion, he devoted himself to the education of his son and daughter, especially the former, for whom he foresaw the probability of a career denied by fate to himself.



This education had for some time been the Marquis's solace and hobby ; forbidden to exercise his invention and try experiments upon the body politic, he was resolved to employ himself to the utmost upon what was in his power; and from his cradle, in consequence, the Marquis destined the young Count Luigi,his son, to be a prodigy. For the first year of the boy's childhood, the father determined on rearing his son after the precepts of Rousseau ; and, accordingly, young Luigi was taught a great many things, of which he might as well have been left in ignorance, being at the same time scrupulously kept ignorant of all those things which the world think it necessary that children should know. In a little time, however, the Italian parent discovered, as Lovell Edgeworth did in the course of a similar experiment, that he might as well domiciliate a young ape in the house with him, as rear up his child in the state of nature. And the Marquis was fairly compelled to forego his admiration for the Genevese philosopher, and adopt some other mode of education more consonant to common sense.



After this failure, the several plans he tried, the several systems he examined, would prove a vain task to enumerate, and Pestalozzi was last inflicted upon the youth. Never were greater efforts made to mar natural talent—in this case without success. Luigi persevered, in despite of pedagogue and system, in the spirit and the ignorance that became his years ; and he went through at Pavia all those pretty things that sentimental folks call education, such as doing rhetoric, philosophy, and humanities, completely to his own ease and ignorance, and at the same time to his father's exultation.



Count Luigi Lecco was a fine specimen of Lombard youth, uniting French spirit with Italian vehemence. Although he had gone through the course of his university, still it is not to be supposed that he had merged all the national feelings and pursuits of youth in classic and scientific studies, after the manner of Englishmen. On the contrary a very poor smattering of Latin, and no knowledge of any science whatever, unless rhetoric can be called such, loaded his noble understanding; which was turned, with the very laudable desire that continental youth entertain now-a-days, to know what is to become of them, to .politics, to theories of government, rights of -kings, character of ministers, and such things. An English boy without a beard would have been ashamed to speak or think of such matters; but abroad women and children are accustomed to assert a community of conversational rights— and if there be one topic more deep or more serious than the rest, they are sure to discuss it. Lord Tara was astonished at the young Count's .proficiency in general politics, of which he seemed to know as much, and to talk as freely as the Marquis. He was sanguine too, and warm, ^ind looked at the Englishman more, if possible, than did his sire, and for these reasons was often a more acceptable companion to his Lordship than even the Marquis Lecco himself.



It proves in genera] very painful to a gentleman, newly known to a family, and either sufficiently shrewd or esteeming himself so, and consequently bent on influencing all those whom he comes in contract with—it proves painful, I say, for him to have acquired this upper, this iiu

VOL. I. N



fluential hand over the males of the said family, and to be thus installed their dearest and best of friends, without at the same time having the slightest acquaintance of, in such a case, that most important personage, the Lady of the mansion. This for a considerable time was Lord Tara's situation, and often as his friend the Marquis mentioned his intention of introducing his Lordship to the Marchioness, so often the promised introduction did not take place. The Marchesa Lecco was either out, or not risen, or not visible, or engaged—and the disappointment each time seemed to the Marquis of such very little importance, that Lord Tara felt it impossible to seem anxious respecting it

Our Englishman was thus the dear, the intimate friend of half the Casa Lecco, and as ignorant of the other half as if he had never entered its portal. And in truth the palace was ample enough to allow of what passed in one compartment of it, being utterly unknown to the





denizens and visitors of the other; the Marchese found it so over-spacious, that he let more than one-half of it out in lodgings, without suffering a single blemish in his noble reputation by what we should call so mean and parsimonious an act. Even its long suites of empty and slippery apartments, Lord Tara seldom had occasion to tread; for, however hospitably inclined, it is not in the metropolis that the Lombard great folks exercise their hospitality. Magnificence and expenditure they reserve for their country residence. The lady is visited in her box at the Sealer, and the noble himself is to be seen for the most part at the Casino.

The Marchese Lecco was, however, somewhat of an exception to the habitual life of his compeers—he possessed a library, a good one, and sate whole mornings therein; not that I pretend to say, a library is rare at Milan. The Trivulzi collection might adorn the proudest imperial palace; it is a museum worth travelling tp visit, but study in truth is not the forte of southern nations. The Marquis, though he could no more have sate down to read a solid quarto, than to devour a huge sirloin, liked nevertheless the foreign literary cookery that serves up the intellectual food in petty dishes. Plans and proposals inundated his hotel, of a thousand improvements and ameliorations, too spirited, however, to hope for the sanction of a government, by which steam was dreaded as an English radical, and gas as a most flaming jacobin. Pamphlets on education, " high piled" from floor to ceiling, filled one side of the apartment to an extent that would have alarmed even Brougham—and Italian essays on political economy, so diluted, that Smith or Ricardo would melt, at the same rate, into as many Italian volumes as contain the novels of Bandello, lay mingled with the libretti of new operas, the last sonneteering effusion of Monti, and bilious-looking numbers of M. Acerbi's languid miscellany. Here my Lord Tara was wont at times to intrude upon the Marquis, perhaps when his brain had teemed upon the previous night with some new thought or project, that he was anxious to communicate. And here would he at times meet the young Count, who at that hour, however, was accustomed to attend the Marchesa's levee. Occupied one morning with the Marchese in this apartment, a beautiful young female entered with a letter for the Marchese. She appeared exquisitely formed, with features the most delicate and expressive, her charms redoubled to Lord Tara by being thus seen in secret; for the Asiatic custom of immuring women is that perhaps most favourable to beauty, which, like the pearl, looks far more precious in the casket, than when worn and displayed to open day.





This lovely bearer of the billet was clad in so homely a dress, stood so submissive before the Marchese, and at the same time so distant, not receiving from him in return the slightest attention, that Lord Tara could not but conclude her to be some better sort of menial, perhaps, attendant on the Marchioness. Never had he beheld such perfect beauty ; her person was of tall, light, northern symmetry, while her features were of southern cast and fire—a dark brow and eye, of •which, though not bent upon him, yet the Englishman might know the lustre. All that he beheld was the blushing cheek, conscious of supporting his gaze, and the long dark lashes radiant from the pensive lid. The fair messenger had evidently not expected to meet a stranger in the library of the Marquis, and the moment she received a verbal answer, she tripped in haste away, leaving his smitten Lordship in a stupor very unfavourable to the continuation of the discussion that the two politicians had been interrupted in.



He was about to ask who that lovely creature might be, when the voicf of the Marchese recalled him to the consideration of the subject; and as the Italian noble seemed neither himself interested in the fair apparition, nor to have perceived how much his companion had become so, the latter thought it better, as yet at least, to be political in private matters, and seek his information either elsewhere or from chance.





CHAPTER IV.

As Lord Tara was not given to jesting, we may suppose in what a clumsy way he endeavoured to extract from Count Luigi some information respecting the fair Jille de chambre of the Casa Lecco. The Count was most willing to afford him any information in his power on such a point, but he vowed that he knew of no young nor handsome female servant in the palace —all the domestics, with the exception of the Marchioness's own woman, who was neither young nor lovely, were males from cook to chamber-maid (man I should have said). And Lord Tara was upon the sea of conjecture, as tossed as ever, after his conversation with the Count.





In order to have further opportunities of satisfying his curiosity, Lord Tara pressed at last to be presented to the Marchesa Lecco. The Count accordingly took an opportunity of introducing his new English friend to his mother; and after a two month's intimacy in the palace, Lord Tara became known to its mistress. The Mar chioness was a woman of eminent beauty, and of mental attraction nowise inferior to her personal ones. She received his Lordship with cour tesy, but with none of the self-prostration with which Italian gentry sometimes think it necessary to worship foreign visitors. The male sex of Britain preserve national dignity, better than our ladies—the French or Italian female seems more possessed of the honourable confidence that inspires such demeanor, than does her lord in general, or the male sex of those countries. These may hate strangers often, be sullen or uncivil towards them; but this is rather betraying a want of that self-confidence, the possession of which they would wish to intimate.



From the first five minutes' conversation between the Marchesa and his Lordship, a shrewd witness would not have failed to conclude the Italian dame the superior being. While his Lordship was lost in admiration of her beauty, ease, and wit, she at a glance took the measure of his mind, and appreciated justly the man, whom her husband and son had so inconceivably been induced to worship. A good magnifier might have enabled Lord Tara to espy the shoulders of the fair Marchesa elevated into a shrug at this facile discovery on her part, but the politician was absorbed at the time in contemplating the benign smile with which she regarded him.

Yet it is surprising that Lord Tara did not shine, for the Marchioness did not discuss with him either on the respective climates or fashions of their countries; she entered upon politics at once, his peculiar theme, and seemed as much at home upon the subject as a British foreign secretary,—far more shrewd and rational, indeed, than either her husband or than any of the patriotic spirits that Lord Tara had met with since his visit to Italy. On several points, nevertheless, the mind of the Marchioness seemed to be made up to conclusions that appeared to be the effect of extreme prejudice, and the utterance of which would have been insulting in the presence of an Englishman, had not the ultra-liberality that his Lordship affected or professed, emboldened her to speak forth sentiments ever so outrageous against his country. Thus she entertained not a doubt that private murder and assassination were amongst the potent arms which the British ministry always wielded for their defence—she instanced late events; and all those dreadful accusations, so extremely ludicrous to English ears, were here uttered seriously and credited by a personage of rank, knowledge, and influence. There is no accounting for this, but from the natural propensity that the world has to link crime with success, and to give eredence to improbable and mysterious causes, in preference to the simple and the obvious ones, that are sufficient nevertheless to produce the most mighty results.





Lord Tara had time to express a polite protest against these opinions of the Marchioness, but not to convince her of their want of foundation, when the fair form, a glimpse of which had so troubled his Lordship's repose, glided through the apartment. In passing she spoke a few words to the Marchioness with a familiar tone, that induced his Lordship to rise, as he supposed her of the family, but the lady of the mansion motioned him to be still, and not to disturb himself on account of so insignificant a personage.

He felt rather annoyed at young Luigi for his past evasion in gratifying his curiosity, and for the obstinacy with which he had denied the existence of a fair and lovely attendant upon his mother. As soon as they were alone, Lord Tara taxed the Count with this duplicity, and appealed to him if the form and countenance that had intruded for an instant was not a domestic of the mansion, young and lovely.



" What! she who entered for an instant,.— do you allude to her ?"

" To no others

" Why, that is Beatrice, my sister," replied the Count.

" Your sister !" cried the amazed Lord Tara; " I never heard of her till this instant."

" Indeed,—what is there strange in that, I pray you?"

Lord Tara could put into words nothing that could be accounted strange; but strange, nevertheless, he did account it, that he should have been so long a friend of these good people, without having chanced to see one-half of tke family, and without the name of so important a. member of it, as the only daughter, having been once mentioned within his hearing. Lord Tara thought this exceedingly strange. Count Luigi Lecco thought it quite natural; and as the opinions of both were drawn from national ideas, more than any natural reason, they did wisely in not discussing or disputing the affair.



" Beatrice then,'' soliloquized Lord Tara, as soon as solitude permitted him, " is the name of my fair, no longer incognita, with whom I hoped to enjoy a pleasing episode in my more serious enterprises;—the daughter, it seems, of my very near and dear friend, but not more accessible to me on that account. What a strange mode of living en famillc! How veryunfavourable to a lover ! How is she ever to get a husband P''

Such were Lord Tara's queries, who at the time was not aware that Italian misses are not permitted to know aught about lovers, and that husbands are daily found for them, without being paraded, except indeed very sparingly, in marts, similar to those fashionable places of rendezvous where the British fair are disposed of.

Lord Tara's, however, was not a mind, in giving the history of which one would have much occasion to dwell upon the passionate or sentimental. " There are a great many people in the world," says La Bruyere, or some one of those apophthegm writers, who have shorn truth to the quick, " who could never have been in love, if they had never heard talk of it." And our peer was just the person to whom the remark might be applied. And those very men, who, according to the maxim, would never have fallen into the folly, were it not suggested to them, are most anxious and prone to it after having learned of its existence. There is not a lady of passing beauty—and what lady does not possess more—who reads this tale, that cannot adduce her example of a pest of this kind, a gentleman sadly in want of experiencing some sort of feeling for a lady, and making the most strenuous and laudable attempts thereat—smitten with a pretty face and a handsome figure—and, dying to be vain of its possession. Beyond such a passion as this, it was not in Lord Tara's nature or range of capabilities to feel for the fair. But " this length he was fully prepared





•

to p >," as his Lordship would have said in his old parliamentary jargon, in admiration of the beautiful Beatrice.

Beatrice Lecco, however, was as yet confined in the nursery-state of existence, not accessible to tlie eloquence of hia lordship; and the Marchioness, within whose empire she seemed to be exclusively, did not appear to be by any means so struck with the transcendant talents of Lord Tara, as had been the Marquis- and his son. A woman of sound sense, and aware how futile any attempt on the part of a few nobles to give freedom to their country against the power of Austria, she dreaded the influence which she perceived the Englishman had gained over her son and husband. She knew the Anglomania that raged through Milan, and much as she despised the Lombard " lords- of the creation'" for their new-fangled servility, she thought that a rage for docking the tails of coats and horses, if not more noble, to her far more wise at least than a



political imitation of England, in asserting by force of arms and insurrection the rights of the people. The Marchioness too, upon consideration, felt the wealth, the rank, the peace, the other blessings she enjoyed, and thought that to peril such certainties in an attempt to obtain liberty, or any such nominal end, was little short of madness. Her arguments to this effect had due weight with the Marquis; but she regretted to see her son borne away by his enthusiasm, and by the increasing liberality of his opinions, to bolder thoughts and more imprudent enterprises.

This extravagance on the part of the young Count, the Marchioness attributed mainly to Lord Tara, and with some little reason certainly, for his Lordship was continually inveighing against the tyranny of Austria, the thick-headed and beerswilling Germans, and the baseness of Jtalian and Lombards stooping, with all their glorious recollections, under the yoke of a transalpine despot. The Marchioness, while she not only felt but alallowed the justice of much of this spleen, yet combated it before her son, to preserve him from joining in any of the rash projects afloat. And as she could not well exile Lord Tara, either from Milan or from the Cara Lecco, she endeavoured,with all the powers of argument and ridicule, to counteract the effects of his continued eloquence.



For this purpose his Lordship was more admitted to the intimacy of the Marchioness, where although he felt himself often worsted, and ridiculed at times, still he was consoled by a glimpse,,, perhaps by the presence of Beatrice. The ruse most generally put in practice by the Marchesa was to lead Lord Tara to speak of England, English life, and English politics, when his. splenetic Lordship never failed to vituperate his country, at least its mode of government, its corruption, its purse-plethory, the venality of every possession and faculty that reigned, and the shadow of freedom, worse than none, affected to be preserved by the sold members and parties of both houses. During these and similar tirades, the Marchioness indulged his Lordship with the most marked attention, in hopes that this picture of free and constitutional government, drawn by the unprejudiced hand of a Briton, might impress upon her son an idea not altogether so magnificent and noble, as she knew he had been led to entertain of such.



Lord Tara, with all his gravity, did not perceive the inconsistency of abusing every specimen of constitutional government that existed, at the same moment that he was inciting hisItalian friends to risk their lives and fortunes in an attempt to reach a similar state of constitutionalism and corruption,—for he could scarcely hope for the absence of rotten boroughs in a country where the whole population of many considerable burghs, nay capitals, were, morally at least, rotten.

"Dear me," said the Marchesa, "it is exceedingly strange; we are all slaves in Italy, and happy, gay, and tranquil as our clime,—you, areall free-men in England ; and I never meet one of the nation who is not discontented."



" And that is what I envy and admire," said the young Count; " that proud disgust of life and all its pettiness, that independence even of contentment that marks the Briton."

" "Tis true," rejoined the Marchesa, humouring her son's enthusiasm, " there is something sublime in ill humour."

Beatrice stared at her mother, as ranch as to say, mamma, I have heard you hold a contrary opinion; but the Marchesa took no notice of her simple daughter.

As for Lord Tara, he was not sentimental; nor in truth had he mind enough to comprehend the romance of disgust and discontent; and he half suspected the Marchesa's gravity ; but the enthusiastic Luigi went on :

" Free as Britons are, they rest not content with the portion of liberty they possess. Turbulent, excited, alive to every despotic measure, the whole country takes the appearance of aa angry council, always convened, always vigilant, always in action. Even wealth and rank cannot -bribe the Englishman to sit down happy, and careless of what does not concern him. He is like a lion, grim even in repose, and dreaded by the very keepers that partially enchain him. We, on the contrary, loaded with grievance and oppression enough to drive us frantic, have the pusillanimity to be contented. Slaves indeed, the ognor Jrementi, with which the poet qualifies our servitude, is a living lie. We talk, to be sure,—we, the uppermost slaves, who feel the iron most; but the people have not one idea of independence, of freedom, more than the ciucci they drive!"



Lord Tara could not avoid crying " hear."

" Then the first step to be taken towards the amelioration of this unfortunate people is to make them seriously discontented and unhappy ?''

" Certainly," cried both politicians.

" You sometimes speak of the time, mother,

', *. •.,."•'> .V •',-!>'• ' ' '. ' ' '''



•when I shall be free; I hope it is not in this way I shall begin," observed Beatrice.

" In verita," replied the Marchesa, laughing, *' for damsels, as for nations, it is no unlikely commencement."

" But Luigi," continued the Marchesa, "after that you had made our happy rabble sufficiently unhappy, what would you do to ennoble them ?"

" Teach them their natural enemies; put arms in their hands."

" To drive away the innumerable armies of his Imperial Majesty."

" The very thing."

" Which, suppose effected. I mind not the loss of lives, the devastation of war, and all its horrors; those inconveniences must of course be submitted to for the sake of the end. But this end gained, and Austria beyond the Alps, what further is to be done with our discontented and free population ?"

<c Being free they will no doubt be contented."



*{ And what token will they have of their freedom ?"

" The liberty to elect representatives.'"

" On what principle ? scarcely one of them possesses a spot of ground.'"

" Without qualification each man shall have his vote."

" Which he shall give to whom ?"

" To whom he pleases."

" Now, Luigi, dare the peasant, without the least property or possession, dependent upon the great landlord for his daily bread, dare he bestow his vote elsewhere than upon his master ?"

" Scarcely in truth," acknowledged the Count.

" And will he be content with this sort of freedom ? Will he not clamour for a division of property in his noble discontent, cry Aristocrats a la lanterns; and instead of sitting down peaceably as you would have him, to servitude to a few nobles, after having by his arm thrown off his servitude to a mighty monarch, will he not grasp wholly at that of which you would impart but a portion to him, will he not throw off his obedience to you as well as to Austria, and demand with armed, and therefore undeniable request, to be allowed his little cabin and corn-field in the midst of your enormous and people-killing ricegrounds ?—What would you say to such noble discontent?"



Count Luigi, in the generosity of youth, was contented, he said, to sacrifice wealth and territorial monopoly to the freedom and comfort of the peasantry ; but he owned that neither the Marquis nor his liberal and noble friends would be likely to consent to any such sacrifice.

" Then you see, my Lord,'' said the Marchesa, addressing the Englishman, " what are the hopes of freedom and revolution in this country. Indeed I wish you would join your voice with mine, in dissuading Luigi from these dangerous thoughts. We are happy- Let us not peril present good for the rash and uncertain hope of ameliorating others.''



Lord Tara felt flattered by the appeal of the Marchesa, and avowed every disposition to use all the little influence that he possessed in recommending prudence and quiet to the Count. He was moreover, for the moment, somewhat won over by the arguments of the Marchioness.

" I would, my Lord,'' said she, in conclusion, " that you saw with your own eyes the truth of what I state. And if you honour us with your company in the approaching mlleggiatura, you •will be enabled yourself to judge of the Lombard noble and the Lombard peasant. In the city our lords affect the philanthropist,—suspend your judgment till you observe them in their proper domains.





CHAPTER V.

At the Villa Lecco, Lord Tara for the first time beheld, and was enabled to judge of the domestic state and happiness of his Italian friends. In town he had seen them always separate, and seemingly without union or domesticity, each confined to their own apartments, and bent upon their own pursuits; and in this state of existence he had been surprised to find the members of a family, so disjointed, living nevertheless in such harmony and happiness. In their country villa, Lord Tara was enabled to perceive the same feelings pervade their domestic circle, no longer separated each member from the other, as in town, but enjoy





ing together the comforts, if not of an English fireside, at least of Italian sunshine.

Notwithstanding the insinuations of the Marchioness, partly true, that the Marquis was a philanthrope in town, but an aristocrat in the country, still his exertion for the public good and that of the poor was not slackened when at his villa. To be sure, those exertions were not directed always in the wisest manner, and like all those fine and rapid plans of amelioration proposed and undertaken in the plenitude of power by nobles and by monarchs, they went to produce the dazzling effects of an advanced civilization, before any of the humble and intermediate steps were duly laid—they seemed to be chiselling out and erecting the capital before the column itself was established. Thus whilst the people were oppressed and starved in the most feudal servility, their benevolent friend and master was meditating the introduction of manufactories amongst them, of steam-boats and steam-engines, and would have them be able to weave their own coat and their own shirt, instead of enabling them to till their own little property —he hoped too, that the press, were it free, would instruct them as to the natural dignity of man, andj equality of all men; whereas, did he sacrifice as many fields as would bestow upon each tenant something peculiarly his own, far nobler ideas of man's independence and freedom would be planted in the breasts of the peasantry by the act, than were ever loosely disseminated by the uncertain and unsteady medium of the boasted press, and the vain scribblers that cater for it.



The Marchioness fulfilled her promise to Lord Tara of showing to him the state of the peasantry,, whom it was designed to liberate from the yoke of Austria, " as if," said the Marchioness, " it would be relief to the prisoner to remove from'over him his head-goaler, whilst the underling officers of the prison remained in the exercise of all their accustomed power and ferocity." Upon a sultry day the Marchioness led his Lordship,





not to the dangerous vicinity of the poor peasantry employed upon the rice-grounds and cheese meadows, for that would have ensured most certainly a tertian to the Englishman. But from some more elevated spot' she pointed out to his view in the plain below, the Lombard cultivators, immersed to their middle mostly in water, and the upper part of their persons in an atmosphere as damp almost as the marshy waters beneath. The pernicious exhalation was reeking upwards under the powerful influence of the sun, and surrounded by such poisoned atmosphere, and immersed as we have described, laboured those peasants who were to be emancipated, not from their death-like task, but from beholding the white uniform and black eagle of Austria amongst them, the only proof that could touch them of Imperial oppression.

" And how are men found for this task ?" asked Lord Tara. " Do they not die."

" About two thirds perish !w



" Surely no population could recruit itself in proportion to so enormous an annual loss."

" This pernicious labour does not last for any long time. And as it requires to be performed speedily, and of course by great numbers, the mountaineers from the Modenese and about Parma, usually descend to earn increased wages at the risk of encountering death and the tertian. Not more than one-third of the number ever return to their mountains.'"

" Good Heavens 1 why not banish altogether this pestiferous mode of agriculture. If liberty were productive of no other benefit, it ought to be desired on this account, if on no other, to abolish this annual immolation."

The Marchioness smiled—

" Liberty here," said she, " must mean an aristocracy more or less independent of any higher power. The country does not possess the materials for any more popular scheme of government. And think you that the noble proprietors will consent to be shorn of this enormous source of revenue, this pestiferous mode of agriculture, against which you so justly exclaim ?"



" What! is there no bourgeoisie in the towns, no middle and moderate proprietors of land in the country to form a third estate ?"

" None, I can assure you. What is a bourgeoisie unless it be rich. And how could it ever become so without commerce ? Some few individuals may have amassed sums in time of war by contracts and peculation, but these have purchased titles and become mock-nobles, incapable of forming a body in counteraction of the aristocracy. As to middling proprietors of land there are none. This cultivation demands millions, repays millions, and could not exist in subdivision."

" You must be prejudiced somewhat, Marchesa," said Lord Tara, " I cannot believe but that the Lombard noble would be willing to sacrifice his revenue to the freedom and amelioration of his country." . 4



The Marchesa again smiled, and said, " Will they do of themselves what they braved all the power of Napoleon in not doing. An edict of his was once sent forth to prohibit rice-grounds within two miles of the metropolis—mark—for two miles only the prohibition extended—a most necessary prohibition for the health of the city. Yet even that edict failed in effect, it was not, and would not be obeyed. What then can be hoped from a senate composed of those very proprietors who resisted ? Nay, I doubt not, but that the Marchese Lecco himself, all philanthropist that he is, could advance some very profound reasons for not making any innovation in this golden mode of producing a harvest* Kice swamps and tertians will have their liberal defenders, and we find the existence of slavery upheld in practice and theory by some of the most enlightened people of the globe. Is it rot the case, my good English friend ?"

Lord Tara could not rebut the insinuation, and although not altogether a convert to the laisser faire system of apathy, which the Marchioness wished to be adopted by her family, he could not but entertain some few doubts as to the complete disinterestedness and wisdom of Lombard philanthropy.



But however shaken the admiration of Lord Tara might be for the political character and sentiments of his Italian acquaintance, their goodness and amiability laid strong hold upon his friendship, even if the eyes of Beatrice were not winding a more potent chain around him. Since his visit to the Villa Lecco he had full opportunity of observing the domestic happiness of the family, and the contrasted character of the several members rendered his residence with them more delightful. The ever-lively and never altering gaiety and good humour of the Marquis, was a continual sunshine to the household, and this was a ban hommie in the seriousness of his political or rather philanthropic quixotism, that harmonized wonderfully well with his good humour. Even in his most patriotic moments, when most exalted with the idea of his country's freedom, there was a simplicity and a timidity about him and his views, that displayed the amiable mind, in which those qualities were inherent, as one utterly unfit for public, far less for revolutionary life. The Marchese sadly misunderstood his natural powers and bias in turning his views to the point he did; but in what can an Italian interest himself worthily, except in the fate of his unhappy country An English noble has some excuse in abandoning himself to pursuits distant from public life; his country breasts the wave with varying, but with no very adverse fate; he sees better and wiser brethren at the helm, and securely betakes himself to any occupation, or amusement. But to the enslaved Italian every trivial pleasure, contentment itself, is felt and considered as a reproach. And the unfortunate political state entailed upon the country is such, that every man of spirit must feel degraded, unless he hopes, exerts himself, and plots for the resuscitation of his country. Conspiracy, he urges, becomes a duty under such unnatural rule, and the necessity of it is bequeathed from faiher to son, to be renewed and re-attempted, as soon as forgetfulness of past vain endeavours has restored fresh vigour to the energies of the people.





The strong, judicious, prudent mind o' the Marchioness was well united and contrasted •with such a character as we have described the Marquis's to be. In her state she was not less amiable for the superiority of both intellect and information, and the cause which rendered both so shrewd and active, being evidently maternal anxiety for her son's future welfare, and fear for her husband's prudence, her opposition to liberality came from an higher source than mere apathy or a love of quiet; and even Lord Tara honoured her hostility to his adopted cause. By the side of these contrasted characters, stood, still more contrasted, the simple Beatrice, most fascinatingly ignorant of all earthly things, a beautiful cypher in the family,—whom to address or take the slightest notice of, would have been a breach of good manners on the part of a visitor, like Lord Tara, wholly unpardonable—and Count Luigi, whose impetuous and headlong spirit displayed itself in every trifle that he loved, hated, or discussed, in appearance a youth of as much general knowledge, as his sister was a damsel of general ignorance.



A happier family group Lord Tara had not beheld even in England : and he, at times, the furious partizan and politician, could not entertain thoughts, as he contemplated its happiness, of disturbing such tranquillity by urging those who enjoyed it, to embark in the dangerous schemes and machinations of rebellion. In the midst of his liberal tirades, a qualm would seize upon him, on reflecting that he might be instrumental in ruining the peace certainly, and perhaps the fortunes, of a noble house. With himself a solitary individual, entailing by his fate no disaster on others, and amusing himself by mingling in the dangerous game of continental revolution, the case was altogether different: but in the aged noble, a father and a husband, he saw to be imprudence, what in himself he considered at most but as hazardous policy. These misgivings were increased in Lord Tara by the expostulation of the Marchioness, and he at length began to side with her in the argumental skirmishes that frequently took place between Luigi's impetuous sentiments and his mother's dissuasions. To the Count he began to be less warm, less eloquent, less the apostle of liberty than he had been; and even with the Marquis his conversations were more seasoned with caution.



But as far as the Englishman's influence extended, and it had proved considerable, this reserve came too late. The spirit of young Luigi had been completely roused to a galling sense of his country's servitude by intimacy with Lord

Vol. i. P



Tara, and the Marchese himself startled from the tranquil apathy and amateur sort of philanthropy, into which he had lulled his ancient aspirations. As a foreigner, and especially as an Englishman, the opinions of his Lordship- were entitled to attention from Italian malcontents: but Lord Tara, as has been already hinted, was more than this simple character. In Paris he had been initiated deeply in the schemes that were forming for the re-regeneration of Europe; at Turin he had followed the thread of the important clue, and had arrived at Milan, a kind of secret plenipotentiary, armed with powers and information sufficient, he hoped, to shake the Emperor Francis on his throne. That he had been chosen to act such a part was evidently owing more to his being possessed of the sacred character of an Englishman, then so respected by foreign police, than of any eminent diplomatic powers they could suppose him to possess. And he in turn was influenced to accept that



dangerous office, more by natural restlessness, and an eagerness to meddle in conspiracy, than by any feeling of love for Italy and the freedom of mankind, that he might have harangued himself into the consciousness of possessing. ; This was the secret of Lord Tara's influence with the Marquis mid Count Lecco, whom, from their family wealth, importance, and known inclinations, his Lordship had singled out from his first arrival in Milan, as the most valuable proselytes that coujdi be gained ,o*eP. ta !the cause. t-TWeuJwSfc.^WI how fer in.a. general way he succeeded, by ex* eiting the Uberal enthusiasm of father and son, vainly- opposed by the Marchioness, and. as vainly by his own subsequent reserve. But even jthis reserve, with the qualms that occasioned it, was but temporary with his Lordship, who recollected that private good should always be sacrificed to that of the public; and it needed but a. little raillery upon his backwardness by the Count and Marquis to restore Lord Tara to all his wonted jacobinism of thought and language.



In the meantime public events did not fail to contribute their due portion of excitement to the few restless spirits, that the upper classes of Italy contain. The revolution of Spain was in progress, and exaggerated reports of its success found their way to Lombard ears, in despite of Austrian vigilance. In the south of the Peninsula, more connected with Spain from commerce and contiguity, as well as from ancient habits and dominion, the seeds of revolution conveyed from them germinated soonest; and secret tidings from the Neapolitan insurgents stirred up the northern Italians to follow and emulate the example afforded them by the southern.

Those who had of old witnessed the wonderful success of the great revolution of a neighbouring people, hoped that their day was come for performing similar feats; and with the exception of the stupendous downfall of Napoleon, which seemed more a suspension of the usual course of circumstances, than a natural consequence of them, the experience of all men seconded the hope, that the cause of the people would prevail against that of kings.

END OF VOL. I.

LONDON:
SHACKELL AND ARROWSMITH, JOHNSON'S-COURT, FLEET-STREET.
