DUDLEY. 



BY 



MISS O'KEEFFE, 



AUTHOR OF 



PATRIARCHAL TIMES, OR THE LAND OF OANMN ; 
ZENOBIA, QUEEN OF PALMYRA ; &c. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. III. 



LONDON: 

Printed by Strahan and Spottiswoode, Printers- Street ; 
FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, 

PATEBNOSTER-ROW. 

1819. 



V, 3 



TO THE PUBLIC. 



The many particular marks of appro- 
bation with which my two former Works, 
" Patriarchal Times" and " Zenobia," 
have been honoured, incline me to hope 
that they have in general been received 
with indulgence : — thus encouraged, I 
now present my third work, Dudley, as 
a candidate for public favour and pro- 
tection. 

Adelaide O'Keeffe. 



Chichester, Sussex. 
May, 1819. 



Digitized by tine Internet Archive 

in 2009 with funding from 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 



http://www.archive.org/details/dudley03okee 



CONTENTS 

OP 

THE FIRST VOLUME. 



PART I. 



LETTER PAGE 

I. The Rev. Henry Clonmore to the 

Countess of Alford 1 

II. The Countess of Alford to the 

Rev. Henry Clonmore 16 

III. Clonmore to Lady Alford 30 

IV. Lady Alford to Clonmore 50 

V. The Same to the Same 56 

VI. Sir Eliot Howard to Lady Alford 60 

VII. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 82 

VIII. Clonmore to Sir Eliot 98 

IX. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 106 

X. Lady Alford to Sir Eliot 126 

XL Sir Eliot to Clonmore 142 

XII. Clonmore to Sir Eliot 155 



VIU ' CONTENTS. 



PART 11. 

LEITER PAGE 

XIII. Clonmore to his Wife 166 

XIV. The Same, to the Same 184 

XV. The Same to the Same 203 

XVI. Lady Alforcl to Mrs. Grantley ... 216 

XVII. Mrs. Grantley to Lady Alford ... 236 

XVm. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 239 

XIX. Clonmore to Sir Eliot 249 

XX. Sir Eliot to Clonmore 261 



DUDLEY. 



PART THE FIFTH. 



LETTER XLI. 

Don Zulvago, H, C. /. Conde d* Almeida^ to Sir 
Eliot Hcmard, 

At Sea, off Madagascar. 

Under the idea, my friend Sir Eliot, 
that you received my last letter, inform- 
ing you of my future designs, I will not 
recapitulate a mention of them, but only 
briefly notice the various circumstances 
which have hitherto frustrated my inten- 
tions of visiting your island on my way 
to England. You recollect my singular 
rencontre with a Spaniard, on board the 
vessel in which I was sailing for Calcutta, 
and which meeting I detailed to you in 
my last letter : firmly depending on the 
assurances of this countryman of mine, 

VOL. III. B 



DUDLEY. 



that he had seen the object of my search, 
Mrs. Shelburne, not many months since 
at Kensington, near London ; I took 
advantage of our hailing a homeward- 
bound English vessel to go on board her, 
resolving to give up all thoughts of India^ 
and follow th^ present certain clue. 

My plans were, however, frustrated, 
and on the same day; our ship was 
captured by a French frigate, and at this 
moment I am a prisoner of war, and 
bound to Rochefort. Captivity at such a 
time being to me particularly inconve- 
nient, I have taken the necessary mea- 
sures to procure my liberation ; but as 
that period may be distant, I endeavour 
to occupy the passing day as agreeably 
as possible. Amongst other resources to 
beguile the hours, permit me to fulfil the 
promise given to you, and your friend the 
clergyman in England, (whose kind com- 
pliance with my wishes claim my best 
thanks,) by furnishing you with a slight 
and rapid sketch of the events of my 
early life, the consequences of which 
have left me the isolated being you hav^ 
witnessed. 



DUDLEY. o 

You must not, Sir Eliot, or Mr. Clon- 
more, for I address you both, judge of 
me by yourselves, or exclaim, during the 
perusal of the following pages, that such 
and such circumstances are incredible, 
and beyond the bounds of human nature ; 
that neither of you could have thus acted. 
To these objections, I have to remind 
you, that we sons of the South, more 
in particular those of Spain, aie of a 
more fiery temperament, than those of 
northern nations; that we are most capa- 
ble of sublimer virtues, and, perhaps, of 
deeper crimes. Generally speaking, you 
have your passions better regulated, your 
discrimination cooler, than we have our's. 
Joined to the high-spirited and chivalrous 
notions which have ever distinguished us 
Castilians above all others, I have to 
plead my own individual nature, which, 
even from childhood, was strongly tinc- 
tured with romance. 

The watchful vigilance and tender 
care of parents, or of judicious tutors, 
might have in time corrected this defect; 
but I was an orphan, and early my own 
master. Pride made me excel in every 
B Q 



4 DUDLEY, 

athletic and gentlemanly exercise, and 
these acquired, I turned my attention to 
literature. Had I studied our own Cer^ 
vantes more, and German authors less, 
my fate might have taken a different 
bias; but shunning those works which 
ridiculed my failing, and eagerly con- 
sulting such as flattered this pernicious 
taste, I became a wild and visionary en- 
thusiast. — Closeting myself with ro- 
mances instead of mixing in society, and 
setting up idols and objects of aversion 
in my mind, drawn from books instead 
of human life, when I was forced to ap- 
pear as a member of the community, I 
saw every thing around me through a 
false medium, and instead of waiting for 
the results of nature, anticipated those I 
had learned to expect from art. 

With these impressions, I decreed that 
my friend (when found) should regard 
none other in the world than myself 5 that 
we should be yoked like well matched 
steeds, and have but one common in- 
terest, one opinion, one taste, and one 
sole pursuit ; — and yet having this view 



DUDLEY, O 

ef friendship, I formed an intention of 
contracting an early marriage ! — My 
birth and connections were known, and 
my fortune was great ; add to which, I 
was heir to various relatives, whose 
possessions in Spain, in Portugal, and 
South America were very consider- 
able. At sixteen, I quitted my college 
and preceptors to join my regiment, 
then preparing, with our other forces, 
for the attack of Gibraltar. We were 
defeated j and on the definitive treaty 
of peace being signed the next year 
between Spain, Great Britain, France, 
and America, I travelled for some 
years, and then returned to Aranjuez 
to prosecute my studies, and to plunge 
deeper than ever into the errors of folly 
and enthusiasm. 

As I observed before, my knowledge 
of the world was drawn from books j and 
having spent the whole of my boyhood 
at college, among either youths of my 
own age, or in the company of tutors 
and other masters j and having in my 
travels, shunned rather than courted 
B 3 



D DUDIEY. 

society, I had never hitherto mingled id 
female company. I had no female rela- 
tive whatever, and was thus deprived of 
those advantages which result from an 
early association with children of the 
other sex. I had neither mother, aunt, 
sisters, or cousins ; and shut out, in con- 
sequence, from even the slightest ac- 
quaintance with feminine manners and 
tastes, my imagination became perverted 
by fiction, instead of being sobered by 
reality, and I was already nineteen before 
I had exchanged the most trivial com- 
pliment with any woman breathing. 
As I have since reflected, my domestic 

tutor, a priest of the order of , had 

his own views in preventing my accept- 
ing the invitations of many noble families 
who coveted my society. He extol- 
led to me the advantages of celibacy, 
and more than once reminded me of the 
poverty of his order : but to all his ar- 
guments I urged my abhorrence of a 
single life, and without disguise gave 
him to understand that I should wish my 
funds to be enjoyed, not by any monas- 



dudleV. 7 

lie order whatever, but by my own lawful 
posterity. 

But how or where was this future con- 
sort to be found, my friends ; for at the 
age of twenty-six, I had in my mind set 
up a standard of such perfect beauty and 
peculiar refinement, that it was very 
doubtful, whether such were in existence. 
I had, from my reading, imbibed the idea 
that a woman must be sought and wooed, 
and only won after a long and assiduous 
courtship on the side of the man : imme- 
terial to me, I argued with myself, what 
labour during my suit I go through, 
what repulses, what disdain, what reserve 
and silence I suffer, provided I succeed 
at last. The siege must be long and 
arduous, nor difficulties nor danger shall 
deter me ; neither must any sign of ca- 
pitulation appear on her side, until the 
time prescribed by me expires : — when 
I ask the love of a woman, it will be 
sufficient time to grant it me ; when I 
court her smiles, let her then, and not 
till then, smile upon me. Petrarch, in 
the course of years, only once touched 
the hand of Laura ; some other lover 
B 4 



S, DUDLEY. 

(equally absurd, I may at this day add) 
was contented to kiss the hem of his 
mistress's robe ; and the female on 
whom my choice falls, although she 
must love me with ardour, and only me, 
and for myself alone, (neither birth or 
w^ealth entering into her consideration,) 
must, to fix my love, with unparalleled 
wariness conceal her own : the virgin 
snow of modesty must cover the blush of 
affection j the averted look of indifference, 
shade the melting beam of tenderness j 
and the chilling voice of restraint, 
smother the thrilling accent of prefer- 
ence and love. 

And thus I continued arguing in my 
own mind : — yes, my future wife must 
in all things be the direct contrast to my- 
self. Low and feminine in stature, her 
complexion, unlike that of my charming 
countrywomen, dazzlingly white, (for im- 
material to me of what nation she is born ;) 
the roses shall blow on her cheeks and 
her lips ; her hair, soft and light, boast a 
natural wave and curl, and dark lashes, 
and long, shade the deep blue of her 
modest eyes. The limbs gracefully 



DUDLEY. y 

formed ; the hands and feet perfection ; 
the voice soft; the manners mild and 
gentle; the education sober and religious. 

Well, my friends, could you think it 
possible that this idol of my fancy were 
in existence? and yet it was. Such a 
being as I have described was Gabrielle, 
the only child of Gustavus Engelhardt, a 
native of Saxony, at that time a super- 
annuated Lieutenant of Dragoons in the 
pay of Spain, and for some years living at 
Aranjuez on a pension bestowed on him 
by the crown. 

This brave officer had served under 
my father, the late Conde d' Almeida, in 
the United States of America, and had 
been taken prisoner by the British forces 
and sent to England, where he married 
an English woman, who shortly after 
their removal to Dresden died, leaving 
him this daughter. He then committed 
the child to the care of a Miss Shelburne, 
her maternal aunt, residing near London, 
and entered again into the service of 
Spain ; but, becoming disabled, retired 
fronft active employment. He was at this 
period settled in a cottage on the banks 
B 5 



10 DUDLEY. 

of the Tagus, accompanied by his daugh- 
ter, and attended by a single domestic, 
an old woman, a native of Ireland, of the 
name of Desmond, who had with reluct- 
ance brought Gabrielle to Spain, on the 
summons of her father, and who was now 
equally unwilling to part with her. 

You, Sir Eliot, have seen the picture 
of Gabrielle ; believe me, the painter was 
no flatterer; you, Mr, Clonmore, have 
not seen the miniature to which I allude 5 
but if you can recall to recollection what 
Lady Alford was at sixteen, you may form 
some idea of the person of this object of 
my fondest attachment. The Countess, 
even at the period I first saw her, bore 
the strongest resemblance to Gabrielle, 
particularly when she was serious or suf- 
fering ; but when whim and gaiety were 
the geniuses of the moment, the likeness 
wholly disappeared. 



The early and trivial circumstances 
which attended the progress of my pas- 
sion, are unworthy of detail. But I be- 
seech you to bear in mind, that in siknt 



DUDLEY. 11 

dignity, in feminine reserve, and in cold 
restraint, this young girl realized my 
most sanguine wishes ; and, indeed, so 
much so, that I at last began to doubt 
whether I should be ever able to thaw a 
heart which seemed incapable of love. 
Guided, however, by certain infallible 
signs of sensibility, I resolved to perse- 
vere ; — which signs were derived from 
her conduct to her father : here affection 
was legitimate, therefore unconstrained. 
The tenderness with which she waited 
upon him ; her complacency at all times, 
and sprightliness when listening to the 
accounts of his warfare, (giving pleasure 
by proving that she received it ;) her 
caution and her prudent care of him in 
their walks, for he was much disabled, all 
gave me the certainty that she could love, 
that is, when the object was sanctioned 
either by nature, or became thus by the 
holy rites of marriage j and I agreed in 
my own mind to dispense with even the 
slightest token of partiality, until I 
should draw near the period when such 
would be my claim. 

B 6 



1^ DUDLEY. 

Thus passed many months ; Engelhardt 
the father receiving me when I came 
from college or off duty, (being one of 
the royal guard at the palace,) with a 
degree of interest and candour, that was 
peculiarly gratifying; and the daughter 
still with modesty and reserve. He, as 
you may conclude, talked over my fa- 
ther's battles and his own, in their 
American and Flemish campaigns ; to 
which I ever listened with patience ; 
whilst Gabrielle sat in a distant corner of 
the room, either knitting or spinning : 
but when, like Desdemona, she was called 
away to attend her family affairs jointly 
with her favourite old servant, my atten- 
tion certainly did wander, neither were 
my answers or my questions as applicable 
as usual. 

Frequently, on entering the cottage, I 
have found the old soldier settling himself 
to sleep in his high and ample elbow 
chair ; on such occasions I used to re- 
mark, that Gabrielle had ever recourse 
to her spinning, in preference to any 
other employment j the buzzing sound of 
the turning wheel seeming to lull him 
as effectually as would a waterfall ; whilst 



DUDLEY. 



13 



the arrangement of the flax, and the 
bustling motion attending the process 
itself, appeared to engross her whole 
attention. 

Fearful of waking him, I generally, at 
such times, took down a book, or opened 
a map, and waited patiently until he 
awoke. One morning, when thus engaged, 
I by chance looked up, casting a careless 
eye to the further end of the apartment, 
— and need I describe to you, married 
men, the sudden sensation I experienced, 
bordering almost on rapture, when I met 
the soft blue eyes of Gabrielle fixed on 
me, with an expression not to be misun- 
derstood. Any other man would imme- 
diately have acted as sense, as delicacy, 
as justice and humanity pointed out : I, 
on the contrary, adhering to the maxim 
I had laid down, though almost maddened 
with pleasure at this unequivocal proof 
of what I most wished, fixed my eyes 
upon her. with a sort of a vacant look, at 
the same time twisting my lips into a low 
whistle of the march I had just heard on 
the parade, whilst both my hands were 
employed in opening and unfolding a 
large atlas, which I then affected to ex- 



14 DUDLEY. 

amine. — I stole one more glance at the 
deeply-crimsoned face which hung upon 
her bosom, as her fingers now moved ra- 
pidly to and fro ; and Gustavus soon 
after awoke. 



Though no favourite of fortune, for 
this hardy veteran had nothing to subsist 
upon but his trifling pension, fand yet he 
was descended from one of the most il- 
lustrious families of Saxony,) such was 
the independent spirit of his nature, 
bordering on fierceness, that had I, or 
any other person in Spain (excepting the 
Royal Family, or Prince Godoy,) at- 
tempted to serve him in any shape what- 
ever, by increasing his income, by adding 
occasionally to his domestic comforts, or 
even by sending a tribute of friendship, 
in some elegant, or perhaps useless or- 
nament, it would have been at the risk 
of our lives, or of his ; for presents of 
every kind his poverty made him regard 
as insults. 

He received me, from the conscious- 
ness of his own birth, as his equal j and 



DUDLEY. 15 

whilst I was contented to walk in and 
out of his house, to take a cup of coffee, 
or to share in the fruits of his little gar- 
den, and amuse him by relating the 
passing events of the day, and improve 
myself by listening to those that happened 
before I was born, he was happy in re- 
ceiving me as a visitor ; but one step 
further on my side, (making him feel 
that I was rich, and he was poor,) would 
have shut his doors for ever against me. 
Such was the character of Gustavus En- 
gelhardt, the blunt, the honest, the brave 
and deserving soldier. 



During the first week of our acquaint- 
ance, having brought him, from the pa- 
lace gardens, a large nosegay of beautiful 
flowers, of which he was fond, he made 
some jesting remark on the elegance of 
the coarse earthenware cups of Segovia, 
into which Gabrielle distributed them to 
ornament the room ; when I, at that 
time not aware of the real character of 
the man, quitted the house, and returned 
in less than half an hour, followed by 



16 DUDLEY. 

two soldiers, carrying between them, in 
a wicker case, the most valuable porcelain 
vase that Aranjuez could produce, and 
which I could only obtain by outbidding 
the Prince of Asturias, for whom it was 
designed. 

Having directed the men to place it 
on the little table in the centre of the 
room, I looked at Gabrielle, pleased and 
conscious ; but was quickly recalled by 
the sound of Engelhardt's voice : turning 
to me, with stern gravity, he enquired, 
was that vase mine ? 

" It is now your's,** I replied. 

" And did I commission you to pro- 
cure it for me, Conde d' Almeida ? If I 
did, and thereby squandered five years, 
at least, of my pension, I deserve to visit 
the debtors' prison at Madrid.^' — On 
which I gave him to understand, that 
this vase was a small token of my friend- 
ship. 

Rising, with a firm and military air, he 
walked, or rather halted over to the 
table, and commanded the soldiers to take 
it away •, whilst I, smiling at his scruples, 

12 



DUDLEY. 17 

desired them to leave it. The dispute 
was soon decided. 

Although the two men had affected to 
stagger under the weight of the vase, 
Engelhardt deliberately grasped it in both 
his arms, and lifting it from the table, 
dashed it down upon the stone floor. It 
was shivered to pieces. He then resumed 
his seat 5 and having first ordered the 
men to clear his room of the rubbish, 
he put a segar in his mouth, and stirred 
the embers of the fire with his crutch. 

The next day I ventured to pay him 
my usual visit, when he received nie 
with his accustomed frankness and cor- 
diality. Encouraged by which return of 
kindness, I hazarded offering another 
present, and with great humility produced 
about a score of segars, which, being in 
reality a trifle, I considered as not likely 
to be refused. 

** If you persist, Don Isidore, in forcing 
them on me," he said, " I thrust them 
into the fire j*' — and he was as good as 
his word. 



18 DUDLEt. 

Seeing that I looked hart at this ac^ 
tion, and I really did feel more disap- 
pointed at this proof of blunt independ* 
ence than at the other, which had some- 
thing of the sublime in it, he softened both 
his voice and manner of address, when 
adding, " My good Carlos, when we 
once doubt of the impropriety of an 
action, we are not far from committing 
it. The first step is every thing. You 
know the terms on which I allow your 
visits here ; and must be aware, that it 
would be no small loss to me to be de- 
prived of your society. As the son of my 
old Colonel, you will be ever heartily 
welcome under my roof; but, respecting 
presents, be they a tobacco stopper, or 
a diamond sword, I utterly refuse all 
you, or any man, can offer ; and on your 
persisting, I still settle the dispute at 
once, by destroying the subject of it.*' 

From that hour 1 perfectly understood 
the man I had to deal with ; and the 
doubt came across me, whether he might 
not have an equal repugnance to give 
presents, as to receive them : in that 
case, thought I, what become of my 



Jt)UJ>LEY. W 

hopes of obtaining my beloved Gabrieile? 
Determined to sound him on that head, 
without committing myself, I, one day 
when we were alone together, mentioned 
a report I had heard, of a rich merchant 
of St. Domingo, or Hispaniola, of the 
name of Sobrino, having become a suitor 
to his daughter. He candidly acknow- 
ledged that such was the case; and 
added, " All I can do is to advise my 
child ; she herself must decide." Thus 
were my fears of his keeping her himself, 
by preventing her marrying, removed ; 
and I considered I had at least an equal 
chance with my rival of obtaining her, 
when I should decide on asking. 

Don Manuel de Sobrino was a widower, 
but without family, who, having great 
property in Spanish America, and the 
West India Islands, had lately purchased 
a territory near Madrid, the court of 
which had granted him letters of nobility. 
He had accidentally seen Gabrieile, as 
she was walking, and he riding, in the 
Calle de la Reyna ; and having discovered 
that her family were military, and noble, 
had offered her his hand. He had already 



^0 DUDLEY. 

been twice rejected j but he still perse- 
vered, and had been heard to declare^ 
by some of my brother officers, that he 
would never give over the pursuit imtil 
she were married. 

I had better opportunity than had En- 
gelhardt, of making enquiries into the 
character of this Sobrino, and soon 
learned that his first wife had died of a 
broken heart : that he was proud, harsh, 
and cruel, a domestic tyrant^ selfish and 
ostentatious. This report (except feeling 
regret at the turpitude of any fellow 
being) gave me little concern on Ga- 
brielle's account^ so sincerely did I regard 
her as my own future wife, conscious of 
my everlasting attachment to her ; and 
every day becoming more convinced that 
it was mutual. 

I therefore considered it as an unneces- 
sary exposure, my relating to either father 
or daughter the accounts I had heard re- 
lative to this man, which, had my in- 
tentions towards Gabrielle been other- 
wise, I should have thought it my duty 
to have done ; and, from that hour, I 
took a sort of malicious dehght in talk- 



DUDLEY. ^1 

ing of him in their presence. It was evi- 
dent that neither Gustavus nor his child 
had any knowledge of the evil reports 
in circulation respecting Sobrino, as his 
age seemed to be the only obstacle in 
Engelhardt's opinion to an union with 
Gabrielle. 

^* He is certainly much too old for my 
girl," remarked the veteran ; " but I am 
not young, and my pension dies with 
me. I wish, before I leave the world, 
to see her in the protection of an honest 
man." And as he spoke he turned to 
where she sat. Thus, from the position 
in which I was placed, I had a full view 
of father and daughter, without being 
seen ^ and I watched both with an 
emotion, of which, my good friends, 
you may, knowing my sentiments, per- 
haps, form some idea. Gabrielle blushed 
deeply, and the spinning-wheel certainly 
took a retrograde movement; whilst, in 
the face of Gustavus, might be read the 
fondest affection, mingled with fear and 
pity. On his appealing to her, whether 
she did not think the noble merchant ra- 
ther too much advanced in years, she 



^% DUDLEY. 

appeared to make a violent exertion to 
summon all her fortitude, and, with ap- 
parent composure, answered, 

« My father, I have already and re- 
peatedly told you, your wishes shall be 
mine : tell me to see Don Sobrino no 
more, and I obey \ assure me that it is 
your desire I should marry him to- 
morrow, and I consent.** 

These words, as I observed before, 
w^re spoken with calmness, and her 
looks were equally serene ; when, at the 
same instant, the door of the cottage, 
after a gentle tap, opened, and a person 
came in. — Gabrielle uttered a faint cry, 
a deadly paleness came over her counte- 
nance, she started from her chair, and 
rushed into a little, vestibule, which, 
concealed from the parlour, opened into 
the garden. 

I hastily followed, and unobserved, 
Gustavus being occupied in receiving 
Don Sobrino, for it was himself. One 
glance at his mean and diminutive 
statute, his coarse and shaggy head, his 
dark and ill-boding countenance, was suf- 
ficient, and I hastily averted my sight. 



DUDLEY. S3 

What followed w-s quick and transient 
as the flash of lightning. Gabrielle 
fancied he was pursuing her ; and with 
the most undissembled tokens of aversion^ 
and, indeed, horror, suddenly turned, 
and, with averted face, held out her 
arms, as if to repulse him, when she 
saw me ! This is one of the few mo- 
ments wherein an angel from heaven lets 
fall a drop of balm into the cup of life ! 

For the first time I touched her, I 
received her in my arms, I pressed 
her fondly to my bosom, whispering, 
<* My own, beloved Gabrielle ! — mine, 
only mine.'' I saw her tears ^ I felt her 
involuntary pressure ; I heard her sobs ; 
and the murmur of my name, <* Isidore ! 
Carlos ! Dear, dear Carlos !" At the 
same instant she recovered herself, tore 
from my grasp, and disappeared at a 
small door, which led to their apartments 
above. 



Would you not imagine, my friends, 
that after such a disclosure on her part, 
(however involuntarily,) aware as you 



24 DUDLEY. 

are of fny own sentiments towards her, 
that nothing but death, on one part or 
the other, could prevent an union taking 
place, especially if we notice the regard 
in which I was held by the father ? And 
yet, can you credit this proof of the fatal 
tendency of my pernicious course of 
reading } — on my return to my quarters 
in the palace, I ruminated, alone, on the 
preceding circumstances, land settled in 
my own mind, that as jealousy was the 
strongest proof of love, it was absolutely 
necessary, before I should come to an 
explanation with either my beloved or 
her father, to appear jealous of my rival, 
and thereby extort on her part some 
purposed token of tenderness, which, 
hitherto, I had receiyed only froni acci- 
dent. Here, you will say, are sentiments 
and wishes diametrically opposite to what 
I had early professed. True ; but such 
is the incongruity of the human mind, 
when swayed wholly by passion and pre- 
judice. 



Determiped, by studied reserve and 
indifference on my side, to produce on 



DUDLEY. So 

her's surprise and mortification, which 
was to end in a full explanation on both 
sides, of a long and secret attachment, 
when Gustavus was to be applied to by 
me to sanction and bless our union, I 
went to his house the next day. I found 
him reading, and alone. On my enquiring 
for Gabrielle, he called her, and so 
sudden was her appearance, that it was 
evident she had only started from the 
room at my entrance. I saw the down- 
cast look, and conscious blush of con- 
fusion and timidity ; but, bent upon my 
own plans, after the first salutations of 
the day, I took no further notice of her j 
and, some time after, asked Gustavus, 
carelessly, had he made up his mind to 
receive the Domingo merchant for^ his 
son-in-law ? 

For the first time, I observed the ve- 
teran look embarrassed, and as if unable 
to meet my eye. He threv/ a log of 
wood on the fire, handled his crutch, 
settled his wooden leg, and then said, 
" Don Sobrino, I allow, is most perse- 
vering, Carlos j — indeed he will takis 
no denial." 

VOL. III. c 



^ DUDLEY. 

" And is it possible," I asked, " that 
you could sacrifice your daughter (Ga- 
brielle had again quitted the room,) to 
that man, who, compared to her, is aged, 
and most hideous?'' 

" It is not always," said Engelhardt, 
" the youngest and handsomest men 
who make the best husbands, my good 
Captain. Gabrielle, it is true, is only 
sixteen, and a pleasing girl 5 but she has 
no pretensions to choose : she must feel 
grateful when selected ; and as she has 
professed her determination not to go 
into a convent, I should feel happy to 
see her married, and thus saved from the 
miseries attending the situation of a 
single woman, young, beautiful, and un- 
protected, — for wealth alone is protection. 
I am old and infirm, I cannot look forward 
to many years. Here is the protection 
of a husb?ind, a home, and independence 
offered her ; she refuses all these, I al- 
low ; but no man ought to be kept in 
suspense, neither shall Sobrino : in three 
days she has, in my presence, solemnly 
promised to give him a final answer ; 
^nd, at my request, he has also engaged 



DUDLEY. 27 

to abide by that answer. He will, there- 
fore, at the end of that period, become 
her husband, or desist ever after from 
pursuing her." 

'' I think," I replied, " that Gabrielle 
should have come to no such terms with 
this man ; but unconditionally have re- 
jected him. Once known that he is 
finally dismissed, other suitors cannot 
fail offering themselves. — Gabrielle is 
still very young, and every day increases 
her beauty, and the admiration of all 
who see her. I have heard several offi- 
cers of my corps protest, that, had they 
the means of supporting a wife, no 
woman on earth should have the prefer- 
ence over your daughter." 

" Silence 1" said Gustavus, in a stern 
voice, and with a gloomy, sullen frown. 
Then looking at me full in the face, 
which he had not hitherto done, he con- 
tinued, ** Do you, Conde d' Almeida, 
think to amuse me, by relating the 
obliging offers of your corps? Is my 
daughter put up for sale in your mess- 
rpom, Don Isidore ?" 
c ^ 



S8 DUDLEY. 

I felt abashed; and secretly owned 
that my frivolous impertinence, and in- 
sincerity, richly merited the indignant 
warmth with which the honest soldier 
treated me. I endeavoured to apologise ; 
but he took his crutch, and in silence 
quitted the room. Little did I then 
imagine, that I had seen him for the last 
time! 

This was the signal for my departure, 
and I seemed to tread on air. " Now," 
thought I, " the day is my own. Ga- 
brielle loves me, and it is plain her father 
is in the secret : he waits for me to speak, 
and I speak to-morrow. To-morrow 
decides my fate. A long perspective of 
happiness opens upon me ; and, in three 
days, Gabrielle, instead of being wedded 
to age, ugliness, and tyranny, becomes 
the wife of her fond, her beloved, and 
loving Carlos !" 



Don Zulvago in continuation. 

Early the next day I went to Engel- 
hardt's, and, for the first time, found his 



DUDLEY. ^d 

seat hy the fire-side vacant. Neither was 
Gabrielle in the room. Supposing they 
were in the garden, I was proceeding 
thither, when accosted by Desmond, the 
old female attendant, who, in her broken 
Spanish, gave me to understand that her 
master had been taken ill in the night, 
and that his daughter was attending on 
him. Determined not to leave the house 
without seeing one or the other, I sent 
up a message to that purpose in my 
broken English, a few sentences of which 
I had learned from Gabrielle, who spok^ 
it with still more perfection than she did 
either German or Spanish. 

A few minutes after, the dear girl 
appeared, and, from her countenance, I 
judged her father's illness was not of an 
alarming nature, which, on enquiry, she 
confirmed, adding, it was rather languor 
than ailment, and that he was now 
asleep. Having answered all my questions, 
and decidedly rejected my offer of send- 
ing to the city for medical assistance, 
she was leaving me, when, luckily, a 
heavy shower of rain came down, ac- 
companied with thunder and lightning, 
c 3 



so DUDLEY. 

which, had I wanted any excuse to pm- 
long my stay, offered the most reasonable. 

** You can find amusement here until 
the rain is over, Don Isidore," said the 
blushing Gabrielle, pointing to the book- 
shelf; " and so good-by for to-day. 
My father, I do not imagine, will come 
down stairs until to-morrow.'' 

" By your own account, Gabrielle,'^ 
I replied, " your father is, at present, 
asleep. You can, therefore, spare 'me a 
few moments of your company, as I 
have something of importance to com- 
municate. The hand I had taken, and 
still held, now trembled in mine, on 
which I let it go, and sat down in a 
chair, near the little table in the centre 
of the room. She took up her knitting, 
and seemingly scarce conscious of what 
she was doing, placed herself opposite 
to me. Every thing on my part was 
done and said to make her raise her eyes 
to mine, but the attempt was vain. I 
played on the table with the knitting 
pins, pushed the hall of cotton with my 
foot to the farther end of the room, asked 
was her clock right, when, as it struck^ 



DUDLEY* 31 

I took out my watch to compare the 
hour ; remarked that the elbows of the 
large chair of her father required new 
covering, and took down the cage of her 
favourite bullfinch, and spoke to it, and 
fed it. 

Still, statue-like, she sat, and only 
replied to my remarks with a sort of 
conscious blushing smile, apparently un- 
able to meet my looks. Oh, with what 
passionate ardour I gazed upon her in 
silence, as she continued her work with 
the most perverse industry 1 contemplat- 
ing, at my leisure, the most beautiful 
and interesting object in creation, a 
lovely and innocent girl, her whole heart 
filled with the tender emotions of a Jirst 
passion, and a passion for myself! — 
** Yes, beloved Gabrielle,*' (such were 
my secret reflections at this moment,) 
" yes, thou dear one, my first love, the 
future blessing of my existence, my wife 
that will be soon, one word more on my 
part, and the barrier of restraint is 
broken down, and for ever, between us, 
and we shall then acknowledge that each 
is the owner of the other's heart!" 
c 4 



S^ DUDLEY. 

" Supposing/^ I continued, debating 
in my own mind, " I were to delay our 
mutual happiness yet longer, that I might 
gather the strongest proofs of attachment 
before I declare myself: or rather, 
ought J not to prove that her fortitude, 
and sense of female prudence, is yet 
stronger than inclination. What if I 
were to put her, for one moment, on the 
rack of doubt and suspense ; and, when 
human nature shall be able to bear no 
more, to throw off the mask of duplicity 
at once, and own myself her future 
husband,'' 

With these ^worthy intentions, my 
friends, formed at the instant, I fixed my 
eyes full upon her charming countenance, 
in which the softest, the purest sensibi- 
lity, was still predominant, and suddenly 
remarked, " Have you heard, Gabrielle, 
that our regiment is ordered to Trinidad?** 
(such was really the case.) Pale con- 
sternation spread itself over each lovely 
feature, which increased as I continued, 
" In a few days, it will be on its march 
to Lisbon for embarkation. Many of my 
brother officers, who, I imagine, have 



DUDLEY. 



33 



some powerful attractions in Spain, regret 
their departure. I, on the contrary, 
leave no one to regret mine. I have no 
one to mourn my absence, or to wish my 
stay." 

I stopped, on perceiving a faint tinge 
rush to her cheek, and her nether lip 
tremble. Oh, my friends, had she at 
that moment but raised her eyes to mine, 
conviction must have come to her heart, 
fof I felt that ail my soul was depictured 
in my countenance : she would then have 
read, regardless of my words, all that 
the fondest admiration and love could 
express ; and what unutterable misery 
we should both have been spared. But 
my unwarrantable conduct, my hypo- 
crisy, deserved its punishment, and I 
loas punished. With my own hand I 
held up the conductor, in defiance, and 
the thunderbolt fell upon me. 

" I suppose," I added, with a sup- 
pressed voice, (and had she not been so 
very young, so truly inexperienced, so 
artless, and diffident of her own attrac- 
tions, my voice alone might have led her 
to guess the truth,) — « I suppose, that 
q5 



34 



DUDLEY 



should I go with my regiment, on my 
return I shall find you the chief pride 
and treasure of this rich merchant, So- 
brino. He may, perhaps, remove with 
you to St. Domingo : in that case, we 
may chance to meet again in that quarter 
of the world." 

Could you. Sir Eliot, at that moment 
have seen my poor unfortunate victim, 
the only object on earth I loved, writh- 
ing beneath the torture I took delight in 
inflicting ! Here, indeed, I beheld be- 
fore me, realised, the very idol of my 
imagination, the extremes of passion and 
of feminine propriety, united, at one 
and the same moment, in youth and 
beauty ! Here was tenderness and dig- 
nity, love, and unbroken silence ! 

1 watched, and with a fond smile, the 
varying countenance, the quickly heaving, 
the panting bosom, the suppressed tears, 
that indescribable shrinking into herself, 
as wishing the earth to open and hide her 
from me 5 — I watched all this ; I un- 
derstood it all J and yet, barbarian as I 
was I I could continue my unmanly, my 
ungenerous artifice ! 



DUDLEY. 35 

i rose, and took out my watch, saying, 
** The vanguard are to be in march by 
four o'clock ; should I accompany them, 
I have a few preparations to make." 
(Here was equivocation ! For such would 
actually have been the case, had I enter- 
tained no prospect of success in my suit 
to Gabrielle.) '^ Well," I added, « I 
must now bid you farewell ; but whether 
we are, or are not, destined to meet 
again, my fair friend, rely upon it, you 
and your father have no sincerer well- 
wisher on earth than myself. — May lie be 
blessed with long life \ and you, my 
sweet Gabrielle, be happy. — Not one 
word to wish me a prosperous voyage ! 
Not one kind farewell to Isidore ! to 
Carlos !" 

I stretched out my hand to receive 
her's j she rose, extended it, and at the 
very instant in which I clasped that dear 
and precious hand in mine, and was on 
the point of drawing her towards me, of 
snatching her to my bosom with a full 
confession of love, she fell at my feet, 
apparently a lifeless corpse ! Thus at the 
very moment that I fancied she was be- 
c 6 



36 



DUDLEY, 



coming mine to all eternity, we were for 
ever separated ! 



In vain it was that I madly flung my- 
self on the ground beside her j that I 
lifted the cold and pale, the beautiful, 
the insensible figure on my knee ; that I 
pressed her in my arms^ kissed her white 
lips, and closed eyelids ; and in all the 
wildness of remorse and despair, called 
lier my wife, ray beloved, my fond and 
tender Gabrielle. No signs whatever of 
life appeared, and in a state little short 
of distraction, I summoned Desmond to 
her aid* The astonishment and grief of 
this woman may be imagined ; but with 
my unintelligible English and her Spa- 
nish, we neither could understand each 
other, until she pointed to the outward 
door, when I guessed she wished my de- 
parture, that she might have recourse to 
the proper methods of restoring her 
young mistress to sensibility. 



For upwards of an hour I walked to 
and fro on the banks of the Tagus, my 



DUDLEY. 37 

eyes perpetually turned towards tlie cot- 
tage, waiting until I judged I might be 
readmitted ; but never from that moment, 
until seventeen years after, did I cross 
that same threshold ! —^ On being denied 
entrance, and repeatedly, I returned 
home, and sent letters both to Engelhardt 
and Gabriel le, confessing my youthful 
error, and imploring their forgiveness, 
laying before both the true state of my 
affections for many months past, and in- 
treating to be considered as his future 
soli-in-law, adding, that unless Gabrielle 
were my wife, I should for ever renounce 
matrimony. 

All my letters, and they were many, 
were returned unopened : the truth was, 
they were considered as containing the 
mere forms of farewell, and enquiries 
after the health of both father and 
daughter ^ and as such, considering the 
apparent duplicity of my conduct, they 
were not thought worthy even of in- 
spection. 

Determined at all events to see one or 
other of the family, and that immediately, 
the next night I w^ent towards Engel- 



o8 DUDLEY. 

hardt's, my mind in a state of frenzy 
on recollecting that two of the three 
days were already elapsed, since my 
rival Sobrino had received the full pro- 
mise of both father and daughter, that 
within that time she should become his, 
or he for ever renounce his suit. — " To- 
morrow is the day !" I exclaimed, ** to- 
morrow 1 No, it is impossible, she never, 
never can wed him ; let her, if such be 
her will, reject me, and I have deserved 
my punishment ; but let me not think 
she can become the wife of that man." 

Doubt, jealousy, and despair, enflaming 
my brain, and nerving my arm, I was 
resolved, if still denied admittance, to 
enter the house by force, and compel 
them, at least, to give me a hearing. — 
Alas ! my dear friends, the tide of my 
good fortune and happiness was turned ; 
I had sported with opportunity, and it 
was gone for ever ! 

The night was dark ; I had long wan- 
dered in the palace gardens, plunging in 
its solitary groves, to prevent my being 
watched and followed by any of the 
<)fticers of my acquaintance j and about 



DUDLEY. S9 

two hours before midnight, I proceeded 
towards the humble cottage of my be- 
loved. As I have already mentioned, it 
was situated under a lofty grove of elms, 
within a few yards of the Tagus ; from 
which it Avas separated by a terrace and 
flower-garden, surrounded by a stone 
balustrade. 

In order to gain the back of the 
house, and thereby have a better chance 
of admission, as the door on that side 
I knew was often left open, and fre- 
quently, even during the night, I climbed 
this balustrade ; and whether from the 
dashing of the water from a small Je^ 
d'eau in the garden, it was slippery, 
or that my agitation rendered my foot- 
steps less firm than usual, I know not, 
but I lost my balance, and fell into the 
river ! 



A month after this circumstance, I 
found myself still confined to my apart- 
ments in the palace of Aranjuez, slowly 
recovering from the effects of fever and 
delirium. It appears, when falling into 
the water I had struck my head against 



4fO DUDLEV. 

the stone railing ; had most probably 
sunk, risen again, and floated with the 
stream ; for the next morning by day- 
break I was found by a muleteer, near 
the little island to the north of the 
palace. 

The physicians who attended me had, 
as you may imagine, discovered the true 
state of my mind; when, on my being able 
to hear it, they with caution and delicacy 
took upon themselves to make known to 
me the events that had taken place 
during my illness. I learned that 
Gabrielle was married, and to Sobrino, 
and on the very day specified ; and that 
they had quitted, together with Engel- 
hardt, the neighbourhood of Aranjuez, 
and were then at Madrid. 



Thus was this inestimable jewel placed 
in my hand, and thus most wickedly 
and wantonly had I flung it from me ! 
Had the punishment fallen on myself 
alone, 1 think I might have borne it, 
and with fortitude ; but my one error 
brought with it a train of most dreadful 



DUDLEY. il 

consequences : nay, to this very hour is 
my victim suffering from its effects. The 
remainder of my narrative shall be brief. 
After about three years spent by So- 
brino in the most profuse and boundless 
extravagance, endeavouring to outvie 
even royalty in splendour, and in which 
ambitious folly his wife was unable to 
restrain Jiim, his affairs became deranged, 
when he removed to Hamburgh, in order 
the better to carry on various specula- 
tions of great magnitude : these failing, 
the savage ferocity of his temper became 
ungovernable ; and too late did poor 
Engelhardt find, that from a false prin- 
ciple of honour in binding his daughter 
to accept or reject this man within a 
limited time, he had virtually sacrificed 
her to hatred and misery. The honest 
soldier had prevailed on himself, at the 
urgent and solemn entreaties of Gabrielle, 
to remain under one roof with her, and 
never to quit her whilst either lived. He 
saw what comfort and protection it was 
in his power still to bestow upon his 
ruined child, and from that time resolved 
that no provocation on the part of the 



42 DUDLEY* 

tyrannical husband, should induce hinl 
to break the promise he had given her. 

Shortly after their removal to Ham^ 
burgh, however, Gabrielle was deprived 
by death of this dearly beloved parent ; 
an infant daughter, born in Spain, was 
now her only consolation ; for the con- 
duct of Sobrino became such as rendered 
him the outcast of society : his patent of 
nobility was withdrawn, his mercantile 
speculations ended in total ruin, and a 
pistol completed the business. 



During these events, you will, my 
good friends, naturally wish to know 
what had become of me. On my recovery 
from a long and dangerous illness, (for 
the news of the marriage of Gabrielle 
produced a relapse,) I quitted Spain for 
Italy ; in which country, and in those 
of Swisserland, Hungary, Poland, and 
Russia, and in both the Cape de Verd 
and the Canary islands, I spent above 
four years ; but, as you will also imagine, 
I was still served by active and faithful 
agents, who constantly informed me of 
the proceedings of those so nearly con- 



t)UDLEV. 43 

Elected with my feelings. I attempted, 
more than once, by means of secret 
friends and correspondents, to uphold 
the sinking credit of Sobrino; but mines 
of wealth could not have saved him from 
ruin, his proceedings being those of a 
madman, rather than even a daring spe- 
culator : and, as I before observed, he 
perished by his own hand, leaving his 
widow, and her daughter Victorina, over- 
whelmed in debt and misery. 

I was at the court of Vienna at the 
time, and indeed in the palace, waiting 
in the anti-chamber to be introduced to 
the emperor and his family, when the 
express arrived from my Hamburgh 
friend, acquainting me of the death of 
Sobrino. 

I quitted the place the same instant ; 
and, after about twenty minutes prepara- 
tion, took charge of an express to the 
Archduke Charles, as the best safeguard 
in those times of republican warfare, 
and which also ensured the utmost pos- 
sible expedition ; and set out for that 
spot, which, as I supposed, contained 



44 DUDLEY. 

the object still dearest to me on earth. 
She had removed from Hamburgh the 
preceding v/cek, and was gone, with her 
child and Desmond, (the servant who 
had been with her from her own infancy,) 
to England. After the del xj necessary 
to procure passports, I followed, and 
traced her to London. Here I was un- 
fortunately deceived, by an account of 
her having accompanied this woman to 
her native country, Wexford, in Ireland, 
and I went thither. 

A fruitless search of many months 
succeeded, in which I was attended by 
an Englishman, as a guide, and also a 
teacher of your language, which, at that 
time, I spoke very imperfectly, and 
could not at all write. I found, it is 
true, that the female servant had been 
over to see her relations, but was not 
accompanied by her mistress, who, dur- 
ing her absence, had remained in the 
neighbourhood of Tunbridge Wells. On 
receiving this intelligence, I purposed 
instantly quitting Ireland ; but, in the 
interim, war having been declared be- 
tween iSpain and England, I was made 



DUDLEY. 45 

prisonej', and, by the Alien Act, sent 
out of the kingdom. 



Once more in my native country, I 
wrote to my agents to ascertain the re- 
sidence of Sobrino's widow, (I had caused 
all his debts to be discharged,) and to 
supply her with remittances, until I could 
venture a letter directly to herself, which 
it was impossible to do luitil I was assured 
of her abode. The course of correspond- 
ence is, as you well know, so very un- 
certain in time of war, that, though I 
sent duplicates of my letters, and by 
various channels, it was a considerable 
time before I received any answers^ and 
when they did arrive, they w^ere merely 
to inform me, that Mrs. Shelburiie, the 
maternal family name that Donna Sobrino 
had assumed during her residence in 
England, had gone to Hispaniola, in or- 
der to endeavour to recover some pro- 
perty of her late husband, and secure it 
to her child. 



46 



DUDLEY. 



A few days after, I sailed from Co- 
runna for the West Indies, and landed in 
safety at Port au Prince, when I found 
on enquiry, that Gabrielle had been 
there, that the daughter had been put 
in possession of the wrecks of its father's 
fortune, (not more than four or five 
hundred pounds sterling,) and that they 
had sailed in a neutral flag back to 
England. 

This was to me prohibited land, and I 
returned to Spain, having only now, in 
order to accomplish my wishes, to trust 
to faithful agency. Many months were 
passed by me in the most anxious state 
of suspence ; during which, if I must 
acknowledge thus far, the only moments 
of peace or happiness I enjoyed, were 
when diverting the noble and magnifi- 
cent stream of my wealth, into number- 
less little channels, where most wanted, 
to refresh the verdure, to irrigate the 
land, and to assist the orchard and the 
pasture. I sought, I found distress in 
every shape, and when administering 
Teliefi suffered no medium between my- 
self and the object relieved ; I employed 



DUDLEY. 47 

110 agent therefore, but for the time, 
associated myself with obscurity, in order 
to avoid imposition ; from which prac- 
tice, I obtained the name of the invisible 
benefactor. 



Two years were thus spent in wander- 
ing through my native land and Portu- 
gal, and on foot, and without a servant : 
my ears, I trust, ever open to the voice 
of complaint, as was my hand to comfort 
and defend. But, still, no object could 
ever find its way to my heart, in the way 
of love. That still cherished its first 
affection ; and incessantly did I behold 
that one form, under all its various and 
enchanting expressions. With me, the 
image of Gabrielle bore the appearance 
of eternal beauty. I could imagine no- 
change in her : I could not even allow 
for the alteration that years, and distress, 
must have made in her appearance. She 
offered herself perpetually to my imagin- 
ation, and ever blooming, gifted with 
immortal youth. 

At length I received the most minute 
accounts, from a friend I had trusted^ 



48 DUDLEY. 

and whom I had commissioned to watch 
over the safety of her and her child, and 
to promote my interests with the former ; 
and these accounts were such as caused 
me the most poignant distress. It ap- 
peared he had seen Donna Sobrino, and 
had followed strictly my directions. 
With every possible respect, and at- 
tention, he had offered her resources, 
and advised her immediate return to 
Spain ; but she had decisively rejected 
every tender made to her in my name, 
and persisted in remaining in the humble 
abode she had chosen, which, as she 
said, best suited her moderate finances. 
The few hundreds saved from Sobrino's 
West India property, were dedicated by 
her to the sole purpose of procuring 
masters to perfect her daughter in those 
talents which might enable her, here- 
after, to earn her own livelihood. 

You may imagine the grief these re- 
ports gave me; but I had no resource 
but patience. I still trusted that the 
perseverance of my friend, who was on 
the spot, and to whom I wrote as fre- 
quently as possible, might yet overcome 



DUDLEY. 49 

her scruples, and I again commenced a 
wanderer. 

I travelled through the States of Bar- 
bary and Algiers, and sent many re- 
deemed captives back to Europe. From 
thence I again visited Madeira, and the 
CanarieSj still accompanied by my Eng- 
lish travelling companion, with whom I 
studied your language ; and it was at this 
period I first became acquainted with 
your worthy countryman, Mr. Balfour. 
After a short stay there, understanding 
from my English agent, that all hope of 
removing Donna Sobrino's objections, 
either to return to Spain, or to suffer me 
to come to England to her, or even to 
receive a letter from me, w^ere at an end, 
I became regardless of my future welfare, 
and considered myself little better than 
a friendless outcast : still under the idea, 
however, that it was more agreeable, in 
the eye of Heaven, to endeavour to be- 
nefit my fellow-creatures, by suiTering 
them to participate in my wealth, than 
by either shutting myself up in a mo- 
nastery, or even building abbeys and con- 
vents. I spent the next three years in 

VOL. III. D 



50 DUDLEY. 

wandering through the world. I visited 
America and India, and trust in the 
bounteous Giver of all good, that I 
established a fair name on whatsoever 
spot I visited. 



I returned to TenerifFe in the year 
1802, at which period. Sir Eliot, you 
and I first met. I certainly could not 
fail of sympathising in your sorrows , 
yet, on comparison, I considered your's 
as light compared to my own. We had 
each lost the beloved of our souls, it was 
true ; but your's, I remarked, had been 
taken from you by the will of the Di- 
vine Creator ; your loss was irremedia-. 
ble ; your case was hopeless ; and was 
therefore capable of amelioration, (to use 
a paradox,) not to mention your superior 
blessing in having a child. I, on the 
contrary, had lost my treasure by my 
own guilty folly, and the object still 
lived: therefore, whilst it lived, I was 
enduring the torment of Tantalus, one 
day hoping, the next despairing of ever 
recovering it. You were in possession 



DUDLEY. 51 

of relatives ; I could not boast of onCe 
You were, still, aikther, a brother j 1 
was an isolated being, connected to ea»th 
by not one tie of affinity. 



On your complete recovery, I quitted 
Teneriffe ; and on the very day that the 
definitive treaty of peace was signed at 
Amiens, landed in England, determined 
that nothing now, whatever, should pre- 
vent my obtaining an interview with 
Gabrielle. Judge my consternation, and 
sorrow, when on applying to my secret 
friend concerning her, I heard that she 
had taken advantage of the peace to 
quit the country, (conceiving it possible 
that I should act as I had,) and that with 
such caution and secrecj'^, that no trace 
of her was to be found. 

I applied to the English police, to the 
Spanish ambassador, to various magi- 
strates, in order to endeavour to find her, 
but all v/as in vain. The only relief 
afforded me, was on visiting the humble 
place of her abode, in which she had 
passed her days in penury and sorrow, to 
D '2 



52 DUDLEY. 

receive from those of the neighbourhood 
testimonies of her most exemplary cha- 
ractere 

War was renewed, as you may remem- 
ber, the following May, when I was 
forced to preserve my liberty by quitting 
England. Unwilling to return to Spain, 
certain that Gabrielle would never choose 
that spot as possible to hide herself from 
me, I returned to Teneriffe, where I 
found you, happy in the society of Mrs. 
Grantley, and your charming little girl. 
I did not, as you may remember, stay 
long with you at that time, for, having 
received intelligence from Geneva, that 
led me to imagine Mrs. Shelburne had 
taken refuge in Switzerland, I repaired 
thither, but had the mortification of a 
disappointment, in pursuing from stage 
to stage a fugitive wife, and her tWQ 
female domestics. From thence 1 made 
my way to Genoa, designing there to 
take shipping for the Canaries; but when 
I came within sight of the coast of Portu- 
gal, and was a witness to the battle of 
Trafalgar, -^ that sight made me feel I 
was still a soldier — that the spark of pa- 



DUDLEY. 53 

Iriotism was not wholly quenched in my 
bosom ! I landed at Lisbon, proceeded 
to Madrid, assumed my title of Almeida, 
and obtained leave to raise a regiment on 
my estates in Old Castile. We fought 
at Maida, — you Englishmen know the 
event. 

In 1807 I quitted Spain, and went to 
Madeira j but, the December following, 
that island being put in possession of 
England, I once more returned to Te- 
'ioerifiig and Euphorbia, where I found 
your society augmented by the arrival of 
the amiable Mrs. Clonmore, and your 
|)romising Dudley. 



The short time I spent with you at 
that period, were so truly gratifyi^ng to 
my feelings, that I had designed to pass 
a much longer period with you ; when, 
on the very day of your sister Lady 
Alford's arrival, I received a letter from 
a friend at Lisbon, (another of my 
agents,) which stated, on the authority 
;<3f private intelligence from Bay onne, 
that Gabrielle had, with her daughter, 
D 8 



54 DUDLEY, 

taken up her residence, long sinc^, in 
that city, where they still lived, retired 
and respected. 

This intelligence appeared to me more 
certain than any I had hitherto received ; 
and, had my aiFection required any sti- 
mulus, the sight of Lady Alford would 
have thus acted on my heart ; — I can 
scarcely describe to you the contending 
emotions with which, unperceived, I 
watched that noble, that beautiful coun- 
tenance, so strongly resembling that ot' 
my lost Gabrielle. 

I quitted Euphorbia, and repaired to 
Bayonne. Here were spent, in the most 
incessant yet fruitless search, upwards 
of six weeks ; and, after repeated disap- 
pointments, I found my agent at Lisbon 
had been led astray by the description 
he had received of a young widow and 
her sister, who, it appears, had passed 
many years in England, and were now 
settled in their native city of Bayonne. 

I had not, however, come to Spain on 
a fruitless errand. At Bayonne, I, for 
the first time, saw Napoleon Buonaparte ! 
I again spoke to Charles, and Ferdinand, 



DUDLEY. 55 

the King and Prince of Spain, (and ih^y 
were prisoners!) I repaired to INew 
Castile. I reviewed my own regiment 
D' Almeida ; and I served in ii as Major, 
by my second name of Hernandez, hav- 
ing first consigned the command (by my 
sovereign's former permission) to my 
old friend, Caspar Costello. We fought 
in the streets of Madrid : we shared, 
with your Wellesley, the honours won at 
Vimiera : and we bled at Corunna ! 



Don Zulvago in continuation. 

Having slowly recovered from the 
effects of a wound received in th^ last 
battle, in which you lost your gallant 
Moore, I repaired to Madrid, where bu- 
siness of a public nature called me j, and 
this concluded, I resolved to indulge my 
feelings by one more visit to Aranjuez, 
after an absence of seventeen years. I 
called at the Palace, spoke to the old 
porters and gardeners, who, during the 
tumults of war, had remained at theii- 
posts, as stationary as the gates and trees 

D 4 



56 ^ DUDLEY, 

of which they had charge 5 and, towards 
evening, at the precise hour when I was 
in the habit of visiting the cottage of 
Engelhardt, I slowly and dejectedly 
went towards it. 

Every object I met with, and which I 
could identify as existing at the period I 
mention, awakened the fondest, the mc^t 
bitter recollections. I now lingered, as 
formerly, by the banks of the river, my 
watch in my hand, fearful of intruding 
too early upon the retirement of the 
father and the daughter ; and I took 
pleasure in keeping the same track, in 
gathering a branch off the same tree, and 
in watching, as I had frequently done, 
the herds of deer, and flocks of birds, 
which still enlivened the woods on the 
opposite banks of the river. 

At length I reached a thicket of orange 
trees, that formed a natural archway, 
and darting forward, I sought and found 
one particular tree, on which, with all 
the romantic fondness of youth, I had 
cut the name of «* Gabrielle," It still 
existed : it was enlarged by time 5 and, 
although defaced by moss and damp, that 



DUDLEY. •'57 

proof of my early attachment was still 
to be seen. I leant against this tree, 
clasping it with my arms, and the lapse 
of time, at the moment, was forgotten : 
it seemed as if a few days only had 
passed since I had cut these letters 5 and 
the days of my youth and love were at 
once restored to my mind, in the glowing 
colours of reality. 



'' Oh, Gabrielle! Gabrielle r I cried, 
without considering that I might be over- 
heard ; and, as my arm was still passed 
round the tree, and my face pressed 
against the trunk, I heard, near me, a 
murmur of voices. Ashamed of my 
weakness, I caught up my hat, which 
had fallen in my eagerness to reach this 
spot, and grasping my sword, I strode 
rapidly through the bushes, aiiecting to 
whistle as I walked along, and thus.soon 
regained the public path. 

1 now saw before me two females, in 

blHck, the one- tall, and of a commanding 

cjppearance, the other of a small and 

'low stature, whose delicate and femi- 

D d 



5B DtJDLEfo 

nine height was rendered still less ob- 
servable by an habitual stoop. I was 
behind them. They seemed to walk 
hastily ; and, more than once, the taller 
female turned her head as if observing 
me. She then seemed to stoop and 
speak to the other, who leaned upon her 
arm ; but who, I remarked, never once 
turned round to watch me, as did, in* 
cessantly, her companion. 

We were now within twenty yards of 
the well-remembered cottage of Engel- 
hardt. I saw it through the trees ; and, 
before I approached farther, climbed a 
high bank, and there stood, taking 
mournful pleasure in examining the ex- 
terior ; and great was my surprise, on 
perceiving that there was no discernible 
change in either the house or its premises. 
The former bore exactly the same ap- 
pearance it had worn seventeen years 
ago ; and here was still, and in the most 
perfect order, the geranium porch, lead- 
ing to the vestibule, the flower garden, 
the little terrace, and the stone balustri?de 
overhanging the river. 



DUDLEY. 59 

By my thus stopping to notice with 
attention these various objects of early 
endearment, and which filled my heart 
at once with tenderness and grief, the 
two females had distanced me ; and al- 
though, from the height on which I 
stood, I could perceive them through the 
branches of the trees, they could not see 
me J the taller still looked frequently 
round, and concluding, as I imagined, 
that I had turned back, they immediately 
struck out of the path they had hitherto 
kept, and went hastily towards the cot- 
tage ; the shorter entered it, whilst the 
other stood with her back to the door, as 
if securing the retreat of her friend. 

I saw, I watched these precautions, 
and the truth flashed at once upon me ! 
Impelled by boundless fury, (for, as the 
poet says, ** Love, indeed, is a species of 
warfare,'') I leaped from the spot whereon 
I had stood, rushed across the green- 
sward, and regardless of the sudden shriek 
of the tall female who stood centinel, 
darted past her, and into the well-known 
parlour — there, pale and in tears, sat 
Gabrielle ! 



60 DUDLEY. 



A few moments wece spent by both of 
us in total silence : she had scarcely time 
to disengage herself from my arms, and 
to motion me to a seat at a distance, 
when the younger female entered the 
room, alarmed and terrified at the vehe- 
mence of my conduct. I had thrown 
myself into the very identical large elbow 
chair, formerly belonging to the veteran 
Gustavus ; which when I comprehended, 
(and with a feeling of horror I sought 
in vain to conceal,) I started from it, 
and took the bench opposite, that 1 had 
so often occupied ; and thus situated, 
could almost imagine him seated before 
me : — my eyes were fixed an vacancy, 
and I seemed to be listening and speak- 
ing to a shadow. 

From this state of delirium, I was re- 
called by a soft and well-known voice, 
which addressing the younger person, 
said in Spanish, ** Why are you so much 
alarmed, my love ? sit down, and compose 
yourself: — this gentleman was formerly 
a — " She hesitated, — her lips could not 
pronounce the word JriencI^ and she 



DUDLEY* 01 

quickly added, " he was many years 
since acquainted with your grandfather, 
as I before told you, when we saw him 
in the orange wood, though I did not 
mention his name. It has for some 
years been my wish to avoid this meeting; 
but since it has taken place, be assured, 
my child, you have no cause for terror/' 

*' But why does he not speak ?" said 
the daughter, in the same language, fold- 
ing her arm round the waist of Mrs. 
Shelburne, as if the latter had need of 
protection, and not herself. ** Why does 
he look so horribly pale? and why does 
he mutter as he looks at us? Oh, my 
dear mother, leave the room, leave it, I 
conjure you, he is mad, I am certain 
he is mad ! — or, is he ill ? 

**^ I am neither,'' I replied, recovering 
myself; then fixing my eyes on Donna 
vSobrino, I said in a tone of voice sufli- 
ciently expressive, ** Gabrielle !" 

The daughter at this threw a pene- 
trating glance at me, and then hiding 
the face of her mother upon her own 
bosom, as if defending a helpless crea- 
' ture from the arm of power, or tlie threat 



6s DUDLEY. 

of insult, she exclaimed, " 'Tishe,*tk 
he himself! that man ! that monster !" 

** Hush, hush, my child/' said Donna 
Sohrino, disengaging herself from the 
grasp of her daughter, and calmly look- 
ing towards me, whom she perceived 
thrown into a state little short of mad- 
ness by these expressions, — " I have again 
to request, Victorina, that you will com- 
pose yourself; be silent, be attentive, 
and listen to what may pass between the 
Conde d' Almeida and me ; — it may 
prove a useful lesson to you, my love, and 
teach you to avoid the evils arising from 
over-credulity, to which the youthful 
female heart is most susceptible. I have 
already informed you of the progress 
and conclusion of my acquaintance with 
Don Isidore, the nobleman before you ; 
indeed it was necessary, in order, as you 
approached maturity, to account to you 
for my frequent change of abode, and 
the secrecy with which it has hitherto 
been conducted ; not to mention that it 
was my wisli you should profit by my 
bitter experience. Attend to what may 



DUDLEY. 63 

now pass, and the lesson will be com- 
plete." 

This calm and sensible reproof to her 
daughter, this judicious reference to the 
past, struck sorrow far deeper into my 
heart, than even tears or grief on h(^r 
part could have done. She was now in 
her thirty-third year; her person had 
suffered, and the expression of the 
countenance had become that of settled 
dejection ; yet the features were still 
lovely and perfect, the blue eyes still full 
of tenderness and innocence. But no 
tinge of colour now appeared in the 
cheek, nor smile upon the lip, nor anima- 
tion whatever in her actions ; all was 
slow, sad, and composed. Such was, 
however, still the delicacy of her shape, 
(although she had contracted a stoop in 
the shoulders, that took considerably 
irom even her height,) and such the 
transparent whiteness of her skin, through 
which the blue veins were seen ; that by 
the side of her daughter, who resembled 
her grandfather in stature, and her father 
in complexion and features, Gabrielle 
appeared to striking advantage : nnd had 



04 DUDLEY. 

I not understood they were mother and 
daughter, so much younger than her 
years did the former appear, and so con- 
siderably older the latter, that I should 
never have guessed their connection. 



Taking pity, as I imagined, on what it 
was evident were my internal sufferings, 
Donna Sobrino whispered her daughter, 
who went to a sideboard, and brought out 
a salver of refreshments : this she placed 
on the little table before me. I took a 
glass of iced water, and was then able to 
speak, which, from powerful and suffocat- 
ing emotion, I had hitherto been unable. 

Recalling to recollection the period 
when, seventeen years back, it was Ga- 
brielle herself who was accustomed, on 
my daily visit to the cottage, to perform 
tliese simple offices of hospitality, the 
change deeply wounded me ; and I 
looked round the room to mark what 
alterations might have taken place in it, 
but I saw none. Here was still the 
chair of Gustavus ; the old German 
clock J the bird-cage, in which was still 
1 1 



DUDLEY. t)5 

a biillfiach, though a young one ; and 
even the identical spinning-wheel, stand- 
ing in the same corner. To complete 
the scene, there lay on the small table a 
half knit stocking, the great atlas, which 
I had been accustomed to consult, and 
the earthen vases filled with flowers. 

It v/as apparent to me, that in whose- 
soever hands this tenement had fallen 
on Gabrielle's marriage, and subse- 
quent to that period, that she had, on 
recovering'it into her own hands, restored 
its exterior and interior to the very iden- 
tical appearance it wore during her 
father's life-time. Sentiment, thought 
I, must have had its share in this arrange- 
ment; ior it was evident to my expe- 
rienced eyes, that it had been done most 
scrupulously : there was nothing missing, 
neither any thing extraneous admitted. 
The daughter, indeed, was to me an eye- 
sore, and gladly would I have exchanged 
her presence for that of her grandfather, 
the worthy old lieutenant, — the noble 
Engelhardt. 



At last I spoke. " Gabrielle,'* I said, 



66 DUDLEY. 

•< if you will at length permit me to ex* 
plain myself, you will find by what a 
sferies of untoward accidents we were 
separated,*' 

** In the first place," she said, ** per- 
mit me, Don Isidore, to interrupt you, 
by reminding you that my name is 
Sobrino, or Shelburne, immaterial to me 
by which I am addressed ; but, to my 
regret, no one on earth at this day exists, 
not even Desmond, my faithlul servant, 
who is entitled to call me by the endear- 
ing and familiar name of Gabrielle/' 

I felt the rebuke; and my eyes, hitherto 
averted from her daughter, were now 
recalled, most painfully, to a tall and full 
formed female of severe and commanding 
aspect, sixteen years of age. I sighed, 
and turned with pleasure to the con- 
templation of a far more lovely object, 
though that object was her mother. Al- 
though I changed my mode of address 
to " Donna Sobrino," I could not mv 
looks or my voice : and commencing at 
our early acquaintance, when I first called 
upon Lieutenant Engelhardt, as an old 
companion in arms of my father, (un- 



DUDLEY. 67 

conscious at that time that he iiad so 
invaluable a treasure as was Gabriel le,) 
I Recapitulated the errors and disadvan- 
tages of my education, my friendless 
youth, my utter separation from female 
society, and the warp my mind had early 
received from pernicious and romantic 
books. 

This explanation seemed to cause in 
Gabrielle at once the most poweri'ui 
surprise, and the most profound emo- 
tion, as was evident, when with extreme 
difficulty she articulated these few words: 
** Then I was not deceived by rny 
own presumptuous credulity, Don Isi- 
dore ; you were at one time attached?" 

** At one time ! ever, ever. From the 
tirst day we met, here in this very room, 
to this present hour, I have neverceased to 
love one and the same object — yourself. 
You and your father,'^ I continued, rising 
in the heat of argument ; *' you it was 
who destroyed our mutual happiness by 
your own precipitancy." 

" Do not blame my father," she said, 
and the tears sprung to her eyes j but she 
would not su^er them to fall. " Spare 



68 DUDLEY. 

ray poor fathei^'s memory ; at least do 
justice there, and acknowledge that he 
acted in all things, in a manner that 
bouid promote our happiness, as far as 
was consistent with a man of honour. — 
^our present candid explanation, Conde 
Almeida, exacts one on my part ; and 
since I now find you were no deliberate 
seducer of the affections, (as, until now, 
I ever considered you,) but the unhappy 
dupe of your own false principles, which 
led you to exercise deceit where most 
dangerous, I will be equally candid with 
you. My father, you ought to own, con- 
ducted himself towards you as a poor and 
obscure, though noble and gallant man, 
was alone authorised to do towards a 
nobleman of the greatest present and 
future advantages. I simply ask this 
question, was it for him to offer me to 
you, or for you to ask me of him? The 
^rst is not to be mentioned, and the 
latter you did not attempt. He fulfilled 
his duty by us both 5 had you demanded, 
he would have granted; but he, like 
m^'self, would have suffered death, rather 
than transgress the bounds of delicacy 



DUDLEY. 69 

and honour.'* She paused, and per- 
ceiving I was disinclined or rather in- 
capable of speaking, she continued : — 
" Your superiority in wealth and station 
were to him nothing, to me, less than 
nothing : and now that we are eternally 
separated Nay, Senor, do not inter- 
rupt me, or force me to leave you, before 
I endeavour to clear up my past conduct, 
which, without such explanation, may 
seem the mere consequence of disap- 
pointment and mortification, perhaps 
of revenge. Let me confess, that had 
you not been the rich and powerful 
grandee, Zulvago Hernandez Isidore 
d' Almeida, but, with birth and connec- 
tions respectable, only the humble Carlos 
— in the ranks, with a private's pay, you 
would have been his choice and mine." 

My impatience here surmounting all 
restraint, I was relapsing into passion 
and reproaches, when Victorina, with 
a commanding look and voice, that, young 
as she was, at once checked me, en- 
treated that I would spare her mother's 
feelings, adding, that if I could not con- 
troul mine, it were better to take my 



70 DUDLEY. 

leave» and defer the conversation uutii 
the next day. 

Donna Sobrino here interrupted her, 
saying, " No, my dear, any farther com- 
munication after this day with Don 
Isidore, I design should be unnecessary ; 
we have now met accidentally, and we 
meet do more. But 1 must return,^' she 
continued calmly, " to the endeavour of 
clearing my father's memory from blame. 
My poor father read my heart, but was 
not equally successful in reading your's, 
Senor. Had you been younger, he might 
have succeeded in this attempt; but at 
the age of twenty-six, man learns to re- 
strain his feelings, and prevent their ex- 
posure to even an interested observer :— 
as I before remarked, he knew every 
emotion, Q^ery presumptuous hope of 
my breast ; and often when you have 
quitted us, has said, whilst I hid my con- 
fusion on his shoulder, (I had no mother, 
he was my all,) * Do not, do not, my 
child, I implore you, thus persist in 
indulging a partiality for this yoor-g 
man, until it can be ascertained that there 
is any on his part. Were he our eqoal, 



DUDLEY. 7 1 

as I wish for your sake and my own were 
the case, some chance might arise of his 
becoming my son-in-law; at present, I see 
none, and, as we may observe, he is too 
honourable to give hopes, which he has 
no intention of reahsing. Let me, there- 
fore, Gabrielle, let me, on some proper 
pretext, forbid him the house, or do you 
consent to return with me to Saxony, or 
to England, if you prefer that country.' 
The idea of removal was to me torture, 
— it was worse than death. No, no, I 
cried." Here again pausing, she turned to 
Victorina, saying, " be this a warning to 
you, my love ; had I suffered myself to be 
implicitly governed by my father, these 
evils might have been averted ; but with 
tender, yet fatal indulgence, he complied, 
when I intreated him, as he valued my 
future peace, not to prevent my seeing 
Car — '^ she stopped; — '' the name of 
Carlos is still too familiar in my memory/' 
And with slight confusion she looked 
from me, and upon the ground. " You 
might plead," she continued, "that you 
were kept in doabt as to my feelings to- 
wards ^'ouvsdfj for many months, I agree 



7^ DUDLEY. 

you were, but — '* and she pointed ex- 
pressively to the garden vestibule, " the 
short scene, as innocent as it was 
tender, that took place in that spot, must 
have completely opened your eyes as to 
the state of my affections, as my eyes 
then were to that of your's. With my 
father I had no secrets, and on my own- 
ing this circumstance, and the words that 
passed between us, he formed his own 
conclusions : it was, therefore, with but 
little comparative uneasiness that w^e, on 
the same day, came to the agreement 
with Don Sobrino, from whose importu- 
nity we could not otherwise be released : 
I thought we hazarded little, but my fate 
at that moment was sealed. 

*< You, Don Isidore, came the next day. 
You may remember the subject of your 
conversation with my father : you saw 
him no more. The follov/ing morning you 
renewed your visit, and as, from the agi- 
tation he had suffered during the night, 
chiefly on my account, my father had not 
risen, you enquired for me : he was 
asleep ; but as we had spoken of your 
conduct shortly before you came, he said, 



DUDLEY. 7^ 

* Should the Conde come, see him, Ga- 
brielle ; perhaps he will be less reserved 
with you, when alone, than with me ; 
perhaps a private interview with your- 
self is what he wishes.' And whilst 
speaking, never had I seen my father more 
pleased or happy from the hopes he .had 
formed, that all would end as we could 
wish. ' But remember,' he added, so- 
lemnly, * remember our mutual and 
sacred promise to Don Sobrino ; he has 
not hitherto been deceived j he knows the 
truth ; and if at the expiration of the 
limited time he should claim you, Ga- 
briel le, you become his wife.' My father 
s^lept — you came — I received you — 
you know the rest :" and she pointed to 
the floor where she had fallen in a deadly 
swoon at my feet. 

I here interrupted her, saying, ** And 
is this all the information you can give 
me of the past : this I knew before. I 
knew I was beloved, I knew I loved you, 
as my own soul T loved you : but you have 
not yet explained wherefore you concealed 
yourself from my search thus long. Why, 
let me ask, have you rejected every offer 

VOL, III. E 



74 DUDLEY. 

I have made you? why have you de- 
prived me of the opportunity of justify- 
ing myself? — You are aware of the mea- 
sures I have taken to find you ever since 
your widowhood , for from the time of 
your marriage, until that period, I 
shunned ^ou, as carefully as you have 
since shunned me. All reserve must now 
be laid aside ; all mystery and false de- 
licacy thrown by ; wherefore here, at 
this hour, in the presence of your daugh- 
ter, I offer you my hand ; my heart had 
been only your's from the first days of 
our acquaintance : unite, then, I implore 
you, your fate with mine ; let me as 
your husband, be the protector of your- 
self and child." 

She looked at me with steady and 
sedate composure, her manner denoting 
pity, and perhaps esteem, but no senti- 
ment of a more tender nature. 

" The time is past," she said ; " had 
you, when my father filled that chair, 
and we thus situated, held out that hand 
to me, as now, I should not have been 
the wretch I have been ! my father 
might be still living !" Her features be- 



DUDLEY. 75 

came convulsed — some horrible recol- 
lection seemed to come across her mind, 
when Victorina rose hastily to her assist- 
ance. For a few minutes the latter quitted 
the room, to fetch some powerful essence 
for the purpose, when Gabrielle con- 
tinued, (and leaning forward towards 
me,) in a low and hurried voice, which 
had something in it awful and terrific— 
** We must spare the memory of that 
child's deceased parent ; she herself does 
not know it ; but — but now learn — that 
my father, in defending me from — my 
husband did not intend it — the blow was 
accidental, but it was mortal : my poor 
father lingered long and kept the secret, 
even on his death -bed he kept it. He 
died in my arms. Spared, I thank God, 
the sight of that dreadful hour, when, 
plunged into the depths of poverty, the 
very beds we slept upon were seized by 
the merciless creditors; and Sobrino 
himself — a pistol-shot awoke me at mid- 
night, and on the truss of straw beside 
me, lay the bleeding body of a suicide 
husband ! Oh ! Carlos, Carlos, had you 
been mine, you would have sheltered my 

E 2 



76 DUDLEY. 

aged father from penury ; you would not 
have insulted, have ridiculed the in- 
firmities of the crippled soldier : with 
you we might have been blessed — but 
for you^ I might not have hurried myself 
into a marriage with that man. Thus, 
though it was in fact the hand of Sobrino 
that gave him the blow, you were vir* 
tually the murderer of my father." 



She concealed her face; Victorin a re- 
turned, and with proper assistance her 
mother was restored to calmness. As I 
thought it necessary, for Gabrielle's sake 
and my own, that the interview should 
here terminate, I rose ; observing, as if 
no possible objection could exist, " You 
will see me to-morrow:" and was leav- 
ing the room, when she detained me, 
saying calmly, though impressively — 
" Let us, Don Isidore, perfectly un- 
derstand each other : we have come to 
a mutual explanation ; and I hope 
now you fully comprehend that this is 
our last interview. You may remember 
the incident oi the porcelain vase ; be 
assured that my father's spirit, though 



DUDLEY. 77 

Softened into feminine feeling, survives 
in me, and I hope will extend to my 
daughter. This meeting, I most so- 
lemnly protest in the presence of that 
daughter, now of mature age and under- 
standing, to be our last. I from this day 
will neither see, speak, nor write to you, 
or receive any messages from agents or 
otherwise : poverty and I are now old 
friends, and we need not separate for 
the remainder of our lives ; at least 
you, Conde, shall never be the means 
of banishing her from me. And I 
now repeat my charge to my daughter, 
on my blessing never to hold any com- 
munication whatsoever with you, or to 
receive aid or support in any shape what- 
ever, from you or your's." After an- 
other pause she added, — *' Neither my 
father nor myself wished otherwise than 
good to you ; and with his last breath he 
blessed you, that peace of mind and happi- 
ness might be your's. You have also now 
my forgiveness, my kindest wishes ; and 
on my death-bed you shall be blessed o^ 
me." — She held out her hand, saying, 
<« Farewell," and the name o{ Carlos 

E 3 



78 DUDLEY. 

trembled on her lips : the presence of the 
daughter restrained me ; and without 
even touching the hand she extended, 
I added, as I hastily made towards the 
door, *• This night I pass on the ground 
under the windows yonder, and to-mor- 
row, after sun-rise, shall enter here, and 
see you." 

" Then to-morrow,'* she said, " my- 
self and daughter will seek the protec- 
tion of a convent." I stopped, and 
looked at her steadily, " Yes," she added, 
<* since this is your decree, Senor, be it 
so ; I did hope to pass the remnant of 
my life in this humble, yet most beloved 
abode ; but even from this asylum, after 
a two years' residence, you drive me in 
the very spirit of persecution. No place, 
I am now convinced, can save me from 
your intrusion, but the holy walls of a 
monastery j there alone, or in the grave, 
I can be assured of protection." 

She wept : I would have given worlds 
at that moment, that Victorina had re- 
tired ; whilst she remained in the room, I 
could only regard Gabrielle in the sacred 
light of a mother, and reverence was the 
predominant feeling ; add to which, as if 



DUDLEY. 79 

the united spirits of Engelhardt and 
Sobrino inspired the girl, her looks alone 
awed me, and when she spoke, I trem- 
bled. The mother was all softness and 
sensibility; the daughter, a compound of 
stern dignity and dispassionate wariness. 
My heart was full; I cast one look 
upon the weeping Gabrielle, and without 
noticing Victorina, took up my hat and 
sword, and quitted the house. 



The next day I wrote a full and im- 
partial account of all the above particu- 
lars of my early life, and concluded with 
imploring Donna Sobrino to accept my 
hand ; or, if that was utterly rejected, to 
suffer me to adopt her daughter as my 
own child, and future heiress ; by this 
plan, herself would be entitled to share 
my present fortune: on which latter con- 
ditions being agreed to, I solemnly en- 
gaged never to attempt to see her, except 
upon her own invitation. This letter I 
sent by one of the gardeners of the 
palace, whom I desired merely to deliver 
it at the door of Donna Sobrino's dwell- 
E 4 



so tJUDLEY. 

ing, trusting to herself to send an answer 
at her own leisure and pleasure. 



Three days passed, and no answer was 
returned, during which period I even 
refrained from going towards the cottage, 
fearful of intruding on their solitude, or 
preventing them leaving the house, ap- 
prehensive of meeting with me in their 
walks. The delay, however, caused me 
no disquietude, or rather I construed her 
silence favourably, as taking time for de- 
liberation on my proposals ; but on the 
fourth morning, my heart took the alarm, 
and I hastened towards their dwelling. 

It was forsaken ! my own letter was 
put into my hand by the man in whose 
charge the premises had been left, and 
by whom I was informed, that four days 
back the ladies had quitted the house 
and Aranjuez, for Corunna. . , 

My travels, my friends, may well be 
called the travels of the heart. I went 
to Corunna, and felt a death-blow to all 
my hopes, on understanding that she had 
placed herself and daughter under British 
protection, that of the English General 



DUDLEY. 81 

Sir D B- , and was then with the 

remains of the army of the unfortunate 
Sir John Moore, (the brave, though dis- 
comfited English troops,) on her way to 
England. 



Had I heard that she had executed her 
threat of throwing herself into a convent, 
I could not have been more afflicted : for 
though, as a Spanish patriot, I might have 
followed her to Great Britain, yet this 
last step of her's appeared to me so deci- 
sive of inflexible abhorrence, that I felt 
inclined, having done all in my power to 
remove her prejudices, and make amends 
for the past, to give up the pursuit, and 
only endeavour by letter to persuade her 
to accept the means of passing the re- 
mainder of her days in comfort, if not in 
affluence. 

I had her picture — that which I ob- 
tained from the artist who had been em- 
ployed by Sobrino, on his marriage, to 
execute a miniature of her. The painter 
linished two, and gave me my choice ; 
and from that hour to this, I have worn 
it next the heart in which she still reigns. 
E 5 



82 DUOLEY. 

Shortly after, I returiiedto Aranjuez ; 
and took a sort of desperate satisfaction 
in visiting the forsaken cottage, wherein, 
as you. Sir Eliot, and Mr. Clonmore, 
have been lovers, (though more success- 
ful, because more deserving than myself,) 
you may suppose, and you are right, 
that I spent a considerable part of my 
time. I purchased that and the few ad- 
joining premises ; and dearer and more 
precious to me was this humble property, 
of which I was now owner, than all my 
palaces in Madrid and elsewhere, with 
their territories annexed. 

I lived in the little parlour. This, 
with mingled sorrow and pleasure, I per- 
ceived was despoiled of many of its 
chief ornaments ; which best served to 
identify it in my eyes. The spinning- 
wheel, the clock, the arm-cliair, all which 
articles were so constructed that they 
<:ould take to pieces, were removed ; — 
the bird-cage, and the coarse Segovian 
flower vases, had also disappeared. I 
missed them, it is true ; but, unless they 
were regarded by Gabrielle with peculiar 
interest, as having reference to the past 



DUDLEY. 83 

—to the days of her early youth— to the 
hours of innocence and love, (and unless 
innocent and lawful, love is not love,) 
she would never, I thought, have en- 
cumbered herself, and in a long voyage, 
with things of no intrinsic value, and in 
that idea there was consolation. 



Love, and war, seem to have held nfie 
in perpetual thraldom. No sooner did I 
seek repose from the one, than the other 
asserted its claim to my duties ; and I 
was sought, in my retreat, by a few of 
the members of the Cortes. My invaded 
country called on my assistance, and I 
once more fought and bled in her de- 
fence. Conjointly with your Graham, 
we won the battle at Barrosa; and at 
Albuera, I was at the side of Beresford, 
the conqueror of Soult. 



A few days after, about the 20th of 

May, seeking a short respite from the 

fatigues of an endless campaign, I 

quitted my regiment, and, having had 

E 6 



84 DUDLEY. 

my wounds dressed by a surgeon on 
whom I could depend, at Aranjuez, went 
towards my retreat, in order to recover 
some papers, of political consequence, 
which I had left there. The place was 
a blank — the cottage no longer existed : 
a party of French troops had been bil- 
leted on the occupier in my absence, 
when a dispute had risen, which had 
ended in the destruction of the dwelling. 
It had shared the fate of war, - — fire had 
consumed it j and be assured, my friends, 
I could have more readily seen my pa- 
lace at Madrid, and my castles de- 
stroyed, than this humble dwelling, the 
solace of affection. 

But these were not times to indulge in 
private and selfish regret. After a short 
stay at Aranjuez, I again joined my re- 
giment ; and though pressed by Costello 
to take the command upon myself, and 
resign to him the majority, I refused, and 
continued, as Hernandez, to serve under 
this brave and noble veteran. 



It was at this period that a secret 
meeting of the friends of Charles, our 

12 



DUDLEY. 85 

imprisoned king, took place at Toledo. 
I was of the number ; and, commissioned 
by the rest, quitted the Peninsula, on a 
secret expedition to South America. 
You may remember, I paid you a flying 
visit at the time ; and in the September 
following, about the period when the 
comet was first observed, I again landed 
at Teneriffe, and went to Ben Lomond, 
where the image of Gabrielle was once 
more brought full before me, in the per- 
son of the lovely Lady Alford, then with 
the Balfours. I had no design that my 
stay should be long here, and was pre- 
paring to return to Spain, having fulfilled 
my instructions, when Balfour detained 
me, and prevailed on me to join in an 
excursion of pleasure to Madeira. There 
every agonizing pang of my heart was 
revived, on beholding, in the humble 

dependant of Sir William and Lady L 

Victorina, the daughter of my cherished 
Gabrielle ! 

In vain I entreated her to acquaint me 
where was her mother at that time. She 
would not even acknowledge that she 
was still in England. In vain I implored 



86 DUDLEY. 

this young girl not to risk trusting herself 
to the mercy of strangers, far from home, 
and without a friend to protect, or see 
that justice were done her. She was in- 
flexible. I blamed her quitting her mo- 
ther ; but, with cutting asperity, she re- 
plied, " The poor have no choice. — I had 
acquired, at the expense of all I was 
worth in the world, the advantages of 
music ; and, before this offer was made 
me, had begun my itinerary career, I 
went from house to house, giving in- 
structions in this science, and thereby 
contrived to gain a scanty subsistence, 
at the best precarious, and ever at the 
risk of health, being daily exposed to all 
weathers. But storms were sunshine, 
compared to what I endured from the 
insolence of some of my employers : — the 
indignity of treatment, and, finally, the 
abhorrence with which I regarded the 
line I had adopted, soon forced me to 
relinquish it. Here I am under safe pro- 
tection for seven years, during which 
time half of my salary (which is most li- 
beral, in consideration of my going 
abroad) can support my mother in com- 



DUDLEY. 87 

parative comfort ; whereas, had Iremained 
in England, my earnings would scarcely 
have supplied the exigencies of the day, 
as we, from bitter experience, well 
know.'* 

And this, Sir Eliot, was spoken to me, 
— to me, the master of upwards of two 
millions. Money, we thus are convinced, 
is not all-powerful ; for though I used 
every argument I was master of, to pre- 
vail on this dear girl to give up her 
India scheme, and return to England to 
her mother, whom she might yet prevail 
upon to accept a competence from me, 
she peremptorily refused. She even ob- 
jected to another proposal I made, and 
with which (depending on the hospitality 
I had ever met with at Euphorbia) I 
eagerly urged her to comply ; — this was 
to go to TenerifTe with Lady Alford, 
whom, I felt assured, would, with Mrs. 
Grantley, join in protecting her. I had 
another motive. My hope was, had she 
consented to my desire, to have obtain- 
ed, through your medium, a reconcilia- 
tion with the mother ; — would but Lady 
Alford, I thought, stand my friend on 



88 DUDLEY. 

this occasion, and, at her return to Eng- 
land, take charge of Victorina, and bring 
about a meeting between myself and 
Gabrielle, a union might yet take place. 
But Victorina was inflexible. Her mo- 
ther had bound he^y a solemn promise 
to avoid me, in wnftsoever part of the 
world we might meet, (and, from my 
constantly roaming through various 
countries, she thought it probable,) and 
neither to accept any pecuniary favour, 
nor hold any correspondence or commu- 
nication, by letter or otherwise, with me 
or my friends 5 and, above all, still to 
conceal her own residence. 1 called 
Victorina my child, — my adopted 
daughter, — my heiress. All was in vain. 
She adhered strictly to the promise given 
to her mother ; and, as you know, sailed 
with Lady L to India. 



, You may remember. Sir Eliot, that I 
related to you, on my return to TenerifFe, 
the heads of what I have here detailed ; 
and that, but for you, I should have 
proceeded in a few days for England, 



DUDLEY. 89 

when you prevented my departure^ and 
offered the services of Mr. Clonmore to 
iind out the actual residence of Donna 
Sobrino, or Mrs. Shelburne, as in that 
country she was called ; and, when 
found, his interest with her in my be- 
half. 



Your friend was unsuccessful^ and I 
then resolved to follow Victorina to India, 

and endeavour to prevail on Lady L 

to give me the necessary clue; when, as I 
mentioned in the beginning of this letter, 
or rather narrative, a Spanish passenger, 
on board the ship in which I had taken 
my passage, not only satisfied me that 
Mrs. Shelburne was still in England, but 
informed me of the place of her abode ; 
and, as I also mentioned, I removed to 
a homeward-bound British vessel which 
we met, with design to proceed to Eng- 
land, whereas I am now a prisoner in a 
French ship, on her way to Rochefort. 



An English sail is in view ! The ship 
in which I am detained is cleared for 



90 DUDLEY. 

action ! I can write no more. 1 know 
not when, or by what conveyance, this 
can ever reach you ; but, whether h*- 
berty or a prison is my fate, be con*, 
vinced, my friends, that, until death, I 
shall ever remain, 

Your most faithful and attached 

The Conde D' Almeida. 

I request to be remembered kindly to 
all at Euphorbia — to the Balfours, and 
to your worthy physician, Dr. H . 



JJUDLEY. 91 



LETTER XLII. 

The Rev, Henry Clonmore to Sir Eliot Ho'wanl. 

Bloorafield Rectory. 

1 LOSE no time, my dear Howard, in 
acquainting you of the safe arrival, at 
Falmouth, of the Countess of Alford, 
and Captain Cavendish. They were 
really so much engrossed in this, their 
fifth honey-moon, by their own charming 
selves, that they could neither give us 
any very minute tidings of their friends 
left behind at the Fortunate Islands, nor 
consent to our invitation of spending 
their autumn at Bloomfield. I therefore 
had the honour of attending them to, 
and leaving them at Bath, where they 
design to winter. 

In my life I never saw a couple better 
matched in the matrimonial yoke ! They 
seem born for each other; and I now 
most sincerely rejoice, that by the advice 



92 mJDLEY. 

of Dr. H , we advised the Captain to 

try his fate in a voyage to Teneriffe* 
The cruize was desperate service, I al^- 
low ; but he has been successful, and 
won one of the fairest prizes our island 
can boast of. Lady Alford. is still most 
enchanting ; and had we not been in- 
formed of her illness, never should have 
guessed it from her appearance. She is 
certainly thinner than she was, and a 
little sun-burnt ; but the former is no dis- 
advantage, and the latter gives greater 
richness to her complexion. 



With Louisa, your sister's predilection 
for ZuJvago finds no excuse j with me, 
the most unlimited. In personal and 
mental accomplishments, very few men 
are his equal ; and even the eccentricities 
of his character were partly the means of 
attaching her. His yery indifference to 
herself, merely as herself, piqued her 
pride, and mspired her with the wish of 
gaining his affections. We may, how- 
ever, now rejoice, that her partiality has 
been so early and decisively put a stop to. 



DUDLEY. 9S 

or it might have led to unpleasant con- 
sequences, particularly as we are now 
aware, from the narrative he has sent us, 
(the perusal of which, I, and Louisa, 
have just finished,) of what were his 
youthful sentiments respecting the female 
sex ; and that his own vehement passion 
for this Saxon lady has ever been, and 
will be the predominant sentiment of ex- 
istence. It strikes me, though I may be 
wrong, that it will yet end in his ruin. 

Dr. H has read this narrative, and 

with attention ; or rather, Louisa and I 
have read it to him, for the worthy ve- 
teran's sight begins to fail him, and his 
remark was, " Ah ! that hidalgo, and his 
couple of million, is little better than a 
. state courier, after all ; only that the latter 
is the wiser of the two, for lie travels to 
some purpose; whereas the other is 
spending his life in dancing after a will- 
o'-the-wisp. The vengeance take the 
woman, with her Spanish pride ; why not 
kiss and be friends — forget and forgive. 
And as for that brown, Roman-nosed, 
sulky young jade who is gone to India, 
a bundle of pompous obstinacy, I don't 



94 DUDLEY. 

like her. She made her mother flout our 
honest Don famously; but will try to 
entrap a nabob for herself, with her 
squalling, and her tinkling, and her 
twanging pianos and harps ; and then 
come home with her chariot-wheels to 
raise a dust, and fling about mud on us 
pedestrians, perhaps on Zulvago himself, 
as if to say, ' we are not beholden for our 
gold to you, Squire Carlos/ '* 

Both Louisa and I considered the re- 
marks of the Doctor on Victorina as too 
severe, but he was peremptory on this 
head ; and though we reminded him that 
the daughter was rather to be honoured 
for her fidelity to the promise made to 
her mother, and for the spirit of inde- 
pendence she had chosen in keeping to 

her agreement with Lady L , rather 

than accept Zulvago's offers, he grew 
peevish and violent j and finding at last 
that he had the worst of the argument, 
interrupted us both with <* Hold your 
tongues, she is an ill-bred puss, and I 
hope will find the wife-market at Cal- 
cutta overstocked." 



DUDLEY. 95 

I have not been able to find the exact 
place of abode of this Gabrielle, this Mrs. 
Shelburne ; but upon the intimation of 
her being at Kensington, I went thither, 
and made the most minute enquiries, 
and hitherto without effect. 

I see by the public papers the account 
of the action between the English vessel, 
on board of which was Zulvago, and the 
French privateer : the former, it appears, 
took the latter after a desperate resist- 
ance, and carried her to the Isle of 
Bourbon, (which you may remember was 
ceded to us about two years back.) The 
report mentions that a Spanish officer was 
wounded in the action, whom I doubt 
not was Zulvago ; he is, consequently, at 
present at the above Island, and no longer 
a prisoner ; we may, therefore, expect to 
hear from him soon, perhaps from India; 
or he may return to Teneriffe ; or we may 
hope to see him in England. He is wel- 
come wherever he goes ; and in the mean- 
time I will prosecute my search for Mrs, 
Shelburne ; and when found, shall make 
no ceremony of taking her by force to 
Bloomfield Rectory. Our Spanish friend 



96 DUDLEY. 

has been more than once a prisoner on 
her account, and I shall not scruple to 
confine her in my house for his sake. In 
the mean time, 1 have applied at the 
Bank of England, where her annuity is 
paid half-yearly; but it appears, they 
pay it to a person empowered to receive 
it by letter of attorney, who is more 
taciturn with respect to his employer's 
abode than could be orator Mum * him- 
self. We must, therefore, have recourse 
to stratagem, not to injure, but to benefit 
the enemy. 



With respect to my own family, all go 
on as happily as I can desire : my chil- 
dren continue daily to improve; and, 
thanks be to God, Louisa and I have 
little or nothing to wish for. St. Eloi is 
no longer with me ; after a residence of 
ten years he had become dear to me as 
one of my own sons, but his parents have 
reclaimed him, and he will, no doubt, 
settle and marry in France. I hear from 

* In O'KeefFe's '< Son-in-Law." 



DUDLEY. 97 

him frequently by the way of Holland : of 
course politics are excluded our corres- 
pondence, and hitherto it has ^scn unin- 
terrupted. My children and he also 
write to each other, which is of the ut- 
most mutual advantage with respect to 
language, he improving their French, 
and they his English. 



Dudley, by Lady Al ford's account, is 
a perfect Adonis, and Claudy the three 
Graces blended in one: we enquired 
farther particulars concerning them, but 
there she stopped us, saying, " Exterior 
is all I pretend to describe ; as to the in- 
terior of their charming curly heads, even 
my sailor R. N. Cavendish is a better 
judge than I am." 

How grateful do Louisa and myself 
feel to you, my friend, and to Mrs. 
Grantley, for all the care and fondness 
shown to our dear boy. We, as you may 
suppose, feel most anxious to see him, 
but my wife is not exactly in sailing trim 
at this time ; and I, like a good husband, 

VOL. in. F 



98 DUDLEY. 

must soon sit by the nest and cheer my 
thriving mate. 



It gives me much pleasure to under^ 
stand from you, that Turner continues to 
conduct himself with propriety. Littl§ 
peculiarities of disposition must be over- 
looked, where we are convinced, as in his 
case, the principles are sound, and the 
understanding cultivated. ■ Jle has one 
excellent recommendation, that of in? 
dustryj for I never yet saw him idle : I 
have observed every hour of his employ- 
ed in study or in amusement, but never 
yet found him, to use a common expres- 
sion, c^om^' ?2o/^^i/2^. y- 



I am glad the foils suited, and have to. 
add all that is grateful from your old 
master Angelo, who remembers his young 
pupil. Sir Elipt Howard, with much kind- 
ness. Your attention to him was, in- 
deed, an '' Agreeable surprise,'^ 

Vv^ith respect to music, as forming 
part of the education of a young man, I 
am entirely of your opinion, jmd felt 



DUDLEY. 99 

most happy that Dudley had the good 
sense to own his conviction of your being 
in the right. As to your ideas on dan- 
cing, I know not what to say ; for I, an 
old fellow within a few months of forty, 
actually danced country dances for up- 
wards of two hours the other night, at a 
rustic ball given at our parsonage in ho- 
nour of Lady Alford's wedding. 

We danced with all our legs and all our 
hearts, as one of my little girls remarked. 
I footed it down, and footed it up, alle- 
mande and change sides, with the Miller's 
wife, to the tune of the " White Cock- 
ade ;" whilst Louisa shuffled off the 
Miller himself to one of her daughters, 
and left me to flirt with all the pretty 
girls in my parish. No, Howard, I can- 
not consent to leave off dancing, not- 
withstanding even Lady Alford's pro- 
hibition, who has frequently called aloud 
to me, " Clonmore, if you dance, posi- 
tively I will never hear you preach again, 
for a jigging parson is my abhorrence." 



Dudley's letters to us, and to his bro- 

F 2 



100 DUDLEY. 

thers and sisters *, begin now to display 
great cultivation of talent, flow of lan- 
guage, truth, and energy ; and yet, at 
times, there are in them sudden breaks 
of boyish simplicity perfectly delightful i 
— and what to me is most pleasing, 
when speaking of his studies, he avoids 
technical terms ; and the mention of 
superior attainments not to be expected 
at his age. His mother, as you may well 
imagine, collects all these letters most 
carefully, and regards them as one of 
her greatest treasures: they are num- 
bered, folded lengthways, and tied up 
with blue ribbon; and are often pro- 
duced either for private perusal, for the 
amusement of her other children, or to 
gratify some of our intimate friends whq 
feel an interest in the Welfare of our boy, 
among the latter, none more so than 

Dr. H , 

He was with us very lately, and, ex- 
cepting periodical fits of the gout, is still 
strong, healthy, and cheerful, and as 
whimsical, as positive, and polite as ever. 

* They do not appear. 



DUDLEY. 101 

His delight at Lady Alford's return 
glistened in his eyes, and whilst he 
claimed the bridal salute, he called her 
a beautiful, capricious hussy, for jilting 
him, after giving him her picture, which, 
as a token of love, and an earnest of her- 
self, he said he had shown to half the 
world : the latter assertion is most true, 
for he does display his diamond snuffs 
box most furiously* 



At the time of receiving Dudley's last 
letter, our old physician was here, and 
he would scarcely give us time to run it 
over before he whisked it out of our 
hands ; he put on his spectacles in 
silence, and leaning back in his great 
chair, deliberately began reading it> with 
as little notice of either Louisa or me 
as if it had been a letter to himself^ 
of which he had permitted us to take 
a slight glance. 

We shortly after observed him lay it 

down, take off and wipe his spectacles, 

and give three or four surly hems ; 

during which, he regaled himself with a 

F 3 



102 DUDLEY. 

pinch or two of snufF. We readily guessed 
the passage that caused this interruption. 
A few lines at the bottom of the second 
page ran thus : — 

" And when you see my dear Dn 

H , whom I so well remember, tell 

him from me, that I bless the hour when 
he advised you to send me to TenerifFe ; 
for though I do love you, and mamma, ^nd 

England, yet You cannot imagine, 

papa, how much I love Sir Eliot and Mrs. 
Grantley ; — and then, Claudy, Claudy, 
papa, is so very dear to me !" 

The Doctor at last concluded the 
letter ; and when Louisa was all agitation 
to receive it from him, and I felt equally 
anxious, for he really had not allowed us 
to finish it, with the utmost indifference 
to our feelings of suspence,lie began read- 
ing it, or rather poring over it, a second 
time, (as I have seen many a dozing 
provoking politician in a coffee-house 
over a newspaper.) I, at last, took com- 
passion on Louisa, and remarked, *' You 
are not aware, Doctor, that a lady is 
longing for that letter ;" without, how- 
ever, any idea of alluding to her most 



DUDLEY. 103 

honourable situation. When he replied, 
** Then let her lo7igy and her next baira 
may be what none of the rest are, a 
lettered man.*' 

Louisa received the sally with good- 
humour, and saying, <* You have now 
fairly killed my impatience," left 
the room. The Doctor watched the 
closing door, and then looking full at 
me over his spectacles, threw Dudley's 
letter across the table ; remarking, after 
a sagacious wink, and his usual com- 
pression of the lip, . — " Away with you, 
madam; no, no, your husband and I 
must confab over this by ourselves ; — 
there, read it with attention. If that 
young villain of your's does not yet cause 
his Baronet guardian many a head-ache, 
and the daughter many a heart-ache, I'll 
eat all the sermons you ever composed. — 
Here we thought all was going on fair 
and smooth the other side the green pond ; 
and yet, in less than two or three years, I 
pronounce there will be the devil to pay 
there." 

You may conclude how great was my 
alarm at this intimation, and I pressed 
F 4 



104 DUBLEY. 

him to explain himself; when in a gruff 
snarl he said, " Why, you ugly hound, 
have you eyes ? can't you read ? won't 
you understand? — Don't you seethat that 
whelp of your's is as obstinate and self- 
willed as a Spanish mule, — that he will 
soon fly in the face of his guardian, and 
set up for an Independent ? — Can't you 
read ? have you ten grains of comprehen- 
sion in your brain, sir." 

It was in vain to remind the Doctor, 
that he had not, until now, suffered me 
to conclude Dudley's letter; I read it 
through, and with the utmost attention. 
The following is the passage which has 
awakened our old friend's fears con- 
cerning the future proceedings of our 
boy ; and it certainly has caused me 
and Louisa, to whom I afterwards im- 
parted it, no small share of uneasiness. 

After filling five pages with an account 
of his studies and amusements, during 
which he contrives to hook in Claudy's 
name upwards of fifty times, he adds, — 
" And, papa, I wish I had a profes- 
sion ; for I well remember every word 
Captain Cavendish said on the subject of 



DUDLEY. 105 

a man having a profession. He asserted, 
that every man ought to have some 
ostensible employment, whether he pos- 
sessed fortune or not ; that with respect 
to himself, however rich he might already 
be, or become in future, he would, 
though married, and to a rich Countess^ 
pursue his calling, until cjisabled by ill- 
ness, or by age ; and that it was the duty 
of every person to contribute their time, 
or labour, or talents, to the general good 
of society, and not to live a drone in a 
bee-hive. Now, papa, I am determined 
on also having a profession. Sir Eliot is 
a wealthy and a good man, and thougli 
he does not actually follow any calling in 
particular, he is always employed ; bat 
though I hope to resemble him in good- 
ness, I never expect to be rich, unless I 
can earn riches. I am conscious that I 
am only one of ten children, and that 
you are only a country clergyman ; 
though you are better off than 

'* Passing rich with forty pounds a-year." 

" You are in the church. My bro- 
thers are, it seems, all aheady engaged 
in, or destined for some employment j 
F 5 



106 DUDLEY. 

and why should not I ? I wish, by the 
next ship that leaves England, you will 
inform me what you wish me to embrace, 
and I will obey you in all things most 
faithfully. — I have already frequently 
spoken to my dear Sir Eliot oh this, to 
me very important, subject; but, I am 
sorry to say, though he is so very com- 
municative on every other, he gives me 
no answer which perfectly satisfies me on 
this. When I consult Mrs. Grantley, 
the general reply is, * My brother is a 
better judge of those affairs than I can 
be, you had better speak to him ;' and 
when I ask Claudy what I shall be, she 
answers, * Be a gentleman, Dudley ; 
that is all 1 desire.' Now, in this, papa, 
as you must be aware, Claudy is very 
silly j for, though a soldier, a sailor, a 
parson, a lawyer, a merchant, a physi- 
cian, or an ambassador, I should still be 
a gentleman. I should like to be in par* 
liament. In the mean time, I intend to 
be a carpenter." 

At this sentence I threw the letter 
upon the table, saying, " The boy's a 
fool." 



DUDLEY. 107 

« Not he," said Doctor H ; 

** more folly in your remark than in his 
argument. Read on." 

1 did read on ; but the conclusion of 
the letter merely contained a list of such 
articles as he said he stood in need of; 
and no agent on earth, I fancy, ever re- 
ceived a commission of a more heteroge- 
neous nature. I am to send him a tool- 
chest, completely filled with the best 
productions of Sheffield, Birmingham, 
and Salisbury ; some pieces of red tape, 
some court sticking-plaister, Welsh flannel, 
bell wire, flints and steels, Flanders lace, 
gunpowder, garden seeds, the busts of 
Fox and Pitt, Wellington and Bonaparte, 
artificial flowers of English manufacture, 
black ribbon, tortoise-shell combs, and a 
barrel of two-inch nails. In short, I did 
not conclude the list j but gave it, the 
next day, to Louisa, who very gravely 
took a memorandum in her pocket-book, 
and entreated me to remind her, lest 
she should forget a single article. 



And now, my dear Howard, in what 
light do you see this business, thus 
F 6 



108 DUDLEY* 

started by our boy, who, entering upon 
his fourteenth year, must be allowed a 
voice. I have no wish but your's. Louisa 
is wholly neuter in the affair ; whilst 

Dr. H has at once espoused the 

cause of Dudley, by approving of his 
intention, at the same time adding, that 
suffering him to have his own way, can 
in no wise militate against whatever views 
you may in future form in his favour. — 
** The boy is in the right,'' said the 
Doctor ; " unless a man is a peer of the 
realm, or born to a seat in the Commons, 
(a sly political hit this of our old friend,) 
he ought to follow some useful calling. 
If in parliament, upper or lower house, 
that will furnish sufficient employment 
for tongue, brain, and heart, without any 
other. Otherwise, every man ought to 
aim at becoming a useful and active mem- 
ber of society. There was myself, for 
example : — My father left me ten thou- 
band pounds, on the interest of which I 
could have very well managed to sleep, 
eat, drink, talk, ride, and walk ; but, 
would my country have benefited by my 
complaisance ? No, sir : I went to 



DUDLEY. 109 

Glasgow, I studied medicine, I attended 
lectures, I returned to London, I prac- 
tised, and my name will go down to 
posterity with those of my countrymen 
Halford and Bailley, Willis and Farquhar ; 
whilst my nieces and nephews, and there 
are a clan of them, will reap the benefit 
of my ten thousand, now increased four- 
fold. Did / not chuse the better part T'' 
" True, Doctor ; but Dudley is as yet 
very young." 

" Young!*' he replied j ** limiting 
man's youth to thirty, he has nearly 
reached half way. Let him step over his 
fourteenth birth-day, and you will find 
him on new ground, the sturdy puppy." 
*< Well, my dear sir, all that we can 
now do is to submit unreservedly to Sir 
Eliot's decision \ whatever he judges, 
must be right." 

" Then I," said Doctor H , " will 

influence the judge ; for, by the ven- 
geance, I will write to him this very day \ 
and whatever predilection your boy may 
have taken for any particular course of 
study, shall be followed up. The Bible 
is already his breast-plate j and he must 



llO DUDLEY. 

now get acquainted with the world, and 
leave his snug coop at Euphorbia, to 
visit our English farm-yard, and learn to 
distinguish good from evil. I agree with 
that confounded Captain Larboard and 
Starboard, who has stolen my princess 
from me, that every man of sense and 
principle should, for the benefit of so- 
ciety, if not for his own individual hap- 
piness, follow some profession ; and, in 
spite of romantic baronets, (tossing away 
his hand, with a snapping finger,) and 
reverend waltzing fops, (a nod at me, 
though I never waltzed in my life,) the 
lad shall follow his own inclinations.** 

Thought I, as I rose from the table to 
avoid farther argument, for I found he 
was working himself into a rage, " You 
have pretty well followed your inclina- 
tions respecting us all ! But for your re* 
commendation of me to the late Lady 
Howard, I, and my wife, should not 
be now owners of Bloomfield Rectory* 
But for you, neither Sir Eliot, Mrs. 
Grantley, Turner, Claudy, nor Dudley, 
would be living at Teneriffe, or Lady 
Alford ever, perhaps, have become the 



DUDLEY. Ill 

happy wife of Cavendish." — I slightly 
remarked all this, adding, that Zulvago 
alone had escaped the magic of his in- 
fluence. On which he protested, with a 
furious rap on the table, that he yet in- 
tended to stand father to that impudent 
widow Gabriel) e, and give her to a man, 
who was a thousand times too good for 
her. 

As he then launched into violent in- 
vective against all coquettes, whether 
single or widowed, I was forced to ob- 
serve, that I was sorry to see it was 
his old silver snuff-box he was then 
using, as, had his grand one been in 
commission, we might hope for peace* 
And it is really incredible the whimsical 
effect these snuff-boxes have on the tem- 
per of our friend ! With his common 
one in hand, he continues his argument, 
whilst rapping, opening, shutting, and 
clapping it violently down on the table 
in the heat of debate, until his opponent 
fairly owns himself defeated. Whereas 
his diamond box operates like a talisman : 
he handles it with caution, shakes it 
gently, places it before him for universal 



11^ DUDLEY. 

admiration, looks and smiles at the 
beauty on the lid, which smiles at him, 
examines each separate feature, and by 
degrees becomes placid and composed. 

Lady Alford was highly amused on 
remarking the effect it had on him, and 
threatened to make Cavendish a present 
of a similar snuff-box, as a check, when, 
in company, he should begin to show off 
his quarter-deck airs. 



As to politics, I, at your own request, 
make no mention of them. Public events 
are, in their consequences, like squibs;-— 
some fall in the water, and are suddenly 
extinguished ; others alight on the 
ground, the nature of which renders them 
harmless ; whilst a third sort drop among 
combustibles, when ignition takes place, 
and. Heaven knows when, how, or where 
the flame may stop ! The affairs of 
Russia now occupy all our attention* 
St. Eloi writes me word, that there is a 
report General Moreau was killed at 
Dresden, where the allies were defeated. 
But by the time you can receive this let- 



DUDLEY. 118 

ter, these affairs will be all old news with 
us. 

I send you the new publications you 
desire. You will perceive, that, in the 
poetic world, Byron, and Scott, Southey, 
and Moore, share the evergreen. Lady 
Alford, who, of late, is become a great 
admirer of poetry, (her husband's taste,) 
says, that had she the crowning of the 
four, a wreath of cypress would be the 
Corsair's claim ; the laurel that of Mar- 
mion; the plain and noble bay should 
deck the brow of Madoc ; and the rich 
and blossoming myrtle be entwined in 
the locks of the Ferii. 

Ever your sincere friend, 

Henry Clonmoke, 

Lieutenant-Colonel Maxwell (or, Irish 
beau Charley, as Lady Alford calls him,) 
and his wife, at present on a visit in the 
neighbourhood, dined with us the other 
day, when he desired to be, in the most 
friendly manner, remembered to you and 
your's. 



114 DUDtEY< 



LETTER XLIII. 

Sir Eliot Hcnsoard to the Bev, Hewy Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

The continued silence of Don Zulvago, 
my friend, rather alarms me ; particularly 
as I cannot find any mention in the public 
papers of the fate of the ship in which he 
sailed, as I understand, from the Isle of 
Bourbon for India. I have written to a 
person at the Cape of Good Hope, with 
whom I have had money transactions, 
and requested him to make the necessary 
enquiries. It seems equally unfortunate, 
that you cannot trace the retreat of Mrs^ 
Shelburne. Should you find her^ I have 
to request you will endeavour to prevail 
on her to come to TenerifFe, where, un- 
der mine and Mrs. Grantley's protection, 
she will be safe until the return of Zul- 
vago, when, I have no doubt, all will 



DUDLEY. 11.5 

come at last to a happy arrangement be- 
tween them. To his plan of her seeking 
an asylum with Lady Alford, you will, 
of course, see the bar. We are conscious 
of what has passed, of which Zulvago is 
ignorant ; and I trust he will ever remain 
thus. 



I have received your last letter, ac- 
companied by one on the same subject 

from Doctor H , neither of which 

gave me the smallest surprise, habituated 
as I have long and daily been, to the 
hearing of Dudley's arguments on the 
necessity of his following a profession. 
The words of Cavendish sunk deep in his 
mind, as I observed at the time; and 
they will never be obliterated. Dudley 
is ardent, impetuous, and insatiable after 
knowledge ; and, in person, has now 
outgrown your memory. Strictly adher- 
ing to his present system of regularity 
and temperance, he will, no doubt, not 
only enjoy good health, but longevity. 
In stature, he is ngiai'ly as tall as myself; 
and, with all the graces of youth, joins a 



116 DUDLEY. 

steadiness and firmness of carriage, 
seldom seen at that age. By constantly 
mixing in society, yet, as I have before 
remarked, without exactly forming part 
of the company, he has acquired a sort 
of modest assurance, a kind of diffidence, 
which is as pleasing as it is becoming. 

He rides well ; and, what is of still 
more importance, walks well. Fencings 
and the military exercise, have given him 
a firm and commanding air, which Claudy 
calls ** very noble ;'' and have greatly 
assisted towards the expansion of his 
limbs, and the freedom of his action. 
He dances as well as a gentleman ought 
to dance ; and, in swimming, he might 
surpass a native of the Friendly Islands. 

His progress in languages has beent 
most rapid — in mathematics, tolerable j 
and, in the first rudiments of chemistry^ 
he gained some knowledge from Balfour^^ 
when on a visit to Ben Lomond. These 
he attempts to teach Mr. Turner, with 
whom he continues to keep on the most 
amicable footing. They are now engaged 
in constructing a balloon ; and amusing 
themselves in other lesser philosophical 



DUDLEY. U7 

experiments, preparatory to their in- 
tended expedition to the summit of the 
Peak, to which, with a Guanche, and 
Pedro, Miguel, and Romeri, for their 
guides and attendants, they are to ac- 
company Mr. Balfour. 



But to return to the subject which 
now occupies my heart and attention, 
to almost the exclusion of all others, — 
this new determination of Dudley of em- 
bracing a profession. The other day, 
on going into my study, I found him and 
Claudy standing in the middle of the 
floor, seemingly in high debate ; yet, 
both separately engaged. She was play- 
ing with an old-fashioned bandalour, and 
he, chucking an apple from one hand to 
the other. My entrance into the room, as 
usual, was unnoticed ; and I went over 
to my desk, and began writing. 

** Indeed,*' said Claudy, *f I cannot 
understand what it is you do want j" and 
she continued her play. 

•« I want some employment,'' said 
Dudley, still tossing his apple to and fro 



118 DUDLEY. 

in the air. ** In short, I repeat, I do 
not wish, when grown up, to be an idler, 
a lounger, a selfish nobody." 

" Employment ! Really, Dudley, you 
are a most unreasonable boy, — you that 
are employed from morning till night ! 
In the course of one day only, I have 
known you to read, compose, translate, 
write, draw, dance, fence, run, swim, 
and ride ! Not to mention hoops, balls, 
and battle-dores, with me. You are 
never satisfied !" 

<< Either you do not, or you will not 
understand me, Claudy," said your son, 
now eating his apple, sitting astride upon 
a camp-stool, and watching her dexterous 
play with the toy, his eyes following its 
motion. " Have I not explained to you, 
that all my present studies end in self- 
gratification ; that they tend to no deci- 
sive point, no general intention to benefit 
mankind ? That my mental acquirements 
improve my mind alone ; that my bodily 
exercises strengthen my limbs alone. And 
what service to the world is either my 
body or my mind, unless exercised for 
the universal good ?" 



DUDLEY. 119 

*' I wish, Dudley, you would speak in 
plainer language. In three simple words, 
tell me what is your wish ?" 

" You shall hear it in two,'* replied 
Dudley, with firmness ; " a profession." 

" But boys of fourteen do not follow 
professions. ' 

'* No J but boys of fourteen," he re^ 
plied, drawing up his head, *« begin to 
prepare themselves to follow them, when 
they shall arrive at a proper age. I have 
read biography to some purpose j and 
can inform you that many men, at se- 
venteen and eighteen, have ah'eady made 
great progress in life ; but how is that 
possible, unless they begin at fourteen ? 
And how shall I be able, unless I now 
fix on some pursuit, without which, when 
I become a man, I shall be nothing." 

** I repeat," said my girl, « you will 
still be a gentleman." 

** And I repeat," answered Dudley, 
with rising warmth, ** that you are very 
foolish, Claudy. Have I not already 
told you, that the word gentleman is a 
general term, applicable to every person, 
of suitable education, polished manners, 



ISO DUDLEY. 

and moral conduct ; and that it is my 
wish, to add to that of gentleman^ one 
by which I may be individually distin- 
guished. Now, my dear Claudy, do put 
away that trumpery bandalour," (she in- 
stantly complied,) " and tell me," he 
continued, taking both her hands in his, 
and kissing her cheek, " what would 
you wish me to be ?" 

•• You have already had my answei^ 
twenty times, Dudley — a fine country 
gentleman, like papa; and that you 
should live for ever at Euphorbia.'* 

" I mean to live for ever at Eu- 
phorbia," replied he; and my swelling 
heart, Clonmore, at this reply, felt a re? 
Jief which filled my eyes : for my worst 
apprehensions were thus quieted. Until 
now, I feared he regretted England, and 
wished to return thither. 

" Oh, Claudy, my dear," he continued, 
*V I never mean to quit this house, or 
you. But cases differ. P^a Eliot is a 
rich baronet ; and has sufficient employ- 
ment to take care of aunt Grantley, and 
you, and me, (the word me confirmed 
my best hopes ;) and all his servants. 



DUDLEY. 121 

You know he has to provide for us all. 
(I was glad to hear him add himself to the 
list.) But when I become a man, (con- 
tinued my beloved boy,) and am walking 
the streets of Orotava, or Santa Cruz, 
(most rejoiced was I, not to hear the 
stfeets of London or Paris named,) or 
visiting among our friends, or with guests 
here, when people shall say, * Who is 
that Dudley Clonmore ? What is he ?' 
I should like the answer to be, * He ! 
Oh, he has great medical skill j* or, * He 
has been lately called to the bar j* of, 
• He is an excellent preacher,' or ' a 
brave and deserving oiSicer-,' or * a 
very capital merchant.' Instead of 
which, I should feel so mortified to heat 
them reply, * Who, Dudley Clonmore ? 
Oh, he is nothing. His father, and his 
brothers are, indeed, So and so, — but he 
is — nothing. He lives at Euphorbia, and 
is — nothing /' No, iio, Claudy j I am 
determined not only to follow a pro- 
fession, but to rise to the very tip-top of 
it, if possible j industry, merit, and ho- 
nesty, my three stepping stone?s. Oh, 
how I should like to be a Sir Matthew 

VOL. III. G 



1S2 DUDLEY. 

Hale, or aGresham, or a Boerhaave, or a 
Newton." 

" Or a Shakspeare!" said Claudy^ 
archly. 

" Oh, no, no, I'll not turn poet ; be* 
sides, that is no profession, that is a vo- 
cation. Men are born to that. I'll never 
be. a poet." 

** Sour grapes/* said Claudy. 

This sarcasm produced a circular swing 
by the hands, when, in a fit of romps, 
they chased each other round and round 
the room, and about my chair, at the 
hazard of knocking that and myself 
down; then darted through the open 
door, and, shortly after, I saw them 
from the window, driving 4n their little 
curricle, Claudy, as I observed, having 
the whip-hand, and Dudley still talking 
to.be^ with great earnestness. 



And noM?^, my friend, to open my min4 
upon this new subject.— Hitherto, I must 
confess, every thing has answered my 
warmest wishes ; and I have not one 
doubt ^xistipg, but th^tp in le^s than.sijs^ 



l>UDLEy. 123 

years, Dudley will be my son-in-law. 
But how are these six following years 
(the most important of their youthful ex- 
istence) to be passed, is the question? 
I must, like Prospero, (see how time 
flies ! I am Prospero now ; no longer a 
Ferdinand, as my lamented Claudina 
more than once called me in the days of 
our courtship,) — I must act warily; 
and, to cement their affections, separate 
them for a time. Dudley himself has 
furnished us the means. And it is now' 
my design, that, in about three years, he 
shall, with your good leave, visit Eng. 
land, and study, by preference, the law, 
Bloomfield Rectory may be his head- 
quarters, and Dr. H 's house, in Ca- 
vendish-square, his London residence. 
Thus we are assured, that, whether in 
town or country, he will be in the best 
of hands. 

He cannot follow a nobler study than 
that of the law ; which, in his peculiar 
situation, will ensure to him two most 
essential benefits. He will be better 
able, hereafter, to protect his own pro- 
perty, (and, from the rapid increase of my 



funds, that will be great;) and, likewise, 
have it in his power to afford justice to 
those unable to purchase it ; whilst the 
dryness, and sober course of law-study, 
will operate as a check on the ardour of 
youth, and the unusual warmth of his 
disposition. 

Thus, my friend, you see Dudley's 
predilection for some pursuit rather as- 
sists my plans than otherwise ; and, as I 
firmly hope that the attachment between 
him and my child will be as lasting 
as it is now fervent and sincere, I think 
I hazard nothing by consenting to his 
removal to England : they will each 
learn by this separation what hold they 
have on each other's affections ; and 
Dudley will have that liberty of choice 
in the affairs of the heart, to which every 
human being, particularly man, is so fully 
entitled. 



Since writing the above, Dudley and I 
have had a long and ample consultation 
on the subject, and now you may look 
forward to numbering an LL.D. in your 

lO 



DUDLEY. 125 

family. He and Turner are at this mo- 
ment ransacking the great library in 
search of authors on jurisprudence ; and 
I have already spoken, at his request, to 
one of our high Spanish law-officers of 
Canaria, to recommend some person 
adequate to give him necessary instruc- 
tions ; for, as you may suppose, my friend, 
I wish his wonderful abilities and practice 
to be confined to the Canary islands, and 
never extend to Westminster-halL On his 
removal to England, he may commence 
the study of Blackstone and Coke upon 
Littleton ; at present, we must look at 
home, and become acquainted, in a 
Spanish colony, with Spanish laws. 



The change in your boy for the re- 
mainder of that day was truly whimsical: 
an air of gravity appeared in his face, and 
a tone of dignity in his voice ; he sat as if 
he was already on the woolsack, and ad- 
dressed those around him, as if charging 
a jury. These boyish fopperies, how- 
ever, soon wore off, or rather they were 
chased away by Claudy simply remark- 
G 3 



•t26 DUDLEY. 

ing, " Dear Dudley, what is the matter 
with you ? you are as stiff' as the picture 
of'Guy Faux." 

" Well then, Claudy, to relieve my mind, 
will you take a run with me to gather 
osiers for the fishing basket Rosalva has 
promised to make me ?" 

Away, hand in hand, they were off; 
whilst Turner, starting from his chair in 
the middle of a grave conversation with 
nie, ran after them, calling out, ** Dud- 
ley ! take me with you, for if one or 
other fail into the lake, you know I shall 
have io Jish you out.'* 



You may remark, my dear Clonmore, 
that in a shorter period than that which 
1 have named for the removal of Dudley 
to England, I shall feel the necessity of 
laying some sort of restriction on the 
present unlimited freedom these children 
€njoy in the society of each other. Rely 
Tipon it, none will be required. Had I my 
choice of permitting Claudy to be the 
companion of half the boarding school - 
misses in EnglaTO, and that of a young 



DUDLEY. 127 

kd such as Dudley, I should not hesitate 
in preferring the latter. Among girls, it 
is a hundred to one but what the subject 
of their private conversation turns on 
lovers and marriage, and that they be. 
come mutual confidantes; thus eatly 
poisoning each other's mind: whereas 
with a well-educated youth, such as my 
adopted boy, love will be the last subject 
discussed. 

Dudley and Claudy, when alone, speak 
of their mutual studies, or arrange an 
intended excursion ; plan subjects for pic- 
tures, compare the merits of authors, or re- 
peat to each other pieces of prose or verse 
they may have committed to memory; 
their very separation during the hours of 
study giving a zest to their meeting, 
when study is at an end : and we always 
observe, that they have daily some im- 
portant secret to communicate to each 
other, though half an hour may not have 
elapsed since they last parted. They 
now are accustomed to ramble in the 
forest and over the neighbouring moun- 
tains and valleys alone, occupying them- 
selves with the various surrounding ob- 
G 4 



1S8 BtJDLEY. 

jects, eyery thing in nature being to 
them a subject of interest and admira- 
tion : the clouds, the sky, the trees, the 
bushes, all afford conversation; they 
watch the flocks of birds; they seek, with- 
out disturbing the nests ; they feed their 
antelopes; they work in their garden, and 
attend to their fruits and flowers, without 
one thought that could raise a blush on 
the cheek of innocence. 

Such are the objects that now exclu- 
sively occupy their young and tender 
hearts ; and when those hearts do begin 
to speak, it will be sufficient time to dis- 
turb this golden dream of happiness. — 
That those hearts will speak, and to each 
other, and at no distant time, I am fully 
convinced ; but it is not for Mrs. Grant- . 
ley or me to hasten the hour, by adopting 
ill-judged measures of prudence : all we 
have to do is to watch in silence, and 
when we see the slightest deviation from 
their present conduct, which is that of 
the most perfect simplicity, candour, and 
open freedom of manner to each other at 
all times, to interfere. Led by parental 
and maternal vigilance, we must the»^ 



DUDLEY. 129 

at once, act with judgment and decision, 
and separate them, until (with exception 
to Dudley's occasional annual visits to 
TenerifFe) they become man and wife. 

At pres^fit, no words can describe the 
perfect union that reigns between this 
darling pair ! Their decided knowledge of 
each other's taste and disposition, their 
mutual esteem, their confidence, their 
boundless affection, is most delight- 
ful to witness ! and I never see them, 
(especially when walking together in the 
open air,) without being reminded of the 
innocence and youth of angelic beings, 
fully personified. 



So, so ! as Dr. H would say, no- 
thing certain under the heavens, after all, 
Clonmore ! At the very moment of my 
writing an account of the mutual felicity 
of this happy couple, would you credit 
they were engaged, and for the first time 
in their lives, in the most serious, and, 
indeed, violent dispute ! Tears and apo- 
logies on the side of the lady, and silence 
or reproaches, and looks of high disdain, 
G 5 



ISO DUDLEY. 

on that of the gentleman, fully explained 
to us that something was wrongs but 
even at this moment, I am ignorant as to 
the subject of altercation, I have en- 
quired of Mrs. Grantley, but she is 
equally surprised and afflicted (compara- 
tively speaking, you will understand); 
and we have only to wait with patience 
until this irritation subsides of its own 
accord. We have to hope that ** The 
sun will not go down upon their wrath.'" 



The whole affair has been explained to 
me, and, as I suspected, Claudy has been 
to blame. About an hour since, I walked 
through the chesnut-wood to the stables, 
as is my daily custom, to enquire after my 
horses, particularly Saladin, a fine Turkish 
charger, given me by Zulvago, which 
had been wounded in some of his Spanish 
battles ; and there I found Agusto and 
Romeri, two of the grooms, talking vehe- 
mently ; the former, an old man, accusing 
the latter, a lad of eighteen, of imperti- 
nence and presumption, saying he ought 
to have asked the Senor (myself), and 



DUDLEY. 131 

not have listened to the directions of 
the donzella, who was little better thati a 
child. On enquiry, it appeared that 
Romeri had persuaded Claudy, what an 
advantage it would be to the two beauti- 
ful Andalusian ponies, which Garolitie 
had given her on her return from Ma- 
deira, would she consent to have their 
manes cut and their tails docked in the 
English fashion, like Lady Alford's coach- 
horses ! Claudy, who considers the ponies 
her own property, and who still frequently 
is fond of the exercise of too much 
authority, gave orders that it should be 
done; when Komeri, in consequence, sent 
a skilful farrier from the city who pre- 
pared to perform the operation. For- 
tunately for the poor animals who werd 
destined to undergo the latter barbarous 
mutilation, Dudley came to the stables 
on a visit to his own horse Malek Adhel, 
and with surprise, and indeed dismay, 
seeing what was going forward, asked 
the lad, had I given orders to that effect. 
Romeri, with some degree of insolence, 
replied, he had his orders from Miss 
Howard, and should not attend to any 
G 6 



13S DUDLEY. 

others, at the same time turmng to the 
operator he desired him to begin. 

Dudley, roused to fury by this conduct, 
rushed quickly past Romeri, and pushed 
the farrier over his own fire (kindled to 
sear the meditated wounds) ; he then cut 
the ropes that tied the mules to a stake^ 
unbound their tails, turned them both 
Joose into the forest, watched them gal- 
lopping off in full liberty, and followed 
them, to act still, if necessary, in their 
defence. 

On receiving this account, I severely 
reprimanded the lad, Romeri, for his 
daring to take orders from a young girl 
as to the treatment of cattle ; and gave 
Agusto strict charge, to watch that no 
operations of that nature should be exe- 
cuted on any of the horses : I then dis- 
missed the i'arrier, and returned to the 
house. 



It was collation-hour : the Balfours 
were with us, and their niece. Miss Mac- 
donald, lately arrived from Scotland j 
otherwise we had no company, and I 
mentioned what had taken place. Soon 



DUDLEY. 133 

after, we remarked that Dudley, instead 
of joining Claudy and Rosalva, as usual, 
at their little table, on entering the room 
took a book, and a retired seat under the 
viranda, where he remained reading : 
shortly after, Claudy went up to him 
with a basket of fruit; but he declined 
taking any, and she, putting it down on 
the floor, continued standing at his side 
with all the humility of a culprit. 

We soon perceived that the tears flowed 
down her cheeks, and in the low and be- 
seeching accents of distress, I heard her 
say, ** Indeed, Dudley, I wish you would 
believe me ; I own I did wrong in giving 
directions to the grooms, unknown to 
papa. And I was to blame when I was 
in such a passion with you, on being told 
you had scolded poor young Romeri — 
but do not think me cruel : I am not 
cruel or hard-hearted, Dudley. I did 
not even imagine, that cutting their tails 
could bring one drop of blood — no, no 
more than cutting their manes." 

** Is there, then," said Dudley, look- 
ing up to her with strong symptoms of 
indignation in his countenance, " is 



134 DUDLEY. 

there no difference in cutting your hair 
and cutting your ears ?" 

** Yes, I understand all that, now that 
you have explained it to me ; but when 
I consented to have my ponies docked* 
I considered that the men were to take 
the hair off their tails, the same as off 
their neck, and nothing more." 

I realJy thought, Clonmore, this very 
probable ; and, on hearing her apology, 
acquitted her in my own mind of inten- 
tional cruelty ; though, I added, we must 
have some conversation with my young 
Donna on this habit of giving the ser- 
vants directions without my knowledge : 
leaving Mrs. Grantley to take her to 
task upon the violent fit of anger she had 
fallen into, on hearing of Dudley's inter- 
ference respecting her ponies, and his 
treatment of Romeri, her favourite 
Equerry. 

Though I was fully convinced of 
Claudy's innocence with respect to cruel- 
ty, Dudley, it appears, was not : and I 
rather wondered how he could doubt her 
word, until I reflected that his irritation 
arose niore from her anger expressed to- 



DUDLEY. 185 

wards himself, than from her preceding 
liigh crimes: his feelings had been 
violently roused, and he could not so 
easily subdue them. 

Seeing that she still continued at his 
side, (and they looked an Adam and a 
repentant Eve,) he arose, saying, " 1 
don't love you. — I did love you once, 
but I shall never love you again." And 
with great majesty he pocketed his book, 
and went slowly towards the heath-tree 
avenue, and disappeared at the entrance 
of the chesnut-f brest. 

Claudy looked after him some time, 
then sat down upon one of the marble 
steps of the viranda, and resting her 
head upon the seat he had quitted, her 
arms folded under her face, she gave way 
to the strongest emotions of grief. Both 
my sister and myseli' saw all that past ; 
but we felt that, had we interfered, it must 
be to advocate the side of one against the 
other, which, by creating jealousy and 
distrust, might lay the seeds of future 
evils: we, therefore, agreed to leave 
them, as if already man and wife, to their 
own time and mode of reconciliation j and. 



136 



DUDLEY, 



accompanied by the Balfours and their 
niece, we strolled towards the woods. — 
About an hour afterwards, being seated in 
the almond-tree recess, as it is called, 
(being built of that wood, and shaded by 
its boughs,) we discerned at a distance, 
coming towards us down the green 
avenue, Dudley and Claudy, an arm of 
each round the other's waist : they were 
walking rapidly, and with that light 
elastic step that seems scarcely to touch 
the earth, and speaking eagerly and with 
smiling animation, Dudley sucking a 
peach as they passed : thus they went 
by, without taking the slightest notice of 
any of us, though full in their view : we 
merely heard him say, <* Besides, their 
fine long manes and tails are to whisk off 
the flies ; you ought surely to have con- 
sidered that, Claudy." 

** Certainly I ought, my dear Dudley,'^ 
she replied ; ** but, now, will you assure 
me — " 

We heard no more : they passed on 
down the long dark -green walk, canopied 
with high trees, and among the foliage of 
underwood we soon lost sight of their 
young and graceful figures, which dis- 



DUDLEY. 137 

tress and animation had rendered lovelier 
than ever. 



This trifling incident has not been 
without its use ; it has served to display 
the strength of mind and courage of 
Dudley, his humanity, and particularly his. 
independence of spirit, which would not 
submit, even to his darling Claudy, when 
he considered her to be in the wrong. — 
It has given my child a good lesson on 
her thoughtlessness and imperious turn of 
character, and has made me still more 
wary, when the safety of the brute part 
of my family is in question, in the conduct 
of my servants. 



Of course I took notice of the above 
affair to Dudley the next morning, when, 
as I expected, whilst I blamed Claudy, 
he excused her. Having ordered our 
horses, w^e rode down together to the 
beach, for the purpose of swimming, and 
by degrees started a variety of subjects ; 
among others, the predominant advau- 



138 DUDLEY. 

tng^s of civilized and uncivilized life. — 
I will spare you the detail of our argu- 
ments, Clonmore, and wind up the ac- 
count of our excursion with assuring you 
that Dudley would make no despicable 
figure as a college wrangler. When we 
reached the sequestered and lonely beach 
the tide was high, and the tops alone of 
huge scatt ered rocks appeared at some 
distance before us. I sat down on a high 
bank, leaving our horses in the care of 
Agusto, whilst Dudley stripped, and, with 
Carlo, ran down the steep and plunged 
into the water. After swimming some 
time, he climbed to the top of a high 
pointed rock that rose from the sea, and 
round which the water appeared calm as 
a lake, and there stood some time 
erect : his white body in the sunshine, re- 
lieved by the dark sea, looked like a fine 
statue emerged from the waves. Whilst 
Carlo in vain endeavoured to gain the 
same station, the slippery weeds forbid- 
ding his ascent, and as often as he 
struggled to get a footing, he fell back 
into the water; Dudley, having stood 



DUDLEY. 1^9 

thus some time, plunged headlong from 
off the roek, swam to shore, and joined 
me. 



** Did you fancy yourself the Belvidere 
Apollo," I asked, " that you there sta- 
tioned yourself to be admired of the 
gulls, the puffins, and the eagles ?** 

"No," he replied, whilst putting on his 
clothes, " I was admiring myself." This 
was said with the most striking simplicity. 
— " As I stood naked upon the rock 
yonder, I fancied myself as if newly come 
from the hands of my Creator ; and I 
felt glorying in my own perfections : here, 
as I stand, I said, I owe all to my God, 
and nothing to my fellow-man. The 
glow after swimming and the warm sun- 
beam made me feel health in every limb. 
I tried the clearness of my sight, by 
marking distant objects ; I listened to the 
various sounds of leaping fish, of mur- 
muring waves, the songs oi^ the land- 
birds, the flapping of wings, and the buzz 
of insects. The fragrance of yonder 
grove of orange and lime trees was 
blown to me by the soft breeze j and I 



140 DUDLEY. 

was eating a cluster of raisins, which I 
had held by the stalk in my mouth whilst 
swimming : thus I proved, that all my 
senses were equally acute and perfect. 
I felt as if dropped from the skies, and 
seemed to wish to soar again ; and I cried, 
* Oh, that I had wings like the dove !' 
It is very singular," he continued, " that 
when I am naked, I always feel inclined 
to fly away ; and with my clothes on, I 
feel as if tied to the earth." 

These remarks led us to speak of the 
senses and faculties, and I particularly 
inculcated my advice respecting the pre- 
servation of sights on which so great a 
proportion of the happiness of life de- 
pends. Every habit, however apparently 
trifling, that can injure that most precious 
of all the senses, I observed, ought to be 
even religiously avoided ; that we ought 
never to read a damp book, (the heat of 
the eyes serving as a conductor to the 
vapour,) or even to write on paper 
unaired; never to indulge in study at 
pight, or to read whilst walking or riding ; 
the certain consequence of which habits. 



DUDLEY. 141 

produce vertigos, swimmings in the head, 
and not unirequently failure of sight. 



We will allow, Clonmore, that there 
are abundance of irremediable evils in the 
world, of unavoidable accidents, which 
no human prudence or foresight could 
avert. Yet, generally speaking, if we 
come fairly to examine the cause of most 
of the calamities under which the human 
species suffer^ shall we not find that they 
are owing to our own fault ; although we 
frequently call the results of our folly, 
the dispensations of all-ruling Provi- 
dence ? Think of the many evils derived 
from excess, from over study, from anx- 
iety, from neglect, imprudent travelling, 
and late hours. 

A friend of mine, for many years a 
paralytic, lost in a few days his excellent 
state of health, by his own obstinacy, in 
inhabiting a new house, the mortar of 
which was scarcely dry, and the paint 
still wet ; and yet I have heard him, in 
the usual canting stile, observe, " My 
sufferings are the will of Heaven, and I 



14^ DUDLEY. 

must submit." Heaven never desired 
him to go into a damp house ; on the con* 
trary, he was endowed with reason, to 
teach him to shun it. 

Another worthy acquaintance, instead 
61 taking the inside ^ of a maii»coach one 
dark December night, when travelling to 
town, to be ready the next day for a 
Christmas dinner, preferred a seat on the 
roof; the coach was overturned, and he a 
cripple : here neither life or death occa-^ 
sioned his journey, but simply good 
cheer. " His affliction is great,'' was 
the cry, " but it is the will of God." 
A third lost his sight by a rheum, which 
ended m a gutta-serena, caught when 
poring day and night over the damp and 
endless parchment documents of a law- 
suit. A young girl — you remember Har- 
riet Chetwynd ; she wag entreated by her 
mother to put off a visit to a friend, to 
whom she had promised to be bride's^ 
maid : a heavy shower of sleet had fallen 
in the night, her horse fell with her into 
a pit of drifted snow, and dislocated hjs 
shoulder ; she proceeded, after con- 



DUDLEY. 143 

siderable delay, to the house of her friend, 
and a rapid consumption and early death 
were the consequences of a cold at that 
time taken. A youth, a relation of my 
own, a midshipman, was drowned off the 
Eddystone, by the upsetting of the boat 
he was in, which, with three others, was 
rowing in a heavy sea, for a wager* 

And we calmly remark^ ** Such are 
the dispensations of Providence !" No, 
my friend, I most sincerely believe from 
experience and observation, that all the 
good we enjoy in this life is derived from 
the Almighty, and that most of the evils, 
if not the whole, arise from our own 
folly, or carelessness, or wickedness. 
Ten parts of all the mischief that is to be 
found in the world, I verily imagine, pro- 
ceed from spending those hours in ex- 
cessj in company, or even in study and 
business, that should be devoted to sleep, 
*< Children of light," and ** children of 
darkness," may be literally applied to 
society, as at present formed ; and though 
it is utterly impracticable to adhere to 
that law, by which the brute, creation is 



144 DUDLEY. 

governed, of rising with the sun and 
going to rest with the same, many good 
effects might be ensured, could we keep 
to that rule as closely as the interests of 
society would permit. 

On a slight perusal of the newspapers 
and other periodical publications, we shall 
find that more than half the accidents 
and disputes that disturb the peace of 
the world, occur after the going down of 
the sun. Of course a medium must be 
observed, and w^e may infer that the cur- 
few law of William the Conqueror had 
no bad moral tendency, whatever might 
be its political error. Were each family 
in every great city shut within the safe- 
guard of its own home, soon after that 
hour, neither our prisons nor our hospitals 
might be quite as well stocked as they 
are at present. 



To return to Dudley. — He is, at pre- 
sent, in good train. His religious prin- 
ciples are fixed. He has a thorough 
conviction of his depen dance on God : 
he looks up to him as all in all ; and al- 



ready knows no earthly medium between 
his heart, and the Maker of that heart. 
He loves his parents, his brothers, his 
sisters, me, Mrs. Grantley, and Claudy ; 
respects and admires others, but adores 
his God alone ; and looks upon us, as 
equally with himself, dependent upon 
the great Creator and Giver of all things. 
Accustomed now to solitary prayer, he 
feels himself, daily, responsible to the 
Almighty for his actions of that day. He 
is amenable to Him — grateful to Him ; 
confiding, and true. Never, I am con- 
vinced, will he suffer himself, when en* 
countering the world, to be seduced to 
go one way, when the law of God points 
out the other. 

He has hitherto reserved one form of 
homage, that of kneeling, as due to the 
Almighty alone j and I actually think, 
that, were a ducal coronet the reward, he 
could not be tempted to bend his knee at 
court, having, I repeat, appropriated 
that posture to the holy purpose of prayer. 
He would, at least, feel as reluctant to 
obey, as any of our noblemen, when de- 
sired to do homage in the court of China. 

VOL. III. H 



146 DUDLEY. 

However, our young lawyer will tieveff 
I judge, be put to either of these trials 5 
for his future fate seems to mark him as 
my successor in the hermitage of Eu- 
phorbia ; whilst the virtues he at pre- 
sent displays, convince me that he will 
be happy in the possession of that, and 
its pretty little mistress. When Dudley 
shall be united to my Claudy, I may 
boast that even courts might envy their 
happiness. 

Adieu, Clonmore. I hope, when you 
write again, to hear some news of Mrs. 
Shelburne ; and that, in my next letter, 
I shall have some intelligence to commu- 
nicate to you concerning our friend 
Zulvago. 

Ever yours, 

Eliot Howard, 



nuBLEY, 147 



LETTER XLIV. 
Mrs. Grantley to Mrs. Clonmore* 

MY DEAR MADAM, Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

1 HAVE selected this day, a trtdy happy 
one to me, to dedicate to your service. 
On this day my niece completes her 
iifteenth year ; and you will, doubtless, 
credit me, when I assure you, that, in 
person and disposition, she far excels any 
girl of that age I ever met with. As her 
limbs have nev^er been under the smallest 
restraint, nor back-boards, collars, straps, 
or ligatiues of any kind, having been 
called into our service, most of which 
frequently occasion deformity, by causing 
the growing wearer to shrink from re- 
straint, Claudy is, at this hour, as per- 
fectly well formed, as graceful, as iair, 
and finely proportioned, as the most beau- 
tiful native of Otaheite, described in such 
H 2 



148 



DUDLEY. 



charming colours by our English navi* 
gators. 

There is an ease, a pob'sh, an elegance, 
and a dignity of carriage in her every 
motion, whether walking or riding, 
dancing or sitting, that is most truly 
pleasing to behold. And you may inform 
my sister Caroline, if you wish it, that 
Claudy's laced trowsers hav^, at length, 
wholly disappeared, and that the hem of 
her frock touches her ankle. Add to 
this, that she no longer plays at hoop, or 
marbles with Dudley, and seldom, if ever, 
is now seen flying a kite ; and that other 
revolutions will, from this important day, 
take place. 

Hitherto, as you have been already 
informed, they have never made a 
part of the drawing-room society ; but 
have kept separate with Rosalva, em^ 
ployed on their elegant little manufac- 
tures. — Rosalva, from this day, will no 
longer attend them into company, among 
whom they are henceforward to mix, 
or not, at their own choice. They dined 
with us to-day for the first time, and 
conducted themselves, before a large so- 



DUDLEY. 149 

ciety, with the strictest propriety, with- 
out intrusion, and without bashfulness. 



I do not know whether my brother in- 
formed you, that he is preparing the 
rooms which Mr. Clonmore occupied, 
when here, for Dudley. They are to be 
newly furnished ; and, on his sixteenth 
birth-day, he is to take possession of 
them. We have undertaken to join our 
talents in producing ornaments for it. 
I have promised to work a border for a 
carpet, and a hearth rug, (for we adopt 
many English fashions,) as Dudley re- 
marked to me, that though he was not 
entitled, from his youth, to study com- 
forts, he loved to study in comfort. 
Eliot intends himself to paint the walls 
in fresco ; and Claudy has undertaken to 
execute twelve coloured landscapes, 
twenty inches by sixteen, to decorate the 
walls. Mr. Turner lends his genius in 
the construction of a rosewood bookcase, 
(for he, as well as Dudley, excels as a 
carpenter and joiner,) and Rosalva is to 
H S 



150 DUDLEY. 

weave flower-baskets, and work covers 
for his chairs sind sofa. 



From the hour that Dudley and Claudy 
became reconciled to each other's society, 
(you, my dear Mrs. Clonmore, must 
remember that day,) it seems to have 
been the main study of her life to please 
him^and to accommodate and benefit him, 
as it has been his to protect and assist 
her. Claudy, with respect to her young 
£nend, acts, as we often observe, with 
intuitive delicacy and judgment. On 
birth-days, and other remarkable eras, 
presents are regularly exchanged between 
them ; but she never yet has offered him 
any thing of value ; though, owing to 
Lady Alford's profusion, she has trinkets 
of all descriptions in abundance, and 
some of considerable price. She gives 
trifles to Dudley, and, with grateful 
pleasure, receives trifles in return. On 
her ninth birth-day, as I well recollect, the 
young lady, without a single blush, present,, 
ed your son with a pair of blue silk garters, 
the workmanship of her own hands, and 



DUDLEY. 151 

received from him a bosom-friend of 
cygnet down, woven by himself. 

This morning she presented him with 
a watch-chain of her own hair, and a 
small gold seal, in exchange for the 
platting of a straw bonnet, that Rosalva 
is to make up for her, and which, he said, 
he hoped she would greatly value, as he 
must now resign these innocent and 
boyish occupations, for those of a more 
serious nature j and, henceforth, give 
his mind up to study, that he might, in 
time, become a great barrister. Claudy 
looked surprised ; as if she really ex- 
pected he would, with her, continue 
platting straw, and weaving mats, to the 
end of his life. 

On the contrary, (agreeable to the in- 
dependence of her character, which, 
with all our care, will still, at times, show 
itself,) she makes Mr. Turner the richest 
and most valuable presents ; and this, 
with the haughty ease and generous 
dignity of an Enghsh princess, heiress to 
a crown, when addressing one of her 
chaplains ! Claudy's idea is to join her 
father in recompensing Mr. Turner for 
H 4 



15^ DUDLEY. 

his care of Dudley ; but, after accepting 
two or three of these gifts, at my bro- 
ther's urgent desire, he had the sense and 
delicacy peremptorily to refuse taking 
more ; and on her carelessly saying, this 
morning, at breakfast, " Mr. Turner, 
tin's is my birth-day ; catch and keep :" 
and throwing him a large and superb 
gold watch, one of the four given her by 
Caroline, and which had belonged to 
Lord Alford, he returned it. It was in 
vain that Eliot pressed him to keep this 
token of his pupil's esteem : (for to him 
is Claudy indebted for her knowledge in 
writing, in accounts, and geography. J 
He refused j and, with something like 
displeasure, added, " If Miss Howard 
can set no bounds to her generosity, I 
must to my avarice. I keep what she 
has already given me ; but I receive no 
more of her presents." 



Claudy, arrived at this age, possesses, 
my dear madam, no splendid talents, or 
even shining accomplishments. She can* 
not entertain a brilliant company, even 



DUDLEY. 



153 



for half an hour together, by either her 
playing, or her singing. She does not 
excel in opera-dancing ; she has little or 
no wit ; and was never known to utter a 
repartee. But, as a set-off to these ne- 
gative acquirements, she can converse, 
in a large society, with propriety, and in 
a smaller, with vivacity. When, with 
only our own family, she keeps up the 
ball of conversation with spirit. With 
one person only, she is, perhaps, most 
charming ; and when in perfect solitude, 
truly happy in herself. 



Add to this, my. niece understands, 
already, how to fulfil the duties of a sick 
chamber ; for, in the little illnesses to 
which, with all our care, human nature 
is subject, she has been the nurse of her 
father, of myself, of Rosalva, and of her 
own nurse Morton. She attended the 
sick bed of the aged Martella ; and, by 
chance, was the only one present in the 
room to close her eyes, when, after a 
lingering disease, the worthy creature 
breathed her last. 

h5 



154 DUDLEY. 

in the chamber of the invalid, Claudy 
is the noiseless, gliding assistant; the 
gentle guardian, the tender, anxious, yet 
cheerful nurse. With regard to her own 
health, it is invariably excellent ; for, 
having been blessed by nature with a 
sound, and, indeed, robiist constitution, 
it was my endeavour early to teach her 
the value of the privilege she enjoyed ; 
but this was only effected, by at length 
taking the care of her health out of the 
hands of her nurses, and other servants, 
and putting it into her own care. 

Until I adopted this plan, we were for 
ever annoyed by Morton following the 
child, throughout the house and gardens, 
with shawls, and bonnets, and shoes, in 
order to wrap her up, and prevent her 
taking cold ; and yet, with all these pre- 
cautions, Claudy was never free from 
ailment. At last, I told her seriously, 
(she was about ten years old at the time,) 
that as swelled eyes, a red face, and 
other symptoms of a cold, were not 
pleasant companions in a drawing-room, 
she should, on the next time of taking 
any illness, through her own faulty be 



DUDLEY. 155 

confined to her chamber three weeks 
from the day of her recovery. 

Of this threat of punishment, she 
made very light at the time, saying, with 
a little toss of disdain, of which she in- 
stantly repented, " I am very happy in 
my own chamber.'' A few days after- 
wards, being out walking with her father, 
they were caught in the rain : no evil 
consequences, however, could have re- 
sulted, had she, as was desired, instantly 
changed her dress, and, particularly, her 
shoes and stockings, on returning to the 
house. These precautions were neglect- 
ed ; for whilst running towards her room, 
in the full intention of obeying, some- 
thing in the way caught her attention, 
and neither shoes nor dress were changed, 
for many hours afterwards. 

A severe illness was the result ^ during 
w^hich, she was most carefully attended 
by both her father and myself. She re- 
covered ; and, forgetting the penalty, 
was rejoicing in the idea of once more 
leaving her room, and joining us below, 
when came the full and firm prohibition, 
which put her under a species of qua* 
H 6 



156 



DUDLEY. 



rantine, and cut her off from society, far 
the period above stated. She was now 
aware that the punishment was most 
grievous, particularly as all communica- 
tion with Dudley was prevented. When 
the time expired, the meeting of the 
children was truly affecting and delight- 
ful. He reproached her carelessness, 
and hinted, that he had also been the 
sufferer. Since which time, she was ob- 
served to be more careful of her health ; 
and often has he been heard, at their re- 
turn from a walk, to remind her of 
changing her shoes ; and seen to produce 
a spare silk handkerchief from his pocket, 
to tie round her neck, of a damp, raw 
evening. 

When attacked by real and unavoid- 
able illness, Claudy and Dudley submit 
to constraint, and confinement, with 
cheerfulness; for no self-reproach mingles 
with their momentary weariness. If 
able, they occupy themselves, in the 
day-time, as well as they can; and in 
the silent hour of night, when unable to 
sleep, repeat aloud some of the psalms, 
or hymns, or other pieces of poetry, or 



DUDLEY. 157 

passages in prose, with which their minds 
are richly stored. Claudy has told me, 
that, frequently, she remembers begin- 
ning to repeat one of the above, but 
seldom coming to the conclusion, as sleep 
overtakes her about half-way. 



As my brother has already informed 
you, they both enjoy, as yet, the most 
perfect liberty of communication, which 
neither he or 1 have had any reason, hi- 
therto, of restricting. The time must 
come ; but we do not wish to anticipate 
it. At present, we feel confident that 
they do not spend an hour alone toge- 
ther, whether in the house, or in their 
walks, and rides, that does not tend, in 
some shape, to their mutual advantage. 

A few years more, and education will 
end ; and then, I trust, that our hopes 
will be realised. Should it please Heaven 
to spare my life, until I can lay my hands 
on the innocent heads of these dear 
children of my affection, wedded to each 
other for the remainder of their exist- 
ence, as they are now united in the bonds 



158 DUDLEY. 

of purity and sympathy, I shall not 
have a wish ungratified. — I shall then, in 
peace, look forward to my own dissolu- 
tion, when I hope, through the mercy 
of the Lord, to be united to the spirits 
of my own departed blessed children, in 
the mansions of peace and happiness. 

With every sincere and kind wish for 
the increasing happiness of my dear Mrs. 
Clonmore, her worthy husband, and their 
yoiuig and promising family, I remain 
ever their attached friend, 

Jane Grantley. 



DUDLEY. . 159 



LETTER XLV. 

Si7' Eliot Howm^d to the Rev. Henry Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe, 

1 KNOW not, Cloomore, what faith you 
put in the supernatural conveyance of 
intelligence respecting the welfare of 
distant friends by means of dreams, in 
which many of the old ladies of my fa- 
mily, I can remember, used to place 
great confidence. But if, in your sleep, 
you or Mrs. Clonmore have seen Dudley 
at the point of death, I hope you have 
also since beheld him in your visions, 
restored not only to life, but to his pre- 
vious state of robust and glowing health. 
Thanks to the blessed Author of our 
being, and Preserver of our existence, 
our dear children (for they have botk 
been on the verge of the grave) are 
permitted once more to become the 
charm of our society! It is now up- 



160 DUDLfil^* 

Wards of a month since this unfortunate 
event took place ; and they are now, if 
possible, more healthy than previous to 
their illness, such is the peculiar excel- 
lency of their constitution. 

I believe I mentioned to you my in- 
tention of permitting Dudley, under the 
care of Balfour and Turner, to make an 
excursion to the summit of the Peak, and 
to undertake a water-expedition through 
our little Canarian archipelago. The 
present summer was named for the pur- 
pose 'y and on the 1st of last May the 
adventurers set out, Turner, with great 
importance, having duly prepared a large 
blank pocket-book, to take notes of the 
tour, which he intimated his design to 
publish at some future period ; and 
Dudley, on my recommendation, and to 
gratify Claudy and me at his return, 
following his tutor's example, though 
without being stimulated by the ambi- 
tious aim of turning author. 

Three weeks passed, at the end of 
which period the travellers returned, 
when my chaplain appeared to fancy 
himself at least as great as Saussure, his 

10 



DUDLEY. 161 

predecessor to the crater of the Peak, and 
to be on a par with the first circumnavi- 
gator in the world. Dudley's feelings 
were very different ; for in the transport 
produced by his return home, (from 
whence he had never been separated for 
so long a time since his first arrival in the 
island,) he seemed to forget his journey, 
and to be solely occupied with Euphorbia 
and its inmates. Turner, his thoughts 
still engaged by his travels, took no no- 
tice of surrounding objects, whereas 
Dudley, in his eagerness to learn what 
had taken place in his absence, scarcely 
answered our enquiries. And this anxiety 
to us was most whimsical j for though 
he had been absent not more than three 
weeks, he conducted himself as if he had 
been gone three years. He appeared to 
expect the seeds he had sown blown into 
flowers ; his antelope to have young ; 
and his unfledged birds ready to become^ 
in their turn, parents. 



These last three weeks had, however, 
Clonmore, been spent with us at Eu^ 



16^ 



DUDLEY. 



pborbia in the deepest solicitude and 
distress. About four or five davs after 
the departure of the travellers, a sort 
of contagious fever, of the typhus kind as 
it appeared, broke out at Santa Cruz. It 
was brought to Euphorbia by one of the 
men-servants, communicated to others, 
and the infection spreading notwithstand- 
ing all our care, Claudy took it, and on 
the sixth day sickened. The absence of 
Balfour, at such a time, was particularly 
distressing, as in all our little illnesses, 
he had hitherto attended her from child- 
hood. We had, however, recourse to 
the best medical, advice Orotava could 
boast ; and I sent a special messenger to 
Madeira for Dr. G-- — . 

Turner and Dudley returned from 
their excursion on the very day when the 
disorder of Claudy was at its crisis ; and 
as I met them purposely, and alone, to 
prepare the latter for the evil intelligence, 
which I wished him to hear from me ra- 
ther than from any other, I sat some time 
listening to both in silence, until Dudley 
remarked my gravity, and enquired the 
cause ; at the same time starting briskly 



DUDLEY. 163 

towards the door, he added, ^* Now to 
seek my own dear Claudy, • — I have a 
thousand things to say to her. Where is 
she r' 

I called him back; and in few words 
made him acquainted with what had 
taken place in his absence. His sudden 
paleness and consternation, (as if he 
had thought Claudy invulnerable to ill- 
ness,) were, at first, alarming ; but I re- 
minded him, that he was now called 
upon to show his fortitude and piety ; 
that this was but one of the many trials 
to which his future life might be ex- 
posed ; and that, at his age, it was time- 
to give some proofs of manliness and 
self-command. I concluded with exact- 
ing a solemn promise, that, as the dis- 
order was highly contagious, he would, 
with Mr. Turner, go immediately to Ben 
Lomond, and not return from thence 
until summoned by me. Their excursion 
had ended much sooner than I expected ; 
otherwise I should not have been thus 
taken by surprise. 

Dudley was, however, reluctant to 
obey J and it was only after many vain 



164 DUDLEY. 

and repeated entreaties that he might 
only take one look at Claudy, and but 
exchange one single word, that he pre- 
pared to follow my directions. For this 
purpose he went with me out of the room, 
and across the lower corridor, towards 
the library, to select such books as might 
be wanted for his studies. At that mo- 
ment we heard the loud scream of a 
female voice, and on looking towards the 
upper passage over our heads, saw and 
heard Morton, who, in all the agonies of 
despair, (and she, at the instant, re- 
sembled the nurse of Juliet,) was ex- 
claiming, " She's dead ! She's dead !" 

Never did the feelings of nature, and 
those of adoption, undergo a more severe 
conflict, than at that instant with me. 
I felt as if my heart had received a fatal 
blow ; and yet, I had presence of mind 
firmly to grasp the arm of Dudley to de- 
tain him ; but the attempt was vain : he 
wrenched himself from my hold, sprang 
up the stairs, and disappeared. I had 
only to follow. 

At the first sight, on entering the 
sick room, I could perceive, by the 



DUDLEY. 16,5 

countenances of Mrs. Grantley, and of 
Balfour, who had been summoned^ and 
of the other medical men, that life was 
not extinct. This was the crisis of the 
disorder. 

After a long and painful struggle, 
Claudy had fainted ; which appearance 
Morton mistaking for death, had impru- 
dently and abruptly quitted the room : 
had not Dudley unfortunately heard her 
words, they would have been of little 
consequence ; but now the evil was too 
late to remedy. On my entrance, he 
lay in a swoon across her bed* It ap- 
pears that, to the grief and surprise of all 
present, (for I had taken upon myself, 
when I quitted them, on hearing of his 
arrival about half an hour before, to send 
him to Ben Lomond,) he had rushed into 
the room, opened the bed-curtain hastily, 
grasped her hand, which lay upon the 
quilt, and fallen deprived of sense or 
motion. 



From that hour Claudy recovered, 
and Dudley sickened. Owing to the state 



166 DUDLEY. 

of irritation in which his system had been 
thrown at the moment of taking the in- 
fection, the disorder appeared in him 
under the most malignant form ; and at 
one period, I felt as if I could with plea- 
sure have lain down, and died beside 
him. 

Be, however, under no apprehensions, 
Clonmore ; for, thanks to the Almighty, 
they are at this present moment of my 
writing, walking arm-in-arm on the 
orange-terrace, in view of my study win- 
dow. I perceive that they often stop, as 
if to examine some insect on a plant ; — 
they appeal to each other — there is cer- 
tainly a greater degree of slowness in 
their steps and movement, than before 
this illness, resulting doubtless from the 
languor inseparable from a state of con- 
valescence ; Claudy appears weary, and 
they seat themselves on one of the 
benches under the trees. He speaks 
earnestly to her, and I should imagine 
she gives him no answer; for he seems to 
repeat his question : she now turns away 
her head ; she rises, and as he gives her 
his arm, I perceive him clasp with his 



DUDLEY. 167 

Other hand, her hand, which is not with- 
drawn, and they renew their walk^ 



Yes, my friend, my hour is come, or 
rather their hour is come ; and an instant 
separation must take place. As you well 
know, I did not intend to part with 
Dudley until his eighteenth year ; but the 
circumstances that have attended their 
recovery prove to us the necessity of 
changing our plans ; wherefore, instead 
of a twelvemonth, you may expect to see 
him in less than six weeks. 

The circumstances I allude to are 
these : — As no possible danger could 
result to Claudy on her recovery, she was 
allowed to pay a visit to your son, when 
he was sufficiently able to be removed for 
change of air to his little study. She found 
him very busily engaged supping his 
chicken-broth, for which I was cutting 
most scientifically toasted bread in squares 
and diamonds. Mrs. Grantley accompa- 
nied my child, saying, ** I bring you a new 
visitor, Dudley ; I suppose Claudy is wel- 
come." Instead of, however, receiving 



168 DUDLEY. 

her as we expected, particularly after so 
long an absence, he gave but one look 
at her ; his face became flushed, when he 
continued to swallow his broth, and with 
such evident voracity and heedlessness, 
that I was forced to remove it from him. 
Of this he took no notice ; but putting his 
handkerchief to his face, he turned from 
ns all and concealed his head in the deep 
cushions of his chair. 

Claudy on her part, to whom it had 
been impossible to hide in what way 
Dudley had caught his illness, now acted 
wholly different to what we looked for. 
Although she had not seen him since he 
had quitted Euphorbia on his tour round 
the island, she did not as usual, after even 
a day's absence, run to him with enquiries, 
and take and kiss and stroke his hand. 
No, no, all that was over with them. — 
Does not the first consciousness of pure 
and innocent love, Clonmore, ever seem 
doomed to appear under the semblance 
of indifference, if not of aversion ? 

Claudy sat down on the chair nearest 
the door, more aukward and embarrassed 
than in my life I had seen her. Mrs. 



DtJDLEV. 169 

Grantley and I, after glancing at both of 
them, exchanged looks ; when I rose, 
observing to my sister, that as Dudley 
had now two companions for half an 
hour, I wished to ride over to Ben Lo- 
mond : the reply was ; " Then I have a 
message to send by you to Mrs. Balfour;'* 
and we were quitting the room together, 
when our surprise was increased on per- 
ceiving that Claudy was preparing to foU 
low us. 

Still resolved not to interfere, I took 
no notice of this unusual conduct, but 
was not displeased, on my turning round 
to bid Dudley good-by, to see him — (and 
with a face all radiance, and eyes filled 
with tears — in short, with every symptom 
of strong and powerful affection,) extend 
his hand, saying, " Claudy :*' the tone of 
his voice was the music, as his look was 
that of love. 

She turned, she caught his glance, she 
rushed to his side and sat down by him. 
As their hands were fondly clasped, she 
hid her face on his shoulder, and wept. 

I then found it necessary to speak. 
" Oh, oh ! your capricious little lady- 

VOL. III. I 



170 DUDLEY. 

ship," I said, "will condescend at last 
to take notice of our poor invalid ; but 
take care, Dudley, you know Claudy is 
an incessant chatterer ; she will either 
talk herself, or make you talk, until you 
are heartily weary of her/' I could per- 
ceive them smile and blush as their eyes 
met; and I think you will laugh at my 
folly, when I own I should not have been 
sorry to see a kiss pass between them, 
on such an important occasion as the 
restoration of each to life. But no, 
kissing days are over, it appears ; and as 
that is the case, it is high time they 
should say " Farewell," until old enough 
to be regularly considered as betrothed 
to each other. 

Prepare then, Clonmore, to see, and 
shortly, this dear child of your's, this be- 
loved son of my adoption, who has most 
amply fulfilled all my expectations, and 
whom, I trust, you yourself will pro- 
riounce as not unworthy of you. I cal- 
culate on receiving an answer to this 
letter in about five weeks, of course it 
will be such as J could wish ; and in 
furtherance of my plans, I reckon on 



DUDLEY. 171 

you, on. Clonmore, and on Dr. H ^. 

Write to Dudley yourselves by the same 
conveyance ; be diffuse in your account 
of the proper arrangements for his future 
course of study ; and keep up the sti- 
mulus of the benefit of a man having a 
profession, which predilection, sponta- 
neous on his own part, I now regard as 
most fortunate : it offers the best mo- 
tive for their separation, and the most 
effectual means of seriously occupying 
the mind of Dudley for the following 
three or four years. 

Claudy's education will in that time 
be going on, and at twenty be com- 
plete. Occasional excursions to Ben 
Lomond, our Teneriffe cities, Madeira, 
and the other neighbouring islands, will 
sufficiently extend her knowledge, amuse 
her mind, and help to shorten the time 
when Dudley will return to us and for a 
permanency. He is of an awkward age 
to be saddled with a tutor ; too young 
to be left entirely to his own guidance j 
yet too old to be put under any degree 
of ostensible restraint. Were he going 
to any part of the continent, or on a 
I ^ 



17^ DUDLEY. 

long voyage, I shoul^ certainly send 
Turner with him ; but when I consider 
the shortness of the passage, and that on 
his arrival in England he will be imme- 
diately under your care and inspection, 
I feel tempted to let him go alone in an 
English frigate, which will sail from 
hence about that period. The Spanish 
lad Romeri (who, it is very singular, has 
become greatly attached to Dudley, from 
the very day on which the latter severely 
censured his designed cruelty and inso- 
lence to himself) shall attend him, and 
also old Robert, on whose conduct I can 
place the firmest reliance. 

During Dudley's absence, the arrange- 
ments making in his new apartments 
shall be completed ; but this, I must con- 
fess, to be a blind concealing my real in- 
tentions (still in the Prospero stile) from 
both your son and my daughter ; for it is 
my sincere wish, that when our young 
lawyer shall have inhabited his bachelor 
rooms for the space of six months, he 
may exchange them for those of a directly 
contrary nature. 



DUDLEY. 17s 

Your account of Caroline's happiness 
gives me the sincerest pleasure ; and I 
pique myself on great correctness of 
judgment in the opinion I had formed 
many years back of Cavendish. I hope 
her young family may be the means of 
endearing her to her home. 

No news yet of Zulvago. I am con- 
vinced he has written to me or to Bal- 
four, but that his letters have miscar- 
ried. I have sent one hap-hazard to 
Calcutta, and wait the result with the 
utmost impatience. 

With the kindest wishes to Mrs. Clon- 
more, and our venerable Esculapius, 
I am ever your's, 

Eliot Howard. 



I 3 



174 DUDLEY. 



LETTER XLVI. 

Sh- Eliot Howard to the Rev, Henry Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

1 OUR letter and that of Dr. H — — 
arrived yesterday, my friend ; and this 
answer of mine will be delivered to you 
by Dudley himself. I am rejoiced that 
you and the Doctor approve of my de- 
termination respecting the immediate de- 
parture of my adopted son. As the letter 
truly remarks, I have, indeed, << nickecl 
my time :" had I separated him earlier 
from Claudy, it would have been at the 
hazard of their attachment not taking 
that decisive turn, which now leaves no 
longer a doubt on the subject; later, 
would have led them to come to some 
mutual explanations, rather interfering 
with the progress of those studies re- 
quisite towards the finishing the educa- 
tion of the one, and the gaining a know- 
ledge of the world in the other. 



DUDLEY. 175 

I repeat, this letter will be given you 
by Dudley ; wherefore I shall continue 
it from day to day, according as circum- 
stances occur, and not seal it until the 
very last moment of my parting with my 
boy. My boy ! a full grown youth nearly 
six feet high ! 

The letters arrived yesterday during 
breakfast, when I, as usual, distributed 
them to their several owners ; and Dud- 
ley, of course, received those to himself. 
But for my thorough knowledge of Mrs. 
Grantley's native simplicity of character, 
so truly well-timed are her out-of-time re- 
marks, that I should suspect they were 
the result of artifice ; on the contrary, 
they really spring from the moment, and 
are wholly without design. I, as you 
may judge, was perfectly aware of the 
contents of Dudley's letters, and at a 
glance was pleased rather than otherwise, 
(such at times the selfishness of my na- 
ture !) to see the deepest consternation 
and amazement spread itself over bis 
face, and which, as he read on, increased 
to a most painful degree. Claudy, as I 
could perceive, when I turned round to 
I 4 



1?6 DUDLEY, 

the table to pour out another cup of 
coffee, (for though I had twice asked her 
to fill my cup it remained empty,) Claudy 
had her eyes fixed on Dudley — I saw her 
change colour, and look as if breathless 
w^ith alarm. 

It was then that the oddities of 
Mrs. Grantley's character came to our 
relief: — ** Claudy, my dear, your boot is 
unlaced, the lace will throw you down.** 
Claudy held out her foot to Rosalva, who 
was standing near her, and Rosalva in 
her speed broke the lace. 

** I must now change these boots," 
remarked Claudy, ** for I have no more 
laces of the same colour ;" and she left 
the room with her attendant. 

In the mean time, Dudley was alter- 
nately flushed and pale ; and at length, 

laying your letter and that of Dr. H 

very calmly on the table, he remarked, 
without addressing any person in parti- 
cular, and with a sort of proud sullen- 
ness, as if an offer of the most insulting 
nature, from a stranger, had been made 
him, " Indeed I shall not quit Teneriffe. 
I have no design of quitting Euphorbia* 



DUDLEY. 177 

What have I to do with England, or 
England with me ? I may wish to see 
my fatlier and mother, and the rest of my 
family, it is true ; but a visit to them is 
soon paid ; and I shall return here again 
immediately. Teneriffe is my native 
place, I may almost say ; and I have no 
design of quitting it." Thus saying, 
your young gentleman put his hands 
into his pockets, after Zulvago's fashion, 
and leaving his letters on the table, calmly 
walked out of the room. 

Here, Clonmore, was the genuine 
language of passion, — the first trial of 
love ! A separation from the object of 
his affections, was, to him, the same as 
a death-stroke ; and after this hour I 
wanted no other proof of the state of his 
heart : for you are to understand, that, 
previous to his illness, his removal to 
England, and his matriculation at Oxford, 
preparatory to his entering on his pro- 
fession, had been repeatedly, and at all 
times the subject of our conversation. 
The source of the change was easily 
traced ; and as I felt confident that his 
reluctance would, in the end, yield to 
I d 



17§ DUDLEY. 

my arguments, I felt secret transport at 
this strong predilection he now professed 
for a place, of which I hope yet to see 
him master. 

Mrs. Grantley and I, thus left alone, 
formed our own conclusions, when I re- 
quested her to go and break the news to 
Claudy, whilst I should speak seriously 
to Dudley on the subject, before even 
they could meet, and discuss it in 
their own fashion. — For this purpose I 
rang for Robert, and desired him to tell 
your ^on I wished to speak with him. 
The answer was, that Mr. Clonmore and 
Miss Howard were gone out riding on 
horseback, and would not return until 
collation-hour. 



I have just parted, in the forest-walk, 
with Dudley, with whom I have had a 
conversation that lasted upwards of two 
hours; and never was I more convinced 
of the headstrong nature of youthful 
passion, than on this occasion. I did 
not attempt to remind him, that, in 
choosing a profession^ he had not even 



DUDLEY. 179 

consulted me or you, or that he had 
done it in such a manner as to convince 
us he was determined to follow his own 
inclinations, on which the happiness, or 
otherwise, of his future life, in a great 
measure depending, we had assuredly no 
right to object. He positively asserted, 
that he could gain great proficiency in 
the law without stirring from Euphorbia! 
At all events, without quitting Tene- 
riffe ! And at last reproached me with 
unkind ness, and a wish of getting rid of 
him. Of this, of course, I made light j 
and judging it better to go upon another 
tack, I looked steadily in his face, saying, 
<* Previous to your illness, you were 
willing, and indeed anxious to go to 
England ; why are you now averse to 
quit TenerifFe ?" 

This he could not stand. His averted 
cheeks were crimsoned. As it was too 
soon to come to an eclaircissement, 
however, (as it is my wish to delay that 
eventful hour until his final return from 
England,) I did not follow up my 
<juestion, but expatiated on the plea- 
sure it would give you and his mother 
I 6 



180 DUDLEY. 

once more to see him : I talked of the im- 
portance a town residence with Dr. H- 



might prove, who, unless his gout and 
age prevented it, was fond of seeing at 
his table the literary characters of the 
day : and, finally, I mentioned my wish 
that he would, on their invitation, spend 
a few weeks now and then with Lady 
Alford and Captain Cavendish, both in 
London, at Richmond, and at Bath ; 
where he might mingle with first-rate 
fashion, and the higher classes of foreign 
nobility. 

I reminded him that I had no objec- 
tion to his taking a trip to France, and 
even paying a visit to the field of 
Waterloo; of shaking hands with Blucher 
and PlatofF; of dining with the Duke of 
Wellington ; and of taking off his hat to 
the King of Prussia, and the Emperor 
Alexander. 

He smiled ; and I continued, " In- 
deed, it is my desire that you should 
spend a few months on the Continent, 
from which our youth have been so long 
excluded. Prejudice and illiberality of 
opinion are, by travelling, removed 5 
10 



DUDLEY. 181 

the mind is enlightened, the manners 
are polished ; and as you are already, to 

use Dr. H 's phrase, ' Guarded by 

the breast-plate of religion,* I shall have 
little fear of you. I use the word little 
instead of no ; for remember, that though 
Hector was clothed in invulnerable ar- 
mour, yet there was one small entrance 
by which the enemy effected his purpose. 

" And now I am on this head, Dud- 
ley, let me warn you of a most serious 
danger which will surround you, and 
particularly in England." He looked 
surprised ; and I added, " the girls of 
our land are renowned for beauty and 
virtue, for lilies and roses ; — take care, 
take care, Dudley ; leave no pass in 
your heart undefended, or they will play 
most dreadful havoc with you.'^ 

This was touching the master-spring. 
He affected to laugh, but he also co- 
loured ; and a silence of a few minutes 
followed. I wished, by making him 
doubt my intentions, to hold him in 
suspense ; and thus give a better security 
for his happiness ; for I repeat, they are 
both too young to be entrusted with the 



laS DUDLEY. 

secret of my most fervent wishes : and 
we all well know, from experience, that a 
state of suspense, on either side, is most 
favourable to theincrease of affection. 

I am so accustomed to read his mind, 
that I perfectly knew what was therein 
passing at that moment. We were 
walking slowly in the forest, when, as 
he had hold of my arm, 1 stopped, say- 
ing, ** You will write to me regularly 
once a month ; that will not encroach too 
much on either your studies or your 
amusements. And let your letters be as 
unreserved and candid as your convers- 
ation. All I have to request is, that you 
will not touch, in any shape, on politics; 
but reserve your opinions, be they what 
they may, until we meet again, which, 
I hope, will be next August twelve- 
month. You will spend a month or so 
here, and then return to England to 
prosecute your studies." As he gave me 
no answer, I repeated, " You will not 
fail in writing to me, Dudley ?" 

** Certainly not. And I shall write to 
my dear Mrs. Grantley, also." 



DUDLEY. 183 

" I hope you will," I replied ; " my 
sister is very fond of you ; and a letter 
from you will give her great pleasure." 
A pause followed. 

" I shall write to Mr. Balfour, also." 

** As you please ; but remember my 
restriction with regard to politics." — 
Another pause. 

" May I, when in England, write 
to — to " 

For the first time in his life^ he he- 
sitated whether to call my child Claudy^ 
or Miss Howard, This was making a 
rapid progress, you will allow, on the 
road of sentiment, in which we often, 
in order to spring forward, find it re- 
quisite to go back a step or two. I 
caught up the word with eagerness, — 
'* To Claudy ? Oh, of course ; that 
admits of no doubt." 

" And on what subject shall I write 
to her?" he enquired, in a smothered 
voice of delight. 

'* On that of love, if you like ;" and 
1 smiled. 

This displeased him, as if he was 
treated like a boy j when I was forced 



184 DUDLEY. 

to add, " Wei], don't be angry ; I don't 
wish you to be in love with Claudy, or 
any other fine girl ; but I have one re- 
quest to make to you, if you should 
correspond, that you will take notice of 
any grammatical fault Claudy may com- 
mit in her answers to you ; any tauto- 
logy, or inelegance of diction : thereby 
you will render her a real service, and 
turn even your absence to her profit ; 
for at present I have no great opinion of 
her talents for letter-writing, if I may 
judge from a very ill-written note of her's 
to Miss Macdonald the other day." 

We had hitherto been walking slowly, 
but, within the last five minutes, he had 
increased his pace to that degree that I 
was unable to keep up with him, when, 
taking my arm from his, I remarked, 
** As you seem to be rivalling Barclay, 
the pedestrian, I shall leave you, and 
take a turn or two alone." Ke took no 
notice of this ; but, when about fifty 
yards from me, called out, " I shall 
write, also, to Jack Turner." 

This was in imitation of Lady Alford ; 
when, for his punishment, at that mo- 



DUDLEY. 185 

merit the little parson appeared among 
the trees. Dudley saw him, and ran off, 
calling out, " Addioy Jack!" 

I guessed there was a point of attrac- 
tion in the walk before us, which had 
escaped my vigilance, but had awakened 
his ; and shortly after I saw, in the 
distance, Dudley and my promising 
daughter (who really seems resolved 
not to be behind him in love's progress) 
walking together slowly up the green 
avenue, towards the vineyards. 

Turner was following them, when 
I caught his arm, and went back with him 
towards the house. This was a fair 
opportunity to put into execution the 
plan I had long formed ; and having 
first rallied him, on his permitting his 
pupil such familiarity, and he had vin- 
dicated his authority, by drawing up his 
head, and assuring me he would suffer it 
from no other youth than Dudley, we 
spoke of the approaching change, when 
I sounded him as to his wishes ibr the 
future, and whether it was his desire to 
return to England with Dudley, or to 



186 DUDLEY. 

remain with me in the sole capacity of 
chaplain, the tutorship being at an end. 

I explained fully my intentions re- 
specting himself; that the salary of four 
hundred a year, which he had enjoyed 
for the last ten years, should be continued 
to him under the form of a life-annuity ; 
adding, whatever might be his deter- 
mination would please me, as all I wished 
was, that he would consult his own hap- 
piness. 

He replied, that he had already made 
up his mind never to quit Euphorbia ; 
but corrected himself immediately, by 
adding, " that is, — Teneriffe." 

I paused for an explanation ; but, as 
he gave none, was forced to remark, 
" You have then some design of quitting 
me, Mr. Turner ?" 

" No," he replied, warmly ; *' no, 
Sir Eliot. The first wish of my heart is 
to be retained as your chaplain, and 
officiate every Sunday here as usual ; 
and to be an occasional visitor, if you 
will allow me ; and to be of any service 
in my power." 



DUDLEY. 187 

Thus he ran on with a whole string of 
capabilities, until I was convinced that 
something lurked behind all these pro- 
fessions, when T said, " Speak out, man : 
speak out at once. We have been ten 
years under one roof, and should have 
done with reserve. You are no youth 
now, and I am getting on in life. Speak, 
therefore, and let me know if I can, in 
any shape, stand your friend.'* 

He caught the decisive tone in which 
1 addressed him ; and, as if plunging at 
once into the Rubicon, answered hastily, 
" You can, Sir Eliot. I love Helen ; 
and, I think, am not indifferent to her." 

I stopped, doubtful whether the man 
v/ere insane or not, for this Helen seemed 
at the instant dropped from the skies 
into his imagination. ** Helen who?'' 
I exclaimed. 

" Helen Macdonald, the niece of 
Mr. Balfour." 

«* Ho ! ho 1" and, as we reached the 
garden-steps that led to the house, I 
shook hands with him j <* if that is the 
case, you have my hearty wishes for your 
success, and shall command my best 



188 DUDLEY. 

services towards promoting it : but you 
and Miss Macdonald seem on as familiar 
a footing as Dudley and yourself. For 
when young gentlemen and ladies come 
to speak of each other by their Christian 
names alone, they may be truly said to 
have marriage in perspective. I hope 
your beloved does not permit herself to 
call you Jack." He made me no an- 
swer, but with rapid strides walked off, 
and, as I afterwards found, dined at Ben 
Lomond. 



Preparations for Dudley's departure 
on Monday next, should the wind prove 
fair, are going on rapidly. The permis- 
sion to correspond with Claudy, I can 
see, has been the healing balm to the 
pains of separation, which would other- 
wise have been most acutely felt, 
particularly on the lady's side, who, 
situated as she is, with respect to this 
worthy object of her choice, must be 
pardoned, if she, in imitation of royalty, 
now and then steps a little out of the 
beaten path of female reserve. 



hVDLEYi 189 



It is all over, my friend, and I ani 
this instant sitting in the cabin of the 
frigate in which Dudley sails for Eng- 
land, concluding and making up my dis- 
patches for Bloomfield Rectory. I shall 
not seal until the final moment, when 
Balfour and I return to shore in the boat 
that brought us to the vessel, now at 
anchor in the roads of Orotava. 

We had permitted Dudley and Claudy 
to spend the two last days as they pleased, 
and we observed that private walks in 
the forest and over the mountains had 
the preference to any other excursion. 
The morning came — we met as usual 
at breakfast ; I in my tight shooting 
dress, he equipped for his voyage. The 
bell at the outward gate of Euphorbia 
rang, and at this signal that our horses 
were coming round, I started up ; Dud- 
ley also rose, but slowly ; he stood for 
one moment pale and tremblings he then 
advanced towards Mrs. Grantley, (Claudy 
was not in the room,) and she saluted his 
cheeks alternately, saying with more 



190 nUDLEY. 

than common emotion, " God bless you, 
my dear." 

He could not utter a word. I looked 
anxiously through the windows, and 
watched the door, expecting at every 
moment to see Claudy, but she did not 
make her appearance ; and my surprise 
was great, when he put his arm under 
mine, saying, " I am ready." 

** You will not surely go away with- 
out bidding good-by to Claudy !" I re- 
marked ; when he answered, ** I have 
bid her good-by." 

When, and where? thought I; but 
that was their own concern, and I ac- 
companied his hurried steps to the hall. 
At his request, I sent on the horses, 
Saladin and Malek Adhel, to wait for us 
at the bottom of the hill, on the summit 
of which, you may remember, is erected 
the flagstaff, the dinner-bell, and the 
Indian gong ; and we followed on foot 
and in silence, winding along the nar- 
row path, leading through the vineyards 
and mulberry groves, until we reached 
the iron gates of entrance. 

I was making some remark on the 



DUDLEY. 191 

favourable appearance of the sky, and 
fair winds, when he with a sudden ex- 
clamation, on looking up to the heights, 
broke from my arm, and climbed the 
steep we had just come down, (but by a 
far more precipitate acclivity, for he had 
to surmount hanging rocks, and cling to 
the branches and roots of trees, even to 
secure a footing.) On looking after him 
until my sight w^as giddy, I saw him 
standing on the green velvet spot under 
the flag-staff, and by his side, a white 
dress floating in the wind. 

** More last words !" said I, as I turn- 
ed away. I mounted Saladin, and rode 
slowly towards the city, frequently look- 
ing back, and still able to distinguish, 
high in the air, the tall, slim, dark figure, 
and the white drapery. " A pretty re- 
tired place they have chosen for their 
final adieus ! half-a-dozen spy glasses 
pointed from the city, perhaps, at this 
moment, at my pair of Unconscious 
Lovers J* 

As they still seemed to have no idea 
of separating, and I was fearful of being 
late, I put forth all the powers of my 



19^ DUDLEY. 

once famous hunting voice, and called 
aloud on Dudley. Echo repeated the 
name, and " Dudley ! Dudley !" re- 
sounded from rock to rock. At last he 
rejoined me, but it was in the presence 
of Mr. and Mrs. Balfour, and Miss Mac- 
donald, who had all come to town to 
render any service to Dudley on his de- 
parture, and to entrust him with letters 
for Great Britain. 

The spirits of your son from this new, 
and, as it appeared, accidental meeting, 
had acquired a fresh flow of cheerfulness, 
such are the magical effects of mutual 
love ! And he parted with Mrs. Balfour 
with a gallant salute, and the niece, with 
a cordial pressure of the hand. How wide 
the difference here shown between taking 
leave of persons of whom he cares but 
little, and the expressive silence with 
which he parted with my sister, whom 
he loves next to his mother ! 

Balfour and I walked on each side of 
him to the beach, where we found a man- 
of-war's boat waiting to take us to the 
vessel. Whilst he and Balfour were ex- 
changing commissions and compliments. 



DUDLEY. 193 

I took the opportunity of recapitulating 
all my orders to Robert ; desiring him to 
be careful and vigilant of his charge, 
until placed in your care, and also never 
to lose sight of Romeri, who in a strange 
country, and with no great knowledge 
of the English language, might other- 
wise be led into scenes of mischief and 
danger. 



Dudley and I have just taken a fare- 
well of each other, unseen by all eyes. — 
He kissed my hand, and I blessed him, 
and may God hear the prayer I offered 
in his behalf ! — Adieu, Clonmore, I 
trust that you and his mother will find 
in him your best wishes realised j and 
that, at the appointed time, I shall once 
again hold in these fond arms my dear 
and adopted son. 

Your's, 

Eliot Howard. 



VOL. HI. K 



194 DUDLEY. 



LETTER XLVII. 

Dm Zulvago, H. C. L Conde (V Almeida, to Sir 
Eliot Howard, 

Calcutta. 

My worthy friend, Sir Eliot, if he has 
not during the last five or six years spent 
by me in India, received the many letters 
I have written to him, must regard my 
silence as most unkind and ungrateful. 
And yet, my good baronet, it is neither 5 
it has been merely owing to the conse- 
quences of war, to the chances of wind 
and wayes, and the negligence of private 
friends. The French vessel in which I 
was sailing to Rochefort, was retaken off 
the Cape of Good Hope by an* English 
man-of-war j when I, as a Spanish Pa- 
triot, being considered at liberty, was 
resolved to adhere to my first resolution, 
and proceed to India. 

I pass over all intervening circum- 
stances attending my arrival, my finding 



DUDLEY. 195 

the persons whom I sought, Sir William 

and Lady L , who had removed to 

Madras ; my following them thither, and 
at last, meeting with them at Bombay. 
On again seeing Victorina, I fancied 
that I perceived in her some slight de- 
gree of pleasure ; but my image was no 
doubt associated in her mind with that 
of her mother. 

A gratifying sentiment was involun- 
tary on meeting so unexpectedly, at such 
a distance, and in the land of strangers, 
one whom she had met with in Europe, 
and in the presence of that parent, to 
whom she was so fondly attached. Some 
years were spent by me in the different 
Presidencies of India, and about a month 
since, I returned to Bombay, and once 
more saw Victorina, so dear to me as the 
child of my Gabrielle. 

On Miss Shelburne retiring from the 
room soon after my entrance, Lady L — 
communicated to me every particular 
relative to an attachment formed during 
my late absence, on the part of a Colonel 
Hamilton, in favour of her protegee, 
and which had induced him a few days 
K S 



196 DUDLEY, 

previous to my return, to offer her his 
hand in marriage. She had frankly ac- 
cepted it, on condition he would wait 
until the (expiration of her engage- 
ment with Lady L— — -, which wanted 
about a twelvemonth to fulfil her seven 
years of service. On his side, he wished 
her to forfeit the bond, saying he would 

pay it ; whilst Lady L , on her*s, 

congratulated Victorina on her golden 
prospects, and released her gratuitously. 
— Such i§ the world, my friend ! 

Had Miss Shelburne captivated the 
affections of a poor and pennyless man, 
and returned them, her protectress 
would most probably have kept her to 
her bond with the utmost rigour of the 
law — thjs tenacity of a Shylock ; but by 
giving up with a good grace a few 
months of her right to the services pf 
this girl, she had a claim on the gene- 
rosity of the Colonel, reputed to be 
worth upwards of a hundred thousand 
pounds; and who, the morning subsequtent 
to her relinquishing the agreement, senf 
her some superb shawls and a diamond 
aigrette. 

13 



DUDtEY. 197 

There is still a decided ait of melan- 
choly about Victorina, which I hope the 
total change in her circumstances will, in 
time, remove. It appears by Sir Wil- 
liam and Lady L 's account, that 

since her residence with them^ she has 
conducted herself most irreproachably. 
Whilst uninterested friends, who have 
been admitted to their private con- 
certs and brilliant assemblies, have 
assured me, that they admired, and 
equally pitied, this young person, who, 
dressed splendidly at Lady L 's de- 
sire, went through the routine of duty 5 
and looked, whilst singing or playing, a 
victim ornamented for sacrifice, or as a 
tuneful swan celebrating its own ob- 
sequies. 

I was told, in confidence, that she 
had refused two offers which had been 
made her by men nearer her own time 
of life J and having some suspicion, on 
hearing that they were in limited circum- 
stances, and only beginning the world in 
point of fortune, that money was the 
motive of her rejection, although she 
might otherwise feel attached, I took an 
K 3 



198 DUDLEY. 

opportunity of speaking to her on the 
subject ; and had I received the smallest 
encouragement to think she nourished a 
partiality for either, would instantly have 
contrived to make her choice, in point 
of wealth, equal to the Colonel; but 
such was not the case ; and she candidly 
confessed that this man, nearly double 
her age, and of infirm health, was her 
choice; and would have been, had twenty 
suitors offered themselves to her. 

" But do you love him ?" I enquired, 
" Love him !" she exclaimed ; " I 
esteem, T respect, I honour him ; I feel 
grateful for his kindness ; and will live 
his wife, and die his widow. But as 
for love, I never have loved, I never 
will love. That passion was the source 
of all my mother's sorrows. It is, in- 
deed, nearly allied to hatred. May I, 
Don Isidore, never feel that sentiment 
which you call love.*' 

" But," I added, " you were already 
eighteen when you quitted England, 
Victorina ; was there no attachment 
formed there, or in Spain ? Do not be 
precipitate: think^ before you act. Is 



DUDLEY. 199 

there no object nearer your own time of 
life, no matter his penury, his obscujity, 
his friendless state, (my wealth shall be 
his, my credit his, my friendship shall 
make him your's.) Confide yourself to 
me, my dear Victorina, the only child of 
my lost Gabrielle. Let me be a father to 
you in this most important step in life 5 
and, before it is too late, suffer me to 
annul your hastily-formed engagement to 
this comparatively aged man, and be the 
founder of your worldly happiness." 

" Should you," she replied, her eye 
kindling with sudden fire, — " Should 
you prevent my marriage with Colonel 
Hamilton, you will be the founder of my 
worldly and eternal misery, as you have 
been that of " 

She stopped ; and I was glad, for her 
own sake, that she did not continue the 
sentence. With more softness, she con- 
tinued, " I am melancholy, it is true j 
but sorrow and I have been so long a 
time friends, sadness is now become 
habitual to me ! I never knew the 
pleasures, the enjoyments of childhood, 
or of youth. My home, when young 
K 4 



^00 DUDLEY. 

and rich, was a scene of domestic war- 
far(|; and when peace was, by death, 
restored, poverty took up her abode with 
myself and mother. I wandered from 
house to house, earning the means of 
subsistence. My mother did the same, 
both in England and Spain. We tried 
families, schools, pupils at home : bitter, 
bitter hours! The life of a convent 
would have been a heaven to all this. 
We were alternately the sport, or pity, 
or scorn of insolence, of pride and ar- 
rogance, of meanness, and of selfish 
cruelty. No, no j I never thought of 
love. No one looked on me as an object 
of love. My mother alone, on earth, 
loved me. She held the first, the only 
place in my withered heart. Yes, 
withered in the bud ; cankered by the 
worm of penury, before it had time to 
expand. The sunshine of peace and com- 
fort never visited me. I was never a 
child 5 I was never young.'' 

She ceased ; and the tears gushed 
from her eyes. 

I took her hand, and pressing it be- 
tween mine, bade her be comforted, for 



©UDLEY. SOI 

that better days were now before her, 
and said, ** Remember your mother." 

" Remember her!'* she replied; "Need 
I be told to remember my mother ! my 
fondest, dearest, blessed mother ! Her 
letters to me have been my only comfort 
during our separation ; (for she could not 
be prevailed on to accompany me.) They 
are my real treasure. She writes by 
every opportunity •, and thus has time, 
and distance, and absence, been in a 
measure annihilated between us. This 
worthy man, this Colonel Hamilton, God 
bless him ! who has honoured me with 
his choice, has consented, immediately 
after our marriage, to return to Eng- 
land." 

She looked up, and with a sort of 
supernatural fire in her eye, gazed upon 
me, then bursting into a kind of wild 
hysterical laugh, that had something in 
it alarming and pitiable, added, " We 
shall return, and then I shall see my 
mother. We meet again, to part no 
more." 

Another agony of tears followed ^ 
and, as I silently watched the progress 
K 5 



SOS DUDLEY. 

of the passions, felt convinced that those 
ofVictorina were, at times, beyond her 
own controul. 

<* Riches ! Riches !" she repeated, 
" did I ever think that I should become 
rich. I'll visit every spot in Spain and 
in England where I have known most 
sorrow. I'll take luxury in going over 
the same dreadful ground, and in point- 
ing out to my mother, and saying, « from 
this house we were driven in the night by 
creditors, and slept on bed^ of straw in 
a barn, an outhouse, a stable. At this 
spot, do you remember our taking 
shelter from a thunder storm, and being 
harshly driven away ; for our appearance 
bespoke poverty, and we had not a 
single coin to purchase shelter. In this 
square, at the corner yonder, we had 
nearly famished, when a passing stranger, 
oh God ! gave some silver in alms ! 
These are the roads we trod together, 
with heavy limbs, and blistered feet, and 
bursting heart, to save yonder bridge, 
the passage of v/hich was one single cop- 
per coin, and we had not even that to 
spare.' My mother, oh my mother !" 



DUDLEY. gO^ 

Again I interfered, reminding her, 
that her duty to her Creator was to sub- 
mit with resignation to his dispensations ; 
that those melancholy circumstances 
were gone by, perhaps never to return ; 
and that the advice of her best friends 
was to look forward to a happy future. 
I remarked, that Colonel Hamilton was 
in years j but that, even should it please 
the Almighty to recall him from her, 
some future choice might — — 

She stopped me, laying her hand on 
my arm, and with a vehemence that 
electrified me, an enthusiasm peculiar to 
the females of our nation, and of which 
you Englishmen can form but a faint 
idea, she fell upon her knees, and with 
uplifted eyes, and strained and clenched 
hands, before I was aware of the nature 
of her words, said, in a solemn and im- 
pressive tone of voice, << Hear, O God ! 
O hear my prayer! Bless my future 
husband 5 and — let me not survive himP* 

I felt shocked, and alarmed at her 
violence, and for some time hesitated, 
whether or not my presence did not in- 
K 6 



^04 DUDLEY. 

crease it. Whilst still debating how to 
act, — - for, overpowered by her own emo- 
tions, she leaned her head on the seat of 
a chair, and wept, — I perceived the 
Colonel approaching, and took that op- 
portunity of withdrawing, at an opposite 
entrance. 



The next morning I again saw Vic- 
torina, when I reminded her, that as her 
happy prospects rendered the restriction 
to my making pecuniary offers to her 
mother null and void, she could no 
longer hesitate in informing me of every 
the most minute particular concerning 
her present situation j adding, that as I 
should certainly take the first opportunity 
after her marriage of going to England, 
I might act as the messenger of good 
news, and prepare her mother for her 
return. 

" My happy prospects,'^ she replied, 
" do not remove the restrictions ; and, 
therefore, your request cannot be com- 
plied with.'- 



DUDLEY. ^05 

" Is there then no hope ?'' I returned ; 
** Can nothing restore me to your mo- 
ther's presence, her friendship, her con* 
iidence ? May I not be permitted to 
sooth her bruised heart ; to repair, in 
some measure, the mischief I have 
caused ; and watch over her future days 
with brotherly protection. I now ask no 
more. Tell me, is there any hope, for 
you well know whether there is or no ? 
I see there is one. Tell me, and I will 
attempt obeying her injunctions, what- 
ever they may be.*' 

Victorina, with the bashfulness called 
forth by the great disparity of our years, 
looked down as she replied, (and, though 
her cheeks have no colour, her eyes, by 
their modesty, supply the absence of a 
blush) ** My mother will be restored to 
your friendship, when she hears that — 
you are married." 

*< Then," I replied, rising, " your 
mother and I can never meet again j 
for unless she would, even now, consent 
to become my wife, I would neither ask, 
nor accept the hand of any woman oa the 
face of the fflobe." 



^06 DUDLEY. 

" In that case," replied Victorina, 
** I guard her secret ; which, however^ 
can be no longer such, when my mar* 
riage is once made known/* 

" Most truly observed,'' I said j 
" then I wait the event, and take the 
stakes into my own hand. We will, 
therefore, drop the subject. And you 
think you shall be happy, Victorina ?" 

" I trust I shall," she replied, with 
openness and candour j ** I repeat, my 
life has, until this my twenty-fifth year, 
been one invariable gloom. The clouds 
are now dispersed from over my head, 
and a beam of sunshine at length deigns 
to visit me. On being restored to my 
mother, I shall be completely happy." 

<* I shall quit India a few days after 
your wedding," I replied ; " will you 
entrust me with letters to your mother ? 
I will undertake to deliver them into her 
own hand." 

She hesitated, and I pressed ; when, 
with happy thought, she replied, <* As 
Victorina Sobrino, I am bound to obey 
my mother. When Victorina Hamilton, 
I shall be compelled to obey my husband; 
were he to command me — " 



DUDLEY. SO7 

" Enough," I said ; " and now, my 
child, before I quit India, tell me, is 
there any one service in which you wish 
to command me ? If there is, speak," 

*' There; is,*' she answered, with some 
confusion ; " you call me your child — - 
stand my father to-morrow. The Co- 
lonel assures me, he will receive me from 
none other than yourself." 

I saluted her pale cheek in silence, by 
way of thanks and consent, and my 
heart felt lightened of a load of misery ; 
for in that salute, I appeared as if I were 
reconciled to her mother ! 



The day is come ; and, in another 
hour, Victorina will be the wife of the 
worthy Colonel Hamilton. Adieu, my 
friend ; I shall most probably touch at 
Teneriffe in my way to England. 
Ever your's, 
The CoNDE d'Almeida. 



^08 DUDLEY. 



LETTER XLVIII. 

The Rev, Henry Chnmore to Sir Eliot Howard, 

Bloomfield Rectory. 

You can best conceive the feelings of 
joy with which I have passed the three 
last days. Dudley is now under my 
roof; whilst I write, he is with his mother 
and sisters in the next room to me, and 
that undescribable sentiment of wonder 
and transport attending the return of so 
beloved a relative, after so long an ab- 
sence, has not yet subsided. None of 
his brothers are, at present, at home ; 
but Dr. H — ~ is with us, having come 
down purposely to Bloomfield, that he 
might form an intimacy with Dudley, 
in this his home, previous to taking him 
with himself to town, where it is our 
design he shall spend part of the next 
winter. 

He is, indeed, my dear Howard, all 
and more than our fondest wishes could 



DUDLEY. 209 

have expected ! much taller and more 
robust than any of his brothers ; yet, 
with an ease and dignity of manner, that 
strike us, at once, as that decided air of 
fashionable superiority, which foreigners 
of high rank so eminently possess.— 
What is most singular, and yet it is 
easily accounted for, having never been 
out of your sight since he was seven 
years of age, he greatly resembles you : 
the likeness is most striking — he has 
acquired not only the character of your 
face and feature by constant association ; 
but your tone of YoiCe, your gesture, 
your walk j in short, were he really your 
son, the resemblance could not be more 
perfect. 

It struck us all, and even some of our 
servants who have a recollection of you ; 
and on our remarking it to Dudley, he 
replied with a gratified blush and smile, 
that he could not have studied from a 
more perfect model. 



He arrived here on a Sunday : myself, 
and indeed all my family, except two of 
the servants, were at church. Dudley 



210 DUDLEY. 

having alighted at the door of the par- 
sonage, sent Robert and the Spanish lad 
to make good their quarters in the 
kitchen, whilst he, having dismissed his 
chaise-and-four, strolled towards the 
church. 

He had certainly no design of 
entering during service, and thereby- 
hazarding a first meeting with us in so 
public a place ; but forced by unavoid- 
able circumstances, which he afterwards 
detailed to us, he did enter, and among 
a large party of fashionables 5 one of 

whom was Lord D , who occupies a 

shooting-box in my neighbourhood. 

The service over, the usual routine of 
bows, and courtesies, and nods, and en- 
quiries took place, which I wish my 
parishioners, at least, would defer until 
fairly outside the porch. When the church 
was cleared, honest George Delver, 
my clerk, as rosy-cheeked and white- 
haired as ever, was helping me off w^ith 
my surplice and gown, whilst talking 
on parish business ; when we observed a 
gentleman, who stood at some distance 
with his back to us, and holding his hat 



DUDLEY. 21 i 

behind him, examining the monumental 
stones which adorn the walls. 

" Who is he ?" I asked in a whisper 5 
(until now, our voices in the vacant 
church had sounded deep and hollow.) 

*« Don't know, sir,'' said old George, 
"but I shall just make bold to give him 
one gentle hint to depart." This gentle 
hint was given thus : " Would you please^ 
sir, to go out of the church, for I must 
lock the doors.'* 

The person he addressed turned 
round hastily, the hat fell from his hands, 
he looked about eagerly, as if to see that 
no other person were present, and then 
sprung forward. One look was sufficient 5 
we were in each other's arms ! I was 
forced to sit down for a few moments on 
the steps of the communion-table, and 
Dudley placed himself at my side. 

With a lengthened " Ho ! ho !" pro- 
nounced with great sagacity, my old 
clerk picked up Dudley's hat, carefully 
placed it on one of the benches in the 
aisle, having first wiped it with the long 
skirt of his own coat, and went out^ at the 



^ii DUDLEY. 

door, first giving me a friendly nod, as if 
to say, ** Nobody shall disturb you." 

He had scarcely left us ten minutes, 
however, when the door was as hastily 
opened, and widely, and again it closed ; 
— a female figure had been admitted : — 
Dudley started from my side, and with 
a sudden spring forward, supported his 
mother from falling. A few drops of 
wine and water, with which my vestry 
supplied us, revived her, and she sat 
down^ between her son and me. 

Louisa possesses neither the very 
poignant and acute feelings, that dis- 
tinguished your late lady, nor the blunted 
feelings of Mrs. Grantley ; and certainly 
not those of a variable nature, like Lady 
Alford's; her disposition is a happy 
mixture of the three : and after a short 
indulgence of the fond emotions of na- 
ture, I desired Dudley to leave his 
mother with me, and go and make him^ 
self known to his brothers, his sisters, 
the servants, the whole parish, M' he 
pleased, and not meet us again until 
dinner time j which I was forced to re- 
mind him, was four hours after noon. 



DUDLEY. S13 

Once more together, Louisa and I 
looked at each other, and on the same 
spot, where you, Howard, was united by 
me to your Claudina, the godmother of 
our Dudley ; where Louisa ancj myself 
were married ; where we had both so 
often lifted up our voice in prayer to the 
Almighty, that he would spare the life 
of this very child ; we now returned 
thanks and blessings that our prayers had 
been heard. He has, indeed, restored 
him to us, not only in possession of con- 
firmed health, but in the full pride of 
manliness and beauty. 



When Dr. H was informed of 

Dudley's arrival, he came down to the 
drawing-room, and my son being absent 
at the time, pretended with humorous 
gravity to watch the level of the key-hole 
of the door, and on his entrance slowly to 
lift up his open mouth and staring eyes 
to a stature of nearly six feet high : — 
then turning him round, he examined 
him from head to foot, and felt his arms 
and hands, when clapping him on the 



£14 DUDLEY. 

shoulder, he cried out at last, " Well 
done Teneriffe !" 

At this word the eyelids of Dudley 
became involuntarily red, but it was only 
for an instant ; and I could observe, that 
if not already master of his passions, he 
is resolved on concealing their effects. 
He answers every question put to him 
concerning you and Mrs. Grantley — 
Turner and the Balfours, with cheerful- 
ness and candour ; but is not so unre- 
served respecting Claudy : and I am really 
glad that the Doctor is in our secret, re- 
specting your future intentions with 
regard to this youthful couple 5 and as 
heartily rejoiced, that Lady Alford is not 
here at present, for she would not scruple 
to rally him on his love affairs, his con- 
stancy, his engagements under the 
Peak, &c. I hope she may spare her wit 
at his expense ; and, if not, let con- 
science whisper in her right honourable 
ear, the magic name of " ZuhagoJ^ 



We are returned from Oxford, where, 
according to your wish, Dudley has 



PUDLEY. ?15 

been entered a Gentleman Commoner. 
His studies go on as usual; his mornings 
are devoted to his books, or to exercise 
on horseback, and his evenings to the 
society which our neighbourhood afr 
fords. The twenty-first of this month is 
fixed for his removal to town with Dr. 

H , when he will proceed regularly 

with his professional studies ; and in 
September, he returns again to us. In 
the mean time, he appears perfectly 
happy here, and in truth, how can he be 
otherwise, when he sees himself the ob- 
ject of universal admiration ; and yet he 
possesses, to a high degree, that excellent 
quality of being ever on his guard to a 
forgetfulness of self. In him, in short, 
is joined all the high polish of the tra- 
velled foreigner, and the solid advantages 
of a domestic education. The beauty of 
his countenance, the expression of can- 
dour in his eyes, the grace and elegance 
of his deportment, are the themes of ge- 
neral conversation in this place ; and 
though our son, Louisa and I really can- 
not find much fault with Miss Howard's 
taste* 



216 DUDLEY. 

One merit which in Dudley is most 
conspicuous, and which distinguishes 
none of my other sons, (at once the cha- 
racteristic of highly civilised life, and of 
the rnost savage nation among the In-* 
dians,) is that perfect and undivided at- 
tention which he pays to the person who 
speaks to him : — no question, no impa- 
tience, nor any other object, can call off 
that attention ; he listens, he answers, 
and either continues the conversation, 
or with perfect propriety, contrives to 
turn it into another and more general 
channel. These graces may have escaped 
your observation, my friend; for with 
you the boy has gradually expanded to 
the youth : with us, it is the young man 
come suddenly to our view. And even 
this very change of place may operate 
unconsciously on himself. He is con- 
sidered by strangers as touching at man- 
hood, and he acts and looks accordingly. 
To conclude, there is certainly more of 
gravity and deliberation in his manners 
and speech, than I was led from your 
letters to expect. 

You have great difficulty in consider- 



DUDLEY. ^17 

ing him, even now, otherwise than as a 
boy ; we, on the contrary, cannot ima- 
gine him a boy, and therefore, treat him 
as a man. Louisa pleasantly remarked 
the other day, she no longer wondered 
at Claudy's blushes and increasing bash- 
fulness, which, until she had seen Dud- 
ley, she considered as prudish and ill- 
placed. 

I have observed also that with most 
wonderful discrimination for his years, 
he suits his mode of address to the per- 
son to whom he is speaking : with age, 
he is invariably respectful ; and to that 
he sacrifices both opinion and inclina- 
tion, when trifles are alone the subject, 
otherwise he is silent. With those of his 
own age, he hazards an objection, and 
does not decline an argument, but with 
his juniors, he himself gives advice ; 
and whenever requested by such to join 
in any thing contrary to his own wishes, 
returns so firm and decided a negative, 
that all further solicitation is at an end. 

I think he has acquired this part of hi^ 
character from studying that of Zulvago, 
whom, in many respects, he resembles, 

VOL. III. L 



SI 8 DUDLEf* 

particularly in the martial air of his «tep 
and carriage. 



The other evening being at a party in 
the neighbourhood, he was requested by 
Maria, one of his young sisters, to join in 
a round game of cards, which, as he was- 
at the time, engaged in conversation with 

Lord D and myself, he refused, and 

Maria left him. He was soon after at- 
tacked by a grandmother of one of the 
party ; who, on understanding his age, re- 
marked, " Although so tall, he is only 
a boy, and ought to join your set ; Til 
ask him myselfi he cannot refuse ^<?." 

She was right; Dudley played, and 
with such liveliness, that he was the 
charm of the whole youthful party. He, 
however, is still, on proper occasions, 
the blunt Dudley. On perceiving unfair 
play among some of the youthful 
gamblers, he openly detected it; and, 
notwithstanding their attempt to laugh 
it off, they, I fancy, secretly regretted 
that the old grandmother had forced him 
among them- . 



DUDLEY. ^19 

He loses and wins at cards, at chess, 
at backgammon, and at billiards, with 
equal spirit, grace, and temper. He 
avoids all games of hazard ; and seems 
to join in the above m*ore from the ne- 
cessity of conforming to the customs of 
society, than from any real partiality to 
play ; add to which, his temperance in 
all other respects is most admirable. 



You may remark, my dear Howard, 
that we have been singularly happy in 
discovering so many excellencies in this 
youth, withont one shade. Yes, we have 
found one ; and it is, also, rather of a 
deep nature. He is self-willed, which, 
at so early a period of life, is a quality 
neither pleasing nor safe, — a hastiness 
of decision, a sudden and violent pre- 
possession for and against such and such 
strangers, which, you will allow, is not 
the best plan to get clear through the 
world, already marks his character. 
Louisa and I were making our obserV'^ 
ations on this subject before Dr. H— • 
L % 



€20 DtJDLEY. 

the other day, when, in his Way, he te* 
plied, 

" I like the young villain the better 
ibr it. What the vengeance, did you 
expect him to come among you with a 
smirk, and a bow, and a cringe, to all 
he should meet? No, no; give me 
downright, plain sincerity, and distinc- 
tion of taste (with general good will, I 
allow) ; but none of your * hail fellow 
well met' to all the asses and calves he 
sees. Like you, my reverend chap, 
who thrust out your Windsor-soaped- 
clerical paw in every body's breastwork, 
and shake your powdered head in all 
their faces, with a grin, and a bent back, 
and a kicked-out heel, with * Baronet 
this,' and ' my lady that,' and * my Lord 
Harry' " 

" Stop, my dear Sir," I said ; ** is 
not that your diamond-snuff-hox you are 
rapping so tremendously ?" 

" Eh ! 'tis faith ;" and then looking 
upon it as if he had committed sacrilege, 
the soft blue eyes of Lady Alford meet- 
ing his, he smiled fondly upon it, saying, 
** the beautiful gypsey !" 



DUDLEY. ^Sl 

Apropos of pictures. — The day beftJre 
yesterday we had a large dinner party, 
when, according to the invariable custom 
among rustic clergymen, from the Vicar 
of Wakefield to the Rector of Bloom- 
field, our best of all descriptions made 
its appearance, consequently the best 
drawing-room was put in company order, 
the covers were removed from the sofa 
and chairs, the curtains unbagged, and 
the chimney ornaments and screens un- 
papered. In short, — as Lady Alford 
once told us, we are really sometimes 
very thankful to our guests, for giving 
us an opportunity of airing our best 
property. 

This was the first time Dudley had 
been in the room ; for the recollections of 
his sickly infancy are nearly effaced. I 
was standing near the chimney-piece 
when he came in, ready dressed and pre- 
pared for our company. After examin- 
ing the Turkey carpet, which cost me a 
quarter of a year's tithes, he observed, 
glancing his eye at the length and breadth 
of the apartment, " A tolerable sized 
room this.'* 

L 3 



Upon which I rallied him upon his 
superb ideas, comparing the humble rodf 
under which he was born to the stately 
and magnificent grandeur of Euphorbia, 
where he had been reared ; whilst he 
sauntered round the walls, to examine 
the pictures with which it is hung. That 
of mine, and his mother, gave him much 
pleasure; but he was suddenly struck at 
the first sight of one at the further end 
of the room. " There is a great likeness 
to Claudy in this picture," he remarked ; 
<* not in the features, or the complexion, 
, or indeed the expression. This lovely 
face is like her's, — and yet it is not 
For whom is it designed?" 

*« For Lady Howard, the mother of 
Claudy \ and your own god-mother." 

<* Indeed !" and he looked long at it 
in silent admiration. 

<' Step this way," I said, " and per- 
haps you can inform me for whom this 
was designed." 

He joined me ; and I pointed to your 
miniature of Claudy, which, with his 
own, have ever since decorated our 
drawing-room chimney-piece. He in- 



DUDLEY. £$3 

stantly took it down, and gazed upon it 
.with passion and tenderness. 

*< Yes/' he said, " I do remember 
this : it was painted by Sir Eliot." 

After another pause, he continued, 
** AViil you grant me a favour, my dear 
father ?" 

•* Certainly, my dear son. It is the 
first you have asked of me since your re- 
turn home ; but I hope will not be the 
last." 

** This miniature," he remarked, 
•« whilst it remains in this most conspi- 
cuous situation, cannot fail of attracting 
the attention of strangers, and giving 
rise to observations and indeed questions 
to myself that I would rather avoid. 
Give it to me, and it shall be concealed 
from general sight in my study." 

1 thought the request at once reason- 
able, delicate, and natural ; and he was 
leaving the room with it, when I called 
him back, observing, as I took down the 
miniatm-e of himself, " This will look 
awkward thus left alone, and create re- 
marks of * where is its companion i' you 
had better take this also, and place them 
L 4 



£S4 DUDLEY. 

togeihet ; for when Sir Eliot sent them 
to me, he desired they ' might never he 
separated.^ " 

The double meaning in these words 
of your's, and which I now repeated so 
very apropos, Dudley could not fail of 
disco\ ering ; but with the invincible 
timidity of his age, he found no words 
to reply. I could only perceive that his 
face glowed with pleasure ; and whilst he 
went to deposit his treasures in his own 
room, I fetched a couple of little land- 
scapes to occupy the places of the de- 
parted miniatures. On the rest of my 
family making their appearance, I cau- 
tioned them to take no notice of this 
change. All passed on well j and Dud- 
ley soon after joined us, to help us to 
receive our visiters. 



We have just had a letter from Lady 
Alford, who, hearing of Dudley's arrival 
in England, desires him to throw off his 
leading strings, and join her musical 
festival on the 12th of August, in honour 
of the Prince Regent's birth-day, or she 
will give out, in her fashionable circles. 



DUDLEY. 



225 



that he is *< Benedict the Bachelor, to 
be had.'' The Doctor has undertaken to 
answer her, and this is a passage in his 
letter :— " Do you look to your nursery, 
my saucy Princess, and have it in tidy 
order ; and your caudle, and your cake, 
and * your sponge biscuit reduced to a 
pul'py ready for Cavendish's son and 
heir; (her two children are, as you know, 
girls) and let the lad be quiet. He'll 
write * Benedict the married man, and 
720/ to be hady before you leave off your 
most noble frolicks.*' 

In one part of her letter, she expresses 
herself very anxious to hear what pro- 
fession Dudley has chosen. She may 
have heard, but she affects ignorance to 
exercise her whims. " Only let me 
know, my dear Louisa," adds her lady- 
ship, ** that I may lend him my assist- 
ance. If the hoy chooses to be a doctor, 
ril poison my guests with French dishes, 
merely to recommend his medical skill ; 
on condition though, that he pays me a 
visit dressed in a flowered skirted suit of 
clothes, and a black mantle, made out of 
the velvet palls of his ci-devant patients j 
L 5 



2^6 DUDLEY. 

a gold-headed cane pointed to his own 
pate, with * nothing in that ;* — a little 
muff, silver buckles, and a flowing wig ; 
(1 have conquered my aversion to a wig, 
since my poor bald-pated little girl is 
forced to wear one.) If Doctor Dudley, 
thus equipped, pays me a visit, 'pon 
honour I'll be ill three times a week, 
that he may feel my pulse with one hand, 
whilst I slip a three guinea fee into his 
ptiier. Let him choose the Iww^ and I'll 
set all my tenants wrangling to load him 
\vith briefs ; and I'll get myself and my 
coach-horses into fifty scrapes, for the 
pleasure of being led out of them by his 
barrister hand. If the churchy I'll write 
a sermon myself, and publish it anon, 
that an admiring pair of lawn sleeves 
may thump down his broad open hands 

upon the book, and swear to No, 

^promise, I mean, to give the writer (un- 
sight unseen) a delectable living in a fine 
sporting country, with a clear stream of 
carp and tench, and a noble pack of 
bounds. 

** Let Dudley say he will be a soldier, 
and ni no faith, I'll have nothing 



DUDLEY. 227 

to do in that quarter ! But I'll tie him 
up black cockades, work him a gold 
sword-knot, and net him a crimson sash, 
that shall make him the coveted mark 
of every female unwedded eye in 
St. James's Street, be it black, hazel, or 
green. And let him choose the sea — 
why 1*11 become a syren among the wise 
lords of the admiralty, until I behold the 
noble jolly-boat ' The TenerifFe,' safe in 
the harbour of promotion." 

And thus the rattling Countess runs 
through every profession, and indeed 
trade, until she ends in that oi^ a black- 
smith, when she declares, that should 
Dudley be a Quintin Matsys, she will 
order her stables and yards to be pitched 
with two-inch nails, as close as the floor 
of horses' hoofs in the grotto at Oat- 
lands, and break the springs of all her 
carriages ten times a month, (at the ha- 
zard of her own bones) that he may share 
in the profit of repairing them. 



Well, my dear Howard, I have little 
or nothing more to add concernijig 
L 6 



S^S ■ DUDLEY. 

Dudley, who is, I understand, writing to 
you himself. Have you heard yet from 
Zulvago ? From my utter failure in all 
my endeavours to find Mrs. Shelburne^ I 
should imagine that, if still in England, 
she has changed her name ; but my real 
opinion is, that she has removed to Spain. 
I have written to a correspondent in that 
country, from whom it is likely I may 
hear some intelligence concerning her, 
^yhich I shall not fail communicating to 
you. With kind remembrance to all at 
Euphorbia, 

I am your's, most faithfully, 

Henry Clonmore^ 



I;ND of THI5 FIFTH PART, 



DUDLEY. 229 



PART THE SIXTH. 



LETTER XLIX. 

Dudley Clonmore to Sir Eliot Howard, 

Bloomfield Rectory. 

With what lively emotions of affection 
and gratitude do I, for the first time in 
my life, write to my honoured and best 
friend, who has never since been absent 
from my thoughts, whose person seems 
always before my eyes, whose voice I 
ever seem to hear. I see you every 
night in my dreams. When I close my 
eyes in sleep, I find myself at Euphorbia^ 
and, with all the clearness of reality, I 
behold you all ! I am with you ; I speak 
to you ; I walk with you ; I feel con- 
scious of no change ; and then I wake, 
and find myself in the bosom of my fa- 
mily. Thus is niy life divided between 



230 DUDLEY. 

the places I most love. Sleeping and 
waking happiness are mine ; and I am 
most content, most happy ! 



My father is but little changed. His 
face is as good-humoured and benevolent 
as ever ; and his elegant person, small 
and well made, has worn well. But 
with me, the difference of looking up 
to him, and looking doum upon him, had 
at first a singular effect. When we 
parted, I stood under his elbow, and he 
now only reaches to my shoulder. My 
mother, from frequent confinement, ap- 
pears very delicate ; but her spirits are 
invariably cheerful. I have not yet seen 
any of my elder brothers ; the two 
younger are just come liome : they are 
fine well-grown lads ; the one is educat- 
ing at Winchester-school, and seems spi- 
rited and manly, yet with a slight degree 
of self-sufficiency, and indeed effrontery 
in his character 5 but which I doubt not 
will in a few years wear off*. The other 
is brought up at a school near town, 
consisting of about twenty boys. He is 
10 



DUDLEY. £31 

timid, and good-natured, but evidently 
helpless and weak. I have offered him 
my services during his holidays, to con- 
quer any difficulty in his studies, at 
which he expressed much grateful plea- 
sure. 

My sisters are charming girls ; ever 
active and employed, happy among each 
other, and doatingly fond of their pa- 
rents. Mine is really a family of love. 
I like well enough to pass an hour with 
my sisters, when they are all together ; 
but it is very strange, that I cannot en- 
dure being five minutes alone with any 
one of them. I feel then as if I were 
with Claudy : — I look up, and find my 
error ! and these are moments of sadness. 
My sisters resemble, in person and 
spirits, the full and ardent glow of me- 
ridian sunshine, all glare and dazzle j 
but I prefer the morning sun-beam, 
creating shadows, and bringing to view 
the striking beauties of a landscape j 
and the soft beam of the evening sun, 
gilding and contrasting all things, — the 
shifting clouds, the falling showers, the 
trembling dew. 



^s^ 



DUDLEY. 



I have her picture, the picture of 
Claudy, which you sent a few years since 
to my father : it now, with my own, are 
the chief ornament of my study, — my 
best comfort on this side the Atlantic. 



Our voyage, owing to storms and 
contrary winds, lasted upwards of a 
month. We lost sight of TenerifFe on 
the 15th, made Cape Finisterre on the 
22d, Cape Ortegal four days after, Ushant 
on the 28th, and were becalmed, or 
blown out of our course, for the remainder 
of the time, off the Scilly Islands and the 
Lizard. *' It is very fortunate," I re- 
marked, ** that the world is at peace ;'* 
to which the Captain, with a look of 
meaning to his officers, observed, *< No 
harm a prize or two, for all that." 

When within sight of England, if you 
just imagine something short of founder- 
ing, you will have a tolerable idea of our 
situation. It blew a gale from the north 
and the north-east the whole of the time ; 
and during three severe squalls, we lost 
two tillers, three yards, our top-mast, 



DUDLEY. Q3S 

and sails innumerable, besides running 
foul of two ships of our company. 



On arriving at Falmouth, at the inn to 
which my father had directed me, I 
found, on enquiry, that he had been 
there twice, and owing to the voyage 
being longer than usual, had returned 
home, leaving particular directions with 
the master of the inn, who thus expected, 
and accommodated me accordingly. A 
chaise-and-four took me to Bloomfield 
Rectory, Robert at my side, and Romeri 
on horseback behind. 



The idea of again seeing my fond pa- 
rents, and my native home, where my 
early years had been spent, filled my 
heart, to the exclusion of any other sen- 
timent ; and such was my agitation and 
restlessness, on driving up to the door, 
that I felt relief when informed the fa- 
mily were at church. It was about 
eleven o'clock in the forenoon, and hav- 
ing ordered my luggage into the house. 



£34 



DUDLEY. 



and dismissed my chaise and servants, I 
strolled towards the little lane between 
the church and parsonage, anxious not 
to be accosted by any one until I had 
seen either my father or my mother, that 
my first welcome might be from them. 

On reaching the church-yard, I lin- 
gered long among the tombstones, when 
my attention was caught by the name of 
* Clonmor€j* on a small black and white 
stone at a distance, and I stepped over 
the graves to examine it. I found it had 
been erected to the memory of one of 
my little brothers, who, at the age of 
six, had died of the measles. This 
brought to my recollection how near to 
death I had been at that very time of 
life, when you stretched out your foster- 
ing hands, took me, reared me in a 
milder climate, and made me what I am. 



As the service was going on, I care- 
fully concealed myself from sight behind 
an ivy-covered buttress, near the rustic 
porch, not daring even to indulge my- 
self in a transient look in at the chiurch 



DUDLEY. ^35 

-windows ; whilst stooping forward I en- 
deavoured to catch the sound of the 
clergyman's voice, who was now reading 
the second lesson. At first it seemed so 
new to my ear, that I thought it might 
be a stranger who was officiating, and 
not my father ; but by degrees the tones 
became familiar to me, and it was with 
the softest emotion, yet with awe and re- 
spect, that I listened to his giving out 
the commandments. 

At that moment a little terrier dog ran 
into the church-yard, and barked at me. 
He was followed by a young and fashion- 
able party, who made towards the church 
door. Their attention, on entering, was 
divided between myself, evidently a 
stranger, and the dog, to whom, in vain, 
one of the gentlemen said, ** Back, sir ! 
Home ! Home !'* 

He persisted in attacking me ; which 
confusion at last brought out old 
George, my father's clerk, to learn 
what was going forward. In order to 
avoid being the cause of further disturb- 
ance, I thought it the wisest plan to take 
advantage of concealing myself) by 



S36 DUDLEY. 

mingling with this party, and accompa- 
nying them into the church, and indeed 
into their very pew, — the owner. Lord 

D , whom I did not at that time 

know, casting on me a look of invitation, 
whilst two bold young ladies of the party, 
hy their loud whispers, made my cheeks 
burn ; and a third, after letting fall the 
expressions of " foreigner," " stranger,'* 
*' perhaps Catholic," to a fourth, offered 
me a prayer-book. 

I had sufficient presence of mind to 
place myself in such a position that 1 
could neither be seen from the reading- 
desk, the pulpit, or the rector's pew ; 
and thus circumstanced, full at my ease, 
I listened with indescribable emotion to 
my father's sermon. It was most ad- 
mirably delivered. In substance clear, 
simple, and impressive ; and, as incul- 
cating the moral duties of life, was 
equally applicable to the inhabitant of 
the parish workhouse, as to the gay 
party of which I had, unavoidably, be- 
come a member. 

Though I had been in a measure 
pressed into their company, when the 



DUDLEY. '2B7 

service was over, it plainly appeared to 
the rest of the congregation that I 
formed no part of it, by my suffering 
them to go away, and lingering in the 
aisle apparently to read the monumental 
inscriptions. 

The church became cleared, and the 
moment after I was in my father's arms. 
Then did my separation from Euphorbia, 
my doubts, my regrets, completely va- 
nish ! They fled before that powerful 
sentiment of nature ; and this, as you 
may suppose, was not weakened when, 
a few minutes after, tlie church door 

again opened, and I saw I did not 

fall into my mother's arms, — I supported 
her in mine ; and thus, under the sacred 
roof of God, in which my father and my 
grandfather have w^orshipped him, and 
been devoted to his service upwards of 
half a century, in the peculiar presence 
of the Almighty, was I restored to my 
most beloved parents. 

May not moments, such as these, be 
called strung pearls ? Some have their 
portion in a few scattered beads upon a 
nearly naked string ; others have pearls 



^38 t>UI)LKY. 

more thickly set. You, my friend, and 
Claudy, have been the means of enrich- 
ing my store to countless numbers ; for, 
has not every moment spent at Euphorbia 
been to me a gem of the richest price ? 



My elder brothers have been spending 
a few days with us. 1 like them all, 
particularly your name-sake Howard ; 
there is an openness and a frankness in 
his manner to me most pleasing 5 and he 
has been kind enough to assure me, that 
as sisters are the most charming relations 
a man can be blessed with, he designs to 
present me ajiother^ in due course of 
time. 

I see, after all, I was perfectly right 
in determining on having a proiession. 
It gives a man an air of independence. 
It occupies his mind : and the idea of 
being useful to society, in some shape or 
other, renders him liberal-minded and 
happy. My brothers have the world to 
get through by means of their own 
probity, their steadiness, and active in- 
dustry. Yet they do not seem to repine 



at their lot, or regret that they are not 
born to independent fortunes. On the 
contrary, I really believe, were such 
offered to any of them, on condition 
they were to resign their professions, 
they would decidedly refuse. I know / 
should. I speak for myself. I would 
not accept half a million, at the expense 
of following the active and honourable 
pursuit I have chosen. 

I remarked this to my father the other 
day ; who replied, *« Your brothers have 
received from me all that they will ever 
receive, they have each had the best of 
educations ; and if not generals and ad- 
mirals, and bishops, and lord chancel* 
lors, it will be no fault of mine. I have 
done all in my power to put them in the 
way of attaining worldly dignities, and 
let their abilities and good conduc4 do 
the rest. There is no occasion to elbo'w 
orjight our way through the world ; let 
the two golden rules of * Love God 
with all our might,' and * our neighbour 
as ourselves,' be their guides, and they 
will get on with credit and honour. As 
for your sisters, the case is different. 



S40 DUDLEY* 

whether or not they marry, my object 
is to secure to them for their lives, how- 
ever humble, a home, an independence." 

'* And do you really expect to see me 
Lord Chancellor, my dear father ?" I en- 
quired. 

*« You ! no, not I," he replied, with a 
strange kind of embarrassment in his 
manner. 

*' But you just now observed, that it 
is the duty of every man to endeavour to 
rise to the top of his calling, whatever 
that may be. And as I am destined for 
the law " 

** Yes ; but when I spoke of wool- 
sacks,'' he replied, " I alluded to your 
youngest brother, whom I have long since 
apprenticed clerk to a solicitor of emi- 
nence at Exeter. Yet, believe me, Dud- 
ley, tny ambition is to see him tread 
in the honest steps of his employer, 
whom, perhaps, he may succeed, and 
thus live and die in the place, where he 
has dwelt known and respected." 



This, and other conversations with 
my father, leads me to reflect on the 



DUDLEY 241 

great inequality between the actual 
situation of my brothers and my own : 
there is something to me painful in 
the conviction, that a line of difference 
is, to the most casual observer, drawn 
perpetually between us. My parents 
think all this is perfectly in course : 
my brothers, instead of questioning my 
rights to superior treatment, seem to re- 
joice at it ; and yet, I ask, by what pre- 
vilege do I monopolize every advantage, 
where there is any doubt to whom it 
should belong ? 

None of these things struck me for 
the first ten days after my arrival, but 
every hour now opens my eyes to the 
partiality bestowed on me, to the exclu- 
sion of any other branch of the family. 

You remember the Rectory, my dear 
Sir Eliot : though I did not express my 
thoughts, for the first few weeks I felt 
so much oppressed when inhabiting my 
bed-room and adjoining closet, or rather 
study, as it is called, which I found so 
small, so inconvenient, and so low, that 
I felt quite suffocated and imprisoned : 
1 endured that sort of irritation, the re- 

VOL. III. M 



M2 



DUDLEY. 



suit of being confined in a close car- 
riage y and yet I found, on going over 
the house, that I was at that time occu- 
pying the most spacious and convenient 
apartments in it. I saw those of my 
parents and sisters, and I blushed at my 
feelings of discontent. The best draw- 
ing-room has since that time been ap- 
propriated wholly to my use, as my 
partial mother fondly says, she has now 
a living ornament to place in it ; and J. 
breathe more freely. 

Robert and Romeri continue their 
attendance upon me ; and yet, but for 
their own sakes, I could gladly dis- 
pense with their service, when I ob- 
serve that even my elder brothers wait 
upon themselves. I took notice of this 
to my father, and reminded him, that if 
my men, or rather your's, could be of 
any assistance, they were expert and 
willing ; but he replied, " No, no, my 
boy ; you have been accustomed to these 
affairs : to you they have become indis- 
pensable, with your brothers they would 
be luxuries, and superfluous. By never 
having enjoyed carriages, riding horses. 



DUDLEY. S43 

grooms, and valets, they do not know 
the want. If my sons find such indispens- 
able, let them earn them." 

All these, and a thousand other mi- 
nutiae, serve only to depress my mind, 
and make me feel a stranger at home. I 
wish I had come alone to England^ un- 
attended; and without the appendages of 
state and distinction, have landed on my 
native shore, and trudged on foot to the 
humble place of my nativity. What an 
ungrateful and dissatisfied fellow am I ! 
Yet you wish to know the most secret 
thoughts of my heart, or I would not con- 
fess the repinings and discontent, into 
which I have of late been betrayed. 
But must it not be grating to my feelings, 
to see myself thus raised above my own 
level, higher than my parents ; above, in 
the common phrase, my own flesh and 
blood. Were Claudy herself^ or even 
you, my dear friend, on a visit at Bloom- 
field Rectory, I do not see that more dis- 
tinction could be paid either of you, than 
is shown to me. 

I am exclusively attended by your 
livery, I have received the curricle and 



5^44 DUDLEY. 

horses, for which you, unknown to me^^ 
gave an order in London. I am put in 
possession, contrary to my earnest wishes, 
of the best apartments of the Rectory ; 
(and the largest is a closet, compared to 
the smallest drawing-room at Euphorbia;) 
and parties are formed in the neighbour- 
hood for my sole pleasure and recrea- 
tion. What more could be done to wel- 
come you ? 

Well, 1 will think no more on the sub- 
ject. In my next letter, I will give you 
an account of my reception at Oxford, 
and our very important proceedings in 
London. And have now to add, that 
nothing gave me more pleasure than to 
see once again my dear old friend Dr. 

H , whose picture 1 have drawn 

whilst sleeping in his elbow-chair, with 
his diamond snuff-box on the table, on 
one side of him, and his crutch on the 
other. I have not yet seen Lady Alford, 
she is at Richmond, and near her con- 
finement. 

Tell Mr. and Mrs. Balfour, and Miss 
Macdonald, I have forwarded all their 
letters to Scotland and elsewhere ; and 



DUDLEY. 245 

Mr. Turner, that some Cambridge 
friends of his, whom I met accidentally 
the other day at Lord D 's, en- 
quired very kindly after liim. I write 
also to Mrs. Grantley, to whom I shall 
for life be most warmly attached : and 
now I must bid you farewell, for I have 
still to write to Claudy. 

My guardian, my friend, I am ever, 
ever your affectionate and dutiful 

Dudley Clonmore. 



M 



M6 



DUDLET, 



LETTER L. 

D?i(Iley Clonmore to Claudhia Howard,. 

A o, Claudy, for still must I call you by 
that beloved name, so long endeared to 
lis both : — no, my dearest Claudy, nor 
time, nor distance, nor absence, can make 
me forget you, as you kindly predicted 
at our last parting in the flower-garden 
at Euphorbia. I considered it as the 
last : what then was my transport, when 
I reached the iron gates at the foot of 
the hill, and looked accidentally up to 
the heights, as bidding a long farewell to 
that abode of peace and love, to see a 
white dress on the summit of the flag- 
staff hill. I discerned the figure, it was 
yourself; — I uttered an expression of 
rapture — I sprang up the acclivity, and 
was at your side. 



DUDLEY. ^24*7 

But to return to what we considered 
a final parting in tlie garden. Need I ask 
whether you remember that hour j it is 
ever present to my mind, and we have 
but one mind. — After along and fruitless 
search in the woods and forest, on the 
morning of my departure, for Rosalva 
had seen you walk out, I saw you — you 
were seated on a bench in the orange- 
walk — I found you pale, and in tears. 

" Go," you said to me, " go to Eng- 
land ; it is your own wish, it has been 
your own proposal \ go, and fulfil your 
desires : — return to polished life, to 
elegant society, to the world of fashion 
and gaiety, of which *we are no longer 
members. Go and leave me an un- 
adorned, disregarded person^ living in 
obscurity, to be neglected and forgotten.'' 
'* Forget you, Claudy! is it in my nature 
to forget? Yes, I may forget injuries, 
(should I ever receive such, for I have 
received none as yet,) but I can never 
forget what we have been to each other : 
living or dead, we shall still be insepara- 
ble in affection. Should I die far from 
you, will not my spirit fly over the At- 
M 4 



^48 DUDLEY, 

Jantic to watch over my Claudy, to hear 
to see, to love you still ?" 



How often, in our delightful solitary 
rambles, have we loved to talk of the 
future world, of the immortality of the 
soul, of the guardianship of angels. Do 
you remember one evening in particular, 
towards the end of July, about four 
years ago, when we had some difficulty 
in recollecting a passage to that purpose 
in the Scriptures, my running back 
to the house in search cf one of my 
pocket bibles : and our sitting in the 
geranium alcove for nearly two hours, 
the arm of each round the neck of the 
other, seeking by the setting sun pas- 
sages in Holy Writ, on which our hopes 
were founded: when we solemnly hoped 
to be the guardian angel of the sur- 
vivor ? Do you recollect our thoughtless- 
ness in leaving the Bible behind us, 
when we both started up to chase a 
parrot from tree to tree, and bush to 
bush ? — It rained heavily that night, 
and the sacred Book was many days 



DUDLEY. 240 

after found by one of the gardeners, 
damaged and totally unfit for use. 

** I deserve to be punished for my 
carelessness," I remarked. 

" And I also," you replied : ** then 
let us punish ourselves," you added, 
" unknown to any one, — for three days 
we will not meet for a private walk." 

From that period, I recollect, we were 
never known to leave a book out of 
doors. 

But once more to go back to our last 
separation. When I found you pale and 
weeping, it was some time before you 
spoke, and silent grief alone convinced 
me that you regretted my departure. 
When I pressed you to remember your 
absent friend, I shall never forget the 
look with which you replied, reproach- 
fully, ** Can I do otherwise than re- 
member yoUy Dudley ? can I go a step, 
or look at a single object i5 ff out of the 
house, without having yo.fv^ image re- 
called to memory ? But it will not be 
thus with you ; you are going to new 
scenes, and at the same time, old and 
tender connections, early impressions 



S50 



DUDLEY. 



will be revived, and your studies engross 
the remainder of your attention: no 
share of it will be left for Euphorbia." 
At that instant the breakfast-bell rang ; 
it was the summons also to bring our 
horses round to the door; my departure 
was close at hand, and I heard myself 
called. 

" Good-by," you said, and you sat 
down again upon the bench where we 
had been seated ; " good-by, Dudley, I 
shall remain here until you are gone.'* 

" And it is my wish that you should,'* 
I replied ; " it was my anxious desire 
that our parting should be witnessed by 
heaven alone, that the impression of 
our mutual farewell might be stamped 
upon my mind, unmixed with that of any 
other. Good-by, I will cherish thi& 
moment in memory." 

We parted ; your tears were on my 
cheek, wh^/* I returned slowly to the 
house: — tli^^ "were your's, Claudy, for 
though my heart was full, I could shed 
none. The pressure of your hand I 
kept distinct in recollection from that of 
all other pressure; and when I turned 



DUDLEY. Q51 

from you, I closed my eyes, as if to fill 
my imagination with your form alone. 

Then, then, my Claudy, at the very 
moment, when in despair I was blaming 
my rash and precipitate folly in having 
formed the design of quitting Teneriffe ; 
at the moment when I repeated, '' She 
is lost to me! days, weeks, and months, 
will pass without my seeing lier!" to 
distinguish you, like an angel indeed, 
far above, hovering high in air ! — 
And when I climbed to the summit, on 
which stood the object dearest to me on 
earth, to find that object crimsoned by 
the blush of modesty, excusing her fol- 
lowing us to watch the vessel in which I 
w^as to embark, your fond affectionate 
smile was all my own ; and those tears 
on your dimpled cheek, dew on the 
bosom of the rose. 

You felt the violent throbs of my 
heart as I pressed you to my bosom. 
That heart spoke in silence for me. Did 
it not say, '* Now ask, can I forget 
you ?" Sir Eliot's voice was heard call- 
ing on me : " Dudley ! Dudley!" echoed 
among the rocks j and you said, * would 
M 6 



f25S DUDLEY. 

that those rocks possessed the power of 
ever repeating " Dudley !" But though 
I should never hear the name again, it 
lives for ever in my heart.' 

It was not until some hours after that 
I discovered the ring upon my finger. 
How or when you bestowed it, though 
doubtless at this last interview, I know 
not. But the brilliants being too costly 
for common show, I have fastened it on 
a ribbon, and take delight in wearing it 
unseen, and pressing it to my iaithful 
bosom. 



Oh, how mournfully did I watch the 
receding shores of Teneriffe ! and 
when far distant, gaze upon its moun- 
tains, which became gradually fainter. 
When at sunset, the ocean and surround- 
ing islands being in total darkness, the 
summit of the Peak, illumined by the 
rays of the departed sun, appeared a 
globe of fire, I watched until that light 
diminished to a star, the star to a spark, 
and all was dark. Then, indeed, de- 
jection came upon me : it was then that 



DUDLEY. 253 

1 seemed to have lost every ray of life. 
That spark extinguished, my spirit sunk^ 
and I resigned myself to the midnight 
indulgence of the most extreme sorrow. 



The next morning we were off Ma- 
deira, the vineyards of which, gilded by 
the rising sun, made a truly glorious 
appearance ; but my eyes were quickly 
turned away, and fixed on the south j 
and though every breeze that blew from 
thence wafted me from you, I inhaled it 
with pleasure, as having passed through 
the groves of Euphorbia. 

Euphorbia ! wedded to my existence 
by the dearest ties which memory can 
form ! To Sir Eliot, and to Mr^. Grant- 
ley, and to others, I can write on the 
subject of England, of my studies, of 
the future ; but when I write to you, my 
Claudy, it can only be of the past. Your 
image lives in my mind. Every word, 
and look, and action of your's, as marking 
an avowed preference for myself^ is 
treasured there ; and from among these 
hidden stores, I seek to cheer my hour? 



^54 DUDLEY. 

of solitude, — to teach me to bear our 
separation. 

When I look back to the ten years of 
perfect and unalloyed happiness I have 
been blessed with you at Euphorbia ; 
when I compare what I am, to what I 
might have been ! — 1 was once a weak 
and puny child, the victim of disease and 
infirmity : and what am I now ! I blush, 
with gratitude to Heaven, and your fa- 
ther, when I think of that. How many 
moments of pure and exquisite bliss, 
my dear and innocent Claudy, have I 
shared with you? The first on recol- 
lection occurred when we were in our 
eighth year. I was one evening throw^ 
ing stones, to knock down oranges ; you 
were on the terrace at a distance. Pre-^ 
sently I heard you, after a gentle cry^ 
and staggering a few steps back, call to 
me, ** Dudley, don't throw stones, it is 
dangerous play ;'' and you turned and 
ran into the house. Although wholly ig- 
norant of the mischief my unlucky hand 
had caused, I left off that play, and 
turned to some other amusement. 
13 



DUDLEY. ^55 

The next day, Sir Eliot remarked that 
your hair was in your eyes, and desired 
you to part it. You blushed, and looked 
silly : upon which he caught you by the 
arm, and divided himself your beautiful 
ringlets, when we saw on your forehead 
a large swelling, of a dark purple colour. 
I felt sorry for the accident, without the 
smallest idea that I had caused it ; and, 
whilst vinegar and brown paper were ap- 
plied, I joined Sir Eliot, and your aunt, 
in questioning you how it had hap- 
pened. — In vain; you were silent: — 
blushes, and downcast looks, your only 
answer. The truth came across me ; and 
I still remember the fond emotion of 
affection and gratitude I felt at your 
courage and generosity, (child as you 
were,) and I called out, *' I did it I I'm 
sure I did it ! I know I did." Do you 
recollect my kissing your forehead ; and 
your putting your arms round my neck,, 
saying, '' Don't cry, little Dudley ; you 
did not intend to hurt me. It was an 
accident, papa ;'' proudly adding, ** and 
I desire no more may be said about it.'* 



^56 DUDLEY. 

* Had the blow been on the temple/ Sir 
Eliot remarked, * or half an inch lower, it 
might have been fatal, or attended with 
the loss of an eye.' From that day 1 
never threw stones; and from that hour 
may be dated, in my bosom, the birth of 
tenderness, as you some time after your- 
self remarked, by saying, " My dear 
little Dudley, I*m not sorry you threw 
the stone at me; for I find you have 
loved me since that accident much 
more than vou did before." 



Our next moment of happiness, was 
when I climbed over the iron inclosure 
to share your solitary confinement. By 
dint of argument having convinced you 
yoii were in the wrong in your dispute 
with Nurse Morton, you remarked, " I 
think, Dudley, you are the best little 
boy I ever knew;" (this, to confess the 
truth, being no great compliment, as you 
were acquainted with no other;) " and 
I will give you -^ — — stay, where are my 
scissors ?" and you took out your pocket- 
book. *< I will give you, Dudley, one 



DUDLEY. 257 

of these pretty curls off my forehead, 
which you have often asked me for ; but 
I thought it a pity to spoil my hair ; and 
you may put it in the brooch Mrs. Balfour 
gave you, and wear it when you grow a 
man, like papa/' 

Claudy, to this hour I wear that 
brooch and hair ; and when you gave it 
me, you added, " There, take that ; 
because you have been a friend to me, in 
this my very great distress.'* 

And then the subject of the only dis- 
agreement we ever had, the Andalusian 
ponies, when I would make no allow- 
ances for your childish thoughtlessness, 
and was deaf to your justiiication, al- 
though I ought to have remembered, 
that you had never, in thought or word, 
deceived me, or indeed any other person 
on earth. Well might your indignation 
be excited at my ungenerous disregard 
to your assertions of the truth. You 
may forget your expressions on that oc- 
casion ; but they live in my memory : — ' 
*< Well, Dudley, from this day, all the 
management of my ponies, and my little 
mules, and my curricle, and harness. 



2.58 DUDLEt. 

and saddles, I give to you ; for you boys 
understand those affairs ; and I will have 
no more conversations vi^ith the grooms 
and stable-men about them. But I do 
desire, sir, that when I assert a thing, 
it may be believed, no matter how ab- 
surd or ignorant it may make me appear ; 
that is my concern. All your duty is, 
to give me full credit for what I say j 
for why should I not speak truth ? Who, 
or what have I to fear, on this earth ? 
If you ever doubt my word again, my 
love for you will cease." 

" Then you do love me now ?" I en^ 
quired, as I took a peach from your 
hand, and we rose together to walk in 
the forest. 

" Do 1 1" you replied ; " excepting 
papa, and aunt Grantley, I love you, 
Dudley, better than the whole world put 
together." 

I would never wish, Claudy, that that 
exception may be omitted. Let me fill 
the third place in your heart, and I shall 
be content. — -Should you lose your fa- 
ther, or your aunt, I must occupy the 
second place ; and if no longer a 



DUDLEY. ^59 

daughter, or a niece, Claudy, may I 
liope to be to you, all in all ? 

Adieu, dearest, most beloved ! Re- 
member to nurse, and water, and cherish 
that moss-rose bush, which we planted at 
the same moment of time, with our hands 
entwined together round the stem, near 
the flowering tulip tree, in the myrtle 
grove. When it puts forth buds, send 
me word. When it blooms, send me 
the leaves in your letter ; and be sure to 
have it fenced round, and with care, or 
our antelopes and parrots will destroy it. 
I shall feel much sorrow, believe me, 
should that shrub of love decay through 
neglect or accident. Look to it, Claudy. 
My own precious, Claudy look to it, as 
you value the peace of your faithful 
friend. 



^60 DtJDLEVe 



LETTER LI. 

Mrs. Gra7itley to Mrs. Clo7imorc. 
MY DEAR MADAM, Euphorbia, Teneriffe. 

iVIr. Clonmore's letter relative to his 
son, has given me, as well as my brother, 
the sincerest satisfaction, though no sur- 
prise, convinced, as we were, that in 
Dudley you would meet with no disap- 
pointment. His education is solid, and 
moral ; and such is the spirit of activity 
which permits him not to waste the 
slightest portion of time, that, we are 
well aware, whatever may be his future 
situation in life, he will constitute, in 
himself, his own happiness. But as 
Eliot, I understand, is writing to Mr. 
Clonmore fully on this subject, suffer me 
to confine myself to an account of how 
my niece bore this first trial of her good^ 
sense and fortitude. 



DUDLEY. 2Gl 

My brother having accompanied our 
dear Dudley to the vessel in which he 
was to embark, I was left alone, Claudy 
not making her appearance the whole of 
that morning. As I well knew the mind 
I had to deal with, and was convinced 
she would not indulge much longer in 
unnecessary lamentation -, but, on the 
contrary, conquer her sorrow, as soon as 
she could, I did not seek her, or cause 
her to be sought. My brother returned 
to dinner, and she had not appeared. 
As we had no company, her absence was 
of no material consequence, and Mr. 
Turner being at Ben Lomond, Eliot and 
I dined alone. On our retiring to the 
small library, on the other side of the 
house, we saw her white dress through 
the windows, among the trees, and she 
soon after joined us, when Eliot, still 
continuing his conveisaiion with me, 
held out bis arm, and enfolded her, as 
she sat by his side, hiding her tears oi) 
his shoulder. 

** Is the wind fair ?" I asked. 

** Perfectly, at present,'' he replied; 
" if it keeps in this quarter, they will 



2&2 DUDLEY. 

have passed Madeira by to-morrow night; 
once they shall have v^^eathered the Bay 
of Biscay, I shall have no apprehensions." 

" Apprehensions !" said Claudy, look- 
ing up, '« have you any ?" 

'' Yes, my love ; the sea is at all times 
uncertain ; and we touch the Equinox.'* 

" I hope Dudley may arrive safe in 
England." 

" 1 hope and trust in God he may," 
said her father. 

And the very idea of Dudley's being 
exposed to peril, made her forget her 
own personal grief in the loss of his so- 
ciety. Such, 1 apprehend to be ever the 
nature of true love ; the object of affec- 
tion is preferred, in all cases, and at all 
hazards, to merely self. " We are now 
only parted for a time," she argued 
aloud ; '* should he be lost, and we 
parted for ever ! — No I will hope for 
the best." Thus, the apprehension of a 
greater evil banished the lesser, and she 
began to revive. 

The evening passed in idleness on the 
part of both the father and the daughter ; 
for whilst I sat at work, they seemed 



DUDLEY. 263 

watching my industrious fingers as they 
talked at intervals with each other. 
Though various subjects were started on 
both sides, they all ended in that of 
Dudley's voyage. 



The next morning, when Claudy and I 
met in our own drawing-room, I could 
not fail remarking the state in which she 
had evidently passed the night; her pale 
cheek and swollen eyes convinced me she 
had not slept. Without taking notice of 
her appearance, 1 observed, as she was 
gathering some scattered drawings, and 
placing them in a portfolio, *' I fear that 
Dudley's loss will be most severely felt 
by your father ; he is so fondly attached 
to him, so greatly accustomed to liis 
society. For the last ten years, Claudy, 
as you well know, they have been insepar- 
able : in their studies, their walks, their 
rides, they have been ever together. In 
losing Dudley, he seems to have lost his 
only son, and has no one now to whom 
he can communicate his thoughts with- 
out reserve (ourselves excepted). He 



^64 DUDLEY. 

has suffered so much in early life from 
the loss of your mother, that I dread a 
recurrence of his dejection: — your's can- 
not fail of increasing his; and thus, in- 
stead of being of mutual comfort, you 
will be the reverse to each other. 

A new light seemed to break in upon 
her, and, as I expected, self was imme- 
diately forgotten, and all her anxiety 
turned upon her father. From wearing 
the appearance of pensive languor and 
negligence, she suddenly recovered her- 
self, exerted every energy of her natu?- 
rally strong mind, and began to see the 
necessity in this, her first trial in life, of 
putting in practice the lessons which 
hitherto had been her study. 

She left me, and passed quickly to her 
own room; from whence, in about half an 
hour, she again came, her dress better 
arranged, her hair in perfect order, and 
her face wearing a smile. She hurried 
me down to breakfast : on entering the 
room I saw my brother already seated at 
the table, but with a look, and in the 
posture of the deepest dejection, an atti^ 
tu(Je and countenance I had not seen for 



DUDLEY. ^65 

many years, and I felt the most sincere 
sorrow. Claudy was behind me, atten- 
tively observing her father, and as if 
held back by respect from obtruding 
upon his grief. — " Jane," he said, ** I 
see you blame me, but I cannot help it — 
this boy fills my thoughts : I did hope — I 
must confess it was the first hope of my 
existence — that he would never have 
quitted Euphorbia, except upon an occa- 
sional visit of a few weeks to see his fa- 
mily ; but this profession, — the new con- 
nections that he must unavoidably form, 
his own unbounded ardour in the pursuit 
of knowledge, this sort of mania that 
possesses him, of seizing what is advanced 
by any person, regardless whether suit- 
ing his ow^n situation or not, and with 
headstrong obstinacy following that, and 
that alone : — in short, all the favourable 
impressions under which I viewed this 
law-scheme fade away, before the bitter 
chance of losing him. — Some officious 
friend or other may put it into his head 
to remain in England, and follow this 
vocation, as he calls it, and sicken him 
of ever returning to Teneriffe : — and 

VOL. III. N 



£66 DUDLEY. 

should his coming to us again not b§ 
vohmtaiy — " 

My brother was here interrupted by 
his daughter, who, leaning over his shoul- 
der, said, ** You unkind papa, thus to 
wrong our dear Dudley. — I am convinced 
he will return, and of his own accord ; 
foi' I know that bis heart is here." Her 
smile and look of consolation seemed at 
once to revive him ; and as he turned to 
the breakfast-table, and began his meal, 
he replied, ** Well, Claudy, if Dudley has 
left his heart in your keeping, I am con- 
tent ; we may then expect to see him as 
certain as the carrier-pigeon flying back 
to its nest." 

Claudy blushed and was silent ; when 
h^ continued, anxious, as it appeared, to 
reward her self-command by assuming 
an appearance of cheerfulness, and which, 
in a short time, became unfeigned — 
" So, now that you have given me fresh 
hope and life of our young Templar's 
return, we will set about the arrange- 
ments for his new chambers, that they 
may be ready for him on his return next 
August twelvemonth." 



DUDLEY. 267 

Thus did Claudy reap the reward of 
her fortitude and filial affection. After 
breakfast she accompanied her father to 
the rooms in question, leaving me to my 
usual morning household avocations j 
since which time they have been almost 
constantly together ; and by their kind en- 
deavours to keep up the spirits of each, are 
of the greatest advantage towards ensuring 
their own peace and cheerfulness of 
mind. Claudy has completed six of 
the set of drawings which are to orna- 
ment the w^alls of one of Dudley's rooms j 
and my brother, as I understand, is en- 
gaged in a still more important under- 
taking : — he has already finished a whole- 
length likeness of himself, and one of 
Claudy, about three feet by two feet ^\e ; 
and, as it appears, I am designed to fur* 
nish a subject for the third picture. I 
consented to their joint request, on con- 
dition that my tambour-frame might be 
admitted, when Claudy remarked, " with- 
out that, however like, it could not re- 
semble Aunt Grantley." 



K 2 



^68 DUDLEY. 

Letters are arrived from England.^ — 
When the mail-bag was placed in my 
brother's hand, Claudy let fall her work 
on the ground, abruptly started from 
her chair, and quitted the room. Eliot 
having given me my letters and opened 
those to himself, took out an inclosed 
one, and glancing at the direction, held 
it over his shoulder, expecting it to be 
taken out of his hand ; when, disappoint- 
ed, he turned, and looked up and round 
the room. *' Where's Claudy ? it is a let- 
ter to her from Dudley :■ — what made the 
child run away at such a moment ?" Her 
running away, my dear Mrs. Clonmore, 
proved her to be no longer a child. I laid 
my own letters on the table, and took 
that which Eliot still held, saying, " I 
will take it to Claudy myself" 

" Yes," replied ray brother, '' if you 
can find her ; she may be at this moment 
half a mile off, at the flag-staff. I sup- 
pose he made her promise to read his 
first billet doux on the spot where they 
last parted." 

I judged otherwise, and went imme^ 
diately to her bible-closet, at the door of 



DUDLEY. 269 

which I tapped gently, calling to her by- 
name. — ** Yes, Aunt," was the reply: 
and as I held the door ajar, and put in 
the letter, I felt it snatched from my 
hand, as if from the sudden impulse of 
emotion ; closing the door carefully, I 
returned to the room below. 

In about three hours afterwards, 
Claudy sprang into the room, and in 
the arms of her fond father hid her tears 
and blushing joy. — I left them together j 
and when we again met, saw in both the 
most perfect and unconcealed pleasure. 
Claudy, it appears, had offered her letter 
to Eliot's perusal, but with a kiss he de- 
clined looking at it, saying, such was his 
reliance on the excellent principles of 
both his children, that he should consider 
their correspondence as sacred i When 
so good an understanding subsists be- 
tween parent and child, nothing can go 
amiss. 

I felt gratified, and yet not disappoint- 
ed, when Claudy offered Dudley's let- 
ter to me to read ; but I also refused to 
see it, not in imitation of the example 
set by her father, but under the full per- 
N 3 



^?0 DUDLEY. 

suasion that connected as these children 
(as we still call them) are at present, 
and will be in a few years, the more they 
are left to the direction of their own in- 
nocent hearts, the better chance of the 
most unbounded reliance and confidence 
in each other hereafter. Were my bro- 
ther's intentions contrary to what they 
are, we should of course act differ- 
ently ; but the constant intercourse of 
Dudley and our niece being now ripen- 
ed into confirmed attachment, we have 
only to hope that no change will take 
place in his affections, (and daily expe- 
rience proves that men are more fickle 
than women 5) for I am certain that those 
of Claudy, even at this tender age, are 
fixed, and for the remainder of her life : 
they could not have rested on a more 
excellent object, and I hope yet he will 
prove a blessing to herself and father. 



Within the last six months my niece 
has greatly improved in person : she has 
shot up in height, and without being less 
healthy, is, in outward appearance, much 



DUDLEY. ^27 

more delicate. — Her manners are softer, 
and carry with them a greater portion of 
feminine grace, than her robust and inde- 
pendent childhood promised ; her voice 
is better modulated, her tone less deci- 
sive ; and though still light and active, 
she is less eager, swift, and turbulent 
than she was only a twelvemonth since. 
Obstinacy, violence, and selfishness, 
which were the prominent faults of her 
early years, have gradually disappeared, 
and chiefly owing to her endeavours to 
amend herself on the one holy and only 
perfect model. The Scriptures continue 
her daily study, and by thern is her con- 
duct, even to the slightest variation of 
temper, regulated. The Gospels are her 
law, her guide, her constant rule of 
right. 

Whilst her chief aim is to study the 
comfort and happiness of those who live 
under the same roof with her, and be on 
the most amicable footing with her 
friends and neighbours, she endeavours 
to extend her general bounty to all who 
may stand in need of it. With the edu- 
cation of the infant poor we cannot of 
N 4 



27^ DUDLEY. 

course in a Catholic country interfere, 
as otherwise we might ; but on those 
points in which the article of faith is not 
a question, such as hunger and want, 
Claudy affords her assistance, and in the 
cities and their neighbourhood extends 
the never-exhausted hand of charity. 
Her present munificent allowance and 
future expectations authorise her to be 
the agent of Heaven ; and she fulfils her 
duties with simplicity, and yet with un- 
bounded liberality. 

Mr. Turner, I must own, did not 
seem to regret Dudley's society as much 
as 1 thought he would ; and I felt hurt 
and surprised at this apparent want of 
affection, when I learned the cause from 
my brother ; he then had my pardon, as 
we must allow that a first passion absorbs 
every other feeling. September is fixed 
for his marriage with Miss Macdonald, 
when he quits Euphorbia for a house at 
Santa Cruz, which has been purchased 
for the young couple by my brother, 
and furnished by Mr. Balfour. 

The latter and his wife were much 
pleased to hear such very gratifying ae- 



DUDLEY. 27^ 

counts of their favourite, Lady Alford, 
and desired me, when I wrote to Caroline, 
to congratulate her and Captain Caven- 
dish on their little son and heir. Mrs. 
Balfour has expressed surprise and dis- 
appointment, that my sister has never 
written to her but three times since she 
quitted Tenerifte : perhaps you would 
have the goodness to mention this to 
Caroline, when you see or write to her. 
Herself I consider the best judge, whe^ 
ther or not she ought, considering cir- 
cumstances, to keep up a correspondence 
with Mrs. Balfour, to whom my brother 
and I continue still very partial. 

With respect to myself, my dear Mrs. 
Clonmore, Dudley, I have no doubt, has 
given you some account of me, with the 
rest of the inhabitants of Euphorbia ; 
and I have little to add, except to own 
that, at times, regret mil find its way 
into my heart. I look on Dudley and 
Claudy, and say, " Had my children 
lived, they might have been like these — 
such might have been my Edward and 
my darling Mary 1'' But I as hastily sup- 
N 5 



274 DUDLEY. 

press every murmur, and add, ** The 
Lord hath taken his own." The bless- 
ing of that Supreme Being be ever with 
you and your's. 

Jane Grakiley* 



DUDLEY. ^7^ 



LETTER LII. 

Claudina Howard to Dudley Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, TenerifFe. 

My own dear friend! Yes, I 6/?t/ read 
your letter in the very spot you wished 
I should — my bible-closet. Before I 
opened it, on my knees, with burning 
tears of gratitude, I thanked the Al- 
mighty Preserver of your life, I blessed 
him for having guarded you through the 
perils of the seas, and conducted you in 
safety to your home. — Your home, 
Dudley ! this, this is your home, that your 
paternal home shared with many ; this 
your adopted, shared with — my father. 
Remember, remember that it was only 
on a visit for which you left us ; that by 
the time our roses have blown for the se- 
cond time, we shall look for your return. 
Yes, I shall watch with jealous care the 
beautiful moss-rose tree we together 
N 6 



^76 DUDLEY. 

planted ; and yet, with all my vigilance 
and affectionate anxiety, it may droop, 
and show symptoms of decay. It is, as 
you observe, the talisman of the heart. 
Should it, through sympathy for your 
defection, wither before even it can ar- 
rive at maturity, can you hope to receive 
the tribute of its leaves, fragrant as the 
breath of love ? No, no, Dudley ; if it 
bear, nor bud, nor bloom, but thorns 
alone, expect those thorns. And yet, 
my friend, should you even forget me, 
I will not, for I cannot reproach you ; I 
have learned, for the last ten years, the 
lesson of kindness; and that of reproach 
will be new indeed to me ! 



I read your letter ; it was a moment 
of bliss, which, I am convinced, can 
find no parallel : yom Jirst letter to me. 
I was alone, beyond the chance of in- 
trusion, and yet I turned the key of my 
door. I was alone, and yet I blushed as 
I held it in my hand. I spun out my 
happiness with artful delicacy — I spun it 
out — I delayed reading it. I Oh, 



DUDLEY. 277 

Dudley ! I am ashamed to eonfess the 
follies I committed previous even to 
examining the contents. Did I not al- 
ready know what it contained ? — I did. 
— Had I attempted to write your senti- 
ments, without having seen your letter, 
such would they have been ; we have, 
therefore, it appears, one mind ; you 
might, perhaps, echo, one heart. 

I can say with truth, that your pre- 
sence never gave me one half of the pure 
and unmixed delight afforded by this 
your letter : and could I have had the 
slightest idea that from absence itself 
can be extracted the most sublime and 
rapturous emotions! — pardon me, Dud- 
ley, but, indeed, the sight of you never 
gave me such joy as have these written 
testimonies of your tenderness, your con- 
stancy. That hour was delirium ; I was 
giddy with excess of joy ; and having 
read it, and pondered over every word, 
and studied every sentence, I quitted 
my retreat, and felt as if I no longer 
touched the ground. 

I know not why, but I felt reluctant 
to be seen by any person whomsoever 5 



S78 DUDLEY. 

and yet, why should I feel ashamed of 
having heard from you, my friend? — and 
yet I was. I did not return to my father 
and aunt, but I went to my garden ; and 
as if my steps were invisibly guided, I 
found myself standing by our rose tree. 
I shall write to him to-morrow, I said, 
but I have no rose leaves to send as yet : 
the buds are barely formed, and it would 
be wanton cruelty to tear open these 
thus early, and thereby destroy all future 
promise. — No, I'll let them blow : pa- 
tience, and sun, and rain, and fostering 
care, will bring this tree to maturity, 
when Dudley, with me, shall share the 
produce, rose for rose. 



Whither did I go next ? — to the orange- 
walk, and I sat down upon that bench ; 
and though you were no longer beside 
me, I scarcely regretted you ; for had 
you not departed, I should have had 
no letter once more to read, and read 
again. I smiled, and almost told the 
trees under which I sat, and the cluster- 
ing jasmine around me, and the canopy 



DUDLEY. 279 

of hanging passion-flowers — they, you 
may remember, had all witnessed our 
parting, — I had nearly spoken to them, 
and said, ** He has written to me." 

But oh, Dudley, when from thence 
I walked — walked ! when I glided 
swiftly, yet gently, as if endowed with 
the power of flight, and reached the 
high summit of the flag-staff hill ! the 
boundless prospect stretched before me 
of mountains, valleys, rocks, waterfalls, 
and sea ! I seemed to stand alone in the 
wide creation, — no human being was in 
sight : this was the narrow velvet spot of 
ground, scarcely able to hold more than 
two persons at a time, whereon we had 
stood, as if it were designed for one af- 
fectionate pair alone, to meet unseen by 
every mortal eye, here to exchange at 
parting promises of eternal remem- 
brance. 

I went over the scene in imagination ; 
I saw you in my mind, winding down 
through the vineyards by the side of my 
father, and reaching the boundary of 
Euphorbia ; I caught again your mourn- 
ful air, your glance at hazard to the 



S80 DUDLEY. 

heights; I heard your exclamation; I 
saw you succeed in your bold and daring 
attempt to reach me by ahuost a perpen- 
dicular ascent. And again, in idea, I 
felt yoii near me ; I repeated your words, 
and my own, (for I have our dialogue 
by heart, not a word missing or ex- 
traneous ;) the hills took pleasure in 
echoing the name of <« Dudley," and 
you vanished from my sight — the name 
died away on my ear, and I closed my 
eyes. 

Still the vessel was in sight: with re- 
spect to itj I marked a distant fixed 
object, to notice the very instant when it 
should stir, — and all was motionless. I 
saw the boat put off the shore, and could 
distinguish the dark figures against the 
light blue sea; it reached the vessel ; my 
eyes were strained with gazing : at 
length, — the despair of that moment 
surely can never be forgotten ! — I saw the 
boat return — I saw the vessel move I 
it passed the fixed object I had for that 
purpose marked, and I saw no more. 



DUDLEY. 281 

Dearest Dudley, and you found, then, 
your father and your mother well; and in 
health and spu'its ? Do they ever talk to 
you of little Claudy ? — I hope they do : 
tell them, from me, to bestow every 
epithet they please upon the infant 
tyrant, whom they must remember : so 
that they talk to you daily of me, it i^ 
all I ask. 

My father fell into despondency O0 
your departure,, andy for the first time in 
my life, I spent a sleepless night. I en- 
deavoured to close my eyes, when my 
room, in imagination, appeared the cabin 
of a ship. Nay, do not jest at what I 
say — I heard the splashing of the waves 
on all sides, and the loud trampling of 
feet over head. A few nights after- 
wards, I suffered still more, and was in 
storms and danger; the sea appeared to 
burst over me, the masts to fall with a 
tremendous crash ; I heard the loud 
voices of men; I felt appalled ; I shrieked 
«* Oh, Dudley, save me !" I awoke, and 
found myself in the arms of the terrified 
Rosalva. 



^^^ DUDLEY. 

You make no mention of the particulars 
of your voyage, my friend, in your letter 
to me, and my father has taken no no- 
tice of the contents of your's. Why not 
have told me whether it was attended 
with danger or not ? We have had no 
storms in our seas since your departure, 
and the wind has been fair ; do, then, 
dreams really go by contraries ; and was 
your voyage as quick and as prosperous, 
as aifection itself could wish ? 



None of your sisters, you say, remind 
you of me j in that I rejoice : I would 
be solitary in your imagination, and 
valued for myself alone. I should not 
feel happy, v/ere you ever to inform me 
that you had found another Claudy. 
The world maypossess — nay, does — many 
of superior intellects, of more refined ac- 
complishments, of exquisite grace in 
features and in form ; but, believe me, 
Dudley, you will find but one Claudy on 
earth : the whole of my sex may surpass 
me in learning and in beauty, but none 
can in truth and fidelity. 



DUDLEY. ^83 



My father's spirits are better than 
they were ; and how I wish to raise your 
jealousy, by assuring you I have suc- 
ceeded to your place in his library. J 
occupy your chair at his writing-table ; I 
arrange my books and papers in the 
same order as you were accustomed to 
do ; I endeavour to smile upon him as 
you used to smile, and to look your 
looks ; but, though I strive to give him 
all my attention, when either reading or 
writing with him, in Spanish, or French, 
or Italian, he finds the difference ; — my 
abilities are so very inferior to those of 
his last pupil ; my intellectual acquire- 
ments so childish, compared to your's : 
and often, though I endeavour to 'check 
this truly feminine habit, I am in so great 
a hurry to begin my study and come to 
a conclusion, that the progress is but 
little attended to. 

The other day he observed this, and 
drew a comparison at the instant be- 
tween your attention, docihty, and pa- 
tience, and mine. ** Study, with you, I 



^84 DUDLEY* 

perceive, Claudy," he said, *' is often a 
rapid drive ; whilst, with Dudley, it is a 
steady, sober walk, capable of admitting 
of reflection: if at the end of your ride, 
you are asked what you remarked on your 
way, the answer must undoubtedly be, * I 
do not know ; all 1 know is, that I was 
tliere^ and am liere f whereas Dudley, 
if questioned and cross-questioned, can 
recall the particulars of his route; he can 
describe the different places at which he 
stopped to admire any local beauty ; he 
gathers wild nosegays and purchases 
cultivated flowers, and these he here- 
after produces to gratify himself and 
others ; he has perhaps caught the re- 
flection of himself in a clear lake ; and 
thus, when he arrives at the end of his 
career, his experience is improved, and 
his knowledge expanded. You, on the 
contrary, dash on in a full rapid flight 
through the road of science, and arrive 
at the end of the journey, enveloped in a 
cloud of dust. Such, Claudy, is a 
picture of the judicious and the tlwugkU 
less reader." 



DUDLEY. 285 

It has become my employment to fill 
the glasses and vases throughout the 
lower apartments with flowers ; and 
these, Dudley, I gather from your garden ; 
they are all of your own culture. My 
garden is now neglected ; but I have 
myself superintended your's. Would that 
you could repay me in kind, my Dudley ! 



The morning after your departure, I 
went to the rooms you had occupied for 
the last ten years, expecting to see them 
despoiled of all your little property. — 
How great then my surprise, to find that 
not the slightest change had taken place : 
here were still your books, your maps, 
your writing-desk ; the painting mate- 
rials, the telescope, the spy-glass, and 
microscope j your mathematical instru- 
ments, your foils, and even your dress- 
ing-case, all are left behind : and, what 
perhaps gave me more pleasure than all, 
was to observe your fur-cap, your riding- 
gloves, and whip on the sofa, where, most 
probably, you had thrown thejn on your 



^86 DUDLEY. 

return from our last drive in the South 
valley. 

At first, this unexpected appearance 
gave me pleasure, and, shortly after, 
pain. Here, I remarked, is the gilded 
cage ; the full trough of seed ; the 
porcelain bath ; the shining glasses of 
water : — but the bird is gone ! and what 
sight more melancholy (comparatively 
speaking) than that of a cage, when our 
favourite bird is dead or flown.- 

I mentioned the appearance of your 
room to my father, when I perceived he 
looked confused and perplexed : the 
sudden flush of his cheek convinced me 
of my imprudence ; and I would have 
changed the subject, when he observed 
with a faint smile, as if his conduct re- 
quired some apology — • " The truth is, 
Claudy, that I am in doubt, whether I 
could not have spared z/ow on a trip to 
England, rather than Dudley. I seek to 
deceive myself, and, by my desire, his 
room has been left in the state you have 
seen ; at my wish, he took with him only 
a solitary portpianteau, and a sea-chest, 
13 



DUDLEY^ 287 

containing a sufficient stock of linen, a 
change of clothes, and a small spy-glass ; 
and, for amusement, Waverley and Guy 
Manner] ng ; for thousands, 1 would not 
have had his rooms stripped of all these 
trifles, which cheat me into the idea that 
they wear the appearance as if he was 
gone on a ride to Ben Lomond, or a morn* 
ing's excursion/' — Need you any further 
conviction of the value in which you are 
held by this best of fathers ? 

And now, my dearest Dudley, that I 
have tried to convince you of the hold 
you have on all our affections, grant me 
the privilege of friendship, and let me 
reprove you. In your letter to me, you 
were so wholly engrossed by recollections 
of the days of our childhood, that the 
present hour and occupation was over- 
looked. — I must also come in for my 
share of blame, whereby I confess to have 
read your letter, at least, ten times, be- 
fore I remarked your errors of neglect. 
Your letter is neither dated, signed, nor 
sealed ; I can only give a guess as to tlie 
(day on which it was written ; I am at 
no loss certainly to know from whence, 



288 DUDLEY. 

or from whom it comes ; and the sealing 
was of little consequence, as it was en- 
closed in one to my father ; but, as he 
remarked on my mentioning these sins 
of omission to him, it was rather, you 
must allow, an unlucky debut in public 
life ; and that such in the literary line 
might be aukward, and, perhaps, pro^ 
ductive of evil or fatal consequences in 
the legal and mercantile world. 



Well, my friend, have I more to add ? 
need I press upon your recollection, that 
in losing you, though only for a short 
period — short ! the last month has ap- 
peared the first lingering period of my ex- 
istence — that each has lost in you an- 
other self? You didiXioi sign yourself] my 
friend, dear Dudley ; but, in the very 
omission, I found a charm, — it owed its 
origin to the hurried feelings of the mo- 
ment j mine are more calm : — what then 
would be my excuse, did I wilfully 
neglect to sign myself your constant, 
Your affectionate 
Cl4udy Howard. 



DUDLEY. 289 



LETTER LIII. 

Ylie Countess of Alford to Mrs, Balfour, 

Park Place. 

And so, my dear Mrs. Balfour, I hear 
from Jane you are unreasonable enough 
to quarrel with me for having written 
to you only three times since my de- 
parture from Teneriffe — at least Mrs. 
Clonmore thus writes me word, and 
presumes to rail at my ill-behaviour. 
My husband might as well find fault with 
me for supplying him with only a leash 
of children during the last six or seven 
years. Recollect, my dear madam, that 
when at Teneriffe, having no family of 
my own, I was glad to load the broad 
and flagging wdngs of old Time with 
fanciful long epistles, to bear to my corre- 
spondents : but now that the case is alter- 
ed, and that the said venerable gentleman, 
with one single lock on his foretop, is 
deceased, and that from his ashes have 

VOL. III. o 



S90 ' DUDLEY. 

sprung the smiling Hoz/r^, whose h'ght and 
playful pinions, who could have the 
cruelty to encumber with any thing 
weightier than a note of enquiry, or a 
card of invitation ? 

Lord ! I'm getting very ridiculous : 
it took me five minutes to wind round 
that simile or metaphor, or whatever you 
may call it. Well then, in plain English, 
(you understand that, Canarian Balfour, 
if not, ask your bra' Caledonian,) I must 
leave off scribbling, and attend to my 
family. I must chase the sulks from the 
face of my nautical spouse; look to the 
keys of good housewifery ; whip all my 
children round, and kiss and put them 
to bed. 



Some advantage, after all, in these late 
marriages ! Had I been honoured with a 
brat or two by my late lord, or had soon 
got tired of my liberty, I might, in the 
course of nature, be by this time a 
granny ! Heaven bless me ! what a word ! 
— a granny ! But having wisely enjoyed 
full ten years of sterile widowhood, here 



Dudley; S91 

am I at — our family Bible does cer- 
tainly say eight-and-thirty ; but my most 
admirable looking-glass, and my mirror 
of a husband, and my kind reflecting 
guests, all diQcldiVQ \h2it I cannot possibly 
bejlve-and-tiveiity. 

All 1 know is, that these little 
striplings beside me are my lawfully 
begotten children j whereas they might, 
in point of years, add the word grand to 
their title. I am now seated, or was 
about two minutes since, between a 
couple of young ladies, my daughters, 
four and five years of age, whilst on my 
knee was perched a little Neptune of 
three months old, not looking at my be- 
witching face, — no, trust him for that, 
what would he get there ? — but at my 
fair neck (alias bosom), with both his 
fists raised, as if he intended to treat like 
a kettle-drum the reservoirs of his daily 
food, whilst roaring with the voice of a 
boatswain, <* Give me my dinner, mam- 
my ;" that is, if he could speak. The 
little villain ! — only think of his coming 
into the world merely to baulk my in- 
tended festival at Richmond, in honour 
o 2 



292 DUDLEY. 

of the Regent's birth-day, — the deuce 
take him. Nay, he had the impudence to 
be born on that very royal morning, as 
if to vow and protest that his birth should 
be also celebrated by the ringing of bells, 
the flying of flags, by trumpets, blacka- 
moors, and tambourines. I had a great 
mind, the moment he was born, to take 
him by the two shoulders, and give him 
such a shake, that should frighten him out 
of the world again. 



Well, hush-a-by, darling mine ! there, 
it is at last satisfied. Here nurse, take 
him, — away with him : — there ! be off 
to sleep with you. And you girls get 
along both into the Park with jour 
nurses, governesses, and tutors, or, by 
the black powers of necromancy, 1*11 
transport you, with a touch of the rod^ 
to Teneriffe, and sister Jenny. Nay, if 
you're saucy, you pair of impudent little 
mermaids, I'll send you to Donna Bal- 
four at once, and she'll soon cram you to 
death with sugar-plums. 



DUDLEY. 295 

Well, enough said of the brats, — a 
word or two of papa. A first-rate hus- 
band after all, short as he is. Did I ever 
think that 1 should marry again in the 
way that I have ! Would you believe it, 
my capital friend, this Triton, this Ca- 
vendish, in person and qualities, is the 
very opposite to all I ever thought in- 
dispensable in my choice of a second. 
In the first place, he is no taller than 
myself; hut 7/ou have seen him ; and, I 
assure you, he is no better in that re- 
spect. Then he is so fair, that, although 
I know him to be apost, and 3. commander, 
he looks at all events so like a fresh-water 
sailor, I am greatly tempted, some night 
in his sleep, to give his face a wash over 
with brown paint, or a gentle scrubbing 
with walnut-shucks. As for gunpowder, 
I don't think, though the gazettes did 
blazon forth his gallantry, he ever stood 
much in the way of that ; for no beauty- 
scar is to be seen on his warlike (that is, 
lady-like) brow ; and instead of the seams 
of wounds, made by an enemy's cutlass, 
my captain has the folly and impudence 
to sport, on his fine face, as bewitching 
o 3 



^94f DUDLEY. 

a pail' of dimples as ever a lady of to7t 
would covet, — to clap on her's. Now 
what, say I, has a sailor to do with 
dimples at all? except, as I pbserved, • 
he should spy them in the cheeks of a 
pretty girl. 

Then I used to like grave, solemn, 
silent, and stalking men, (the heavy horse 
of society,) whereas this light skirmisher, 
this little blue and white beau of mine, 
with his enormous gold epaulettes, and 
his medal of K. C. B., is ever on the 
broad smile of good-humour. I'm 
«* Cany, my love," and " Carry, my 
dear," at every moment ; and he looks 
upon his children as if he were a sportive 
dolphin, enticing them to have a ride 
upon his back. 

Well, upon the whole, I find that these 
little, slender, smiling men make the 
best husbands ; they are so cosey and so 
domestic, and they draw their chairs so 
close to the fire, and so rub their hands, 
and feeling happy in themselves, are 
happy with all around them ; and, in a 
walk, they are indisputably to be pre- 
ferred. When hanging on the arm of a 



DUDLEY. ^95 

great tall fellow, he never hears what 
you say to him, nor do you understand all 
the fine things he says in return — they 
are lost in air : for either he has to stoop 
to you, or you to stretch up a long neck 
to him ; and this breaks the thread of 
conversation. Whereas you and Balfour, 
I and Cavendish, are most wonderfully 
well matched in this respect, (and, to tell 
the truth, in every other.) When walk- 
ing side by side, we are on a par ; a re- 
gular communication of ideas and ob- 
servations can go on ; when I turn round 
to speak to Cavendish, (I, being tall, am 
on a level with my mmi-of-war,') our eyes 
meet, we can watch each other's coun- 
tenance ; I speak to a face. But faith, 
in walking with some men of my ac- 
quaintance, Charley Maxwell for example, 
(Irish giant the second,) I seem speaking 
to his elbow, at best to the lapel le, or the 
collar of his coat. Then, add to this, 
little men try to make the most of them- 
selves, and rise as they walk, whereas 
tall men often contract a stoop. Little 
men are active, tall men sluggish 5 little 

men 

o 4 



^96 DUDLEY. 



The deuce take little men, and all 
men, I say ! Tafferil Cavendish had the 
audacity to bounce into my dressing- 
room just now, like a Congreve rocket, 
to set me on fire — with passion. He 
dare to interfere in my intended arrange- 
ments! Next Thursday — six weeks, I 
purposed opening our Richmond villa 
for the season to the world, (and its 
wife, if she would come,) with a ball and 
supper, and here he has, positively he 
has, altered the date to that of a month 
later ! This is not to be borne ; — and his 
excuse ! fears of my health, and the 
fatigue, and the crowd, and the late 
hours 1 Nonsense. I protest, I'll get all 
my friends to send him a Round Robin of 
abuse for his ill-behaviour. 

Lord ! my dear ma'am, the designed 
hero of the fete^ Dudley Clonmore, (I 
have not seen him yet,) will be off to 
Oxford by that time, where his college 
tutors intend, I find, to keep him strict 
to his terms* 



DUDLEY. 297 

The deuce a bit, were I Dudley, if I 
would be governed by old walking pic- 
tures of* proctors, and doctors, and 
masters, and fellows, and such sort of 
stuff. And if I must obey naval orders, 
and have my ball on the night chosen by 
Captain Cavendish, huff and bluff, should 
Dudley not be inspired with the proper 
University spirit, to give them all the 
slip, and come to us gay ones at Rich- 
mond, he is not worth one single pow- 
dered hair in the graceful wig of old 
Mrs. Ellen Law : he is not, by the judi- 
cial eloquence of AdolpJius Alley^ Esq. 
and Messrs. Robin Hood, Scarlett, and 
Little John, with the fair Clorinda to- 
boot. 



I have seen him ! I have seen this 
jiere and superbe young Guanche ! This 
prince of Teneriffe ! This most exquisite 
lad of the Fortunate Isles ! The adopted 
of Eliot, and the chosen dearly beloved of 
Claudy. I have seen him at last ; him 
who quitted England as squalid and di- 
minutive as an ludian pagod, and who is 
o5 



S98 DUDLEY. 

returned, expanded and lofty as a Persian 
satrap ! 

He called about an hour ago. I was 
out. On my return, glancing at the 
hundred and ten cards which covered the 
table in the hall, I distinguished that of 
«' Mr. Dudley Clonmore." I believe I 
shrieked ; at any rate, I turned back, * 
sprung into my carriage, just as James 
was drawing up the blinds, and crying 
out, " To Dr. H 's. Cavendish- 
square," rattled off with the thundering 
noise of a fire-engine. 

I alighted, and tripped — (no wicked 
interpretation, I beg) — tripped up stairs, 
and there defend me ! when I ex- 
pected to find the physician that is, and 
the counsellor that is to be, poring over 
green bags and folios, comparing cases, 
reading reports, and unrolling parch- 
ments, talking of briefs, fees, bones and 
skeletons, with a pen stuck behind each 
ear, — they were — yes, faith, they were 
rattling the bones, but they were those of 
a dice-box. There, at a backgammon- 
table, with a bottle of port, and one of 



DUDLEY. 299 

Madeira at their elbow, sat lounging 
away the after-dinner hour, in a snug 
back drawing-room, our M. D. and his 
gout, and our blooming student of ju- 
risprudence. 

** Hoy, hoy, my Princess !" cried the 
old beau, with a shining skin full of joy, 
holding out to me both his hands, and 
one of his feet also, for the matter of 
that ; for, wrapped in flannel, it lay upon 
a chair. Then with a brimful!, eye, and 
a leer of pleasure, he added, jerking his 
head and turned-back thumb to a noble 
and graceful figure, who, on my entrance, 
rose hastily, and leaned on the back of 
his chair, " There he is — look at him. 
Pity you did not wait a few years longer- 
There's a fellow for you 5 — can you 
match him in England ?" 

In the mean time, my dear friend, 
this fine creature stood smiling at me 
with a bright blush upon his downy 
cheek ; and I, having taken the seat he 
had placed for me, sat — like the en- 
chanted lady in Comus. No ; this I 
was not prepared for. I had heard he 
o 6 



300 DUDLEY. 

was tall and pretty ; and I expected to 
see a high, lanky, aukward — not auk- 
ward, but sheepish in short, a mawk- 
ish younker, neither the bold and daring 
boy, nor the assured man ; but here was 
finished excellence in youth. 

" Why don't you give her pretty lady- 
ship a kiss, you dog ? She has often 
kissed you. One good turn deserves 
another ;" said our elegant Hippocrates. 

When I replied, " Oh no, Mr. Dudley 
has no salutes to give away ; besides, it is 
a contraband article in this country : it is 
the growth of Tenerifte ; and my niece 
Claudy now has alone a right to such 
valuables ;" and I held out my hand to 
Dudley, which he grasped affectionately, 
and then let go. 



" So,'* I said, " you almost keep 
Euphorbia hours. Doctor, do you ? Din- 
ing at three o'clock ! — in compliment to 
Dudley, I suppose ; but let him come 
and spend a month with me, and I'll en- 
list him in fashion's train." 



DUDLEY* 301 

«* What ! teach him the value of health 
by the loss of it. Eight o'clock dinners, 
eh ? No, no ; none of your matricula- 
tions, my freakish Countess. The lad 
has health to boast of now ; and if he 
despises warning, he deserves to lose it." 

" Why, my dear sir, we keep very 
early hours ; all the difference being in 
the name we give our meal. For ex- 
ample, what we in England call breakfast, 
he may call dinner ; what we name din- 
ner, let him fancy his collation : and 
strictly, and in fact, this is the case : and 
as for retiring to rest, that should be as 
early as the young Civilian pleases, — in 
the morning." 



I gained my point j and Dudley is to 
spend a week with us, a month hence, at 
Richmond, when I shall introduce him 
to the fashionable world, as a newly -im- 
ported object of curiosity and admiration, 
— a youthful Guanche ! If he does not, in 
less than a week, fall in love with one of 
my charming guests, tell Claudy TU 



302 DUDLEY. 

forfeit all my reliance on the cosmetic 
powers of cold cream, and rose-colour 
window-curtains. 

Upon my life, Claudy will have no 
bad bargain in this business, after all ; for 
by a finer youth I never had the honour 
of being handed down stairs, and into my 
carriage. And yet, would you believe 
it, though I purposely reminded him I 
was still his aunt, he persisted in address- 
ing me as Lady Alford ; and even 
blushed, when I, with a nod and a smile, 
and a kiss-hand, said, ** Good-bye, ne- 
phew." 



And Claudy, as I understand from the 
letters of Eliot, and Widow Grantley, 
conducts herself like a wise little woman, 
and goes on with her daily avocations 
with alacrity and good-humour. I have 
a commission for you to execute, my 
dear Mrs. Balfour : — go directly to Eu- 
phorbia, to Jane, to my most veneiable 
sister Jenny, and desire her, without 
delay, to take a sup Now don't 



DUDLEY. 303 

mistake me. Do you think I mean eau- 
de-vie ? Something a-kin to it, though. 
Let Widow Grantley contrive to get hold 
of* St. Leon's* elixir of life, and I promise 
her the guardianship of all my female 
progeny, grand-daughters and all, that 
she may bring them up on the milk of 
propriety, and the flour of common sense ; 
better, after all, than the milk of roses, 
and I'esprit de jasmin. 



I know, that had I been in Claudy's 
place, all Teneriffe should have heard 
my complaints at the loss of this charm- 
ing youth. No piping Sappho, no blub- 
bering Ariadne, nor hair- wrenching 
CEnone, should have surpassed me in 
expressions of grief, or loudness of la- 
mentation ; for though Dudley may have 
promised, nay, sworn to be constant, we 
experienced matrons are aware, that at 
lovers' vows, the man in the sky, with 
the thunder-bolt, laughs. 



* Godwin's «' St. Leon/ 



504 DUDLEY. 

I was a wife at seventeen. And now, 
my dear native of the Atlantic Islands, 
to prove to you what are some of our 
English boarding-schools, or rather, (to 
be more liberal,) what some of us board- 
ing-school ladies turn out, I will honestly 
confess the number of times that I fancied 
myself up to my finely-shaped ears in 
love, before any man really convinced 
himself that he was sincerely in love with 
me. 



At the age of fifteen, I found myself 
placed, by the death of my mother, at a 
school of eminence, as the alternative of 
living with my sister Grantley, (that was 
my first error.) A ball at the foreign 
ambassador's in the neighbourhood was 
graced by my presence, when I danced 
the usual number of dances with a young 
cornet of dragoons ; and, before six 
o'clock in the morning, was desperately 
bewitched in his favour. As I had an 
opportunity of spying his regimentals 
daily, during his walks and fides, from 
that time my delicate fingers could not 
support the weight of a pencil, of a pen, 
7 



DUDLEY. 305 

or a needle. The army-list was my 
study j scarlet and white my colours ; 
and military music my passion. The 
only benefit I reaped from these amorous 
notions, was the cure of a lounging walk, 
which, until then, I thought peculiarly 
fashionable. A firm step, and an easy car- 
riage, when softened down to the proper 
medium, gave me an air of great ad- 
vantage over my companions, who, how- 
ever, took their revenge, by hastening to 
inform me, that Cornet O' Roderick had 
run away with an old widow, and her 
jointure, from the neighbourhood of Pe- 
tersham, who had, on that condition, 
promised to purchase his promotion. 



The transition from army to navy 
came in course : being on a visit in 

town at Lord E 's, the uncle of 

my present hopeful husband, in less than 
a week I was over head and ears in love 
and idleness (generally inseparables) 
with a young lieutenant, introduced to 
me at Covent-garden Theatre, (Wild 
Oats for ever !) as a brother-officer of 



306 DUDLEY. 

his, by Miles Cavendish himself. The 
next day he dined with us, and in the 
evening I sang and played, and he did 
me the favour of accompanying me in 
the tJie7i fashionable " Lullaby," and the 
ever fashionable *« Rule Britannia." 
Three more attacks, thought I, and he 
lowers his top-sails, strikes to my flag, 
and I take him in tow with flying co- 
lours. For a whole week I was engaged 
in poring over Cook's Voyages, and 
drawing ships and boats for card-racks. 
I read nothing but the Naval Chronicle, 
or sported ribbons but of navy-blue. 

A few evenings after, Lord E 

enquired of Lieut. Starboard where was 
his wife ? and why he had not brought her 
to town with him? to which my true 
blue returned, he had left her at Ply- 
mouth with the children, having only 
come to town upon admirable (a slip 
of the pen) Admiralty business — two 
words not always of synonimous import. 

Now in this case was I to blame, my 
dear friend ? How w^as it possible for me 
to imagine that a young slim fellow of 
cheerful musical abilities, not yet one- 



DUDLEY. 807 

and-twenty, who had been a midship- 
man only the other day, could have 
already shackled himself with a wife and 
posterity ? Upon my life, those tied-up 
rogues, to make known to us damsels 
w4io are on the look-out, that their hearts 
are already captured, should be com- 
pelled, like us, to wear on one of their 
stardy fingers the badge of slavery. 
Golden for marriage, and black for 
widowhood ; with liberty to reverse this 
fashion as circumstances might w^arrant. 



Well, — a party of us youngsters went 
to Oxford, when a square cap and a black 
gown, (a youth inside them, you will un- 
derstand,) exerted, in his function of 
guide, the juggling arts of a sorcerer ; 
and I immediately fancied myself bom 
to be the wife of a divine, (in beauty I 
was half that already.) By the help of a 
fertile imagination, I saw my gentleman- 
commoner a curate, a rector or vicar, an 
archdeacon, a right honourable — no, a 
right reverend, I fancy is the word, (no 
matter, they ought to be synonimous,) a 



308 DUDLEY* 

prebendary, a rosy dean, and a bishop *, — * 
there I had the grace to stop, before I 
touched either of their graces : — for one 
of the arch ladies^ I did not know which, 
being of my family, (a hundred and fifty 
degrees removed,) I had the conscience 
not to covet either of their dead slip- 
pers with purple rosettes. 

Eliot, who was his fellow-collegian, in- 
vited him to Oakland Park, whilst I was 
at home for the holidays, Louisa Clonmor e 
(then Miss Vivian) being my compa- 
nion. I soon became astonishingly par- 
tial to Gothic architecture, painted win- 
dows, vestibules, cathedrals, colleges, 
surplices, and cambric bands ! I remem- 
ber drawing a landscape, (a vile perform- 
ance,) with a little country church, and 
a spire at a distance, peeping from 
among the trees, and in the fore-ground 
a cottage, with the smoke of bright blue 
issuing from the chimney, to show it 
was inhabited ; and underneath I wrote 
these words, " Love and a Cottage ;" 
which admirable design (design, — you 
comprehend me, — pray admire my can- 
dour) I slipped into the first volume of 



DUDLEY. 309 

the Antiquities of Oxfordshire, which i 
knew he was reading at the time. The 
next day I found the very identical draw- 
ing in my work-box, with the words I had 
written drawn throughby a pencil, and the 
following substituted : but you know the 
old adage, about love and poverty, and a 
door, and the blue smoke of the chim- 
ney. Now, though he might not be able 
toTjoast an intimacy with the blind boy 
of soft emotions, he could not possibly 
be ignorant, that / could never form the 
most distant acquaintance with the gaunt 
fiend of penury. He acted nobly, and 
shortly after became master of a gram- 
mar-school in the North of England. — 
Relating this among all my girlish follies 
to Alford, he made a memorandum in 
his pocket-book, to the honour of the 
Reverend ; and in less than a twelve- 
month after our own marriage, pre- 
sented him a living, by which he was 
enabled to exchange the irksome labour 
of a school, for the peace and quiet of a 
college-life. 

Now, to relate the consequences of 
folly the fourth : — I was in town at the 



310 DUDLEY. 

time, and caught a sore-throat, which 
was followed by a low intermittent fever, 
that continued its company, though its 
introducer was gone. 

An amiable youth of a physician at- 
tended me, who looked so soft, and felt 
my pulse so tenderly, and behaved so 
anxiously and exquisitely kind, when 
leading my feeble steps from the sofa to 
the window, and from the window to the 
sofa, that I concluded he was deeply 
smitten ; and I began to reflect how I 
ought to conduct myself when I should 
become a physician's wife. I took care 
to be well assured that he was single ; 
and from his manner concluded it de- 
pended on myself, whether he should 
remain single much longer. * 

1 recovered, and yet liis attendance 
continued. When I thought the crisis of 
my fate at hand, one of our housemaids 
was attacked by the same illness. Figure 
to yourself, a short, thick-set, round- 
shouldered, great staring woman, with 
red elbows, and asses' ears. T, being 
quite restored, paid her a visit in her 
garret, to see whether she was in want of 



DUDLEY. 311 

any thing ; when judge my surprise, on 
beholding at her side my young physi- 
cian, who was feeling her pulse so 
gently, and speaking so kindly, and 
looking with such tender anxiety ! — 
giving her his arm, in common with the 
nurse, to assist her feeble steps ! My 
dear, I perfectly stared with astonish- 
ment ; and it was some time before I 
chose to comprehend, that what I mis- 
took for individual penchant, was no- 
thing more than professional manner. 



I fell next into the company of a dash- 
ing young student of one of the Inns 
of Court, who was staying with my 
brother-in-law, Grantley, whilst I was 
on a visit to my sister. We were at 
Wimbledon at the time ; and it being 
summer, our evenings were passed in 
rambling among the green lanes, and 
over the common. I once contrived to 
engross the whole of his attention to 
myself, although other young ladies were 
of the party. I wished for honeysuckles 
out of the hedges ; dog-roses out of the 



SIS DUDLEY. 

bushes ; wild flowers from the banks ; 
butterflies from the air ; and so forth. 
These services performed, (and he of 
course obliged to carry his gleanings for 
me,) I managed, with a very pretty lisp, 
to express fear at every sound and mo- 
tion : a cow, a carriage, a horse, a sheep, 
even a stray duck, or goose, or fowl, had 
its use ; and, at last, a sparrow, or chaf- 
finch among the bushes, set me in most 
perilous alarm ; — a frog was a legitimate 
cause for fright : and thus was spent the 
walk in pretty cries and exclamations, of 
" Oh dear 1" and " Bless me 1" and 
running this way, and that way, and 
every way but the right ; suffering my 
muslin paraphernalia to be entangled 
among the briers, and blushing and 
simpering at every stile we came to, 
though conscious of possessing the best 
foot and ankle in company. Thus, I re- 
peat, passed that evening, and from that 
day, adieu to my serjeant-at-law : in all 
our future promenades, he had either an 
arm for sister Jane, or one for old Grant- 
ley 5 or a couple of arms for two of my 
young friends ; or he was too late to join 



DUDLEY. SIS 

in our walk, or too early ; in short, never 
again could I catch him in my toils, — 
it was brief work with him : and he soon 
after got a convenient friend to suhpcena 
him to town, by which his visit was 
shortened, when 1 was heard openly to 
declare, that of all the men on earth, I 
never would marry a lawyer. 

" Really," thought I, " the deuce is 
in all the men ;" and then came Miss 
Conscience, with her face of demure 
propriety, ** female reserve'' written in 
legible characters on the bandeau round 
her grizzled head of decorum ; and with 
a sharp rap on my unfortunate knuckles, 
she said, " rather, is not the deuce in you ? 
if you wish to secure the men, let them 
alone." 



And after all, Mrs. Balfour, I was mar- 
ried more in the German princess fashion, 
unsight and unseen, than in that of an 
English girl of quality. Ton my honour, 
I had scarcely exchanged three quarters 
of a word, or the tenth part of a look, 
with Lord Alford, when Eliot one day 

VOL. III. r 



514 DUDLEY, 

stopped me in the height of my flirting 
here, and coquetting there, and waltzing 
round and round, by laying before my 
dazzled eyes the sumptuous coronet of a 
countess. 

It appeared that this noble young 
swain had fallen desperately in love with 
me, merely out of contradiction ; for, I 
suppose, had I cast upon him one half of 
the smiles and pretty condescensions I 
had lavished on the preceding train of 
beaux, (passing shadows like those of 
Banquo, giving place to the golden- 
cr owned substance,) my young earl 
would, after their fashion, have adjusted 
his neckcloth in the glass, stroked hi^ 
whiskers, looked at me with a " What 
was it you were saying, Miss Howard ?'* 
and strode off without an answer ; but 
here, having, instead of encouragement, 
met with indifference, he comes to the 
point at once, by appealing, unknown to 
me, to my brother. 

Eliot, with all the solemn dignity of a 
Pope's Nuncio, laid the illustrious 
youth's credentials before me, saying, 
<* I shall introduce my friend Lord AU 



DUDLEY. 315 

fold to you .to-morrow, sister ; take your 
own time to become acquainted with 
him : but once you have made up your 
mind, either one way or the other, I will 
take care, Caroline, that he shall not be 
made a fool of 

" Mighty fine, truly!" thought I, 
" and yet you haughty magistrates of 
the creation have made a fine fool of me, 
and more than a dozen times •, and here 
I am not allowed to exercise my talents 
that way, even in one solitary instance 1'* 

I was deucedly afraid of Eliot at that 
time ; but with Alford, when I thought 
myself perfectly secure of him, I did 
try to play off a few of my airs : but 
Lord, I found him such a ** Gunpowder 
Percy,*' that is, whilst still a bachelor, 
and in doubt, (Iwill do him justice there, 
he was unlike his sex in that respect,) 
that I got frightened, and was glad to 
compromise upon fair terms. ^ 

1 remember one morning in particular, 
some? trifle rose to a desperate quarrel (and, 
my dear Mrs. Balfour, had I my choice, 
and were such goings on the fashion, 
I would rather that my intended should 



316 DUDLEY. 

give me a good beating at once, tbair 
that my husband should throw me an 
angry word) : — I forget the origin of our 
dispute, something about a bride's maid, 
but it happened only a very short time 
before our marriage : — carriages were 
bespoken, jewels ordered, dresses made, 
house and villa taken, the hoop of gold 
bought, and the day of horrors named ; 
when I, thinking myself as sure of him as 
if I had already pronounced the words 
" for better, for worse," remarked, with 
the most insulting nonchalance, "^ Well, 
Lord Alford, do just as you please — it 
is not yet too late — you are your own 
master — you know ^our happiness is 
alone what I desire — consult that, I 
beg, and / shall be perfectly satisfied.'* 

*' The d 1 you will !" was my 

lord's reply ; " Oh, if it is such a mat- 
ter of indifference to 2/ou, Miss Howard 

— You have not forgotten, I hope, cer- 
tain circumstances which I have already 
detailed to you — My cousin Georgey 

— I must have a little conversation with 
her ;" and as he looked in the chimney- 
glass, he pulled up his collar, settled his 



DUDLEY. 317 

quizzing-glass, and pinched his eye- 
brows : adding, " yes, positively I'll 
speak this day to Georgey.'* 

** Do, if you dare," I cried^ starting 
up. Now such words from a lady ! and a 
lady of fashion ! But, my dear madam, 
my *words were perfectly gentle, com- 
pared with my attitude, Alfbrd turned 
round with one of his plaguy seducing 
smiles, and holding out his arms, the 
fop ! sang and parodied — " Lady, 
strike home !" 



Thus, my good friend, have I run 
through the follies of my early youths 
over which Cavendish and I (for Alford 
was, like myself, too young to regard 
them as such) have since our marriage 
had many a laugh, particularly when 
chance has thrown in our way any one 
of the individuals above-mentioned, 
whose career, and even name, I had long 
since forgotten, though they had not so 
readily lost sight of me. 

Here you see the effects of a neglect- 
ed education, and the mischiefs result- 
ing to female youth from the want of 
p 3 



318 



DUDLEY. 



the early vigilance and superintendancCy 
which none but a mother, or some very 
near relative, can be expected to bestow* 
But for my known connections and ac- 
knowledged rank in life, with my per- 
verted imagination, in v/hich the seeds 
of religion and morality planted by my 
mother and sister Jane had had no time to 
grow, might I not have become the vic- 
tim or the dupe of mankind, and there- 
by perished as a worthy member of 
society ? 

I lost Lord Alford whilst I was still 
young, and with unfixed principles. 
Finding myself once more free, and, of 
course, possessed of a greater share of li- 
berty than before my marriage^ I had 
the sense to distrust my own prudence ^ 
and though, in conformity to Alford's 
wish that I would, after his death, reside 
with his mother as long as she lived;, 
no sooner did death separate me from 
the gay dowager, than I, with desperate 
fortitude, tore myself, from the bright 
circles of fashion, and threw myself on 
the protection of my brother, conscious 
that if left alone in the world, I should 



DUDLEY. 319 

go astray, by which you are to under- 
stand make some imprudent match with 
a needy adventurer : — with Eliot, my 
honour, my peace, and character, were 
safe ; and I was resoh^ed not to quit his 
roof and protection, unless consigned by 
himself to that of the husband he should 
with me approve of. 



There are other circumstances in 
which I have been placed, but those I 
pass over, and have only to assure you, 
my dear madam, that a happier wife, at 
this present hour, cannot exist. 

However, I must not get serious, or 
in the dumps of sensibility ; — no, no, 
in a few minutes I expect Cavendish, 
and a prime maxim of mine is, that one of 
the first duties of a wife is to receive 
her husband on his return home (let his 
cruise have been short or long) with a 
cheerful voice, and a face all smiles. 

Well, my good Mrs. Balfour, and what 
have I more to say, than that I yet 
hope, in the company of you and your 
bonny Scotchman, to take my long 
talked-of trip to the Highlands. 
p 4* 



820 DUDLEY. 



Oh ! by the by, I hear you have im- 
ported a niece into Teneriffe — was that 
to match my importation of a divine ? — 
Have they any intention of making a di- 
vine match of it ? or is the day of sacri- 
fice with this high pontiff already over ? 

— If I am not too late, I should wish to 
give Miss Helen a yard and a half of 
advice on gilt post paper. If she is not 
irrecoverably lost — in love, let her, in 
the choice of a partner, keep in mind 
about half-a-dozen indispensable quali- 
ties which I am about to enumerate ;- — 
and let her trust to the word of a matron, 
who is now within four-and-twenty years 

— that is months, of the black-and-white, 
brown-and-grey, age of forty. I spent 
full half an hour yesterday morning,^ 
Savage on one side of me, and Patience 
on the other, having my intrusive grey 
hairs turned out of the company of my 
brown hair, the original and lawful pos- 
sessors of crown, pole, and fore-top, — 

fore-top ! a little of the shop that. By the 
way, what could induce me to choose a 
pair of waiting-women of such fanciful 



DUDLEY. 321 

names, which try my temper twenty 
times a day at least ; and this might 
easily be avoided, if they would enter 
into a mutual compact, of watching in 
what sort of a humour I rise in the morn- 
ing ; instead of which, when I in the 
course of the day am in a passion, and 
ring for one or other of them. Savage is 
sure to make her appearance, and this is 
fuel to fire, for " Savage do this," and 
" Savage do that," in less than half an 
hour renders me a very femme Sauvage 
myself. — And when I am in mighty 
good-humour, all hurry, bustle, and ani- 
mation, in comes Patience ! and that 
very word, *' Patience here, and Patience 
there 1" repeated ten times in a minute^ 
puts me oat of all patience, or sobers 
me into a mawkish drawl, as if I had 
taken a dose qiian, suf, of hops and 
opium. 



Well, to return to Helen, «* ever fair 
and young ;" let her above all things 
marry a little man, and a man with dim- 
ples in his cheeks. I have already men- 
tioned the superior advantages enjoyed 
p 5 



S^^ DUDLEY. 

by the tot class of beings, and with re- 
spect to the second, depend upon it a 
pair of round dells on each side of the 
mouth, are of more consequence than 
she may be aware of. Conscious of this 
beauty, the possessor takes pretty good 
care ever to display it, until smiles grow 
familiar, and what was at first vanity, be- 
comes the settled character of the face ; 
and if on earth there is a prettier sight 
to me than any other, it is that of a 
charming, open, good-humoured coun- 
tenance, (no matter whether handsome 
or not,) good-humour is the equivalent 
to beauty ; and give me a pleasant-look- 
ing, milk-fed Sylvanus, in preference to 
an indignant Apollo. 

I certainly once had a horror of a wig, 
yet married a man with a pate as bald as 
old Time. Now should Helen turn Jack 
adrift, and meet such a one as I describe, 
who may have lost his head — his hair, I 
mean — by the wind of a cannon-ball, let 
her be under no concern on that ac# 
count, but marry him at once, and like 
me prove, that the growth of affection 
will keep pace with the honours of the 



DUDLEY. 32S 

head. In less than three months after 
om* marriage, Cavendish sported his na- 
tural auburn locks, and I no longer 
sported with his affection. 

And does your niece really intend to 
take pity on Jack, and his creaking 
boots? the sound of which, like the 
smacking of a French postillion's whip, 
announces his approach, though at 
twenty yards distance. Then for the sake 
of your nerves, my dear Mrs. Balfour, 
should he be domesticated with you, do 
pray give Miss Helen a few gentle hints 
from me, that she may, during court- 
ship, (I'll be shot if she ever will be 
able after,) try to break him of all his 
boyish blve-coated tricks, and youthful 
Cantab fopperies, his pompous readings, 
his flourish of the hands, his stretched- 
out legs, his drinking healths, his affect- 
ation of whispering in company, his 
forming and polishing his nails at table, 
his my ladying and my lording^ his lift- 
ing up his eye-brows until his forehead 
is in ridges like the skin of a baboon, 
his starts of surprise, his ad libitum eja- 
culations, and sundry other unfashion- 
p 6 



S24f DUDLEY* 

able oddities, which, with all his solid 
excellencies, make up the character of 
the Rev. Jack Turner. 

Do you think I am quizzing him, in 
calling him Jack? No such thing, my 
dear madam : some men, instead of 
Henry and William, are christened 
Harry and Billy, and I have been told 
that at Turner's baptism, when the ques- 
tion was put at the font, ** What is the 
name of this child ?'' out from the blun- 
dering mouth of the sponsor tumbled 
the word Jack, instead of John. 

Lord, Mrs. Balfour, I could no more 
finish a letter in a serious humour of 
propriety, than I could resist the tempt- 
ation of giving a Rowland for an 
Oliver, where I had a grudge : — and 
here goes, hap-hazard : — that is, my Unica 
Virtus ; — and by the crooked beaks of a 
couple of clambering magpies, I'm in 
as great a rage as a Countess and a 
beauty ought to be ! Would you be- 
lieve it ? — but upon my life I had better 
be silent, and put my disappointment at 
not seeing the Prince of Nabobs at my 
last brilliant Jete in my ridicule j or, to 



DUDLEY* 3<25 

escape a jolt from the track of a waggon- 
wheel, I may fall into a quarry. 

So to return from the intoxications of 
fashion and routes, to the common milk- 
and-water affairs of life, Love and Folly, 
personified — who are yoke-fellows, as 
inseparable as are the names of Southey 
and Coleridge on the high road of litera- 
ture, or those of my Lords G and 

G in the political circus. Give my 

best wishes to the clever little parson, 
and assure him that I'll drink — - sip, is 
the word — a glass of imperial — that is, 
tokay — at his wedding, and dance a qua- 
drille (if possible,) to the tune of 
** Moggy Lawder," or ** Come under 
my Plaiddy, sweet Lassy.*' 

And tell Miss Helen from me, neither 
to attempt to* wind the silk of life, like 
sister Jane, through all its mazy difficul- 
ties, nor yet to fling it into the fire with 
impatience, like my worship ; but when 
it gets entangled, to make the best of a 
bad bargain, by cutting it and putting 
it in a paper, and chusing for her pur- 
pose a less complicated skein. 

And with this modicum of advice to 



3^6 DUDLEY. 

all our sex, I close the log-book of our 
correspondence for the present, deter- 
mined not to open it again, until my son 
and heir can sing in downright English, 
** Steady boys, steady ! we'll fight and 
we'll conquer again and again !" 
Ever, my old friends. 
Your enchanting 

Caroline Alford. 



DUDLEY. 327 



LETTER LIV. 

Mrs. Clonmore to Mrs, Graniley* 

Your letters, with those of Sir Eliot and 
Miss Howard*, have all, my dear madam, 
been received, and, hitherto, punctually 
answered. We are now greatly in ar- 
rear \ and need 1 remind you, that Au- 
gust, the period fixed upon for Dudley's 
return to Teneriffe, is past, and that he 
is still in England ! Of this you must 
have some idea, as you have not heard 
from him or from us, respecting his de- 
parture hence. But how, my dear Mrs. 
Grantley, shall we inform you of the total 
revolution that has taken place in the 
mind of this singular young man: in 
what words can we describe what has 
past ; what apologies offer in his behalf, 
or what consolation hold out ? 

* None of which appear. 



3^8 DUDLEY. 

About two months since, Lady Alford 
gave a ball at her house in Park-lane, 
which was attended by royalty ; and, 
indeed, every star in the world of fashion. 
Dudley, being in town, was invited ; and 
from that hour his mind became poisoned, 
if I may use so harsh an expression, by 
a strange combination of circumstances, 
which occurred in his presence the same 
evening. A few days after, he came 
down to us to spend a month or so, when 
the change in him was so apparent, that 
it could not fail to strike us with wonder 
and apprehension. His spirits were de- 
pressed, and his person much altered for 
the worse. We questioned him as to his 
having had news from TenerifFe, and his 
answer was, " All is well there,^' 

We had company to dine with us the 
same day ; and, amongst other gentle- 
men, a person high in the law. Dur- 
ing dinner the conversation, at first, took 
a political turn, when, on a sudden. 

Lord D enquired of the guest above 

mentioned, *' What is this affair of Co- 
lonel Maxwell ?'' — (Sir Eliot will under- 
stand, that, unfortunately, this is his old 



DUDLEY. 80,9 

friend Charles, who ran off to Gretna 
Green with a young heiress, a few years 
since) — " Are they parted ?" 

** Yes,'* said the other, *< they are 
now twain. I have the legal proceed- 
ings in my hands j and it will be brought 
into the House next session." 

** But what has it all been about? 
Who is to blame ?" 

" Why he, originally, for marrying a 
giddy heiress, when he had not sufficient 
of the needful even to pay for the chaise- 
and-four, without getting behind-hand 
with his agent. But the fact is, he has 
led a sad life with her ever since they 
were married. Depend upon it, the 
affair at Lady Alford's route, the other 
evening, was not the beginning of the 
dispute, but its clirfiaa:,'^^ 

** Were you there ?" enquired Lord 
D . 

" Yes ;" and, turning to Dudley, " and 
so were you, my young friend. Did 
you remark what passed ?" 

The blushing face of our son showed 
but too well that he had ; when his fa- 
ther, to divert attention from him, asked 



330 



DUDLEY 



the Counsellor to explain himself; for 
though he had seen the affair hinted at in 
the newspapers, he was wholly unac- 
quainted with one of the parties, (the 
lady,) or the cause of contention. 

" The affair is simply this," replied 
our law-guest : " you may understand 
it in three words. Mrs. Maxwell, on 
her marriage, had 50,0001. or so ; the 
husband not a shilling, excepting his pay. 
No sooner was the nuptial tie formed, 
than she (a worthless young fool, to 
say the best of her) wished to untie this 
true lover's knot. Charles is warm, and 
tenacious in temper. Her reproaches 
stung him to the quick : but love con- 
quered ; and they contrived to endure 
each other until she became of age, 
when fresh sources of contention arose. 
Still all was kept a secret, from even the 
observation of their friends and guests. 
Last Wednesday, however, dissolved all 
connection between them ; and legal 
measures are proceeding : for though 
she is perfectly innocent as a wife, he has 
taken care to give necessary grounds for 
separation. A pearl bracelet, or diamond 



DUDLEY. 331 

necklace, or something of that kind, 
broke, whilst dancing at Lady Alford's j 
was it not, Mr. Dudley?" Our son 
assented, and he continued : " Maxwell, 
upon this, reproached her carelessness, 
(the jewels were flying about the room,) 
when she retorted ; he replied ; and the 
wife grew sarcastic ; and this in the pre- 
sence of a few good-natured friends, who 
took care to repeat it. Thus did their 
contention become by degrees known to 
the whole circle, of perhaps two or three 
hundred persons. They parted $ and 
from that hour have never met." 

We listened to this account j but, in 
my own mind, I could see no reference 
in all this to Dudley, or his concerns. 
At last Lord D spoke : 

" That is ever the way with those con- 
founded heiresses ! Charles Maxwell is 
rightly served: and he, too, tl:it always 
professed so independent a spirit! A 
man, I am convinced, had better shoulder 
a musket, work on the highway, follow 
the plough, dredge for oysters, or work 
in the mines, than (provided he is him- 
self pennyless) marry an heiress. This 



332 DUDLEY. 

very Mrs. Maxwell — I remember her 
before her marriage, was as pretty, and 
modest, and disinterested a girl, of as 
generous and liberal-minded a spirit, as a 
man would wish to meet with ; and see 
how she has treated this honest fellow, 
who doated upon her ; — to reproach him 
as a beggar, a fortune-hunter, a seducer; 
and that in the hearing of her own rela- 
tions." 

<* I understand" — said the Counsellor, 
<* I was not by at the time, that she was 
thunderstruck at the effect produced on 
him by her words. But it was too late, 
the evil was past recall : he has fled to 
the continent, and in company ; and she 
may, if she pleases, be soon free, to 
make a more prudent choice." 



I know not, my dear and best friends, 
whether ,^9u have, by this time, antici- 
pated what have been the sad conse- 
quences of Dudley's witnessing the 
dispute betw^een the Maxwells ; and 
hearing, both in town, and now at our 
table, the general and individual opinion 
on the probable happiness of him, who, 
poor himselii and without connections, 



DUDLEY, 333 

title, or consequence, professional or 
otherwise, to throw into the opposite 
scale, marries an heiress, or fortune, as 
it is called. 

Such, at present, is the situation of 
Dudley's mind. Sir Eliot's intentions, 
it is true, though acknowledged to us, 
and more than suspected by him, have 
never been openly declared, much less 
been the subject of conversation here ; 
and yet his eyes have, by this introduction 
into the world, been opened, as to the 
footing he holds in society; and, I -re- 
peat, his m.ind is now poisoned, by the 
doubt of, whether, if offered him, he would 
or would not reject an heiress. 

His father and he have already had 
repeated conversations on this subject ; 
but the mischief is done — the evil im- 
pression was made in an hour, when, 
separated from us, he could not, by 
communicating what had passed, give us 
the opportunity of endeavouring, by ar- 
gument, to efface it ; and 1 fear that 
that impression is indelible. Judge your- 
selves. August is past : and he has not 



334* DUDLEY. 

even hinted at his departure for Tene- 
riffe. 

In the mean time, his industry is in- 
defatigable. He prosecutes his studies 
with an ardour, which, I am fearful, will 
injure his health. He associates exclu- 
sively with students in his own line, and 
is almost incessant in his enquiries of the 
best and speediest methods whereby to 
acquire eminence, to get into practice, 
to arrive at distinction j — in short, to 
make a fortune : for, poor fellow ! the 
truth is now discovered — he idolizes 
Claudy; but would reject her were she 
offered him: — and with a wild, romantic 
vehemence, of which I did not think him 
capable, he declares he will be the 
founder of his own fortune, and ne- 
ver marry, until he has realised what 
he shall consider as securing to himself 
not only independence, but the rank of a 
gentleman. 



A few days since, I went into his 
room, to consult with him on a fresh 
stock of linen, which, I hoped, would be 



DUDLEY. 335 

ready for his voyage, should he deter- 
mine on leaving us in October, as his 
father has fixed that period for his going, 
though he has not uttered a syllable 
himself on the business. At the mo- 
ment, my homely thoughts were really 
so much engaged upon deep or narrow 
frills, high or low shirt-collars, long or 
short wristbands, that I forgot to knock 
at his door, and went in abruptly. He 
was writing, and to Claudy. At the 
side of his letter lay her picture, the 
glass of which was dim and misty ; 
" Dudley,'' I said, ** do I interrupt 
you ? if I do, 1*11 step in again. But I 
wished to ask, is it the first, or the second 
week of next month, you leave Eng, 
land ?" 

He closed his letter j and turning over 
tl 3 back of his chair, replied, *' My dear 
r .other, I have no intention of leaving 
^ngland." 

" Dudley !" I cried, much surprised 
at his words, but more by his manner, 
which was unusually calm and decisive. 

" I have postponed my voyage to Te- 
neriffe," he continued. 



336 DUDLEY. 

Again I breathed freely ; and imitat- 
ing his own composure, sat down, ob- 
serving, " Oh, for a few days. Well, 
your stock of linen shall be in readiness." 

" You misunderstand me," he replied ; 
" it may be some years before I return 
to Teneriffe." 

And when he uttered these words, 
such was the uncommon firmness of 
manner that acx^ompanied them, I felt at 
once shocked and terrified. " Does 
your father, sir, know your intentions?" 
I, at last, summoned courage to enquire. 

" He does, my dear mother," he re- 
plied, rising slowly, and seating himself 
by my side. He took my hand, and 
pressed it in his ; *' and you, also, must 
be acquainted with those intentions. My 
father has but just left me, smd after a 
two hours' conversation on the subject. 
Did you not meet him ? I have written 
to Sir Eliot, and to Mrs. Grantley," he 
continued, pointing to some sealed letters 
on the table ; ** and I am now writing 
to Claudy." 

Her name appeared to soften him j 
and, on observing a return to sensibility, 
14 



BUDLEY* 337 

1 could not help remarking, " Dudley, 
Dudley, if this had been told me of you, 
could I have believed it ? Thus to give 
up your better sense to the vain follies of 
a heated imagination ; and, wantonly 
and ungratefully, to sport with the feel- 
ings of all who love you." 

At these words he started from my 
side ; and never had I seen, until that 
moment, in real life, so perfect a re- 
semblance to the poet's imaginary 
Douglas, though, unfortunately for me, 
instead of looking on me with the ten- 
derness due to a Lady Randolph, he re- 
garded me as if I had been Glenalvon 
himself. 

" Ingratitude !" he replied ; *' is it 
you, my mother, who tax me with in- 
grMitude ? And to whom am I ungrate- 
ful ? — to Sir Eliot ? whom, next to my 
own father, I love and revere ; — to Mrs. 
Grantley ? who succeeds yourself closely 
in my affections; — to Claudy!*' — he 
stopped, and with a sort of bitterness 
added, *' Ungrateful to Claudy, indeed ! 
the dearer half of my existence, the in- 
cessant object of my thoughts ; the only 

VOL. III. Q 



838 DUDLEY. 

being, to attain whom (on my own 
terms) is, night and day, the blessed ap- 
parition that consoles my disappoint- 
ment, and supports me in exertion ! In- 
gratitude ! if all this be ungrateful in 
your eyes, my mother, then indeed 
we must cease to understand one an- 
other.'* 

Henry, as it afterwards appeared, had 
come to the door, designing to renew 
the conversation with his son ; but on 
hearing our voices had retired. As, how- 
ever, he caught the sound of Dudley's 
voice, raised to a higher pitch than 
usual, he sent a servant up to say he 
wished to speak immediately to me, and 
at the same time ordered Robert to en- 
quire of his master should he order his 
horse. 

I joined Clonmore, and you may guess 
the nature of our conversation ; during 
which, we observed Dudley on horse- 
back, riding slowly up the Bath road, 
and unattended. 

He returned to dinner more cheerful 
than usual, but as we had strangers with 
us, the debate on domestic affairs could 



not be renewed. He is since gone back 
to his chambers in town, and, as his 
tather hears from various friends, his 
studies are prosecuted with the most un- 
remitting industry. 

Thus, my dear friends, is accounted 
the non-appearance of Dudley at Tene* 
riffe. Kad we to deal with any other of 
our sons, we should know how to act 5 
but with this youth, we are really our- 
selves perplexed, unconscious whether 
we take with him a right or a wrong 
course, whether we say too much or too 
little. All I have now to confess is 
this — he is your own ; as such, act by 
him J and to the advice of those to 
whom he is so much indebted, and whom 
he loves next to ourselves, he may be 
brought to listen ; by them, he may yet 
suffer himself to be governed. For his 
own sake, and need I add for yours 
and ours, we have only to hope Sir 
Eliot will, at least, make the attempt. 
Ever your affectionate 

Louisa Clonmore. 



a 2 



f 

^^0 DUDLEY, 



LETTER LV. 

Sir Eliot Howard to Dudley Clonmore, 

Euphorbia, Tenerifle. 

August is past, and you are not return- 
ed. I have received six letters from you, 
dated September and October; but 
where are you yourself? — a breach of 
faith, nothing can excuse. Put senti- 
ment out of the question, and place the 
business upon the broad footing of a com- 
pact between man and man, you gave 
me a voluntary promise of returning 
hither last iVugust, (health and winds 
permitting,) and you are still in London. 
When you gave me that promise, you 
certainly fully intended to keep it , what 
then am I to understand by this conduct ? 
I am willing to acquit you of mental 
reservation, but I cannot of having suf- 
fered yourself to become the dupe of 
fancy. 



DUDLEY. 341 

I allow the plea you bring forward in 
your last letter, that you are no longer 
a boy ; but how can I agree to the sen- 
tence that follows, in which you claim 
the privileges of a man, and expect to be 
allowed to decide for yourself? You are, 
it is granted, too old to be governed by 
force ; but, by the laws of the land, as 
well as those of nature, are, as yet, too 
young to be left sole master of your own 
conduct. Yoii may reply, that / have 
been the original cause of your present 
source of uneasiness, by having in your 
childhood demanded you of your pa- 
rents, and reared you in solitude : I con- 
fess my selfishness, — I was sinking into 
the grave, — they gave you to my guar- 
dianship, and thus have you been the 
means of restoring me to many years of 
comparative happiness. — On the other 
hand, with respect to yourself^ I appeal 
to Dr. H— , and other medical men, 
to assert, that had it not been for your 
removal to this, or a similar genial cli- 
mate, (and such was the state of warfare 
on the continent there was little choice 
of any spot, excepting this island, and 
Q 3 



34^ 



DUDt£3C, 



Madeira,) that but for your timely 
change of air, you had died. You may 
blame me for not restoring you to Eng- 
land and your family immediately on the 
establishment of your health, and therein 
your censure may be well grounded y 
and yet I had hoped, that nothing on 
my part had been wanting to render 
your prolonged life a blessing to your- 
self, in proportion as it became a bless- 
ing to me. 

Add to the above circumstances, you, 
as the godson of my wife, had a greater 
hold on my affections than any of your 
brothers could possibly have ; indeed I 
question whether, had t/ou been denied 
to me by your parents, I should have 
adopted any other child. 

That Lady Howard was your god- 
mother is of little concern to you ; you 
were an infant of two years old when 
she died, therefore her image can offer 
itself to you under no impressive form : 
but to me it can, it ever does ; for re- 
peatedly I have seen you in her arms, 
and when pressed to her bosom, she has 
more than once said, *« I trust in Heaven, 



DUDLEY. 343 

Eliot, that we also shall be blessed with 
sons, but should we not, I think we must 
adopt this darling boy, this godson of 
mine." 

You, Dudley, cannot have the slightest 
recollection of my wife, but you have 
seen her picture at your father's ; and if 
it would be any gratification to know 
more of her, ask him for the written 
account of our first acquaintance and 
subsequent marriage * ; read it, Dudley, 
and with attention ; I have no doubt he 
has it still — read it, and learn to ap- 
preciate the merits of her who regarded 
you as a son, and many of whose virtues 
Claudy inherits. 



And now that I have mentioned my 
daughter's name, you must suffer me to 
remark that, laying aside all reserve on 
the subject, I shall henceforward put 
your future happiness, or the contrary, 
into your own handsj and from this 
hour, show you that I no longer con- 
sider you a boy, but am as willing as 
yourself to acknowledge, that where the 

* See the conclusion of volume the first. 
Q 4 



344t DUDLEY- 

heart is concerned, I must begin to treat 
you as if already arrived at manhood. «— 
You may, perhaps, censure me for having 
brought you up in habits of the closest 
intimacy with a young and certainly 
beautiful girl, whose strong sensibility, 
open disposition, and unconcealed at- 
tachment to yourself, warranted some 
show of correspondent feelings on your 
part. I must now speak plain, and 
therein, I trust, I neither violate that 
respect due to my own character and 
rank in life, or remove that veil of 
chaste reserve, through which my 
daughter should be alone regarded. 

If I see no error of judgment or 
breach of propriety in making an offer of 
the following nature, neither can I incur 
censure, should that offer be refused. I 
chose you, I adopted you, I reared you 
to what you are ; but there my duty 
had its bounds ; the heart knows no 
controul. My daughter might have fixed 
her affections on you without a return 5 
you might have loved her, and your love 
have met with indifference ; — • it was not 
for a third person to interfere between a 



DUDLEY. 345 

youthful couple thus situated. No art 
whatever has been used to inspire you 
with affection — you have been merely 
educated together under one roof, as 
brother and sister ; and yet what have 
been the consequences? Such, Dudley, 
as I ever fondly hoped — a mutual and 
voluntary attachment has been daily 
forming between you, which is now 
ripened into full and confirmed love. 

After this explicit and candid explana- 
tion on my part, I have very little to 
add. Since your late defection, your 
correspondence with Claudy has neces- 
sarily passed through my hands, I being 
responsible for the consequences, as they 
may interfere with my daughter's future 
happiness. Your letters to her glow 
with all the purest, we will allow, but at 
the same time warmest expressions of 
everlasting affection. You love her, — I 
believe it, and I am confident you are 
equally dear to my child ; but unless, by 
yielding blindly to my guardianship, you 
convince me on what foundation her 
future peace of mind is to rest, all fur- 
ther communication between you from 
Q 5 



S46 



DUDLEY. 



this time must cease 5 with me, I trust, 
it never will, until the death of one or 
the other. 

Do you now understand me, or must 
I enter on a further avowal ? In the 
determination you adopted of follow- 
ing a profession, I saw no obstruction 
to my future hopes; indeed the con- 
trary, as I observed in one of my letters 
to the friend of my youth, your re- 
spected father, " A little law knowledge 
will teach Dudley the better to take care 
of his future fortune.*' 

You may remark that herein my hopes 
outstripped your own 5 and that in that 
observation, I anticipated your inten- 
tions, and disposed of your affections 
w^ithout your knowledge or concur- 
rence : pardon me, such as were then 
are now my intentions; the decision of 
the present hour is that formed in your 
childhood. I repeat, the affections of 
the heart are not to be controlled where 
the object is worthy, otherwise parental 
and guardian advice and authority 
ought and must interfere ; but in your 



DUDLEY. 347 

case, apprehensions of this nature are 
out of the question. 

You have therefore to learn, that al- 
though I permitted you to enter on the 
study of a profession, I never intended 
it should make any part of your future 

reliance for support. Of this. Dr. H , 

Mr. Balfour, and Mr. Turner, can best 
inform you, for they are witnesses to ray 
Will, which was made six years since, 
and is now depositee! in the first law- 
hands in England. By that Will, you 
will find, that to the last shilling, (ex- 
cepting sundiy annuities,) my fortune is 
shared equally between you and my 
daughter. By a clause I have provided, 
that should you intermarry with Claudy 
after my death, you are to take the name 
and arms of Howard. You will thus 
observe that you are both left perfectly 
free, each to marry whomsoever may be- 
come your choice ; and that a Jiope only 
is held out, that you may choose each 
other; this being the first and most 
cherished wish of the testator. 

Have I now been sufficiently explicit \ 
and do you now fully comprehend, that 
Q 6 



348 DUDLEY* 

my only motive for concealing from you, 
even at our last parting, my hope that 
you would one day, and that during my 
life-time, become my son-in-law, was to 
leave you perfect master of your own 
affections ; and can you now blame me, 
that, conscious as I am, they bend the 
way I wish, and fix upon my child, whose 
tenderness is wholly engrossed by your- 
self; can you, my dear and beloved boy, 
be longer deaf to the entreaties I make to 
you to return, and without delay, to my 
arms, — to your own paternal roof, — to 
the bosoms that so fondly cherish you. 

You deceive yourself, my child, if you 
think that you are prepared to buffet with 
the world, to make your way, with la- 
bour, through the intricate windings of 
any profession whatsoever, to gain a live- 
lihood ; in short, to earn your bread. 
Your brothers have been educated in the 
active routine of public and private 
schools; they have been accustomed to 
the self-denial system, and the severe 
discipline and deprivations attendant on 
that state, in which a man who has to 
build his own fortune ever finds himself j 



DUDLEY. 319 

but it is not so with you. You, my 
Dudley, underwent sufferings during 
the first seven years of your life, from 
which your brothers were exempted. 
Thus were advantages equally balanced 
between you. They, blessed wn'th health 
and vigour, were trained to exertion : 
you, afflicted from your birth, were 
nursed in the lap of indulgence, the fond 
object of all our care, the pride, the or- 
nament, the blessing of Euphorbia. 



You have now been sufficiently long in 
England, to grant Claudy the merits of 
being your real choice. AVhilst insulated 
with us, you had no opportunities of ex- 
ercising that first privilege of man, the 
power of choice. You are still young in 
years, it is true, but not in intellect, or 
judgment. Have you seen an object 
you prefer to Claudy ? If you have, re- 
main in England, where I will still sup- 
port you as my son ; and, when your un- 
alterable determination is known, the 
spirit of my Will shall be put in force. 
Let no consideration of my child come 



350 DUDLEY. 

across you, like a gleam of pity. I 
trust that my daughter will rise superior 
to the pity of any man. Withdraw your 
love from her, and give it to another, 
and you will find that she needs no 
prompter how to act, even on such a 
trial. I would stake my existence, from 
the knowledge I have of her strength of 
mind, her sense of honour and delicacy, 
and, above all, her entire submission, 
daily renewed, to the will of Providence, 
that, dear as you are to her this day, 
were she, to-morrow, to hear you were 
married, she would, after the first feel- 
ings of nature had subsided, lift up her 
heart in prayer, for your and your 
chosen partner's happiness. 

To put the final stroke to all mystery 
and reserve between you and me, I have 
only a few lines to add. You are, now, 
my adopted son. When turned of one- 
and-twenty, may you become my son-in- 
law ; and 1 shall then have reason to 
confess, that, after my own marriage, 
the happiest moment of my life was that, 
when, in my little chapef at Euphorbia, 
were united in matrimony the dearest 



DUDLEY. 351 

objects of my heart, — my Claudy, to 
her faithful and beloved Dudley. 

Whatever you may determine, my 
blessing will be ever yours, 

Eliot Howard. 

P. S. Claudy, as an apology for not 
sending you, as you requested, a letter 
full of rose-leaves, desires me to say, that 
the once beautiful rose-tree you helped, 
with her, to plant, is almost withered ; 
that she has not been to blame : she 
nursed it with tenderness ; but that an 
unexpected blight has nearly destroyed 
every hope. 



352 DUDLEY. 



LETTER LVI. 

Dudky Clonmm-e to Sir Eliot Howard, 

Cavendish- Square, London , 

Oh, my friend, my guardian, my dear 
protector, my more than father, what a 
letter is this I have received from you ! 
What an impression, at once rapturous 
and mournful, has it left upon my mind ! 
Is it, then, true ? and is it possible ? 
Yet, knowing you so well, how could I 
ever doubt it ? May I, then, look for- 
ward to a blissful point of existence, 
when I shall become in reality your son ; 
when I may call you father 5 when 
Claudy will be mine ? 

I have read the narrative you mention ; 
and with what delight, and interest ! 
My love for the memory of Lady Howard 
is increased ; but not that for her 
daughter, — for it was incapable of in- 
crease. 



DUDLEY. 353 

I know Claudy to be an affectionate, 
a noble, a disinterested girl ; and yet — 
would that I liad something worthy of 
herself to offer in exchange. But I have 
nothing. All the advantages will be on 
her side. Except what I possess from 
your bounty, I have nothing to bestow. I 
am portionless, obscure, of humble, 
though respectable birth ; and have not 
one single merit to weigh against her 
beauty, her youth, her fortune, her su- 
perior rank, and high connections. 

If it were possible, — but I suppose it 
is not, — you would not deceive me on 
this subject ; you never did deceive me, 
(as I can well remember,) through the 
whole course of my education. You 
think it then impossible for me to ac- 
quire, we will say, in the space of five 
years, or perhaps less, by incessant ap- 
plication, a fortune. No ; not exactly a 
fortune: I shall have no need of that, as 
you have already provided for me in mo- 
ney affairs. But, if I could gain some 
consequence in the world, a name, a 
distinction. I have been thinking of 
adding to my professional studies, those 



354 DUDLEY. 

which might bring me forward in the 
diplomatic line. Suppose you were to 
write to your friends in England, and 
have me employed as secretary to an em- 
bassy, or something of that nature? 
Would not my proficiency in languages 
be of service ? I am master, you know, 
of the English, French, Spanish, Italian, 
and German, besides the dead languages. 
I feel rather weary of the law. I should 
greatly prefer being a charge d'affaires, or 
an ambassador, or something of that kind; 
and, perhaps, my future services might 
entitle me to knighthood. The next 
step, to a peerage, is no such great 
difficulty; and, I think, Claudy would 
make as lovely a Countess as Lady Alford 
herself. 

Oh, how I should like to see mv own 
dear, dear Claudy, a Countess! How 
I wish, (and only for her beloved sake,) 
that I were a Marquis, or a Duke. I 
wonder did the Honourable Arthur Wel- 
lesley ever think that he should wear a 
ducal coronet. But I am not a noble 
soldier ; I am nobody ! 



DUDLEY. S55 

Is it not very strange, my dear friend, 
that when I am writing to you, or Mrs. 
Grantley, or my Claudy, — she is mine 
now, you know, by your own gift, your 
own confession, and I'll not relinquish 
her to any man on earth, be he who he 
may ; and I'll marry her the instant I 
gain a name in the world : — is it not very 
singular, I repeat, that, when correspond- 
ing with the inmates of Euphorbia, I 
feel as if I was still a boi/ ? My style 
grows puerile ; and yet my heart warms, 
nay, glows with delight. On the con- 
trary, at Bloomfield Rectory, (and yet I 
love my parents, fondly love them,) and 
here in town, and particularly with 
strangers, I feel as if I were a man, they 
treat me with such respect and formality ! 
as if, instead of nearly eighteen, I were 
five-and-twenty. 

And then Lady Alford no longer 
suffers me to treat her with familiarity ; 
but there I think she is right ; and, in- 
deed, I do not feel much inclined to be 
on familiar terms with her, or any other 
lady, although I love and admire her 
most sincerely j besides which, Captain 



D5D DUDLEY. 

Cavendish is one of my greatest favour- 
ites. Their children are charming ; and 
the little boy has as many names as Don 
Zulvago himself, which I remarked to 
Lady Alford, who blushed, but made 
me no answer. I hope I did not offend 
her by my observation ;• but, really, to 
add to that of Cavendish the names of 
Frederick, Miles, Eliot, Dudley, Howard, 
(I am one of its godfathers, and you, by 
proxy, the other,) seems rather fanciful, 
as I told her, when she replied, " This 
little sea-horse, at present, bears on his 
shoulders all the names designed for my 
future boys ; so, according as they shall 
be born, we will strip him of some of 
his honours, and leave him those of Miles 
Eliot only." 



How pleased you will be to hear that 
I am going, next week, with Captain 
Cavendish, under the guidance of M. St. 
Eloi, the French gentleman educated in 
England by my father, to Paris ; from 
whence we purpose visiting Switzerland 
and Italy, and to sail from Malta, after 



DUDLEY. 357 

a visit to the Isle of Elba, for Spain. 
From Lisbon we purpose embarking for 
Ostend, whence we shall proceed to 
Brussels and Waterloo, visit some parts 
of Germany, and endeavour, if possible, 
to reach Moscow and St. Petersburgh, as 
I have a great desire to see the northern 
courts, of which I form, in my mind, a 
grand and magnificent idea. 

We must certainly travel with the ra- 
pidity of state couriers, if, as Captain 
Cavendish calculates, (winds and tides 
permitting,) we are to complete this tour 
in a few months. One or two of my 
brothers will accompany us, the soldier 
and William the Lieutenant. 

Li answer to your former enquiries 
respecting the state of my funds, as my 
father observes, I think I certainly give 
you the best proof, that though his son 
by nature, I am yours by adoption, for, 
in compliance with your commands, I 
have drawn upon your bankers with the 
magnificence of a nobleman. 

This tour completed, I shall return to 
my studies with double ardour, and shall 
expect when I come back to England to 



358 DUDLEY. 

find many treasures waiting my arrival ; 
(letters from all the beloved inhabitants 
of Euphorbia.) I fix on no time, as you 
see, for my visit to you, for having broken 
my V70rd once, you have no longer a 
right to depend upon me^ that is, on the 
one subject between us ; and yet prepare 
for my taking you by surprise, as an 
honest Hibernian would say, one of 
these days, when 1 hope to find you, my 
dear friend, my Aunt Grantley, and my 
own Claudy, still enjoying the full bless- 
ings of health and happiness. 

So prays your and their affectionate 
and grateful 

Dudley Clonmore. 



DUDLEY. 359 



LETTER LVII. 

The Rev, Henry Clonmore to Sir Eliot Howard. 

MY DEAR FRIEND, 

Cavendish- Square, London. 

As I informed yoif in my last letter of 
Dudley's having quitted England on his 
continental tour with Captain Caven- 
dish, St. Eloi, and two of my other sons, 
you will feel, of course, anxious to know 
all their proceedings, and whether your 
alarming prediction, founded on the 
peculiarity of Dudley's character, has 
been verified. 1 am truly happy to say it 
has not : whatever may have been the 
lures held out to him, to recommend a 
residence on any part of the continent in 
preference to England and Teneriffe, 
they have failed, and last week he re- 
turned with still more alacrity and joy 
than were shown even on his setting out. 
He has come back to us highly gratified 



360 DUDLEY. 

by his travels, as he entitles tliem, of 
which he has kept notes, in order to 
write a journal for your and Claudy's 
amusement ; and fully prepared to re- 
sume his studies with even more indefa- 
tigable ardour, if possible, than ever. 

You really do him injustice in sup- 
posing that he is over delicate in calling 
on you to honour his drafts ; he receives 
the allowance you make him with as 
little scruple as your fetters, and I should 
advise you to limit your guardian gene- 
rosity to one-third of his present income, 
had not repeated instances come to my 
knowledge, that he puts the superfluity 
of your kindness to the noblest pur- 
poses. His charities are so unbounded, 
that, as I observed to him, he certainly 
at tim.es fancies himself a Lorenzo de 
Medici, when he replied, — **^o, I am 
only his agent." 

As you so solemnly charged him, he 
has been most diligently careful of his 
health, which, after the first seasoning 
to our humid, foggy, and variable atmo- 
sphere, has never been known to suffer 
from his own negligence: — excess of 
II 



»UDLEY« 36i 

all kinds he has strictly guarded against, 
and his cheek and eyes still display that 
decided and peculiar bloom and open 
candour, which are the certain sureties 
of health and innocence. 



I was interrupted yesterday morning 

in my letter by visitors to Dr. H •, at 

whose house in town I am staying a 
month this spring ; my principal motive 
being a wish personally, yet secretly, to 
guard Dudley from dangers that may 
threaten his youth and inexperience 
through the attempts of unprincipled 
adventurers of either sex. 

This I can do more effectually by a 
residence near him than by letter, as I 
would prefer protecting him whilst still 
so young, without explaining my motives, 
and thereby suddenly snatching from his 
eyes that heavenly veil through which 
he, at present, is induced to view man- 
kind. — He hitherto knows evil and vice 
only in books ; he has associated with 
nothing but what is excellent and good : 
and though he does certainly take sud- 
den predilections for, and aversions to 

VOL, III. R 



36^ DUDLEY. 

strangers, (the result of a pretended 
skill in physiognomy, pardonable at his 
fanciful age,) he judges of many with 
whom he becomes acquainted through 
the medium of himself. 

He has chambers at Lincoln's Inn, 
and I am grazing in the pasture of our 
old Physician, by which means, Dudley, 
without being actually put under the re-, 
straint of boyhood, which might awaken 
his suspicions, and lead him to question 
his rights on the enjoyment of unrestrict- 
ed liberty, — is, at all times, within my 
surveillance, and, as you may suppose, 
not a day passes without our meeting. 
Robert, and his Spanish servant, Ro- 
meri, live with him ; but as it is one of 
my invariable principles never, in any 
shape whatever, to interfere between 
master and servant, (rendering the latter 
a spy upon his employer,) I merely ex- 
change with tliem a friendly nod, or a 
passing word of good will, and refrain 
from either questions or answers to 
either. 

Old Robert the other day asked me 
as he was sweeping the hearth and put^ 



DUDLEY. 363 

ting on fuel, whilst I waited in Dudley's 
chambers for his return, whether I knew 
if my son intended to go back to Tene- 
riffe soon ; but I checked him with a re- 
mark, that when his master had made 
up his mind to leave England, I suppose 
he would be informed. To this I added 
a little advice respecting his fellow- 
servant, who, as a young lad in a strange 
country, might, if not watched by some 
experienced friend, get into difficulties. 

Romeri^ at this instant, came into the 
room hastily, and asked if the Senor 
was returned. " No,'' replied Robert, 
<* master went again to Hampton Court 
soon after you were gone ; and eight- 
and-twenty miles are not to be galloped 
over in two hours, especially as he takes 
as much care of his horses as if they 
were Christians." 

This was the first intelligence to me 
of Dudley's having any acquaintance in 
the neighbourhood of London, except- 
ing Lady Alford : he might, however, 
have formed, at her house at Richmond, 
some new intimacies unknown to me ; 
or I concluded he had gone for a morn- 
R 2 



364 DUDLEY. 

ing-ride. He had not, however, men- 
tioned his intention the night before, or 
even spoken of that place in my hearing ; 
and though I could not account for the 
propriety of my feelings, I felt a sort of 
vague anxiety and alarm. 

Determined not to put it into the 
power of the servants to suppose me 
ignorant of my son's proceedings, with 
which, at his age, I had a right to 
be made acquainted, I determined to 
question him when we should again 
meet. I returned to Cavendish Square 
— he was expected to dine with us ; but 
dinner passed and he had not arrived, 
upon which I communicated what I had 
heard to Dr. H. who, after a pause that 
rather increased than diminished my 
fears, said, '* The red vengeance take 
the fellow, that he could not keep his 
promise with the Baronet, and return to 
TenerifFe ! — I was wrong, I see, in this 
business — he is not calculated for any 
profession — it is, after all, a pet canary- 
bird escaped from its cage, and now at 
large : our English sparrows, and jays, 
and tom-tits, and jack-daws, men and 



DUDLEY. 365 

women, will have a pluck at him ; they'll 
chase him from bush to brier, and over 
hedges and ditches, to get his pretty 
i^elloxi) feathers, and tufted crown of 
honour, to decorate their murky selves." 
This was a true and melancholy pic- 
ture of what might ensue ; and with 
undissembled grief, I lamented that 
Dudley had ever quitted your protec- 
tion, and that he still delayed returning 
to it ; for as you well observe, he is 
not, at this period, to be classed with 
any of his brothers : his education has 
been more than secluded, fitted, I allow, 
to render him blessed and blessing in 
retirement, but unequal to combat with 
the world : — his simplicity of charac- 
ter, contrasted with his height, his 
voice, and appearance, is most remark- 
able, and even your noble allowance 
may be the means of increasing his dan- 
ger. — Had you, my friend, during his 
stay in England, left him as I wished, 
solely dependent on me, he would have 
run a better chance of escaping the 
snares that may be laid for him ; and so 
well 1 am now convinced that he is wholly 
R 3 



$66 



DUDLEY. 



unfit to be left to his own guidance, for 
two or three years at least, that unless 
he consents to return immediately to 
TenerifFe, I shall exert my authority over 
him as a parent -, and for the remainder 
of his minority, either domesticate him 
with us at Bloomfield, or place him in 
the family of some other country-parson, 
as unfashionable as myself. 

Dr. H. and I still kept conversing on 
this one subject of my constant anxiety, 
when our ideas suddenly met, and he 
asked me, whether since Dudley's re- 
turn from the continent, he had been 
heard to fix any time for going to 
Euphorbia ? I replied in the negative, 
adding a request to the Doctor, that he 
would take the privilege of age and 
friendship to reason with him firmly on 
that head. 

" A pretty sap, that you're afraid to 
speak to your own puppy !" he replied^ 
•* an obstinate young rogue, with his pro- 
Jessions and promise-breaking : — if / 
take him in hand, I'll drive him out of 
all his strong holds and fastnesses^ I pro- 
mise you J —- I'll not run round and 



DUDLEY. 367 

round the bush, but give him a long 
claw at once. If you make a Polonius 
of me, though," added our old friend, 
*' recollect I write on my forehead seven- 
ty-four ; and if this mad ermined judge 
that is to be, should out with his rapier, 
and cry * dead for a ducat,' must you 
stand by and see fair play." 

" For Heaven's sake, my dear sir, say 
or do what you please," I answered, 
" only get him out of the way of tempt- 
ation and danger at once, and blow him 
over to Euphorbia, Ms only harbour of 
security and affection. But remember. 
Doctor," I added, " that when you do 
begin the attack, you take your old snuff- 
box in hand." 

** Ah, that's true," said the Doctor ; 
" and here it is," taking it out; 
** beauty and diamonds are snug in my 
desk. I wish the fellow would come in 
at this very moment ; I feel primed to 
give him a good drubbing — of words.'* 

And, at that instant, we heard a knock 
at the hall-door ; and, whilst still over 
our wine, Dudley came in, 

« Lost your dinner, you rascal,'* «aid 
R 4 



the Doctor, ringing the bell for the ser- 
vant to bring in a tray; ** is this the 
way you keep an assignation with a 
turkey, you goose you! Where have 
you been ?" 

" Do not order any thing for me, my 
dear sir/' he replied, " for I have dined. 
I rode over to Hampton Court this morn- 
ing, on business ; and, on my return, 
called at Richmond, where I took an 
early dinner with Lady Alford, who, 
with Captain Cavendish, and the chil- 
dren, have set out for Bath. I waited 
until they wrote several letters, which 
they entrusted me to forward imme- 
diately to TenerifFe.'' 

" And how are the little sea-urchins ?'* 
said the Doctor, who, I saw, was form- 
ing his plan of attack. Dudley expatiated, 
and with feeling, and even emotion, on 
the mutual and increasing happiness of 
the lovely Countess and her gallant 
husband, and on the beauty and growth 
of their children. 

" Why, you speak of wedded life, and 
its liveli/ consequences, con amorey my 
boy," said the Doctor ; and then, with 
a wink at me, added, " Eh ! how shall 



DUDLEY. 869 

your reverence like, one of these days, 
to look in the glass at your ugly phiz, 
and find yourself a grand-daddy ? You 
see, that none of your girls go off your 
hands ; one of your lads, it is true, has 
some doubts, whether or not he should 
like to buy a wedding-coat ; but I would 
lay a pipe of Madeira to a dozen of claret, 
that this strippling, this Dudley here, will 
be the first of your family to give you 
the honours o^ grand paternity." 

Dudley blushed ; and rising, turned 
from us, and poured himself out a glass 
of wine. — '* And now, my gay fellow," 
continued the Doctor, *' that you have 
taken a little fillip, will you answer me 
one question ? When do you mean to re- 
turn to Euphorbia ?" 

" When I shall have realised, hy my 
own ea:ertions and ahilities, five hundred 
a year," added Dudley, very composedly, 
placing himself between us at the fire 5 
and taking down a hand-screen, to shade 
his eyes from the heat and glare of the 
blazing coals, (one o^ your customs.) 

'* Realised what!" said the Doctor^ 
R 5 



S70 DUDLEY. 

** What's that? Have the goodnesi^j, 
sir, to repeat those words/' 

You have doubtless remarked, that 
when our old friend condescends to use 
really civil expressions, he is seriously 
displeased ; as, on the other hand, he 
never utters terms of abuse but when in 
a good humour, or but to those for whom 
he feels a friendship. 

Dudley was not aware of this trait of 
his character, or he would have endea- 
voured to dispel the unpleasant sensation 
to which his answer and manner had 
given rise. He, therefore, as he was 
required, did repeat his words, adding, 
** Then, and not till then, I shall consider 
myself entitled to marry. This inde- 
pendence, I allow, is very moderate, 
particularly in England; but, though 
humble, it will secure me the privileges 
of a gentleman, and I desire no more." 

The Doctor looked at me ; but as I 
was resolved not to interfere, I took a 
newspaper, and, for upwards of an hour, 
literally amused myself with cross-read- 
ings ; so disjointed and unconnected was 
my occupation. 



DUDLEY. 371 

*» And pray, sir/* said the Doctor, 
** what may be the foundation on which 
you design to erect this snug, and mo- 
deflate, and /tumble retreat of five hundred 
a year ? You have, at present, a liberal 
allowance from your baronet guardian, 
I grant, which meets all your expenses 
and enables you to contribute to many 
of the public charities, such as schools 
and hospitals, the Bhnd and other 
asylums, poor-houses, and alms-houses. 
You have also, as some of my meddling 
M. D. friends inform me, a number of 
weekly pensioners, among the aged, the 
infirm, and the helpless young brats. You 
have, as I am told, personally visited 
most of our prisons, enquired into the 
cases of debtors, released them, supplied 
them w^th a change of clothes, and put 
them in the way of continuing their 
labours as artificers, or tradesmen, or 
handicraft folks. Nay ; it has been 
whispered that you have appropriated a 
considerable sum to the comforts of 
lying-in married women ; and made a 
mighty bustle with a regiment of infanta 
r6 



372 DUDLEY. 

established by your bounty, with good 
nurses, a few miles from town." 

" Yes,'' said Dudley, with a glow of 
pleasure, and a smile, whilst again filling 
his glass, " I have done all this ; and 
more, much more : ten times more than 
you can have any knowledge ofj I have 
performed." 

It was evident that there was a latent 
meaning in his words ; of this I felt con- 
vinced from his looks, and the know- 
ledge I had of his character, which is 
modest and unassuming, and as far re- 
moved from ostentation as is possible to 
be. I suppose he felt aware of the false 
conclusions we might gather from his 
words, and to his disadvantage, in one 
particular, for he instantly added, «« I 
have, as you well know, no funds of my 
own. Where public charities are the 
question, I am the steward of Sir Eliot ; 
in those of a private nature, I am merely 
the agent of Claudy. At our last part- 
ing, in the garden at Euphorbia, she 
put into my hands this embroidered 
pocket-book." He took it from the side- 
pocket of his coat, and from its outward 
II 



DUDLEY. 375 

ease of dark-green silk. — <* Take this 
to England with you, Dudley," she 
said, *< it is full of notes. My father, 
as you will see, has not been frugal. 
Take it, — and remember, though an 
inhabitant of Teneriffe, I am still an 
English girl ; that I am a native of that 
most beloved island, from which our re- 
sources, our wealth, these very sums are 
drawn. Take it ; — and let every shil- 
ling of this be spent among the poor. 
Release the debtor, comfort old age, 
protect the infant, assist the destitute ; 
imitate, in. short, the character of Zul- 
vago ! — I, as a female, cannot follow my 
own inclinations in this particular, and 
go about the world doing good, as he 
does. But you may — you must be my 
kind steward, and act for me." 

He ceased, replaced his pocket-book 
in his coat, filled our glasses, and took 
his in hand, saying, with an air of gal- 
lantry and spirit not to be described, 
" Pledge me ; here's to the health of 
my Claudy, the heiress of Euphorbia." 



S74 



DUDLEY. 



I saw perfectly what was passing in the 
mind of the Doctor ; and was not much 
surprised, when, after three loud hems, 
and a furious attack on the fire, he added, 
** Clonmore, take away that decanter, 
or by the vengeance this tipsey dog will 
finish the contents, and I shall lose my 
hit at backgammon, for no playing with 
a varlet when he is half-seas over. — And 
now that we talk of over-seas," he 
added, turning to my son, " pray let 
me sail back to the original question, 
even at the hazard of your making up an 
account of your answers, and my ques- 
tions, and sending me a Chancery bill. 
On what capital, sirrah, do you purpose 
raising this same 5001. a year income? 
The baronet, as you know, intends at his 
death, (long life to him !) to leave you 
half his fortune ; and, in the mean time, 
allows you a royal income, every shilling 
of which, it appears, you take pretty 
good care to spend, in some way or other, 
according to his own particular desire ; 
but if you persist in running counter to 
his wishes, he may yet withdraw his 
golden hand, and burn his Will. In tiiat 



DUDLEY. 375 

ease, let me ask, what becomes of you? 
As for your father, he can't assist you, 
having to educate your brothers, to lay 
by a little to buy husbands for your 
sisters, and to provide for your mother in 
case of widowhood. With regard to my- 
self, 1 could 3issist you, hut 1 won't. My 
nephews and nieces have always looked 
forward to my old clothes, and shall not 
be disappointed, having conducted them- 
selves as I could wish, — and let me get 
them through the world by means of 
bridle, whip, and spur. We considered 
you, my fortunate buck of the Fortunate 
Islands, as already provided for ; there- 
fore shall treat you as an interloper. 
Widow Grantley has only her jointure. 
Lady Alford has married again, and has 
her own children, who will be very will- 
ing, in future, to tur-n her bank-notes 
into curling papers, without your assist- 
ance ; and as for our Spanish Don, — 
Zulvago, were he even willing to assist 
you, which, froni your ungrateful con- 
duetto his friend Sir Eliot, 1 much doubt, 
(and he is the only other person existing 
that you are acquainted with, who has 



376 DUDLEY. 

it in his power to forward your visionary 
speculations,) no one knows what is be- 
come of him. He may be dead, or in 
the prisons of the Inquisition, (that 
blessed company being restored.) In 
short, he appears to have vanished be- 
yond our power of recall ; and now, my 
young sir, I ask, on what foundation 
may your hopes rest ?" 



This, you will allow, was using the 
probe, and to the quick. I was rather 
apprehensive of the consequences, but 
feared still more taking it out of skilful 
hands ; wherefore I snuffed the candles, 
and continued running my eye over de- 
bates, and advertisements, lottery puffs, 
deaths, births, and marriages. 

Dudley had risen from his chair some 
time back, and was now traversing the 
room, apparently endeavouring, in con- 
sideration of the age and personal gra- 
titude due from us all to our worthy 
Doctor, to check the impetuosity of his 
temper, and deeply wounded spirit, at 
this unforeseen attack. 

At length he summoned courage to 
say, " Indeed, sir, this is most extraor- 



DUDLEY. 377 

dinary language ! I owe my existence to 
my father, and my past and present de- 
pendence to Sir Eliot Howard j but when, 
may I enquire, did I express the slightest 
intention of appealing to the bounty of 
either yourself^ or that of the persons 
you mention ? What claim have I on 
you, or on Mrs. Grantley, or Lady Al- 
ford, or Don Zulvago ? When I apply 
to them, or to any other person on earth, 
for pecuniary succour, in any shape 
whatever, it will be time enough to re- 
fuse it me." 

" There's a fellow!" said the Doctor, 
turning to me (but I was impenetrable) j 
" There's a sturdy islander for you ! 
You ungrateful whelp! Did not I say, 
years ago, that you would cause the ba- 
ronet many a head-ache, and his daughter 
(pretty little darling !) many a heart- 
ache ?" 

This touched the gentler feelings of 
Dudley, and he answered, *' Believe me. 
Doctor, that both Sir Eliot and his 
daughter are dearer to me than exist- 
ence ; and if by tlie sacrifice of my life, I 
could promote their happiness — " 



378 DUDLEY. 

" Hold your tongue, sir — no cant, 
or I've done with you. Suppose I were 
to say, * Dudley, fetch me that chair 
yonder; to rest my gouty foot upon,' and 
you were to answ^er, < Not I, indeed^f 
fetch it yourself; but I'll jump out of 
the window to cure your gout.' Yes, 
a pretty return you have made to all 
the kindness of your patron." 

•* Patron, sir !" exclaimed my son, 
suddenly stopping, and turning round 
fiercely, ** I suffer no man to use that 
word to me ! — I have no patron, sir : I 
wish the w^ord were blotted from the 
language. Sir Eliot is my friend, my 
guardian, my benefactor, — but not my 
patron. I never had, I never will have 
patrons." 

At the very moment that I dreaded 
the effect these words of this singular, 
and I fear, eccentric youth, must produce 
on our old friend, what was my sur- 
prise to see him turn over the back of 
his chair, and with glistening eyes 
stretch out his hand to Dudley, say- 
ing, ** You are right — shake hands upon 
that — I ask your pardon — keep to that 



whilst you live ; never suffer yourself 
to come under that worst of slaveries, the 
servitude of the mind. A vengeance 
take those words of patron, and patro- 
ness, and patronizing, and patronage 1'* 
Then turning back to the fire, as Dudley 
calmly re-seated himself by his side, he 
added, ** Have you read Miss Edge worth, 
my boy, on that subject?" 

On Dudley's replying in the negative, 
the Doctor took out his pocket-book, 
and from it a list of books as long as a 
college tailor's bill ; and having added 
with a pencil the word " Patronage" to 
this list, he gave it to Dudley, " There, 
take that, I observed your book-shelves 
at your chambers the other day were 
rather shabby : there is my gift to you, 
the only one I shall ever make you, 
dead or alive — three hundred pounds* 
worth of books, you young dog — who 
but for me would have been a tenyears^ 
old skeleton in a coffin by this time. So 
go to-morrow morning to Longman's, 
and contrive to empty a little corner in 
one of his three hundred warehouses. — 
No debts though — Henry Hase for that 



380 DUDLEY. 

— Here, you trans- Atlantic young por- 
poise — here's to pay for them, and 
something to buy pens and paper, ink 
and wafers, and sand and sealing-wax/' 

It was rather comical to observe Dud- 
ley, (after all his fine flourishes of inde- 
pendence, and aversion to obligations of 
any nature,), with evident gratification, 
slip the note carelessly into his waist- 
coat-pocket, and eagerly peruse the list 
of books. 

Without one word of thanks or com- 
pliments, or grateful professions of any 
kind, (your own profusion, Howard, has 
spoilt him,) he added, *« I suppose I may 
change some of these authors for others, 
according to my own taste and judg- 
ment? — 1 think, my dear sir, you have 
put down a greater number of law-books 
than I shall ever have occasion for." 

I need not remark with what pleasure 
I heard this observation ; and he con- 
tinued enumerating the authors on his 
list. 

" Plenty of < Voyages and Travels,' I 
see, and with plates. I'm glad of that — 
Claudy is so fond of travels j * Bio- 



DUDLEY. 381 

graphy/ that is my choice ; * Theology/ 
to please us all ; ' Scott's Works,' I shall 
give those to Mr. Balfour ; ' Sou they 's,' 
Don Zulvago is fond of them ; the last 
editions of the * Antiquary, Rob Roy,* 
&c. Sir Eliot's favourites, he sliall have 
these ; the * Antiquities of Cambridge,' 
for Mr. Turner ; * Patriarchal Times,* 
Claudy and 1 have read that already in 
our lonely walks in the forest and vine- 
yards — I shall omit that ; ' Zenobia, 
Queen of Palmyra,' Lady Alford's fa- 
vourite, but complains of the vile hard 
names in it, wishing, that instead of Ode- 
nathus, Longinus, &c. the author had sub- 
stituted Charles, Edward, and Tom * ; 
< Byron's Works,' I have most of them 
by heart ; * Lallah Rookh !' he repeated 
with delight, '' dear Lallah Rookh!'* 
and he began reciting a part of the 
' Fire Worshippers,' with an accent at 
once correct and tender, when he was 
interrupted by the Doctor, who told him 
to hold his prate. 

After a moment's silence, (I under- 
:3tood what our physician was upon,) lie 

* A remark actually made to the author. 



382 DUDLEY* 

asked abruptly, «' And when do you go 
back to Teneriffe, sirrah ?" 

Dudley hesitated, and in apparent 
confusion answered, '* I think my going 
back at present would be a great inter- 
ruption to my studies." 

" And what prevents your going on 
with these same studies at Euphorbia ?" 

" But, my dear Doctor — my profes- 
sion, you know." 

" The D — ^1 fly off with your pro- 
fession, sir 1 bothering all our ears with 
your profession ; when, if the truth is 
fairly stated, you have no right to exer- 
cise any profession at all, not being in 
want of any. Times are changed when 
I advised your following one. Silence, 
you jack-a-napes, and hear me speak : — 
here is a Baronet, who having adopted 
you for his co-heir and son-in-law, stalks 
up to you with an inexhaustible purse in 
one hand, and a fine girl in the other. 
Now tell me, what right have you to 
reject either ?" 

" I have no intention of rejecting 
either/* replied Dudley j «* on the con- 



DUDLEY. SSS 

trary, I mean to acceptthem both.'* This 
was said with a naivete really amusing. 

** You do, do you ? amazing conde- 
scension, truly ! Then what have you to 
do with professions, I ask, and law-books, 
and chambers, and briefs, and terms, and 
bands, and gowns ? — Hey ?" 

** I wish to obtain a title for Claudy, 
and that can only be gained by rising to 
great eminence in some public capa- 
city. Claudy may have the monei/y but I 
must acquire the title," 

** Ho ! ho ! are you there ? — And 
supposing your success complete, how 
are you certain that Miss Claudy will 
wait thirty or forty years until you have 
it in your power to make her a grey- 
headed baroness ?" 

" Thirty or forty years !" repeated 
Dudley, in amazement. 

" Aye, and think yourself very well 
off too, even by that time, to be able to 
sit down up stairs * with the key of your 
strong box in your pocket, wherein are 
deposited the vouchers of a few tens of 
thousands." 

* The House of Lords. 



384 DUDLEY. 

** But surely, my clear sir, in a mucli 
shorter period than that, in eight years 
say, by industry, and merit, and abilities, 
and principle, and economy — " 

" Yes, you know much of economy," 
said the Doctor, " all your life squirting 
pine-apple juice from your mouth; 
munching olives, and rinsing your claret 
bumper glasses in port wine 1 Yes, you 
can prate of economy, and you will 
tell me next, I suppose, that should the 
Baronet withdraw his present shield of 
competence, you can wrestle with 
poverty, and fight your way through the 
hostile world of society. And so, my lad, 
you can reconcile yourself to wait eight 
years ! can you ? the most patient lover 
I ever heard or read of! other fellows in 
these cases need the curb, but faith you 
require the spur ; to tell you the truth, 
I don't think you are in love with Claudy 
at all." 

** No ! — why, sir, you might as well 
say Claudy is not in love with me !" The 
gravity with which this remark was 
uttered was so irresistibly comic, that it 
fairly conquered mine ; and laying 
down the paper, I said to the Doctor, 



DUDLEY. 385 

" If Dudley has no love to boast of, we 
cannot acquit him of want of vanity j" 
and turning, I closed with them round 
the fire. 

" Besides/' remarked my son, *< 1 am 
certain of getting forward, if not in the 
noble profession of the law, in the diplo- 
matic line. Although Sir Eliot has re- 
fused to interfere in these concerns of 
mine, as I wished and requested him, I 
shall certainly contrive to get into par- 
liament; and fortune, fame, rank, and 
honours, attend the career of a senator. 
And then I'll marry Claudy : — it is very 
fortunate for us both that my education 
has been so liberal and so perfect.'* 

" Plague of your education, you 
blockhead 1*' said the Doctor, <* if I can 
see what one good purpose it has an- 
swered, but to enable you to make a fool 
of yourself! — Ah, my fine lad, I see 
how it will end, treading in the steps of 
that Spaniard, that Zulvago — Her- 
nandez, what do you call him ; whose 
one false step in life has made him what 
he is (though as capital a fellow as ever 
smoked a cigar); yet you see what he has 

VOL. 111. s 



SS6 DUDLEY. 

brought himself to — he played with 
mousey till he lost it ; he mounted his 
romantic hobby -mule, as you are doing 
now, and broke the heart of a fond be- 
lieving girl, (without, however, killing 
her, the more the pity;) and yet he 
vowed by St. Isidro, the patron saint of 
old Madrid, (we'll allow a city to have a 
patron,) that he loved the girl he forsook, 
and his conduct has proved he did. Yet 
you see what he has turned out — instead 
at this hour of being a good husband 
and father, and a happy citizen of Spain, 
there has he been wandering ever since 
his twenty-sixth year, little better than a 
moody, melancholy, whistling, sighing, 

crack-brained -" 

A loud and thundering coachman's 
rap at the street-door cut short the 
Doctor's long sermon ; and in the midst 
of our suspense, as to who could be the 
visitor at so unusual an hour, for we were 
just going to tea, the door of the room 
was thrown open by a servant, who an- 
nounced— *^ Don Zulvago d' Almeida." 



DUDLEY. 387 

Acquainted as you are, my friend, 
with all the parties, you may conceive 
what was our reception of this noble 
Spaniard, this most excellent man 5 who, 
after so long an absence, was thus re- 
stored to us at the moment that we had 
thought him lost for ever. But you 
can have only a faint idea of the surprise 
and admiration with which he almost 
gazed upon Dudley ! — it was some time 
before he could be persuaded of his 
identity, such is the change from the 
mere boy to the full-grown youth. — 
When perfectly convinced, he made every 
minute enquiry concerning your welfare, 
and all your connections 5 by which, 
we understood, he had not been at 
Euphorbia lately, and he expressed much 
pleasure on the subject of Lady Alford's 
marriage. 

Having answered unreservedly all our 
questions, and he was far more inquisi- 
tive than I considered consistent with 
his nature, we, in return, enquired of 
him how time had flown since his 
communication to you, which we ob- 
served contained the account of Miss 
s ^l 



388 DUDLEY? 

Shelburne's approaching marriage with a 
Colonel Hamilton. 

He was for a short time silent ; and 
being by this led to take further notice 
of him, I perceived, on his taking oiF 
his great coat, that he was in mourning. 

He saw our eyes glancing at his dress, 
and seemed to be thankful for the deli- 
cacy which prompted us to restrain our 
curiosity to looks ; and, shortly after, as 
if to make us amends for the state of sus- 
pense we evidently endured, he spoke 
with the most unreserved frankness : " It 
is Colonel Hamilton who is dead,'* he 
said. ** Perhaps you concluded that I was 
in mourning for the lady of whom you 
have heard and read so much ; for I 
take it for granted,'* looking at the 
Doctor, <« that you, Sir, as well as Mr. 
Clonmore,are acquainted with the subject 
of a narrative which I drew up of my 
early years, and sent to Sir Eliot Howard.'^ 
The Doctor replied that he was, when I 
remarked that we had not presumed to 
show it to a third person, (my wife ex- 
cepted,) and that consequently it had 
never been seen by Dudley. 



DUDLEY. 389 

My son upon this with much pro- 
priety rose, and with a smile, shaking 
hands with Zulvago, took up his hat, 
bidding the Doctor good-night, for that 
he had promised a fellow-student to ac- 
company him to the theatre, and that 
he hoped to be in time for the last 
act of Miss O'NeiPs charming Juliet, 
or at any rate, his favourite Miss 
Stephens in Artaxerxes* I did not 
attempt to detain him, though, had it 
not been for Zulvago's arrival, I should 
certainly,j^r more reasons than one, have 
made a third in this theatrical excur- 
sion J and the Doctor called out as he 
shut the door and ran down stairs, — 
" Hollo ! you sir I come back ; if you 
fail to breakfast with me to-morrow, I'll 
send a Bow-street-runner after you." 



We then had a long and serious 
conversation with Zulvago, who inform- 
ed us, what I must sum up in few words 
— the marriage of Victorina with Colo- 
nel Hamilton — their embarkation for 
Europe — the Colonel's illness and death 
s 3 



^90 DUDLEY* 

at the Cape of Good Hope — and the 
arrival at Portsmouth of his widow 
with the body, which, by his directions, 
is to be buried in Hampton church- 
yard. Thus far his communication. 
His next enquiry was to me, '** Have 
you ever had any tidings of Mrs. 
Shelburne ?" — *« Never/* I replied, 
" though nothing on my part has 
been left undone in pursuance of your 
wishes." Then he said, ** I have at last 
obtained the clue 5 immediately after 
Victorina's marriage, she communicated 
to me 'that her mother had, on her own 
departure for India, retired to a cottage 
(her own being destroyed) in the neigh- 
bourhood of Aranjuez, where she had 
lived ever since under another name, 
having no other communication with 
England than to receive the annuity 
settled upon her by her daughter ; the 
funds of which were long since withdrawn 
from the Bank of England and made 

payable at the private bank of 

and Co." 

<« Good heavens 1" 1 exclaimed, "that 
house failed five or six years back. If 



DUDLEY. 391 

reliance on that bank was the only 
means of support which Mrs. Shelbnrne 
possessed, I much fear she must have 
suffered some inconvenience from its 
insolvency.'* 

Zulvago looked considerably alarmed, 
and replied, " that *was her only support 
— her daughter has been as open and 
candid with me since her own change of 
fortune, as she was previously perverse 
and reserved j and I can safely protest 
that the mother had no other means of 
subsistence, (except what might arise 
from actual labour,) than that annuity of 
a hundred pound, being one-half of Vic- 
torina's salary. As that bank failed in 
which the money was deposited for her 
use until her daughter's return from 
India, at the time you mention, Ga- 
brielle may have been exposed to actual 
want, for, excepting her child and my- 
self, such have been the hardships to 
which her early years were subjected, and 
the retirement in which they lived, she 
has no other friend on earth." 

*' And where is this Mrs. what's 

her name ? now ?" enquired the Doctor, 
s 4 



^^ DUDLEY. 

n which place I left her a few hours since 
having never lost sight of her since we 
quitted Calcutta. Had it pleased Heaven 
to spare the Colonel's life, they would 
have been happy _ his love for her daily 
increased, and she was his constant 
cueertul companion whilst health re- 
mained, and his attentive and affectionate 
nurse during a long and painful illness." 
" And what made you leave her at 
Portsmouth," said the Doctor, " instead 
of accompanying her to the place where 
the Colonel is to be buried? — You will 
pardon the liberty of an old fellow. Don 
Zulvago —It appears to me, that having 
travelled thus far together in company! 
you need not have left her at a time 
when she must stand in need of most 
assistance." 

" yf 7 true," replied the Spaniard, 

ivT c, ^. ^^^ ^^* '''"^'■^ received from 
Mrs. Shelburne, it appears she some 
time back quitted Spain for England 
and that she is most probably still in 
l^ndon." Hetookacardfrom his pocket. 



DUDLEY. 393 

*« Here is her address, dated about eight 

months since : No. Swallow-street, 

Oxford Road ^ as you may now con- 
clude, 1 am sent forward by Mrs. Ha- 
milton to prepare her mother for the 
joyful news of her daughter's wealthy 
marriage and return to England." 

" And have you been to Swallow- 
street," I asked. 

" No ; I only arrived in town about 
an hour since, and came directly here. 
Night was not a proper time to intrude 
upon Donna Sobrino ; I shall go thither 
to-morrow ^ you can inform me in what 
part of London is this street ?" 

" If you will allow me," I said, " I 
will accompany you to-morrow ;" for I 
guessed that the Spaniard, from his 
ignorance of London, could have no 
suipicion that Mrs. Shelburne would, 
from the very direction, be found in a 
state of obscurity, perhaps of the most 
abject penury. 

He neither declined or accepted my 
offer, and then, as I could perceive, 
willing to turn the conversation from his 
s 5 



S94i DUDLEY. 

still fondly-remembered Gabrielle, he 
spoke of Mrs. Hamilton. Although he 
praised her conduct in the warmest 
terms, both before marriage and since, 
he took notice, (as if expecting that here- 
after some acquaintance might arise be- 
tween her and us, especially if it should 
be her design to settle in England) ; *' Her 
character is not a common one — it is 
violent, impetuous, enthusiastic ; she in 
this resembles her father Sobrino ; her 
passions are under little restraint ; and it 
is well that she has none of a still more 
dangerous tendency than those I men- 
tion, her strongest being that of love 
to her mother ; but this in itself is car- 
ried to excess J for it supersedes her duty 
to her Maker.'' 

He paused, as if his mind dwelt on 
some painful recollection, " but I trust,' ' 
he continued, " that her errors, arising 
from an unbridled vehemence of imagi- 
nation, and bitterness of spirit, may yet 
be softened down ^ and that now she is in 
possession of the blessings of wealth, 
pride and tenacity will wear away, leav- 

12 



DUDLEY. 895 

ing behind them the amiable qualities of 
sensibility and filial love." 

" Is her health good ? has it suffer- 
ed by the climate of India ?'* enquired 
the Doctor. " No," said Zulvago, ** it is 
invariably excellent. When I left her at 
Portsmouth she had a cold, it is true, but 
it was very slight ; add as her journey 
from thence must be necessarily slow, 
(for she persists in attending the funeral, 
and never quitting the body until it is 
deposited in earth at the place he men- 
tions in his will,) travelling can do her 
no injury. Besides, after I shall have 
had one interview with her mother, I 
intend returning, to accompany her my- 
self to the burial-ground at Hampton." 

Here our conversation ceased, and 
we separated for the night, Zulvago 
having promised the Doctor to breakfast 
with him the next morning. 



I had written thus far, and on the very 
morning I speak of! since which period 
a fortnight has elapsed ! — Good God, 
s 6 



396 DUDLEY. 

to what a scene we have since that hour 
been witness ! Dudley will communi- 
cate the particulars to you — I have not 
the power. 

Yours ever, 

Henry Clonmore. 



DUDLEY. 397 



LETTER LVIII. 

Dudley Clonmore to Sir Eliot Ho*ward, 

Bloomfield Rectory. 

My dear Sir Eliot, my own friend ! 
What have I not of late gone through ? 
To what dreadful trials have not my 
feelings been put ! What agony of 
mind have 1 not suffered for the last ten 
days. I endeavour to close my eyes, and 
shut out that scene, but it has laid fast 
hold on my imagination, and I feel like 
a scared bird, all horror and alarm. — Oh 
that I were but safe in the protection of 
Euphorbia, that I could for ever quit a 
world that can thus frighten me, a world 
containing such anguish, such misery. 



My father has informed me how far he 
had made you acquainted with our pro- 
ceedings, and I now resume from the 



398 DUDLEY. 

morniiig, when at Doctor H/s invitation 
I went about ten o'clock to Cavendish 
Square. Don Zulvago, wl.om he had 
also engaged to breakfast vMtli him, had 
not arrived : we began, but had not con- 
cluded our meal when he was an- 
nounced. How unlike the Zulvago of 
the preceding evening 1 — then, he ap- 
peared the image of restored happiness, 
or at least of hope — now, the' very pic- 
ture of calm and settled despair. 

He sat dov/n, and looking stedfastly 
at my father, said, " She is not to be 
found.*' 

" Then you have been already to 
Swallow-street ?" 

" Yes, I could not rest, I could not 
wait for you to accompany me. I rose at 
seven this morning, and by means of a 
hackney chariot enquired the place." 

u Well?" 

*« I found it — she has been living in 
that one spot, and for the last few years 
has practised what may perhaps be called 
a pious fraud upon her daughter, to keep 
her mind at peace. She did go to Aran- 
juez, intending there to live until Victo- 
rina's return j but without funds there is 



DUDLEY. S99 

no more possibility of living in Spain than 
elsewhere. On the failure of the bank, 
and her remittances from London stop- 
ping, she came to England, and has, 
from that period, inhabited two wretched 
rooms in the miserable and forlorn habi- 
tation to which I was directed. How 
widely different to my expectations ! 
(for I expected in proportion to my 
hopes.) It appears that she had once 
rented other apartments in the house, 
having - supported herself by needle- 
work, glad to secure the shelter of a 
home, at once honest and reputable, and 
the services of ' its poor but worthy 
owner, (from whom I had all these parti- 
culars.) From illness and various disap- 
pointments, of which these subject to 
them are the best judges, she felt obliged 
to give up these rooms and gradually 
ascend from bad to worse, until she was 
forced, at last, to feel grateful for the 
shelter of a garret.*' 

" And she is dead, then ?" said my 
father, compassionately. 

*« No,'' said Zulvago, " not that we 
know of 5 but vshe is lost. A week since 



400 DUDLEY. 

she left her home to take some needle- 
work she had finished to a person who 
lived a few miles out of town, (the 
woman did not know the name of the 
place,) and has not since returned, or 
been heard of. I fear the worst. Want, 
misery, complete abandonment, utter 
despair may have led her to — *' and he 
rose to conceal his agony. 

« Why I don't know what to say to 
it,'* said the Doctor ; *' but you have no 
certainty that she is dead ; and doubt im- 
plies hope." 

My father appeared as if he wished 
to give consolation, but knew not in what 
shape j whilst I, from my youth, and ig- 
norance of the whole of the subject, 
(though I guessed much of the real busi- 
ness,) sat silent. 

** What would 1/ou advise. Doctor?'' 
enquired my father. " Perhaps were I 
to go to a coffee-house where they file 
the newspapers, I might, on looking 
over them for the last week, find some 
clue among the accidents or casualties ; 
for it is in vain to endeavour to delude a 
man of our friend Don Zulvago's strength 



DUDLEY. 401 

of mind. Mrs. Shelburne, in my opinion, 
is no more ; and I rest upon the very 
circumstance of her having placed so 
much confidence in the woman with 
whom she lodged. She would not have 
changed her abode without acquainting 
this person, whom it appears she liked, 
and without assigning some cause for her 
removal. Had any accident happened 
short of death, she would have written, or 
sent to her landlady. You did not, I 
suppose, go into the apartments which 
Mrs. Shelburne had occupied ?" 

" I did,'' replied Zulvago, " I took 
pleasure in so doing ; it was to me the 
very luxury of grief and remorse. There 
I saw her work, her books, and other 
trifles, all scattered in that careless yet 
decided manner, that, at one glance, 
acquaints us the owner has only left the 
room for a short time for a walk, or to 
go into another apartment. 1 took up 
the work in my hand; I examined the 
books, many in the Spanish language ; 
and in all her name, or that of her 
daughter, was written. In one, a volume 
of Lopez de Vega, was my own namcj 



402 DUDLEY. 

and written by myself upwards of seven- 
and-twenty years since, and dated from 
the cottage of Engelhardt, at Aranjuez. 
I found also an Atlas, which I knew to 
have belonged to her father, Gustavus ; 
and on a narrower inspection of this 
sordid and wretched chamber, I saw in 
one corner a spinning-wheel, and near it 
a German clock, over which were ar- 
ranged, upon a shelf, half-a-dozen of the 
well-remembered flower-vases. I knew 
them all. I looked at them ; and handled 
them with a mixture of interest and sor- 
row, which at last gave way to the most 
agonizing fears, that their owner, at the 
moment of being restored to her daughter, 
and to the blessings of riches and society, 
and perhaps to me, was lost to all for 
ever. 

*' I renewed my enquiries of the 
woman, but she had already told me all 
she knew, and could add nothing. I am 
positive that she is no more. From cer- 
tain pecuniary circumstances, mentioned 
by this person, I am convinced she has 
become the victim of hopeless poverty 
and despair^ for though she might na- 



DUDLEY, 403 

turally have expected hei: daughter's 
speedy return to England, (the term of 
her service to Lady L being ex- 
pired,) we, who are in possession of 
treasures never exhausted, can form 
but Httle idea of that horrible sensation 
that seizes on the mind of the person, 
who, compelled to earn their daity bread, 
find, at an instant, the resources stopped, 
even for four-and-twenty hours. I re- 
peat, I am certain she is dead. Gabri- 
elle is dead, and my life has, with her 
existence, lost its main-spring.'^ 



I, my dear friend, had, as you may 
judge, hitherto kept silent ; but at that 
word, — I allude to the word " Ga- 
brielle," which 1 do not recollect ever to 
have heard you, or my father, or even 
Don Zulvago himself, until that hour, 
pronounce, — I started up, and, with a 
feeling that nearly bordered on distraction, 
exclaimed, " Gabrielle ! Did you say 
Gabrielle ?" — and every eye in the room 
was fixed on me. " Speak, sir," I con- 
tinued ; ** it is no common name, at 



404 DUDLEY. 

least in England. Is the name of Mrs.' 
Shelburne, Gabrielle ?" 

" It is," he replied. 

" But/' I added, fearful of giving 
rise to hopes that might be dashed to the 
ground the moment of forming them j 
** but, — may I ask, was not the lady 
whom you wished, when young, to 
marry, a Spaniard ? consequently dark ; 
her hair and eyes equally black : at least 
such have ever been the Spanish females 
I have seen ; — and I, until now, under- 
stood that it was to a native of Spain to 
whom you were early attached.'* 

<* No," said Zulvago, summoning all 
his fortitude, to bear what I had next to 
say ', ** Gabrielle was a native of Saxony ; 
her mother an Englishwoman. Recol- 
lect yourself, Dudley," he added ; " you 
have seen this picture before ;" and he 
took from his pocket a miniature, hung 
by a black ribbon, which I immediately 
recollected. 

" Yes," I said, " I have : it was at 
Euphorbia. You and I were fencing at 
the time ;" and I looked attentively at 
the picture j and then, with sorrow and 



DUDLEY. 405 

doubt, said, " I can trace no resem- 
blance, although the person to whom I 
allude has light eyes, and is very pale ; 
and, indeed, fair, although far advanced 
in years. No ; this can never have been 
designed for her." I paused ; and then 
added, " What was her maiden name? 
and that of her husband ?" for I was still 
unwilling to give up every hope. 

" Engelhardt— Gabrielle Engelhardt ;" 
he replied, " and she was married to a 
Spanish West Indian, of the name of 
Manuel de Sobrino." 

Judge, oh my dearest friend, of my 
emotions at that instant ! Tears, tears 
of joy almost rushed to my eyes. A 
man ought not to weep j but I could 
scarcely restrain my tears, when I grasp- 
ed the hand of Zulvago, and said, « She 
lives ! She does live ! Four-and-twenty 
hours are not past since I saw her, — 
since I spoke with her." 

Under what strange appearances does 
joy often show itself! My interest in 
her life or death, compared to that of 
our Spanish friend, was trifling, yet I 
was all rapture 5 my voice, my face, my 



406 DUDLEY. 

actions, expressive of unbounded plea- 
sure, at having converted the despair of 
this v^orthy man into happiness (a trans- 
formation he has been the means of to 
hundreds of his fellow-creatures). His 
sensations must have been, at this mo- 
ment, exquisite, far exceeding mine ; 
and yet he continued speechless, and in- 
deed immoveable, as if oppressed by a 
sudden weight; and incapable of the 
smallest exertion. 

My father spoke, and the Doctor 
spoke, but Zulvago did not open his 
lips ; and I briefly acquainted them, that 
about a week since, on my return late in 
the evening, on horseback, from Esher, 
having, with others, been to see Clare- 
mont,) I had been the means of saving a 
female from the hands of a ruffian foot- 
pad, in a dreary part of the road, near 
Hampton Court ; but not before he had 
contrived to rob her of a bundle, which, 
as she informed me, contained needle- 
work she was taking home. I gave my 
horse to Romeri, and desired him to ride 
back to the inn we had just passed, and 
send a chaise to meet me, at the same 



DUDLEY. 407 

time enquiring of the female whither she 
was going, that I might conduct her 
thither in safety. She had scarcely 
time to inform me that she was going to 
Hampton Court, when the villain made 
another desperate attack, during which 
he fired a pistol, and disappeared over a 
hedge. He had wounded the woman in 
the shoulder, though very slightly. The 
alarm was, however, sufficient to deprive 
her of her senses. The chaise arrived, 
but it would have been madness to think 
of rem.ovang her to any distance, without 
surgical aid. She was taken into the 
inn, and proper assistance sent for ; and 
a fever, though slight, I greatly fear as 
much the consequence of anxiety of 
mind, and want of proper sustenance, 
was the consequence. 

" But w^hy,'' remarked my father, 
** did you not, on your return to town, 
relieve the anxiety of her landlady, as to 
the safety of her lodger ?'^ 

*' Because," I replied, " for a reason 
I could not then account for, the female 
concealed from me the place of her 
abode, and her name, adding, her con- 



408 DUDLEY. 

finement could be of no long duration, 
when she should return thither. On 
perceiving my wish to discover who 
she was, and where she lived, although 
she had written to the mistress of the 
house in town, she burned the letter be- 
fore my face, and would not, after that, 
even hazard sending to the post by the 
servants of the inn. With the warmest 
expressions of gratitude to me for my 
trifling services, she, however, asked me 
for my card of address, adding, the time 
for acknowledging her pecuniary debts 
might be distant, but it would certainly 
come : those of kindness, she added, she 
could never repay. I gave her my card, 
as required, expecting through that 
means I might be enabled hereafter to 
trace her ; for from that hour, under- 
standing from herself that she was a 
widow, and in years, and that she main- 
tained herself by honest industry, I put 
her down, in my own mind, on the list 
of Claudy's pensioners." 

** And where is Mrs. Shelburne now ? 
and how came you to know her name ?'* 
enquired the Doctor. 



DUDLEY. 409 

I replied, that she was still at the inn 
at Hampton Court; and that I had gained 
the knowledge of her name from the 
accidental sight of a small pocket Latin 
and English prayer-book of hers, which 
1 found one morning on the table ; be- 
fore she could take it from me, I had 
read in a blank leaf these words, ** Ga- 
brielle Engelhardt: married" (I forget 
the date) " to Manuel de Sobrino, late 
of St. Domingo, now of Madrid." 



After this most circumstantial detail, 
my friend, you may easily imagine what 
followed. The Doctor having ordered 
his chariot, advised Zulvago, and my 
father, to proceed in it immediately to 
Hampton Court, to which place I, with 
Romeri, rode on horseback on before, that 
I might prepare Mrs. Shelburne for the 

coming of her friend ; whilst Dr. H 

took upon himself to call in Swallow- 
street, and set the good woman^s mind 
at ease respecting the fate of her lodger, 
and present place of abode. 

VOL. III. T 



410 DUDLEY^ 

On arriving at the inn, I found Mrs. 
Shelburne calm, and more cheerful than 
usual. Change of air, rest, and gene- 
rous nourishment, had so greatly im- 
proved her personal appearance, that, at 
this interview, I was enabled to form a 
more correct judgment with respect to 
her real time of life, and found that she 
was not so very far advanced in years as 
I had represented to Zulvago, being at 
this time about four or five-and-forty. — 
Her dress, not that of a widow, although 
black and close, set off her fair com- 
plexion, and light hair and eyes, to great 
advantage; and the expression of her 
face being most charming, though de- 
jected, I then, for the first time, saw the 
strong resemblance between her and 
Lady Alfbrd. *« Did Mrs. Shelburne 
possess the blooming cheeks and lips, 
and look of enchanting vivacity, which 
distinguish the Countess,'* thought I, 
" here is equal regularity of features, 
beauty of expression, dignity of manners, 
(though Lady Alford is much taller of 
the two,) sweetness of voice, and grace 
of motio^." 



DUDLEY. 4X1 

After the usual enquiries upon the state 
of her health that morning, (and as she 
ever received me with the affectionate 
unreserve of a mother, I felt for her the 
respect of a son,) she said, " You per- 
haps, young gentleman, blame the mys- 
tery under which I conceal from you 
both my name and residence in townj 
and the request I have made you that 
you will not mention to your friends what 
has happened; but the day is not distant'* 
(she alluded, I imagine, to the return of 
herdaughter) "when youshall know both, 
and you will then find you have afforded 
your assistance to one whom you need not 
blush to own as an acquaintance. In the 
mean while I trust in the promise given 
me, that you will wait my own hour, and 
neither seek to know my name, or to 
follow or trace me to my dwelling in 
London. I shall return thither this even- 
ing by one of the stages which pass the 
door; and having your card, you may 
depend on hearing from me at some 
future time." 

T 2 



41£ DUDLEY. 

You know best, my dear Sir Eliot, 
whether I am capable of carrying on, 
even for five minutes, a plan of deception, 
however innocent the purpose. As I 
did not answer this address, she looked 
stedfastly at me, and I felt myself blush» 
** Then, sir, you have broken your pro- 
mise with me!" she said-— " You have 
already, by some contrivance, learned my 
name 5 you have found out my abode of 
wretchedness, which duty and proper 
pride (and other circumstances not 
worthy to mention to one so young) made 
me wish to conceal. — You have been to 
that retreat where, hidden from the 
world, 1 have passed the last few years of 
my life, labouring for subsistence. Your 
countenance promised truth, and I relied 
on the expression it wears of nobleness 
and innocence, and on the solemn pro- 
mise you gave me — but I was born to be 
the victim of my own credulity — I was 
born to be deceived !*' and she sighed 
bitterly. " No, madam,'' I answered; 
<« No, Mrs. Shelburne, I have not de- 
ceived you : I neither enquired your name 
nor have I been to your lodgings in the 



DUDLEY. 413 

house you speak of." — " And yet you 
know my name !" she answered with in- 
creased wonder, looking fixedly at me 
with the dignity her years allowed, whilst 
I, with the aukward timidity natural to 
mine, shrunk from her look. There was 
no time to be lost. — I went to the window, 
and gave the preconcerted signal, unseen 
by her, to Romeri, who was on the green 
below. He disappeared, and I turned 
once more to speak to Mrs. Shelburne, 
who sat trembling and in alarm, at some 
inward apprehension. Suddenly address- 
ing me, she said, " As it appears you 
know my name, and perhaps still more of 
me than I am aware of, you may have 
heard I have a daughter in India ?'* 

I smiled, and with a look expressive of 
all I wished her to understand, replied, 
*< At this moment, madam, you have a 
daughter in EnglancV She heard no 
more ; she concealed her face in her 
hands, and fell upon her knees. *' My 
God! My God! I thank thee!" she 
cried, but with so soft a voice, so gentle 
an expression, and slow a movement, 
T 3 



414 DUDLEY. 

that I felt as if in the presence of a 
worshipping angel. — ** And you have 
seen her ?" she continued, slowly rising 
and drawing near me ; " and you bring 
me letters from my Victorina! — My 
child ! — Where, where is she now ?'' — 
*» She is at Portsmouth, on her way to 
town,'* I replied, " but / bring no letters 
to you. / have not seen her. It is not 
/, Donna Sobrino, who can speak to you 
of your daughter.** She trembled, and 
turned pale, saying, as she sat down and 
looked steadily at me, ** Then who is it ? 
Who can" — The door opened, and Zul- 
vago was at her side j — his face was con- 
cealed on her knee. With hands raised, 
and eyes expressive of all that was pass- 
ing in her heart, Mrs. Shelburne looked 
down upon him. I instantly quitted the 
room, and joined my father in a parlour 
below. 



Hitherto, my dearest friend, all is 
smooth, and full of hope and comfort, and 
peace and sunshine. — Now prepare, pre- 
pare your heart for sudden darkness, for 



DUDLEY. 4.15 

the storm, for the thunderbolt : — it fell, 
and at once scattered instant destruction 
around. — I am interrupted, and will 
write again in a few days; in the mean 
time I am ever yours, 

Dudley Clonmore. 



T 4 



416 DUDLEY. 



LETTER LIX. 

Dudley Chnmore to Sir Eliot Howard, 

I RESUME the subject of my last letter. 
— It was, as you may suppose, some 
hours before either my father or myself 
ventured to intrude on our long separ- 
ated but now mutually restored friends j 
nor should we at all, had we. not at the 
moment of thinking of returning to town^ 
for it got late, received a message from 
Don Zulvago^ requesting to see us both, 
above stairs, and in the presence of Mrs. 
Shelburne. 

We went. Neither of them appeared 
as if they had stirred from the places 
where I had left them. The lady sat 
in the same spot, and Don Zulvago was 
still at her side, and, as was consistent 
with their time of life, engaged with her 
in calm and serious conversation. We 
were introduced by him to her regularly 
by name, and she to us, but no longer as 



DUDLEY. 417 

Mrs. Shelburne — ** Donna Gabrielle de 
Sobrino," said our friend, presenting her, 
and we at once fell into easy and familiar 
discourse, which by degrees turned 
even upon indifferent subjects, during 
which she indiscriminately addressed him 
as Isidore and Carlos. Future arrange- 
ments were, however, spoken of; and it 
was decided that the lady should return 
the same evening in the chariot to Caven- 
dish-square, where she was promised a 
hearty welcome by my father, in the 
name of our worthy physician ; whilst I 
was commissioned to go to Swallow-street 
to the good landlady, and promise that 
her lodger would call upon her the next 
day y Zulvago, in the mean time, with- 
out returning to town, was to proceed 
direct from Hampton Court, and strike 
into the Portsmouth road, to join Mrs. 
Hamilton and the funeral procession, 
which we supposed might by this time 
have begun its route. 



Thus were we situated, the hearts of 
all full of security and joy, (for it was ap- 
T 5 



418 DUDLEY. 

parent what would be Zulvago's happy 
fate,) so great had been the change pro- 
duced in Donna Sobrino by the account 
of her daughter's marriage and return to 
England ; (Mrs. Hamilton's widowhood 
being slightly mentioned, though the 
Colonel's memory was spoken of with 
affection by him, and with regret by her). 
— Thus, my friend, were we situated 5 
lights, tea, and coffee, having been or- 
dered — the lady and Zulvago (the one 
still so handsome and the other ever grand 
and noble) at her side, occupying the sofa, 
and my father and I opposite, conversing 
with them and with each other inthatquiet 
sort of calm and social ease, the effect of 
perfect and unalloyed happiness: — a 
calm, indeed, the forerunner of a storm ! 
when a great and universal bustle was 
heard below; but as these things are not 
unusual at an inn, they did not give us 
that disturbance which they would at a 
private house, and we continued our con- 
versation. 

The noise increased, however, to so 
alarming a degree, and seemed to ap- 
proach so near the room we occupied. 



DUDLEY. 419 

that Zulvago and my father rose at the 
same moment to enquire the cause ; but 
before they could leave the room, a loud 
trampling of feet from without was follow- 
ed by the door being thrown widely open, 
when in rushed a female in mourning.—* 
For a moment she stood in the middle 
of the room, looking slowly around; 
then, with uplifted hands, she said, " I 
was told shc'was here !" uttered a pierc- 
ing shriek, and rushed into the arms of 
Donna Sobrino. — I need not inform you 
that this was Mrs. Hamilton ; but unless 
I describe, you cannot have the slightest 
idea of the spectre-like apparition under 
which she presented herself: — her tall 
stature; her majestic features; her stern 
look ; the dead-white complexion ; the 
dark and frowning eye-brows ; the 
large and brilliant eyes of black, thrown 
wildly round the room, whilst with oiie 
hand she still shaded the light from her 
face ; — her disordered dress ; — her 
hurried step ; — her trembling limbs ! — 
It was, to me at least, accustomed from 
my birth to no other objects than peace 
and love, a sight of horror. I can only 
T 6 



4^0 DUDLEY* 

compare her appearance to that of a per- 
son who had been buried alive ; and who 
having broken open the funeral vault, 
might rush again among her friends to 
light and life. — i- The image of Juliet 
suggested this idea, I allow ; but here 
was not to be traced either the consum- 
mate beauty, or early youth, the soft- 
ness, or angelic sweetness of a Juliet I 
— here all was grandeur, defiance, pride^ 
menace, and the sternest majesty. 



You will naturally conclude that Mrs, 
Hamilton had accompanied the funeral 
procession hither j and that, consequently, 
her arrival at this inn was, though sooner 
than had been expected by two or three 
days, not so much the cause of wonder ; 
but you are mistaken ; — she had, as we 
afterwards learned from an Indian fe- 
male servant, the sole attendant of her 
journey, although not recovered of her 
illness, quitted Portsmouth with the 
hearse and mourning coaches ; but from 
whatever cause was not then understood, 
in proportion to the slowness of the pro- 



DUDLEY. 421 

cession, her anxiety to get forward in- 
creased, until that feeling arose to pain- 
ful eagerness, and eagerness to a state of 
irritation little short of delirium. 

At the last stage but two, that of 
Haslemere, she had retired to rest the 
night before, apparently calm. About 
six o'clock in the morning she had 
started from lier bed, dressed herself with 
desperate speed, and without acquainting 
her English servants, who had hitherto 
forced her to be careful of herself) and 
not hurry the procession at the expense 
of her own health (for the fever attend- 
ing her cold had scarcely left her), she 
dragged this old Indian female out of her 
sleep, saying, '* I shall be late — come, 
come along, come ;" and ordered a chaise 
and four to be prepared. Most of her 
people were of course not risen, and those 
that were, obeyed her orders, ignorant of 
the true state of her mind. 

During her journey to town, which 
was one rapid whirl, she literally scat- 
tered the roads with money — throwing 
it to the post boys and turnpike men as 
she went, repeating, <* I shall be too 



422 



DUDLEY. 



late." They supposing she was on her 
way to see a dying relative, forwarded 
her journey with every assistance in 
their power. 

On arriving in Swallow-street, she 
found Mrs. Shelburne no longer there ; 

but Dr. H having in the mean time 

called on the mistress of the house, Mrs. 
Hamilton learned from her her mother's 
address, — when stepping again into the 
chaise, she hurried on the post boys, and 
they the horses to their utmost speed, — 
uttering still as she travelled, the awful 
and mysterious words of, " I shall be too 
late." 

Don Zulvago was the only one of the 
party cool and collected enough to de- 
termine how to act. My father and I 
were both equally struck with surprise 
and terror at this apparition, whilst 
Donna Sobrino wholly engrossed by the 
full happiness that she, once more after 
so long an absence, held her child in her 
arms, seemed incapable of making any 
remarks on the strange and wild cir- 
cumstances that attended her appearance. 

With a sort of ghastly smile, the 



DUDLEY, 4^3 

daughter having passionately and re- 
peatedly embraced her mother, looked 
up and round at us, giving each a fa- 
miliar nod, and then bursting into a 
smothered laugh said, " I have run a 
race with death, and have out-stripped 
him." It was natural to suppose she 
alluded to her having accompanied, on 
its journey, the dead body of her hus- 
band, but to our sudden amazement, and 
indeed horror, she soon undeceived us* 
You remember, my dear friend, Lewis's 
ballad of the Earl King — the child dying 
of a fever in his father's arms, during 
his return home through the forest, — 
at this hour we saw the subject of that 
ballad realised, and in its most awful 
form. 

*' Yes," she continued, throwing around 
her the glance of madness, " I have won 
the race, he thought he had mastered 
me on our landing, but I wrestled with 
him : he thought to detain me from you, 
but I escaped, he could not hold me." 

" Of whom are you speaking, my love ?" 
enquired her mother : " who could have 



4^4 DUDLEY. 

had the cruelty to try and prevent our 
meeting ?'' 

" Death'' said the daughter, turning 
round with horrid slowness of motion, 
and fixing her dreadful eyes upon her 
mother. 

We could then perceive that the lat- 
ter began to discover symptoms of 
alarm : — as if no longer able to endure 
the piercing gaze of Victorina, she 
gently retreated, looking in speech- 
less appeal to Zulvago. — He had been, 
for the last five minutes, engaged in 
writing at a distant table, and now ap- 
proaching me said, *« Allow me to send 
your servant Romeri to town with these 
letters, — one to the Spanish Chapel, in 
Manchester Square, — the other to my 
friend Doctor B. — let him spare neither 
money or speed, and on no account re- 
turn without the persons for whom I 
have written, — they must leave London 
instantly, and may be here in the course 
of a few hours."' 

I quitted the room with the letters to 
seek Romeri, and my father was follow- 
ing me, observing that the presence of 
14 



DUDLEY. 425 

Strangers was at such a time improper ^ 
when Zulvago caught his arm, saying, 
" We shall have need of you — this is 
the hour to prove your friendship to 
me ; — and Dudley, when you have dis- 
patched your servant, return hither in- 
stantly." 

** But," observed my father, *• at the 
first meeting of a mother and a daugh- 
ter, particularly as that daughter is evi- 
dently indisposed — is it exactly right 
thus to intrude upon them ? — Had 
not Dudley and I better return to town 
and come again to-morrow, when the 
kdies may be better able to see us ? 

The look of Zulvago in reply was the 
most expressive I had ever witnessed : it 
went full to the heart, as he replied, 
** Is it possible, Mr. Clonmore, you can 
be so deceived ? do you not see she is 
dying ?" 

'« Dying," repeated my father, **^which 
of them ? not the mother ?" 

" No, no," he replied, " the daugh- 
ter, — I have seen more of death than 
you, — by to-morrow's sun, Victorina 
(at least thus I fear) will be no more." 



4^6 DUDLEY. 

Then seeing I still lingered, he added, 
" Not a moment, if we would save her, 
is to be lost, — send to town for the 
persons I have summoned, and in the 
mean while do you, Mr. Clonmore, en- 
quire of the master of the inn, whether, 
in case we should be pressed for time, 
the neighbourhood of this place can 
furnish us with good, or indeed any 
medical advice, and above all a Catholic 
clergyman." 

Having dispatched Romerj, and exe- 
cuted Zulvago's directions, my father 
and I returned to the room, where we 
found Victorina still seated on the sofa 
by Donna Sobrino, on whose shoulder 
her head rested ; whilst her breath, quick 
and irregular, seemed drawn with in- 
creased difficulty. 

<* She seems very ill," remarked the 
mother, as she held her hand, and looked 
up to Zulvago. *« Had she not better 
be removed to bed, and endeavour to 
rest after her journey, which appears to 
have been conducted with a haste equally 
imprudent and unnecessary ?" and as 
she spoke she glanced at the situation of 



DUDLEY. 427 

her daughter, which, until that moment, 
we had not observed. 

" Remain quiet, my dear Gabrielle,'* 
said Zulvago in reply, *' still keep her 
hand in yours, and do not attempt to se- 
parate from her, — the least motion to 
that effect may be productive of danger," 



Thus were we situated, when after a 
slight convulsion, Mrs. Hamilton raised 
herself, and leaned back on a cushion 
placed by Zulvago, — she looked up as 
with habitual courtesy to thank him, 
when her eyes became fixed in a hor- 
rid stare upon his countenance, -— 
clinging to her mother she said, 

*« I have seen that face before ! — when 
was it, — it is, it is, the same!— that 
Isidore! — it is the face of him who 
destroyed my mother's peace ! — the 
wretch, the base, the cowardly, the vile 
seducer of a girl's affections j" — another 
pause ensued, when addressing him she 
added, " Look at me. Sir, look at me, 
and say, are you not that monster, — you 
are, you are, the cruel cause of all our 



4^8 - DUDLEY. 

misfortunes ; — you knew my mother 
loved you, you were conscious you loved 
her ; — nor duty, nor parents, nor any 
one impediment on earth existed to 
prevent your union, and yet you be- 
trayed her. Now, Sir, tell me, and tell 
me at once, why did not you marry 
her ?" 

This address, strange and alarming as 
it was, caused not the slightest alteration 
in the countenance or manner of Zulvago, 
who had his eyes fixed intently as it ap- 
peared, more upon her hands than upon 
her face ; whilst Donna Sobrino, all 
consternation and grief at her conduct 
said, ** My child, what is all this ! — 
surely you have forgotten our past 
sorrows, or how can you enjoy the bless- 
ings for which, thanks to God, we have 
exchanged them ? — Don Isidore and I 
are now friends, — when in India, and on 
your passage homeward, he has proved 
himself to be yours ; and I hope that 
our renewed friendship will not cease 
but with life ;" and, as she spoke, she 
held out her hand to Zulvago, who, im* 



DUDLEY. 429 

moveable as a statue, did not even at- 
tempt to take it. 

*' Do not touch him !" shrieked the 
daughter, snatching back the hand of 
her mother, with painful violence. 
** Touch him not! He did not murder 
your father, it is true ; but he was the 
cause that murder was committed. Had 
that mail, Don Isidore, married you, 
would you, my precious mother, have 
lost, by dreadful and premature means, 
that father of yours, so much, so de- 
servedly beloved." 

An expression of dread and astonish- 
ment appeared now in the face of Donna 
Sobrino, when, recovering herself i she 
attempted to rise, saying to Zulvagd, and 
looking at my father and me, who sat in 
a dark and distant part of the room, 
<« She is deranged. This is delirium. 
Her hand burns mine as I hold it. She 
is in a fever ; — this is madness. — For 
Heaven's sake, gentlemen,'' addressing 
us, " leave the room." 

We felt inclined to obey, and were 
rising for that purpose, when Zulvago, 
without stirring from his chair, or indeed 



430 DUDLEY. 

turning bis head, said aloud, <* Remain 
where you are, at least until the arrival 
of a medical man. Manual force may 
presently be necessary, when your as- 
sistance, in preference to that of the 
master, or the waiters of the inn, may be 
required.'^ 

This decided us ; and my father ad- 
dressing me in a low voice, for he saw 
what I suffered, exhorted me to rally my 
fortitude, and meet the event with man- 
liness and good sense, adding, that he 
had need of all his, for that, though at 
his time of life, and in his clerical func- 
tion, he had, of course, frequently at- 
tended the bed of death, this was a scene 
of which he could form, from experience, 
no idea. 



In the mean time, the situation of 
Donna Sobrino became most pitiable. 
The last words of Zulvago explained to 
her the peril that threatened her 
daughter, as he designed it should, and 
in compliance with his directions not to 
attempt to persuade her even to move 



DUDLEY. 431 

from that room, she continued in a stat^ 
of the most painful suspense. Mrs. 
Hamilton had one of her hands still 
grasped in hers, while her other arm was 
past round the waist of her mother. 

The chain of Victorina's ideas was not 
as yet broken, and she continued view- 
ing Zulvago with suspicion and abhor- 
rence. — Shortly after, the scene ap- 
peared to shift in her imagination ; and 
springing from the sofa, she fell upon 
the neck of Zulvago, saying, <* My 
father ! Sobrino ! My poor unhappy 
father !'* and rising, added, one hand 
resting on his shoulder, " Did I not 
say that the blow was accidental ? 
It struck him, it is true ; it struck my 
grandfather to the ground, and he was 
stunned, and he bled, and he lingered ; 
but he was silent, and he died. / have 
been silent also ; though a child, I was 
silent. J saw the blow, unseen by any ; 
but I never spoke of it. Did I, my mo- 
ther ? No, never. So look up, dear 
father, I love you ; I love you still. 
You know the stroke was accidental, 
and I can bear witness that it was j but, 



432 DUDLEY. 

— then, — your own death. Was that 
accidental ! I was sleeping at my mo- 
ther's side when that happened j — your 
blood fell upon me ! My God, what a 
life of horror has been mine !" and, 
quitting him, she fell upon the sofa, her 
head upon her mother's bosom, fondly 
pressed to that bosom by her now weep- 
ing parent. 

Victorina did not weep ; but in a short 
time, some change seemed to take place 
in her mind, for she added, taking and 
kissing her mother's hand, *' Are these 
tears to welcome my return ? We must 
dry them. We must have no tears now ; 
all must be joy and happiness. My poor 
husband did not live to see England 
again. Had he, how truly blessed would 
this meeting have been." 

<« Here is a return of reason surely," 
observed Donna Sobrino to Zulvago. To 
which he merely replied, — " Attend, — 
and do not speak." 

" Yes," continued the daughter, " I 
did love him, tenderly, truly; I never 
loved any on this earth, that is, really 
loved any other persons, — you my 



DUDLEY. 433 

mother held the very first place in my 
heart, my husband the second." 

" And your God," observed her 
mother, — "should He not rather, as I have 
ever told you, hold the^r^^ place in your 
heart ?" At this most natural observ- 
ation, Zulvago by a motion of his head 
expressed the deepest regret, and ad- 
dressing Donna Sobrino, said — " Ga- 
brielle, my love, did I not warn you to 
listen, and not speak !" 

The event proved he was right : from 
that hour, Victorina never had but one 
lucid interval. — With a glare of horror 
upon her mother, she drew back, thrust- 
ing her violently away with both hands; 
when at a signal given by Zulvago, we 
rose to be in readiness. 

"And you, you, too, join in reproaching 
me, do you?" she continued wildly, — 
" has not my conscience been a sufficient 
torment ? — my remorse amply profound ? 
— was it not this, — this reflection, that set 
my brain on fire ? When my husband 
died, and I was still but half-way on our 
return to England, did not one dreadful 
conviction come to my heart, the con- 

VOL. III. u 



4fS4f DUDLEY. 

viction that, previous to my marriage, 
so elated, so transported was I at the 
idea of being suddenly lifted up from 
a groveling state of poverty and de- 
pendence, that, more than once, I had, 
on my knees, when imploring the Al- 
mighty to bless my husband, also prayed 
that I might not' survive him! 

** 1 have survived him, you will say ;*' 
and she breathed with difficulty, gasping 
in convulsion — " Yes, I have survived 
him ; but he is not yet buried. And, as 
certain as that there is a God in heaven, 
who heard my prayer, so certain am I that 
my husband and I shall be buried toge- 
ther in one grave, and in less than four- 
and-twenty hours. Was it not this that 
made me hasten forward ? — this, this," 
she continued, clasping her mother 
round the neck, and kissing her, passion- 
ately, " to see you again, to see you 
once more, did I not precipitate my 
journey with the haste of a mad woman ? 
though Heaven knows I am not such ; 
and still, as I pursued my frantic course, 
feeling death in my heart, I cried, * On! 
on ! or I shall be too late ! ' ** 



DUDLEY, 435 

It was then, my dear Sir Eliot, that 
the scene became most painful ; for the 
mother had now caught the alarm. She 
understood it ali. No longer attending 
to the advice of Zulvago, but giving way 
to the sudden impulse of maternal an- 
guish, she snatched in her turnVictorina 
to her bosom, crying, " My child, my 
child, I will not lose you. You must 
not, shall not die !" ' 

** There !'' said the daughter, turning 
to us individually, with a smiling and sa- 
tisfied look of confidence and pleasure ; 
" There ! I told you so. Did I not tell 
you I should not die ? I said that death 
should not overtake me ; nor shall he 
yet these twenty years ; for my mother 
and I intend to be very happy yet, — so 
happy ;" and she sighed deeply ; — *« and, 
for the first time in our lives." Then, affect- 
ing to whisper her mother, whilst look- 
ing at us, we heard the words of " Aran- 
juez," and " Cottage," and «< Tagus." 
" It would be rather singular," she con- 
tinued, *• if we had contrived for so 
many years, to exist in wretchedness and 
poverty, and that, now that we are rich, 
u 2 



436 DUDLEY. 

we should die. You have heard that we 
are rich, my mother. You must have 
heard that. Oh, what days and years of 
happiness we will spend together yet, 
to make up for the past !" 

She stopped, and shuddered ; then 
shrieked, and paused. — ** That pang is 
past; another heart-string broken. Now 
hold me fast, mother ! — Grasp me tight. 
Now, now, don't let go your hold;" 
and, slowly, she moved her eyes round 
the room. 

At this moment, a gentle knock at the 
door attracted our attention. On my 
father going to it, the landlady, who 
stood without, acquainted him that a 
room was ready for the sick travelling 
lady; and one of the waiters immediately 

following, said, " Here is Mr. X , 

mentioning a medical person of the 
neighbourhood, who had already attended 
Donna Sobrino, when wounded by the 
footpad. He was instantly introduced; 
when Zulvago, as if it were no longer 
requisite for him to stand centinel over 
the actions of Mrs. Hamilton, rose, and 
spoke to the surgeon. 
11 



DUDLEY. 437 

** Bleeding, sir, is the first thing to 
be thought of," said the latter ; and he 
began at a distant table the necessary 
preparations, saying to us, ** You need 
not, gentlemen, retire, for I shall cause 
the lady to be removed at once to her 
chamber." 

Sudden and violent screams followed; 
when the maniac, for such Victorina had 
really now become, still gazed slowly 
round the room, looking on vacancy, 

** He's come !" she cried, ** He is 
come ! He has overtaken me ; and at 
the moment, when, for the first time in 
my life, I wished to live. I have called 
on death, and he now faces me. Don't 
you see him ? — Hide me, - hold me ! 
Oh, my mother ! You a mother, and 
not prevent me being torn from you, — 
and for ever ! Grasp me hard. Death 
is here ! He has found me, even in my 
mother's arms. He now lays hold upon 
me : he tears me ; he drags me. Oh, 
Isidore, help me ! I forgive the past ; — 
I forgive all the past. You love my mo- 
ther ; — can you see me taken from her ? 
Dear, dear Isidore, oh save me ! Oh 
u 3 



438 DUDLEY. 

God — my God forgive me — hear my 
repentance — receive my spirit!" 

At this appeal, Don Zulvago approach- 
ing her tenderly, supported her in his 
arms ; — the spasms returned — she look- 
ed alternately at her mother and Zul- 
vago, and seizing a hand of each, put one 
within the other, as if bequeathing her 
wretched parent to his protection. Sh^ 
attempted to speak — the most violent 
struggles ensued — she was literally wrest- 
ling with death — her youth and strength 
attempting to overcome him, but it 
would not do — her hour was come — 
she once more clasped the neck of 
Donna Sobrino ;andwhen,a few moments 
after, Zulvago attempted to raise her 
from the bosom of her mother, she was 
dead I 



The remainder is told, my dear Sir 
Eliot, in few words ; we of course left 
the room immediately, and shortly after 
were informed by Romeri of the arrival 

from town of Doctor B , Zulvago's 

medical friend, and a foreign gentleman, 



DUDLEY. 439 

whom we concluded was a Catholic 
divine ; but they were too late. Within 
twelve hours from that time, the hearse, 
containing the remains of Colonel Hamil- 
ton, stopped at the inn, under the very 
windows of the chamber of death, as 
if to claim the body of his deceased 
wife. 



They afe buried — and in one grave.-— 
Zulvago, as chief mourner, was supported 
by Dr. B , my father, and myself. 

Donna Sobrino, as heir to her daughter, 
has administered to her large property, 
and moreover made her own will, of 
which her Spanish friend, the Doctor, 
and my father are executors. She ap- 
pears calm and resigned ; and Zulvago 
feels secure of her restoration to health 
and future peace of mind. May he 
prove as correct in his judgment in this 
case, as in that of poor Mrs. Hamilton ! 
but herein we all secretly concur in 
thinking that he deceives himself. — 
Might we be allowed to pronounce upon 
u 4 



440 DUDLEY. 

the future, we should say, that the heart 
of his Gabrielle is broken. 

Adieu, dearest, best of friends. — Still 
talk of me to Claudy. Tell Mrs. Grantley 
never to forget me ; and believe me, 
Ever your affectionate, 

Dudley Clonmore, 



DUDLEY, 4.41 



LETTER LX. 

&> Eliot Howard to the Rev. Henry Clonmorc. 

Euphorbia, TeneriflTe. 

It is now upwards of three weeks, my 
dear Clonmore, since I heard from Eng- 
land, and fiis you may imagine, feel 
rather anxious to learn how you all go 
on, I received with great pleasure the 
journal of Dudley's continental tour 
which he sent me about a week since, 
and am truly happy that Cavendish and 
your other sons enjoyed together so plea- 
sant an excursion ; even my Claudy ob- 
served, she should have had no objection 
to have made one of the party, provided 
her aunt Alford had gone. 

I am rather surprised and disappointed 

that Dudley did not, when he was abroad, 

particularly in Spain, (though they all 

appear, under the convoy of the captain, 

u 5 



442 DUDLEY. 

to have flown over half-a-dozen countries 
like a flock of wild geese, without giving 
themselves time for much observation,) 
that he had not made some enquiry after 
Zulvago. I can hear no accounts of him 
whatever ; and, from his long silence and 
continued absence, really fear some ac- 
cident must have befallen him. I saw^ 
an account in the papers of Mrs. Hamil- 
ton's marriage ; and have only to hope, 
that through her means, on her return to 
England, her mother may be restored to 
the wishes of our friend. 



And now we are on the subject of 
constancy, if Dudley supposes that his 
love for Claudy will last until he ob- 
tains, by his own personal and mental 
abilities, an independent fortune, high 
consideration in the world, a seat in 
parliament, and the title of Baron as a 
step to higher honours, I fear, poor 
fellow, he will find his heart wofully in 
the lurch ! — With respect to Claudy, I 
scarcely know how to determine : she 
now perfectly understands the lover she 



DUDLEY. 443 

has to deal with, and comprehends that 
it is his fixed intention to accept her 
hand, in about twenty or thirty years. 

Penelope herself never underwent a 
greater trial ; but away with jesting, — 
and really I am in no great jesting hu- 
mour, — when I reflect on the state of the 
case ; for though my daughter conducts 
herself exactly as I could wish, it is in vain 
_to deny that her cheeks have lost their 
roses, and her blue eyes their lustre. — 
She loves Dudley ; she feels, and keenly, 
her disappointment, or wherein would 
consist her merit ; her good humour, her 
industry, her cheerfulness, being in- 
variable : — she continues to be the daily 
comfort of her aunt, thus evincing her 
gratitude for the anxious care and fond- 
ness which my sister has shown her since 
her childhood ; and to me, she is a real 
blessing. 

Every action being the result of piety, 
and conformable to the strictest rules 
laid down in the Holy Text; my daughter 
does not )'ield to melancholy regret ; she 
neither poisons the present by comparing 
it with the past, nor dwells upon visions, 
u 6 



444 DUDLEY. 

whether sad or otherwise, of the future. 
From day to day, she says to her Creator, 
«* Thy will be done ;" and looks upon 
what passes during that day, as the con- 
summation of that Divine Will. 

I am most dear to her ; her aunt 
Grantley is affectionately regarded ; and 
Dudley is still, and ever will be, loved ; 
but the best affections of her soul are 
given to her Maker, and nothing, I am 
convinced, merely sublunary, can inspire 
her with a feeling of utter despair. — 
The loss of health, of friends, of fortune, 
might grieve her ; but she can never feel 
overwhelming misery, until, by self-con- 
demnation, she should be convinced she 
has lost the favour of the Almighty. — 
His protection. His grace, and His 
guidance in even every worldly concern, 
as well as those of a spiritual nature, are 
daily, and perhaps hourly implored (for 
from childhood, she has known the value 
of mental prayer, at all times, and in all 
places) ; and thus has Claudy learned 
to meet this truly severe trial, for 
so youthful, so fond, so sensible a heart, 
with piety and resignation. 



DUDLEY. 445 



Your last letter, Clonmore, and that 
of Dudley, are arrived. I received them 
yesterday. Their contents are indeed 
melancholy ! — Poor Zulvago ! though 
the original cause of his own wretched- 
ness, I cannot but pity him, and hope 
that happier days await him in a union 
with Gabrielle. 

In the death of Mrs. Hamilton, we 
trace the finger of God ; and my dear 
friend, through my life, I have seen, and 
I doubt not you have made the same 
observation, that we are oftener the 
cause of our own miseries, by unwarrant- 
able murmurs, by impious invocations, 
and by desperate vows to Heaven, than 
may seem, to a casual observer, even 
possible. 

Among my own most intimate friends 
and acquaintances, I have taken an 
interest in observing this, and could 
almost venture to stand forth the as- 
serter of a belief, that every sinful, and 
every pious, nay, every unguarded wish 
we utter is instantly registered by a 



446 DUDLEY. 

supernatural power ; and that we reap 
the consequence in its certain, its in- 
evitable fulfilment. Otherwise, how 
vain and indefinite is that universal ex- 
clamation on hearing of accidents or 
casualties falling on individuals or na- 
tions, — that such are judgments from 
Heaven? — in short, to explain myself 
in the best and clearest manner, let me 
repeat the words of truth : we ask, and 
it is given (be it good or evil) ; we 
knock, and it is opened to us ; we seek, 
and are permitted to find. 



The gong at the flag-staff sounds, an- 
nouncing the arrival of strangers; and I 
quit my letter to enquire who, at this 
late hour, ventures to besiege our castle ; 
for my spirits now are such, my dear 
Clonmore, that they will not admit of 
much, or scarcely any company, at 
Euphorbia ; indeed, of late, my society 
has been confined to that of the Bal- 
fours, and Mr. and Mrs. Turner ; the 
latter couple occasionally residing with 
us a month at a time. 



DUDLEY. 447 

The gong continues to sound, and the 
bell to ring. I must break off — I shall 
resume this letter at the first opportunity. 



My gracious God, I thank thee ! thou 
hast heard my prayers, thou hast re- 
stored me once more to life, and happi- 
ness. Now indeed are my words fully 
verified. My daily petition is granted — 
the door of peace is once more opened to 
me — I have sought good, and I have 
found it. 



On quitting my study yesterday morn- 
ing, I went, as quickly as illness and 
general debility of body and mind would 
permit, to the library, where I found my 
sister, and alone. 

" Who can have arrived?" remarked 
Jane ; and, unable to reply, I sat down 
near her, gasping, with my eyes turned 
upon the door. — Slowly and cautiously 
it soon after opened, and Zulvago ap- 
peared ! without closing it after him, he 
came over, and in silence seated himself 
at my side. 



448 DUDLEY. 

After a short pause, during which I 
held out my hand, which he grasped 
most feelingly, he observed, having first 
spoken to my sister, ** You are ill. Sir 
Eliot, and very ill.'* 

*' Oh, no, . no ;" I repHed, ** only a 
little nervous — at my time of life, the 
nerves do not possess quite that vigour 
which they could boast of twenty years 
ago.'' 

" I," replied Zulvago, " am by some 
years older than you. Sir Eliot, yet am 
not nervous.' ' 

" But you, my friend, Major Her- 
nandez, — you are a soldier, and have no 
right to any nerves ; though, by the by, 
you military men contrive, in some way 
or other, to possess the most tender and 
kind of all hearts." 

** Why, mine has of late been tried, I 
allow," he answered ; and, after a short 
pause, during which he appeared as if 
conquering some deep and internal 
emotion, he acquainted me that he puri 
posed to settle at Teneriffe for the re- 
mainder of his life. You may imagine 
the pleasure this gave me ; and I re- 



DUDLEY. 449 

minded him, that though the morning 
and meridian of his days had been dreary 
and overcast ; yet that the evening pro- 
mised fair, and I trusted that he would 
close his existence in calm and cheering 
sunshine. 

** And now, my friend," I said, 
** though I have hitherto avoided a ques- 
tion of a nearer nature, I hope I am not 
deceived — you are, I trust, a married 
man, and your interesting friend has 
accompanied you hither. — You are not 
alone — you have brought your wife with 
you — you are surely not alone." 

No," he replied, ** I am not alone — 
she is with me ; I brought her with me ; 
we shall never more be parted — I quit 
Teneriffe no more ; I shall purchase 
lands here, and perhaps build." 

** Bravo 1" I said, forcing a smile upon 
my haggard cheek. ** Well, and have 
you left your lady behind you at Oro- 
tava ? — or is she here ?" I said, looking 
towards the door, which I observed was 
a-jar, — ** Come, Zulvago, introduce me at 



450 DUDLEY. 

once, to your Gabrielle, to the Countess 
d' Almeida — where is she T' 

** In her coffin," he repHed. 

The shock was great, and I knew not 
how I looked, or what I said ; when he 
continued, with the air of a man, who 
has no longer a single hope or wish in 
this lower world, 

" We *were united, and at my most 
earnest entreaty, on her death bed \ — I 
had scarcely placed the marriage ring 
upon her finger, and received this mourn- 
ing one in return — (showing it on his 
hand,) the broken hearted Gabrielle and 
I, had only time to exchange the names 
of husband, and of wife, when she ex- 
pired in my arms." 

Perceiving that I was still unable to 
speak, he continued, ** All that re- 
mains to be told nearly concerns your- 
self, Sir Eliot. By the will of Gabrielle, 
made before our marriage, and since 
legally ratified by me, Dudley, her 
friend in distress, my young friend Dud- 
ley, inherits the whole of the property, 
which, as heir-at-law to her daughter, 
became hers." 



DUDLEY. 4f5l 

This news was as surprising as it was 
unexpected. — After some consideration, 
— ** I am pleased for his sake/' I replied, 
mournfully ; «* but he is not in the slight- 
est degree dearer to me now, than he 
was when pennyless, and the son of my 
adoption. I know not, Zulvago, whe- 
ther I did not prefer him as such ; my 
fortune, with only one child, being 
already princely. I loved the boy for 
his own sake, Claudy loves him still at 
this time, when considered wholly de- 
pendent upon me ; and had I my choice, 
I would rather have seen him wedded to 
her, not master of ten pounds in the 
world (except what was derived from 
me), than now, (were he even to come 
here again, and offer himself,) the master 
of thousands. — He was then my chose7i, 
he now becomes the chooser." 

Zulvago took my hand, and 1 saw in 
his looks something expressive of plea- 
sure. " I find," he said, ** that my 
destiny is to enjoy happiness only by re- 
flection ; whilst all around me grasp the 
substance of bliss, to me is only left its 
shadow — but in the sight of the happi- 



45S DUDLEY. 

ness of my fellow- creatures, there are still 
most enviable feelings ! — Well then, 
Sir Eliot, you have your choice : — Your 
Dudley received this fortune, it is true, 
but is no longer in possession of it ; 
nay, I almost doubt if he has even the 
ten pounds in the world, which you say 
you would wish your son-in-law to be 
master of. He has, by my connivance 
and assistance, I confess, legally con- 
trived to dispossess himself of the whole; 
and you will allow that it is easier to get 
rid of fifty thousand pounds, than to ac- 
quire it. He has increased his father's 
income, settled an annuity on his mo- 
ther, portioned his sisters, befriended 
his brothers, and bestowed a sum on the 
Spanish chapel ; and returns to you and 
TenerifFe, the very same orphan of your 
bounty, the dependent on your gene- 
rosity, the son of your adoption, as when 
he quitted it." 



This, Clonmore, was to me a moment 
of more sure and waking bliss than in my 
life I had known equalled! — " And 
where," I said, " where, is he now?" 



DUDLEY. 453 

" Here ! my father, here, my dear, dear, 
Sir Eh'ot !*' The door was thrown open, 
and I clasped once more, to my nearly 
faintinglieart, my most beloved boy. 

At the same moment, the drawing- 
room door behind us was opened hastily ; 
when I heard him exclaim, " My 
Claudy 1" She ran to meet his fond em- 
brace ', and whilst in tears and silent 
rapture, they firmly, yet silently held 
each to the other's fond and tender 
bosom, with my hands upon their heads, 
I blessed them both ; and then taking the 
hand of my darling child, I placed it in 
that of her Dudley. 



THE END. 



Fr'iiited by Strahan and Spottiswoode, 
Printers- Street, L^ndoo. 



LATELY PUBLISHED, 

Bj^ the same Author, 

1. PATRIARCHAL TIMES; or the 
Land of Canaan. In Seven Books, founded 
on the Holy Scriptures. The second Edition, 
handsomely printed in Two Volumes, duode- 
cimo. Price, in boards, 10s. Gd, 

2. ZENOBIA, QUEEN OF PALMYRA; 

a Narrative, founded on History and the Tra- 
vels of Messrs. Wood and Dawkins in the East. 
In Two Volumes, price, in boards, 12s. 

3. NATIONAL CHARACTERS, exhi- 
bited in Forty Geographical Poems for the 
Amusement and Instruction of Youth. In one 
Volume, with Plates. 

4. A TRIP TO THE COAST, or Poems 
descriptive of various interesting objects on the 
sea-shore. With Plates, for children. 
