MISS FEEEIEE'S NOVELS 



V-^' ^ -s^^ 



THE INHEEITANCE 



BY THE AUTHOR OF "MARRIAGE" 



"Si la noblesse est vertu, elle se perd par tout ee qui n'est pas 
vertueux ; et si elle n'est pas vertu, c'est peu de chose." 

La Bbuy^re. 



(JEUtniiurg]^ ^Kition 




1$^'^ 



IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOLUME n. 



LONDON 
RICHARD BENTLEY & SON 

Puljlisfjerg ixi ©rtJmarg to J^et i^ajegtg t]&e d^ueen 
1882 






Printed by R. & R. Clark, Edinburgh. 



THE INHEEITANCE. 



CHAPTER I. 

' ' Such deep despondence rends her trembling heart, 
Conscious of deeds which honour cannot own." 

Euripides. 

Although Mr. Lyndsay had made all despatch in 
dressing, yet, upon entering the drawing-room, he 
found Mrs. St. Clair had got the start of him. 

No appearance of hurry or agitation was now 
visible, unless in her more than usually brilliant 
colour. Her dress was handsome and well arranged ; 
her air, to common observers, easy and unembarrassed, 
and altogether she formed a striking contrast to her 
daughter, who sat by her, pale, thoughtful, and de- 
jected, with the look of one who had almost uncon- 
sciously suffered herself to be dressed. 

As Mr. Lyndsay entered, he heard Mrs. St. Clair 
say to Lord Rossville, in answer to some remark of 
his — 

"I was indeed caught to-day; I foolishly took 
VOL II. B 



2 THE INHERITANCE. 

the alarm at Gertrude's absence during that prodigious 
shower, and set out in search of her myself ; but we 
missed each other, and have now only met by the side 
of your Lordship's charming fire." 

Lord Eossville loved to be complimented upon his 
fires, which were always constructed after a model of 
his own, and were, of course, notoriously bad ; but 
Mrs. St. Clair knew how to throw out a tub to catch 
a whale ; her well-timed compliment led to a discus- 
sion upon fires, stoves, and coals, which ended in the 
whole company being speedily involved in the intri- 
cacies of one of the Earl's own coal-pits, from which 
they were only rescued by a summons to dinner. 

Mr. Delmour had returned, bringing a band of his 
second-rate political allies along with him, and the 
conversation consequently took its cast from them, 
and was as dull as political discussions always are, 
unless when worse than dull — violent. Mrs. St. Clair 
entered into all that was said con amove, and was con- 
sequently thought by the greater part of the company 
to be an uncommon clever, charming, well-informed, 
lady-like woman. Lady Betty asked some questions 
as efficient as usual, and passed for a very worthy, 
sensible, affable, old lady. Miss St. Clair sat silent 
and absent, and indifferent to what was going on, and 
was pronounced a cold, haughty, inanimate, fine lady 
Such are the judgments daily passed upon as sHght a 
knowledge of that within which passeth show, and 
so superficial a thing is popularity. 

On quitting the dining-room Mrs. St. Clair whis 



THE INHERITANCE. 3 

pered her daughter to follow her to her own apart- 
ment, and no sooner were they there than, shutting 
the door with violence, she seemed as if eager to in- 
demnify herself for the constraint she had been under. 

"Gertrude!" cried she, all at once giving way to 
her agitation; "again you see me in your hands, 
again my fate hangs on your decision, again it is 
yours to save or to destroy me !" 

Gertrude could not speak ; her heart sickened at 
the evil she anticipated. 

" But I will not go over the same ground I have 
done : I tell you I am at your mercy, but I will 
neither supplicate nor command. I leave you free ; 
pronounce my doom, and do not fear even my 
reproaches.' 

Gertrude's senses almost forsook her, as the dread- 
ful idea flashed upon her that she was to be required 
to save her mother's hfe at the expense of becoming 
the wife of the dreaded Lewiston, and sinking at her 
feet, in wild broken accents she besought her to 
spare her. 

" Compose yourself, Gertrude," cried Mrs. St. Clair, 
suddenly calmed herself at sight of her daughter's 
still stronger emotion ; " I tell you, you have nothing 
to fear from me; I have promised that I will not 
even seek to influence you ; all I require of you is to 
hear the alternative." 

" Oh, no, no ! spare me that dreadful alternative ; 
kill me, but save me from him !" and she clung to her 
mother's knees with convulsive energy. 



4 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Gertrude, this is madness ; it rests with yourself 
to rid me of that man, I trust for ever. Come, sit 
down by me, and listen;" and she seated herself at a 
writing-table, and placed her daughter beside her. 
After a pause, during which she seemed to be 
struggling with her feelings, she spoke — 

"Gertrude, I cannot conceal from you that we are 
both in the power of a villain. I have told you, and 
I again repeat it; the circumstances which have 
placed me there I will only disclose with my dying 
breath, if even then ; how soon that may be depends 
upon your decision. I can no longer conceal from 
you that he does possess a claim over you — nay, be 
still, and hear me — which he is ready to relinquish, 
if, within twenty-four hours, I can raise five hundred 
pounds; this I must accomplish, or my ruin, your 
wretchedness for life, is inevitable." 

Gertrude began to breathe at this unexpected 
relief. 

" If he obtains this sum he has pledged himself to 
quit the kingdom, and with worlds, if I had them, 
would I purchase his absence." 

" But what are those mysterious claims which this 
man has upon mel Why not bring them forward 
openly 1 Let them be urged in the face of the world : 
in this land of freedom — in my uncle's house — what 
have I to fear?" 

" As you value your father's memory, as you value 
my peace — my life — let this transaction be for ever 
buried in silence ; if there were a way to escape, if it 



THE INHERITANCE. 5 

werepossiUe to release ourselves from him, can you 
suppose that I would have suffered what I have done, 
that I would have submitted thus to humble myself 
to my own child 1 " 

And Mrs. St. Clair dropped a few tears. 

"But where is such a sum to be had?" asked her 
daughter, as she thought how she had already been 
stripped of everything she could call her own. "I 
have nothing in my power ! " 

"I know you have nothing to give ; but you have 
only to ask and you will obtain. My uncle can refuse 
you nothing ; and it is no such mighty matter in the 
future Countess of Eossville to borrow a few hundred 
pounds from a man to whom wealth is an absolute 
drug. "Here," said she, placing some paper before 
her, and putting a pen into her hand, " you have only 
to write, and I will dictate." 

But the pen dropped from Gertrude's fingers. 

"No, I cannot — indeed I cannot be guilty of 
such meanness ; it is too degrading." 

Mrs. St. Clair made no attempt to argue or remon- 
strate ; but, waving her hand with a sort of desperate 
calmness, she merely said — 

"I am answered; leave me." 

" Oh, mamma ! give me the paper — you shall be 
obeyed. Tell me what I must say." 

Mrs. St. Clair testified neither joy nor gratitude at 
this concession, but immediately began to dictate 
the form of a letter to Mr. Adam Eamsay, which her 
daughter implicitly followed — scarcely conscious of 



6 THE INHERITANCE. 

what she wrote. In a calmer mood she would have 
revolted from the duplicity and servility with which 
every line was fraught; but in her present excite- 
ment of mind her powers of thinking were sus- 
pended, and she was the mere passive instrument of 
her mother's will. At length it was finished; and, 
as Mrs. St. Clair sealed it, she looked at her watch — 

" It will be just in time for the letter-box and no 
more ; we must return to the drawing-room, and we 
can put it into the box as we pass through the hall." 

"I cannot return to the company," said her 
daughter. " I am unfit for society after such a scene 
as this — I cannot dissemble." 

" You can at least, it is to be hoped, exercise some 
self-control, and not suff'er yourself to be read and 
commented upon by every curious eye which chooses 
to look in your face. Happily, 'tis one that even 
crying cannot spoil; you have only to wipe away 
your tears," and she applied her own handkerchief, 
" and see ! not a trace of them remains. Come, I insist 
upon it." And Gertrude suffered herself to be led to 
the drawing-room. 

The only person with whom she now felt any 
companionship was Mr. Lyndsay. There was a sort 
of protection in his presence which made her like to 
be near him; some unknown evil hung over her, 
from which it seemed as if he only could deliver her ; 
and when he entered the room and approached her, 
she welcomed him with the only look of gladness 
that had brightened her face that day. 



THE INHERITANCE. 7 

Although Mr. Lyndsay was pretty well aware of 
Mrs. St. Clair's real character, and saw, moreover, 
that she had some strong motive for wishing to mis- 
lead him, still her words had made some little im- 
pression upon him. He gave her full credit for her 
anxiety to detach her daughter from Colonel Delmour ; 
but he was somewhat sceptical as to her sincerity in 
wishing to bestow her upon him. He saw that Ger- 
trude loved with all the delusion of romance, and, 
like many a young enthusiast, had mistaken her 
imagination for her mind, and to have saved her from 
the fatal consequences of such infatuation he would 
have made any sacrifice, but his nature was too noble 
to join in any stratagem. With these feelings he 
drew near Gertrude, but Mrs. St. Clair had contrived 
to get herself and her daughter so built in by Lady 
Betty, her little table, her large basket, and her fat 
dog, that it was impossible to engage in a separate 
conversation. He could only talk to her, therefore, 
as he leant on the back of her chair, of common 
topics; but that he did in a manner to render even 
these amusing and instructive, without being either 
satirical or pedantic; for he possessed an accurate 
knowledge of most subjects of science and literature, 
and, like all really well-informed people, he threw out 
ideas and information without the slightest design 
of instructing others, or displaying his own acquire- 
ments. Insensibly Gertrude became interested in 
his conversation, and did not observe the entrance 
of the rest of the gentlemen, till she heard Mr. 



8 THE INHERITANCE. 

Delmour say, in answer to a question from one of the 
voters, — 

" Certainly, we may rely upon Frederick ; indeed, 
he will probably return to Britain in the course of a 
very few months. It was quite unexpected, I believe, 
his having to accompany the regiment, as it was at 
one time settled that Colonel Brookes was to take the 
command, and I have never heard it explained why 
he devolved it upon my brother ; but I understand 
he is to follow immediately, and then unquestionably 
Frederick will get leave, so we may reckon upon 
him confidently." 

At the first mention of Colonel Delmour's name, 
Gertrude had ceased to be conscious of anything else, 
and as his brother went on she scarcely dared to 
breathe lest she should lose a syllable of a subject so 
interesting ; her very soul seemed to hang upon his 
words, insignificant as they were ; and when he ended 
a deep flush of joy overspread her countenance and 
lighted up her eyes. 

" He will come, then, to clear himself from all un- 
just suspicions ! " thought she, and as the transporting 
thought rushed upon her mind she raised her eyes, 
beaming with delight, to Lyndsay. But they met his 
fixed upon her with an expression so grave, so uncon- 
genial with her own, as instantly made her feel how 
little his sentiments were in unison with her own, and 
a slight shade of displeasure crossed her face as she 
turned it away. He said nothing, but left his station, 
which was soon taken by Mr. Delmour, to whose 



THE INHERITANCE. 9 

insipid verbiage she listened with sustained interest, 
in hopes of hearing the subject renewed. But 
nothing more was said. Mr. Lyndsay had disap- 
peared, and the evening wore away in a dull tedious 
manner. 



CHAPTER IL 

'^ I am not a man of law that has my tongue to sell for silver 
or favour of the worldi." — John Knox. 

The following day Mrs. St. Clair was confined to bed 
with a severe cold and rheumatism, the consequences 
of her walk the preceding day. All was anxious 
expectation on her part and Gertrude's for the answer 
from Mr. Eamsay ; but the post arrived and brought 
only a note from the joyful Lilly announcing the day 
of her nuptials, and inviting her aunt and cousin to 
be present at the celebration. As Mr. Larkins had no 
vote, a civil refusal was immediately returned. This 
disappointment was only a passing knell, as the 
thought suggested itself that Uncle Adam might not 
think it proper to trust a bill for five hundred pounds 
to the post, and would most probably send it by a 
special messenger. 

By her mother's desire Gertrude therefore stationed 
herself at the window to watch the arrival of any one 
likely to be the bearer of the important despatch. Not 
Sister Anne herself looked with more mstful eyes, or 
was of tener called upon to declare what she saw ; and 
when at length she descried the identical old red 
hack-chaise belonging to the White Bear, rocking up 



THE INHERITANCE. 11 

the avenue, not Blue Beard himself, sword in hand, 
could have caused greater consternation. This was 
an evil Mrs. St. Clair had never contemplated — a 
personal inquiry set on foot by the awful Uncle Adam 
was an idea too dreadful to have entered into her 
imagination; and when it was announced that Mr. 
Ramsay wished to see Miss St. Clair alone, her 
agitation was almost too much for her. Although 
trembling herself, Gertrude yet tried to soothe her 
mother into calmness; and having again and again 
assured her that she would not betray her — that she 
would take the whole responsibility upon herself, she 
left her to obey the summons. But her heart failed 
her when she reached the door of the apartment 
where he was, and she stood some minutes with her 
hand on the lock ere she had courage to turn it. At 
length she entered, but dared not lift her eyes to the 
cold sour visage, whose influence she felt even with- 
out seeing. She tried to say something of trouble 
and kindness ; but, in the agitation of her mind, she 
could not put a sentence together; she could only 
invite him to sit down, and that she did with trepi- 
dation. But, instead of complying, Mr. Ramsay drew 
from his pocket an old black leather pocket-book, from 
which he took Gertrude's letter, and, showing her the 
superscription, asked — 

" Is that your writing']" 

**It is," answered Gertrude in a voice scarcely 
articulate. 

" And wi' your ain free will and knowledge ?" 



12 THE INHERITANCE. 

She could not reply ; but, in silent confusion, bent 
her head. 

" And you're in want o' five hundred pound ^ " 

Gertrude's colour rose to the deepest carnation, 
while she faintly answered — 

"lam." 

Mr. Ramsay gave something betwixt a hem and 
a groan, as he drew a paper from the very inmost 
pocket of his venerable repository, and held it out to 
her, then suddenly drawing back, and looking sternly 
upon her, he asked — 

*' You're no gawn to flee the country 1 — speak the 
truth." 

Gertrude felt her very temples glow at this igno- 
minious question; and, without speaking, there was 
something in her look and gesture which dispelled the 
old man's hasty suspicion. 

" There's the money, then," said he in a cold, bitter 
tone. 

Gertrude involuntarily shrank from the ungracious- 
looking hand that was scarcely extended to her. 

" Tak' it," cried he in a still more angry voice. 
" Tak' it, but you maun tak' this alang wi't. I would 
rather ha'e parted wi' five thousand — ay, five times 
five thousand, than that such a letter should ha'e come 
frae you ;" and, tearing it in pieces, he threw it into 
the fire. 

" Oh ! do not say so," cried Gertrude, in great 
emotion, and catching his hand as he was about to 
leave the room. 



THE INHERITANCE. 13 

"I maun say what I think; I'm no ane o' the 
folk that can say ae thing and think anither; I'm 
disappointed in you." 

" Yet if you knew — ^if the circumstances " 

Mr. Eamsay shook his head. 

"Ay, ay, circumstances — that's aye the cry; but 
they maun be ill circumstances that need aw this con- 
cealment, even frae your ain mother." 

" The time may perhaps come," cried Miss St 
Clair in increasing agitation, " when I shall be able to 
convince you that I am not to blame ; in the mean- 
time, if you will trust me " 

" Dinna think it's the money I care for," interrupted 
Mr. Ramsay ; " I value that five hundred pound nae 
mair than if it were five hundred chucky-stanes ; but 
I'll tell you what I valued : I valued you ; and I valued 
your truth and your openness and your downright- 
ness, and I'm disappointed in you." 

" Oh ! do not judge so hardly of me," cried Ger- 
trude ; " the time will come when you will think 
better of me." 

" The time o' a man o' threescore and ten will no 
be very lang in this world; we'll maybe meet nae 
mair ; but, before we part, there's ae thing I maun tell 
you : Trust me, ye'U ne'er buy true friends, nor true 
love, nor true happiness o' ony kind, wi' money; so beg 
and borrow, and spend as you will, but mind my words." 

*' Do not, oh ! do not leave me in displeasure," 
cried Gertrude, bursting into tears, as he was again 
moving away. 



14 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I feel nae displeeshure against you ; I am only- 
vexed, and mortified, and disappointed. I had ta'en a 
liking to you ; but, as the auld sang says, — 

** Whene'er you meet a mutual heart, 
Gold comes between and makes tliem part." 

It was gold that parted me frae her that was aw the 
world to me, and it was a pleeshure to me to like you 
for being like her ; but gold, gold, gold, has parted us 
next." 

Gertrude had been prepared to stand the burst of 
Uncle Adam's anger ; but there was something in his 
querulous sorrow that went to her heart. There is, 
indeed, a feeling inexpressibly painful in adding to 
the afflictions of the aged, and heaping fresh sorrows 
upon the hoary head ; many a bitter drop must they, 
even the most prosperous, have drank in the course 
of their long and weary pilgrimage, and woe be to the 
hand which would willingly pour fresh gall into the 
very dregs of their cup ! 

Some thought such as this filled Gertrude's heart, 
even to overflowing. 

"My dear, kind uncle!" cried she, as she again 
seized his hand, and even pressed it to her lips with 
reverence, while her tears dropped upon it, " Oh ! 
that you could read my heart ! " 

Mr. Eamsay, like all caustic people, thought it 
necessary to be more severe as he felt himself getting 
soft. 

" It might soon be better worth reading than your 



THE INHERITANCE. 15 

letter, but there need be nae mair said about it ; let 
byganes be byganes." 

" But can you — will you forgive me ? " 
"I ha'e nae thing to forgie; I tell you I value the 
money nae mair than the dirt beneath my feet ; but 
I'm vexed, I'm mortified, that you should ha'e brought 
yoursel' to such straits already." 

"At least, in mercy, suspend your judgment." 
" That's impossible. Suspend my judgment! that's 
ane o' your fashionable phrases ; you seem to think a 
man can suspend his judgment as he would hing up 
his hat ! I canna help judging o' what comes to my 
ain knowledge ; and I judge that, for a bairn like you 
to want five hunder pound without the knowledge o' 
your ain mother, or ony relation you ha'e — canna be 
right — it's no possible. I maun be a born idiot if I'm 
no fit to judge o' that ; and your letter ! — I wad rather 
ha'e scrapit the mool for my bread as I wad ha'e 
bleckit paper to beg for siller." 

And taking up his little old bare shapeless beaver 
he was moving away. Gertrude saw with grief it was 
in vain to attempt to clear herself in Mr. Ramsay's 
eyesj he was evidently no less displeased at the 
demand than disgusted by the manner in which it 
had been made ; indeed, in proportion as he despised 
money himself, so he seemed to despise those who set 
any value upon it, and while he literally looked upon 
his purse as trash, nothing enraged him so much as 
a direct attack upon it. 

"I am very unhappy at having lost your good 



16 THE INHERITANCE. 

opinion," said Gertrude, in a tone of deep dejection, 
" but nothing shall ever make me forget your kind- 
ness, my dear, dear uncle — may God bless you ! " 

Mr. Eamsay made no reply ; his heart yearned to 
the image of his beloved Lizzie, and he was on the 
point, not of taking her to his breast, for that was a 
weakness he would have blushed at even in thought, 
but of holding out his cold, blue, jointless hand, and 
of according his forgiveness. He, however, checked 
himself as he thought of the magnitude of the offence, 
and the encouragement it would be giving to that, in 
his estimation, the most heinous of all offences — 
extravagance. With a sort of repressed "Weel, 
weel!" and a small wave of his hand, he therefore 
moved on without betraying his emotion, and seated 
himself in his old chaise, satisfied that he had done 
his duty in discountenancing vice by being as dis- 
agreeable as possible. 

How rarely can we judge of people's hearts by their 
manners, and how seldom do we see "the manner 
suited to the action," except in skilful actors or 
untaught children ! How many a soft smile covers 
an unkind deed ; while it sometimes happens that we 
meet with acts of friendship from those who would 
be ready to "bandy words with us as a dog." But 
how much is it to be regretted when charity and 
good-will thus assume the garb of enmity, and when 
kind-hearted people convey their admonitions in a 
manner calculated to make us dislike the reprover, 
even while we admit the justice of the reproof ! 



THE INHERITANCE. 17 

On the present occasion, Mr. Eamsay's roughness 
and asperity produced no corresponding emotions in 
Gertrude's gentle heart. She felt only regret and 
sorrow at having been the means of embittering the 
scanty measure of the old man's enjoyment, and of 
having, she feared, for ever forfeited his good opinion 
and affection. 



vol., II. 3 / 



CHAPTER III. 

" Qu'un ami veritable est une douce chose ! " 

La Fontaine. 

But Mrs. St. Clair was in no mood to sympathise in 
the nature of her daughter's distress, as her own joy 
at receiving the money seemed to absorb every other 
consideration. 

" There is still something for you to do, Gertrude, 
love," said she; "I had promised to have some con- 
versation with Mr. Lyndsay to-day ; but you see my 
situation, and how unfit I am for such an exertion. 
You will therefore represent it to him, and, at the 
same time, convey to him my determination to meet 
him to-morrow coute qu'il coute ;" then, reading surprise 
in her daughter's countenance, she added, in a solemn 
tone, "Gertrude, whatever has appeared strange and 
mysterious in my conduct towards you, I am now 
going to confide to him; will that satisfy youf 

"Is it possible!" exclaimed Miss St. Clair in an 
accent of astonishment and pleasure; "then, I am 
sure, all will be right." 

"Mr. Lyndsay appears to have made very rapid 
strides in your good graces," said her mother, with a 



THE INHEEITANCE. 19 

look of displeasure. " Yesterday you seemed to me to 
be scarcely upon speaking terms. Well, although I am 
no great admirer, scarcely a believer, in Platonics in 
general, yet there may be exceptions where there is 
Methodism in the case ; you may therefore indulge in 
a sentimental, religious flirtation if you will, though I 
must always think a daughter's best friend must be 
her mother ; at anyrate she will be cautious how she 
talks of her mother, and suffers others to do it ; you 
have simply to deliver my message, and beware of all 
comments. Now give me my writing-materials, light 
that taper, and leave me." 

Accustomed as she was to her mother's crooked 
policy even in the merest trifles, Gertrude's mind 
misgave her that something very false lay at the 
bottom of this pretended confidence ; and she could 
not repress the painful suspicion that it was all a 
scheme to dupe him and deceive her. She, however, 
sought her cousin for the purpose of delivering her 
message ; but it was not without embarrassment she 
repeated it; and she thought she read doubt and 
distrust in the manner in which he received it. 
Without expressing their mutual thoughts, both felt 
that sort of intuitive knowledge of what was passing 
in each other's mind, which needed not the aid of 
words to impart. Nothing could be said, indeed, to 
serve any purpose, beyond that of mere speculation 
and conjecture, and although to many a mind there is 
nothing more delightful than that sort of guess-gossip, 
yet Mr. Lyndsay's rose superior to any such petty 



20 THE INHERITANCE. 

enjoyment, and he rather sought to divert Gertrude's 
from dwelling on so disagreeable a subject. 

To-morrow came as to-morrow hitherto has done, 
but, as is equally common, to-morrow fulfilled not the 
hopes of yesterday. Mrs. St. Clair's malady had 
assumed a more serious aspect. A physician was 
called in, who pronounced her disorder to be an acute 
rheumatic and nervous fever, which, though not of 
a malignant nature, was likely to prove severe and 
tedious in its operation. Here could be no deception, 
and as Gertrude was almost wholly confined to her 
mother's apartment, Mr. Lyndsay felt his presence was 
useless, and therefore resolved on returning home. 
But before he went he sought an interview with 
Miss St. Clair. 

" I flattered myself," said he, " that before I lost 
sight of you again I should at least have had the 
satisfaction of knowing the nature of the evils you 
are exposed to, but Mrs. St. Clair's situation puts an 
end to that hope for the present. I trust I leave you 
in safety, and I shall not stay long away ; but if in 
my absence anything should occur to alarm you, 
promise that you will write to me instantly." Seeing 
her hesitate, he quickly added, " I am not seeking to 
engage you in any clandestine correspondence. I abhor 
all concealment as much as you can do, but — must I 
say it 1 — you require a protector." 

" I have my mother — my uncle," said she faintly ; 
for she felt that her lips belied her when she named 
her mother, and she shrank from the idea of appealing 



THE INHERITANCE. 21 

to her uncle; "and, besides," added she, "I have 
mamma's solemn assurance that this person has left 
Scotland, probably for ever ;" but the manner in which 
she said this showed how little reliance she placed on 
this assurance. 

"I cannot to you say what I think," said Mr. 
Lyndsay; "but will you then promise, if ever you 
have the slightest reason to suppose you are again to 
encounter the insolence of that man " — and Lyndsay's 
soft mild eyes flashed fire as he spoke — " promise me, 
then, that you will instantly claim Lord Rossville's 
protection." 

But Gertrude dared not promise, and she remained 
silent. 

" As it is," continued he, " I scarcely know whether 
I am justified in withholding from him what I have 
witnessed " 

" Oh ! do not, dear Mr. Lyndsay, do not, I beseech 
you, breathe a syllable of what has passed to Lord 
Rossville, or any one else — for my sake, do not " 

"For your sake I would do much ; weil, then, you 
give me your word " 

"Do not urge me; why should you involve yourself 
in trouble, perhaps in danger, for me 'i Already you 
have risked your life to save mine. No, leave me to 
my fate, whatever it is." 

"I hate the word fate," said Lyndsay; "like 
chance, it is 'a word easily pronounced, but nothing 
more ;' so I shall not leave you to anything so vague 
and mystical. As for me, I am no duellist, and, 



22 THE INHERITANCE. 

besides, this person scarcely appears to be of that 
rank in society which would, what is called, entitle 
him to such satisfaction. Be assured, therefore, you 
will find me a bloodless champion ; but without some 
assurance from you, I will not leave you unprotected." 

Gertrude gave him her hand. 

"My dear, generous cousin!" said she, much 
affected by the interest he showed for her ; "I pro- 
mise that if ever I am again in difficulty, and can 
have recourse to your assistance, I will; more I 
cannot — I dare not promise." 

"Then with that I must be satisfied; look upon 
me as your friend, my dear cousin, and let us leave 
the rest to Heaven. Farewell !" 

Lyndsay's absence caused a blank to Gertrude, 
which she in vain tried to fill up ; for to an affection- 
ate heart and refined taste what can supply the want 
of that social intercourse which is the very aliment of 
the soul? Nothing could be more triste than this 
state of existence. The only varieties she experienced 
were in the querulous complaints of her mother, the 
verbose harangues of Lord Eossville, the senseless 
questions of Lady Betty, and the twice-told compli- 
ments of Mr. Delmour. 

"Is this life?" sighed she. "Ah! how different 
from what I had pictured it to myself ; and thus I am 
absorbed, and this is life." 

But Gertrude only felt what all persons of acute 
sensibility have felt in similar situations, that " to be 
no part of anybody is as to be nothing." 



CHAPTER IV. 

•' Avaunt ! and quit my sight — ^let the earth hide thee ! " 

Macbeth. 

The dreary monotony of a snowstorm now reigned 
in all its morbid solemnity. All nature was shrouded 
in one common covering ; neither heavens nor earth 
offered any variety to the wearied sight, any sound to 
the listening ear. All was sameness and stillness, 
'twas as the pulse of life stood still — of time congealed ; 
or if a sound perchance broke the dreary silence that 
reigned, it fell with that dull muffled tone which only 
denoted the still burdened atmosphere. 

Nothing can be more desolate and depressing than 
this exterior of nature to those who, assembled under 
one roof, are yet strangers to those fireside enjoy- 
ments, that home-born happiness, which springs from 
social intercourse. Here were no intimate delights, 
no play of fancy, no pleasures to deceive the hours 
and embellish existence. Here was nothing to palliate 
dulness, nothing to give time a zest, nothing to fill the 
void of an unfurnished brain. There was stupor of 
mind without tranquillity of soul, restlessness of body 
without animation of spirit Gertrude felt her heart 
droop beneath the oppressive gloom which surrounded 



24 THE INHERITANCE. 

her, and thought even actual suffering must be pre- 
ferable to this total stagnation of all enjoyment. But, 

"All human things a day 
In darkness sinks — a day to light restores." 

It was drawing towards the close of a day when 
the snow had fallen without intermission, but was 
now beginning to abate. Lord Eossville stood at his 
drawing-room window speculating on the aspect of 
the clouds, and predicting a change of weather, when 
he suddenly uttered an exclamation, which attracted 
the whole of the family to where he stood. 

A huge black object was dimly discernible entering 
the avenue, and dragging its ponderous length towards 
the Castle ; but what was its precise nature the still 
falling snow prevented their ascertaining. But sud- 
denly the snow ceased, the clouds rolled away, and 
a red brassy glare of the setting sun fell abruptly on 
this moving phenomena, and disclosed to view a stately 
full-plumed hearse. There was something so terrific, 
yet so picturesque, in its appearance, as it ploughed 
its way through waves of snow — its sable plumes and 
gilded skulls nodding and grinning in the now livid 
glimmering of the fast -sinking sun — that all stood 
transfixed with alarm and amazement. At length 
the prodigy drew near, followed by two attendants 
on horseback; it drew up at the grand entrance; 
the servants gathered round ; one of the men began 
to remove the end-board, that threshold of death 

" This is — is " gasped the Earl, as he tried to 



THE INHERITANCE. 25 

throw open the window and call to his servants; but the 
window was frozen, and ere his Lordship could adopt 
another expedient his fury was turned from the dead 
to the living, for there was lifted out — not " a slovenly- 
unhandsome corj)se, betwixt the wind and his nobility," 
but the warm, sentient, though somewhat discomfited, 
figure of Miss Pratt. All uttered some characteristic 
exclamation ; but Lord Rossville's tongue clove to the 
very roof of his mouth, and he in vain laboured to 
find words suited to the occasion. 

Whether the contents of the hearse should be pre- 
mitted to enter his castle walls from such a convey- 
ance was a doubt in itself so weighty, as for the 
moment to overpower every faculty of mind and 
body. True, to refuse admission to one of the blood 
of Rossville — a cousin to himself, the cousin of 
many noble familes, the aunt of Mr Whyte of 
Whyte Hall — would be a strong measure. Yet to 
sanction such a violation of all propriety ! to suffer 
such an example of disrespect to the living, of de- 
corum to the dead ! to receive into his presence a 
person just issued from a hearse ! Who could tell 
what distempers she might not bring in her train? 
That thought decided the matter. His Lordship 
turned round to pull the bell, and, in doing so, 
found both hands locked in those of Miss Pratt. 
The shock of a man-trap is probably faint compared 
to that which he experienced at finding himself in 
the grasp of the fair, and all powers of resistance 
failed under the energy of her hearty shake. 



26 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Well, my Lord, what do you think of my travel- 
ling equipage 'i My Jersualem dilly, as Anthony Whyte 
calls it 1 Ton my word, you must make much of me, 
for a pretty business I've had to get here. I may well 
say I've come through thick and thin to get to you. 
At one time, I assure you, I thought you would never 
have seen me but in my coffin, and a great mercy it 
is it's only in a hearse. I fancy I'm the first that 
ever thought themselves in luck to get into one ; but, 
however, I think I am still luckier in having got well 
outof it— ha! ha! ha!" 

"Miss Pratt !" heaved the Earl, as with a lever. 

" Well, you shall hear all about it by-and-bye. In 
the meantime, I must beg the favour of you to let the 
men put up their hearse and horses for the night, for 
it's perfectly impossible for them to go a step farther, 
and, indeed, I promised that if they would but bring 
me safe here, you would make them all welcome to a 
night's lodging, poor creatures ! " 

This was a pitch cf assurance so far beyond any- 
thing Lord Eossville had ever contemplated that his 
words felt like stones in his throat, and he strove, but 
strove in vain, to get them up, and hurl them at Pratt's 
audacious jaws. Indeed, all ordinary words and known 
language would have been inadequate for his purpose. 
Only some mighty terror-compelling compound, or some 
magical anathema, something which would have caused 
her to sink into the ground, or have made her quit the 
form of a woman, and take that of an insect, would have 
spoke the feelings of his breast. While his Lordship 



THE INHERITANCE. 27 

was thus struggling, like one under the influence of the 
nightmare, for utterance, Miss Pratt called to one of 
the servants who just then entered — 

" Jackson, you'll be so good as see these men well 
taken care off, and I hope Bishop will allow a good 
feed to the horses, poor beasts ! and " 

"Miss Pratt!" at length bolted the Earl— "Miss 
Pratt, this conduct of yours is of so extraordinary, 
so altogether unparalleled a nature, that " 

" You may well say that, my Lord — unparalleled, 
indeed, if you knew all." 

"There's eight horses and four men," said Lady 
Betty, who had been pleasing her fancy by counting 
them. " Who's burial is it 1 " 

" It's Mr. M'Vitae's, the great distiller. I'm sure 
I'm much obliged to him, for if it hadn't been for 
him, poor man, I might have been stiff and stark 
by this time." And Miss Pratt busied herself in 
taking off her snow-shoes, and turning and chafing 
herself before the fire. 

"Miss Pratt," again began the Earl, mustering all 
his energies — " Miss Pratt, it is altogether inconceiv- 
able and inexpKcable to me, how you, or anyone 
else, could possibly so far forget what was due to 
themselves and me, as to come to my house in a 
manner so wholly unprecedented, so altogether un- 
warrantable, so — so — so perfectly unjustifiable ; I say, 
how any person or persons could thus presume " 

A burst of laughter from Miss Pratt here broke in 
upon the Earl's harangue. 



28 THE INHERITANCE. 

" My dear Lord Kossville, I beg your pardon ; but 
really the notion of my presuming to come in a hearse 
is too good. Ton my word, it's a piece of presump- 
tion few people would be guilty of if they could help 
it. I assure you I felt humble enough when I was 
glad to creep into it." 

" I repeat presume, Miss Pratt," cried his Lordship, 
now fairly kindled into eloquence, "to presume to 
bring to my house an equipage and attendants of — 
of — of the most luctif erous description ; and farther, 
to presume to expect that I am to premit the hearse 
of Mr. M'Vitae, the distiller, the — the democratic 
distiller, with eight horses and four men, to — to — to 
— to — to transform Eossville Castle into an inn, a — 
a caravansera of the very lowest description, a — a — 
a charnel-house, a — a — a receptacle for vehicles 
employed for the foulest, the vilest, the — the most 
unseemly of all purposes ! Jackson, desire those 
people, with their carriage and horses, to quit my 
grounds without one moment's delay." 

"My dear Lord Eossville !— (Stop, Jackson) — 
Bless my heart ! you're not going to turn away the 
people at this time of night ! Only look how it's 
snowing, and the sky as black as pitch; there's 
neither man nor beast fit to travel afoot this night. 
Jackson, I'm sure you must be sensible that it's per- 
fectly impossible for them to find their way now." 

Jackson, who had, like his betters, felt considerable 
ennui during the storm, and rather rejoiced at the 
thoughts of any visitors, however inferior to himself 



THE INHEEITANCE. 29 

in rank and station, confirmed the assertion with all 
due respect — but to little purpose. 

" At all events, and whatever may be the conse- 
quence," said his master, "they certainly can, and, 
indeed, positively must, return by the road which 
they have recently traversed." 

" They may just as well attempt to fly as to go 
back the way they came — a pretty fight they had to 
get through ! I only wish you had seen it — the 
horses up to their shoulders more than once in the snow, 
even then, and it's now snowing ten times worse 
than ever ; so I leave you to judge how they are to 
drag a hearse back nine miles at this time of night." 

Here Jackson re-entered with a manifesto from the 
hearse-drivers and company, stating that they had been 
brought two miles and a half out of their way under 
promise of being provided in quarters for the night, 
and that it was now impossible for them to proceed. 

" It will be a pretty story if I'm landed in a law- 
suit," cried Miss Pratt, in great alarm, as the Earl was 
about to reiterate his orders ; " and it will make a fine 
noise in the county, I can tell you." 

Mr. Delmour, who had been out investigating 
matters, here struck in, and having remarked that it 
might be an unpopular measure, recommended that 
Mr. M'Vitae's suite should be accommodated for 
the night, with strict charges to depart by dawn 
the following morning; and the Earl, though with 
great reluctance, was prevailed upon to agree to this 
arrangement. 



CHAPTER V. 

" Our life is but a pilgrimage of blasts, 
And every blast brings forth a fear, 
And ev'ry fear a death." 

QUARLES. 

Miss Pratt having carried her point, and dried, 
warmed, fed, and cherished her person in all possible 
ways, now commenced the narrative of what she 
called her unparalleled adventures. But as has been 
truly said, there are always two ways of telUng a 
story, and Miss Pratt's biographer and herself are by 
no means at one as to the motives which led to this 
extraordinary expedition. Miss Pratt set forth that 
she had been living most comfortably at Skinflint 
Cottage, where she had been most kindly treated and 
much pressed to prolong her visit ; but she had taken 
an anxious fit about her good friends at Rossville ; she 
had had a great dreaming about them the night before 
last, and she could not rest till she had seen them all. 
She had, therefore, borrowed the Skinflint carriage, 
and set out at the risk of her life ; but the horses had 
stuck in the snow, etc. etc. etc. 

Miss Pratt's biographer, on the other hand, asserts 
that Miss Pratt, in the course of circulation, had 



THE INHERITANCE. 31 

landed at Skinflint Cottage, which she sometimes 
used as a stepping-stone, but never as a resting-place. 
Here, however, she had been taken prisoner by the 
snowstorm, and confined for a week in a small house 
full of children, some in measles, some in scarlet fevers, 
some in hooping-coughs — the only healthy individuals 
two strong unnily boys, just broke loose from school 
for the holidays. The fare was bad, her bed was 
hard, her blankets heavy, her pillows few, her curtains 
thin, and her room, which was next to the nursery, 
to use her own expression, smoked like a killogie. 

To sum up the whole, it was a retreat of Miss 
Becky Duguid's, and at this very time Miss Becky 
was in such requisition that it was resolved to send 
the carriage for her, in the double hope that, as 
Eossville Castle was in the way, their guest would 
avail herself of the opportunity of taking her de- 
parture. Accordingly, a pair of old, stiff, starved, 
superannuated horses were yoked to a large, heavy 
family coach, to which Miss Pratt joyfully betook 
herself even in the very teeth of the storm. But the 
case was a desperate one, for she had received several 
broad hints about one of the children in the hooping- 
cough — Charles Fox by name — having taken a fancy 
to sleep with her, in consequence of her having, in an 
unwary fit of generosity, presented it with a pepper- 
mint drop. But all these minute particulars Miss 
Pratt passed over, which occasions some little dis- 
crepancy betwixt herself and her faithful biographer ; 
but from this point they can now proceed hand in hand. 



32 THE INHERITANCE. 

The old horses tugged their way through the snow 
most manfully till they came to Cocklestonetop Muir, 
and there it lay so deep as to baffle their utmost 
exertions. After every other alternative had been 
tried in vain, there remained no other than to leave 
the carriage, and for Miss Pratt, her green bag, and 
the coachman, to mount the horses and proceed to the 
nearest habitation. But the snow fell thick and fast ; 
Miss Pratt could not keep her seat on the bare back 
of a huge, stiff plough-horse, whose every movement 
threatened dislocation if not dissolution, and even her 
dauntless spirit was sinking beneath the horrors of 
her situation, when, as she expressed it, by mere dint 
of good luck, up came Mr. M'Vitae's hearse, drawn by 
six stout horses, who had been living for the last two 
days at heck -and -manger in Mr. M'Vitae's well-filled 
stables. After a little parley, and many promises, 
they were induced — nothing loath, indeed — to turn 
out of the way and deposit Miss Pratt and her bag at 
Eossville Castle. 

But even this account failed to still the tumult in 
the Earl's breast ; there was something in having a 
hearse, and the hearse of Mr. M'Vitae, the radical 
distiller, thus forced within his walls, he could not 
away with. Death, even in its most dignified atti- 
tude, with all its proudest trophies, would still have 
been an appalling spectacle to Lord Eossville ; but in 
its present vulgar and almost burlesque form, it was 
altogether insupportable. Death is indeed an awful 
thing, whatever aspect it assumes. The King of 



THE INHEEITANCE. 33 

Terrors gives to other attributes their power of terri- 
fying : the thunder's roar, the lightning's flash, the 
billow's roar, the earthquake's shock — all derive their 
dread sublimity from Death. All are but the instru- 
ments of his resistless sway. 

From these, and even from his more ordinary 
emissaries. Lord Eossville felt secure ; but still a 
lurking fear had taken possession of his mind, and he 
could not divest himself of the train of ideas which 
had been excited by beholding, in horrid array. 
Death's cavalcade approach his dwelling. He passed 
a restless night ; he thought of what the county 
would say, and what he should say to the county ; 
he thought of whether he would not be justified in 
banishing Miss Pratt for ever from his presence. 
When the first faint gray streak of light appeared, 
he rang his bell to inquire whether the funeral pro- 
cession had departed ; but a fresh fall of snow during 
the night had placed the castle and hearse in a com- 
plete state of blockade. He rose and opened the 
window to ascertain the fact, but nothing was to be 
seen but a f ast-faUing, blinding snow ; he next went 
to the door, but there the snow lay six feet deep ; he 
returned to bed, but not to sleep ; and when his 
servant entered in the morning he found his master 
a lifeless corpse. 

Whence it came, who can tell? Whether from cold, 
mental disquiet, or irreversible decree ? 

"When houre of death is come, let none aske 
whence nor why ! " 

VOL. TT. B 



CHAPTER VI. 

''And feel I, Death, no joy from thought of thee V* 

Young. 

Gertrude was now Countess of Rossville, and how 
often had her heart bounded at the anticipation ! 
How slight a thing seems the life or death of an in- 
dividual to whom we are united by no ties of affec- 
tion when merely thought of as to be or not to be, 
and Death and his awful attributes are not made 
manifest to our senses. But how sad and solemn 
when we come to witness, even in those most alien to 
us, the last struggle, the dread change, the total ex- 
tinction of mortality. 

As the youthful Countess looked on her uncle's 
cold remains, she forgot all her dreams of vanity, and 
wept in real sadness, as she thought how many a 
painful emotion of anger and disappointment she had 
excited in that now still, unconscious form. Oli ! 
how bitter are the upbraidings which come to us from 
the lips of the dead. Would that the living could 
lay the too tardy reflection to heart ! 

Gertrude could not blame herself, but she sorrowed 
in the sorrow of a warm ingenuous heart that she 
should ever have offended the pale and peaceful image 



THE INHERITANCE. 35 

now stretched before her. But tears, though shed in 
earnest, are, alas ! often shed in vain. 

•' As from tlie wing no scar the sky retains, 
The parted wave no furrow from the keel ; 
So dies in human hearts the thought of death," 

when that thought is not embalmed by affection. 

The funeral obsequies were celebrated with a pomp 
of heraldry, a display of solemn state, which would, 
if aught on earth could, have brightened the dull cold 
eye of the dead to have witnessed. 

The Earl had left no settlements ; he had de- 
stroyed his original ones, and been planning others of 
a totally different nature, which, had he lived, would 
certainly have been put in execution, to the utter 
exclusion of Lady Rossville, unless as the wife of 
Mr. Delmour. 

Gertrude wished for nothing more ardently than 
for an opportunity of coming to an explanation with 
that gentleman, and at once putting an end to the 
delusion under which he evidently laboured. But 
there was so much formal politeness, so little of the 
energy of passion in his addresses, that she felt it 
-would be hke anticipating were she to appear to 
look upon him in the light of a lover. 

She was therefore obliged to endure the annoy- 
ance of his little punctilious assiduities, which, though 
for ever claiming her notice, were yet too vapid and 
insignificant either to please or offend — they vv^ere 
merely flat, stale, and unprofitable. From these she 



36 THE INHERITANCE. 

was soon, however, unexpectedly released A few 
days after the Earl's funeral an express arrived with 
the intelligence of the death of his cousin, the Marquis 
of Haslingden ; he had died of the breaking of a 
blood-vessel, and in so doing had rendered Mr. Del- 
mour presumptive heir to the dukedom. As his pre- 
sence was now required in the south, he immediately 
set about preparations for his departure; but pre- 
vious to setting off, he sought an interview with Lady 
Eossville, for the purpose of expressing his regret at 
being under the necessity of leaving her at such a 
time, and his assurances of returning as speedily as 
the nature of the mournful circumstances under 
which he was called away would permit ; concluding 
with the hope that, whenever propriety sanctioned 
the fulfilling of his late lamented uncle's intentions, 
his fair cousin would at once testify her respect for 
the wishes of the dead, and complete the happiness 
of the living. However much Gertrude had longed 
for this opportunity, she now felt, as every delicate 
mind must feel in a similar situation, that 'tis a ner- 
vous and a painful thing to tell a person face to face, 

"I don't like you, Doctor Fell, 
The reason why I cannot tell ; 
But I don't like you, Doctor Fell ;" 

for, however it may be expressed, that is generally 
the substance of a refusal. The words must be 
rendered, however, in some shape or other, and, 
collecting herself, she, with that self-possession which 



THE INHERITANCE. 37 

in such cases speaks even plainer than words, ex- 
pressed her regret at the misunderstanding that had 
so long been allowed to exist ; assured him that the 
Earl had been perfectly aware of her sentiments — 
they were such as made it impossible she ever could 
do honour to her uncle's intentions. Politician as he 
was, Mr. Delmour could not conceal the surprise and 
pique with which he received this communication. 
He had all along been led to consider his union with 
the heiress of Rossville as a settled point; he had 
therefore looked upon her as his destined bride — 
fortunately, a very beautiful, charming, elegant girl, 
to whom it was his part to be more than usually polite 
and attentive ; and now, at the very moment when 
he had extended his hand to seize the prize, like a 
second Ixion he found he had grasped a cloud. But 
whatever were his feeHngs on the occasion, he had 
too much pride to express anything beyond mere sur- 
prise at the very awkward and unaccountable mis- 
apprehension which had thus involved both parties 
in so unpleasant a dilemma. He certainly could not 
accuse Gertrude of having varied with the circum- 
stances of her fortune — since his own was now, to all 
appearance, much more brilliant than at the commence- 
ment of their acquaintance; but it was evident he 
thought himself extremely ill-used by her, and there- 
fore took a very distant and stately farewell. 

When informed of Mr. Delmour's dismissal, Mrs. 
St. Clair's indignation against her daughter was no 
less violent than unaccountable. 



38 THE INHERITANCE. 

" You were born to be my ruin ! " was her first 
exclamation. "To refuse, situated as you are, an 
alliance that would have secured you against the 

possibiUty of You know not what you have done 

— infatuated that you are ! " And she paced the 
chamber with a disordered mien, while Gertrude, too 
much accustomed to her mother's wayward moods to 
attach any peculiar meaning to her words, in silence 
allowed the storm to take its course. But, as is 
commonly the case with unjust displeasure, it took 
such a wide range, and branched out into so many 
ramifications of anger and invective, that labour dire 
and weary woe it would be to attempt to follow her 
through all the labyrinths of her ill-humour. Mrs. 
St. Clair was indeed a riddle hard to solve. Although 
not quite so hypocritical as to pretend to be in- 
consolable at the death of the Earl, yet certain it 
was that event had agitated her in no common 
manner or degree. And her daughter's exaltation, 
which for so many j^ears had been the sole object of 
her ambition, seemed, now that it was obtained, to 
have lost all its value in her eyes ; the only visible 
effect it had yet produced had been to render her 
more than ever violent, irritable, and capricious. She 
still kept her own apartment, refused to see anybody 
on the plea of her health, was restless and dissatisfied ; 
and, in short, showed all the symptoms of a mind ill 
at ease. 



CHAPTER VII. 

"Love ! 
Tliere is no spirit under Heav'n that works 
Witli such delusion." Ben Jonson. 

The want of a will is a desideratum which invariablv 
causes disappointment to many an expectant. Pei - 
haps, on the late occasion, no one felt more chagrined 
at the failure of the Earl's than Miss Pratt. Although 
there Avas little difterence in their ages, yet, from 
being of a lighter and more active nature, she had 
always looked upon herself as at least twenty years 
younger, and had all along settled in her own mind 
that he was to die long before her ; and from having at 
first contemplated the possibiHty of his leaving her a 
small legacy, she had next considered it as highly 
probable that he would leave her something very 
handsome ; and, at length, all her doubts had resolved 
themselves into the absolute certainty of his doing 
something highly to his own credit. Not, to do her 
justice, that she looked to it so much for her own 
aggrandisement, as for something to bequeath to 
Anthony Whyte in his necessities; as she declared 
that, in tliese times, Anthony found he was pinched 
enough with his three thousand a year. 



40 THE INHERITANCE. 

Miss Pratt could not, therefore, reconcile herself 
to this desideratum ; but spent her days in rummag- 
ing the house, and expressing her amazement (which, 
far from lessening, seemed daily to increase) that the 
v/ill — for a will there must be — should be missing, 
and her nights in dreaming that the will had been 
found. The will, she was certain, would cast up yet 
— nobody knew poor Lord Eossville better than she 
did ; she might say they had been like brother and 
sister all their lives ; and nobody that knew him — 
worthy, well-meaning man that he was ! — could ever 
believe that he would go out of the world and leave 
things all at sixes and sevens. Not so much as ten 
guineas, even, for a mourning ring to his oldest friends 
and nearest relations — the thing was quite impossible. 
She only wished she had access to his repositories ; 
she was sure she would soon bring something to light 
— some bit paper, or letter, or jotting, or something or 
another, just to show what his intentions were ; and she 
was sure Lady Eossville would willingly act up to it, 
whatever it was ; for he was a just, upright, friendly, 
liberal, well -principled, well-meaning, kind-hearted 
man ; an honourable-minded man, with a great deal of 
strong natural affection ; a man that had always, and 
upon all occasions, shown himself her steady friend 
and well-wisher, etc. etc. etc. There was one drawer 
in particular, the right-hand drawer of his writing-table, 
the end next the window; she had several times, 
when she had occasion to speak to him in his study, 
found him busy there. Poor man, the very last time 



THE INHERITANCE. -41 

she saw him there he was working amongst some 
papers in that very drawer. She wondered if it had 
been well searched, and so on. 

Gertrude had no doubt but that due search had 
been made there as in other places by the constituted 
authorities, and she had too much respect for the late 
Earl's feelings when living to suffer Miss Pratt to 
invade his repositories now that he was dead ; but 
weary of hearing the same changes rung upon this 
drawer, she one day suddenly resolved to examine it 
and some other of her uncle's private repositories. 
For that purpose she repaired to his apartment and 
began her scrutiny. It was with a feeling of solemnity 
she displaced the relics of the departed, and sought 
in vain for any indication of his will or intentions ; 
nothing of the kind was to be seen, for nothing of the 
kind was in existence. Only bundles of bills and 
packets of letters were contained in the drawer which 
Miss Pratt had vainly flattered herself held her future 
fortunes. The Countess was about to close it, when 
her eye was arrested by one of those packets ; it was 
titled "Correspondence with Colonel F. Delmour — 
Private— No. 1." 

" Can this be the correspondence," thought she, "on 
which the happiness of my life depends?" and her 
colour ebbed and flowed as the contending emotions 
of hope and fear rushed over her heart. " And am I 
justified in thus stealing on the secrets of the dead — 
is it right — is it honourable?" She paused. "Yet 
my all of happiness is at stake ; why should I hesitate?" 



42 THE INHERITANCE. 

And with a trembling hand she unfolded the copy of 
a letter from Lord Eossville, written, it seemed, on 
his first discovering the attachment that existed. It 
was very angry and very wordy, and the substance of 
it was calling upon his nephew instantly to resign all 
pretensions to Miss St. Clair's hand, and to authorise 
him to annul any engagement subsisting between 
them, upon j^ain of his most serious displeasure. 
Gertrude's heart throbbed violently as she turned to 
the answer to this in the well-known, careless, elegant 
hand of her lover. It was short — expressed the 
deepest regret at having incurred his uncle's dis- 
pleasure, pleaded the excess of his passion as the only 
excuse, and declared, in the most unequivocal terms, 
the utter impossibility there was in his ever complying 
with his Lordship's commands by relinquishing that 
which was dearer to him than life. 

Tears of delight burst from Gertrude's eyes as she 
read this decided avowal of unalterable attachment. 

"How could I be so base as ever to doubt — ungener- 
ous that I am ! " was her first exclamation ; and, in 
the exultation of the moment she felt as though 
worlds could never again for a moment shake her 
faith. But there were more letters to peruse. The 
next in order was another from Lord Eossville. It 
was in part a repetition of what her uncle had said to 
herself, when he declared his intention of disinheriting 
her and settling the estates upon Mr. Delmour ; but 
his resolutions were still more strongly expressed and 
fully detailed in the letter ; and he concluded by an 



THE INHERITANCE. 43 

offer of instantly liquidating his nephew's debts and 
settling ten thousand pounds upon him, provided he 
would come under an engagement never to marry 
Miss St. Clair. 

"This, then, is the test?" thought Gertrude; and, 
with a beating heart, she opened another letter in 
Colonel Delmour's handwriting, and read as follows : — 

"My dear Uncle — It was only on my return 
here late last night that I found your letter ; and I 
have passed a sleepless night ruminating on the heart- 
rending alternative you offer to me. Were my own 
interests solely at stake I should not hesitate a single 
moment; but the thought of reducing the adored 
object of my affections to poverty — of being the means 
of bereaving her of the possessions of her ancestors, 
and depriving her of your favour — is so overwhelming, 
that I find myself quite unable to come to any con- 
clusion at present. Heaven knows how much I could 
endure for her sake ; but it is torture to me to think 
of her sacrificing so much for mine. Yet to resign 
her for ever is distraction. I repeat it is impossible 
for me, all at once, to resolve upon a point on which 
the happiness of my life is at issue. Pray, allow me 
a few days to form my resolution, and beheve it is my 
most earnest wish to gratify you in all possible ways. 
The regiment is on the point of embarking for 
Gibraltar, but I expect Brookes to take the command, 
and that I shall obtain leave to remain at home for 
the present. You shall hear from me again whenever 



44 THE INHERITANCE. 

I can summon resolution to cast the die. Meantime, 
you will of course suspend all further proceedings. 
— Believe me, my dear uncle, yours with the sincerest 
esteem and affection, F. M. H. Delmour. 

" F.S. — You may rely upon my secrecy, and I agree 
with you that it is better George should not be made 
acquainted with what has passed, at present." 

Here was " confirmation, strong as proofs of holy 
writ," to the generous, confiding heart of the 
Countess. 

Yes ! it was upon her account that he hesitated ; 
it was for her happiness that he was tempted to 
sacrifice his own. Ah ! how little did he know her if 
he deemed that wealth and grandeur could ever stand 
in competition with his affection. That, the peculiar 
treasure of her soul; that, the pearl of great price; 
the rest, was it not all mere earthly dross 1 Without 
that what were rank and fortune to her? But to 
share them, to bestow them upon the chosen of her 
heart, was indeed a blissful privilege ! And the whole 
tenor of her mind became bright as 

" The first blush of the sun-gilded air." 

Impatient to vindicate the honour of her lover, she 
hastened to her mother's apartment. She found Mrs. 
St. Clair in the same posture in which she had so 
frequently observed her since the Earl's death — seated 
at a writing-table, her head resting on one hand, a 
pen in the other, as if meditating how to begin a 



THE INHERITANCE. 45 

letter, which, after all this preparation, did not appear 
yet to have been commenced. 

With cheeks glowing, and eyes sparkling with 
triumph and delight, Gertrude placed the packet in 
her hands. 

" Eead these, mamma," said she in a tone of exulta- 
tion, " and if you ever had a doubt, surely these must 
satisfy you." 

Mrs. St. Clair took the letters and read them in 
silence, then, as she folded up the last, she said with 
a sarcastic smile — 

"My doubts are indeed ended; I am now con- 
firmed in what I have all along suspected. Colonel 
Delmour loved you from the first as the heiress of 
Kossville — as the Countess of Rossville I have no 
doubt he will adore you." 

Gertrude was struck dumb ; her mother went on — 

"It is evident to me — it would be to any one in 
their senses — that the only struggle here is caused by 
self-interest. He, like many other people, doubted 
whether Lord Rossville really possessed the power of 
disinheriting you ; and he therefore prudently evades 
the question until he has ascertained that point. It 
would have been selling his right, indeed, for a mess 
of pottage to have resigned the heiress to twenty 
thousand a year for a paltry ten thousand pounds 
and the payment of his tailor's bill ; but, on the other 
hand " 

"It is enough," said Lady Rossville, as, with a 
burning cheek and in a tone of wounded feeling, she 



46 THE INHERITANCE. 

collected the letters, and was turning to leave the 
room. 

" No, Gertrude, it is not enough," cried her mother, 
pointing to her to be seated ; "sit down, and listen to 
me at least with calmness if not with respect — I will 
not be interrupted — I will be heard." 

Her daughter seated herself in silence, but evidently 
struggling with her feelings. 

" I cannot see you, as I do, the dupe of an artful, 
unprincipled man, without making an effort to open 
your eyes to the dangers of your situation ; yet I own 
I almost despair when I behold you thus wilfully 
closing them against the light which would carry 
conviction to any mind that was not the slave of its 
own delusions ; yes, I repeat, it is clear as noonday, 
that it is solely as the heiress of Eossville you are the 
object of Colonel Delmour's attachment. He hesitate 
about reducing the adored object of his affections to 
poverty ! he distracted at the thoughts of bereaving 
her of the possessions of her ancestors ! Stuff ! Who 
that knows anything of the character of the man 
would for an instant believe that he would hesitate 
about sacrificing the whole world were it to promote 
his own interest % Gertrude, I would not unnecessarily 
pain you, but I consider it my duty to save you from 
the snares I see set for you. Why should you distrust 
me 1 What interest can I have in deceiving you, my 
child 1" 

" I know not — I cannot tell," said the Countess, 
with a sigh ; " if I am distrustful '" 



THE INHEBITANCE. 47 

She stopped, but Mrs. St. Clair felt the reproach 
implied in her look and accent. 

" 'Tis I who have made you so, you would say ; 
yet you can distrust me, your guide, your companion, 
your friend, your mother ! " — Mrs. St. Clair's voice 
here faltered with emotion — "although you cannot 
even doubt the faith of one who but a few months 
since was an utter stranger to you." 

" But in those few months what have I not learnt ? " 
said Lady Rossville, in much agitation ; " enough to 
make me sometimes doubt the evidence of my own 
senses • certainly enough to teach me to distrust even 
my own mother." 

Mrs. St. Clair's face crimsoned. 

"Beware how you provoke me, Gertrude!" cried 
she, with much vehemence ; " I will endure no taunts 
or reproaches from you, for, with one word, I could 
lay all your romantic dreams in the dust. Although, 
as Countess of Rossville, you may wish to forget what 
is due to me as your mother, I will not relinquish my 
claims to you as my daughter; I will be obeyed!" 
continued she, with increasing violence, " and I com- 
mand you from henceforth to think of that man no 
more." 

" Then you command me to do what is impossible," 
said the Countess, giving way to tears. " Oh ! mamma ! 
why will you force me to this alternative 1 Why must 
I be accounted rebellious, undutiful, because I cannot 
see as you see, and think as you think ? I call Heaven 
to witness I would ever render to you the respect, 



48 THE INHERITANCE. 

the reverence of a child, but I cannot — no, I cannot 
yield you the submission of a slave." 

"And where is the child who owes to a parent 
what you owe to mef demanded Mrs. St. Clair 
warmly ; " where is the child possessed of such an 
inheritance of rank, of power, of riches, of beauty, of 
talents ? and where is the mother who would not feel 
as I do at seeing them all sacrificed to the cupidity 
of an artful, unprincipled manf 

" And is it because I possess all these advantages 
that I am to be denied the privilege of the poorest 
and humblest?" asked Lady Eossville, her voice falter- 
ing with emotion. " Of what value to me are all those 
gifts if I may not share them with those I love? 
ah ! how much rather would I forego them all " 

"Than not indulge your own weak, wajrward, 
childish fancy," cried her mother with indignation; 
"this is nob to be borne! How shall I tear that 
bandage from your eyes ? If you doubt me, will you 
credit the testimony of your friend, your counsellor, 
your Platonic admirer, Mr. Lyndsay ? " 

"I respect and esteem Mr. Lyndsay," said the 
Countess ; "but I will not adopt his prejudices." 

" Will you believe the voice of the world, then ? " 

" I already know all that the world can say. It 
will tell me he is thoughtless, extravagant, imprudent, 
erring it may be, in many things ; but all that he 
has told me himself ; such he once was, till — till he 
loved." 

Mrs. St. Clair groaned. "Then whose testimony 



THE INHERITANCE. 49 

will yor. admit, since you reject mine^ You reject 
Mr. Lyndsay's. You reject that of the whole world," 

" I will receive none," said Lady Rossville mildly, 
but firmly ; " erring, perhaps faulty, he may have 

been ; but to doubt that he loves me there, I will 

receive no one's testimony but his own." 

"Then you are lost!" exclaimed Mrs. St Clair, in 
violent agitation; ''but it must not — shall not be. 
You dare not marry without my consent — without the 
consent of " she stopped. " I tell you " 

" If I am to be ruled by any authority it must be 
solely by my mother's," said Gertrude proudly ; " no 
other being has, or ever can have, the right to control 
me on this point. Once before I promised that I 
would form no engagement -svithout your consent until 
I had attained the age of twenty-one — I am now will- 
ing to repeat it ; but in the meantime, my preference 
must be left free. And now, mamma, let us end this 
strife ; it may be my misfortune to differ from you ; do 
not, oh ! do not let that difference divide us. I will be 
always yours in affection, if not in sentiment." And she 
would have embraced her, but her mother repelled her. 

"Such a compromise is a mere mockery," said she 
with bitterness; "but I too am sick of altercation; 
such as it is, then, for the present your promise must 
suffice ; let me trust in Heaven that your delusion may 
be dispelled ere it be too late ! " 

" i/" it is a delusion, I too join in the prayer," said 
the Countess, but more in the tone of lofty assurance 
than of lowly supplication. 

VOL. XL £ 



50 THE INHERITANCE. 

This contest with her mother only served to 
strengthen Gertrude, as violence invariably does, in 
her own opinions. There was something, too, in the 
very suspense calculated to give a play to her imagina- 
tion and fascinate the youthful heart far more than 
any sober certainty of waking bliss could have done. 
She would have shrank from acknowledging even 
to herself that she harboured a doubt; but how 
many a stranger feeling mingles unknown to ourselves 
with the home-born sentiments of our hearts ! 



CHAPTER VIII. 

" With an old bachelor how things miscarry ! 
What shall I do ? Go hang myself — or marry ? " 

HOEACE. 

There was a duty which Gertrude was particularly 
anxious to discharge, and that was the debt she had 
incurred to Mr. Adam Ramsay. Having procured 
a bill for the money, she therefore ordered her 
carriage one day, and having contrived to elude the 
curiosity of Lady Betty and the vigilance of Miss 
Pratt, she set out alone in hopes of making her peace, 
at any rate of relieving her mind from the weight of 
pecuniary obligation. A thaw had begun, but just 
begun ; consequently both earth and atmosphere were 
in that raw, chill, dubious state which combines all 
the discomforts of foul and frosty weather, and even 
in the narrow precincts of Uncle Adam's parterre 
both were displayed in perfection. The snow, though 
soft, lay deep betwixt his house and the little gate 
which separated him from the road ; no attempt had 
been made to clear it away or open a passage ; and 
an avalanche, which had fallen from the roof of the 
house, lay undisturbed upon the steps, and effectually 
blocked up the door. Altogether, it had a desolate 



52 THE INHERITANCE. 

uninhabited look, different from the neatly -scraped 
paths and sanded steps belonging to the houses on 
either side, and Gertrude began to fear, she knew 
not what, from this desolate exterior. Meanwhile, 
the footman having, with some difficulty, contrived 
to wade up to the door, knocked loud and long in all 
the energy of insolence and ill-humour, but no answer 
was returned. Again and again the summons was 
repeated, in a manner enough to have raised even 
the drowsy porter in Macbeth, but with no better 
success. At length the servant turned away in despair. 
"There is nobody within, my Lady." But at that 
moment his lady's eye was caught by a view of the 
back of Uncle Adam's wig, as its queue hung in 
expressive silence over a chair in the parlour. It 
retained its posture, however, so immovabl}^, that it 
seemed as though it would have required a touch of 
galvanism to ascertain whether it were suspended from 
a dead or a living skull. Alarmed at the immobility 
of this appendage of Uncle Adam's brain. Lady Eoss- 
ville hastily called to have the carriage door opened, 
and without exactly knowing what she would or could 
do, she stepped out, and made the best of her way 
through the snow towards the house. Scarcely had 
she touched the door when, to her sui'prise, it flew 
open, as if impelled by the invisible hands of the 
White Cat herself. No invisible hands were there, 
however, for there stood Uncle Adam in propria 
persona, with his pigtail, and his cold, blue, radish- 
looking fingers. 



THE INHERITANCE. 53 

"Come in, come in," cried he in no very inviting 
tone, as Gertrude stood for a moment transfixed with 
astonishment at this sudden resuscitation ; " I'm sure 
this is no weather to be stan'in' at open doors;" and 
violently shutting it, he led the way to his little 
parlour. A dead fire, a dirty hearth, and the remains 
of a wretched breakfast, were the only traces of civil- 
isation to be descried. 

"I was afraid something was the matter," said 
Gertrude, as she entered. "My servant knocked 
repeatedly, but could get no answer, but I am happy 
to find it was a false alarm, and that I have the pleasure 
of seeing you well, my dear uncle." 

Mr. Ramsay hemmed. 

"You may see something's the matter, or the 
things wadnae be stan'in' there till this time o' day ; 
there's naebody in the hoose but mysel' ; and I wasna 
gawn to play the flunky to thae idle puppies o' yours," 
pointing to the Countess's dashing lackey, as he 
strutted before the window, "and I never wish to 
see onybody at my door that canna chap at it them- 
sel's." Then muttering between his teeth, "Fules 
should nae ha'e chappin-sticks," he seemed to recover 
a little, at having thus vented his venom in ignominious 
epithets applied to his niece and her spruce serving- 
man. 

Lady Rossville was much at a loss how to proceed. 
At no time did she perfectly comprehend the breadth 
of Uncle Adam's dialect ; but, on the present occasion 
he was more than usually unintelligible ; and, as she 



54 THE INHERITANCE. 

could neither divine what was meant by fules nor 
chappin-sticks, she prudently passed them over, and 
proceeded to business. 

" I am come to repay my debt to you," said she in 
her sweetest manner ; " that is, the pecuniary part of it ; 
but your generous trust and confidence in me I never 
can repay. My dear uncle, will you accept of my 
warmest, my most grateful thanks for your kindness V 
And she put the money, inclosed in a pocket-book of 
her own embroidering, into his hands, and affection- 
ately pressed them as she did so. 

"An' what has that to do wi't?" demanded Mr. 
Eamsay, eyeing the souvenir with no gracious aspect. 

" That is a pocket-book I have worked on purpose 
for you ; and I hope you will keep it for my sake." 

" Weel, I may do sae ; though it's nonsense to gie 
me the like o' thae foolish things;" and taking out 
the bill, he carefully wrapped the pocket-book in a piece 
of paper, and opening an old bureau that stood in the 
corner of the room, deposited it in a little drawer, 
then cautiously locking it, returned to his seat. 
"Next to no borrowin' the best thing's ready payin', and 
I'm glad to see you ha'e that muckle discretion ;" and 
his features gradually relaxed into a more benign 
expression, as he slowly took out his spectacles to peruse 
the bill ; when, suddenly resuming their usual stormy 
cast, "What's this?" cried he, "whar's the interest 
for my money ?" 

In great confusion at this unthought-of demand, 
Gertrude apologised by saying she had been so little 



THE INHERITANCE. 55 

accustomed to money transactions that she had 
entirely forgot that part of the claim. 

" I think it's time you was learnin' something o' 
the vaala o' money, noo that yeVe learnt hoo to spend 
and to borrow sae readily. I dinna care ae bodle 
about it for my ain part, but I like to see folk ken 
what they're aboot, and gi'e awbody their due;" and 
taking up an old blackened stump of a pen, he began 
to cast up his account on the back of the bill ; then 
showing it to Lady Eossville, "There's what I was 
inteetled to frae you ; but I tell you I dinna want it ; 
I only want to mak' you sensible o' what you're 
aboot." 

Gertrude acknowledged the justice of his admoni- 
tion, and, having thanked him for it, she was again 
taken into favour, but it was of short duration. 

"Ha'e nae you got your feet wat wi' that snaw?" 
said he in a complacent tone ; then glancing at her 
little silk slippers, all his wrath revived. "Bonny- 
like feet, to be sure, to be wadin' through the snaw ! 
I thought you had mair sense than till ha'e come oot 
wi' such daft-like things in such weather; they're liker 
dancin'-schule pumps than sensible walkin' shoes." 

And Uncle Adam walked up and down in great 
discomposure, his own huge leathern buckets creaking 
at every step. 

"I did not know all I had to encounter, else I 
certainly should have provided better for it," said 
Gertrude, smiling; "but I am not at all subject to 
colds, so don't be alarmed on that account, and when 



56 THE INHERITANCE. 

your servant comes in she will dry my shoes at your 
kitchen fire." 

*' You'll sit a while before you see ony servant o' 
mine ; I ha'e nae servant, and the kitchen fire's black 
oot." 

"No servant, and no fire !" exclaimed Lady Ross- 
ville, horror-struck at such an avowal. "Good 
Heavens ! what a situation ! how, what has occa- 
sioned this ?" 

"Just the occasion is, that that impudent thief 
that's been wi' me these twa year thought proper to 
own a marriage wi' a scoondrell o' a dragoon that she 
ne'er saw till within this month ; and what do you 
think o' her assurance 1 she had the impudence to tell 
me last night that she but to leave my service im- 
mediately unless I wad buy her husband's discharge, 
tak' him into my service, and settle an annuity on her 
for life ; I daursay there ne'er was the like o't ! " 

" That w^as certainly very audacious," said Gertrude ; 
" and she ought at least to have remained until you 
had procured another servant." 

" Her remain ! do ye think I wad left mysel' at the 
discraation o' such a slut as that ? I just took her by 
the shoothers, and gied her the outside o" the door 
for her answer. Settle an annuity upon her ! I've 
settled her wi' a vengeance. Tak' a dragoon into my 
service ! I wad just as soon tak' the hangman into 
my service ■ " 

"What a picture of lonely old age!" thought 
Gertrude; "left at the mercy of a mercenary, un- 



THE INHERITANCE. 57 

principled servant, destitute even of the necessaries of 
life — how dismal !" 

Even the luifortunate peculiarity of his temper, 
which kept him aloof from all fellowship with others, 
she viewed, as indeed it was, an additional misfortune, 
and she felt anxious to alleviate the wretchedness of 
his state by every means in her power. But to have 
insinuated to IJjicle Adam that his comfort at all 
depended either upon a servant or a fire would have 
been an insult he would have resented accordingly. 

"You must come to Eossville -wath me, my dear 
uncle," said the Countess, taking his hand with her 
sweetest look and accent of entreaty. 

"]\Ie gang to Eossville!" exclaimed Mr. Ramsay, 
with a sudden start of horror; "I'll do nae such 
thing. What wad tak' me to Eossville f 

"To paj^ me a visit, to give me the pleasure of 
seeing you in my own house; you know you must 
visit me some time ; and this is so good an oppor- 
tunity, that indeed I will not excuse you." 

"I suppose you think I canna contrive to live 
fower-and-twenty hours by mysel' ; but you're much 
mista'en if you think I depend for my comfort either 
on man or woman; at onyrate, there's a tyelor and 
his wife, down bye there, very discreet folk, that 
wad be ready to do onything I wanted, so ye needna 
fash your heed aboot me." 

"I have no doubt you could have abundance of 
service," said Lady Eossville, still persisting in her 
benevolent intentions, " to say nothing of your own 



58 THE INHERITANCE. 

domestics at Bloom Park ; my aunts too, I am sure, if 
they knew of your situation " 

"My situation !" interrupted Mr. Eamsay sharply. 
" What's my situation 'i a great situation, to be sure, 
to ha'e got rid o' a gude-for-naething impudent thief 
that wanted to pick my pocket. I'm only thankful I'm 
quit o' her; and that's what you call my situation; what 
else could you say if I was lyin' wi' my throat cut?" 

" I beg your pardon, but you must make allowance 
for my blunders ; you know my tongue is not so Scotch 
as my heart, and that is another reason why you must 
come to Rossville, to give me some lessons in my dear 
native accents — I must now learn to speak Scotch to 
my poor people." And Gertrude hung coaxingly 
round him, till even Uncle Adam's flinty nature began 
to melt. 

" What wad ye mak' o' me at your braw castell, 
amang aw your fine folk? I'm no used to your 
grandees, and I'm no gawn to begin to learn fashion- 
able mainners noo, so dinna ask me ; I'm no gawn to 
mak' a fule o' mysel' at this time o' day." 

" I assure you we have no fine people at Eossville, 
my dear uncle, not one ; and, indeed, I do not like 
what are called fine people any more than you do. 
We are a very plain, quiet, old-fashioned family, quite 
clockwork in our ways and hours ; and besides, if you 
don't like them or us, you shall take your own way 
in everything ; you shall breakfast, dine, sup, if you 
please, in your own apartment, and be quite at home ; 
now don't — pray, don't refuse me." 



THE INHERITANCE. 59 

" An' be made a sang o' to aw the hoose, high and 
low? I suppose it'll be through the toon next that 
I could nae mak' a shift for a day without that 
impudent thief, Chirsty Carstairs. No, no; I'm no 
gawn to be dragooned oot o' my ain hoose by her." 

Gertrude was certainly not a persevering charac- 
ter; and, despairing of success, she had risen to 
depart, when her heart smote her at the thoughts of 
abandoning the desolate old man to his cheerless 
solitary state — at his advanced age, and in such incle- 
ment weather, to be left in a house alone ! — the idea 
was frightful. Again she returned to the charge, and 
at length she prevailed ; for she held out an induce- 
ment Uncle Adam was not proof against. She told 
him of the picture he would see at Eossville of her he 
had so truly loved, and the right string was touched. 
A silken thread might have led Uncle Adam over half 
the globe when Lizzie Lundie was paramount. His 
little preparations were soon made ; the tailor's wife 
was summoned, and invested with the charge of the 
mansion ; and Mr. Eamsay, covered with shame and 
confusion at his own folly in being thus led by a child, 
sneaked into the carriage with his head on his breast, 
and his ears hanging down to his shoulders. Lady 
Rossville tried to animate him, but he still retained 
his humbled discomfited air, till the carriage stopped 
at the castle gate, when the old man burst forth, — 

" I've a gude mind just to gang back the way I 
cam — auld idiot that I am, to be rinnin' after pickters 
like a bairn !" 



60 THE INHERITANCE. 

Bub it was now too late ; the movements of the 
great arc commonly conducted \vith a celerity that 
baffles all calculation, and Uncle Adam was scarcely 
aware that he had reached his destination ere he 
found himself in the hall surrounded by a train of 
servants. All that was left for him, therefore, was 
to scowl upon them as he passed along; but they 
Avere too well-bred to testify either mirth or surprise 
at sight of such a phenomenon, and in spite of himself, 
he was ushered to the saloon with all the customary 
demonstrations of respect. It was vacant ; and Lady 
Eossville having safely deposited him l)y the side of 
a blazing fire, and vainly tried to persuade him to 
partake with her of some refreshment, left him for a 
little to solace himself "with the newspapers [of the 
day, while she went to announce his arrival to her 
mother. 



CHAPTER IX. 

*' Listen to me, and if you speak me fair, 
I'll tell you news. " 

Shakespeare. 

When Gertrude had left her mother in the morning, 
she had left her, as usual, fretful and gloomy ; but on 
returning she was struck with the change which in 
the course of a few hours had taken place. Her 
countenance was lightened, her air was almost joyous; 
and though some slight traces of agitation were 
visible, yet it was evidently of no painful kind, for 
the tout ensemble was that of a person who had thrown 
off a load of cares and of fears. She was seated at 
her toilet, which, ever since the Earl's death, had 
been much neglected; but upon her daughter's en- 
trance she dismissed her maid. 

"Come away, my love," cried she, holding out her 
arms, and affectionately embracing her ; "I have been 
tiring to death for you. Where have you been, my 
sweetest?" 

Gertrude, but not without wondering at this 
sudden overflow of love and tenderness, related to 
her the particulars of her visit to Mr. Eamsay and 
its consequences. 



62 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Ah ! nothing could be better managed," said Mrs. 
St. Clak ; " and his arrival to-day is quite hp'opos^ as 
I mean to make my aj^pearance at dinner, and it may 
very well pass for a compliment to my good uncle ;" 
then changing her tone to one of deep solemnity, 
" Since I saw you in the morning, love, I have been 
a good deal shocked with a piece of news I accident- 
ally stumbled upon in a provincial paper I happened 
to take up ; my nerves, to be sure, have been sadly 
shattered of late;" and she sighed and took up her 
smelling-bottle. " But 'tis impossible not to be struck 
with such an event. Gertrude, you have no longer 
anything to fear from that unfortunate man, he — he 
has perished ! " added she, in strong but transient 
emotion. 

Gertrude involuntarily shuddered. There is always 
something revolting in the gaiety that springs from 
the death of a fellow-being ; and for a moment she 
turned away her head from the wild unnatural plea- 
sure that gleamed in her mother's eye. 

"What was this man's life or death to me?" ex- 
claimed she suddenly. *' Surely now the time is 
come when you will tell me all ! " 

" Not now, my love, do not urge me ; the time may 
come when I shall have no secret with you, but at 
present it can serve no purpose but that of agitating 
and distressing me. Perhaps I should not have 
mentioned this disagreeable occurrence to you at all, 
but for the fear that it might have come upon you 
unawares, and so have betrayed you into some symp- 



THE INHERITANCE. 63 

torn of recognition that had better be avoided ; for I 
think you could scarcely fail to be struck as I was at 
reading the account. As yet it has got no further 
than the " Barnford Chronicle," but it will, of course, 
appear in the London papers, and you will probably 
hear it nsad and commented on at all hands, so 'tis 
better you should receive it from mine — forewarned 
is forearmed;" and taking up a newspaper she 
pointed out a paragraph under the head of "Melan- 
choly Shipwreck." It set forth in the usual terms a 
most elaborate and high-drawn narrative of the wreck 
of the Dauntless packet, bound for America, on the 
coast of Ireland, when every soul on board had 
perished. Several pieces of the wreck, and some of 
the bodies of the unhappy sufferers, had been cast on 
shore, and were all minutely described, amongst 
others that of a "gentleman, seemingly turned of 
thirty years of age, tall, fair complexion, light hair, 
blue eyes, high nose, linen marked J. L. On his 
person were found a watch, a small sum of money, 
and a pocket-book, the latter containing papers 
and bills, but so much damaged by the water 
that the writing was wholly obliterated, only on one 
of the bills the letters 'S lair' could be traced, 
and those were the only marks which could throw 
any light on the unfortunate gentleman's identity," 
etc. etc. 

" It is very sad to be called upon to rejoice over an 
event fraught with so much misery," said the Countess, 
with a sigh, as she finished it. 



64 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I do not call upon )'ou to rejoice, Gertrude," said 
Mrs. St. Clair solemnly. " God forbid that I should ; 
I merely wished you to see that you have nothing- 
more to fear in that quarter." 

"But after all, mamma, how can you be quite sure 
that this ill-fated sufferer is the very person you 
suppose — Lewiston V 

" Because I have it under his own hand that he 
had actually engaged his passage in that very vessel ; 
and it is surely very improbable that there should 
have been two men on board a small packet answering 
so completely to the same description in every parti- 
cular ; and even if there were, both must have shared 
the same fate. And now let us drop the subject, and 
everything relating to it. Should it pass without any 
observation from those two tiresome fools, Lady Betty 
and Miss Pratt, 'tis well ; if it is noticed and com- 
mented upon, you will of course be prepared to talk 
about it as any one else would do." 

"But Mr. Lyndsay," said Gertrude, "surely you 
will explain everything to him?" 

" I have already explained enough to Mr. Lyndsay," 
said Mrs. St. Clair angrily. " I know not what more 
he would require." 

" Yet you said you had promised to lay open the 
whole " 

" But the whole is now at an end ; and I do not 
feel myself called upon to revive old and disagreeable 
stories merely to gratify his curiosity." 

"In justice to yourself — to me," said Gertrude, 



THE INHERITANCE. 66 

urgently, "you ought not to lose a moment in clearing 
up, if possible, everything that appears wrong in your 
conduct and in mine." 

" In justice to myself," said Mrs. St. Clair, colour- 
ing with anger,. "I will not harrow up my feelings 
and endanger my health by. recurring to anything of 
a painful or agitating nature at present. Mr. Lyndsay, 
I repeat, knows all that it is necessary for him to know; 
if he would know more, let him know that the Countess 
of Eossville, in her own house, and under the protec- 
tion of her mother, stands in no need either of his 
advice or assistance." 

" No ! that he shall never hear from me," said 
Gertrude warmly. "Mr. Lyndsay may have been 
duped ; he shall never be insulted under my roof if 
I can prevent it." 

"Is this the language I am now to hear?" cried 
Mrs. St. Clair, passionately. " Am I so degraded by 
your exaltation that I must submit to be stigmatised 
— and by you ! But beware ! Lewiston is gone, but 
his power remains." Lady Rossville remained silent, 
but tears fell from her eyes ; at length she said, " I 
am no longer a child to be frightened by a bugbear ; 
either tell me who this person really was, and what 
power he possessed over me, or, if you refuse to gratify 
me in this, at least let his name be no more mentioned 
betwixt us. Already," cried she, giving scope to her 
emotion, and speaking under its excitement, " already 
my feelings have been sacrificed, my reputation en- 
dangered, certainly sullied, in the eyes of one person, 

VOL. II. F 



66 THE INHERITANCE. 

and yet to him you refuse that explanation which is 
due both to him and to me." 

While her daughter spoke, Mrs. St. Clair seemed 
to be struggling with her passions ; at length, by a 
violent effort she obtained the mastery over them, 
and in a feeble languid tone said — 

"I am unable to contend with you, Gertrude; you 
are mistress here, and may command, it seems, even 
your mother to obey you ; but, exhausted as I am by 
a long and dangerous illness, my nerves shattered, my 
mind unstrung, you might have spared me yet a little. 
But why should you weep. Lady Eossville — you who 
have all that this world can bestow ? Methinks you 
might, at least, have left tears for your mother — poor 
dependant — humble as she is ! Gertrude, I am in no 
situation to oppose your will, with a worn-out frame, 
broken spirits, depending on your bounty for my 
daily bread " 

Accustomed as she had all her life been to her 
mother's acting, still Gertrude never could hear a 
reproach from her lips without the bitterest sorrow 
and compunction, and on the present occasion every 
word went as a dagger to her heart. Her attention 
had artfully been led away from the point at issue, 
and now she only beheld herself as the oppressor of a 
mother, feeble, old, and poor. 

With her usual impetuosity she at once flung her- 
self into her mother's power — sued for forgiveness, and 
the scene ended, as such scenes always did end, in 
Mrs. St. Clair's victory. Still she felt it was but a 



THE INHERITAI^CE. 67 

temporary one, as a mere triumph over the feelings 
always is. There might be silence, but there was no 
submission at heart, for there could be no conviction 
of mind. Such as it was, however, it served for the 
present; a hasty reconciliation was patched up on 
a sort of mutual understanding that all relating to 
the unfortunate Lewiston was to be consigned to obli- 
vion. Mrs. St. Clair was not to be urged to any expla- 
nation till she should see fit to make it ; and Lady 
Rossville was never more to be offended with the 
mention of a name, connected as it was in her ideas 
with so" much degradation. Mrs. St. Clair then rang 
for her maid to resume her office, and the Countess 
returned to the saloon to her guest. 



CHAPTER X. 

*' Mes yeux sont trop blesses, et la cour et la ville 
Ne m'offrent rien qu' objets k m'echauffer la bile ; 
J'entre en une humeur noire, en un chagrin profond, 
Quand je vols vivre entre eux les hommes comme ils font ; 
Je n'y puis plus tenir, j 'enrage ; et mon dessein 
Est de rompre en visiere a tout le genre humain. " 

MOLIERE. 

Upon entering the apartment Gertrude's surprise was 
great at finding Mr. Eamsay and Miss Pratt seated 
together, seemingly in a most harmonious Ute-d,-tete, 
She had anticipated, almost with dread, a meeting 
betwixt two such opposite natures, and had expected 
something to result from it little less discordant than 
the union of a bagpipe and fiddle ; instead of which, 
she found their tastes and sentiments completely 
blended into one beauteous whole, and the current of 
their conversation gliding on so smoothly that it did 
not seem even to require Cowper's animated 

««No 

To brush the surface, and to make it flow. " 

But the extraordinary conjunction of two such 
distant planets is easily accounted for. It was not 
brought about by any heavenly influences, for such 
were not the tests for their spirits, but simply by 



THE INHERITANCE. 69 

means of a sufficient quantity of well-expressed, well- 
applied abuse, which is perhaps the strongest of all 
cements for worldly minds. 

Uncle Adam, it is already known, had been left, 
like one of the fortunate adventurers in the Arabian 
Tales, in a luxurious apartment, surrounded, not with 
singing damsels and silver tissue and sherbet, 'tis 
true, but with what to him were far greater enjoy- 
ments — silence, and freedom, and a newspaper. 
Perhaps another in his place would have taken a 
survey of the room, or have pondered a little over its 
comforts, but he was none of these; he was quite 
unconscious of the finery that surrounded him, and 
not at all aware of the difference between the crimson 
and gold damask fauteuil in which he was seated, and 
his own little strait-backed haircloth one; neither was 
he at all struck with the contrast between the pro- 
fusion of lamps which dififused their enchanting light, 
and his long -wicked, dim, streaming tallow candles. 
The bright blazing fire, indeed, was too powerful an 
object to be overlooked, but that only drew forth a 
peevish exclamation as he pushed back from its over- 
powering influence, and sought for his spectacles to 
see how stood the stocks. But no spectacles were to 
be found ! Every pocket, and they were not a few, 
was searched, and their depths profound explored — 
but in vain ; the case, the shagreen case, was there, 
as if only to mock his hopes, for it was empty ; and 
Uncle Adam at length recollected, with infinite vexa- 
tion, that he had left their precious contents on the 



70 THE INHERITANCE. 

little table in his own parlour. How tormenting to 
behold with the mind's eye the very object we are in 
want of lying on a particular spot, where our own 
hands have placed it ; to see it, as it were, within our 
grasp, and yet to be in torments for the want of it ! 
Such as have experienced this will sympathise in the 
sufferings of Uncle Adam, as he saw his spectacles 
lying afar off upon their broad end, their arms ex- 
tended as if to grasp his temples, while yet the 
spectacles saw not him ! 

" I deserve this for my folly in comin' to such a 
place!" was his mental ejaculation, as he shuffled 
away to a window to see whether it was not yet too 
dark for him to find his way home to his own house 
and his spectacles. But at that critical moment the 
door opened, and Miss Pratt, like another Fairy 
Paribanon, entered. She had discovered his arrival, 
and having had the advantage of hearing his character 
and peculiarities thoroughly discussed upon various 
occasions, she was prepared to meet him accordingly. 

Miss Pratt, like many other people, had a sort of 
instinctive reverence for riches, even where she had 
not the shghtest prospect of profiting by them. She 
therefore accosted Mr. Eamsay with the greatest 
respect and courtesy, expressed the pleasure it gave 
her to see him at Eossville, hoped he had taken 
something since he came — it wanted a long while to 
dinner yet ; and, in short, did the honours as though 
she had been mistress of the mansion. 

Uncle Adam, who knew not who he had to deal 



THE INHERITANCE. 71 

with, was not displeased at the empressemenf testified 
in his behalf by a stranger, and he declined the prof- 
fered civility in his politest manner, adding that he 
never took anything between breakfast and dinner. 

"And an excellent rule it is," said Miss Pratt in 
her most emphatic tone, "for them who can keep 
it ; for I really think there is a great deal too much 
eating and drinking goes on in the present day, 
especially amongst young people. The consequence 
is, you hear of nothing but bile, bile, bile, from the 
oldest to the youngest I really think poor Lord 
Rossville hurt himself very much by his manner of 
eating, not but what he was a moderate man in the 
main ; but, to tell the truth, God knows ! but I never 
can help thinking he dealt too deep in a fine fat 
venison pasty that was at dinner, the very last day 
he sat at his own table, poor man." 

"I dinna doot it," said Mr. Eamsay, secure that 
he never would come to an untimely end by any 
such means. 

" I've given our young Countess a hint about that," 
resumed Miss Pratt; "for I really think there's need 
for a little reform in the kitchen here. It was just 
yesterday I was saying to her that for all the cooks 
she had, and for all the grand things they sent up, 
I didn't believe she had one that could make a drop 
good plain barley-broth, or knew how to guide a 
sheep's head and trotters. She laughed, and desired 
Philips the maitre d^hdtel^ to be sure to have one 
Scotch dish on the table every day ; but I've no great 



72 THE INHERITANCE. 

brew of any Scotch dish that'll ever come out of the 
hands of a French cook." 

*' There'll be nae want o' a fire to cook the dinner, 
I'm sure," said Uncle Adam, pointing to the well-filled 
chimney ; " there's a fire might roast an ox. There's 
no possibility o' going near it." 

" I'm sure that's true ; for I'm quite o' your opinion, 
Mr. Eamsay, as the old byword says, * Better a wee 
ingle to warm ye, than a muckle fire to burn you.' 
It's really a sin to see such fires; and it's all the 
same way — every room in the house blazing with 
fires and lamps, till, I declare, my eyes are like to be 
put out o' my head ; but Lady Rossville's so fond of 
light, she never can get enough of it, and her eyes are 
young and strong ; but she'll maybe feel the frost of 
it yet, when she comes to know the value of them 
like you and me, sir." 

Miss Pratt was quite conscious that her stout, 
active, indefatigable eyes were not to be mentioned 
in the same breath with Mr. Eamsay's little, weak, 
pale, bleared ones ; but when people are resolved to 
please they must sometimes make great sacrificed. 
The compliment was not wholly thrown away, though 
it was not returned in kind, for, with one of his 
vinegar smiles. Uncle Adam replied — 

" I set mair value upon my spectacles than my een 
noo, for I find the tane o' very little use to me want- 
ing the tither ; I've forgotten my glasses in my ain 
hoose, and I canna read ae word o' thae papers that 
she put into my hands." 



THE INHERITANCE. 73 

" That is really a hard case ! " exclaimed Miss 
Pratt, with the most ardent expression of sympathy ; 
"but I'll tell you what, Mr. Eamsay, you need be at 
no loss for spectacles in this house, for poor Lord 
Rossville, I'm sure if he left one pair, he left a score — 
always changing his glasses. I really think he hurt his 
sight very much by it. I would get you them in an 
instant, but Lady Rossville has the keys of all his places, 
and she's with her mother just now, so perhaps you'll 
wait till she comes out ; but if you'll give me leave, 
I'll read the papers to you, for I haven't seen them 
myself yet ; somebody or other whipped them out of 
the room this morning before I had time to look at 
them. I suspect some of the servants, for they are 
really getting out their horns at no allowance. 
Lady Rossville stands much in need of some experi- 
enced, judicious friend, to take some management, 
for they're really going off at the nail. I do not 
know what servants are to come to for my part ; 
they'll be no living with them by-and-bye. I have 
but one, and what do you think, sir, of the trick she 
played me the t'other day *? It's but seldom I leave 
my own house, for I'm one of those who think there's 
no place like home, but you know one must give up 
their own way sometimes ; and I had been away upon 
a visit, and came home one dreadful night very 
wearied and far from well ; had been just comforting 
myself all the way with the thoughts of getting a 
warm cup of tea and my own bed, when instead 
of that, lo and behold ! I found my house shut up, 



74 THE INHERITANCE. 

my key nobody knew where, and my fine madam off 
on some junketing match. The consequence was, I 
must have lain in the street if your worthy nieces, 
the Miss Blacks, hadn't accidentally heard of the 
situation I was in, and made a point of my coming 
to them ; and after all this, I'm obliged to keep her 
for six months, or pay her wages and board wages ! " 

All this was oil and honey to Uncle Adam's wounds ; 
and Chirsty Carstairs's enormities, great as they were, 
looked somewhat smaller beside the still more mon- 
strous offence of Babby Braidfoot. He had had the 
satisfaction of turning the delinquent out of his doors, 
instead of having endured the humiliation of being 
locked out by her ; consequently, whatever similarity 
there might be in their injuries, still he stood upon 
higher ground, and he gave a faint chuckle of delight 
at finding his new friend's misfortune so much worse 
than his own. 

Miss Pratt now turned to the newspaper. " I'm 
just taking a glance of the stocks, for though it's but 
little I have to do with them, still, you know, ' we all 
bow to the bush we get bield frae.' Ay! there's 
another tumble, I see, down to 80 and a fraction ; rose 
to 80-|; some done so high as 81-1- • left off, at the 
close, at 80|." 

" That's the 3 per cents ; and what are India 
bonds 1 " asked Mr. Kamsay. 

"India bonds, 61 to 63 premium, long annuities 
shut, short do.," etc. etc. etc. And Miss Pratt, in the 
twinkling of an eye, ran through the whole range of 



THE INHERITANCE. 75 

the money market, displajdng in her career the 
most complete knowledge of each and every branch, 
as though she had been born and bred a stock-jobber. 

Uncle Adam was astonished. He had read of 
women ascending to the skies in balloons, and de- 
scending to the depths of the sea in bells ; but for a 
woman to have entered the sanctum sanctorum of the 
Stock Exchange, and to know to a fraction the differ- 
ence between 3 per cents red. and 3 per cents ace, 
and to be mistress of all the dread mysteries of scrip 
and omnium ! it was what Uncle Adam in all his 
philosophy never had dreamed of, and Miss Pratt 
rose at least 5 per cent in his estimation. 

Having discussed the stocks in all their bearings, 
she proceeded with the varied contents of the paper ; 
but the fall of the 3 per cents had not sweetened her 
temper, and she was very bitter in her indignation, at 
" Proposals for publishing, by Subscription, a Print 
of the Reverend Peter Pirie, Proofs, £2 : 2s.," etc. ; 
and at the announcement that the lady of a " Lieu- 
tenant Duncan Dow, late of His Majesty's 119th 
Regiment," had presented him with a son and heir. 
But the whole measure of her wrath was reserved for 
the obituary record, which, as usual, contained the 
apotheosis of some, it may be very worthy, but cer- 
tainly very insignificant, individual, as in the present 
instance. 

"Died, at the house of his father, No. 2 East 
Cotton Row, where he had gone for the recovery of 
liis health, on the 13th ult, aged 45, Nathaniel 



76 THE INHEKITANCE. 

Lamb, Esq., hosier and glover, after a long and linger- 
ing illness, which he bore with the most heroic 
patience and Christian resignation. To the purest 
benevolence, the most enlightened piety, and the most 
devoted patriotism, Mr. Lamb, junior, united the 
firmest principles, the most perfect integrity, and the 
most affable address " 

Here Uncle Adam broke out with — "Affable 
address ! the affability o' a hosier ! I never could 
bear that word aw my days, and far less noo ; dinna 
read ony mair, ma'am. Affable ! affable ! I wonder 
wha wad tak' affability aff the hands o' a glover ! but 
it's just o' a piece wi' awthing else in this world now. 
Half-pay lieutenants maun hae leddies and heirs, and 
bodies o' schulemaisters and ministers maun sit for 
their pickters, and hae their faces printed as though 
they war kings and conquerors. The newspapers are 
filled wi' the lives o' folk that naebody ever heard o' 
till they war dead. I dinna ken what things are to 
come to ! " 

" Indeed, sir, that's my wonder, for I really think 
the world has been turned fairly topsy-turvy since 
our days ; but I assure you it would be well if people 
were satisfied with putting their deaths in the papers. 
What do you think, sir, of having to pay, as I had 
the t'other day, thirteenpence-halfpenny for a notifi- 
cation of the death of a woman that wasn't a drop's 
blood to me ; just thirteenpence-halfpenny out of my 
hand, and that for a person that, to tell the truth, I 
thought had been dead twenty years ago." 



THE INHERITANCE. 77 

This was another nut for Uncle Adam, who had 
long brooded over the mortification of having had to 
pay a penny for a similar compliment, and even 
thought how he should obtain redress, or at least 
revenge. Miss Pratt went on — 

" As Anthony Whyte (my nephew, Mr. Whyte of 
Whyte Hall) says, 'I've given orders to take in no 
letters from the Post-Office now with black seals; 
they're either disagreeable or expensive, and some- 
times both.'" 

" It's a very sensible regulation," said Uncle Adam, 
warmly. 

" And as for burial letters — what do you think, sir, 
of Anthony Whyte being asked to three burials in one 
week, and two of them people he never had broke 
bread with r' 

" I think a man had better be a sauUie^ at once," 
said Mr. Ramsay, vehemently. 

But here the colloquy of these two congenial souls 
was interrupted by the entrance of Lady Rossville. 

"That's an ooncommon sensible woman," said 
Uncle Adam, as his friend and ally pattered away to 
the other end of the room for a fire-screen for the 
Countess. 

" I really am agreeably surprised with your uncle," 
whispered Miss Pratt, as she drew Lady Rossville a 
little aside ; " a fine shrewd old man. I assure you he 
knows odds from ends ; it's not everybody that will 
do with him — he puts you to your trumps in a hurry." 
^ A hired mourner. 



CHAPTER XI. 

" If a man be gracious and courteous to strangers, it shows he 
is a citizen of the world, and that his heart is no island cut off 
from other lands, but a continent that joins to them." 

Lord Bacon. 

Gertrude watched with some solicitude the meeting 
between her mother and Mr. Lyndsay, as she entered 
the drawing-room before dinner, leaning on her arm 
in all the parade of convalescence. When he came 
up to offer his congratulations her cheek was slightly 
suffused, and for a moment her eye fell beneath the 
mild yet searching expression of his. But quickly 
regaining her self-possession, she repHed to his saluta- 
tion in that distant ceremonious manner which plainly 
indicated the sort of footing they were henceforth to 
be upon. Mr. Lyndsay had too much tact not to feel 
what was implied, and the inference he drew was 
that he must now cease to expect any explanation 
from her as to the past. The Earl's death had de- 
prived him of the only hold he had over her, for there 
was no one now who had a right to interpose their 
authority. Averse as he was to interference in 
general, yet, upon this occasion, he considered him- 
self called upon to act a decided part, and he resolved 



THE INHERITANCE. 79 

to take the first opportunity of coming to an under- 
standing with Mrs. St. Clair on the subject of the 
mysterious interviews. 

Lady Eossville felt that some apology was due 
to her cousin for the introduction of so uncouth a 
companion as Uncle Adam ; and she hastened to ex- 
plain to him the cause of his becoming her guest, and 
to request that he might not consider him as any tax 
upon his politeness, or think it incumbent upon him 
to entertain a person who, she assured him, despised 
entertainment in every shape. 

But Lyndsay was not one of those fastidious beings 
who can only tolerate the chosen few whose endow 
ments place them at least on a level with themselves. 
Although the gulf was wide which separated Mr. 
Ramsay and him in mind and manners, yet he did 
not disdain all fellowship with him, but welcomed the 
old man with that politeness which, when it springs 
from benevolence, can never fail to please, and at the 
same time with that ease and simplicity which of all 
modes of expression are without doubt the most 
attractive. Although quite alive to the peculiarities 
of his new associate, and not a little amused with 
many of them, yet his better feelings always prevailed 
over his sense of ridicule, and instead of "giving 
play " to Uncle Adam's foibles, he led the conversa- 
tion to such subjects as were best calculated to show 
him to advantage. 

It is only well-informed people who are capable of 
extracting information from others. We require to 



80 THE INHERITANCE. 

know something of a subject ourselves before we can 
even question others to any purpose upon it; and 
perhaps it often happens that our own ignorance is in 
fault when we throw the blame upon other people's 
stupidity. Such was not Edward Lyndsay's case; 
and while he unconsciously displayed his own know- 
ledge even in seeking information, he drew forth the 
hidden stores of Mr. Eamsay, and rendered him 
almost an instructive and an entertaining companion. 

Uncle Adam was no Othello, but still, in the 
course of his long life he had met with his "disastrous 
chances," his " moving accidents," his " hairbreadth 
'scapes," and had traversed many an " antre vast and 
desert idle;" and though he would have disdained 
anything like a regular recapitulation of aught he had 
ever seen or met with, yet by judicious management 
a great deal could be extracted from him in his own 
homely manner. 

Meanwhile Miss Pratt's cloven foot began to display 
itself to his piercing ken. Vague notions at first 
floated through his brain about her, but they were 
such as only wanted a little more time and oppor- 
tunity to body forth into real shapes. He had a 
notion that she spoke too much, that she took too 
much upon her, that she tasted of too many different 
dishes instead of dining upon one thing, which was 
one of his cardinal virtues. Then, it was not her 
business to press him to eat in his own niece's house, 
where he felt he had a better right to eat and to 
speak than she had. But the head and front of her 



THE INHERITANCE. 81 

offending was her asking him to drink a glass of 
Madeira with her during dinner — that was a piece of 
assurance he could not away with. In his time it 
used to be a serious and solemn thing for a gentleman 
to invite a lady to drink wine with him, but here was 
a total boideversemenf of the natural order of things, 
and Uncle Adam actually blushed an acceptance as he 
wondered what was to come next. To counterbalance 
these improprieties, she had, in the -t^vinkling of an 
eye, suited him in a pair of spectacles, which seemed 
as though they had been made for him, or he for 
them; she had bespoke a haggis for dinner the 
following day, and undertaken to direct Monsieur 
Morelle in the art of stuffing it ; then she lost seven 
games at backgammon, for which she paid down three 
and sixpence — with very evident reluctance, too ; which 
always serves to enhance the value of the winnings 
tenfold. So that, upon the whole. Uncle Adam was 
rather inclined for once to suspend his judgment, and 
instead of decidedly condemning her, he merely began 
to look upon her as a sort of doubtful character. 

Lady Rossville had ordered an apartment for her 
uncle communicating with the yellow turret, which 
contained the goddess of his idolatry, and which she 
intended should henceforth be his sanctum sanctorum. 
She therefore introduced him to it the following day ; 
but that he might feel more at liberty to indulge his 
soft emotions, she was retiring, when, looking round, 
he called to her — 

" But whar's the pickter you promised me 1 " 

VOL. II. G 



82 THE INHERITANCE. 

"There," said Gertrude, pointing to the Diana. 

"That!" exclaimed he in a tone of surprise and 
indignation. " That Lizzie Lundie ! they're no blate 
that evens her to it ! " And he walked round and 
round the turret, something in the manner of an 
obstreperous horse in a mill. 

"This is very strange," said Gertrude; "both 
Lord Eossville and Miss Pratt seemed to know the 
history of this picture so perfectly that I never 
imagined there could be a doubt about it. I am 
really sorry that you have been so disappointed." 

"Disappointed ! " repeated Uncle Adam, stopping 
short, and looking almost black with wrath ; "I'm mair 
than disappointed — I'm perfectly disgusted ! " Then, 
taking another look : '* Lizzie Lundie was a daacent, 
wise-like, sensible craater as ever lived, and to compare 
her to that brazen-faced tawpie, wi' a moon upon her 
head, and a great bow and arrow in her hand ! " 

And again he turned away in increasing animosity 
against the Diana. 

" But, my dear uncle, these are merely adventitious 
embellishments ; you see she is represented in the 
character of Diana " 

" And what business had they to represent her as 
ony such thing?" 

This was a question Lady Eossville was aware 
she could not answer to his satisfaction, therefore 
prudently waived it by asking another. 

" So, then, you don't discover any resemblance f 

"Resemblance! Hoo is't possible there can be 



THE INHERITANCE. 83 

ony resemblance ? Wha ever saw he/r in that mad-like, 
oonnatral condition — mair like a stage actress than 
an honest man's dochter. You might just as weel set 
me up for a — a — an Apollo ! " 

The idea of Uncle Adam, with his long cross blue 
face and pjrramidical peruke, personating the God of 
Day, diverted Lady Eossville so much that she laughed 
outright But he retained his inflexible severity of 
countenance, and seemed quite unconscious of the 
ridicule of such a supposition. 

" Well, since you don't like the picture, you shall 
not be ofi'ended by it again," said the Countess, la3dng 
her hand gently on his arm to lead him from the 
place. " You shall have another dressing-room to 
your apartment, and you have only to forget the way 
to this one." 

But Uncle Adam now fixed himself opposite to the 
huntress queen, and having carefully wiped and ad- 
justed his spectacles, he contemplated her for some 
time without speaking. At length, with a groan he 
said — 

" I'll no say but what there may be something o' a 
likeness in the face when you come to consider it. 

There's the brow, the bonny brent brow " Then, 

kindhng anew : " But wha e'er saw her brow wi' that 
senseless-like thing on the tap o't 1 They could nae 
pent her een, to be sure, for they might as weel hae 
tried to pent twa diamonds. The bit mouth's no 
entirely unlike, but it has nae her bonny smile." And 
Uncle Adam gazed and conmiented till he gradually 



84 THE INHERITANCE. 

lost sight of the moon and the bow, and all the 
offensive peculiarities of the sylvan goddess, and at 
length saw only the image of his long-loved Lizzie. 

From that time the turret became his favourite 
haunt ; and as he was there perfectly unmolested, and 
was left at liberty to follow his own devices, secure 
from even the interruptions of Miss Pratt, he remained 
tolerably quiescent. Every day, indeed, he made an 
attempt to break off, and return to his own comfortless 
abode, but every day he was overruled by Lady 
Eossville, whose influence over him was daily increas- 
ing, although he was perfectly unconscious of it, and 
would have spurned the idea of being influenced by 
anything but his own free will. But there was also 
another inducement for him to prolong his stay, which 
he would have been still more ashamed to have 
acknowledged. In a paroxysm of ennui one bad day 
he had taken up the first volume of " Guy Mannering," 
with Httle expectation of deriving either amusement 
or instruction from it ; but, once fairly entered upon 
it, he found himself compelled, nolens volens, to proceed, 
which he did, however, in the most secret and stealthy 
manner. Uncle Adam had been no novel reader even 
in his younger days, and with him, as with many other 
excellent but, we must suppose, mistaken people, 
novels and mental imbecility were ideas inseparably 
united in his brain. Novel writers he had always 
conceived to be born idiots, and novel readers he con- 
sidered as something still lower in the scale of intellect. 
It was therefore with feelings of the deepest humiha- 



THE INHERITANCE. 85 

tion he found himself thus irresistibly carried along 
on a sort of hinges cushion^ as it were, by Meg Merrilees 
and Dominie Sampson. Not that he traversed the 
pages with the swiftness of a modern reader, or that 
he read them probably with half the rapidity with 
which they were written — for he was one of those 
solid substantial readers who make what they read 
their own. He read and re-read, and paused and 
pondered, and often turned back, but never looked 
forward even while experiencing the most intense 
anxiety as to the result. In short, Uncle Adam's 
whole being was completely absorbed in this (to him) 
new creation ; while, at the same time, he blushed even 
in private at his own weakness in filling his head with 
such idle havers, and indeed never could have held 
it up again if he had been detected with a volume in 
his hand. 



CHAPTER XII. 

"Oh ! scene of fortune which dost fair appear 
Only to men that stand not near !" 

Cowley. 

And now visions of earthly bliss — of pomp, of power, 
of pleasure — began to float before those eyes scarce 
dried from natural tears. But Gertrude had not now 
so much time as formerly to indulge in the idle day- 
dreams of romance. With her change of situation 
the penalties of greatness came thronging upon her. 
Unthought-of claims upon her time, her talents, her 
attention, followed in rapid and never-ceasing suc- 
cession ; and she found, with surprise and disappoint- 
ment, that the boundless freedom she had so fondly 
anticipated as the attribute of power was farther from 
her than ever. To will, indeed, was hers ; but how 
many obstacles intervene to the accompHshing of the 
will, even of the most absolute ! obstacles which con- 
science itself raises as barriers against the encroach- 
ments of self-indulgence and natural inclination, and 
which, though as thin air to some, are as rocks of 
adamant to others. But Lady Rossville possessed a 
more powerful monitor than even conscience would 



THE INHERITANCE. 87 

have proved in the person of Edward Ljmdsay. " line 
femme est ais4e a gouverner," says a French satirist, 
"pourvu que ce soit un homme qui s'en donne la 
peine;" and the truth of the assertion Gertrude 
seemed in a fair way to realise. Ardent and enthusi- 
astic in her nature, and as such always prone to fall 
into extremes, the sense of dependence she felt towards 
her cousin as the only person on whose judgment and 
rectitude she could safely rely would gradually have 
assumed the habit of implicit deference to most of his 
views and opinions ; not from conviction, for on many 
subjects they widely differed, but simply because, like 
many other people, she loved to be directed in matters 
where her affections were not concerned, and was 
always ready to sacrifice her judgment provided it did 
not interfere with her inclination. There is, indeed, 
much of luxury to an indolent or a fanciful mind in 
thus casting its cares upon another, while it floats 
calmly along in undisturbed serenity, or abandons 
itself to the thick-coming fancies of its own imagina- 
tion. In every situation of life this disposition, alas ! 
has its dangers ; but how much more in those gifted 
ones whom God has set on the high places of the 
earth ! But Mr. Lyndsay was not a person to take 
advantage of this flexible form of mind. He had too 
much delicacy to assume any authority, or interfere in 
any department openly ; too much honour to use his 
influence in an indirect or underhand manner. He 
aimed to guide her principles, not to direct her actions; 
to strengthen her mind, not to govern it ; but, above 



88 THE INHERITANCE. 

all, he strove to impress upon her the responsibility of 
the duties assigned her ; the account which would one 
day be required of the talents committed to her. But 
such doctrine, even though uttered in the mildest and 
most persuasive accents, still sounded harsh to ears 
just opening to the blandishments of the world. 
Imagination had stretched a broad and flowery path 
in endless perspective before her, and she recoiled 
from that straight and narrow way which the Christian 
pilgrim has been commanded to tread. Life — young 
life's enchanting scenes were now bursting on the 
sight in all their exquisite but transient, delusive 
beauty ; and at that joyous season when " the common 
air, the earth, the skies " seem to the exulting heart 
to breathe of " opening Paradise," how does it turn 
from the holy precepts, the solemn admonitions of 
Divine truth, as from that which would annihilate all 
that is delightful in existence ! 

So felt the child of prosperity, as she looked on all 
the pride of life, and, with the fallen cherub, was 
ready to exclaim — 

" earth, how like to heaven, if not preferr'd !" 

But with all her faults — and they were many — 
Gertrude was not one of those selfish, sordid spirits, 
whose enjoyments centre solely in their own gratifi- 
cation. Her nature was lofty, and her disposition 
generous ; but her virtue was impulse, her generosity 
profusion. She wished to diffuse happiness around 
her, and she imagined she had only to scatter money 



THE INHERITANCE. 89 

with a lavish hand, and it would necessarily spring 
up, bearing the fruits of peace and love, and virtue 
and joy. Like all enthusiastic novices her schemes 
of philanthropy, if schemes they might be called 
which plan had none, were upon the most magnificent 
scale; and it was with mortification she beheld her 
baseless fabrics melt away beneath the plain practical 
results of Mr. Lyndsay's rational benevolence. Schools 
were the only establishments for which she could 
obtain his concurrence, and even there she thought 
his ideas much too humble. A plain schoolhouse 
was an odious, frightful thing; she must positively 
have it elegant, if not expensive, and the children must 
be all prettily dressed ; and she drew a design for the 
building, and invented a uniform for the children, both 
so classical and so uniquey that she was all impatience 
to behold these models of her taste and fancy realised. 
There was another object which Gertrude was still 
more anxious to accomplish, and that was to make 
the happiness of William Leslie and Anne Black, by 
providing him with a church. But the one for which 
her cousin had applied had been given away by Lord 
Rossville, and there was no immediate prospect of 
another vacancy occurring. Even Mr. Lyndsay could 
not assist her here, for his interest was already deeply 
engaged ; but he was little less desirous than herself 
of befriending a young man whose amiable character, 
evangelical doctrine, and mild attractive manners, 
were more powerful recommendations than aught 
that rank and beauty could have urged. 



90 THE INHERITANCE. 

Matters were in this state when Anne accompanied 
her father and mother one day on a visit of condolence 
to Eossville. While Miss Pratt, as usual, did the 
honours of the mansion to the seniors of the party, 
Lady Eossville took her cousin apart to converse with 
her on the subject; for, [although too modest and 
diffident to make a direct application, there was an 
anxious appeal in her pensive countenance that could 
not be misunderstood. She at once frankly owned 
that the cause of her dejection proceeded from the 
apparent hopelessness of her prospects. 

" But is the want of a church really the only obstacle 
to your union 1" inquired Gertrude. 

"Alas, no!" said her cousin mournfully; "my 
father and mother, and indeed my whole family, 
oppose it now more than ever, because of the superior 
establishments my sisters have got ; and they talk of 
the degradation I am bringing upon them all by such 
a poor connection, till I am sometimes ready to give 
it up in despair ; and so I would, were it only my own 
happiness that is at stake, that I would willingly sacrifice 
to theirs, but William loves me so truly, and has loved 
me so long, ever since we were children, and to give 
him up now, I am sure would break both our hearts." 
Here Anne dropt some natural tears, but wiped them 
soon, and in a firmer tone, added — " But I am wrong, 
very wrong, to give way to such desponding thoughts ; 
if it is God's will we shall yet be happy in His good 
time; and if He sees good to disappoint us I trust we shall 
both be able from our hearts to say, His will be done ! " 



THE INHERITANCE. 91 

Gertrude was for an instant smote with the dif- 
ference of her cousin's sentiments from her own ; her 
meek submission,' her humble acquiescence, seemed as a 
reproach to the wayward feelings of her own rebellious 
heart; but quickly she dispelled the gathering con- 
viction — " She cannot love as I do," thought she, " or 
she could not reason thus ; hers may be virtue, but it 
is not love." 



CHAPTER XIIL 

"Thy house and pleasing wife ! " 

Horace. 

The snow had now disappeared, the waters had sub- 
sided, the air was soft for the season, the cloudy- 
welkin had cleared up into a fleecy dappled sky, and 
sanguine spirits deemed that winter was past and 
gone. For, in the quaint words of Cuddy, in the 
Shepherd's Calendar, — 

' * When the shining sun laugheth once, 
You deemen the spring is come at once. " 

Even the faintest breath of spring brings pleasure 
to all whose hearts are not seared and whose bodies 
are not iron. "We feel as if we were about to renew 
our existence ; the opening skies seem to smile upon 
us as they did in the days of our youth, and again 
their bland influence steals upon our senses. Again 
we cast away the cares and the griefs of the world, 
with its clouds and its storms, and again spring up in 
our numbed hearts, 

' ' Hopes that are angels in their birth, 
But perish young, like things of earth ! " 



THE INHERITANCE. 93 

But it is not every one who owns such influences. 
Amongst the inmates of Eossville Castle a fine day 
produced its pleasures, but they were of a diff"erent 
nature. Mrs. St. Clair liked it that she might take 
an airing in state, and, accordingly, set forth in all 
the pomp of a stately equipage. Lady Betty liked 
the sun, because it would shine upon fat Flora, who 
was sent out to profit by it. Miss Pratt having 
rummaged every creek and cranny in the interior of 
the house, took advantage of it to look about her a 
little without doors, to see what abuses she could 
detect. Uncle Adam having seen Dandie Dinmont 
and Dumple safe home, closed his book, and crept 
away with his hands behind his back to take a 
saunter. Lady Eossville, taking Mr. Lyndsay's arm, 
set out as she had done on many a worse day, to mark 
the progress of the improvements she had begun ; to 
accelerate, if possible, by her impatience, the building 
of her schoolhouse, and to visit some of the cottages 
of her poor, with whose ways and wants she was now 
beginning to make herself acquainted. 

Her romantic expectation of finding elegant dis- 
tress in mud -cabins was now gradually dwindhng 
away, for wherever she went she met only the home- 
liness of matter-of-fact poverty. 

Gratitude and respect and blessings indeed were 
hers, for how easy is it for the great to make them- 
selves beloved by the poor — how cheap the purchase 
of the best feelings of humanity ! Gertrude was 
new to the luxury of doing good, and her heart would 



94 THE INHERITANCE. 

swell and her eyes fill with tears as the trembling 
hand of age was raised to Heaven to call down its 
blessings on her head; and she could look almost 
with pleasure on the children her bounty had clothed, 
even though their fe-atures were coarse and their 
dialect uncouth. 

In the course of her domiciliary visits she found 
herself at the door of the cottage she had visited the 
memorable morning after her arrival at Eossville; 
and, somewhat curious to know the state of affairs 
there, she was about to enter, when at that moment 
Uncle Adam was descried approaching. They waited 
till he came up, and then invited him to join in the 
visit, which, after a little humming and hawing, he 
agreed to do. 

The door was hard and fast shut, but upon knock- 
ing it was banged open by our ci-devant friend, the 
dame of the stoups, who immediately recognised and 
most cordially welcomed her former visitor. 

" Eh ! my Leddy, is this you 1 I ax your pardon 
my Leddy, but I really didna ken weel wha you was 
the first time you was here ; just come foret, my 
Leddy; just stap in ower, sir; dinna be feared my 
Leddy, just gang in bye," etc. etc. etc. ; and carefully 
closing the door against the breath of Heaven, she 
ushered her guests into the dark precincts of her foul- 
aired, smoky cabin. A press-bed, with a bit of blue 
checked stuff hanging down, denoted that the poor 
sufferer had now exchanged his seat by the fire for 
his bed, and the chair which he had formerly occupied 



THE INHERITANCE. 95 

stood with its back to the fire, covered with clothes 
apparently drying. 

"How does your husband do?" inquired Lady 
Rossville. 

" Oo, 'deed, my Leddy, he's just quite silly-wise," 
responded the dame in a whining, melancholy key ; 
" he just lies there snottering awa', " pointing to the 
bed. 

" Is he confined to bed ?" asked Mr. Lyndsay. 

" No — no, sir, he's no confined ony ways, he gets up 
whiles ; but 'deed it's no aye convenient for me to ha'e 
him up ; for, as I tell him, what can he do when he 
is up 1 for he's no fit to put his hand to onything ; 
and he's mair oot o' the way there than he wad be 
ony place else." 

"More out of the way of regaining health, cer- 
tainly," said Mr. Lyndsay. 

"Health, sir!" interrupted the hostess; "'deed 
he'll ne'er ha'e health as lang as he lives ; he's just 
been draggle -dragglen on these twunty month by 
Martimas; I'm sure I've had a weary time o't wi' 
him, and noo I canna get a hand's turn maist done for 
him, the hoose an' awthing's just gawin' to destruc- 
tion ; and I'm sure I really think shame o' mysel'," 
surveying two large dirty arms from top to toe ; " an' 
there's the weans, puir things, gawin' in perfect rags, 
for I ne'er can get a steek put in either to their duds 
or my ain." 

Here the voice of the sick man was heard in a faint 
accent, calling the gudewife. 



96 THE INHERITANCE. 

" That's just the way he gangs on, my Leddy ; he 
just lies there and yelps, yelps, yelps even on for me. 
What is't noo ?" in her loudest sharpest key, as she 
banged up to the bed. " A drink ? I wonder ye ha'e 
nae mair sense, man, than to ask for a drink the noo, 
when her Leddyship's here, an' Maister Lyndsay an' 
aw, speerin' for you." 

Mr. Lyndsay here took up a jug of water which 
was standing on the top of a chest by the bedside, 
and held it to the sick man's lips, but the reproof was 
thrown away, or rather misconstrued by his soothing 
helpmate. 

" Oh, sir, I think shame o' your takin' sae muckle 
trouble, for he's just like a bairn ; he's aye wantin' 
something or anither, and he's just lost aw discretion 
thegither. I wonder you dinna think shame o' your- 
sel'," to her husband, "when ye see the fashery you 
mak'." 

Mr. Lyndsay, meanwhile, having felt the invalid's 
pulse, began to put a few queries to him, touching his 
complaint. 

" Have you much thirst f asked he. 

" Oh, sir, he wad drink the very ocean an let him." 

" Pray, let him speak for himself," said Lyndsay, 

again putting the question to the patient, who seemed 

so unused to the privilege that he was evidently at 

a loss how to make use of it. 

" Have you any pain in your head V* 
" 'Deed, sir, I dinna think he has muckle pain in 
his heed, though he compleens o't whiles ; but, as I 



THE INHERITANCE. 97 

often tell him, I wiss he had my back. I'm sure 

I've a pain whiles atween my shouthers, sir " 

rolling a huge, fat, strong-looking back as she spoke. 

" I shall attend to your pains some other time, if 
you will be so good as keep them quiet for the pre- 
sent," said Lyndsay ; then once more turning to the 
sick man, he asked whether he had pain or weakness 
in his limbs that prevented him from rising. 

" I'm sure I dinna ken what it is," again interposed 
the incorrigible matron. "He canna be sair, I'm 
positive o' that, for there's naething like an income 
aboot him — oo no — no, no sir, he's aye keepit a hale 
skin, and that's a great mercy. He's very silly, to be 
sure, but that canna be helpit, ye ken." 

" Do you never allow your husband to answer for 
himseK?" asked Mr. Lyndsay, at a loss whether to 
laugh or be provoked at this intolerable woman. 

" Oo, sir, I'm sure he's walcome to speak for me ; 
but, 'tweel I dinna think he kens very weel what till 
say, or what it is that ails him. Tam" — shouting 
into his ear — "the leddy wants to hear an you can 
speak ony. Canna ye thank her for the braw claise 
and the siller she gied you ? " 

" Should not you like to be up out of bed •? " asked 
Gertrude, now trying her skill to extract an answer ; 
but before he had time to reply, his mouthpiece again 
took up the word. 

" Up, my Leddy ! 'Deed he just craik craiks to be 
up, and than whan he's up he craik craiks to be doun ; 
an' it wad be very disconvenient for to ha'e him up 

VOL. II. H 



98 THE INHERITANCE. 

the day, for you see," pointing to the clothes that were 
spread over the chairs, " the fire's aw tane up wi' his 
dead-claise that I was gi'en an air to, for they had 
got unco dampish -wise wi' the wat wather ; an' I'm 
thinkin' he'll no be lang o' wantin' them noo ; and 
this is siccan a bonny day, I thought what atween the 
lire and the sun they wad be sure to get a gude 
toast. " 

Uncle Adam had hitherto practised a degree of 
forbearance which had scarcely a parallel in his whole 
life and conversation ; but, indeed, from the moment 
the dame had first opened her lips he had felt that 
words would be weak weapons to have recourse to, 
and that nothing less than smiting could at all satisfy 
his outraged feelings. Luckily at this moment she 
was not within reach of his arm, otherwise it is to be 
feared his wrath would have vented itself not in thin 
air but in solid blows. As it was, he at length burst 
forth like a volcano, with — 

"Airing the honest man's dead-claise when the 
breath's in his body yet ! Ye're bauld to treat a 
living man as ye wad a sweel'd corpse, and turn his 
very hoose into a kirkyard ! How daur ye set up 
your face to keep him frae his ain fireside for ony o' 
your dead duds 1 " 

And snatching up the paraphernalia, so ostentati- 
ously displayed, he thrust the whole into the fire. 
" There, that'll gie them a gude toast for you ! " said 
he, and as they broke into a blaze he quitted the cabin. 

" Eh, sirs ! the bonny claise that cost sae muckle 



THE INHERITANCE. 99 

siller ! " sobbed the mistress in an hysterical tone, as 
she made an ineffectual effort to save them; "the 
ill-faur'd carle that he is, to tak' upon him for to set 
low to ony honest man's wundin'-sheet ! " 

Lady Rossville was confounded; for, as she but 
imperfectly comprehended the pith of the parley that 
had taken place, the action appeared to her, as 
indeed it was, perfectly outrageous, and her purse was 
instantly open to repair this breach of law and justice. 
But Lyndsay could scarcely keep from laughing at 
the tragi-comic scene that had just taken place. From 
his knowledge of the character and modes of thinking 
of the Scottish peasantry he was not at all surprised 
at the gudewife's preparations; but while she was 
engrossed with her attempts to redeem some bits of 
the linen from the flames he took the opportunity of 
carrying on his colloquy with the husband. 

" So I see your wife does not attempt to conceal 
from you the danger you are in," said he. 

" Na, na," said the invalid, perking up, " what fore 
wad she do that ? they wadna be a true f reend that 
wad hid a man's danger frae him ; we're aw ready 
enough to hide it frae oursel's, and forget the care o' 
our ain immortal sowls." 

" You have seen your minister, then, I suppose 1 " 

" Oo ay, honest man 1 he ca's in nows and thans, 
and muckle edification I get frae him ; " then calling 
to his dame, he began to comfort her for the loss she 
had sustained, as though it had been her own holiday 
suit. 



100 THE INHERITANCE. 

" What a shocking woman ! " exclaimed Gertrude, 
as they quitted the cottage ; " how worse than un- 
feeling to have prepared her husband's dead-clothes, 
and have them even displayed before his eyes in that 
manner ! " 

"She certainly is not a favourable specimen of a 
Scotch gudewife," answered Mr. Lyndsay; "but I 
have seen the most affectionate wife talk of the death 
of her husband, even while administering to his wants 
with the greatest solicitude ; but they are much less 
sophisticated in their ideas upon these subjects than 
we are ; they would think it highly wrong to use any 
deception at such a time." 

" But how shocking to hear one's death talked of 
as inevitable " 

" But they do not talk of it in that manner ; they 
believe that all things are possible with God. They 
send for the doctor as they do for the minister, and 
pray for a blessing on the means used ; they leave all 
in the hand of God. I have seen many on their 
deathbeds in various circumstances, and I have always 
found that they who were in the habit of hearing of 
death and eternity, of conversing with their ministers 
and religious people, have, generally speaking, looked 
forward to death with resignation and composure." 

"I can, indeed, easily imagine," said Lady Koss- 
ville, " that the poor man we have just left must look 
forward to heaven with great complacency, were it 
only to be rid of that tormenting creature, and out of 
that vile smoky cabin." 



THE INHERITANCE. 101 

"A smoky house and a scolding wife have, indeed, 
always been looked upon as the ne plus ultra of human 
misery ; but that is only amongst the rich. When you 
have seen more of the poor you will be satisfied there 
are still greater evils; you are still a novice in the 
miseries of life, Gertrude." 

" Perhaps so, and yet " she stopped and sighed, 

and they proceeded homewards in silence. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

"Shee hath forgott how many a woeful stowre 
For him she late endured ; she speaks no more 
Of past ; true is it that true love hath no powre 

To looken backe " 

Spensek. 

All must have felt what it is in this ungenial clime 
to part with a fine day. It seems as though we were 
bidding farewell to some long-lost friend, and we love 
to watch, even with pensive regret, the last rays of the 
softly-sinking sun, as we would trace the lingering 
steps of some loved one, who it may be long ere we 
behold again. 

"Fatigued as I am, still I must enjoy this lovely 
day to the last," said Lady Rossville, as they ap- 
proached the castle, and she threw herself on a 
garden chair that stood upon the lawn; "it is one 
that sends such a ' summer feeling to the heart,' that 
I feel as though I were a better being while sitting 
here listening to the faint notes of that sweet thrush 
than I should be shut up in the drawing-room with 
Lady Betty and Miss Pratt." 

" It is much more agreeable, at least," said Lyndsay, 
also seating himself ; "as to its being more amiable 



THE INHERITANCE. 103 

and virtuous, I fear I may scarcely lay that flattering 
unction to my soul. I am apt to distrust myself 
since " 

" Since when 1 " asked the Countess. 

"Since I knew you, Gertrude." 

This seemed rather to have burst from his lips 
involuntarily than to have been uttered deliberately ; 
and there was something in the tone which made 
Gertrude start, as a vague suspicion darted across her 
mind that Lyndsay loved her. But she had scarcely 
time to admit the idea ere it was as quickly dispelled ; 
for when she turned to look on him the earnest 
expression with which he had been regarding her 
fled ; and, in a gay manner, he added^ — 

" I flattered myself I had been an infinitely wiser, 
better, and more respectable person than I find I am ; 
for I begin to feel myself, under your influence, 
gradually sinking into a soft, simple, neat-handed, 
somewhat melancholic sort of a souffre douleur ; and 
if I stay much longer with you I must provide myself 
with a flute and a silk dressing-gown, and then " 

"What, then?" asked Lady Eossville laughingly. 

" Why, then, you must promise to look upon me 
as a very interesting creature; and I will stand, or 
sit, half the night at my open window playing love- 
lorn ditties that will cause, as Gray says, the very 
cat to wring its hands." 

" Well, I shall provide the silk dressing-gown and 
the flute ; but for the lady and the cat — you must find 
these for yourself." 



104 THE INITEKITANCE. 

" But these will be only a small part of the stock- 
in-hand necessary for me to commence business with. 
I must be able to write sonnets upon every occasion, 
often upon no occasion at all. I must be able to take 
the most correct and striking likenesses without a 
single sitting " 

" 'Tis time you had begun to practise that part of 
your profession, certainly," said Gertrude. " Do you 
remember how long ago it is since you promised to 
draw my picture 1 Pray, begin now ; I have nothing else 
to do, and this lovely setting sun will invest me with 
a little of his radiance, and soften down all my ugli- 
nesses; see how beautiful everything looks in its light." 

"But, you know, I warned you I never flattered in 
my portraits ; mine profess to be ' truth severe ;' cold, dry, 
hard facsimiles, without a single Claude Lorraine tint." 

" No matter ; let me see myself such as I am, or at 
least appear to my friends." 

" Well, not to shock you at the very outset, I must 
say you appear to me to love truth, and to be sincere 
in the search of it; but you have some pride and 
a little obstinacy to prevent your arriving at it; 
then, your fancy is too lively to permit you to take 
the right way, and while you are under its fantastic 
dominion you will never judge correctly." 

" Not very flattering, certainly," said the Countess, 
affecting to laugh, " 'is just not ugly, and is just not 
mad,' seems to be the amount of your panegyric ; but 
pray go on." 

"You do not want penetration, but you form your 



THE INHERITANCE. 105 

opinions too hastily; you will be accused of incon- 
sistency and caprice, but unjustly i, you will only be 
undeceived " * 

" I seem to have got into tAe hands of a fortune- 
teller rather than a portrait-painter," said Lady Ross- 
ville somewhat pettishly, "and as I never listen to 
predictions that bode me no good, I'll none of yours ; 
'tis an idle art, and no coming events shall cast their 
shadows upon me. Come, this is enough for one 
sitting ; you shall have another to-morrow, when per- 
haps you will do me such as I am, not as I may be." 

" To-morrow I must leave you," said Lyndsay. 

"No — pray do not talk of leaving me," cried 
Gertrude quickly. "What will become of me when 
you are gone ? I shall have no one being with whom 
I can have any companionship ; no one to talk with, 
no one to read with, no one to sing with, no one to 
walk with, no one to teach me any good thing ; my 
dear cousin, say you will not leave me ?" 

But Lyndsay shook his head. 

"Come, Zoe," to a little Italian greyhound that 
lay at her feet, "do you join your pretty little en- 
treaties to mine;" and she made it assume a begging 
attitude. The dog was a gift from Delmour, and 
Lyndsay turned away his eyes. 

"I must be gone," said he. 

" Nay, rather say shall, or will be gone," cried the 
Countess pettishly; "I do not believe there is any 
must in the matter ; you are your own master, free 
to go or stay as you yourself incline." 



106 THE INHEEITANCE. 

"Even were it so, do not be so much of a spoiled 
child, Gertrude, as to quarrel with your friend merely 
because he has, what it is said all men have, and some 
women too, a will of his own." 

"But I have more than once of late sacrificed 
mine to Mr. Lyndsay's," said Gertrude coldly. 

" But were I to sacrifice my will, I must at the 
same time sacrifice my conscience along with it," said 
Lyndsay; "or rather, to confess the truth, they are 
somewhat at variance upon this occasion; the one 
urges me to stay, the other warns me to be gone." 

" The conscience may be mistaken as well as the 
will sometimes," said Gertrude; "in this matter I 
suspect yours is, otherwise it would have told you 
how much good you may do by remaining here." 

" No, it never tells me such flattering tales ; that 
is the province of hope or fancy, and sometimes, 
perhaps, I may have been weak enough to listen to 

their idle tales " he stopped in some emotion, and, 

for an instant, fixed his eyes on Gertrude's face ; but 
if his words had any particular meaning it was not 
caught by her, [for not the slightest change was 
perceptible on her speaking countenance. "If I 
thought I could be of any real service to you I would 

remain here even at the sacrifice of my own " 

happiness was on his lips, but he checked himself, and 
substituted " time ; but I have no right to interfere in 
the only way where I might be of use, and I cannot 
linger on for an indefinite time as a sort of spy upon 
the actions of others. You require protection, I know, 



THE INHERITANCE. 107 

and are now in a situation to claim it ; choose, then, 
guardians for yourself, or allow the law to appoint 
them for you." 

To think and to speak were commonly one and 
the same thing with Gertrude, and she instantly 
exclaimed — 

" Then I shall choose you for one of my guardians." 

" Choose me !" exclaimed Lyndsay in astonishment, 
"No, that cannot be." 

" Why not 1 I know nobody I should like so much 
to have for my guardian. I am sure you would never 
scold me or lecture me, however naughty I might be. 
Now, don't, pray don't propose to me any of your old 
cross things, with round wigs, and square buckles, and 
long pockets, who would preach me a sermon upon 
every five-pound note I squandered." 

" Such guardians are scarcely to be met with now, 
except upon the stage," said Lyndsay, smiling. 

" Perhaps the wigs and pockets ; but the long 
faces and long lectures, I fear, prevail everywhere. 
I must know the person before I can put myself in 
such jeopardy." 

"You may be in greater jeopardy, Gertrude," said 
her cousin gravely. 

Lady Kossville blushed ; she saw to what he 
alluded; and, after a pause, she said, in some 
emotion, — 

"The danger which you seem to apprehend no 
longer exists ; the person whose audacious behaviour 
to me you twice resented is no more — he has perished 



108 THE INHERITANCE. 

at sea." And she recapitulated the account of the 
shipwreck, and her mother's testimony confirming 
the fate of Lewiston. 

" So far, then, I shall leave you with a lightened 
mind," said Lyndsay ; " there seems no more to 
apprehend from that quarter at least. If there are 
other dangers " 

But at that moment a post-chaise and four, the 
horses in a foam, came driving up the avenue full 
speed. 

"Who can this be?" exclaimed Lady Eossville; 
then as the thought flashed upon her that it might 
be Colonel Delmour, she started up, her heart beat 
violently, her colour went and came, she would have 
moved towards the house, but her agitation was so 
great she sank upon the seat, while her eyes remained 
fixed upon the carriage. It drew up at the castle 
gate, and scarcely had it stopped, when the person 
from within burst open the door, and Colonel Del- 
mour himself sprang out with such impetuosity that 
it was but a single glance could be caught of him as 
he rushed into the house — but that was enough. 
Again Gertrude rose, but, ashamed of her emotion, 
she could not lift her eyes to Lyndsay's, or she would 
have seen that he was little less agitated than herself ; 
she could only accept the arm he off'ered her, and in 
silence they proceeded together towards the house. 

As they entered the hall the voice of one of the 
servants was heard, as, in reply to an interrogatory, 
" Her Ladyship has been out for some hours with Mr. 



THE INHERITANCE. 



109 



Lyndsay;" and at that instant Colonel Delmour, with 
a hurried step and agitated air, rushed from the 
saloon. Joy, fear, doubt, displeasure, love, a thousand 
mingled emotions were all struggling in Gertrude's 
breast ; she tried to withdraw her arm from Lyndsay's, 
but she only clung the more helplessly to him, while 
he felt her increasing weight, and feared she would 
have fallen to the ground. 

" Lady Eossville is fatigued with her walk," said 
he, addressing Colonel Delmour, and mastering his 
own agitation at sight of hers ; " a glass of water here, 
quickly," to the half-dozen of servants who stood idly 
lounging in the hall, and the whole instantly vanished 
in all the bustle and importance of their bearing. 
But, mortified and ashamed of this display of her 
weakness, the Countess instantly regained, in some 
degree, her self-possession. Even while her heart 
beat high, and her whole frame trembled with exces- 
sive emotion, she said, with a lofty air — 

" I have to apologise to Colonel Delmour for this 
uncourteous reception on his return to " 

At that moment Lyndsay, taking the water from 
the servant, presented it to her himself, in the manner 
of one privileged to render those little attentions. 

"Desire my carriage to wait," cried Delmour, in a 
loud and passionate voice, as it was driving away. 

Lady Rossville was now nerved to perfect self- 
command, and, with a blush of offended dignity, she 
passed on to the saloon, where sat only Lady Betty, 
still lost in wonder at her nephew's sudden appearance 



110 THE INHEmTANCE. 

and no less sudden flight. Lyndsay's indignation bad 
been excited by the rudeness and violence of Colonel 
Delmour's address, but anger with him was at most 
but a transient feeling, and a moment after they had 
entered the saloon he held out his hand to him in a 
friendly manner ; but the other turned hastily on his 
heel and paced the room with disordered step, utterly 
regardless of the questions Lady Betty continued to 
pour out upon him. At length, approaching Gertrude, 
he said, "I would speak with Lady Eossville alone." 

For a moment the Countess hesitated at the abrupt- 
ness of the demand, and her pride revolted at the 
manner in which it was made ; but she rose, and 
with an inclination of the head, led the way to another 
apartment. Colonel Delmour followed, when, having 
shut the door — 

" Gertrude," cried he, as he seized her hands, while 
his own shook with the violence of his emotion ; " now 
speak my doom — from your own lips only will I hear 
it ; say but the word — tell me I have been deceived, 
forgotten, forsaken?" 

" Oh, no — no — ^never !" exclaimed Gertrude, giving 
way to tears, as her resentment began to subside at 
sight of her lover's anguish. 

" Call it what you will, then, but do not rack me 
by equivocating. Already I have endured tortures 
for your sake that worlds would not have bribed me 
to undergo ; despair itself would have been a blessing, 
compared to these distracting doubts." 

"'Tis I who have had cause to doubt," said the 



THE INHERITANCE. Ill 

Countess, as she seated herself at a table, and shaded 
her eyes with her hand, ashamed of the tenderness 
her tears betrayed for one whose constancy she had 
such cause to question. 

"You who have had cause to doubt!" cried 
Delmour impetuously ; " could you then doubt me, 
Gertrude?" 

" Had I not cause ? Why was I left at such a 
time, when a single word from you " 

" Would have consigned you for ever to poverty 
and obscurity. Is it not so ? You would have been 
mine, had I been base and selfish enough to have 
plunged you in ruin — to have sacrificed your happi- 
ness to my own ? " 

" Ah ! by what a degrading standard did you 
measure my happiness if you thought pomp and 
wealth could ever compensate for broken vows — for 
a deceived heart*? You would have renounced me !" 

"No, by Heavens, I would not — I will not; but, 
yes, you are right, I would ; I will renounce you, 
Gertrude, if by doing so I can ensure your happiness ; 
it matters not though mine be a wreck." 

Lady Rossville spoke not ; her heart heaved with 
emotion, and Colonel Delmour, leaning against the 
chimneypiece, contemplated her for some moments 
without speaking. At length, taking her passive 
hand, he seated himself on the sofa by her, then, in 
a voice calmed into tenderness, he said — 

"Gertrude, there was a time when not^ had an 
angel spoke, should I have believed that aught on 



112 THE INHERITANCE. 

earth could ever have induced me to resign this hand, 
and even now worlds should not wrest it from me ; 
but fickle, faithless as you are, why should I seek to 
retain it 1 " 

" Release me. Colonel Delmour," cried the Countess, 
in a voice choking with emotion. " I have not de- 
served — I will not listen to such language ; " and she 
struggled to withdraw her hand. 

" Yet hear me one moment ; my fate is on your 
lips. Tell me that our vows are cancelled, and in 
doing so, seal my doom." 

But Gertrude spoke not. 

"Gertrude, in spite of all, dearest, most beloved ; I 
cannot resign you but with my dying breath. Why 
do you impose upon me so cruel a sacrifice 1 " He un- 
clasped the hand in which he had held hers locked : 
" Why suffer your hand to remain for an instant in 
mine ? Gertrude, you are free ! " 

Lady Rossville slowly withdrew it ; then raising her 
head she shook off the tears which gemmed her eyes, 
and cast on him a look which spoke all the confiding 
tenderness of her soul. Then, replacing her hand 
within his, she turned away her head to hide the 
blush that mantled her cheek. 



CHAPTER XV. 

"0 Jove ! why hast thou given us certain proof 
To know adulterate gold ; but stamp'd no mark 
"Where it is needed most — on man's base metal ? " 

Euripides. 

Lyndsay passed the intervening time in a state of 
feverish excitement, very foreign to his natural 
equanimity of mind. That he loved Gertrude he 
could no longer conceal from himself, but his love 
was not of that violent yet contracted nature which 
had sought merely to engross and appropriate her 
affections exclusively to himself. He had proposed a 
nobler aim, a purer gratification. As his love was with- 
out idolatry, so was it free from selfishness. He had 
not sought to undermine her aff'ections ; he had aimed 
at elevating and ennobhng them by extending their 
sphere beyond the narrow perishable limits of human 
attachment, and he had hoped that a mind so pure, so 
lofty, so generous as hers, might yet become enamoured 
of virtue, might yet be saved from uniting itself with 
a nature so unworthy of its love. And now was the 
test; on this interview her fate seemed suspended. 
Her emotion at sight of Colonel Delmour had, indeed, 
evinced the power he still retained over her, but that 
VOL. II. X 



114 THE INHERITANCE. 

power might be urged too far. Though Gertrude 
was soft and feminine in her feelings, yet her spirit 
was high, and ever ready to rise against violence and 
injustice ; and thus the tie which a tenderer hand 
could not have unloosed, might, by his own im- 
petuosity, be broken. Such were the hopes and fears 
that alternately rushed over Lyndsay's heart as he 
waited, in an agony of impatience, the result of the 
conference, his eyes fixed immovably upon the door 
which led to the adjoining apartment. Their usually 
soft, benign expression had given way to dark and 
troubled melancholy, and Lady Betty's questions fell 
unheeded on his ear. At length the door opened, 
and the first glance sufficed to show Lyndsay that his 
doom and hers were sealed. Gertrude's eyes were 
still moist with tears, 'tis true ; but there was a smile 
on her lip, a flush of joy on her cheek, a lightness in 
her step, an aerial grace diff'used over her whole face 
and figure, that told a tale of reconciled love, and 
seemed as though Happiness itself were embodied in 
a mortal form. All had been explained, and explana- 
tions were received as proofs of holy writ — for what 
imperfect evidence suffices where the heart is willing 
to believe ! Colonel Delmour told a tale of suffering ; 
he told of the agonising alternative that had been 
offered to him to make her his, and in doing so to 
make her at the same time an outcast from the home 
of her fathers, to reduce her to poverty and want; 
he told her of the struggles of his mind, of the menac- 
ing fears, the half -formed resolutions, the desperate 



THE INHERITANCE. 115 

thoughts which had harassed his fancy and destroyed 
his peace by day ; the horrid dreams, the agonising 
forms which had haunted his couch by night ; till at 
length nature sank under the conflict, and a violent 
fever ensued. No sooner was he sufficiently recovered 
to encounter the voyage than — unable longer to 
endure this state of suspense, and yet still more 
unable to come to any decision until he had seen her, 
— he formed the resolution of returning to Britain, be 
the consequences what they might, of sounding the 
depths of her affection, and of receiving his sentence 
from her own lips. The voyage proved tedious and 
hazardous, and on landing he proceeded direct to 
London. He had there heard, for the first time, of 
the death of Lord Kossville ; and his brother at the 
same time made known to him his rejection by the 
Countess, and the fact that her marriage with Edward 
Lyndsay was a settled point, and was to take place 
as soon as propriety admitted. Almost maddened at 
this intelligence, he had thrown himself into a post- 
chaise and travelled night and day till he had arrived 
there, when his worst fears were confirmed by the 
answer he received to his inquiry for her, as well 
as from the footing she appeared to be upon with 
Lyndsay. 

This was Colonel Delmour's way of telling his own 
story, and it was correct in everything save the motives. 
" What's done we fairly may compute," but who can 
trace actions to their source 1 Who can fathom the 
depths of the human heart, or discern those secret 



116 THE INHERITANCE. 

springs which, although they send forth waters alike 
pure to the eye, are yet as the issues of life and death 1 
Colonel Delmour had told a tale which in every cir- 
cumstance was true, and yet the colouring was false. 
He had ascribed to disinterested affection what in 
reality proceeded from self-interest ; for although he 
assuredly did love, it was love compounded of such 
base materials as adversity, like the touch of Ithuriel's 
spear, would soon have shivered to atoms. But she 
saw nothing of all this, and she gave her tears, her 
faith, her love to him whom she thought more than 
worthy of them all. His looks, too, seemed to confirm 
his words, for he looked thin and pale and harassed ; 
but as the cloud cleared away from his brow, and the 
traces of passion which had disfigured his fine features 
disappeared, that gave him an interest in her eyes 
which more than atoned for the want of more dazzling 
attributes. 

On her part, Gertrude could also have told much ; 
but 'tis woman's part to suffer, man's privilege to 
speak, on those occasions ; and while Colonel Delmour 
poured forth the history of his feelings in all the 
eloquence of excitement, it was plain to see that he 
touched an answering chord in her heart, and that 
she too had endured all that he expressed. But now 
that the storm was past, the sunshine of the soul was 
theirs, only varied according to the different natures 
from which it emanated ; and as Lyndsay beheld the 
April-like joy that beamed in Gertrude's face, and 
met the haughty exulting glance of Delmour, he for 



THE INHERITANCE. 117 

a moment closed his eyes, as though he could also 
have closed his heart against the conviction that Ger- 
trude was lost to him — lost to the higher, happier 
destiny, that he had fondly traced out for her. 

"Wliat's taking you away in such a hurry, 
Frederick ? " asked Lady Betty, laying down her book 
and her spectacles on their entrance. 

" I only came in haste, and have no intention of 
returning the same way," answered he, with a smile of 
meaning to the Countess ; then ringing the bell, he 
gave orders to discharge his carriage. 

"Where did you come from to-day?" was Lady 
Betty's second interrogatory. 

"That I really cannot tell, having travelled day 
and night since I landed at Falmouth; their bound- 
aries are not very accurately defined in my mind, or 
my mind's eye either." 

" What was the need of that?" demanded her Lady- 
ship. " Had you heard of your good uncle's death f 

"In London, where I only stopped half-an-hour." 

" Did you see your brother ? Did he tell you that 
he had given up the election *? Did your mother and 
sisters tell you that ? " 

"I did — he did — they did; let us have done." 

" And what was the nonsense of your posting down 
then?" 

"To put a stop to absurd pretensions," answered 
Colonel Delmour with a sort of insolent nonchcdance^ 
as he looked at Mr. Lyndsay. 

" But do you think you'll succeed ? " 



118 THE INHERITANCE. 

Colonel Delmour smiled a smile of haughty disdain. 
Lady Ross ville coloured; and Lyndsay, looking steadily 
at him, said calmly — 

" I have heard of no absurd pretensions — none who 
had not, at least, an equal right to try their merits if 
they had thought proper." 

Ere Colonel Delmour could utter the scornful 
retort which had risen to his lips, the door opened, 
and Uncle Adam walked in, with his antique peruke, 
and blue boot-hose, for he had now got so tame that 
he had learnt to walk the house at all hours of the 
day. He was not aware of the arrival of a stranger, 
otherwise he would certainly have skulked till the last 
moment, if, indeed, he would not actually have fled 
the country to his own city of refuge in Barnford. 

Colonel Delmour surveyed him for a moment from 
head to foot with unfeigned astonishment, when Lady 
Rossville introduced him as her uncle, Mr. Ramsay. 
He then, quickly recovering himself, saluted him with 
a bow, twice repeated, so condescendingly profound, 
and with such an air of high breeding, as formed a 
ludicrous contrast to Uncle Adam's awkward, repulsive 
gait, and dry uncouth manner. The latter possessed 
too much tact not to feel what was implied, and that 
such lofty courtesy only betokened one, "proud 
enough to be humble," and a new stock of wrath 
began to ferment within him, that on hand having 
previously been disposed of at the expense of Dame 
Lowrie's dead-clothes. For the first time Lady Ross- 
ville blushed for her relation, but ashamed to show 



THE INHERITANCE. 119 

that she was ashamed, she hastened to made some 
remark to him on the scene they had witnessed in the 
cottage ; then, as if afraid to hear him answer, she 
went on — "But I must tell the story, and my cousin 
Lyndsay will help me in my Scotch ; " and with her 
musical voice and refined accents she attempted to 
take off the barbarous dialect of the cottars ; but 
when she came to the denouement, Uncle Adam burst 
out with " The impudent thief ! She deserved to ha'e 
been sent the same gate as her duds ! " 

Colonel Delmour absolutely stared, and that was 
a great deal for a man like Colonel Delmour to do. 
Lady Kossville, covered with confusion, tried to laugh ; 
but the thought that Colonel Delmour was shocked 
with her uncle made it rather a difficult matter. 
Luckily, at that moment, her servant entered to say 
that Mrs. St. Clair had returned from her airing, 
and begged to see her Ladyship immediately. The 
Countess rose to obey the summons. Colonel Del- 
mour attended her to the door, pressed her hand, 
whispered some soft nothing in her ear, to which she 
replied with a blush and a smile; then calling his 
servant, said he should go to dress, while she repaired 
to her mother's apartment. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

'* ! how this spring of love resembleth 
Th' uncertain glory of an April day ; 
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun, 
And by-and-bye a cloud takes all away." 

Shakespeari:. 

"What is this I hear?" was the exclamation that 
greeted Gertrude on her entrance. "Is it possible 
that Colonel Delmour has had the effrontery to come 
to this house ? Is it credible that you have had the 
weakness to receive him under your roof after what 
has passed 1 " 

" I know nothing that ought to render Colonel 
Delmour an unsuitable or an unwelcome guest in my 
house," answered the Countess, endeavouring to speak 
calmly and decidedly. 

"Then you do not know that, as the poor, de 
pendent Gertrude St. Clair, he slighted, disowned, 
and in a manner rejected you ; and that now, as 
Countess of Rossville, he flies to you, worships you, 
would marry you ? Is it not so, and did I not foretell 
how it would be 1 " 

"While we view Colonel Delmour's conduct in 
such different lights, 'tis impossible we should agree. 
Mamm^a, I beseech you, say no more. I am satisfied — 



THE INHERITANCE. 121 

completely, perfectly satisfied — that he has acted all 
along from the noblest and most disinterested motives." 

"How has he proved that? Who is there credu- 
lous enough to believe his averments of disinterested 
affection? Why should they be believed? What 
right has he to expect such monstrous credulity ? " 

" The right which every generous mind feels it has 
upon the faith and confidence of another." 

" Gertrude, your words are those of a child — I may 
say of a fool. Who else could be weak enough to 
credit assertions contradicted by the whole tenor of 
the man's conduct ? " 

" Be it so, then ! " cried Lady Rossville, vainly 
struggling to retain her composure ; "I am a child, 
a fool — for I believe in Colonel Delmour's truth and 
honour. The prejudices of the whole world would 
not shake my conviction." 

" And what is to be the consequences of your mad- 
ness? Will you dare to brave my authority, and 
marry him against my consent?" cried Mrs. St. Clair, 
giving way to one of her transports of passion. Lady 
Rossville remained silent. " Speak, I desire you," con- 
tinued she, with increasing impetuosity; "I repeat, 
will you dare to marry him against my consent?" 

" Mamma, I have twice solemnly passed my word 
to you that I will not marry until I have attained the 
age of twenty-one." 

*' If you would have me to trust to that, then, till 
that period arrives, dismiss your lover ; this very 
day let Colonel Delmour leave your house, and leave 



122 THE INHERITANCE. 

you free; consent to that, and I will believe you 
sincere. " 

" Impossible ! " exclaimed the Countess in agitation. 
" How can you require of me to act in such a manner ?" 

"Then leave it to me. I am the fittest person 
to act for you in this matter. I will see Colonel 
Delmour myself ; " and she was moving towards the 
door when Gertrude laid her hand upon her arm, 
and, with a cheek coloured with resentment, exclaimed 
— " If my friends are to be turned from under my 
roof, then is my own house no longer a habitation for 
me. I will seek another home — other protection." 

Mrs. St. Clair turned pale with passion, and in a 
voice almost suffocated, she said — " In the meantime, 
I command you, by the duty you owe me, to confine 
yourself to your own apartment for the present. Do 
not think to brave my power. I still possess it, and 
will use it." 

There are bounds beyond which passion cannot go 
without counteracting its own purpose ; and Mrs. St. 
Clair had scarcely uttered the words when she was 
sensible she had gone too far to be obeyed. Lady 
Rossville instantly became calm, but it was not the 
calm of fear or of submission, but that of settled 
determination, as she bent her head in silent acqui- 
escence, and, without uttering a syllable, was about 
to withdraw. 

"Stay — where — what do you meanf cried her 
mother, interrupting her in her progress to the door. 

"To obey," answered Lady Eossville, calmly. 



THE INHERITANCE. 123 

"Gertrude, why — why do you drive me to such 
extremities'?" 

" 'Tis I who am driven to extremities, God help 
me !" exclaimed her daughter, bursting into tears. 

" Gertrude, what is your meaning — what is your 
purpose?" cried her mother, in violent agitation. 

Lady Kossville was silent for a few moments. The 
question was repeated, when, after a struggle to regain 
her composure, she said — "This house and all that 
I call mine is yours to command ; but my affections, 
my Hberty, will brook no control. For this day I 
submit to be a prisoner in my own house ; to-morrow 
I will place myself under the protection of the laws 
of my country ; from these I shall surely meet with 
justice — let these appoint guardians for me " 

Mrs. St. Clair was struck with consternation. She 
felt the error she had committed in goading to the 
utmost a spirit such as her daughter's; and there 
remained but one way to extricate herself from the 
dilemma she had brought herself into by her violence ; 
true, that was the old way, but it had hitherto 
succeeded, and might still answer the purpose better 
than any other. 

" No, Gertrude," cried she ; " since it is your wish 
that we should part, it is for me to seek another home. 
Suffer me to remain here for this night, and to-morrow 
you shall be rid of me for ever. I feel I can neither 
contribute to your greatness nor your happiness ; but 
all that I would lay claim to — peace of mind and 
respectability — are in your hands. Spare me, at least, 



124 THE INHERITANCE. 

the misery and disgrace of being denounced to the 
world by one for whom I have done and suffered so 
much ! " and Mrs. St. Clair wept real genuine tears. 

But at that moment Mrs. St. Clair's maid tapped 
at the door to inform her lady that dinner was 
upon the table; and at the same moment the gong 
sounded in confirmation of the intelligence. In an 
instant all high-wrought feeling was put to flight by 
this vulgar everyday occurrence. 

" Good Heavens ! " exclaimed she, aware that her 
elaborate toilet required at least an hour to arrange. 
" What is to be done 1 How came we to miss the 
dressing-bell. It is impossible for me to appear ; and 
both to be absent would have a strange appearance. 
Gertrude, you must join the company; do make 
haste." Then, as her daughter stood irresolute — "As 
you love me, obey me now. Let there be mutual 
forgiveness, mutual confidence. Away, my love!" 
and she kissed her forehead. To avoid further con- 
tention, Gertrude hastened to her apartment to dress 
and recover her composure as she best could. 



CHAPTEE XVIL 

•' My soul, sit thou a patient looker-on ; 
Judge not the play before the play is done ; 
Her plot has many changes ; ev'ry day 
Speaks a new scene : the last act crowns the play." 

QUAELES. 

But there was no fairy awaiting her there to dry her 
tears, and deck her from head to foot by a touch of 
her wand, but a mere human, though very expert 
waiting-maid, lost in a maze of conjecture at her lady's 
non-appearance at this, the most important crisis of 
the day, in her estimation. 

" I have put out your black crape robe with bugles, 
my Lady," began the important Miss Masham, "and 
your black satin and your pearls, my Lady, and 
your " 

" Pray, don't tease me, Masham," interrupted her 
lady in a fretful manner, very foreign to her natural 
one. 

" My Lady !" exclaimed the bewildered maid. 

" Desire Jourdain to say that I beg the company 
may not wait for me. I will join them at the second 
course, and give me — no matter what; no, not that 
odious velvet — never let me see it again." 



126 THE INHEEITANCE. 

" Crape, to be sure, my Lady, is much more suitable 
now ; though satin, you know, my Lady, is the most 
properest demme schuchong."^ 

The Countess sighed as she threw herself upon a 
seat, and allowed herself, for the first time, to be 
dressed according to Miss Masham's taste. 

"What a frightful head!" was the reward of 
Masham's toils, as her lady looked at herself in the 
glass; then, smote with the mortification she had 
inflicted, she added, " But I believe 'tis because I look 
so cross — don't I, Mashamf 

" Cross ! dear, my Lady, that is such an idear ! 
As if your Ladyship could ever be cross ! and your 
head, my Lady, looks charmingly becoming." But 
her lady demolished part of Miss Masham's work 
before she descended to the dining-room. 

Notwithstanding that Miss Pratt had instantly 
voted that Lady Kossville's message should be acted 
upon, and loudly protested that it would be very ill- 
bred were they not to eat their dinner the same as 
if she were present, when she had desired it; yet 
Colonel Delmour as promptly decided otherwise, and 
ordered the dinner to be taken downstairs again. 
Then quitting the room, he repaired to the gallery 
through which he knew the Countess must pass from 
her own apartment, there to wait her appearance, and 
lead her to dinner. 

The old feud between Pratt and him had lost 
nothing by absence, and they had met with the same 
^ Demi-saison. 



THE INHERITANCE. 127 

feelings of hostility as they had parted. She had 
expressed in the loudest manner her astonishment 
at sight of him ; he was the very last person she had 
dreamt of seeing at Rossville, had figured him still 
at Gibraltar with his regiment, it was so long since 
he had been heard of, and sometimes it was " out of 
sight, out of mind," etc. etc. etc. 

On Colonel Delmour's part, he, in a contemptuous 
manner, had congratulated Miss Pratt on having 
accepted an official situation in Lady Eossville's 
household, which insured her friends the enjoy- 
ment of her company at all times, and at all 
seasons, however unseasonable. 

No sooner was his back turned, than Miss Pratt 
and Uncle Adam began to lay their heads together, 
for he had already become a new bond of union 
between them. 

"What do you think of this new-comer, Mr 
Ramsay*?" whispered she, as she made up to him 
in the out-of-the-way corner where he usually sat. 
Uncle Adam, who scorned to whisper, and, indeed, 
would not have whispered to have saved the Capitol, 
only replied by an expressive grunt, which was, how- 
ever, sufficiently encouraging for his friend to proceed. 

"What do you think of his taking it upon him 
to order the dinner down again, after Lady Ross- 
ville had sent to desire us to begin 1 I'm sure I didn't 
care a pin-head, for my part, about the matter ; but 
I really thought it vastly impertinent in him, of all 
people, to say black or white in this house ; for, be- 



128 THE INHERITANCE. 

tween ourselves, I can tell you he is no favourite in 
a certain quarter." 

" I dinna wonder at it; for he's a proud upsetting- 
like puppy." 

" Proud ! I only wish, sir, you had seen as much 
of his pride and impertinence as I've done." 

" I've just seen enough o't. Didna I see him boo 
to me as if he were the Prince o' Wales V 

" That's exactly Anthony Whyte ! — my nephew, 
Mr Whyte of Whyte Hall ! He says he can stand 
anything but Colonel Delmour's bow, for that he 
bows to him as if he was his shoemaker — a man 
that could buy and sell him, and all his generation ! 
As for me, I assure you, I am thankful he gives me 
none of his civilities." 

"What's brought him heref demanded Uncle 
Adam, gradually winding up to the sticking point. 

" Indeed, sir, that's more than I can tell you, un- 
less it's to try whether he can come better speed with 
the Countess than he did with the heiress. But 
there's little chance of that, or I'm mistaken." 

"She has mair sense, I hope." 

"That she has ! Not but that I will always think 
she might have Avaited and looked about her a little ; 
for, you know, to use an old saying, ' There's as gude 
fish i' the sea as e'er came out o't,' and she needn't 
have been in any hurry." 

"I see nae gude that comes o' waiting," said Uncle 
Adam, with a sigh, as he thought how he had waited 
in vain; "but I'm at a loss to understand wha ye ca' 



THE INHERITANCE. 129 

the fish, for I dinna think she's ta'en up wi' onybody 
that I've seen." 

" My dear Mr. Eamsay ! is that possible ! I really 
would have given you credit for greater penetration ! 
Ay ! not to have found out what's been going on all 
this time," and her eyes took the direction where 
Lyndsay sat reading, or at least appearing to read, 
for his thoughts were otherwise employed. 

Uncle Adam shook his head. 

"No, Mr. Eamsay; you know, if you doubt that, 
you may doubt anything. Even Lady Betty, honest 
woman, who seldom sees over her nose, asked me 
t'other day if I did not think we were like to have 
a wedding soon ? In fact, everything, I believe, was 
pretty much settled before poor Lord Eossville's death, 
though whether he would have given his consent I 
can't pretend to say ; I only speak of what I know for 
a certainty." 

Mr. Eamsay still looked incredulous. 

"But what makes you doubt it, sir*? — there's 
nothing very unlikely in it. To be sure, as I said 
before, Edward Lyndsay's no match for her in point 
of fortune, you know ; but she has plenty for both, and 
he's a genteel, elegant-looking creature ; and though 
I think his notions on some things a great deal too 
strict, yet I know him to be an honourable, fine crea- 
ture as ever lived, and she'll change him, depend upon 
it; she'll bring him round to her way of thinking 
before it's long." 

" Weel, weal ; we shall see — time will show," said 

VOL. II. K 



130 THE INHERITANCE. 

Mr. Kamsay, still in that unconvinced manner, wliich 
is infinitely more provoking than flat contradiction. 

"The old ram-homed goose, that he is," thought 
she ; " what can he know about these things f Then 
aloud, " See ! — 'pon my word, Mr. Eamsay, I think 
we've seen enough to satisfy anybody, and heard 
too, some of us; for instance, what would you say 
if it had so happened that I was so situated as to 
be actually obliged to hear (without the sHghtest in- 
tention of listening — but this between you and me) 
her give our friend the Colonel there his congS ; and 
at the same time acknowledge herself engaged to 
Edward Lyndsayl and that I heard with my own 
ears." 

Miss Pratt had told this story so often that it 
had gradually grown upon her hands, and was firmly 
impressed upon her own mind, and she now told it 
with all the force of truth. 

Uncle Adam was vanquished. "Ye ken, if ye did 
that, there need be nae mair said about it. But I 
wadna hae said that she was in love wi' him, though 
I'll no say but I've sometimes thought there might 
be something on his side for her. Weel, if it is sae, 
as ye say, she might hae done better, and she might 
hae done waur. But the warst o't is, I dinna think 
there's muckle love on her side;" and Uncle Adam 
heaved a sigh of fond remembrance. 

"I'll tell you what, Mr. Eamsay, love's a very 
different thing now-a-days from what it was in our 
time. Preserve me ! I believe I would have sunk 



THE INHERITANCE. 131 

through the ground before I could have gone on as 
Lady Eossville does. Such a work as she makes 
with — Cousin Lyndsay this, and Cousin Lyndsay 
that ! — and what's all this work about visiting the 
poor and building schoolrooms, and such nonsense, 
but to please him? and yet she's a sweet, modest- 
like creature, too ; and, for as easy as she is, there's 
really nothing flirting in her manner neither. But 
just look at that!" with a jog on the elbow to her 
ally, as Lady Eossville entered, followed by Colonel 
Delmour. "Did you ever see such impudence, to 
be hunting her in that manner 1 Poor soul ! she 
looks quite fluttered : I really think she has been 
crying." 

Lady Eossville was beginning to apologise for the 
delay she had occasioned, when dinner was for the 
second time announced. She motioned Lady Betty, 
as usual, to take the lead, and looked at Colonel 
Delmour to ofler his arm ; but ^vith one of what Uncle 
Adam called his Prince of Wales's bows to Edward 
Ljmdsay, he fell back, and seized the Countess's hand 
with a look of haughty triumph. 

" I hope you observed that manoeuvre," whispered 
Miss Pratt, bending towards Uncle Adam as they 
stotted along, side by side, but a full yard asunder ; 
for he would as soon have off'ered his head as his hand, 
or even his arm, upon these occasions; — " but there's an 
old byword, * Fanned fires and forced love ne'er did 
weel ;' and some people will maybe not crack quite so 
crouse by-and-bye. 



132 THE INHERITANCE. 

Miss Pratt's ideas were further confirmed by Lady 
Eossville's manner at dinner; for she observed she 
paid more attention to, and seemed more at her ease 
with everybody than Colonel Delmour. Uncle Adam 
likewise remarked this, but he drew a different augury 
from it, as he called to mind his own shamefacedness 
when Lizzie Lundie was in question. He marked, too, 
Edward Lyndsay's thoughtful, melancholy expression, 
so different from that of a favoured suitor, and the 
more striking from being constrasted with his rival's 
gay, exulting air ; and as he revolved all these things 
his mind misgave him, even in spite of Miss Pratt's 
confidential assurances 

"I could wager you anything you like you're 
mista'en about yon," said he, with a shake of his head 
to her. 

"Done!" was promptly replied; for, next to a 
legacy. Miss Pratt liked a wager ; " what shall it be ^ " 

"I could lay you a crown." 

"A crown!" with contempt; "I'll take you five 
guineas.' 

" Five guineas 1 that's a wager indeed ! Weel, I 
dinna care though I do — 'a's no tint that's in hazard ;' " 
and Uncle Adam and Miss Pratt touched thumbs 
upon it. 

" I'm very curious to know what you and my uncle 
are laying, not only your heads, but your hands, 
together about ? " said the Countess, with a smile, to 
Miss Pratt. 

Mr. Kamsay blushed up to the eyes at having been 



THE INHERITANCE. 133 

SO detected; but Miss Pratt, nowise abashed, answered, 
with a significant look — 

"Your Ladyship has, perhaps, a better right to 
know than anybody else; but there's a good time 
coming — all's well that ends well." 

" Even when a gentleman gives his left hand to a 
lady?" said Colonel Delmour. "I thought even Miss 
Pratt would scarcely have ventured on such a con- 
tract." 

"They say ill- doers are ill -dreaders, Colonel," re- 
torted his antagonist ; " and for my part I would prefer 
an honest man's left hand to a ne'er-do-weel's right 
any day of all the year. * There's my thumb, I'll ne'er 
beguile you,' was a favourite song in our day, sir," to 
Uncle Adam, " though it's maybe little — too little in 
vogue now, but we have not forgot it." 

This was a random shot of Miss Pratt's, but it had 
the effect of raising Colonel Delmour's colour as well 
as his anger, though he prudently suppressed the 
latter for the present, and dexterously managed to 
give the conversation a turn to Scottish songs, and 
from thence, by an easy transition, to Italian music 
and poetry, which gave him an opportunity of uttering 
and insinuating many a tender sentiment, and at the 
same time put him completely beyond the reach of 
his enemy who had the command of no tongue but 
her own. 

When the dessert was put upon the table the usual 
bustle announced the entrance of Mrs. St. Clair, for 
an extraordinary 6clat now attended all that lady's 



134 THE INHERITANCE. 

movements, as she entered a room somewhat in the 
manner of a Tragedy Queen coming upon the stage. 
And as she was really a fine-looking woman, dressed 
highly, and had a good portly air, the effect was very 
successful. She really looked — what she evidently 
intended to represent — the Dowager Countess. 

Colonel Delmour rose and advanced to meet her 
with an air of empressemenf he was far from feeling ; 
but the hand he held out to her was not accepted, and 
a distant inclination of the head was the only acknow- 
ledgment vouchsafed, as she moved on to the seat he 
had vacated by Lady Eossville, and took possession 
of it. 

"I presume I interfere with no one's rights in 
taking this chair, which to me possesses the double 
attraction of being next my daughter and nearest the 
fire." 

Lady Eossville blushed at this open display of her 
mother's hostility. Colonel Delmour bit his lip to 
repress the scornful retort which was ready to burst 
forth. Miss Pratt hemmed, and gave Uncle Adam a 
jog on the elbow. 

* You look fatigued, love," addressing her daughter 
in a fondling manner; "you have done too much to- 
day; why, you must have been out at least three 
hours this morning. Mr. Lyndsay, I shall scarcely 
trust my daughter with you again. I hope you ate 
something. Lady Betty, I hope you made a point of 
Gertrude taking something good 1 Now come, let 
me dress a little pine for you in the way you used to 



THE INHERITANCE. 135 

like it abroad," and taking off her gloves, and display- 
ing her large, round, white arms, all glittering in rings 
and bracelets, she began to cut up a pine-apj)le, and 
show her skill in this refined branch of elegant cookery. 

Lady Eossville felt this display of her mother's 
affection was merely with a view to deceive others as 
to the footing they were upon ; she could, therefore, 
only sit in silent endurance of it, and Mrs. St. Clair 
continued to overwhelm her with endearing epithets 
and tormenting assiduities, which she could neither 
repel nor return. The party was too small to admit 
of tete-d,-tetes, and too dissimilar in all its parts to carry 
on anything of general conversation, and the Countess, 
weary of the irksome and idle verbiage of the dinner- 
table, rose early and retired to the drawing-room. 

"Take you care of these two," whispered Miss 
Pratt to Uncle Adam, as she was leaving the room; "for 
I see a certain person's ready to fight with the wind." 

No sooner had the ladies left the room, than 
Colonel Delmour, going to the already blazing fire, 
began to stir it so violently that it roared and 
crackled and burned till Uncle Adam felt as though 
he should be roasted alive, sitting in his own seat. 
But Colonel Delmour, uttering an ejaculation about 
cold, rang the bell and ordered some mulled claret, 
well spiced, to be got ready immediately; then placing 
himself before the fire, he stood there, humming an 
opera air, and occasionally exciting the troublesome 
gambols of a large French poodle, to whom ho 
addressed a few words in its native tongue. 



136 THE INHERITANCE. 

" It will no be possible to live in a hoose wi' that 
puppy," thought Uncle Adam ; and he began to medi- 
tate his retreat the following day; but then, as the 
thoughts of " Guy Mannering " came over him, he stag- 
gered in his resolution — leave it he could not; to 
borrow it he would have been ashamed ; to abstract 
it never entered into his primitive imagination ; for, 
in his day, it had not been the fashion for ladies and 
gentlemen to take other people's books, or to lose 
other people's books, or, in short, to do any of the free 
and easy things that are the privilege of the present 
age. True, there were libraries in Barnford ; but to 
have recourse to a circulating library ! to have it 
through the town that he was a novelle reader — there 
was distraction in the thought ! Perish Dumple and 
Dandie Dinmont, Dominie Sampson, and the whole 
host of them, before he would stoop to such a measure ! 
But then, not to see the end of that scoundrel Glossin, 
whom he could have hanged with his own hands, only 
that hanging was too good for him — ay, there's the 
rub ! To be sure, he might skip to the end ; but he 
never had skipped in his life, and had such a thorough 
contempt for skippers that he would rather have 
" burst in ignorance " than have submitted to so 
degrading a mode of being relieved. At one time, 
during dinner, he had thoughts of sounding Miss 
Pratt as to the result, but his courage failed him — 
it was hazarding too much with a woman ; now he re- 
volved whether he might not, by going about the 
bush with Mr. Lyndsay, extract the catastrophe from 



THE INHERITANCE. 137 

him ; but then he never had gone about the bush all 
his life, and he was rather at a loss how to set about 
it now. Before he could make up his mind, therefore, 
the time came for adjourning to the drawing-room ; 
but, instead of repairing there. Uncle Adam stole away 
to his own apartment, to try whether another chapter 
would not set the matter at rest. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

"But, all in vain, I bolt my sentences." 

EUEIPIDES. 

Mrs. St. Clair's generalship was exerted so suc- 
cessfully throughout the evening that, without any 
apparent design, the lovers were effectually precluded 
from exchanging words with each other, except in the 
way of common conversation. But this could not 
always continue ; she felt she had committed herself 
with her daughter, and must now either act with 
decision and authority, or give up the attempt 
altogether. The first would be a dangerous experi- 
ment with one of the Countess's high spirit, and the 
other was too galling an alternative to be voluntarily 
embraced. Sooner or later she saw it must end in 
guardians being appointed for her daughter, and she 
therefore determined to put the best face she could 
upon it and be the first to propose the measure herself, 
not without hopes that, while she thus appeared to 
throw up the reins, she might at the same time be 
enabled the more effectually to strengthen her own 
hands. When the party broke up for the night she 
took Lady Rossville's arm and led her to her own 
dressing-room, when, dismissing her attendant, she 



THE INHERITANCE. 139 

thus began — "Gertrude, as this is perhaps the last 
time I may have an opportunity of addressing you 

under your own roof " 

" Oh, mamma ! " exclaimed the Countess, seizing her 
mother's hand, " do not, I beseech you, do not recur 
to what has passed on that subject ! This house is 
yours; you must not leave it. I will not leave 
you " 



" Gertrude, be calm, and hear me- 



"No, mamma, first hear me declare that all remon- 
strance will prove unavailing — that no earthly con- 
sideration ever can change my resolution. I will not 
renounce my own free choice." 

Lady Eossville spoke slowly, and she pronounced 
the last words in a manner which showed that oppo- 
sition would indeed be vain. 

"My object is not to contend with you, Gertrude," 
said her mother, with a sigh ; "for I am fully aware 
how little influence I now possess over you ; but my 
wish is to see you placed under the protection and 
guardianship of those who, if they want a mother's 
love, may soon possess more than a mother's influ- 
ence. Say who it is that you would choose for your 
guardian." 

"I choose you, mamma, for one, and my cousin 
Lyndsay for another ; if a third is necessary, do you 
and he appoint whom you please." 

Mrs. St. Clair was thunderstruck at the promptitude 
and decision of this answer, and she could only repeat 
in a tone of amazement — 



140 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Mr. Lyndsay your guardian ! What an idea !" 

" Surely there is nothing wrong in it, mamma ? and 
who else could I name f 

" It certainly is not customary to choose so very 
young a man for such an office." 

"But Mr. Lyndsay knows how I am situated. I 
consider myself as having been repeatedly obliged to 
him beyond the possibility of my ever repaying him, 
and although on one point we certainly differ" — 
Gertrude blushed as she spoke — "yet that does not 
prevent my doing justice to his general character. I 
respect and esteem him as my friend — as the person 
who has twice saved me from insult, once from 
destruction ; and I would fain prove to him, in perhaps 
the only way I may ever have in my power, the reli- 
ance I have on him by placing myself under his 
control. After the scenes he has witnessed I owe it 
to myself to make Edward Lyndsay my guardian." 

Mrs. St. Clair was silent for some time, while in 
her own mind she balanced the pros and cons of this 
measure. In the first place, she disliked the thought 
of having to deal with a person of Edward Lyndsay's 
acute understanding, unbending principle, and high 
standard of rectitude — one who, besides, already knew 
too much of her private concerns, and, consequently, 
could not be impressed with a very favourable idea of 
her character. But, to balance these drawbacks, he 
was evidently no friend to Colonel Delmour, and she 
thought she might safely calculate on his assistance to 
further any scheme to preserve Gertrude from becom- 



THE INHEKITANCE. 141 

ing the dupe of his artifices. She was aware that he 
took more than a common interest in her daughter, 
and she had no doubt but she would so manage as by 
that means to gain an ascendency over him, while she 
had Httle fear that he would ever succeed in supplant- 
ing his rival ; she would be on her guard against that ; 
and, at anyrate, it was worth running all risks to 
detach her from her present entanglement. Still, even 
in this view, it was a bitter pill to swallow, and she 
remained thoughtful and disconcerted. At last she 
said, "You talk of repaying your obligations to 
Lyndsay as though it were a benefit you were about 
to confer on him by choosing him for your guardian. 
Are you aware that it is an office attended with much 
trouble and responsibility, and that you will only be 
adding to the weight of that mighty debt you have 
already incurred f 

"My cousin, I know, will not consider it in that 
light; and even if he should, I would rather be 
indebted to him than any one else." 

" Yet there are others on whom you have at least 
equal claims, and whom the world might think rather 
more suitable guardians for you." 

" I do not know to whom you allude, mamma." 

" It is not for me to point them out to you," said 
Mrs. St. Clair, with affected dignity. 

" If you mean my Uncle Adam, he is out of the 
question ; he is so odd " 

" I do not mean my uncle," interrupted her mother; 
"you have still nearer relatives." 



142 THE INHERITANCE. 

Lady Eossville coloured at the thoughts of Mr. 
Alexander Black ; there was a good-humoured, vulgar 
familiarity about him she could scarcely brook, and to 
subject herself to it was more than her proud spirit 
could submit to. She made no reply. 

" There is also another person, whom I have less 
scruple in naming to you; and either, or both of 
those, I believe, the world in general would deem 
perfectly unexceptionable in point of station, connec- 
tion, character, experience, property; in short, all 
the esssentials for such a trust. Neither of them 
certainly are Werters or St. Preux, but they are both 
what I think fitter for the purpose — they are both 
men of unblemished character, respectable under- 
standings, mature age, and good, if not great families ; 
but to one or both of these add, if you choose, any 
third party, such as Lord Millbank, Sir Peter Well- 
wood, Lord Fairacre ; all of them you have seen and 
know something of, and one of them, joined either 
with Mr. Black or Major Waddell " 

"Major Waddell!" exclaimed the Countess; 
" surely, mamma, you are not serious ^ Major Waddell 
my guardian ! No, that is too — really too degrading." 

" You assume a vast deal too much with your new 
dignities," said Mrs. St. Clair warmly, "when you 
presume to talk in that strain of a man born and 
bred a gentleman, and connected, too, with the first 
families in the county. The time may come when 
you may know what degradation is, and, much as you 
despise my family, you may yet But no more 



THE INHERITANCE. 143 

of this folly. I have named to you no less than five 
individuals, each and all of whom I consider perfectly 
unexceptionable in every respect" 

"Well, then, if I must be so guarded, let Mr. 
Lyndsay and you raise a whole regiment of guards 
if you will, with the exception of Major Waddell; 
everything else I leave to you and my cousin " — Lady 
Rossville laid particular emphasis on the word cousin. 
" And now, mamma, pray dismiss me ; I am dying of 
sleep." 

" And I of care," said her mother, with a deep sigh. 

"Do not say so, mamma ; be assured we shall both 
be happy in our own way ; " and kissing her, Gertrude 
withdrew to her own apartment. 

Unwilling as she was to yield, Mrs. St. Clair felt 
that she had no alternative. Sometimes she thought 
of leaving Eossville, and taking her daughter along 
with her. But where could they go that Colonel 
Delmour would not follow 1 and by adopting violent 
measures she found she would only drive the Countess 
to extremities — perhaps accelerate the very evils she 
was most anxious to avoid. In short, after a night of 
restless deliberation, the mortifying conclusion she 
arrived at was, that in this instance she must submit 
to her daughter's decision, and adopt the plan she had 
declared herself determined to pursue. It was par- 
ticularly disagreeable to her, too, on account of the 
footing she was upon with Mr. Lyndsay. She still 
stood pledged to him for an explanation of the 
mysteries he had witnessed, but that pledge she had 



144 THE INHERITANCE. 

no wish nor intention to redeem. The time was past ; 
she had nothing to fear from him, and she felt averse 
to recur to a subject which she wished to be for ever 
consigned to oblivion. 

In spite of all this, however, the thing must be 
done ; and it would be much better done were she 
to come boldly forward as if of her own free-will, 
than if she waited till she was compelled to do so in 
compliance with her daughter's wish. The following 
morning, therefore, she sent at an early hour to desire 
Lady Eossville to attend her in her dressing-room ; 
and Gertrude was surprised, upon obeying the sum- 
mons, to find her mother already up and dressed ; as, 
ever since Lord Eossville's death, she had indulged in 
late hours, and secluded herself in her own apartment 
during the greater part of the day. 

" I wish to know, Gertrude, said she in a solemn 
manner, "whether you still retain the same senti- 
ments that you professed last night. Is it still your 
determination to throw off the parental yoke, to pub- 
lish your distrust of your mother 1 " 

"It is still my determination," answered the 
Countess gravely, " to obey my mother in all things 
compatible with what is due to myself; and I pro- 
claim my sentiments to the world when I voluntarily 
make choice of her as my guardian. The other must 
be Edward Lyndsay." Lady Eossville spoke even 
more firmly than she had done the preceding night ; 
and Mrs. St. Clair found that all attempts to turn 
her from this resolution would prove abortive. 



THE INHERITANCE. 145 

"Beit so, then!" cried she; "anything must be 
better than this state of things. Give me your arm. 
I mean to breakfast below to-day," and they descended 
together to the breakfast room, where only Uncle Adam 
and Miss Pratt had just appeared. These two worthies 
were in the heat of a colloquy, but on the entrance "of 
the ladies it suddenly ceased in a very abrupt and 
suspicious manner, and Uncle Adam shuffled away 
to the window with ears pendant, while Miss Pratt, 
who at first was quite thrown on her beam -ends, 
began to rally her forces. 

The mystery was simply the last night's wager 
renewed, not without hopes on Pratt's side of per- 
suading Uncle Adam to knock under at once upon 
the voluminous mass of evidence she was pouring out 
upon him, and which, she flattered herself, would 
finally terminate in her fingering the five guineas, as 
she already looked upon them as her own, and felt 
somewhat impatient at being kept out of her lawful 
property. They had, however, all the air of detected 
lovers, and Mrs. St. Clair's antipathy against Miss 
Pratt was trebled tenfold, as the idea flashed upon 
her that she was endeavouring to inveigle Uncle Adam 
and his seventy thousand pounds into an alliance, 
off'ensive in the highest degree. However, their loves 
were a secondary consideration at present, and she 
allowed them to pass unnoticed, in the virtuous in- 
tention of crushing them effectually at some future 
period. 

Breakfast passed very heavily. There was an 

VOL. II. L 



146 THE INHERITANCE. 

evident constraint on all present ; for even Miss Pratt 
was more intent on watching the progress of her 
wager than in dispensing the usual flow of chit-chat. 
Mrs. St. Clair maintained the same haughty reserve 
towards Colonel Delmour, which he either was, or 
affected to appear, quite unconscious of, and directed 
his looks and attentions solely to Lady Eossville. But 
Miss Pratt's abstraction seldom lasted long, and as she 
chanced to cast her eye on Lyndsay, she suddenly ex- 
claimed, " Bless my heart, my dear ! what makes you 
look so ill to-day?" 

" I was not aware that I was looking particularly 
ugly this morning," answered he. 

" Ugly, my dear ! that's a very strong word ; as 
Anthony Whyte says, it's one thing to look ill and 
another thing to look ugly, and that there's many a 
one it would be paying too high a com]3liment to, to 
tell them they were looking ill, for that would imply 
that they sometimes looked well; so you see you 
ought to be much flattered by my telling you that you 
are looking ill. Don't you think so. Lady Eossville?" 

" I suspect Mr. Lyndsay is not easily flattered," 
answered she ; " I was trying my powers with him 
in that way yesterday, but I cannot flatter myself I 
was successful." 

"A fair acknowledgment that you were only 
flattering me all the while," said he, forcing a smile ; 
" I half suspected as much ; and therefore, to punish 
you for your insincerity, I shall certainly remain 
where I am for this day at least." 



THE INHERITANCE. 147 

" I suspect that will prove rather an encouragement 
than a corrective of the vice," said Mrs. St. Clair 
gaily; "and lest Mr. Lyndsay should next mistake 
the matter so far as to think of rewarding our plain- 
dealing by running away from us, I engage him to 
attend me now to the library." 

Mr. Lyndsay bowed his acquiescence, not without 
some surprise ; and as he rose Mrs. St. Clair put her 
arm within his, and was leaving the room, when, as if 
recollecting something, she called her daughter to her, 
and contrived to converse her out of the room, and to 
lead her through the suite of apartments till they came 
to that adjoining the library. 

" Wait here, my love, for a few minutes," said she; 
" I would first speak with Mr. Lyndsay alone, but it 
will be necessary you should join us immediately." 

Lady Eossville felt as if she had only been taken 
there to be away from Colonel Delmour, and she 
almost smiled in derision at her mother's petty 
stratagems. 

" Now ! " cried Miss Pratt in an exulting tone to 
Uncle Adam, as the party left the room. 

" Weel, what noo ? " demanded he in an undaunted 
tone. 

" That's really speaking out," continued she, point- 
ing after them, and at the same time casting a glance 
at Colonel Delmour, who had hitherto sat in a sort of 
bitter scornful silence ; but on finding himself left at 
table with such a group as Uncle Adam, Lady Betty, 
and Miss Pratt, ho had immediately risen, and after 



148 THE INHERITANCE. 

carelessly tossing some fragments of the breakfast to his 
dog, and whistling a French air to him, he sauntered 
away with his usual air of high-bred nonchalance. 

" Sour grapes," whispered Miss Pratt to Uncle 
Adam. 

" I'm no very sure about that," was the reply, as he 
prepared to creep away to his turret to Lizzie Lundie 
and Meg Merrilees. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

"For my part, I think there is nothing so secret that shall 
not be brought to light within the world." — Burnet. 

Mrs. St. Clair's nerves almost failed her when she 
found herself alone with Ljnidsay for the first time 
since their meeting in the wood ; but then the reflec- 
tion that the secret connected with that scene was for 
ever buried in the deep (or what was still deeper, her 
own heart), recalled her self-possession, and without 
betraying any fear or hesitation, she began — 

"It must doubtless appear extraordinary to you 
that I should have allowed so much time to elapse 
without giving you the ddaircissement which you must 
naturally have expected." 

" Which I was promised," said Lyndsay, em- 
phatically. 

" True, you were so ; but my own illness, the sub- 
sequent events which have taken place in the family, 
rendered the performance of such a promise for a 
time impracticable; since then it has become un- 
necessary. The person who was the cause of so much 
needless alarm to my daughter and myself is no more ; 
he has perished at sea. You must have observed in a 
late newspaper the detail of the shipwreck, and prob- 



150 THE INHERITANCE. 

ably drew from it the same conclusion — that the 
wrong-headed, infatuated man, who had caused us so 
much annoyance, had met his fate." 

" Yes, so far I did conjecture ; but the circum- 
stances which seemed to have placed Lady Eossville 
and you so completely in the power of such a man, 
you surely do not mean to leave these to conjecture?" 

" It is certainly not every one on whose candour, 
and liberality and charity, I could place such reliance 
as to leave a shadow of doubt on their minds which 
it was in my power to clear away ; but when I balance, 
on the one hand, the painful task I should have to 
perform in recurring to past events, in disturbing the 
ashes of the departed, in harrowing up my own feel- 
ings by recalling the unmerited obloquy, the poverty, 
and privations my unfortunate husband was doomed 
to endure in consequence of his ill-fated attachment 
to me — can I — ought mine to be the hand to tear 
aside the veil in which his errors are now for ever 
shrouded ? On the other, what have I to dread from, 
a nature so honourable and candid as yours — one 
which I believe to be as incapable of suspecting evil 
as of committing it?" 

" I fear you give me credit for an extent of virtue 
I do not possess," said Lyndsay gravely ; " for I must 
freely confess that I have received impressions of so 
unfavourable a nature that I find all my charity quite 
insufficient to dispel them. Surely, then, justice is 
due to the living as well as tenderness to the dead." 

" You say true, and rather than that my daughter 



THE INHERITANCE. 151 

should suffer in your estimation " Mrs. St. Clair 

stopped and sighed. "Yet I flattered myself that, 
with the thousand opportunities I have lately afforded 
you of gaining a thorough insight into her character, 
and of witnessing the almost childish openness of her 
disposition, you would ere now have been enabled, 
from your own knowledge of her (an infinitely surer 
criterion than a mother's commendation), to have 
acquitted her of all culpability in this unfortunate 
occurrence, ambiguous as it may appear." 

" My suspicions do not in the least degree attach 
to Lady Eossville," cried Lyndsay warmly ; "I could 
stake my life on the purity of her mind and conduct, 
but " 

" But you distrust me. Well, be it so ; since my 
daughter does not suffer I am satisfied. Let mine be 
the obloquy, only let me screen from reproach the 
memory of a husband." 

*' I am little used to disguise my sentiments," said 
Lyndsay, " and the present occasion I think warrants 
my expressing them very plainly. You must excuse 
me, then, when I say that I can scarcely conceive any 
motive so powerful as to induce a mother to endanger 
her own and her daughter's reputation. I have twice 
seen Lady Eossville insulted; had I possessed the 
power she should certainly have been under other pro- 
tection before now." 

Mrs. St. Clair coloured deeply, and struggled for 
some moments to retain her composure ; but she suc- 
ceeded, and resumed — 



152 THE INHERITANCE. 

'*I was aware that such must be your opinion; 
and, mortifying as it is, I shall make no attempt to 
change it at present. Hereafter, perhaps,, you may do 
me greater justice. In the meantime it is my deter- 
mination to resign the guardianship of my daughter 
into other hands. It is my wish and that of Lady 
Eossville that Mr. Lyndsay would accept this trust — 
the strongest proof we can either of us give of our 
own self-respect, as well as our confidence and esteem 
for him." 

Mr. Lyndsay's emotion at this proposal did not 
escape Mrs. St. Clair's piercing observation, and she 
secretly hoped he might decline the proposal; but 
after a few minutes' consideration he said — 

"I accept of the trust, and hope I may be enabled 
to discharge it faithfully ; but I cannot take the whole 
responsibility of such an office. There must be other 
guardians appointed." 

" My daughter insists upon my acting also in that 
capacity, although it was my wish to have delegated 
the office entirely to others — to my brother, for in- 
stance, or my nephew. Major Waddell, or any other 
of the county gentlemen she would name ; but she is 
immovable on that point, so we have only to consider 
hereafter who it will be proper to make choice of. 
Meanwhile, allow me to consider you as the actual 
guardian of my daughter, and as such, anxious to co- 
operate with me in all that is for her advantage." 
And Mrs. St. Clair went over pretty much the same 
ground she had done before, in painting the antici- 



THE INHEKITANCE. 153 

pated miseries of her union with Colonel Delmour, 
aggravated, too, by his late evasive conduct, the whole 
concluding with — " Had his absence been prolonged 
but for a few months, this childish fancy would have 
passed away ; a more rational and more enduring attach- 
ment would have taken its place. Already, I some- 
times flattered myself, the work was begun ;" and she 
sighed as she fixed her eyes on Ljrndsay, whose 
changing expression and varying colour spoke the 
feelings he would not for worlds have uttered. " And 
now what is to be done ? Separated they must be, 
and that without delay, for while they are suffered to 
remain together his influence will prevail over every 
other. Already his ascendency is obvious ; every 
day, every hour, spent together will only serve to 
strengthen it. My authority singly will be of no 
avail to counteract it, but you possess weight and 

influence with Gertrude " 

" Which I have neither the right nor the inclina- 
tion to use at present. Eashness and violence can 
serve no purpose but to increase opposition. Rely 
upon Lady Rossville's promise not to marry" — and 
Lyndsay's voice faltered a little as he said it — "till 
she is of age. In the meantime, treat her with open- 
ness and confidence ; these will prove firmer holds 
than bolts or bars with a nature such as hers. Suff'er 
her mind to expand and her judgment to mature ; 
suffer the slow but gradual process of mental elucida- 
tion to go on ; let her see others, perhaps as gifted as 
Colonel Delmour, and leave her free to form her own 



154 THE INHERITANCE. 

opinions and draw her own conclusions. Perhaps 
when she knows him better she will learn to value 
him less ; but any attempt to force a mind such as 
hers against its own bent will never succeed. You 
may gall and fret her temper, but you will not change 
or at least improve her nature, and I never will con- 
sent to any measures of the kind." 

This was very contrary to what Mrs. St. Clair had 
anticipated. She had flattered herself that he would 
have caught eagerly at the bait thrown out, and would 
have been ready to assist her in any scheme she might 
have suggested for the separation of the lovers. But 
Lyndsay's mind was much too noble and generous to 
allow any selfish considerations for a moment to sway 
him, even where the temptation was most powerful. 
He had no base passions to gratify — neither envy, 
nor jealousy, nor revenge, and consequently his 
decisions were always just and upright. But it was 
far otherwise with Mrs. St. Clair, and she was pro- 
voked and disappointed at having failed to stimulate 
him to co-operate with her in the violent measures she 
had projected. She was aware, however, that it 
would be in vain to oppose the Countess and him 
together, and she was therefore obliged to yield an 
unwilling assent for the present. 

Lady Eossville was now summoned to the con- 
ference, and the result was, that Lord Millbank and 
Mr. Alexander Black should be requested to accept 
the office of joint guardians along with Mrs. St. Clair 
and Mr. Lyndsay. 



THE INHERITANCE. 155 

"As there are now no secrets amongst us, Ger- 
trude," said her mother, in her most ostentatious 
manner, waving her hand to Mr. Lyndsay, "I may 
inform you that it has been agreed upon by Mr. 
Lyndsay and myself that Colonel Delmour shall be 
permitted to remain here for the present, on the foot- 
ing of any other guest. Such is the confidence we 
both place in your good sense and propriety." 

Lady Rossville blushed to the forehead at this 
extraordinary address, and both Lyndsay and she 
turned away their eyes from each other. 

" It would be a strange assumption of brief authority 
in me," said he, " were I to presume to interfere with 
Lady Rossville in the choice of her guests ;" and with 
a slight inclination of the head he quitted the room. 

" What a load has been taken from my mind by 
this arrangement," said Mrs. St. Clair, with a sigh 
which rather belied her words ; " and now, Gertrude, 
love, will you order the carriage, or shall I ? We must 
pay some visits; in particular we must go to my 
brother's. Mr. Lyndsay has promised to ride to 
Lord Millbank's this morning and settle matters with 
him. He is a stupid man, but it seems he is a relation 
of yours and understands business, so he may do very 
well As for your uncle, 'tis proper you should see 
him yourself. I don't think you have been at Bellevue 
since Lord Rossville's death?" 

" But this morning is so delightful, it would be a 
sin to waste it on a dull drive to Bellevue ; a much 
worse one might serve equally well for that purpose, 



156 THE INHERITANCE. 

and there are a thousand things I have to do to-day. 
I must see what progress has been made with my 
rustic bridge, whether the terrace-walk has yet been 
begun, how speeds my bower, if my flower knots are 
arranging according to rule — hpropos, mamma, what 
a lack of shrubs and flowers are here ! I must have 
quantities immediately, not a day must be lost. I 
must have clouds of dropping roses to meet this 
* ethereal mildness,' and do all honour to this gentlest 
of gentle springs." 

"Don't be a fool, Gertrude ; or at least remember 
there is a time for all things, even for folly. The 
present belongs to more important subjects than 
building baby-houses and dressing dolls." 

" Well, mamma, pray manage them as you will, but 
leave me at liberty to have a walk to-day." 

"And who, pray, is to be your escort in this 
important survey % " 

Lady Eossville blushed and hesitated, then, in a 
faint voice, said, "Anybody, mamma." 

"But Lady Eossville is not to ramble all over the 
country with anybody or everybody," said her mother 
sarcastically; "I will have no clandestine meetings, 
remember." 

" Clandestine ! " repeated the Countess, " no ; with 
my own guests and relations, why should I have re- 
course to clandestine measures'? My intention was 
to walk with Colonel Delmour ; but since it is your 
desire that I should accompany you, I will do so ; " 
and she rose to ring the bell and order the carriage, 



THE INHERITANCE. 167 

when the movement was arrested by hearing the 
sound of wheels crisping the gravel, as they rolled 
slowly round to the grand entrance. " Ah ! there 
are my aunts ! " exclaimed Lady Eossville. "I wrote 
yesterday to invite them, but I scarcely looked for 
them so soon. I must fly to welcome them ; " and in 
an instant she was on the outer steps of the entrance, 
ready to assist her Aunt Mary herself. 



CHAPTER XX. 

"These Indian wives are loving fools, and may do well to 
keep company with the Arrias and Portias of old Rome. " 

Dryden. 

But the carriage door being opened, there stepped 
out Major Waddell, having upon his back a vast 
military cloak, with all its various appliances of tags, 
and jags, and flags, and waving capes, and scarlet 
linings, and shining brooch, etc. etc. etc. The 
Major having placed himself on one side of the car- 
riage door, black Caesar, in no less gorgeous array, 
stationed himself at the other, and then, after a little 
feminine delay, there came forth Mrs. Major Waddell 
in all her bravery. A rich and voluminous satin 
mantle enveloped her person ; a rare and costly lace 
veil streamed like a meteor to the wind ; muff, bonnet, 
feathers, boots, reticule — all were in perfect keeping ; 
and Mrs. Major Waddell, from the crown of the head 
to the sole of the foot, might have stood for the 
frontispiece of La Belle AssemhUe. 

Placing a hand upon each of her supporters, she 
descended the steps of the carriage with much de- 
liberate dignity, and then, as if oppressed with the 
weight of her own magnificence, she gave her mufi" to 



THE INHERITANCE. 159 

Caesar, while the Major gallantly seized her reticule, 
and assisted her to ascend the flight of steps, where 
stood the Countess, provoked at herself for her preci- 
pitation in having so unwarily rushed out to receive 
this unexpected importation. 

" Well, cousin, this is really kind ! " exclaimed 
Mrs. Major ; " but you see what it is to be without a 
lord and master. Here is mine would be in perfect 
agonies if I were to stand for a single moment outside 
the door without my bonnet." 

"You ought to tell Lady Eossville, at the same 
time, who it was tied two double neckcloths round 
my throat yesterday, when " 

But Lady Eossville could not listen to the Major's 
playful recrimination, and she interrupted him by 
saying, with a somewhat stately air — 

*'I imagined it was my Aunt Mary who had 
arrived, and, knowing how helpless she is, I hastened 
out to see that she was properly attended to. But 
my friends are all welcome," added she, with her 
usual sweetness of manner, and she led the way to 
the saloon. 

Mrs. Waddell was a prize to Lady Betty and Miss 
Pratt, who were both fond of seeing fine -dressed 
people ; and Mrs. Waddell had so much to look at, and 
her things were all so new, and so rich, and so fashion- 
able ; and India muslin, and India shawls, and India 
chains and lace and trinkets were heaped upon her 
v/ith such an unsparing hand, that it was quite a feast 
to sit and scan each article individually. Miss Pratt 



160 THE INHERITANCE. 

even went farther, and anticipated at the least half 
a piece of sprigged India muslin to herself, the same 
as Mrs. Waddell's gown, which she forthwith began 
to admire with all her might. Moreover, she intended 
to ingratiate herself so far as to obtain a footing in 
the house, for, as she reasoned with herself, there was 
nobody knew good -living better than your nabobs'; 
they were commonly squeamish and bilious, and 
needed a nice bit ; and, at anyrate, one might depend 
upon genuine Mullagatawny and Madeira at their 
tables, and, to a used stomach, these were great 
restoratives for a fortnight or so now and then. 
Miss Pratt thereupon began to do the honours with 
even more than her usual activity. She made a point of 
taking off Mrs. Waddell's mantle with her own hands, 
commenting upon its beauty as she did so; she in- 
sisted upon her using a footstool, and having two 
additional squab-cushions to lean upon, and pressed a 
cup of chocolate in a manner not to be withstood. 
She was obliged to give back a little, however, when 
Mrs. St. Clair came sweeping in with her usual 
authoritative air, and welcomed her relations with a 
patronising grandeur of deportment that sunk Miss 
Pratt's nimble civilities into nothing. 

Mrs. St. Clair was vulgar enough to feel gratified 
by the appearance made by her niece. Her equipage 
was handsome, her dress fashionable and expensive, 
she herself very pretty ; the Major's rank was respect- 
able, his connections were good, and though they were 
both fools, yet a fool in satin was a very different 



THE INHERITANCE. 161 

thing from a fool in sackcloth, and was treated 
accordingly. She therefore began, "I observe your 
carriage has not been put up, Isabella ; surely Major 
Waddell and you have not come so far to pay us a 
mere morning visit"? Gertrude, you must endeavour 
to persuade your cousins " 

" The best of all persuasions," said Miss Pratt, " is 
to order the horses to be put up ; that's a sure argu- 
ment, is it not, Major 1 Let me pull the bell. Lady 
Eossville." 

" Why, to tell you the truth, the Major and I had 
agreed before we set out that if we found you living 
quietly here, and no company, we would have no 
objection to spend a day or two with you en famille ; 
but, as I go nowhere at present, it must be upon 
condition that I remain quite incog." 

Mrs. St. Clair already repented of her invitation ; 
and Gertrude could only say, " We are quite a family 
party." 

" In that case, then. Major, I think we must remain 
where we are. You had better speak to Eobert 
yourself about the horses, and tell Caesar to see that 
everything is taken out of the carriage. As we were 
quite uncertain of remaining, I didn't think of bring- 
ing my own maid with me — and. Major, I think I 
must have left my vinaigrette in one of the pockets 
of the carriage ; when one travels in their own caniage 
they are so apt to litter it, you know, and leave things 
lying about, that really mine is almost like my dress- 
ing-room." 

VOL. II. M 



1G2 THE INHERITANCE. 

" A very handsome carriage it is," said Miss Pratt, 
as it wheeled past the windows. 

" Very plain ; but the Major and I are both partial 
to everything plain." 

This plainness consisted in a bright blue body, with 
large scarlet arms, bearing the Black and Waddell 
quarterings, mantle, crest, cipher, couped gules, and 
all appliances to boot. 

" By-the-bye, I hear strange things of my poor uncle," 
said Mrs. Major, when the carriage was out of sight. 
" I'm told, cousin, you found him all but dead in his 
own house, and had him carried away in a fit. The 
Major and I were from home at the time ; we were 
on a visit at Lord Fairacre's, and heard nothing of 
it till two days ago, that we returned, or I should 
certainly have made a point of seeing after him, poor 
man. He is not confined to bed, I hope 1 Does he 
know we are here, I wonder ? " 

" I shall let him know myself," said Lady Eossville, 
who instantly conjectured that if Uncle Adam came 
unwarily to the knowledge of the Major and lady 
being under the same roof with himself, stone and 
lime could scarcely contain him. She therefore (glad 
at the same time of an excuse for leaving her com- 
pany) hastened to the yellow turret. She tapped 
several times at the door, but received no answer; 
she listened, all was silent ; she slowly opened the 
door — no notice was taken ; she looked in, and there 
sat Uncle Adam, with spectacles on nose, so intent 
upon a book that all his senses seemed to be com- 



THE INHERITANCE. 163 

pletely lapped in its pages. Gertrude coughed, but in 
vain ; she spoke, but it was to the walls ; she went 
close up to him, but he saw her not ; at length, she 
ventured to lay her hand on his shoulder, and — " Guy 
Mannering " dropped upon the floor. 

" You seem to be much interested in your studies," 
said Lady Rossville, as she stooped to pick it up for 
him. 

Mr. Ramsay purpled with shame, as he tried to 
affect a tone of indifference, and said, " Oo — I — hem 

— it's just a wheen idle havers there that I — ^just 

hem ! They maun ha'e little to do that tak' up their 
heads writing sic nonsense." 

"I never heard the author accused of idleness 
before," said Lady Rossville, with a smile ; " and no 
one need be ashamed to own the interest excited by 
these wonderful works of genius." 

"Interesst, hugh ! Folk may ha'e other things to 
interesst them, I think, in this world. I wonder if 
there's ony o't true "? I canna think how ae man could 
sit down to contrive a' that. I dinna misdoot that 
scoondrel Glossin at a'. I would gie a thoosand pound 
out o' my pocket to see that rascal hanged, if hanging 
wasna owre gude for him !" 

" Well, you may be at ease on that head, as even 
worse befalls him," said Lady Rossville. 

" Weel, I rejoice at that ! for if that scoondrel had 
gotten leave to keep that property, by my troth, I 
believe I would have burnt the book ;" then, ashamed 
of his ardour in such a cause, he added in a peevish 



164 THE INHERITANCE. 

tone : " But it's a' nonsense thegither, and I'm no 
gaun to fash my head ony mair about it." 

Lady Eossville now announced the arrival of the 
Waddells in the most conciliating manner she could, 
but in any way it was an event to rouse all Uncle 
Adam's angry feelings, though for some minutes he 
said nothing, but merely walked round and round the 
turret, rubbing his forehead as if at a loss how to 
proceed. At last he stopped and said — 

"I ken weel enough what's brought them here. 
That creature, though she is a fule, has the cunning 
o' Auld Nick himsel' ; but you may just tell her frae 
me, she'll mak' naething o' me — she shall ne'er see ae 
bawbee o' mine ; you may just tell her that." 

Gertrude here attempted a sort of vindication of 
her cousin from such debasing suspicions ; but she was 
cut short with — 

"Weel, if ye winna tell her, I'll tell her mysel'. 
I'm no gaun to be hunted up and down, in and out, 
that I canna turn mysel' but Maister and Mrs. Major 
Waddell maun be at my heels;" and he resumed his 
perambulations, as if to give the He to his words by 
his actions. 

"I'm just switherin'," resumed he, "whether to 
quit the hoose this minute, or whether to stay still 
and see the creators oot o't;" then, as his eye, in a 
fine frenzy rolling, glanced from Lizzie Lundie to " Guy 
Mannering," he added, " But I'll no gie them the satis- 
faction o' thinking they ha'e driven me awa.' I daursay 
that's just what she wants, so I'll stay still where I am." 



THE INHERITANCE. 165 

This magnanimous resolution formed, Lady Eoss- 
ville tried to prevail upon him to return to the saloon 
with her to meet his relatives, but in vain ; he declared 
that till dinner was on the table he would not stir 
from where he was, and Lady Eossville, who had too 
much sense to attempt to combat his prejudices openly, 
was obliged to leave him, and make the best excuse 
she could for his non-appearance. No sooner had she 
left the room than Mr. Eamsay locked and bolted the 
door, to prevent any further intrusion, and after a few 
glances at Lizzie his ruffled pinions were smoothed, 
and he returned with unabated ardour to his studies. 

Colonel Delmour and Mr. Lyndsay had both joined 
the party during Gertrude's absence ; and she again 
felt something like shame as she marked her lover's 
lofty bearing towards her relations, while the Major 
seemed to grow ten times sillier, and his lady twenty 
times more affected, in their struggles to keep on par 
with him. With Lyndsay it was otherwise ; for 
although his manners were not less elegant, yet as 
they emanated from better feeHngs, so they never 
oppressed others with the painful consciousness of 
their own inferiority ; and even the Major and lady 
in his company might have become something better 
had not his benign influence been counteracted by the 
haughty port and humihating condescension of the 
other. But his horses had been some time announced, 
and he set out upon his ride to Millbank House. 

"Do you know, I begin to think Mr. Lyndsay 
really quite handsome, and his manners extremely 



166 THE INHERITANCE. 

pleasing," said Mrs. Major, with an air as though her 
approbation set the seal to him at once. 

"He sits his horse remarkably well," said the 
Major ; "I wonder whether he ever was in the dra- 
goons?" 

"Do you walk to-day, Lady Eossvillef demanded 
Colonel Delmour abruptly. 

As the expedition to Bellevue was now given up, 
Gertrude answered in the affirmative, and invited 
Mrs. Waddell to be of the party. 

" Oh, you must first get my lord and master's leave 
for that. Major, what would you think of my taking 
a walk to-day f looking very archly to the rest of 
the company. 

The Major looked distressed. 

" Why, you know, Isabella, the very last time you 
walked was to see Lord Fairacre's new pinery, and 
you certainly caught cold, for you may remember 
Lady Fairacre remarked next morning how heavy 
your eyes were, and I think you look a little pale 
to-day, my love." 

" There now ! I knew how it would be. You see 
how completely I am under orders. However, I beg 
I mayn't prevent you from indulging your taste in a 
rural stroll — with your beau," added she in a whisper 
to Lady Eossville, who, ashamed and wearied of such 
intolerable folly, rose and went to prepare for a walk, 
at the same time, in a general way, inviting such of 
the party as chose to accompany her. 

On returning, she found the party was to consist 



THE INHERITANCE. 167 

of herself and the two gentlemen. Lady Betty and 
Mrs. St. Clair (like Mrs. Waddell) never walked 
when they could help it, and Miss Pratt had attached 
herself so assiduously to the nabobess, and had so 
much to tell and to say, that, contrary to her usual 
practice, she was a fixture for the day. 

" Major Waddell," cried Mrs. St. Clair, in her most 
authoritative manner, as they were leaving the room, 
" remember I commit Lady Rossville solely to your 
care ; Gertrude, you will be at pains to point out to 
Major Waddell the beauties of Eossville, and get his 
opinion of the improvements you have begun." 

" You see what you have brought upon yourself. 
Major, by your care of me," cried his lady, not much 
delighted with this arrangement, which she thought 
was rather interfering with her privileges. 

Lady Eossville and Colonel Delmour were too 
much annoyed at this appendage to say anything; 
the latter, indeed, was revolving in his own mind 
how to dismiss him the moment they were out of 
sight, and the Countess was hesitating whether she 
should do more than merely take a single turn before 
the house under such guardianship, when, as they 
crossed the hall, Mrs. Waddell's voice was heard 
loudly calling the Major back, and the lady herself 
presently appeared in great agitation. 

" Now, Major, is it possible you were really going 
out without your cloak, when you know very well 
you were so hoarse this morning that I could scarcely 
hear what you said V^ 



168 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Well, for Heaven's sake compose yourself, my 
dear girl," said the Major, in a whisper. 

"Now, Major, that is impossible unless you put 
on your cloak." 

"But, I assure you, I am much more likely to 
catch cold with my cloak than without it. Why, this 
is almost like a day in Bengal. I do assure you my 
cloak would be quite overcoming." 

"Now, Major " 

"Well, well, my dear, don't say any more. Do, I 
beseech you, compose yourself; but this cloak is so 
confoundedly heavy — do just feel it." 

" Now, Major " 

"Well, no matter, my dear; anything to make 
you easy;" and the poor Major buckled on his appar- 
atus, while the lady set up the collar, clasped the 
brooch, and drew the voluminous folds close round 
his person, already bursting at every pore. 

" Now, Major, be sure you keep it close round you, 
and for any sake don't open your collar. Do you 
promised' 

"But, my dear Bell " 

" Well, Major, I can only say " 

"Well, well," gasped the poor Major, "that is 
enough." 

"There now, I feel quite comfortable," said the 
lady, as she completed her operations. 

" It is more than I do," thought the Major, as he 
slowly sallied forth, and caught a glimpse of Lady 
Rossville and Colonel Delmour, who had taken advan- 



THE INHERITANCE. 169 

tage of this conjugal delay to make their escape. 
"So my companions have got the start of me;" and 
he footed away as fast as his short legs and ponderous 
cloak permitted. But in vain, like panting Time, did 
he toil after the fugitives, whose light figures and 
elastic steps mocked his utmost exertions to overtake 
them ; and the provoking part of it was that, while 
he was puffing and blowing and sawing the air with 
his arms without ever gaining a single step upon 
them, they had the appearance of sauntering along 
quite at their ease, and deaf to his repeated calls. 



CHAPTER XXL 

" Oh ! sooner shall the rose of May- 
Mistake her own sweet nightingale, 
And to some meaner minstrel's lay- 
Open her bosom's glowing veil, 
Than Love shall ever doubt a tone, 
A breath of the beloved one ! " 

Lalla RooTch. 

Meanwhile the lovers had much to say to each 
other ; but for a time the eloquence and the vehemence 
of Colonel Delmour bore down the softer accents of 
the Countess, as he pleaded his suit in all the energy 
of passion, and appealed to herself as a witness of 
the injurious treatment he met with from Mrs. St. 
Clair. But when he proceeded to urge immediate 
union, as the only means of putting an end to the 
machinations against him, she stopped him by saying, 
"Do not renew that subject again for years to come, 
as you love me ; I have promised my mother that I 
Avill enter into no engagement till I am twenty-one, 

but I promise you then " 

" Then," interrupted Delmour impetuously — "that 
is a mere mockery. Gertrude, if you loved as I do, 
you would not talk so calmly of what may be years 
hence ; every day seems to me an eternity until you 



THE INHERITANCE. 171 

are mine beyond the power of fate to separate us. 
Years ! better tell me at once that I have nothing to 
hope ; despair itself would be almost a blessing com- 
pared to this intolerable agony of suspense." 

"Ah! Delmour, why should you be so unjust to 
yourself and me as to talk thus ; I have no doubts of 
your faith and constancy, why should you have any 
of mine ?" 

" Because no one can love as I do, to distraction, 
without inquietude; passion without passion is an 
anomaly I cannot comprehend." 

** And love without confidence in the person beloved 
seems to me still more inconceivable ; I have no more 
doubt of your fidelity than I have of my own." 

"But everything will be done to destroy your 
confidence in me ; your mother is ambitious, Gertrude, 
she wants a more splendid alliance for you; she 
thinks I am unworthy of you, and perhaps she is 
right." 

"But in that I must choose for myself, and she 
knows my choice is made," said the Countess, with a 
blush. 

"But not confirmed. Ah, Gertrude, would to 
God you loved as I do ! that you could conceive the 
miseries of separation — the worse than death it will be 
to me to part from you." 

" But we shall see each other frequently ; you must 
give up the army — you must not go abroad again — 
indeed, you must not ; and then two years will soon 
pass away." 



172 THE INHERITANCE. 

" And in that time what may not be effected by 
the misrepresentations of your mother, and the artful 
insinuations of that cold-blooded stoic, Lyndsay ?" 

" You wrong your cousin ; indeed, you do, by such 
a supposition; he is far above anything of the kind." 

"Has he never once said anything that had a 
tendency to injure me in your estimation V demanded 
Colonel Delmour, turning his eyes full upon her. 

"If he had, he has certainly been very unsuccess- 
ful," said the Countess, with a smile ; " but, indeed, 
Edward is incapable of meanly insinuating " 

" What, he spoke out, then ! " exclaimed Delmour 
passionately; "he told you of the folhes and the 
extravagances of my boyish days — in which, however, 
he himself went hand in hand, and exaggerated them 
into vices, and warned you to beware of the profligate 
who had lost, I forget how many hundred pounds, one 
night at cards." 

" No, indeed, he told me nothing of all this ; you 
wrong him ; you misunderstand each other ; but you 
must be better friends now that he is my guardian." 

" Your guardian ! " exclaimed Delmour, as if 
thunderstruck ; " what, in the name of Heaven, do 
you mean 1 " 

"Even that it seems it was necessary for me to 
have guardians appointed, and so I have made choice 
of my cousin for one ; he has already proved himself 
my friend on more occasions than one, and to him, I 
think, I owe my life; you cannot therefore wonder 
at my choice." 



THE INHEEITANCE. 173 

" Yet you must be aware that Lyndsay is no friend 
to me, nor — I confess it — am I to him; we think 
differently upon most subjects, and his creed is much 
too bigoted and intolerant for me." 

" Indeed, I have not found him so ; on the contrary, 
I should say he was extremely liberal in his sentiments 
and lenient in his judgments ; and I am sure he has 
a great deal more toleration than I have. I wish I 
saw you both better friends — ^why should it not be 
so?" 

"Because I am no hypocrite, Gertrude; and, per- 
haps, also, because — shall I confess my weakness to 
you 1 — I am jealous that you should bestow so much 
of your regard upon him." 

"Jealous of my regard for Edward Lyndsay!" 
exclaimed the Countess; "then you would be jealous 
if I had a brother whom I loved." 

" Yes, I believe I should ; when a man loves, as I 
do, to adoration, he can seldom brook any interference 
in those affections which ought to be exclusively his 
o\^^l ; your lukewarm sort of people, I know, make all 
welcome ; but I am not one of these. Ah ! Gertrude, 
woman's heart is indeed a royal palace if it admit 
but one guest, and then 'tis a glorious privilege to be 
that one." 

"Nay, you would rather turn it into a cell, I 
think," said Gertrude, smihng, " and become yourself 
a moping monk." 

" No matter what it is, provided it is mine, solely 
and exclusively mine," returned Delmour impatiently, 



174 THE INHElllTANCE. 

" But being yours, wholly yours," said the Countess, 
and she blushed at the tone of emphatic tenderness 
with which she said it ; " surely you would not wish 
it to be unjust and ungrateful to all the world beside ; 
such a thing would be no better worth having than 
this pebble on which I tread," as she touched one with 
her foot. 

"Do not blame me, Gertrude, because, conscious 
that I possess a pearl richer than all its tribe, I fear 
to leave it open to all, lest even a part of it should be 
stolen from me. Common things may be shared, but 
who could lose the hundredth part of a rare and costly 
gem without feeling that its value was gone 1 Even 
such a miser am I with your affections. You are all 
the universe to me ; day and night I think, I dream 
but of you ; a desert island in the midst of the ocean 
with you would be a paradise. Gertrude, if you 
shared in these feelings, how little would you think 
or care for others in comparison." 

"Alas ! you little know, but how shall I convince 
you, sceptic as you are, of my — folly 1 " added she, with 
a smile ; " you would not have me perjured, and to 
my mother; or drive from my house a friend and 
relation to whom I owe so much, or retract my word 
passed to him when I chose him for my guardian 1 " 

Colonel Delmour remained silent. 

" Surely you would not have me so base as to do 
any of those things, nor would you value such proofs 
of my attachment." 

Colonel Delmour found he had gone far enough 



THE INHERITANCE. 175 

for the present, and that, gentle and feminine as Ger- 
trude was, his influence over her mind must be more 
gradual than he had expected. He saw that he was 
beloved with all the fervour and simplicity of a young 
confiding heart, but love mth her was yet too pure, 
unsullied a passion, to have tainted the better feelings 
of her nature. These still flowed free and generous ; 
she loved and was beloved, and her heart expanded 
beneath the joyous influence, and the bright rainbow 
hues of hope and fancy tinged every object with their 
own celestial colours. But no shade of suspicion or 
mistrust fell on the noontide of her happiness. Even 
the narrow, selfish, domineering sentiments she had 
just heard fall from the lips of her lover seemed to 
her to breathe only the quintessence of love, and she 
looked on him in all the calm radiance of a happy, 
trusting heart. 

" Be it as you will, Gertrude," said he ; " my fate 
is in your hands ; you know your power, for I have 
told you what I am — proud, jealous, vindictive, 
perhaps, when you are concerned ; but such as I am 
you have vowed to be mine, have you not 1 " 

" When I am twenty-one ; that is, unless you should 
change your mind," added she, sportively. 

" I change ! " repeated he ; " no, Gertrude, you 
will see many a strange sight before that comes to 
pass ; this river may change its course, and these 
rocks may change into plains, but my heart can never 
change in its love for you." 

Much more of the same sort passed ; for lovers, it 



176 THE INHERITANCE. 

is well known, carry the art of tautology to its utmost 
perfection, and even the most impatient of them can 
both bear to hear and repeat the same things times 
without number, till the sound becomes the echo to 
the sense or the nonsense previously uttered. But 
lovers' walks and lovers' vows must have an end, and 
Lady Rossville and Colonel Delmour found themselves 
at the castle ere they had uttered one hundredth 
part of all they had to say. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

"Hot from the field, indulge not yet your limbs 
In wisli'd repose ; nor court the fanning gale, 
Nor taste the spring. Oh ! by the sacred tears 
Of widows, mothers, sisters, aunts, forbear ! " 

Armstroxu. 

" What have you done with the Major 1 " exclaimed 
his lady as they entered the saloon, and found her 
and Miss Pratt with their heads together. 

Gertrude was at a loss Jiow to answer this ques- 
tion, as, till this moment, she had as completely 
forgot the Major as though no such person were in 
existence. 

" Where in the world is the Major 1 " was repeated 
in a voice of alarm. 

"Very snug in his cloak, probably," answered 
Colonel Delmour, with a disdainful smile. 

"Lady Rossville — cousin, I entreat of you, what 
has become of the Major 1 " 

"I daresay he is not far off," answered the 
Countess ; "but he did not overtake us." 

" Good gracious ! " exclaimed the lady, all panting 
with alarm, "did he not overtake you? then the 
Major is lost ! " 

" My dear Mrs. Waddell, don't distress yourself," 
VOL. II. N 



178 THE INHERITANCE. 

began Miss Pratt; "depend upon it, he'll cast up; 
there's good daylight yet, and he may meet some of 
the work people in the woods; and we'll send out some 
of the servants to seek for him. Colonel Delmour, will 
you pull the bell ? — he never would think of taking 
the Crow-Foot Crag, and that's the only ugly turn 
about the banks. Lady Eossville, I'll thank you for 
the smelling-bottle there. There's not much water in 
the river just now. Jackson, a glass of water here 
as quick's you can, and send out some of the men to 
look for Major Waddell " 

"With bells, ropes, and lanthorns," said Colonel 
Delmour. 

"There is Major Waddell, ma'am," said the 
pompous Jackson, as he glanced his eye, but without 
turning his head, towards the window. 

" Where 1 Oh ! where 1 " exclaimed his lady, as 
she flew to the window. " Thank God ! " as she again 
sank upon her seat. 

The Major it certainly was in j^ropno^ persona, 
slowly and laboriously plodding his weary way, close 
buttoned to the chin, though evidently ready to drop 
with heat and fatigue. He carried a handkerchief in 
his hand, which he ever and anon applied to his face, 
which shone forth like a piece of polished yew. To 
add to his perturbation, Miss Pratt, throwing open a 
window, screeched out to him — 

"Come away. Major, make haste; here's your 
good lady in hysterics almost about you." 

The poor Major, uttering an ejaculation of despair, 



THE INHERITANCE. 179 

did his utmost to mend his pace, and again the droop- 
ing capes, arms, sails, and tails of his cloak were all 
in commotion, as the inward man struggled and 
plunged amidst the toils of broadcloth and timmen, 
till at length the whole mass came floundering into 
the room. 

" Oh, Major ! " exclaimed his lady faintly, as she 
rose to meet him. 

" My sweet girl, what is all this ? '' cried the Major, 
as he cast back part of his folds, and extended his 
arms like claws towards her. 

" I have been so frightened about you. Major. You 
must have met with something, you are so heated, 
and — do tell me what has happened. I see you have 
met with something." 

" My dearest girl, I do assure you I have met with 
nothing. I have been rather on a wild-goose chase, 
to be sure, trying to overtake my charge, the Countess 
there ; but " — turning to Colonel Delmour and her — 
" I could not make you hear me at all, though I had 
you in sight almost all the way." At this remark 
there was a smile on Colonel Delmour's lip, and a 
shght blush on Lady Eossville's cheek, which Miss 
Pratt did not like, and a sort of vague tremor ran 
through her frame. 

" That was very odd," said Mrs. Major, recovering. 
" I never doubted you were all together. I shall take 
care another time how I trust you to walk without 
me. Oh ! you have got yourself heated to such a 
degree I am sure you will catch your death of cold. 



180 THE INHERITANCE. 

Pray, Miss Pratt, shut down that window. Now, 
Major, do sit away from the door, and I beseech you 
don't think of taking off your cloak till you are 
cooler." 

"My dear Bell!" gasped the almost suffocating 
Major. 

"Now, Major, I entreat of you " 

"But — 'pon my soul this is a thousand degrees 
hotter than ever I felt it in Bengal." 

"Well, but. Major, you know very well how ill 
you were in consequence of throwing off your cloak 
suddenly one sunny day when you had got yourself 
overheated, and you promised me that you never 
would do so again." 

" But, my dear Bell, this is absolutely like a day in 
June." 

" Now, Major, I can only say " 

But, happily for all concerned, the lady's sayings 
were here stopped by the sound of the dressing-bell ; 
and, half distracted betwixt her desire to superintend 
the cooling of the Major by keeping him in a hot 
room enveloped in his cloak, and her anxiety to 
dedicate the full three-quarters of an hour to the 
duties of her toilet and the display of her Oriental 
finery, she felt much at a loss which to choose. At 
length the woman prevailed over the wife, and the 
Major was allowed to betake himself to his dressing- 
room, while the lady repaired to hers. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

** Ah ! sure as Hindu legends tell, 
When Music's tones the bosom swell, 
The scenes of former life return. 
Ere sunk beneath the morning star, 
We left our parent climes afar, 
Immured in mortal forms to mourn. 

"Or if, as ancient sages ween. 
Departed spirits half unseen, 
Can mingle with the mortal throng, 
'Tis when from heart to heart we roll 
The deep-toned music of the soul 
That warbles in our Scottish song." 

Leyden. 

At dinner Mrs. Major reappeared in a dress which 
might have done honour to Cinderella's godmother, 
but which, even with the aid of Hyder Ali's car- 
buncle, had no effect in subduing Uncle Adam's flinty 
heart towards her. He, however, received her salu- 
tations with tolerable composure, and moreover, per- 
mitted her to touch his hands; but as for shaking 
them, that was an efl'ort little short of tearing the 
limpet from its native rock. As for the Major, he 
was too much exhausted by the toils of the day to be 
able even to offend, being reduced to a state of per- 
fect passiveness. 



182 THE INHERITANCE. 

" What a pretty woman your niece, Mrs. Waddell, 
is," whispered Miss Pratt, as Uncle Adam and she 
stotted along, as usual, to dinner. 

" Pretty ! What makes her pretty 1 wi' a face like 
a sookit carvy !" 

"Ah, to be sure, she's not like Lady Eossville; but 
where will you see the like of her ? Such a distin- 
guished-looking creature as she is ! For you see, 
although she has but that bit myrtle in her hair that 
she brought in in her hand from the greenhouse 
before dinner, how much better her head looks than 
Mrs. Waddell's with that fine pearl sprig that must 
have cost her many a gold rupee ! As Anthony 
Whyte would say — she's really very classical." 

" I wish you wud nae compare them," interrupted 
Mr. Ramsay impatiently, as his temper was still 
further irritated at seeing the haughty but graceful 
air with which Colonel Delmour led the Countess to 
the top of the table, and as a matter of course placed 
himself by her. 

" There's a bold stroke for a wife playing there, 
but it won't do," again responded Miss Pratt, with a 
sHght palpitation at the heart, which she would have 
scorned, however, to have admitted even to herself. 

Dinners are commonly dull things, unless when 
there is some bel esprit to take the lead and act as 
sauce piquante to the company ; but here was nobody 
(except Miss Pratt) who could or would lay them- 
selves out to talk; and even she was somewhat 
damped as the thoughts of her five guineas came 



THE INHERITANCE. 183 

across her now and then with a qualm. As if to 
counteract that, her chief business was in calling forth, 
and then construing. Lady Eossville's most common 
civilities towards Mr. Lyndsay, to the great annoyance 
of both, and the repressed indignation of Colonel 
Delmour. 

Mrs. Waddell thought neither the Major nor she 
met with that attention that was their due. She 
therefore sat very stately, with Hyder Ali's carbuncle 
emitting dark and hirid gleams, as if it shared in her 
displeasure. In the evening it was somewhat better, 
though in any way it was difficult to get such incon- 
gruous materials as the company was composed of to 
hang together. But then they were more at liberty 
to follow their own devices ; and if music has not 
always charms to soothe a savage breast, it has at 
least the merit of keeping civilised beings sometimes 
in order. Although Lady Rossville had little expec- 
tation of deriving any pleasure from an exhibition of 
Mrs. Waddell's musical powers, yet she was too polite 
to pass her over. 

" Pray sing me a Scotch song," said she, seeing her 
preparing to execute an Italian one ; "I have taken 
quite a fancy for Scotch songs." 

"Scotch songs!" repeated Mrs. Waddell, with 
astonishment and contempt. " I hope, cousin, you 
don't think me quite so vulgar as to sing Scotch songs. 
I assure you they are quite exploded from the drawing- 
room now ; they are called kitchen songs," with an 
affected giggle. 



184 THE inhf:kitance. 

" Call them what they will," said Lady liossville, 
" I shall certainly learn to sing the songs of my own 
country, and to sing them, too, in my own way, con 
amore." 

" K so, you will sing them better than any mere 
taught singer will do," said Mr. Lyndsay. 

"But I assure you, cousin, nobody sings them 
now," said Mrs. Major, vehemently. 

"The more shame, then, to everybody," said 
Gertrude. 

" To everybody who can sing them," said Lyndsay ; 
" but I believe it is much more difficult to sing one's 
national music well in their native land than it is to 
'discourse most eloquent music' in a foreign tongue; 
the first speaks to every one's heart and feelings, the 
other merely addresses itself to the ear or the taste, 
or, it may be, the ignorance of the audience. To sing 
Scotch songs well requires great compass of voice, a 
clear articulation, and the very soul of feeling." 

"Pray, Mr. Lyndsay, were you ever abroad?" 
demanded Mrs. Waddell, abruptly. 

" I spent two years on the Continent ; one of them 
in Rome." 

" Indeed!" in a manner as if she doubted the fact, 
and rather displeased to think that anybody should 
have been where the Major had not been. " Well, I 
must ssij I am rather surprised at anybody who has 
ever been abroad being able to tolerate Scotch music. 
I think you say. Major, you have had little relish for 
it since you were in India." 



THE INHERITANCE. 185 

*'0h! surety," said the Major, who just knew a 
(Irum from a fife. 

" I like everything that is good of its kind," said 
Lyndsay. 

" Some of the Scotch airs are rather pretty," said 
Colonel Delmour, who, but for his abhorrence of Mrs. 
Waddell, would have uttered an anathema against 
them. 

"And I hope you admire the words?" said Mrs. 
Waddell, with an ironical air. 

" Indeed, I do, many of them," said Lady Rossville. 
" Here, for instance, is such a pretty sentiment prettily 
expressed," and as she leant against her harp she 
touched its chords, and sang with taste and feeling — 

" Wilt thou be my dearie, 
"When sorrow wrings thy gentle heart, 
Oh, wilt thou let me cheer thee ? 
By the treasure of my soul, 
And that's the love I bear thee. " 

" Well, I suppose it's my want of taste, for I can't 
say I can discover anything very beautiful there," 
said Mrs. Major, with a disdainful toss. " My dearie ! 
what a vulgar expression ! How should I look, Major, 
if you were to call me your dearie f 

" Ha ! ha ! very good ; but that is a charming 
thing you sing, my dear, 'Rosina mia caro,'" said the 
Major, who was half asleep. 

" Some of the Scotch songs are undoubtedly coarse, 
vulgar, and silly," said Lyndsay; "and most of them 
sung from beginning to end would certainly be some- 



186 THE INHERITANCE. 

what of a penance ; but many of them are charming, 
and a verse here and a verse there, in almost all 
of them, will be found to possess infinite beauty 
and " 

" I thought people who were really musical cared 
little for the words of a song," interrupted Mrs. Major, 
triumphantly. 

" Milton thought otherwise, and few will dispute 
his ear for music ; but if words are not fit to be heard 
they ought not to be sung. It by no means follows 
that because words are Scotch they must needs be 
vulgar ; on the contrary, I have heard good musicians 
say that, from the frequent termination of the Scotch 
words in vowels, there is a softness in the language 
which renders it much better adapted to music than 
any other, the Italian excepted; andHhen, what a 
superiority in the poetry of our songs ! How little 
nature, feeling, or variety is there in the greater part 
of the Italian ariettas and Venetian canzonettes." 

"Did you ever hear ^ Dee tentee ^ellpeetee ?' " asked 
Mrs. Waddell, with a consequential air. 

Mr. Lyndsay could scarcely restrain a smile at 
the question, '' De tenti palpete" being scarcely less 
hackneyed than " The Flower of Dumblane," or "From 
the white blossom'd sloe," etc. 

But, without waiting an answer, the lady forth- 
with squared her elbows, rounded her arms, spread 
out her fingers, and commenced waving her head, and 
rolling her eyes from side to side, in the manner usually 
practised by vulgar affected singers, who try to make 



THE INHERITANCE. 187 

up by their bodily gestures for the want of aH taste, 
feeling, and expression. 

Colonel Delmour had been talking to Lady Eoss- 
ville in a low voice during the greater part of this 
colloquy, which otherwise he never would have suffered 
to proceed, as he seemed to look upon the Major and 
his lady as quite beneath his notice ; and although he 
might have deigned to contradict, he never would have 
stooped to reason with either of them. When she be- 
gan, he certainly would have left the room, had not Ger- 
trude's presence restrained him ; not that her singing 
was more obnoxious to him than it was to Lyndsay ; 
but the one was accustomed to consult only his own 
pleasure ; the other to consider the feelings of others. 

" What a store of pretty old Scotch songs your 
sister Anne has," said Lady Eossville, trying to gloss 
over the deficiencies of the one sister in the praises of 
the other. 

" My sister Anne has a great store of nonsense in 
her head," said Mrs. Waddell, with a toss of her own ; 
" it is so stuffed with religion and poetry, I think, and 
with texts, and songs and hymns, that there seems 
little room for good common sense." 

" From your account she must greatly resemble a 
little quaint, simple sketch I have met with some- 
where and admired," said Lyndsay ; " I think it is 
one of old Isaak Walton's. Speaking, I presume, of 
some such person, he says, ' To say truth, she is never 
alone, for she is still accompanied with old songs, 
honest thoughts, and prayers — but short ones.' " 



188 THE INHERITANCE. 

" That seems to suit my cousin Anne exactly," said 
Lady Eossville ; " she is very sweet and very pleasing, 
and, I am sure, very good. I wished her to have 
come here with my aunts ; but she writes me she 
cannot be spared at present, and they will not be 
persuaded to leave home, it seems ; so we must do the 
best we can without them." 

Colonel Delmour placed some music before her, 
and they sang Itahan and French duets for the rest 
of the evening. Miss Pratt and Mr. Eamsay battled 
away as usual at backgammon ; but she was victorious, 
and again his suspicions of her recurred, and he 
thought — 

*' I wish she may be the thing after all ; she kens 
owre weel how to shake the dice." 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

"Unless one could cure men of being fools, it is to no purpose 
to cure them of any folly, as it is only making room for some 
other." — Horace Walpole. 

Mrs. Waddell did not find herself at all at home at 
Rossville ; except Lady Betty and Miss Pratt, nobody 
seemed to notice her finery. The simplicity of Lady 
Rossville's dress was felt to be impertinent towards 
her, a married woman; and the Major could not stand 
beside Colonel Delmour's lordly port and fashionable 
nonchalance. 

Then, except at meals, there seemed no possibility 
of getting hold of Uncle Adam, and there was no 
speaking to him before so many people ; it was only 
exposing him, poor man, to observation, and the less 
he was called out the better. It was inconceivable, 
too, what he made of himself all day ; there was no 
getting a private word of him; and, in short, the 
result was a determination to depart the following 
day. Fortune, however, seemed to favour her design 
on Uncle Adam, as she found herself in the breakfast 
room with only him and the Major, none of the others 
of the party having yet appeared. She therefore 



190 THE INHERITANCE. 

accosted him in her most ingratiating manner, which 
was met, as usual, by a very cool response. 

" It is very difficult to get a word of you, uncle, 
except in the midst of these fine people. You seem 
always engaged — ^you are certainly composing some- 
thing." 

"Maybe I'm makin' my will," was the reply, in a 
manner most suspiciously calm and benign. 

"Indeed! but I'm sure, uncle, you have no occasion 
to think of that just now. The Major and I were 
both remarking how uncommonly well you are look- 
ing — you were just saying to me yesterday, Major, 
that you really thought my uncle looked twenty years 
younger than he did last time you saw him." 

" Yes, indeed, 'pon my word I think so." 

" It's a sign that change of air agrees with you, 
uncle, so I hope you'll take a seat with the Major 
and me in our carriage, and accompany us to Thorn- 
bank ; I assure you I shall be quite affronted if you 
don't ; after staying here so long, it will have a very 
odd appearance in the eyes of the world, if you pass 
the Major and mo over — and me a married woman ; 
and besides, you know, uncle, if you really wish to 
do anything about your property — though, I'm sure, 
there can be no hurry about that — you know you are 
much nearer the law people at Thornbank than here ; 
and, indeed, Mr. Aikinhead the advocate has promised 
us a visit this vacation, and perhaps you might hke 
to advise with him before " 

" I thank you, but I need naebody's advice as to 



THE INHERITANCE. 191 

the disposal o' my ain property," replied Uncle Adam, 
still preserving a sort of horrid supernatural mildness ; 
" my mind's made up." 

" Indeed ! Well, I really think I should be at a loss 
how to dispose of such a charming property as Bloom 
Park." 

" But I'm at nane ; I'm just gaun to mak' a mor- 
tification^ o't." 

" A mortification of Bloom Park !" repeated Mrs. 
Waddell, in tones well suited to the words. 

"A mortification, my dear sir!" ejaculated the 
Major. 

" Yes, just a mortification. What is there wonder- 
ful in that?" 

" Why, I must say I think, uncle, considering " 

gasped Mrs. Waddell, vainly trying to preserve her 
unruffled dignity, " how much is done for the lower 
classes now, I really think the higher ranks stand 
quite as much in need of mortifications." 

"I think sae too, so it's lucky we're baith agreed." 

" I can assure you, uncle, although it's a thing I 
would not choose to say to everybody, the Major finds 
he has quite enough to do with his money." 

"Idinnadootit." 

*' There is so much required now to support one's 
rank in the world, that I assure you it is no joke." 

" Joke — wha said it was a joke ?" 

" In short, uncle, I can assure you, in spite of the 
appearance we make in the eyes of the world, the 

* In Scotland an endowment is termed a Mortification. 



192 THE INHERITANCE. 

Major and I both find ourselves pinched enough, and 
he now doubts very much about buying a place; 
although certainly Thornbank does not suit us in many 
respects; the house is very indiff'erent, we have only one 
drawing-room — and, with his connections, that is not 
the thing ; and the garden is really a poor affair. So 
that, altogether, I am really anxious the Major should 
find another residence." 

" He'll maybe find ane at Bloom Park before it's 
lang," said Uncle Adam, drily. 

" Oh ! uncle, I'm sure we never thought of that, and 
I thought you said you were going to make a morti- 
fication of if?" 

"So I am; but it's to be a mortification as you say 
for the rich ; it's to be a mortification for thae miser- 
able, unfortunate men that are married to tawpies and 
haverels that spend a' their substance for them." 

Uncle Adam had here broke out into his natural 
manner, and there is no saying how much plainer he 
might have spoken, had he not at that moment been 
checked in his career by the entrance of Mr. Lyndsay, 
who was the only person (strange as it may appear) 
for whom he felt anything approaching to respect; 
but there was so much mildness and calmness of 
manner, with so much manly dignity in his deport- 
ment, that even Uncle Adam was ashamed to behave 
ill before him. The rest of the party came dropping 
in, and Mrs. Waddell, with one cheek very red, was 
obliged to take her seat in silence ; it gradually 
cooled, however, as she began to think it was just 



THE INHERITANCE. 193 

her uncle's way ; he liked a rough joke, and so on ; 
while the Major, for some little time, sat revolving 
whether he should not call upon the old man to say 
what he meant; if there was anything personal in his 

allusion, he but the poor Major, even to himself, 

could not say what he would do. At last, he too 
gulped down the affront with his last dish of tea, and, 
by the time breakfast was over, both were ready to 
enter the lists again with Uncle Adam. 

Upon hearing of the proposed departure of the 
Major and lady, Gertrude said all that was necessary 
on the occasion ; but she was too sincere to be press- 
ing in her entreaties for them to prolong their stay ; 
she felt that her relations were ridiculous, and she 
saw they were despised by Colonel Delmour. It was 
rather a relief, therefore, to hear they were going 
away. Any deficiencies on her part were, however, 
amply atoned for by Miss Pratt, who was vehement 
in her remonstrances, assuring them they had seen 
nothing of Rossville yet, that it was really no visit at 
all ; people scarcely knew one another's faces till they 
had spent at least three days together, etc. 

In spite of all that could be urged by Miss Pratt, 
however, the Major and lady remained fixed in their 
purpose to return home ; all they would concede was 
to remain part of the morning, and the carriage and 
Caesar were ordered to be in readiness accordingly. 

The breakfast party, with the exception of Lyndsay, 
having lounged over their repast to the utmost length 
of procrastination, read their letters and newspapers, 

VOL. II. O 



194 THE INHERITANCE. 

pampered their dogs, and, in short, done all that idle 
people do to kill time, even at his very outset, en 
masse J were severally sauntering away to try their 
skill individually, each their own way, when, as Uncle 
Adam was retreating, Mrs. Waddell followed him into 
the ante-room, and was as usual followed by the 
Major. 

*' Before we go, uncle, I wish to know if there is 
anything I can do for you ; since you don't seem in- 
clined to accompany us at present. Any message to 
Bloom Park "? We shall pass close by it, you know ; 
and, by-the-bye, uncle, I really wish you would give 
us an order of admittance there ; it has a most extra- 
ordinary appearance in the eyes of the world that the 
Major has never yet been within your gate." 

" Oh ! my dear Bell, you know, if your uncle has 
any objections to showing his grounds " 

" Weel, weel, dinna plague me, since it's to be a 
mortification at ony rate ; gie me pen and ink, and 
ye shall ha'e an order, if that's aw ye want," said Mr. 
Ramsay impatiently. 

Pen, ink, and paper were speedily procured, and 
Uncle Adam, seating himself in a most deliberate 
manner, produced the order. 

Mrs. Major glanced her eye upon it, then reddened, 
as she exclaimed — 

" Such a way of wording it ! Good gracious ! 
uncle, can you suppose I will go on these terms ? 
' Admit Major Waddell and his wife ! ' Wife ! I 
really never met with anything like that." 



THE INHERITANCE. 195 

" WTiat is't you mean 1 " demanded Uncle Adam in 
a voice of thunder ; "are you no Major Waddell's 

wife r 

" Why, my good sir," began the Major, " you know 
it is not customary to call ladies of a certain rank 
mves now." 

" Certainly not," interposed his lady ; "I thought 
everybody had known that ! Wife! What else could 
you have said if the Major had been a carter f 

" What are you then, if you're no his wife V 

"Why, my lady, you know, my dear sir, would 
have have been the more proper and delicate thing." 

" Your leddy !" cried Uncle Adam, with a sardonic 
laugh, " your leddy !" 

"Certainly," said the lady, with much dignity; 
" there can be no doubt about that ; and I can assure 
you I have too much respect for Major Waddell and 
myself to submit to any such low, vulgar appellation." 

" I've met wi' mony a daft thing in my day," said 
Uncle Adam, "but this beats them a'; a married 
woman that'll no submit to be called a wife ! I 
dinna ken what's to come next. Will you be his 
dearie, then V 

"Eeally uncle, I must say I have borne a great 
deal from you; but there are some things that no- 
body can put up with, and there is a duty we owe 
to ourselves, that — I must say, I think neither the 
Major nor I have been very well used by you;" and 
the lady's passion grew strong. The Major looked 
frightened. 



196 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Do compose yourself, my dear ; I am sure your 
good uncle had no intention of doing anything 
disrespectful. Why, my dear sir, a very little will 
set all to rights," offering the pen to Uncle Adam. 
"If you will just take the trouble to write the line 
over again in the customary style, Major Waddell 
and lady, all will be well." 

"I'll just as soon cut off my finger," said Uncle 
Adam ferociously; "and if she winna gang to my 
house as your wife, she shall ne'er set her foot in't 
in ony other capacity." 

"My dear Bell, you hear that?" said the poor 
Major. 

" Yes, Major, I do ; but I have too much respect 
for you to give up the point; it would be lower- 
ing you, indeed, in the eyes of the world, if I were 
to allow myself to be put on a footing with any 
common man's wife in the country. It is what I 
will not put up with." And with much majesty she 
seized the order and put it into the fire. 

Uncle Adam looked at her for a moment, as if 
he too would have burst into a blaze. Then, as if 
disdaining even to revile her, he walked out of the 
apartment, banging the door after him in a manner 
enough to have raised the ghost of Lord Chesterfield. 

" The old gentleman is very testy this morning," 
said the Major. 

" I am surprised at your patience with him. Major ; 
I have no idea of allowing one's self to be trampled 
upon in this manner. Wife ! I really can't tliink 



THE INHERITANCE. 197 

enough of it ! What else could he have said, speak- 
ing of my coachman's wife f 

"It's very true, my dear, the same thing struck 
me ; and, in a political point of view, I assure you I 
think it the duty of every gentleman who wishes 
well to the government of the country to support 
the standing order of things, and to keep up the 
existing ranks of society." 

"That is exactly what I think, Major; it is quite 
necessary there should be distinctions kept up. Wife ! 
— every beggar has a wife !" 

"Undoubtedly, my dear! beggar -wife, in fact, 
means neither more nor less than the wife of a 
beggar-man ; and in these times, when there is such 
a tendency to a bad spirit amongst the people, and 
such an evident wish to bring down the higher ranks 
to a level with themselves, it becomes the duty of 
every gentleman to guard his privileges with a jealous 
eye." 

"I for one certainly never will give in to these 
liberty and equality notions; that I am determined." 

"I hope not, indeed," said the Major, warmed 
into fervour by the spirit of his lady — "I hope not, 
indeed." 

" How," said the lady, " can my servants possibly 
look up to me with proper respect, when I am 
brought upon a level with themselves?" 

"You are perfectly right, my dear; they cannot 
do it — it is impossible." 

" Perfectly. Wife, indeed ! " 



CHAPTER XXV. 

" Leath we are to diseas or hurt your persone oiiy way is, and 
far leather to want you." — Bannatyne's Journal. 

The dialogue was now at its lowest ebb, when Miss 
Pratt came pattering into the room full speed. 

While this disturbance was going on in one room, 
Mrs. St Clair was conversing with Mr. Lyndsay in 
another, on the subject of her daughter's pupilage, 
and Lady Rossville and Colonel Delmour found them- 
selves together in the drawing-room, where they 
flattered themselves with enjoying an uninterrupted 
Ute-cL-Ute. But within the drawing-room was a small 
turret, containing piles of music, portefeuilles of draw- 
ings and engravings, heaps of worsteds and sewing- 
silks, and, in short, a variety of miscellaneous articles, 
which the Countess had not yet had leisure to look 
over. This was a favourite haunt of Miss Pratt's, 
who was fond of picking and grubbing amongst 
other people's goods; not that she actually stole, 
but that, as she expressed it, she often met with 
bits of things that were of no use to anybody, 
and that when she showed to Lady Rossville she 
always made her welcome to. For some time her 
head had been completely immersed in a large Indian 



THE INHERITANCE. 199 

chest, containing many odds and ends, a few of 
which she had selected for the purpose of being 
hinted for, and she was just shaking her ears from 
the cobwebs they might have contracted in their 
researches, when they were suddenly smote with 
the sound of her own name pronounced by Colonel 
Delmour; she heard the Countess's voice in reply, 
but it was too soft and low to enable her to ascertain 
her words. 

"Since Miss Pratt is disagreeable to you and 
odious to me, why don't you dismiss her the house, 
then 1" asked Colonel Delmour. " Much as you despise 
her, she may do mischief. Ah, Gertrude ! " But 
here Colonel Delmour's voice sank into a tenderer 
strain, and its undistinguishable accents only pene- 
trated the massive door which was betwixt them. 
Miss Pratt had met with many a buffet in her day, 
but she never had met with anything like this, and 
her ears tingled with rage and mortification at hearing 
herself talked of in such a manner. 

"I wish Anthony Whyte heard him !" was her first 
mental ejaculation ; though even to herself, had she 
considered a moment, the mortifying conviction must 
have been, that if Anthony Whyte did hear it it 
would only be to laugh at it. She tried to make out 
something more, which might prove either a confirma- 
tion or a refutation of this opprobrious expression ; but 
"love — doubts — adore — agony — suspense — unalter- 
able heart — wholly mine," etc., were aU she could pick 
up ; but these were too much ; the sword that had just 



200 THE INHERITANCE. 

fallen upon her cut two ways, if not three; her 
respectability (and that was her weak side) was com- 
promised ; her footing in a house she had long looked 
upon as a home was endangered, and her five guineas 
were in the most imminent peril. In short, she 
found she was in a very great scrape, and the best 
thing she could do at present would be to take the 
first word of flyting and depart. 

"Dismiss, indeed ! dismiss one's own blood ! " and 
Miss Pratt's danced and bubbled at the bare thought 
of such a thing. There was a little back stair from 
the turret, by which she could emerge without going 
through the drawing-room and confronting her adver- 
saries, and to that she betook herself, and after a 
little searching, found the Major and his lady just 
beginning to recover their equilibrium. When one's 
mind is ruffled it is always a satisfaction to meet with 
others in the same state, especially when the cause is 
somewhat similar, and though neither party would for 
the world have betrayed to the other the cause of its 
discomposure, yet both felt that sort of secret sym- 
pathy which made it hail fellow, well met ! 

Miss Pratt was too experienced in the art of 
offering visits, securing a seat in a friend's carriage, 
and such like manoeuvres, to be at any loss on the 
present occasion ; and as the Major and lady, in spite 
of all their finery, were not particularly sought after, 
they were much flattered at the compliment, and soon 
settled that she should accompany them, in the first 
instance to Thornbank, where she insinuated she 



THE INHERITANCE. 201 

would not be allowed to remain long, as both Lady 
Wellwood and Lady Eestall would go mad, if they 
heard she was in their neighbourhood, till they got 
hold of her. 

This important point settled, the next thing to be 
done was to give all possible bustle and importance 
to her departure, that she might not appear to have 
been driven away by anything that insolent puppy 
had said ; she had no notion of sneaking away, as if 
her nose had been bleeding, or showing herself any 
way flustered, or giving him the slightest satisfaction 
in any way. She therefore went openly to work — 
rang all the bells, called to the servants, spoke 
loudly, but calmly, about her preparations to Lady 
Betty and Mrs. St. Clair ; and finally repaired to the 
room where she had left the Countess and her lover, 
and where she still found them. 

" Well, Lady Eossville, I'm just come to apologise 
to you for doing what is really an ill-bred thing ; but 
your good friends, the Major and his lady, have pre- 
vailed upon me to take a seat in their carriage ; and, 
as there's many visits I ought to have paid long ago, 
our cousins the Millbanks for one, I'm just going to 
run away from you. I declare there's the carriage ; 
and, by-the-bye, Countess, there's a bit of Indian silk 
I have of yours that I got for a pattern, and have 
always forgot to return, but I shall bring it with me 
next time I come," with a look of cool defiance at 
Colonel Delmour. 

" You are perfectly welcome to it," said Lady Ross- 



202 THE INHERITA'b^CE. 

ville, in some little embarrassment what to say next ; 
" but this is a very sudden resolution of yours." 

" I'm a great enemy to your long preparations — a 
long warning is just a lingering parting, as Mr. Whyte 
says ; so farewell. God bless you, my dear ! and take 
care of yourself," in a most emphatic and oracular 
tone — "take care of yourself, and" — in a loud 
whisper — " if you would take an old friend's advice, 
you would dismiss at least one of your lovers," with a 
glance at Colonel Delmour, who, from the moment of 
her entrance, had been amusing himself with a musi- 
cal snufF-box, which he continued to play off with the 
most unceasing attention, as if quite unconscious of 
her presence. Gertrude was leaving the room with 
Miss Pratt, to do the parting honour to her guests, 
when looking up, he called, "Shall I walk to the 
stables now, and examine the state of your stud, or 
shall I wait for you 1 " 

"I am no judge of horses," answered the Countess, 
" so I shall leave that department entirely to you ; " 
and she passed on to the saloon, before Miss Pratt 
could find words to express her indignation at finding 
he had already begun to interfere in the Eossville 
manage. All was now leave-taking — regrets, compli- 
ments, promises and invitations, and final adieus ; and 
the trio at length were wheeled off. Much solace 
they found in each other's society during the drive, 
for each and all of them had something to animadvert 
upon as to the state of affairs at Eossville. 

Uncle Adam missed Miss Pratt at dinner, and the 



THE INHERITANCE. 203 

kind message she had left for him with Mrs. St. Clair 
was not delivered. Lyndsay was out of spirits, and 
Lady Rossville was inattentive ; and, in short. Uncle 
Adam began to feel himself one too many. He was 
also within two pages of the end of "Guy Mannering"; 
and therefore, upon retiring to his chamber, he sent 
off a line to the Blue Boar, desiring a chaise might be 
sent for him the following morning at six o'clock. 



CHAPTEE XXVI. 

"Ah ! what will not a woman do who loves ! 
What means will she refuse to keep that heart 
Where all her joys are placed ! " 

Dryden. 

The seeds of false shame were beginning to be sown 
in Lady Eossville's heart, and she was secretly pleased 
when she heard of Uncle Adam's intended departure. 
She felt the contrast between Colonel Delmour and 
him was too much ; the gulf seemed impassable that 
was betwixt them, and it was painful to her to feel 
that she was ashamed of her uncle. 

"I wonder why I never felt this with Edward 
Lyndsay," thought she; "it must be that he is not 
so refined in his ideas as Delmour," and with that 
answer the thought passed away from her mind. She, 
however, pressed her uncle to wait breakfast and to 
accept of her carriage to take him home ; but he was 
resolute in taking his own way, which was commonly 
the most uncomfortable that could be contrived. 

" Fare ye weel," said he, with something of softness 
in his look and manner ; " ye want naething frae me, 
so you'll tak' naething." 

"No indeed, my dear uncle," said Gertrude, affec- 



THE INHERITANCE. 205 

tionately shaking his hand, "I do not require any- 
thing; but I shall always remember your kindness 
to me when I did. I only wish I could make you as 
happy as — as I am myself," added she with a smile 
and a blush. 

Mr. Eamsay shook his head, and uttered something 
betwixt a groan and a hem. 

"Weel weel, I wish it may last, but 'rue and 
thyme grow baith in ae garden ; ' but I need nae fash 
to gie ye ony o' my advice, for whan folk need nae- 
thing else they'll no tak' that ; so fare ye weel ; " and 
with something amounting almost to a squeeze of the 
hand in its own uncouth way, the uncle and niece 
parted. Her relief from the presence of her mother's 
relations was, however, of short duration. 

The following days were almost entirely devoted to 
business ; for Lord Millbank and Mr. Alexander Black 
came to Eossville, and long meetings and discussions 
ensued, at many of which Gertrude was obliged to be 
present, to her and Colonel Delmour's infinite weari- 
ness and chagrin. His only solace during the hours 
she was shut up from him was in lounging about the 
house and grounds devising plans of useless expense, 
which he longed impatiently to have put in execution. 
No views of beneficence or charity made any part of 
his schemes ; his every idea centred in self-indulgence, 
and luxury and magnificence were all to which he 
looked as his recompense. 

At length the business was brought to a conclusion, 
and Gertrude was once more at liberty ; for Mrs. St 



206 THE INHERITANCE. 

Clair, after several ineffectual attempts to gain the 
entire direction of her daughter and the control of 
her every action, found it vain ; and she was therefore 
obliged to carry the reins with a light hand, lest the 
Countess should have sought to free herself from them 
altogether. 

Lyndsay alone, of all the guests, now remained, 
and he still lingered, as though loath to give her up 
entirely to the influence of Colonel Delmour. He was 
aware that the heart cannot be long and exclusively 
devoted to one object without contracting somewhat 
of affinity towards it ; and he sighed in bitterness of 
spirit when he thought how Gertrude's nature, even 
now, with all its faults, still so pure, so lofty, so 
generous, so amiable, would be debased and perverted 
by the baser alloy with which it mingled. What a 
different creature might she become under other 
guidance, so easily managed when her affections led 
the way ! What capacities of happiness for herself and 
others seemed now at stake ! But, alas ! how mis- 
directed, how useless, if not pernicious, might they 
become under such control ! and Lyndsay, unlike 
himself, became wavering and irresolute as to the part 
he ought to act. Every day seemed to increase the 
alienation betwixt Colonel Delmour and him ; but on 
Lyndsay's part it was so calm and mild, so free from 
all wrath and bitterness, that it might have escaped 
notice altogether but for the sort of repressed animosity 
which the other occasionally betrayed. 

"Why is it," said Lady Rossville one day to her 



THE INHERITANCE. 207 

lover, " that Edward and you are not better friends ^ 
Has any misunderstanding taken place betwixt you 1 
for you are not even upon the same terms you were 
when I first saw you. Then you walked, rode, shot, con- 
versed together, but now you seem carefully to avoid 
all intercourse ; it is unpleasant to me to witness this." 

" 'Tis you yourself are the cause of it, Gertrude," 
answered Colonel Delmour, warmly. "How can you 
imagine I can endure the sight of a man who, knowing 
the terms we are upon, yet presuming upon the 
encouragement you give him, dares to love you, and 
is at this moment planning to undermine me in your 
affections 1 By Heaven, I think I am but too patient." 

" Lyndsay love me ! " exclaimed the Countess ; 
" what a fancy ! " but at the same moment a confused 
crowd of half-formed, half-forgotten thoughts rushed 
upon her mind, and raised a blush on her cheek which 
did not escape Delmour's notice. 

" Yes, in his own cold-blooded, methodistical way ; 
not in the way I love you — to madness ! to idolatry ! 
His existence, his soul, are not bound up in you as 
mine are ; but he would supplant me if he could." 

"His love must indeed be of a different nature 
from yours," said Lady Eossville, trying to laugh away 
Colonel Delmour's roused passion, " for he has scarcely 
ever said a civil thing to me ; and as for a comphment, 
I have sometimes tried whether I could not extort one 
from him, but never have succeeded. Nay, don't 
frown so, Delmour; if L3nidsay does not flatter, at 
least he never frowns." 



208 THE INHERITANCE. 

This remark did not dispel the cloud from her 
lover's brow ; on the contrary, he bit his lip as if to 
repress the rising of his anger. After a few moments 
he said in a subdued voice, " I have never flattered 
you, if by flattering you mean insincerity ; but I had 
flattered myself that you had been above practising 
those paltry arts by which so many women seek to 
enhance their value. I flattered myself, Gertrude, 
that you had been superior to coquetry ; but when I 
see you encouraging the attentions of one who pre- 
sumes to love you — even in the face of him to whom 
you have given your vows — one, too, whom you must 
know to be my enemy, can you wonder that I am 
sometimes driven to hate him, and almost to doubt 
whether you really love me ? " 

"Unjust, unkind!" said Lady Eossville, turning 
from him in displeasure. 

"No, Gertrude, 'tis you who are unjust, unkind; 
my heart is solely yours — its every thought and wish 
centre in you ; but it must have yours — ^yours wholly 
and undivided — in return ; less will not satisfy love 
such as mine." 

Lady Eossville remained silent, and Colonel Del- 
mour's agitation increased. 

"I see how it is," cried he passionately; "his artful 
insinuations have prevailed but he shall answer for 
this." 

Gertrude laid her hand upon his arm, while tears 
burst from her eyes. 

" Ah ! Delmour, if you love me as you say you do, 



THE INHERITANCE. 209 

why do you thus grieve me 1 I would not for worlds 
willingly afflict you !" 

" But you do," interrupted he ; " you torture me to 
agony, and w^hen I dare to complain you reproach me." 

" Tell me what it is you require of me, since all I 
have done and suffered for your sake is insufficient." 

" All that I require of you, Gertrude, is, that you 
will not at least ask me to become the bosom friend 
of one who, I know, seeks to undermine me in your 
affections. I cannot be the friend of a hj^ocrite." 

" Edward a hypocrite ! Ah ! Delmour, how your 
passion misleads you ! He is all truth and openness ; 

he is indeed " then, after a pause, "When I 

look back a few months and think of the state of 
incertitude I was then in as to your faith and con- 
stancy, when at times my own was almost shaken 
by my doubts — at such a time, had Lyndsay been 
what you suppose, had he sought to ingratiate himself 
with me — I do not know, I cannot tell — perhaps he 
might have gained an influence over me. But, indeed, 
he never tried ; he never spoke to me as a lover, but 
on every occasion he proved himself my friend. As 
such I must always consider him. Do not, then, dear 
Delmour, embitter my peace with any of those idle 
jealousies ; the time is past," added she with a smile, 
"for Lyndsay to think of loving me now." 

" But he does love you, Gertrude. I read it in the 

agitation he betrayed upon my arrival. He guessed 

his schemes would then be frustrated ; he knew that 

I detested all underhand plots, and would come boldly 

VOL, Ti. p 



210 THE INHERITANCE. 

forward and bring matters to an issue. I did so ; you 
have promised to be mine ; he knows you have, and 
yet he would supplant me if he could. And is it 
right in you, Gertrude, warned as you are of all this, 
to continue to encourage him, and lavish your atten- 
tions on himf 

" What can I do f asked the Countess, beginning 
to give way to her lover's vehemence, and to believe 
that she really was doing wrong; "what would you 
have me do?" 

" Nay, it is not for me, Gertrude, to point out the 
line of conduct you ought to pursue ; I leave that to 
yourself. I would have concealed from you, if I 
could, all that you have made me suffer ; but when 
you call upon me to make a friend of the man who, in 
spite of our mutual vows, dares to love you " 

"But this is mere fancy." 

"No, I speak from certainty. Gertrude, is it 
possible you can be so blind as not to have perceived 
it yourself?" 

" Would that I were both blind and deaf to all the 
jarring elements which are for ever threatening my 
peace, " said Lady Kossville sorrowfully. "How happy, 
how perfectly happy, might I be but for the passions 
and the prejudices of others ; but it is distracting 
to me to see all those I love thus at variance. If this 
is the necessary consequence of riches and grandeur, 
oh ! how willingly would I exchange them for good- 
will and mutual confidence !" and the tears dropped 
from her eyes as she leaned her head upon her hand. 



THE INHERITANCE. 211 

"Gertrude, dearest, most beloved, forgive me that 
I have thus distressed you. Were you but mine, all 
these doubts would vanish; but while it is in the 
power of malice or treachery yet to separate us, can 
you wonder that it requires all your love to still the 
tumults of my heart ? Call it suspicion — jealousy — 
what you will; until you are once mine your par- 
tiality for Lyndsay will constitute the torment of my 
life." 

" And I must become unjust, ungrateful, to one to 
whom I owe so much 1 Ah ! Delmour, at what a 
price must I satisfy you !" 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

*' Human faults with liuman grief confess 
'Tis thou art chang'd . . . ." PiiiOR. 

From this time Gertrude's manner was wholly changed 
towards her cousin. Instead of the sweet smile with 
which she used to welcome him, her eyes were now 
commonly averted from him, and an air of constraint 
and embarrassment had succeeded the open, confiding 
carelessness which had hitherto marked their inter- 
course. 

Lyndsay felt the change, and was at no loss to 
guess the cause. The books they had been reading 
together, the songs they used to sing together, were 
now discarded for others of Colonel Delmour's choice, 
and she read and sang with him, and with him only. 
The plans they had been carrying on together were 
stopped or overturned, and others of a totally different 
nature were adopted. 

" Will you walk with me to-day, Gertrude f asked 
Ljmdsay one morning when he accidentally was left 
alone with her ; "it is long since you have seen your 
schoolhouse; should you not like to look at it and 
see what progress it has made since we last saw it 
together f 



THE INHERITANCE. 213 

" Certainly, I should like very much to see it ; but 
the phaeton and horses Colonel Delmour ordered for 
me have arrived, and I promised to take a drive with 
him." 

" Perhaps you will drive that way, and I shall meet 
you there ?" 

"I am afraid it will not be possible ;" then, after a 
pause, she added, "I am afraid you will think me 
very foolish and expensive, as you tell me I have not 
much money to squander ; but Colonel Delmour and 
I discovered such a lovely little spot lately on the 
banks of the river, just a little below the cascade, you 
know — a sort of tiny paradise, that the thought struck 
us both of making a sort of miniature of a ferme orn^e^ 
quite a baby-house thing, in fact — a sort of LilHpu- 
tian beau ideal of rustic life," said she, attempting by 
a laugh to hide her confusion, "with a flower garden, 
and all sorts of prettinesses, for you know flowers 
are my passion, and we appointed to meet some of 
the people there to-day, to talk and walk over it ; but 
I am afraid you will think " 

" You did not use to be so afraid of me, Gertrude," 
said Lyndsay mildly, but gravely ; " what have I done 
to inspire you with so much dread?" 

" You know you are my guardian now," said she, 
with an assumed gaiety ; of course it is my duty 
to be a little afraid of you, especially when I know I 
deserve a scold." 

" Well, you will be relieved from your fears; I shall 
leave you to-day." 



214 THE INHEEITANCE. 

" My dear cousin, I spoke but in jest," cried Ger- 
trude, thrown off her guard, and relapsing into her 
natural manner. 

"Not entirely," said Lyndsay, with a melancholy 
smile ; " but, whether you fear me or not, I feel you 
no longer look upon me as your friend." 

"Indeed you wrong me," cried the Countess, in 
emotion; "I never can cease to regard you as my 
friend, would you but become the friend of those who 
are dear to me." 

"Impossible!" exclaimed Lyndsay, while a flush 
passed over his face, and he was for a moment silent ; 
he then added in a calmer tone, "I trust I am no 
one's enemy ; I wish well to all mankind, and so far 
I may style myself the friend of all ; but, with some 
characters, farther I cannot go." 

Lady Eossville coloured deeply, and remained 
silent ; but from her look and air she was evidently 
displeased. 

"You distrust me, Gertrude," said Lyndsay, at 
length breaking silence, "and that is worse than 
being afraid of me." 

" I am, perhaps, too little distrustful of any one,'' 
answered she ; " it is not my nature to suspect evil — 
I hope it never will ; surely there are other marks by 
which we may know those who love us than any that 
base suspicion can furnish us with." 

"Yes, and here is one," said Lyndsay, taking a 
book from amongst a mass of French novels which 
lay upon the sofa-table. It was the "Life of Colonel 



THE INHERITANCE. 215 

Hutchinson," and Lyndsay had begun to read it to her 
before Colonel Delmour's arrival, since when it had 
lain neglected ; " here is a picture of true and faithful 
love, who studies that may soon learn to distinguish 
the real from the counterfeit ; " and he read that 
simple description of the perfection of human attach- 
ment with an emotion Avhich showed how deeply he 
felt it. 

" There is this only to be recorded, that never was 
there a passion more ardent and less idolatrous — he 
loved her better than his life, with inexpressible 
tendemesse and kindnesse; had a most high and 
obliging esteeme of her, yet still considered honour, 
religion, and duty, above her, nor ever suffered the 
intrusion of such dotage as should blind him from 
marking her imperfections ; these he looked on 
with such an indulgent eye as did not abate his 
love and esteeme of her, while it augmented his 
love, and blotted out all those spots which might 
make her appeare lesse worthy of that respect he 
paid her."^ 

He laid down the book, but Lady Rossville made 
no comment ; she continued to busy herself arranging 
some fine forced flowers, which had just been brought 
her, in a vase, and seemed to give her whole attention 
to them. This continued for some minutes, and 
Ljmdsay made no attempt to interrupt her ; but, on 
hearing the sound of a carriage, she raised her head 
and saw the phaeton, driven by Colonel Delmour, and 
^ "Life of Colonel Hutchinson." 



216 THE INHERITANCE. 

drawn by four beautiful horses, followed by two 
grooms mounted on two of the same set. A throb 
of pride and pleasure was felt at her heart, as she 
looked at the elegant bauble which had stopped 
opposite the saloon ; and as she threw open the sash 
with childish delight, Delmour called to her to know 
if she was ready. She answered in the affirmative, 
and was leaving the room to put on her things, when 
Lyndsay said — 

"Is it thus, then, we are to part, Gertrude, after 
all the pleasant friendly days we have passed to- 
gether f 

Lady Eossville stopped and turned towards him. 
"You are not serious in thinking of leaving us to- 
day?" 

"I am, indeed, perfectly so." 

"At least stay till to-morrow; this is such a 
strange hurried way of leaving us — pray, give us one 
day more?" 

" I would give you many days if they could be of 
service to you, but that cannot be ; forgive me, my 
dear cousin, if I have pained you. Farewell, God bless 
you!" 

Gertrude's heart swelled, and the tear started to her 
eye as she returned the affectionate pressure of her 
cousin's hand, but she repressed her emotion. 

" You will come again soon," said she ; but Lyndsay 
made no reply, and they parted. 

"I fear I have not done as I ought," thought 
Gertrude, with a sigh, but in another moment the 



THE INHERITANCE. 217 

thought was gone, and she was seated by her lover. 
The equipage was perfect, the day was beautiful, all 
was gaiety and brightness; Colonel Delmour was 
more than usually delightful, and Lyndsay was for- 
gotten. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

" Serment d'aimer toujours, ou de n'aimer jamais, me paroit 
un pen temeraire." — Voltaire. 

Several days passed in the same manner, and every- 
day some new scheme of useless profusion was sug- 
gested by Colonel Delmour, and adopted by the 
Countess. New stables must be built to accommo- 
date the additional number of horses he declared to 
be absolutely necessary; the present billiard -room 
was inconvenient, a new one would cost a mere 
trifle ; there was no good music-room, and there was 
no living in the country without a private theatre ; 
the present library might be turned into a conser- 
vatory ; and the smooth green bank which sloped 
gradually down to the river must be changed into 
an Italian garden, with hanging terraces and marble 
fountains ; and he sketched a design of the whole so 
beautiful, that the Countess was in ecstasies. 

Mrs. St. Clair witnessed all this with very difl'erent 
feelings ; but she saw the ascendency Colonel Delmour 
had gained over her daughter was absolute, and she 
feared to come to extremities with either of them, 
lest it should prove the means of throwing her more 
completely into his power, and he might prevail upon 



THE INHERITANCE. 219 

her to unite herself to him, notwithstanding her 
promise to the contrary. She had remonstrated with 
both on the impropriety of Colonel Delmour con- 
tinuing to reside at Eossville in the present situation 
of the family, but her words produced no effect ; till, 
at length, finding she could not dislodge him, she 
formed the resolution of taking Lady Eossville to 
London, as the best means of detaching her, in some 
degree, from him. She thought of Lyndsay's words 
too, "Let her see others no less gifted than he is," 
and she thought it was not impossible that a change 
might be wrought in Gertrude's sentiments ; at 
least, there was more likelihood of its being effected 
amidst the novelty and variety of the metropolis than 
in the romantic seclusion of Eossville. 

This resolution caused infinite chagrin to the lovers. 
To Gertrude's young enthusiastic heart all happiness 
seemed centred in the spot which contained herself 
and the idol of her affections ; and although the mere 
inanimate objects of nature — woods, rocks, water — are 
in themselves nothing, yet, combined with the associa- 
tions of fancy and memory, they acquire a powerful 
hold upon our hearts. Every step to her was fraught 
with fond ideas ; for it was at Eossville her feelings 
had been most powerfully excited, whether to joy or 
sadness ; and Eossville, its trees, its banks, its flowers, 
seemed all entwined with her very existence. It is 
thus, when the heart is exclusively occupied with one 
object, it clings with fond tenacity to every circum- 
stance connected with it. 



220 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Ah, mamma," said she, with a sigh, " how sad to 
think of leaving Rossville when it is just beginning 
to burst forth in all its beauty ; and to immure our- 
selves amidst the stone and lime and smoke and 
dust of London ; do only look at these almond trees 
and poplars." 

But Mrs. St. Clair put it on the footing of her 
health, which required change of air and scene, and a 
consultation of the London Faculty ; and her daughter 
could say no more. 

Colonel Delmour shared in her regrets; but his 
arose from a different cause ; his heart was too worldly 
and sophisticated to participate in those pure and 
simple pleasures which imparted such delight to hers. 
But he was aware of the admiration Gertrude would 
excite when she made her appearance in London ; and 
he was unwilling that she should be seen there until 
she should be introduced as his wife. He thought 
too well of himself and her to dread any rival in her 
affections ; but still the gay world was very unfavour- 
able to the growth of sentiment ; there was a multi- 
plicity of objects, a diversity of amusements, a glare, 
a glitter and bustle, that could not fail to distract 
her attention, and weaken the strength of that 
exclusive attachment she now cherished for him; 
and, selfish and engrossing as he was, he felt the 
charm would be diminished were the devotion 
lessened. 

But, in his murmurs and repinings, Gertrude heard 
only the same tender regrets which filled her own 



THE INHEKITANCE. 221 

lieart even to overflowing, and she loved him the 
more for this sympathy in her feelings. The day 
before that on which they were to set off was the 
Countess's birthday, but she would not have it ob- 
served. 

" This day two years, it shall be celebrated gaily, 
nobly, if you will," said she. 

"And must this one pass away like other vulgar 
hours," said Delmour, "unmarked by aught to dis- 
tinguish it from common days, without a single 
memorial to mark it ? Poor that I am, I have not 
even the most trifling memento to lay at your feet." 

"I will not tax you so unmercifully as did the 
ladies of old their lovers," said the Countess, with a 
smile ; " I want neither a dragon's scale nor a hydra's 
head, nor even a glass of singing-water, nor a branch 
of a talking-tree ; but you shall bring me, from the 
green-house, a rose unique^ and that shall be my only 
gaud to-day." 

Colonel Delmour brought the rose. Lady Rossville 
drew from her finger a rare and costly gem, which 
had belonged to the late Earl. 

" Such tokens are but mere vulgar and oft-repeated 
emblems of an old story," said she, smiling, "from 
Queen Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex down to the 
milkmaid and her 'rush ring;' but it will mark the 
day, will it not % And if you should turn rebel, or I 
tyrant, you must choose some more faithful messenger 
than poor Essex did ; and that's all the moral of my 
tale." 



222 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Woe to the hand that shall ever seek to wear 
this while I live ! " exclaimed Delmour, as he pressed 
it to his lip, and then placed it on his finger. 

Lady Eossville's sole ornament when she appeared 
at dinner was the rose unique ; but the heat of the 
room caused it to expand too quickly, and the leaves 
dropped suddenly away. 

" Happily my nurse could never succeed in making 
me superstitious," said she in a low voice to Colonel 
Delmour, " else I should have looked on this as some 
fatal omen." 

" The prodigy is," answered he with a smile, " that 
either the rose unique has suddenly expired of envy at 
finding itself so eclipsed by the wearer, or, that your 
gardener forces his flowers too much." 

"I fear the latter is the true cause," answered the 
Countess, laughing; "and it is my own fault, for I 
never have the patience to wait the gradual growth 
of anything. I am for everything starting into full- 
blown perfection at once." 

"Yes, you say true," said Mrs. St. Clair signifi- 
cantly, as she caught her daughter's last words; "art 
seems to carry the day with you in all things, Ger- 
trude; 'tis well you are beginning to discover your 
own foible." 

Colonel Delmour bit his lip, and the Countess 
blushed with wounded feeling, as she bent her head 
to pick up some of the scattered rose leaves. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

" Une personne a la mode n'a de prix et de beaute que ce 
qu'elle emprunte d'un caprice leger qui nait et qui tombe pres- 
que dans le meme instant : aujourd'hui elle est courue, les fem- 
mes s'en parent ; demain elle est negligee, et rendue au peuple." 

La Be-uyeke. 

Lady Rossville's departure from the home of her 
fathers called forth the regrets and the lamentations 
of the poor; for although her attentions towards them 
had somewhat relaxed since Colonel Delmour's arrival, 
yet she had done enough under Lyndsay's auspices 
to render herself completely beloved by them. The 
various works, too, which she had begun, all in the 
spirit of profuseness and self-gratification, contributed 
for the present to her popularity, and she flattered 
herself that she was equally actuated by beneficence 
and humanity, although they had taken a different 
direction under her lover, from what they had done 
under her cousin's guidance. She sent splendid rather 
than suitable gifts to her aunts and her cousin Anne, 
and directed that the former should be constantly sup- 
plied with the choicest of fruits and flowers from Ross- 
ville. She felt unwilling to depart without sending 
some remembrance to Lyndsay — some little token of 
her gratitude for all she owed him of generous inter- 



224 THE INHERITANCE. 

ference — of time and trouble and kindness, hitherto 
but ill requited; yet she feared to mention the subject 
before Colonel Delmour, aware of the jealous irri- 
tability it might excite. At length the thought struck 
her to send him a picture of his mother, which was 
the most admired and conspicuous of any of the family 
portraits. It was a Sir Joshua, and done at a time 
when the subject was in all the graces of early beauty, 
and the artist in all the fulness of his perfection. 
The picture was therefore not merely precious as a 
portrait, but was valuable in itself, as most of that 
great master's works are, on account of its own in- 
trinsic beauty. " There is something of Lyndsay in 
the half-melancholy, half-smiling expression of those 
dark eyes," thought Gertrude, as she looked on the 
picture; "something, too, of his reproachful look," 
added she, with a sigh, as her heart told her he had 
cause to reproach her. 

She wrote a few lines to accompany the picture, 
which was to be packed and sent after she was gone ; 
and then, all being arranged, she bade adieu to Eoss- 
ville, and the tears stood in her eyes as she looked on 
its budding woods and sparkling waters, in the soft 
rays of vernal sunshine. 

Mrs. St. Clair had peremptorily refused permission 
to Colonel Delmour to accompany them to London, 
and Gertrude had at once conceded that point to her 
mother. However much chagrined, he was therefore 
obliged to acquiesce, and as his rate of travelling was 
rather more rapid than theirs, he preceded them by 



THE INHERITANCE. 225 

several days, and (apprised by a note from the Countess 
of their approach to the metropolis) was at the hotel 
ready to receive them on their arrival. 

The following day he brought his mother and 
sisters to introduce them to Gertrude. She had anti- 
cipated the meeting with that trepidation natural to 
one so situated, but her timidity was soon dispelled by 
the pleasant social manners of Lady Augusta, and the 
lively, good-humoured frankness of her daughters. 
There was much to attract, and nothing to be afraid 
of, and before they had been half- an- hour together, 
Gertrude felt as though she were already one of them- 
selves. They were pressed to dine with Lady Augusta 
in Brook Street, but Mrs. St. Clair declared herseK too 
much fatigued with the journey for such an exertion, 
and Gertrude resisted their entreaties out of compli- 
ment to her mother. They were, however, to meet 
the following day, when something was to be fixed ; and 
after much talking, and a great display of affection on 
both sides between the cousins, they parted. Even 
Mrs. St Clair was more pleased with them than she 
cared to admit to herself, for they had paid her more 
attention than she was accustomed to receive, and had 
they not been Colonel Delmour's mother and sister 
she would have been loud in her praises of them. 
Gertrude spoke of them to her lover with all the 
warmth she felt, but he appeared but little gratified 
by her commendations. " You do not seem suffi- 
ciently sensible how charming they are," she said ; 
"you did not say half enough in their praise." 

VOL. II. Q 



226 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I told you you would find Lady Augusta a very 
good-looking, well-bred person, did I not 1 " said he, 
with a smile; "and the girls very gay, and good- 
humoured, and very like other girls." 

"Oh, more than that! Lady Augusta is very 
delightful, and your sisters — how much more agree- 
able they are, for instance, than the Miss Millbanks." 
" Are they ^ Yes, by-the-bye, the Miss Millbanks 
are very Scotch indeed ; but all Misses, Scotch or 
English, are pretty much alike.'' 

A house had been procured in Park Lane. Mrs. St. 
Clair thought it too magnificent and too expensive ; 
but Colonel Delmour approved of it ; Lady Eossville 
admired it, and the house was taken. Then came 
equipages, horses, liveries — in short, an establishment, 
in which taste and splendour were alone consulted, 
without any regard to the means, which, indeed, Ger- 
trude herself believed to be inexhaustible, and which 
Delmour, with the reckless profusion of selfish extra- 
vagance, thought not about at all. Since Lady Eoss- 
ville was to appear in the world, his only anxiety was 
that she should at the first take her place at the very 
head of the fashionable world — aware that, if she once 
entered in an inferior grade, she might not afterwards, 
even as his wife, be able to attain the proud pre-emi- 
nence of ton, which of all pre-eminences is the one 
most esteemed in the great world. 

"Lady Augusta has kindly off'ered to introduce me 
to her milliner and jeweller, and all sorts of useful 
people," said Gertrude to him one day ; " and in the 



THE INHERITANCE. 227 

evening she proposes that mamma and I should accom- 
pany her to the opera." 

Colonel Delmour received this information rather 
drily, and seemed to hesitate in his reply. At last 
he said, " I have a great respect for Lady Augusta's 
good sense and good intentions, but really her trades- 
people are so perfectly antediluvian that you will 
oblige me by having nothing to do with them." 

Gertrude was disposed to take this as a joke, but 
that she saw he was serious. " Lady Augusta does 
not dress in good taste," continued he ; " and as for 
the girls, they can scarcely be said to have a taste 
at all; they stick themselves over with feathers, or 
flowers, or butterflies, or anything that comes in their 
way. Emily rather carries it ofi" well, but poor 
Georgy looks as if her ornaments had been actually 
blown upon her." 

" But how can I refuse so polite an offer ? And, 
besides, I don't know who are the people to employ." 

"Leave all that to me, or rather to a friend of 
mine, Lady Charles Arabin, who comes to town to- 
morrow, and who I shall bring to visit you immedi- 
ately." Seeing Gertrude look surprised, he added, 
"She is not handsome, and is rather jpassde; but she 
has the best air and taste of anybody in town; in 
fact, she gives the ton at present to everything ; and, 
therefore, I would rather that you took her as your 
ij^uide than Lady Augusta — that is, in all matters of 
mere taste and fashion." 

" But I have a taste of my own in dress," said Lady 



228 THE INHERITANCE. 

Rossville, half displeased at the idea of being obliged 
to submit to the decision of another. 

" And a perfect one," said Colonel Delmour ; " but 
taste alone won't do without fashion. Venus herself, 
even attired by the Graces, would be thought maus- 
sade, were she to be introduced by a Duchess who 
had been excluded from Almack's, or who had never 
supped at D House." 

" Then, who can value the blind admiration of the 
multitude?" said Gertrude; "not I, indeed; 'tis 
much too paltry a triumph for me to take any 
trouble to acquire. I care not a straw for such 
empty distinctions, and would rather have the 
approbation of your mother, than of the whole 
fashionable world." 

" What a word for you ! " said Delmour, laughing. 
" Approbation is a very good thing in itself, and a 
very useful school-word ; but for you, Gertrude, with 
your charms and your graces to be approved of ! 
No, you must be followed, admired, adored, wor- 
shipped." 

"I am afraid 'tis in your imagination alone I stand 
any chance for being deified," said Gertrude, smiling; 
"so I shall certainly not start a candidate for im- 
mortal honours. I am not ambitious, Delmour, and 
shall be satisfied with your homage and true affections, 
since you will not allow me the approbation of your 
family." 

" But I am proud, and vain, and ambitious of, and 
for you, dearest Gertrude," said Delmour gaily ; " and 



THE INHERITANCE. 229 

must not suffer your partiality for me and my family 
to detract from the brilliancy of your star." 

" But I would rather be introduced by them than 
by any one else ; if Lady Augusta does not mix much 
in society, there is your aunt, the Duchess of Bur- 
lington. 

"Worse and worse," cried Delmour; "I would 
rather you never appeared at all than have you 
brought out by her." 

"Why so?" asked Gertrude in some surprise; 
" is she not respectable 1 " 

Colonel Delmour could scarcely preserve his gravity 
at the question, as he replied, " Eespectability, like 
approbation, is a thing of no account here ; it gives 
no consequence whatever to its possessor." 

" Then, what precious gifts of nature, or acquire- 
ments of art, are they which do give consequence in 
this magic circle of yours ? " said the Countess. 

" That nameless je ne sai quoi which all admire, 
but none can define, and which unfortunately my 
highly respectable relations want. The Duchess is 
an excellent person in her way, but she is antiquated 
in her notions, dresses shockingly, gives parties where 
I should blush to be detected, and I should be undone 
were I to be seen offering her my arm in pubKc." 

This was said in a sportive manner, which made 
Gertrude look upon it as a jest. 

" Then I may scarcely expect to be acknowledged 
by you to-night," said she in the same tone. " Per- 
haps it would be your ruin also were you to be seen 



230 THE INHERITANCE. 

in Lady Augusta's box talking to, or, it may be, 
handing out a Scotch cousin." 

Colonel Delmour looked grave. 

" You will really oblige me," said he, " if you will 
decline going into public for a day or two ; although 
I have been talking mere nonsense on the subject, yet, 
I do assure you, a first introduction is of more conse- 
quence than you at present are aware of." 

" Consequence ! " repeated Gertrude, contemptu- 
ously ; " if I am not entitled to be of consequence on 
my own account I certainly do not wish to derive it 
from Lady Charles Arabin." 

"You mistake the matter entirely, dearest Ger- 
trude ; I am desirous you should appear vdth that 
effect which you are so well entitled to produce, but 
which you will derive much more from your beauty 
and your grace than from your rank. I cannot 
exactly make one so unsophisticated as you compre- 
hend the arbitrary and capricious mechanism of the 
fashionable world." 

" No, pray do not attempt it. I am sure I shall 
never be fashionable. Ah ! Delmour, it was not thus 
we talked and felt at dear Eossville ! What was the 
world to us there ? " 

"Would to Heaven we were there now!" said 
Delmour, echoing her sigh; "but you mistake me, 
Gertrude ; it is not that I place the world in compe- 
tition with you, but that I abhor the thoughts of your 
preference for me lowering you in the slightest 
degree. You have everything that entitles you to 



THE INHERITANCE. 231 

take the first place in the best society; but, absurd as 
it seems, I must candidly confess to you that my 
family, although high in rank and fair in character, 
cannot do you justice in that respect. I keep clear of 
all that sort of thing ; but if once you get into their 
circle, you will be shackled eternally with bad parties 
and acquaintances that will keep all the best people 
aloof. For instance, Lady Augusta ivould introduce 
the girls into the Burlington set ; the consequence is, 
they are eternally followed by men with whom I don't 
associate; in short, secondary men, whom they are 
forced to smile on faute de mieux ; but that must not 
be with you, Gertrude ; you have already given up too 
much for me ; do not, as you love me, add yet more 
to the self-reproach I sometimes feel for having 
suffered you to sacrifice so much." 

"The feeling is a generous, a noble one; but I 
cannot help thinking it a mistaken one," said the 
Countess ; " but, since you are so scrupulous, I shall 
yield the point ; make me then, what you will, only, 
pray don't make me a fine lady." 

Colonel Delmour was all rapture and gratitude, 
and only left her to go and inform his mother that 
Lady Eossville had caught cold, and was unable to 
fulfil her engagements; his sisters visited her in the 
course of the day, and Gertrude blushed with shame 
as she attempted to confirm the falsehood. 

" I half suspect," said Georgiana, laughing, " that 
Master Fred, has been telling you that mamma is 
not fashionable ; he is so admired and recherclU him- 



232 THE INHERITANCE. 

self that we think he gives himself airs; so, pray 
don't encourage him, or you will spoil him entirely." 

"It is so provoking," said Miss Emily, "that he 
won't allow you to go with us ; for I can see it is he 
that prevents you from going with us to Kitchner's 
this morning ; he has some such exquisite things just 
now ! — things really to die for ! " with a deep sigL 

"Since that is the case," said Gertrude, smiling, 
"I am fortunate in having escaped the danger; but 
if you are not afraid to encounter it you shall each 
of you choose something for me, according to your 
own taste, and then I shall see how far we agree." 

"How happy you must be, who can afford to 
choose what you like ! " said both sisters sorrowfully. 

"For to-day I devolve my happiness upon you," 
said Lady Eossville; "only remember to choose 
exactly what you should like for yourselves." 

The sisters departed, delighted with the commission, 
and not without some latent suspicion as to the result 
of their choice, which was verified by each receiving 
the very handsome and expensive articles of jewellery 
they had selected. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

"The stage is pleasant, and the way seems short, 
All strew'd with flowers ; 
The days appear but hours. 
Being spent in time beguiling sport. 
Here griefs do neither press, nor doubts perplex ; 
Here's neither fear to curb, nor care to vex." 

QUARLES. 

Perhaps no woman ever heard another highly com- 
mended by her lover without feeling at least a 
slight sensation of pique and jealousy, and something 
of this sort Gertrude had begun to cherish against 
Lady Charles Arabin before she saw her. She was 
therefore prepared to receive her with something of 
the air and manner with which a pretty spoiled child 
might be supposed to welcome its governess; and, 
unknown to herself, there was a tournure of the head, 
a colour on the cheek, a slight pout on the lip, when 
that lady and Colonel Delmour were announced to- 
gether. But the first glance at Lady Charles instantly 
dispelled all her fears and thick-coming fancies; as 
she beheld (what in common life would be called) a 
middle-aged woman, without any pretensions to 
beauty, beyond a tolerably regular set of features, 
and a figure which, though evidently of a fine struct- 



234 THE INHERITANCE. 

ure, was thin almost to meagreness. Her dress was 
striking without being singular; her manners were 
quiet, but perfectly elegant ; and the tout ensemble 
conveyed that impression of high birth and high 
breeding which is something too subtle and refined to 
be described or analysed — something of so delicate 
and impalpable a nature that it might sometimes 
escape notice altogether, but for the effect it produces 
upon others. Gertrude had never felt that her 
mother was vulgar till she contrasted the florid pom- 
posity of her manner with the ease, grace, and sim- 
plicity of Lady Charles Arabin ; she spoke little, and 
there was nothing in her conversation beyond the 
frivolous chit-chat of the day; but her voice and 
accent were both fine, and she skimmed over subjects 
with an airy lightness that would have baffled any- 
thing like discussion, even had any one been so 
inclined. She invited Gertrude to take a drive with 
her, to which she readily acceded, notwithstanding 
Mrs. St. Clair's manifest displeasure, which, however, 
she did not venture to express. 

That lady was considerably annoyed by the 
manners of Lady Charles, which made her feel her 
own as something unwieldy and overgrown; like a 
long train, they were both out of the way and in the 
way, and she did not know very well how to dispose 
of them. Indeed, few things can be more irritating 
than for those who have hitherto piqued themselves 
upon the abundance of their manner, to find all at 
once that they have a great deal too much ; that no 



THE INHEKITANCE. 235 

one is inclined to take it off' their hands , and that, in 
short, it is dead stock. 

Lady Charles took leave, but Gertrude stopped a 
moment in the drawing-room behind her companions 
to say a few coaxing words to her mother ; then, as 
she hurried to overtake them, she heard Lady Charles 
say, as in answer to some remark of Colonel Delmour, 
"She is perfect !" and she blushed as she caught the 
meaning glance he turned to cast upon her. Much 
was done in the way of shopping ; a variety of splen- 
did dresses were ordered; a great deal of bijouterie 
was purchased, and Gertrude was whirled from place 
to place, and from shop to shop, till her head was 
almost turned with the varied and bustling scenes in 
which she was acting, for the first time, a part. 

It is not at first that London either astonishes or 
delights. It is too vast and too complicated to be 
taken in all at once either by the eye or the mind ; 
and it requires a little schooling to enjoy even the 
variety and the brilliancy of its pleasures, as they 
flash in rapid and never-ceasing succession on the 
bewildered senses. Lady Rossville, like all novices, 
felt something of this, and she sighed for the peaceful 
romantic seclusion of her own domain, where she was 
all in all, and where her lover was all to her. But it 
is not the young and admired who can stand long on 
the brink of pleasure indulging their own sentimental 
reveries; and Gertrude, with all her feeling and 
romance and enthusiasm, was soon in the vortex of 
elegant dissipation. 



tiSQ THE INHERITANCE. 

Borne like a feather on the tide of fashionable 
celebrity, she was hurried along she knew not 
whither ; while at the same time, wherever she went, 
she was hailed as the leader of every favourite folly. 
She was the idol of the day, and she breathed only in 
an atmosphere of adulation, baleful alike in its effects 
on the head and the heart. Amidst the delusions of 
the senses she forgot everything save her lover ; but 
even when all looks were turned upon her as the 
magnet of the glittering throng, it was in his eyes 
only that she sought to read her triumph. Although 
her engagement with Colonel Delmour was pretty 
generally understood, and he had all the bearing of the 
accepted lover, still that did not prevent others from 
entering the lists, but, on the contrary, was rather an 
additional attraction ; and men far superior to him- 
self in rank and station, and some of them not much 
his inferior in personal endowments, had declared 
themselves her lovers. But even Delmour, jealous 
and irritable as he was, felt that he had no cause to 
dread a rival in her affections. Mr. Delmour and she 
had only met once, and that at a formal dinner at the 
Duke of Burlington's, where they had merely ex- 
changed the common courtesies of acquaintanceship. 
He was evidently of the family school ; the Duke and 
Duchess being formal, dull personages, living in a 
vast and stately mansion, amidst a profusion of mag- 
nificent heir-looms of every description. 

" That tvould have been an establishment for you, 
Gertrude," sighed her mother, as they left the mansion 



THE INHERITANCE. 237 

where she had felt more at home than amidst the gay 
unattainable ease of fashionable manners. " What mad- 
ness to reject so magnificent a lot ; but even yet " 

" Oh mamma ! beware how you utter even a hope 
on that subject, unless you would raise the shades of 
the whole race of the mighty departed Delmours. I 
have been thinking how fortunate it is that I am 
destined to be a mere scion on that noble stock. How 
could I ever have sustained the whole weight of the 
family dignity ! I protest I have got a crick in my 
neck with only looking at and imagining the weight of 
the Duchess's old-fashioned diamond necklace." And 
Gertrude said to herself that Colonel Delmour was quite 
right in wishing to preserve her from his family circle. 

She now gave herself up with greater zest than 
ever to the round of frivolous occupations and amuse- 
ments which form the sole business of so many an 
immortal being's existence, and which are no less 
fascinating to the unreflecting mind than they are vain 
and unsatisfying to the eye of reason and experience. 
It was to no purpose that Mrs. St. Clair remonstrated, 
and threatened and denounced ; her power was gone. 
She never had possessed the afl'ection of the daughter, 
and she had now lost the control of authority. Be- 
sides, the Countess afforded her little time or oppor- 
tunity to expatiate on her extravagances ; she lived 
in such an unceasing whirl that Mrs. St. Clair had in 
vain strove to keep pace with her. She had been 
obliged to relinquish the attempt ; their hours did not 
keep time, and their engagements were in opposite 



238 THE INHERITANCE. 

spheres. Each had their apartments, their carriages, 
their society; and Gertrude felt satisfied that her 
mother had all these things, and was also noticed by, 
and indeed in habits of intimacy with. Colonel Del- 
mour's family. Her own mornings were spent in 
sitting to half the sculptors and painters in town for 
busts and pictures, in all possible variety, to please 
the fastidious taste of her lover : in riding in the Park 
with him, or in shopping with Lady Charles, or some 
other frivolous idler. In the evening there were 
dinners, and parties, and balls, and operas and con- 
certs, in such quick succession, as left her scarcely 
conscious of having been at one before she found her- 
self at some other. 

" Confess this is to live," said Delmour to her one 
evening, as he led her from one gay multitude, where 
she had been the admired of all admirers, to another 
where her appearance would excite an equal sensation. 

" All that is wanting," replied she with a smile, " is 
time to feel one's enjoyment ; but I can scarcely tell 
whether I chase pleasure or it chases me, or whether 
we are running a race ; or, in short, how we go on 
together." 

" Take a ride with me to-morrow in the Park, and 
we shall go at a sober foot-pace, that you may have 
time to find out," said Delmour. 

"But to-morrow I give Lawrence another sit- 
ting " 

" Take the ride first, and you will go to him with 
a bloom that will make him burn his pallet." 



CHAPTEK XXXI. 

"All these inconveniences are incident to love ; reproaches, 
jealousies, quarrels, reconcilements, war — and then peace." 

Terence. 

The Countess smiled a consent, and Colonel Delmour 
was at her breakfast-table the following morning. A 
salver stood upon it covered with cards, notes, letters, 
bills, petitions, and memoranda of every description. 
She carelessly tossed over some, opened and glanced 
over others, while she listened at the same time to 
her lover as he read the record of her triumphs in the 
"Morning Post." At length, as she discovered some 
post letters amid the heap, she drew back her hand, 
and with a shudder exclaimed — 

" Ah ! these ugly letters ! " 

"What letters?" inquired Delmour, as he at the 
same time drew the stand towards himself. " Oh ! 
some Scotch parish business ; is that all ? " 

"Lectures from my guardians and tiresome ex- 
planations from my steward are the best I have to 
expect I had a letter from him t'other day telling 
me the schoolhouse was stopped for want of money." 

"How very distressing!" said Colonel Delmour, 
with an ironical smile. " Then you will have no long, 



240 THE INHERITANCE. 

lean, gray, weeping-looking building, with its steep, 
straight roof, and its -little green glass windows, and 
its shoals of hoddy-doddy, white-haired, blubbered 
boys and girls. I hope it was to have formed a vista 
in the park; it would have been what is called, I 
believe, a most gratifying sight." 

" You are very kind to try to reconcile me to my- 
self by treating it so slightly ; but I feel I have been 
to blame ; I have been too expensive." 

" In what respect ? " 

" In everything — this service, for instance," point- 
ing to the magnificent breakfast service of richly- 
chased antique plate and Sevres china. "I am 
shocked to think how much it cost." 

" Why, delft, to be sure, would have been cheaper ; 
and to the philosophic eye a pewter basin is as be- 
coming, perhaps, as a silver one. 'Tis a pity you did 
not consult me instead of Lady Charles about it ! " 

"Lady Charles is certainly very extravagant," said 
the Countess gravely. 

"Not more so than others in her rank. Lord 
Charles has a good fortune, and allows her to spend it, 
which she does in supporting her station in society. 
Methodists and misers, I believe, are for abolishing 
all these distinctions, and building conventicles and 
endowing hospitals with their money." 

" One of these letters, I perceive, is from Lyndsay," 
said Gertrude, with another sigh. 

" Which you seem afraid even to look upon. Shall 
I open it for you 1 " 



THE INHERITANCE. 241 

"Do; but first give Zoe a few of these straw- 
berries." 

Colonel Delmour read the letter aloud. It was 
short and hurried, and the purport of it was com- 
municating the sudden death of the parish minister 
of Rossville, by which means the Countess would 
have it in her power to provide for young Leslie, who 
had just been with him bespeaking his good offices. 

"Who is this Leslie who finds such a patron in 
Lyndsay ? " inquired Colonel Delmour. 

"He is a very interesting young man, who is 
engaged to my cousin Anne Black, and the want 
of a church has hitherto been the only obstacle to 
the marriage. How happy it makes me to have it 
in my power to remove it ! Pray, reach me my 
Avriting-stand, and I shall settle that sur le chanvp." 

But instead of obeying, Delmour took the hand 
she had impatiently extended, and said — 

"Is it possible, my dear Gertrude, you can be 
serious in this 1 Can you really think, for a moment, 
of having your relations placed so near you in so 
inferior a situation^ Only consider, the manse is 
almost close by the gate ; that is of little consequence 
with people who have no claim upon you ; but really 
the Countess of Rossville and her cousin, the minister's 
wife, thus brought in contact — there is confusion in the 
thought." 

Lady Rossville looked displeased, then said — " My 
cousin is a person I never can feel ashamed of." 

"Not as she is; but as she will be, when she de- 

VOL. II. R 



242 THE INHERITANCE. 

generates into the minister's wife, with her printed 
gown and black mittens, with a troop of half-licked 
cubs of children at her heels, and the minister himself, 
honest man ! at their head, with his lank locks, and 
his customary suit of rusty blacks, all coming to visit, 
perchance to dine with, their cousin the Countess !" 

" If you are ashamed of my relations you ought to 
have said so sooner," said Gertrude, struggling with 
her emotion ; " as it is, it is not yet too late " 

"Dearest Gertrude, how seriously you take my 
hadinage; but you must be sensible that where the 
difference of rank and station is so great between 
near relations, the local afl&nity had as well not be 
quite so close ; your own good sense and delicate 
perception must point out to you the inevitable 
Msagr4ments that must ensue ; the slights that will 
be felt ; the offences that will be taken ; the affronts 
that will be imagined." 

"My cousin is not a person of that sort," said 
Gertrude ; " and I am sure her vicinity would be a 
source of great pleasure to me. I like her society, 
and should have her often with me." 

" You may at present ; but, be assured, that could 
not possibly continue; you must move in such 
different spheres, and must associate with such 
different people, that 'tis impossible you could act 
or think alike. For instance, you told me that the 
Duchess of Arlingham, the Arabins, Lady Peverley, 
Mrs. Beechey, and I know not all who, had promised 
to pay you a visit at Rossville this summer, and to 



THE INHERITANCE. 243 

take parts in your theatricals if you can have the 
theatre ready. How do you suppose the minister 
and his wife could relish, or be relished by those 
of your friends?" 

"But I am in a manner pledged to my cousin " 

"Not for this church, surely f 

"No; not for this one in particular; but I re- 
peatedly assured her that whenever I had it in my 
power I would befriend her, and now it is so " 

" Dearest Gertrude, it is not in your power — that 
is, if I possess that influence with you I have hitherto 
flattered myself I did ; on that faith, in the transac- 
tion I had lately with Harry Monteith relating to my 
exchange into the Guards, I ventured to promise that 
the first church that was in your gift, as the phrase is, 
you would — that is — I would engage your interests in 
behalf of his old tutor; quite a charity case as he 
represented it; a married man with a large family, 
and I forget all the particulars; but at the time it 
struck me as a thing that would interest you." 

Lady Eossville's colour rose during this speech, 
and for some moments she remained silent, as if 
struggling with her feelings ; at last she said — 

" You have taken a strange liberty, it seems, and 
one which I cannot easily pardon." 

At that moment a servant entered to say her 
Ladyship's horses were at the door. 

"Desire them to be put up; I shall not ride 
to-day," said she, and taking up Lyndsay's letter she 
quitted the room, leaving Delmour too much piqued 



244 THE INHERITANCE. 

as well as surprised at this display of spirit to make 
any attempt to detain her. He, however, lounged a 
considerable time at the breakfast-table, expecting her 
return, tossed over all the litter of new publications 
and music and expensive toys that lay scatttered 
about ; touched her harp to ascertain whether it were 
in tune, and broke two of the strings ; stirred the fire, 
although the room was suffocating ; then threw open 
a window, exclaiming at the smell of a tuberose ; but 
still Gertrude did not return ; carriage after carriage 
was sent from the door, and even Lady Charles was 
not admitted. At length his patience was exhausted ; 
he wrote — "Dearest Gertrude, see me but for one 
moment, as you love me;" and ringing the bell, he 
desired it might be conveyed to Lady Rossville. A 
verbal answer was returned ; her Ladyship was sorry 
she was particularly engaged ; and Delmour, too proud 
to sue any further, left the house in a transport of 
indignation. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

' ' Is Nature's course dissolv'd ? Dotli Time's glass stand ? 
Or hath some frolic heart set back the hand 
Of Fate's perpetual clock ? Will't never strike ? 
Is crazy Time gi'own lazy, faint, or sick. 
With very age ? " Quaeles. 

Gertrude, too, was proud in her way, and her feel- 
ings had been severely wounded. She had already- 
become sufficiently fine to be able to feel, in some 
degree, the truth of what Delmour had said in regard 
to her relations ; but she was piqued that he should 
have been the person to force so disagreeable a con- 
viction upon her — he who had so often declared that 
she was all the universe to him, and whose favourite 
maxim it was that love could see no defects in aught 
pertaining to the object beloved. How often had he 
repeated to her, when she smilingly chid his flatteries, 
" que les illusions de I'amour sont amiables ! Les 
flatteries sont en un sens des Veritas — le jugement se 
tait, mais le ca3ur parle !" Why was it, then, that he 
was become so clear-sighted as thus to anticipate these 
paltry feelings of wounded vanity 1 and to have pre- 
sumed so far already as to have usurped her power — 
to have promised away in her name, without leave 
asked or obtained, a gift of so much importance ; one 



246 THE INHERITANCE. 

which she might have had a pleasure in conferring at 
his soHcitation, but which it would be weakness to 
allow to be thus taken from her. " Lyndsay would 
not have acted thus !" thought she, as she looked at 
his letter, and a tear dropped upon it. She leant her 
head upon her hand, and, for the first time since her 
arrival in London, fell into a train of reflection, from 
which she only roused herself to begin an answer to 
his letter. But she had only got as far as — " My 

dear Cousin — I am hap^y to have it in my power " 

when Colonel Delmour's billet was brought to her. 
She read it, and wavered. " No, I will not see him," 
thought she proudly, at this triumph over her already 
returning tenderness. "But I will not finish my 
letter to Lyndsay till to-morrow ; one day can make no 
difference, and 'tis almost time to go to Lawrence's." 
She rang, and ordered the carriage, then drove to 
Lady Augusta's to get one of the girls to accompany 
her. As they drove along, Delmour passed on horse- 
back, and merely bowed, with an air of lofty respect. 
" Fred, seems to be on his high horse to-day," said 
Miss Georgina, laughing. " I told you he would give 
himself airs; but" — looking after him — "he certainly 
is the handsomest man in town, and unquestionably 
the most admired and imitated. Apropos, have you 
seen the Duchess of St. Ives ? I hear she has already 
dofi'ed her weeds, and come out in all her glory. 
Delmour was an admirer of hers, you. must know, in 
her married state ; at least so the ill-natured world 
said. I know she is desperately in love with him. 



THE INHERITANCE. 247 

and I believe would marry him to-morrow if he would 
ask her ; so she will be ready to poison you, or pierce 
you to the heart, perhaps, with a bodkin, as the ladies 
in old ballads used to do their rivals." 

There certainly was nothing in this that ought to 
have gratified a mind in a right state of feeling ; it 
was food for a perverted taste only ; but how often 
are the passions and the prejudices gratified at the 
expense of the principles ! Gertrude's vanity was 
pleased to hear her lover praised, and her pride was 
piqued to show her triumph over the Duchess of 
St. Ives. 

These two ladies had met, exchanged cards, and 
graced each other's parties, but a mutual and instinct- 
ive sort of antipathy had from the first existed 
between them. They were both young, beautiful, 
distinguished, and independent. Kivals in celebrity 
and extravagance, Gertrude learnt for the first time 
that they were also rivals in love, and a momentary 
pang shot across her breast at the discovery. But 
hers was not a nature to harbour jealous fears, and 
she soon dismissed them. 

"No," thought she; "whatever Delmour's faults 
may be, I should wrong him were I to doubt his love 
and truth;" and she recollected some slighting and 
satirical remarks he had made upon the Duchess the 
evening before. She therefore listened with com- 
placency while Miss Delmour rattled away about the 
Duchess — her beauty, her pride, her parties, her 
diamonds, her jointure, her independence of all con- 



248 THE INHERITANCE. 

trol ; and to sum up the whole, she concluded, with a 
sigh— 

" Do you know, I never see the Duchess of St. Ives 
that I do not wish I had been born a widow." 

When Gertrude returned home it was in the secret 
hope of hearing that Colonel Delmour had called 
during her absence. 

"Has anybody called since I went out?" inquired 
she of her porter, as she entered the hall. 

" Oh, surely, my Lady!" repHed he, in some surprise 
at such a question, as he pointed to a pile of cards. 

"No one else?" as she tossed them over with an 
air of chagrin. 

"No, my Lady !" in the same tone of amazement 
at being, for the first time, so strictly interrogated on 
the duties of his office. 

"He may have called, although that stupid man 
has forgot to mention it," thought she ; " and he will 
probably call again ; it is not very late. Those French 
clocks and watches are always wrong" — as they told 
a different tale — " it cannot be more than seven." 

But just then Mrs. St. Clair entered, and the 
mother and the daughter exchanged their morning 
salutations. The former was going to the theatre, as 
it was one of her greatest enjoyments to patronise a 
large party of secondary people, by whom she was 
looked up to with that respect which money and con- 
sequence will always procure from one set if not from 
another. She expressed her astonishment at finding 
her daughter seated at her harp in her morning dress ; 



THE INHERITANCE. 249 

and the Countess, hastily rising, said she was just 
going to commence her toilet. "But I dine with 
Lady Peverley, ,who is always late." 

*< And then what else 1 " asked Mrs. St. Clair. 

" Then, I believe, I shall go to the opera with Lady 
Charles, and I shall perhaps just look in for half-an- 
hour at the Duchess of Arlington's." 

"You are killing yourself, Gertrude — absolutely 
killing yourself ; you look wretchedly. I must put a 
stop to this ; we must leave this town." 

" We shall talk of that to-morrow, mamma — good- 
bye," cried the Countess, as she flew away to her dress- 
ing-room, anxious to avoid all unpleasant discussion. 

She half expected to meet Colonel Delmour at 
dinner, but she was mistaken. At all events there 
could not be a doubt of seeing him at the opera ; and 
to the opera she went with Lady Charles, escorted by 
two or three men distinguSs. But Delmour was not 
there, and she watched the opening of every box to 
see whether he would not yet enter. Her whole atten- 
tion absorbed in this single point of observation, she 
neither saw nor heard anything else. She was merely 
conscious that her companions were amused at some- 
thing, she knew not — cared not — what; till at last 
Liidy Charles, touching her on the arm, said — 

"Do, Lady Rossville, take a little share of our 
diversion, bad as it is; that odd, little, nid-nodding 
face is too good to be kept all to ourselves ; and 'tis so 
comical, all its nods and grimaces seem as if directed 
to our box." 



250 THE INHEEITANCE. 

" It is very savage that none of us will return the 
compliment," said Lord Ilfrington. 

"It will be no sinecure," said Mr. Vavasour; 
"there must be a prodigious arrear, and still accumu- 
lating ;" as a fresh succession of nods ensued. 

" We must draw lots," said Lord Ilfrington ; " but 
Vavasour has the strongest head of the party." 

While this was going on Lady Eossville had looked 
to the spot indicated, and there, in the centre of the 
pit, was to be seen a long small throat, with a pretty 
little, broad, smirking, delighted-looking face on the top 
of it, surmounted by a most elaborate pile of hair, 
dressed in all the possible varieties of style, combining 
Grecian braids and Gothic bows and Tuscan curls, 
which seemed to vibrate with renewed vigour as the 
Countess looked in that direction. 

"Surely," thought she, "that is a face I have seen 
somewhere ;" but she still looked on it with a vacant 
eye, till at once it flashed upon her that the face and 
the head and the nods were all combined in the per- 
son of her cousin, Mrs. Augustus Larkins ! As if to 
confirm the fact, Mr. Augustus himself, a caricature 
of the reigning fashions, turned round and joined his 
bows to his Lilly's nods. On first coming to town 
Gertrude had heard from Mrs. St. Clair that they were 
in the country, which had proved rather a relief ; and 
from that time to the present no thought of Mr. or 
Mrs. Larkins had ever crossed her brain; and now 
to be recognised by them in this public manner 
where they were only conspicuous to be laughed at ! 



THE INHEEITANCE. 251 

The Countess felt her very temples glow, and with 
an exclamation at the heat of the house she drew 
back, then rose, and took a chair in the back of the 
box. 

"How mean — how silly I am!" thought she to 
herself, " that dare not acknowledge my own relations 
for fear of sharing in the pitiful ridicule of two or 
three people who are nothing to me ! Oh, I could beat 
myself for my folly ! Ah, Delmour knows me better 
than I know myself, and I have quarrelled with him 
because he does so ; " and tears of mortification and 
disappointment rose to her eyes. "I will get the 
better of this paltry feeling," said she to herself; and 
again she returned to the front of the box, determined 
to acknowledge her cousin ; but the ballet was draw- 
ing near a close, and Mr. and Mrs. Larkins devoted 
their whole attention to it. Then came the bustle and 
confusion of breaking up, and Gertrude began to think 
she should have her good resolutions for her pains, 
when again the good-humoured Lilly turned round her 
bright joyous face, and Lady Eossville gave her a smile 
and a bow of recognition. But the next moment she 
felt her cheeks glow, as she beheld the whole party, 
as if touched by electricity, face about simultaneously 
with looks of eager expectation. Again she turned 
away, and only breathed freely when she found herself 
in her carriage. 

Delmour was not at the Duchess of Arlington's. 
Lady Charles expressed her astonishment at not find- 
ing him in any of his usual haunts; and Gertrude 



252 THE INHERITANCE. 

disclaimed all knowledge of his proceedings with as 
much indifference as she could assume. 

"He is probably at the Duchess of St. Ives," said 
Lady Stanley; "she has a musical party, I believe, 
to-night." 

Again the Countess found the heat insupportable ; 
and her easy, good-humoured chaperon left the party 
with her as soon as her carriage could be got. 

Gertrude returned home wearied in body and 
wretched in mind. All the worst qualities of her 
nature had been called forth and excited during the 
day — resentment, envy, pride, jealousy, had all been 
felt; and some of their leaven still wrought in her 
breast. "Oh, how I hate myself, and how hideous I 
look!" thought she, as she glanced at herself in a 
mirror. " Is this pleasure 1 Ah, how different from 
the sweet serene days I passed at Eossville ! but there 
I was not the vain, foolish, fantastic thing I am 
here. Lyndsay was right when he told me I 
should never find my happiness in what the world 
calls pleasure!" and the admired and envied Lady 
Eossville owned for the time, that to be admired 
was but vanity, and to be envied but vexation of 
spirit. 

But a sound sleep and a bright sun have wonderful 
effects in dispelling solemn thoughts, and the following 
morning found Gertrude's mind again gay with ideas 
of happiness, and her beauty restored to all its native 
freshness. She tried to think how she ought to receive 
Delmour; but she never could study a part ; she must 



THE INHERITANCE. 253 

always be swayed by circumstances or by impulses, 
and to these she committed herself. 

" Perhaps I shall find him already below," thought 
she, and in that half-formed expectation she hastened 
to breakfast. " There may be some mistake," was the 
next idea that occurred; "those people are all so 
stupid !" and she rang the bell. "I am at home to 
everybody this morning." 

" Everybody, my Lady 1 " 

"Yes, everybody." 

She dawdled over her breakfast, again murmured 
at the rapidity of her timepiece, while in her heart 
she felt the slowness of time itself. Amongst her 
letters was one from Anne Black to the same effect as 
Lyndsay's. 

"I am quite resolved," said she, as she read it, 
" that William Leslie shall have that church ; all that 
I will concede is, that I shall first convince Delmour 
of the propriety of it. To be sure, I may answer 
Lyndsay's letter now," and she took up a pen; "but 
I think I began one yesterday which I left in my 
dressing-room; I may as well finish it as begin 
another." The entrance of Mrs. St. Clair added 
another ta the many excuses for procrastination. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

" Perish those who have said our good things before us !" 

DONATUS. 

That lady had by some means discovered that a mis- 
understanding had taken place between the Countess 
and Colonel Delmour, though she was ignorant of the 
cause of it, and she deemed it more politic to take no 
notice of it, that she might not be suspected of any 
sinister design in wishing to get her daughter out of 
London. But before she had an opportunity of be- 
ginning an oration on the subject, Lady Rossville held 
out her cousin's letter to her, saying — 

"By-the-bye, mamma, do you know Mr. Bauld, the 
minister of Rossville, is dead, and I mean to bestow 
the church upon William Leslie^ Here is a letter 
from Anne upon the subject." 

Mrs. St. Clair looked very solemn. "You forget 
you have guardians to consult upon these occasions, 
Gertrude." 

" I had a letter from Edward yesterday ; he is very 
anxious for it, and Anne says her father will not object 
to it. Lord Millbank, you know, is a mere name ; and 
of course you must approve of it, mamma." 

" No ; I do not approve of your being instrumental 



THE INHERITANCE. 265 

to the degrading of your uncle's daughter into the 
wife of your parish minister. If she will throw her- 
self away, let it be in some remote situation ; but 
don't let her bring her poverty and contempt to our 
very door." 

" She may be poor, but I am sure she never can be 
despised, mamma." 

" Poverty and contempt generally go hand in-hand 
in this world," said Mrs. St. Clair. "She cannot 
possibly afford to dress herself even upon an occasion, 
so as to be fit to appear at your table as your cousin, 
though merely as the minister's wife she might pass 
without observation." 

"She is so gentle and lady-like in her manners, 
and so unassuming in her dress, that I am sure I 
never could be ashamed of either." 

"Then she can scarcely afford hats and shoes, 
certainly not stockings and gloves, to her children, 
and you would enjoy very much, every time you went 
outside your gate, to be followed by a troop of half- 
naked urchins staring after their fine-lady cousin." 

" But, mamma, I promised " 

"But at present you have no right to perform; 
you are a minor, you are under pupilage ; it is your 
guardians you must be guided by ; wait till you are 
of age and then do as you think proper. By that time 
a much better living may be in your gift ; for this, I 
understand, is one of the poorest" 

The discussion was stopped, for just then there 
drew up an equipage, somewhat of a dift'erent style 



256 THE INHERITANCE. 

from those which usually graced the Countess's door. 
It was a very large, heavy, roomy -looking coach, 
evidently built to carry six, of a strong salmon colour, 
with grass-green hammer-cloth, and green and orange 
liveries. The general effect was shocking to the eye 
of taste, and Gertrude uttered an exclamation of 
horror as she caught a glance of it. It appeared to 
be literally as full as it could hold, as sundry bonnets 
were to be seen, and it was some minutes before Mr. 
Larkins could extricate himself from the company 
within, and several more elapsed before Mrs. Larkins 
emerged : then followed another lady, and another in 
less time ; and all four were actually in the hall before 
Lady Eossville had presence of mind to take any 
precautions against this irruption. 

Mr. and Mrs. Augustus Larkins, Miss Larkins, 
Miss Barbara Larkins, were now announced, and much 
bowing and curtseying and introducing took place ; 
and the good-natured, simple Lilly, seemed as though 
she never would weary of shaking hands and express- 
ing her delight at sight of her aunt and cousin. At 
length they were all seated, and then apologies com- 
menced for not having been to wait upon them 
sooner. 

"You must have thought it very unkind," said 
she ; " but we have been staying at old Mr. Larkins's 
beautiful villa. Willow Bank, and we only came back 
to town the day before yesterday. And how odd it 
was that we should see each other first at the opera ! 
I saw you didn't know me at first ; but Augustus said 



THE INHERITANCE. 257 

he daresay'd you were angry because I had not been 
to wait upon you ; but, I assure you, it was only the 
day before yesterday we came to town, and yesterday 
we couldn't get old Mr. Larkins's coach, for he wanted 
it himself ; but we have got it to-day, and old Mrs. 
Larkins came with us, but she has hurt her leg, and 
finds it very troublesome to get out, so she hopes 
you'll excuse her." 

" Chawming owse this, mem," observed Mr. Augus- 
tus, surveying the apartment all round. 

" Monsous nice owse, indeed," said Miss Larkins. 

" Sweet, purty owse it is," said Miss Barbara Lar- 
kins. 

"Well, mem, you have been to our theatres of 
course ?" inquired Mr. Augustus. 

Lady Eossville answered in the negative. 

" Good la, mem, it an't possible ! Why, then, you 
have seen nothing ! S'pose we make a party for Drury 
Lane some of these nights?" 

A thundering rap at the door here proclaimed 
other visitors, and Gertrude thought she would have 
swooned when the Duchess of St. Ives was announced. 
She rose to receive her in the other drawing-room, 
but she was too late ; the Duchess was already in the 
very heart of the Larkinses. 

" How do you do, dear Lady Eossville ? I heard 
you were taken ill at the Duchess of Arlington's last 
night, and I felt quite anxious about you; but you 
seem pretty well to-day 1" 

This was uttered in that tone of insolent, conde- 

VOL. II. S 



258 THE INHERITANCE. 

scending superiority, which is intended at once to 
convey an impression of the speaker's own triumphant 
happiness, and their commiseration for the person 
they are addressing. Gertrude tried to repel it, but 
she was no adept in dissimulation, and her attempt at 
gaiety failed when she answered that she had merely 
been fatigued by the length of the ballet at the opera, 
and overcome by the excessive heat of the Duchess's 
rooms. 

" I judged wisely, then, it seems," said the Duchess 
carelessly, " in having my own little quiet j)arty at 
home, though, to own the truth, I believe I was 
rather wise by compulsion, as I had two or three 
friends dining with me who positively would not go 
away, and I was forced to sing to them till I actually 
made myself hoarse," giving a httle affected cough as 
she spoke. 

Gertrude's colour rose, and her heart beat, but she 
made no reply. Mrs. St. Clair, therefore, thought it 
necessary to say something, if only to prevent the 
Larkinses from getting in a word. 

"Your Grace's musical powers, it seems, have 
greater attractions than even the wonder of the day — 
the celebrated Catalani." 

"Oh, dear no," said the Duchess, in a sort of careless, 
contemptuous manner, as if she disdained to be com- 
plimented ; " but 'tis pleasant to sing with those who 
understand one's style of singing. There is only one 
person I know who can sing ' Felice chi vi mira ' — that 
is, in the way I sing it." 



THE INHERITANCE. 259 

That was Colonel Delmour's favourite song, and 
one Gertrude and he had often sang together; and 
she had heard him mention the Duchess of St Ives's 
style of singing as something fine, though in a diff'erent 
style from hers. She felt that her agitation would 
betray her if she attempted to carry on the conversa- 
tion, and she was glad even to turn to the Larkinses, 
who, attracted by the splendid binding of some books 
which lay upon one of the tables, had begun to inspect, 
or rather to handle them. 

"This is beautiful," said Mrs. Larkins, displaying 
some fine engravings in one of them to her sisters-in- 
law ; "I never saw this before, ' Fisk, by Mrs. Tigg,' " 
reading the title of it. 

"Fishie, my dear," whispered Mr. Larkins, as if a 
little ashamed of her mal-pronunciation. 

"Dear! is that Peseechye?" said Miss Larkins; 
" a sweet, purty thing it is." 

Gertrude could almost have cried at this Malaprop 
murder of " Psyche, by Mrs. Tighe," while the Duchess 
had recourse to her little aff'ected cough, to conceal 
the play of her muscles. 

^^ Apropos of music, which we were talking of," 
said she, " pray, is not Colonel Delmour some relation 
of yours? I think he told me you were somehow 
cousins. How very well he sings ^Felice chi vi mirar" 

"Yes, I believe Colonel Delmour is my cousin," 
said Lady Rossville, now wrought up to an air of 
haughty indiff'erence ; " and he does sing some things 
very well ; in particular, ' Vorrei die almen per gioco.*" 



260 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Ah, that, I suppose, he keeps for his particular 
favourites," said the Duchess with an insolent smile, "as 
he has never- sang it to me. I shall certainly reproach 
him with his treachery when I see him. Meanwhile, 
good morning, dear Lady Eossville ; I am quite happy 
to find you so well :" and with a squeeze of the hand 
to the Countess, a slight bow to Mrs. St. Clair, and a 
supercilious stare at the Larkinses, as they all rose, 
and bowed and curtseyed with profound respect, she 
swept out of the room. Gertrude was much too 
wretched to know or care what passed during the 
remainder of the visit. She heard something said 
about a dinner, and about a party to the play, and 
about old Mr. Larkins's villa and old Mrs. Larkins's 
leg, and in the inanity of despair she assented to 
everything ; and they at length took leave, impatient 
to carry the tidings of all they had seen and heard to 
their less noble acquaintances. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

' ' My truant heart 
Forgets each lesson that resentment taught, 
And in thy sight knows only to be happy." 

Mason's Elfrida. 

Like all those who are the slaves of their feelings, 
Lady Rossville found she must fly to one extreme or 
other. She must either shut herself up in her chamber, 
and refuse to be comforted, or she must plunge still 
deeper into the whirlpool of folly and extravagance 
to drown thought. As persons in a similar state of 
mind generally do, she chose both evils; she first 
wept the bitter tears of jealousy and mortification, 
then ordered her carriage, and, throwing on a veil, 
drove away to Lady Charles Arabin, to get her 
assistance in choosing some dresses and jewels. 

"I may as well order the furniture I want for 
Rossville too," said she to herself ; " I shall be there 
very soon now;" and the tears again sprang to her 
eyes, as Rossville and all its tender recollections rose to 
her mind ; but she strove to put them down with the 
splendid plans she tried to busy her imagination about. 

On being usherBd into Lady Charles's drawing- 
room she found her surrounded by gentlemen, child- 
ren, and dogs, and the bustle of her first entrance 



262 THE INHERITANCE. 

prevented her all at once from recognising Colonel 
Delmour amongst the number, and when she did, a 
mutual bow was the only acknowledgment. 

One by one the idlers dropped off, the children 
were sent to dinner, and only Lady Charles and her 
two friends remained. Gertrude then made her 
request, to which she acceded, adding — 

"Though, as I have got a little cold to-day, and 
your carriage is open, I must wrap up, so pray don't 
tire to death if I should be ten minutes at my 
toilet;" and with a smile, she disappeared. 

Silence ensued. Gertrude carefully avoided looking 
in the direction where Delmour was, lest he should 
construe it into an appeal to him, and she almost feared 
to breathe, lest he should imagine she had spoken. 
She flattered herself she was the very emblem of 
indiff'erence and abstraction; but even through the 
folds of her veil Delmour marked, with secret 
triumph, her quivering lip and tearful eyes. At 
length this state became too painful to be endured. 
She rose with the intention of passing into the 
adjoining drawing-room, when Delmour, approaching 
her with an air of agitation, said — 

"Although I should not have presumed to seek an 
interview with Lady Eossville in her own house again, 
after having been once turned from it, yet I cannot 
allow the present opportunity to pass without making 
an attempt to obtain from her justice what I have 
now little hope of owing to her tenderness." He 
stopped in emotion, but Gertrude felt her tears ready 



THE INHERITANCE. 263 

to spring forth, and made no reply. " All I ask is, 
that you would hear what I have to offer in excuse 
for my conduct, rash and unwarrantable as it must 
appear to you, until in some degree explained." 

"I was wrong," said Lady Eossville, summoning 
all her pride to her aid. " The step you had taken 
was one of so extraordinary a nature that I certainly 
ought to have heard what you had to offer in vindica- 
tion of it." 

This was a more prompt and spirited reply than 
Colonel Delmour had reckoned upon, and for a 
moment or two he was silent and disconcerted. He 
then said — 

" I find I have mistaken your character, or rather 
I have judged it by my own. Had I been master of 
the universe, my pride, my happiness, would have 
been that the object of my love should, from the 
moment I loved, be the partner also of my power, be 
it what it might ; but your sentiments are different 
from mine, it seems." 

"I too should have had a pleasure in sharing 
the gifts of fortune, whatever they were," said the 
Countess, "but to have them wrested from me! " 

" But I never sought to wrest them from you," said 
Delmour with earnestness ; " though, being rather 
rough and blunt in speech, I perhaps did not go so 
wooingly to work as some one more designing would 
have done. I told you — too briefly perhaps — the 
simple truth that, at your wish, I had used every 
means to get myself exchanged into the Guards; but 



264 THE INHERITANCE. 

it was a matter of difficulty, and — why should 1 
scruple to own it ? — of expense too, beyond my means. 
But this I was too proud to own to you, and I have 
been punished for it. In short, not to bore you with 
tiresome business detail, Monteith proposed that I 
should engage to — to use my influence with you to 
provide for this old tutor of his, who is a sort of dead 
weight upon the family; and I, in the belief that 
I was — pardon my presumption — gratifying you, 
foolishly enough pledged myself to that effect." 

" Nay, more — that you would obtain it," said Lady 
Rossville, still struggling against betraying her ten- 
derness. 

"Perhaps I did, in the sanguine hope that, when 
the time came for fulfilling my promise, I should then 
have acquired greater influence with you than I can 
flatter myself I now possess. But that hope is at an 
end. However disgraceful it may be to fail in my 
promise, disgrace itself could scarce be more intoler- 
able than the misery I have endured under your dis- 
pleasure." 

" And yet you could sing with the Duchess of St. 
Ives ! " said Gertrude reproachfully, while her cheek 
flushed and the tear swelled to the very brim. 

"Did I? It may be so, for I can scarcely tell 
what I have done for the last four -and -twenty hours. 
Yes, now I recollect Lord Westerton forcing me to 
her house, and being compelled to sing with her 
something or other — I forget what — that I used, I 
believe, to sing with her before the flood — that is, when 



THE INHERITANCE. 265 

I rather admired her bravura style of beauty and of 
singing. But these days are past, never to return." 

Gertrude's tears, hitherto with difficulty restrained, 
now dropped from her eyes ; but they were tears of 
joy and tenderness. "Ah, Delmour ! " said she, as she 
gave him her hand, " we have both been to blame. 
You have been rash and I hasty ; but you shall keep 
your promise." She rose and placed herself at a 
writing-table. " What is the name of the person you 
wish to befriend ? " asked she, as she began to write ; 
but she sighed as the name of William Leslie pre- 
sented itself to her mind's eye. Colonel Delmour 
could not tell the name ; but she wrote a few lines 
engaging to bestow the church and living of Eossville 

upon , then presented the paper to her 

lover; who, with affected generosity, for some time 
refused to receive it. But at length the Countess 
prevailed, and he consented to keep his promise at 
the expense of hers. 

Still Gertrude did not feel happy ; but the usual 
panacea was applied, viz. squandering money in dis- 
sipating thought. Colonel Delmour was of the shop- 
ping party, and encouraged her in every expensive 
whim. The most magnificent orders were given for 
furnishing Eossville with all possible expedition ; and, 
to crown her transient delusive pleasure, when they 
met the Duchess of St. Ives, Delmour's only salutation 
to her was a distant bow. 

" Do you go to her assembly to-night ? " inquired 
the Countess of her lover. 



266 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Not unless to accompany you." 

"Then, pray don't, dear Lady Kossville," said 
Lady Charles, who was of the opposite faction to the 
Duchess, "Do, both of you, come and dine quietly 
with Arabin and me. My cold is really too bad to 
admit of my going out in an evening, and you know 
we never give dinners, so we shall be a party quarrd — 
no bad thing sometimes." 

Gertrude consented, and the quiet evening was 
passed partly in arranging a ball to be given by her, 
and partly in losing fifty guineas to Lord Charles at 
icarti. 

" What an odd jumble of a day this has been ! " 
thought she, as she laid her head on her pillow ; "and 
yet I have had a great deal of pleasure in it too." 
But she sighed as she said it ; for not all the delusions 
of her own heart, or the blandishments of her lover, 
could stifle the voice of conscience, or conceal from her 
that she had acted unjustly and unwisely. 

"What shall I say to Lyndsayf was the first 
thought that presented itself the following morning ; 
but by the time she was dressed she heard Delmour's 
well-known knock. "I fear I shall not have leisure 
to write to him to-day," said she, as she hastened to 
receive her lover, glad of the excuse for delaying the 
irksome task. Then came the " strenuous idleness" of 
the day, most unremittingly persevered in for many 
successive days, till at length it became too late to 
think of writing at all. It would be better now to 
wait till she returned to Eossville ; she could explain 



THE INHERITANCE. 267 

the matter so much better in person than she could 
do by letter. Alas ! she took not into account (how 
few of the great and the gay do !) the thought of that 
" hope deferred " which "maketh the heart sick," and 
which was experienced in all its intensity, as post 
after post arrived and brought no tidings for those 
whose happiness hung upon her word. 

Anne wrote again, and a blush of shame and re- 
morse stained Lady Eossville's cheek as she beheld 
her cousin's handwriting; but she opened all her 
trifling billets, and read all her cards and newspapers, 
and pampered her dog, and made her bullfinch pipe to 
her, but still she could not find leisure to break the 
seal of her cousin's letter! Her mind was now 
averse to exert itself upon anything that did not 
bring some semblance of pleasure along with it ; and 
it was not so much the want of leisure, as the utter 
inability to employ what she had to any useful pur- 
pose that thus bereft her of all self-command and 
power of action. 

" The thought she takes is, how to take no thought," 

an art in which she was every day becoming a greater 
adept 

She went, however, with her mother to return 
Mrs. Larkins's visit, and found the romantic Lilly 
settled to her heart's content in a dull, vulgar, well- 
furnished house in the heart of the city, talking 
Cockney by way of English, and overflowing with 
rapture at her own blissful lot. She pressed most 



268 THE INHERITANCE. 

vehemently for her aunt and cousin to fix a day to 
dine with them. Augustus would be so disappointed 
if they did nx)t do it ; he was so anxious they should 
meet some near relations of his, Sir Christopher and 
Lady Huggins. He had been Lord Mayor once, and 
was a remarkably genteel, nice man, and Lady 
Huggins was such a nice woman ! But, indeed, 
Augustus was very petikler in his friends, and had no 
ideer of visiting vulgar people. But if they would 
not fix it now, Augustus and she would call in Park 
Lane some day very soon, for she knew he would 
take no denial ; he kept a gig, and could drive 
her there any day. At this threat Lady Eossville 
promised to look over the list of her engagements 
when she returned home, and if she had a day 
disengaged before leaving town she would dine with 
them. 

" Oh, cousin, you really must not think of going 
away without dining with us. I assure you Augustus 
will never forgive you if you do, and you are a great 
favourite of his at present." 

Mrs. St. Clair here engaged that a day should 
certainly be allotted for the purpose, and at length 
they were permitted to depart, with much lamentation 
that Augustus was from home, and repeated assurances 
of calling again some day soon. 

In hopes of averting that evil, Gertrude, upon con- 
sulting her engagements, found a day disengaged, and 
it was settled accordingly that it should be given to 
the Larkinses. Mrs. St. Clair, indeed, rather antici- 



THE INHERITANCE. 269 

pated pleasure from a party there. She was sure of 
being of consequence, and of making and of causing a 
fuss and a bustle — a thing she could by no manner of 
means effect in the higher circles, where she could not 
even shine in the reflected lustre of her daughter. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

" 0, fair ladies, how plesing war this lyfe of yours, if it sould 
ever abyde, and then in the end, that we might pas to hevin 
with all this gay gear." — John Knox. 

Meanwhile the day of the ball arrived, and even in 
the greatest of great houses a ball causes more or less 
of confusion and commotion. Mrs. St. Clair had in 
vain remonstrated against it. Her remonstrances, 
indeed, were rather reproaches, as the cards had been 
issued before she had even been consulted, and the 
preparations, made upon the most splendid scale, had 
all been arranged by the Countess and Colonel Del- 
mour, aided by some of their friends. They were to 
come early to assist her in receiving the company, and 
she was dressed and her apartments lighted in due 
time. She walked through them with almost childish 
delight. All was light and flowers and perfume, and 
her own figure, radiant in beauty and pleasure, flashed 
upon her in all directions from the magnificent mirrors 
as they gave back the brilliant scene in almost endless 
succession. She had stopped at one of them to alter 
something about her hair, when in the long vista she 
perceived the servant ushering in a gentleman, who 
she immediately concluded must be Delmour. She 



THE INHEIUTANCE. 271 

turned round to meet him with a smile, but to her 
amazement she beheld, not her lover, but her guardian, 
Lyndsay ! 

"Mr. Lyndsay! my dear cousin!" exclaimed she; 
but there was more of surprise than pleasure in the 
accent in which the words were uttered; "how — 
where have you dropped from — the moonf 

" No, dear Gertrude," said he, as he affectionately 
shook her hand ; " you have given me a long journey, 
but not quite so long a one as that. I come from 
Scotland." 

"From Scotland!" repeated Lady Eossville, in 
some confusion, as her conscience smote her at the 
sound ; " and how long have you been in town 1" 

" Only since the moi'ning ; that is, my morning, 
\vhich, I suppose, is your daybreak, for I called — such 
is my vulgarity ! — about noon, and was told my lady 
was not up. I left my card, and called again at three, 
when I was told my lady had just gone out ; and here 
I am now, it seems, just in time for my lady's ball." 

" Will you indeed stay?" cried Gertrude, rather at 
a loss to ascertain whether he were in jest or earnest ; 

" that will add so much to my pleasure — that is, I 

but, indeed, I never heard you had called, and I forgot 
to look over my cards this morning." 

"Is that all you have forgot, Gertrude?" inquired 
Lyndsay in a somewhat reproachful tone. 

" I fear not," said she, with a smile and a blush, 
but the one was forced, the other natural ; " but this 
is not the time for me to remember all I have forgot." 



272 THE INHERITANCE. 

"When is the time, then, Gertrude?" 

" Oh, any time, you know, that — that — any morn- 
ing " 

"Any morning sometimes means no day, does it 
not?" said Lyndsay. "But I have come far on pur- 
pose to see you and to talk with you, since you will 
not write to me, and I must know when you Avill be 
disengaged." 

" Spoken like a guardian, indeed ! " said the Coun- 
tess, with an affected laugh; "but since you must 
know, I must candidly confess that I really cannot 
at this precise moment recollect what my engage- 
ments are. To-morrow, I know I made a party to 
go to Eichmond by water to breakfast. I wish to 
get out of the way of the ddbris of to-night." 

"And what follows?" 

" Why, we shall probably dine there, and return 
in the evening, when I have several engagements." 

"And the day after to-morrow — can I see you 
then?" 

"What day is that? — Friday. I rather think — 
yes, indeed, I remember now I engaged to give 
Tournerelli a sitting at a very early hour; and as 
I forgot once before, if I fail this time he will 
certainly make a Gorgon or a Medusa of me. But 
you will join our party to Eichmond to-morrow, and 
then we can talk it all over — pray do." 

Lyndsay sighed. "Ah, Gertrude, what changed 
days since those we passed at Eossville together ! 
I little thought then you would have grudged half- 



THE INHERITANCE. 273 

an-hoiir from your pleasures to bestow upon your 
friend ! " 

" You surely would not have me break my engage- 
ments?" said the Countess, with some pique. 

" On the contrary, it was to remind you of them 
that chiefly brought me here," said Lyndsay mildly, 
but gravely ; " but I would have you choose the lesser 
evil — that which will give least pain to others. Your 
gay friends will not break their hearts, I dare say, 
although you should disappoint them to-morrow ; but 
there are others, Gertrude, with whom you have made 
engagements of more consequence, and whose happiness 
is in your hands ; it is for them I would intercede." 

Lady Rossville coloured deeply, and rising, said, 
" It will have rather a ridiculous effect for you and 
I to be found sitting here in grave debate, discussing 
our parish business in the ball-room ; the place is, at 
least, as ill chosen as the time," added she somewhat 
haughtily, as she moved away. For a moment Lynd- 
say seemed too much hurt to reply, but recollecting 
himself, he said — 

"Upon my own account I certainly would not 
intrude wliere I am evidently so unwelcome ; but I 
have undertaken a task which I umst perform. I have 
engaged to remind Lady Rossville of her promise — 
and more, to get that promise fulfilled." 

The Countess remained silent, but her countenance 
betrayed the agitation of her mind. At that moment 
the knocker sounde<l an alarm. 

" You have refused to fix an hour to see me," said 

VOL. 11, T 



274 THE INHERITANCE. 

Lyndsay; "I will therefore name one to wait upon 
you — to-morrow at one I will be here." 

Gertrude made no reply, but hurried forward to 
receive Lady Charles, Colonel Delmour, and a succession 
of friends, who now came pouring in. 

Delmour's astonishment at sight of Lyndsay could 
only be equalled by his dissatisfaction, and the meeting 
on both sides was cold and distant. Mrs. St Clair now 
made her appearance; Lady Augusta and her daughters 
followed, and Lyndsay was soon overwhelmed with 
expressions of surprise and pleasure from all quarters, 
but he contrived to disengage himself from them and 
disappeared. 

" Lyndsay has been giving you a godly exhortation 
against the sinfulness of dancing, I suppose," said 
Delmour, as he led Gertrude to open the ball; "and 
you look almost as grave as though you had the 
fear of the kirk-session before your eyes." 

Gertrude smiled, and the exhilarating effects of 
the music, and all the concomitants of a brilliant 
ball, soon dispelled the unpleasant thoughts which 
Lyndsay's appearance had excited. All was enchant- 
ment while it lasted ; and the Countess believed she 
was happy. 

But the morrow told another tale, when she awoke 
to the realities of life and found the delusion had 
vanished, leaving only dust and rubbish to mark 
where it had been. It was near the hour when 
Lyndsay had said he was to call, but she had not 
promised to receive him. It was disagreeable to 



THE INHERITANCE. 275 

see anybody that morning. Her head ached, her 
house was in confusion, her servants were all stupid 
with wine or sleep ; nothing was as it ought to be ; 
then two o'clock was the hour when she was to set 
off for Richmond, and she should be so hurried ! No, 
it was impossible — quite impossible. It was unreason- 
able to expect that she should be able to enter on 
business all at once so wholly unprepared, and she 
resolved to send her excuse ; but just then her maid 
entered to say that Mr. Lyndsay was below, but as 
he was in no hurry, begged her Ladyship might not 
be disturbed. There was no evading this, and with 
a mixture of haste and delay, she prepared for the 
interview. 



CHAPTER XXXVL 

* ' You do imagine, 
No doubt, you have talked wisely, and confuted 
London past all defence." James Shirley. 

If Lyndsay had departed in displeasure, as Gertrude 
thought he had done the night before, all traces of 
it had completely vanished. But there was a settled 
seriousness in his look and manner which made her 
feel that levity would be misplaced, and if anything 
so graceful could have felt awkward she would have 
done so. As it was, she was evidently embarrassed. 
She rang for her chocolate, caressed her dog, spoke 
to her bird, ordered away some flowers that were too 
powerful, desired her maid to fetch her some emt de 
Cologne ; and in short, seemed bent upon keeping up 
a bustle around her, as if to prevent the possibility of 
anything like settled conversatioa Lyndsay sat calmly 
waiting till all this should be over ; and, at length, her 
orders having been all obeyed, she began to feel ashamed 
of such trifling, and allowed the servants to leave the 
room without any more frivolous commands. 

" I think I am very good-natured, am I not % " said 
she, making an attempt to rally her spirits, as she 
sipped her chocolate, "to admit you this morning. 



THE INHERITANCE. 277 

considering how ill you used me last night in running 
away from my ball ; and now, to come thus behind 
the scene only to see how ugly we look after all is 
over, is scarcely fair." 

" The spectre of pleasure is perhaps not more 
beautiful than other spectres," said Lyndsay; "but 
I have something of a wizard's eye in these matters, 
and last night's scene, brilliant as it was, could not 
impose upon me. I have learned to distinguish real 
from artificial happiness." 

" But my happiness, I do assure you, was quite 
real while it lasted," said Gertrude gaily ; " the only 
melancholy part of it was that it did not last quite so 
long as one could have wished." 

" Is your happiness, then, of so evanescent a 
nature, Gertrude ?" asked Lyndsay. 

" How very literal you are become !" answered she, 
attempting to laugh ; " you seem to have forgot the 
way to jest." 

" Not when there is good occasion," said Lyndsay 
gravely ; " but at present I confess I am not in a jest- 
ing mood." 

" How unfortunate ! for I am not in a serious one, 
so we shall never agree — unless, indeed, you agree to 
be of my party to Richmond. Come, you surely cannot 
refuse me that 1 However you might despise my ball 
as an artificial pleasure, you must by the same rule 
approve of my fete champitre as a piece of real rural 
felicity. Now, don't be so churlish as to refuse. Do 
consent to be gay and happy like other people." 



278 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Are you happy, Gertrude?" asked Lyndsay still 
more gravely. 

" To be sure ; why should you doubt it?" 

" Because I have always looked upon true happi- 
ness as a generous, diffusive sentiment, that sought 
to impart a portion of its own blessedness to all 
around. Such it was with you, Gertrude, at Eoss- 
ville ; but now you seem to confine it within narrower 
bounds ; none of it finds its way there now." 

Gertrude blushed while she attempted to smile, 
and said — 

" I am keeping it all to carry there along with me. 
I mean to return to Kossville very soon now, and I 
intend that you should all be very happy to see 
me." 

" Some, I trust, will have good cause," said Lyndsay; 
" but in the meantime, there are two young lovers who 
are suffering not merely the tortures of suspense, but 
the aggravation of an evil report ; yet it seems so in- 
credible a one that I almost hesitate to repeat it ; you 
will think we country folks so credulous." 

"Pray let me hear it," said the Countess faintly. 

" It is said that you have actually given away the 
living of Rossville, which you had promised to young 
Leslie, to a superannuated Ion vivant hanger-on of the 
Monteiths." 

Lady Rossville's colour mounted to her very tem- 
ples, and at that moment a servant entered to say her 
Ladyship's carriage was in waiting. She rose, and 
stammered out something about her engagement. 



THE INHERITANCE. 279 

her party, and she knew not what, as she was moving 
towards the door. 

"I too have an engagement to keep," said Lyndsay 
calmly but very gravely, and he took her hand and 
led her to her seat ; " I have engaged to prove the 
falsity of that report from your own lips." 

But Lady Eossville remained silent, evidently 
struggling with her feelings. 

" Gertrude, you could not be so false to others, 
so unjust to yourself?" said Lyndsay, with emotion. 

Shame, sorrow, and pride, all swelled in Lady Eoss- 
ville's heart almost to suffocation, but pride prevailed; 
and even while her burning cheeks and downcast eyes 
betrayed her consciousness of wrong, she answered 
with an air of haughty indignation — 

" One part of the report you are certainly at liberty 
to contradict — I never promised the living of Eossville 
to Mr. LesHe." 

" You promised to provide for him when it should 
be in your power." 

" And I will yet do so, but in the present instance 
it is not in my power ; and now, Mr. Lyndsay, excuse 
me if I must be gone." 

" No, it is not thus we must part," said Lyndsay, 
in a tone so firm yet so sad as awed the Countess 
even in spite of herself, and she remained passively 
waiting for what was to follow. "If we part thus, 
we may never meet again as we have done" — he 
stopped in some emotion, and then proceeded — 
"Before I became your guardian I had learned to 



280 THE INHERITANCE. 

consider myself as your friend, and I had flattered 
myself the confidence you then honoured me with 
would have been continued, but it has not proved so ; 
I appeal to yourself, Gertrude, has it ? " 

For a moment Gertrude could not answer, but at 
length she said — 

" My sentiments remain unchanged ; but surely you 
might know enough of a London life to make allowance 
for any omissions I may have been guilty of." 

"I have — I do make allowance for them," said 
Lyndsay ; " I knew all the dangers that awaited one 
of your ardent, confiding, .susceptible, but volatile 
nature ; I knew that the adulation of the world would 
prove incense too intoxicating to be resisted by one 
who had not yet looked through the shallowness of 
earthly grandeur. I do not therefore reproach you 
with your neglect, your unkindness, your almost 
boundless extravagance — these are faults that may 
yet be repaired ; but broken promises and power 
misused — ah ! Gertrude, what can make up for 
these?" 

Lady Eossville made a gesture of impatience, as 
if to conceal her agitation, then said — 

" I have already disclaimed the promise, the power 
is my own ; I did not imagine I was accountable for 
it to Mr. Lyndsay." 

"No, Gertrude, you are accountable to a higher 
tribunal, even to God Himself, for the choice you 
make of His ministers. I am aware that in the world 
the appointment of a clergyman is reckoned a slight 



THE INHERITANCE. 281 

thing, but I view it differently, and as your guardian 
I protest against the choice you have made." 

" It is too late," said Gertrude, in a faltering voice. 

"No, it cannot be too late. You have been mis- 
led, betrayed into one engagement at the expense of 
another. If you will give me leave I will extricate 
you from it." 

" Impossible ! " exclaimed the Countess in an 
agitated tone, as she shrank from the thoughts of 
encountering Delmour's displeasure. "Why then tease 
me by prolonging this painful and needless discussion? 
I will not, I cannot, retract what I have done." 

"Ah ! Gertrude, do not suffer a false principle of 
honour thus to sway all your better feelings. If no 
higher motive can influence you in this, at least let 
me conjure you by the friendship of former days, by 
the affection you bear your cousin, who loves you so 
tenderly she will not believe in the possibility of 
your deceiving her " 

" Oh, Lyndsay, do not, do not torture me ! " cried 
Gertrude, as she covered her face with her hand. 

" It is to save you from the torture of an upbraid- 
ing conscience, dear Gertrude, that I thus afiiict you. 
The happiness of two amiable, interesting beings is in 
your hands ; you are their only earthly stay at pre- 
sent ; should you fail them, their disappointment may 
be bitter, but the reproaches of your own heart will 
l)e bitterer still." 

Lady Rossville's heart heaved, and, in spite of her 
efforts to restrain them, tears burst from her eyes; 



282 THE INHERITANCE. 

but at that moment she thought she heard Dehnour's 
knock ; she started up, and hastily brushed away the 
tear from her cheek. " Let there be an end of this," 
said she ; " I can hear no more." 

"Yes," said Lyndsay, seizing her hand to detain 
her, while his own shook with emotion, " you must 
hear yet more ; you must hear me resign from hence- 
forth the office of your guardian; 'tis a mockery I 
can no longer endure." 

Lady Eossville made no reply. A thousand con- 
tending feelings struggled in her breast, but she 
repressed them all with that force which is the result 
of conscious weakness ; and with the calmness of one 
determined to do wrong, she merely bent her head in 
acquiescence. 

"Should the time ever arrive when Lady Eoss- 
ville, gay and prosperous as she now is, should want 
the aid or counsel of a friend" — Lyndsay's voice 
faltered, but the Countess remained calm and motion- 
less — " Gertrude, will you remember me ? " But Ger- 
trude averted her face to hide the anguish that filled 
her heart. " At least, you will say ' Farewell ' to 
me?" 

" Farewell," said Gertrude, in an assumed tone of 
indifference, and without turning round. I^yndsay 
dropped the hand he held in his, and in another 
instant was gone. 

It was then Gertrude's long-repressed feelings 
burst forth in all their violence. "Unkind, unjust, 
ungrateful that I am ! " exclaimed she to herself, as 



THE INHERITANCE. 283 

she wept in an agony of remorse. " I have lost the 
best, the truest friend, and he thinks me — Oh, what a 
cold-hearted, unfeeling wretch must he think me ! 
How must I have behaved, when even Lyndsay, the 
mild, forgiving, disinterested Lyndsay, has renounced 
me ! " But her sorrow and her self-reproaches were 
checked by the entrance of Delmour, who, after 
knocking, had stopped to speak to a friend who was 
passing, and while so engaged, Lyndsay had gone out. 
The cousins did not speak, but from the expression of 
his countenance Delmour at once perceived he had 
no cause for jealousy. 

But for the first time the sight of her lover failed 
to bring pleasure to Gertrude, as she contrasted his 
gay triumphant mien with Lyndsay's mild, pleading 
look and melancholy air, and when he accosted her 
with an exclamation of astonishment, she turned from 
him, as she thought " It is he who has caused me to 
act thus ! " 

"My dear Gertrude," cried he, "what is the 
meaning of all this "? But I guess how it is — you have 
had a puritanical lecture from the very Eeverend 
Edward Lyndsay, and I am not surprised you should 
weep at it, were it only from weariness." 

But Gertrude still leant her head dejectedly upon 
her hand, and only sighed in answer. 

" By Heaven ! " cried Delmour, passionately, " he 
shall answer to me for every tear he has made you 
shed." 

"Beware how you add to the sorrow you have 



284 THE INHERITANCE. 

already brought upon me, Delmour," said Gertrude ; 
" I have forgiven much, and may forgive more, but I 
will never forgive insult or injury offered to Edward 
Lyndsay on my account." 

Haughty and overbearing as Delmour was, he saw 
that, on the present occasion, he was not likely to 
obtain the mastery ; and he was piqued to find that 
it required all his skill and eloquence to prevail 
upon Lady Eossville to keep her engagement and join 
the party to Richmond. At length he prevailed ; but 
she set out with a heavy heart. By degrees, how- 
ever, the novelty and the gaiety of the scene, the 
beauty of the day, the succession of lovely landscapes 
that met the eye as they glided along, the music, 
the company — all combined to charm the senses, and 
Lyndsay was forgot ! 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

*' Something that's bitter will arise 
Even amid our jollities." Lucretius. 

"Penso qual ne partii, qual vi ritorno." 

Metastasio. 

The London season was now drawing near a close, 
and Lady Rossville had run her full career of folly 
and extravagance. As bills came pouring in upon her 
from all quarters she was startled at the magnitude 
of the sums she had expended, and for which she 
had now nothing to show but a parcel of gewgaws, 
which had ceased with their novelty to afford her any 
pleasure. She felt almost glad that Lyndsay was no 
longer her guardian, that he might not see the extent 
of her imprudence ; for even Delmour was surprised 
when he heard how much she had spent in so short a 
time. As for Mrs. St. Clair, this discovery, joined to 
the disappointment of her other schemes, occasioned 
her a fit of the jaundice, which put a stop to the 
Larkinses' dinner; and as soon as she was able to 
travel she was ordered to Cheltenham for the benefit 
of the waters. There they accordingly repaired, but 
not before it had been arranged by the lovers that 
Colonel Delmour should join them in a short time. 



286 THE INHERITANCE. 

At first Gertrude was pleased with the combination 
of picturesque beauty and fashionable gaiety, which 
are so happily blended at this celebrated watering- 
place ; but a short time sufficed to dispel the illusion. 
The amusements wanted the life, splendour, and 
variety of the London parties, and the walks and 
rides were little resorted to ; the supreme hon-ton of 
the idlers being to drive or walk backwards and for- 
wards for about the space of a quarter of a mile of 
dusty street, and that without intermission, for two 
or three hours day after day, and week after week, 
and that with as much settled seriousness as though 
they were actually fulfilling the high destinies of im- 
mortal beings. 

" Oh, how can'st thou renounce the boundless store 
Of charms which nature to her votary yields ! " 

But in vain would the minstrel have attempted to 
sing the beaux and belles of Cheltenham off" the 
burning pavement, even while the dog -star raged, 
provided the libraries and confectioners and toy-shops 
kept their places. What to them 

"The warbling woodland, the resounding shore, 
The pomp of groves, and garniture of fields ; 
All that the genial ray of morning gilds, 
And all that echoes to the song of even." 

But it was otherwise with Lady Eossville ; her taste 
was not yet so vitiated as to take pleasure in the 
vapid pastimes of a watering-place, which, however 
they may amuse and relax the minds of the sick and 



THE INHERITANCE. 287 

the studious, can only tend to enfeeble those of the 
healthy and the gay. She sighed as she thought of 
her own fair domain — its woods and its waters, its 
flowers neglected and forsaken ; herself a queen there, 
while here she was one of a motley throng, with 
nought to recompense her but stare and heat and 
dust and pressure. To add to her weariness and 
chagrin, Delmour had been detained in London on 
some regimental business, and was not likely to join 
her before her return to Eossville. 

Mrs. St. Clair's aversion to Colonel Delmour had 
by no means diminished; but she found her oppo- 
sition so perfectly vain, and her attempts to lead her 
daughter now so futile, that she had almost abandoned 
both, but not without many severe struggles, and 
some dark mysterious threats, which, however, the 
Countess had now learnt to disregard. 

At length they bade adieu to Cheltenham; but 
summer was far advanced, or rather autumn had 
commenced, before they returned to Eossville. It 
was with mingled feelings of pleasure and pain that 
Gertrude beheld it again. Even while her heart 
bounded at sight of every well-known object, they 
seemed to reproach her with having lavished her 
thoughts, her affections, her money, upon worthless 
baubles and heartless pleasures. Her conscience 
smote her as she passed some old cottages which she 
had planned puUing down, and building new and 
more commodious ones in their place. " Half of what 
my opera-box cost me would have done that," sighed 



288 THE INHEltlTAXCE. 

she ; " and that bridge ! " as she caught a glimpse of 
one, half finished — "the poor people must still go two 
miles about, till my diamond necklace is paid ; " and 
tears of contrition dropped from her eyes. 

But it was not so at the Castle; for Delmour's 
orders had superseded Lyndsay's schemes, and, how- 
ever the poor might suffer, nothing had been left 
undone there. The conservatory and the garden had 
been completed, and stocked at an immense expense ; 
the apartments were superbly and tastefully furnished; 
the theatre was almost finished, and again Gertrude's 
volatile heart throbbed with pride and pleasure as 
she looked on this new creation of taste and fancy, 
and anticipated the joys yet to come. But as the 
novelty abated again the voice of conscience was 
heard, and the thoughts of Lyndsay recurred. She 
wondered whether he would come to visit her 
upon her return, and she both wished and dreaded 
the meeting ; but day after day passed on, and Lynd- 
say came not. Her cousin Anne, too, how could she 
behold her without shame and confusion of face ! 
But her apprehensions on that score were partly 
relieved by receiving the following note a few days 
after her arrival : — 

" My dear Lady Rossville — I am very sure it 
will give you pleasure to hear that William has at 
length been provided for, as I know how much it 
must have pained you to be unable to fulfil your kind 
intentions in his favour. But what you could not do 



THE INHERITANCE. 289 

yourself, your kind friend Mr. Lyndsay has done for 
you. He has so generously interested himself in this 
affair that he has got William appointed to the living 
of Whinbrae ; and Mr. Turner, who was to have suc- 
ceeded to that church, he has secured in a secular 
office of greater emolument, and better suited to his 
views and sentiments. The only obstacle to our 
union is therefore now removed; and as we are to 
have immediate possession of the manse, it is to take 
place very soon — perhaps in the course of the next 
week. It is to you, under Heaven, that we owe our 
happiness, by interesting so kind and generous a 
patron in our behalf. Accept, therefore, my dear 
Lady Eossville, the united thanks and prayers of 

" Your affectionate Anne Black, 

" and obliged and grateful William Leslik'' 

" Kind and generous, indeed ! " exclaimed Lady 
Rossville, as she read this billet, and a blush of shame 
burned on her cheek. " He has saved me as far as 
he could from the disgrace of — at best, I fear, equi- 
vocation, and from the wretchedness of having dis- 
appointed the hopes of those whom I had taught to 
put their trust in me." 

In the overflowing of her heart she wrote to Anne, 
expressing her participation in her happiness, and 
giving the sole credit of it to Mr. Lyndsay. She could 
not bring herself to tell her exactly how matters 
stood, but she assured her again and again that it 
was to him, and to him only, they were indebted. 

VOL. II, U 



290 THE INHERITANCE. 

She thought she ought also to write to Lyndsay, 
to thank him for his kindness to her relations, and 
she took up the pen for that purpose, but she could 
not write anything to please herself; one style was 
too cold and formal for the warmth of her feelings ; 
another too humble and penitential for her pride to 
stoop to, and Delmour might be displeased. "No !" 
exclaimed she, as she threw down the pen, " I cannot 
write what I feel — I must either say too much or too 
little. It would be otherwise were we to meet ; a 
few words would set all to rights, and how I wish he 
would afford me an opportunity of making my peace 
with him ! I cannot be happy while I think I have 
forfeited his good opinion. Surely he will come, and 
he will be pleased to find I have not forgot all his 
good lessons ; " and she tried to resume the studies 
and occupations she had begun at his suggestion ; but 
it would not do; the illusions of passion and the 
vanities of life still maintained their sway over her, 
and all was dull and joyless that did not administer to 
one or other. " I shall never be good," sighed she, 
" according to Lyndsay's notions, so 'tis in vain to try 
— perhaps Delmour would not like me so well if I 
were ; " and that argument was conclusive against all 
further attempts of the kind. 

Colonel Delmour's absence had been protracted 
much beyond the period assigned, by the alarming 
illness of his brother, whose life at one time had been 
in imminent danger, in consequence of a pleuritic 
attack, the consequence it was said (as everything of 



THE INHEEITANCE. 291 

the kind must either have or be a consequence) of cold 
caught at a late sitting of a committee of which he 
was chairman. He was now better, and as soon as he 
was sufficiently recovered for his brother to leave 
him, the impatient lover was to set off for Eossville ; 
meanwhile, he implored Gertrude to write to him 
every day — every hour, if possible — as the only allevia- 
tion to the tortures of separation. Such was Colonel 
Delmour's way of telling the story, and as usual it 
contained a portion of truth and falsehood. It was 
true that his brother had been dangerously ill while 
he was in London, but it was not true that he was 
still detained there from that cause. The fact was 
he rather dreaded a dull family party at Eossville, 
for, lover as he was, he was too much a man of the 
world, too much accustomed to be amused, to be able 
to devote himseK entirely to one object, however much 
beloved — and Gertrude was as much beloved by him 
as anything could be; but he felt himself now so 
secure in her affections that there was not even the 
stimulants of jealousy or uncertainty to give a zest 
to their intercourse. In short, Colonel Delmour's heart 
and affections were so jaded and sophisticated that 
simple feelings and simple pleasures had now become 
stale and insipid. He rather liked the country for 
two or three months in the autumn with a good party; 
but to be constantly enacting the sentimental lover, 
and with no greater variety than Lady Betty and Mrs. 
St. Clair, or an interchange of neighbourly visits with 
some agricultural lord or raw-boned squire — to be 



292 THE INHERITANCE. 

bored about county politics or county races, it was 
more than either his love or his philosophy could 
endure. At length his brother's convalescence left 
him no excuse, and he wrote to Gertrude that he 
would have set off instantly, but as the Arabins, 
Peverleys, and his friend Ilfrington, were preparing 
to storm Eossville, he had been prevailed upon to 
wait a day or two and join the party. A P.S. added 
they should probably go by the Lakes, as Lady Charles 
had taken a sketching turn, and Lord Charles wished 
to eat char. 

Lady Eossville was deeply mortified at this letter. 
It contained even more than the usual quantity of 
love superlatives, was eloquent on the miseries of 
separation, and the anticipated happiness of their 
meeting; but still he did not fly to her; he could 
submit to wait on the movements of a capricious 
fine lady and the taste of an indolent gourmand ; and 
for the first time a doubt of the reality of his attach- 
ment struck upon her heart. The supposition was 
too dreadful to be endured, and she shrank from it as 
she would from the stroke of a dagger. " At least he 
does not love as I do ! " thought she, as she tried to 
dispel the fast-gathering tears that, in spite of herself, 
rushed to her eyes ; " but I was a fool to expect it. 
Who ever loved so fondly, so truly as I have done 1 
and men never love with the devotion of women. 
But I would have Delmour different from every one 
else, I would be his all, as he is mine." Then to 
wounded tenderness succeeded pride. He had be- 



THE INHERITANCE. 293 

sought her to write to him as usual, and mentioned 
the places where he should expect to find letters from 
her ; but she determined to punish him by her silence, 
though the punishment would in the first instance 
fall upon herself, as the forbearance of not writing 
was probably at least equal to the disappointment of 
not receiving her letters. 

Gertrude was naturally of an open, communicative 
temper, and the want of a confidante had often been 
severely felt by her ; but she had n^er met with any 
one whom she thought perfectly suited to act even 
that subordinate part. Lady Charles was too much 
a woman of the world to enter into her enthusiastic 
notions ; the Miss Delmours were too deep in flirta- 
tions themselves to be able to listen to anything of 
the kind at second-hand, and she had formed no other 
particular intimacy in London. Her cousin Anne might 
have done, for she was patient and attentive ; but then 
she was so good, and so flat, and so matter-of-fact in 
her ideas on the subject, that it was in vain to expect 
any congeniality there. Hitherto she had contrived 
to exist without one, but now the want was felt, as 
sooner or later it must be, in all its loneliness. It 
would have been such a luxury to have complained of 
her lover to some considerate friend, who would have 
defended him, and proved to her that he was right 
and she was wrong. Her mother was out of the 
question ; she was the last person to whom she would 
have uttered a complaint of Delmour, whose name by 
a sort of tacit agreement was seldom mentioned be- 



294 THE INHERITANCE. 

tween them. In this state of restless displeasure it 
was a relief to have something to do, however dis- 
agreeable in itself ; and she therefore acceded to Mrs. 
St. Clair's proposal that she should go and visit some 
of the members of her family, she herself being con- 
fined with a cold. Lady Eossville then ordered her 
carriage, and set forth to try the effects of rapid 
driving and change of company in dispelling chagrin 
and ennui. 



CHAPTER XXXVIIl 

" Fair seemly pleasance each to other makes, 
With goodly purposes there as they sit." 

Fairy Queen. 

" A name unmusical to Volscian ears, 
And harsh in sound to thine. " 

Shakespeake. 

Bellevue was her first destination, for she could 
now endure to meet Anne, since she found her con- 
duct was not viewed in the light she feared it would 
have been. She was welcomed by Mrs. Black with 
even more than her wonted cordiality, and having 
dismissed the children, who were in the room with 
her, she immediately started the subject of Anne's 
marriage, prefacing her observations with a deep sigh, 
or rather groan — 

" I'm sure we were all much obliged to you, my 
Lady, for refusing to give them your church. I was 
in great hopes that might have put an end to the 
thing altogether, and I really beHeve it would, if it 
had not been for Mr. Lyndsay. Folk are really ill 
employed sometimes when they think they're doing 
good, and it would maybe be just as well if there was 
less of that kind of interference in the world. As 



296 THE INHERITANCE. 

Mr. Black says, 'Let ilka sheep hang by its ain 
shank;' and it might have been long enough before 
William Leslie would have got a kirk, and in that 
time there's no saying what might have happened; 
but now her father's just weary and sick of the sub- 
ject, and he has given his consent, — and what could 
he do else? So it will be all over soon now;" and 
Mrs. Black heaved another sigh. 

" I trust they will both be very happy," said Ger- 
trude. 

"It may be so," said Mrs. Black coldly; "but it 
will be but a waif kind of happiness — very different 
from her two sisters, who want for nothing, and both 
keep their own carriages ; but I must always think 
her family are little obliged to Mr. Lyndsay." 

Anne's entrance put a stop to her mother's lamen- 
tations, and Gertrude was then strictly questioned as 
to all she had seen or heard of Mrs. Larkins, who, 
Mrs. Black seemed to think, must, from her own 
account, be a very distinguished personage in London. 
Lady Rossville made no attempts to undeceive her, 
but gave as flattering a picture as she could of the 
Larkinses' prosperity. 

Upon hearing that her cousin was going to walk 
to Barnford to visit her aunts, the Countess off'ered 
her a seat in her carriage, which she willingly accepted 
of. While Anne went to make ready, Mrs. Black 
again returned to the charge, and again expressed her 
own and Mr. Black's gratitude for the friendly part 
she had acted in refusing the kirk. "As for this 



THE INHERITANCE. 297 

marriage," said she, " I have no heart to make any 
ploy of it, so I shall ask nobody. The lads may come 
out to it if they like; but I'm very doubtful if the 
Major and his lady will countenance it." 

Gertrude was on the point of offering to attend, 
but just then Anne returned, and they set off. No 
sooner were they alone than Anne began to repeat 
her acknowledgments for what had been done. " Had 
it not been for Mr. Lyndsay," said she, " I know not 
what would have become of us, for my mother had 
resolved upon sending me to London to live with my 
sister, in hopes that a change might have been 
^vrought in my sentiments ; but it would have served 
no purpose but to render us both unhappy, for the 
love that is founded in religion and virtue cannot 
change." 

" No," said Gertrude ; *' I do not think the love 
could have been true that any circumstances could 
ever change." 

"It is perhaps sometimes difficult to distinguish false 
from true," said Anne ; " but I am sure whoever Mr. 
Lyndsay loves he will love truly, and whoever loves 
him will love for ever and aye." 

"He has made a warm advocate in you," said 
Lady Rossville, smiling. 

"Ah, he deserves much more than I can say of 
him! Had you but seen with what warmth and 
kindness he entered into our affairs, and how feelingly 
he sympathised in our disappointment, and how 
vexed he seemed upon your account too " 



298 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Upon my account!" exclaimed Gertrude, while 
a glow of conscious shame suffused her cheek. " How 
— what could he say for me 1 " 

" He did not say much ; but when my father and 
mother argued from your having otherwise disposed 
of the church that you were opposed to our union, 
he disclaimed that idea altogether, and said that 
although you had inadvertently made an engagement 
which you thought you could not break, yet he was 
sure you suffered more than any of us did, and he 
said it in a way that showed how much he felt for 
you." 

"It is in sorrow then, and not in anger, that he 
thinks of me!" thought Gertrude, but there was 
something more humiliating in the one than the 
other. She could have made overtures to be recon- 
ciled, but she could not sue to be forgiven ; and she 
sought to steel herself against the repentance that 
her cousin's recital had awakened in her breast. 

As Anne was about to renew the grateful theme, 
the Countess abruptly changed the conversation, and 
as they were then in sight of Uncle Adam's mansion 
she proposed to pay him a visit, to which Anne 
timidly assented, not having had the courage to 
encounter him since her marriage had been made 
known to him. 

They were received as usual in a very doubtful 
sort of way by Mr. Eamsay. Gertrude's looks com- 
monly softened his asperities, by recalling the image 
of his Lizzie ; and it was so long since he had seen 



THE INHERITANCE. 299 

her that he would have almost hailed her appearance, 
had not the rumour of her engagement with Colonel 
Delmour reached his ears, and caused them to tingle 
to the very drum with indignation. She looked pale, 
and out of spirits too, and less like Lizzie than 
usual ; so that he was ready to take the field against 
her, especially as he saw that she had got a new and 
more splendid equipage, and her dress was something 
he was not accustomed to see pass his windows every 
day. 

" I canna say London has improved you," said he, 
scarcely looking at her. " I dinna think I wad ha'e 
kent you if I had met you. If that's a' you have 
made by it, I think you would have been just as weel 
at hame." 

" Much better, I believe," said Lady Rossville, with 
a sigh she did not intend. " London is not the place 
for either hght heads or light purses like mine." 

Uncle Adam thought this savoured of an attack 
upon his hoards, and he resented it accordingly. 
" Ay, light heads mak' light purses, and it's best they 
should keep company wi' ane anither." 

Lady Rossville only smiled at this rebuff, then said, 
" Well, as you don't seem to make my light head and 
my light purse very welcome, here is a light heart 
that I hope will please you better," pointing to Anne, 
whose happy, blooming face, and Httle simply dressed 
figure, formed quite a contrast to the Countess's pale 
complexion, dissatisfied expression, and elegant, but 
fanciful style of dress. 



300 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Oo ay, sweet hearts are aye light hearts ; but 
maybe that's ower light a word for you and your 
dominie. I dinna ken what you religious folk ca' 
yoursel's. Ha'e ye ony godly name that you carry on 
your courtships wi' ?" 

Poor Anne blushed, as she answered in some con- 
fusion, that her uncle might call her what he pleased. 

"And if I should ca' you twa great fulesf de- 
manded he. 

"Perhaps you will only call us by our right names," 
said Anne, with a smile. 

"There's some modesty at least in that," said Uncle 
Adam more benignly ; " but what did you mean by 
carrying on this hiddlin' coortship o' yours sae lang ^ 
I never heard a word o't till I heard it frae your 
father last week." 

" I thought it unnecessary to trouble you upon a 
subject which did not interest you," said Anne. 

" How did you ken whether it would interesst me 
or no ? I suppose if I had had a kirk in my aught, you 
wad hae thought it very interesstin'." Then, as his 
attention was attracted to the carriage moving for- 
ward, "That's a fine ootset for a minister's wife, or 
else no, to be riding up and down the country in a 
phyeton and fower, and her twa flunkies !" But at 
that moment the Waddell carriage took the place of 
the Eossville one, and Mrs. Major herself appeared in 
all her pomp and bustle. " This is very hard," mut- 
tered Mr. Eamsay, as he turned to and fro, "that I 
canna ca' my hoose my ain." 



THE INHEEITANCE. 301 

But Mrs. Major now entered in a very slow, 
solemn, interesting manner ; and, as if much fatigued 
by the exertion of walking from her carriage to the 
house, she seated herself immediately on her entrance, 
and then held out her hand, first to Uncle Adam, 
who would not take it, next to Lady Eossville, with 
an affectionate shake, and lastly to Anne, whom she 
scarcely touched. 

" This is the second time I have been out," said 
she, speaking in a languid affected tone, and applying 
a smelling-bottle to her nose ; " and I feel quite 
fatigued with the exertion of walking from the 
carriage here." 

" I am sorry to hear you have been unwell," said 
Lady Eossville ; " nothing serious, I hope f 

"Good gracious. Lady Eossville !" exclaimed Mrs. 
Waddell, roused into energy ; " have you forgot that 
I have been confined f 

" Oh — I — I beg pardon," said Gertrude, as some 
confused notion darted across her brain of having 
heard of some such event when in London. 

"The Major announced it to Mrs. St. Clair, I 
know," said the lady. 

" Yes — very true — I had forgot ; but I " 

" And you must have seen it in the papers ; I know 
the Major sent it to all the papers." 

"He had very little to do," observed Uncle 
Adam. 

"What paper do you get?" demanded Mrs. Major, 
determined to dive to the bottom of this mystery. 



302 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I seldom read any but the 'Morning Post.' " 

"And was it not there?" 

" Perhaps — very hkely ; I daresay it was; but— 



" You know if it had been there you must have 
seen it, and it wasn't a thing to overlook. I must let 
the Major know that, and have it inquired into. I 
know he sent it to every one of the papers ; I know 
that perfectly." 

Lady Eossville now thought she recollected Mrs. 
St. Clair mentioning an heir to the race of Waddells ; 
and by way of atoning for her lapse she said, " I hope 
your little boy is quite well ?" 

"Boy!" exclaimed the still more exasperated lady; 
"it happens to be a girl ! and I assure you the Major 
and I were much better pleased ; we were both very 
anxious for a girl ; for although, where there is a title 
in the family, it is natural to wish for a son, yet we 
both think it is of the greatest consequence the eldest 
should be a girl, so it was a great gratification to us ; 
it was just what we wanted." 

"Very true ; I beg your pardon." 

But the outraged mother turned towards Mr. 
Eamsay. " I am come, uncle, to make a request in 
the name of my little miss, whom we must really think 
of having christened some of these days. As the 
Major is an Episcopalian, we will, of course, have it 
done according to that service ; and we hope you will 
Idndly officiate as godfather upon the occasion." 

At this proposal Uncle Adam looked "black as 
night, fierce as ten furies;" and he seemed on the point 



THE INHERITANCE. 303 

of uttering some awful anathema, when suddenly 
checking himself, he said in one of his alarmingly 
mild tones, " I've nae great objections ; provided I'm 
to ha'e the bairn called after me." 

Mrs. Waddell was confounded. On the one hand, 
that was all but declaring the child his heir ; on the 
other, Adam Waddell was rather an uncouth appella- 
tion for a young lady. But then a movable tail 
might be tacked to Adam; she might be Adam to 
him, and Adamine, or Adamella, or Adamintha, to the 
rest of the world ; and Mrs. Major inwardly chuckled 
at the proposal, though she resolved at the same time 
to enhance the value of the concession. She there- 
fore said — 

"Why, to tell you the truth, uncle, I had fixed in 
my own mind to have our little miss called after the 
Major, although he declares she must be named after 
me; but I think Andromache is such a beautiful 
name, and so off the common " 

" Andrew Mackaye's a very gude name for her, to 
be sure," said Uncle Adam, gravely. 

" Good gracious, uncle ! such a way of pronouncing 
Andromache ! However, I shall give up all thoughts 
of that, since you are so anxious to have our missy 
named after you " 

"Weel," said Uncle Adam, with a savage smile; 
" that's a' settled ; for you'll no object to a bit trifling 
addition to the name, for it's rather short and pookit 
— isna'tf 

" Why, to tell the truth I think it is, and an addi- 



304 THE INHERITANCE. 

tion would certainly be an improvement ; Adamintha, 
for instance ?" 

"I like a name that has some meaning in't, and 
the name that ye're to ca' your bairn after me maun 
be Adamant ; for I can tell baith you and her that 
Adamant you'll find me to the last generation o' you." 

The natural man here broke out, and Adam was 
himself again. 

"Eeally, uncle, you have the oddest ways," began 
the lady, affecting to laugh, in order to cover her 
confusion; "so we shall say no more about it at 
present. I shall leave it to the Major and you to 
settle it; and " — addressing Lady Eossville — " when it 
does take place, we hope, cousin, you will be one of 
the godmothers, and favour us with your company on 
the occasion ; and, I flatter myself, your god-daughter 
will not discredit you. Dr. Bambleton says she is, 
without exception, the largest and finest child he ever 
beheld, and just her father's picture." 

Lady Eossville bowed, then rose to take her leave, 
and motioned Anne to accompany her. 

" Bless me ! " exclaimed Mrs. Waddell, "is it 
possible, Anne, that you are flaunting about in a fine 
open carriage ? I had no idea you would have done 
anything so dissipated. What will the synod say to 
that 1 " in an aff'ected whisper. 

Anne was too meek to retort, but Uncle Adam 
was always ready to take up the cudgels for the 
oppressed. 

"Are you no satisfied wi' ha'in' a chaise o' your 



THE INHERITANCE. 305 

ain, but you maun envye your sister, puir thing ! a 
ride in other folks' r' 

" Envy ! " repeated Mrs. Major, with a toss, 
" I'm sure I don't know what I should envy her or any 
one else for. As for four horses, I could have them 
whenever I choose, but I greatly prefer a pair; so 
what I have to envy I'm sure I don't know " — with 
an affected laugh of contempt. 

" It's a pity you should be at a loss for something 
to wrack your envye upon," said Uncle Adam, as he 
opened his little old bureau, and took out the identical 
£500 bill he had received from Lady Rossville, and 
which had lain there ever since : " Ha'e, my dear," 
to Anne, "there's something for you to begin the 
world wi' — see what it is." 

Anne looked at the bill, and was too much over- 
whelmed to be able to speak, but the glow that over- 
spread her face, and the tears of joy that stood in her 
soft blue eyes, spoke volumes. Uncle Adam saw her 
vainly attempting to thank him, and patting her on 
the shoulder, said, " You needna fash to say onything 
about it, so gang your ways. Ha'e you a pocket to 
pit it inl" and he almost thrust her out at the 
door. 

Mrs. Waddell was now past speaking. She was 
to have waited for the Major, whom she had per- 
mitted to go to a meeting in the County Hall, but to 
wait was impossible. She instantly drove off, and 
called the Major away from his business to attend to 
her injuries, and consult whether it would not be 

VOL. II. X 



306 THE INHERITANCE. 

possible to cognosce Uncle Adam, and get the editor 
of the " Morning Post " put in the pillory. 

So much time had been spent at Bellevue and 
Uncle Adam's that Lady Eossville found she had 
little to bestow upon her aunts. She had pleasure, 
however, in seeing them, and in seeing that in 
many things she had contributed to their enjoyments. 
Their rooms were filled with the choicest flowers and 
plants from Eossville. Some beautiful Scriptural en- 
gravings, which she had sent them, decorated their 
walls ; and she had filled an empty space at one end of 
the room with a pretty bookcase filled with well-chosen 
books. All these things her aunts were at pains to 
point out to her, and to tell her what pleasure her 
kind considerate gifts had aff'orded them. She pressed 
them to come to Eossville for a few days, while her 
mother and she were quite alone, for even Lady Betty 
was absent on a visit ; but Aunt Mary was too much 
of an invalid to leave home, and her sister never 
quitted her; so, with many thanks, the kind offer 
was declined, and they parted still more favourably 
impressed with each other. 



CHAPTEE XXXIX. 

•* This is the state of man : in prosperous fortune 
A shadow passing light, throws to the ground 
Joy's baseless fabric ; in adversity 
Comes malice with a sponge moisten'd in gall, 
And wipes each beauteous character away. " 

iEsCHYLUS. 

The weather had now set in wet. Everything without 
was cheerless, within was dull ; and surrounded with 
all that wealth and luxury could furnish, Lady Ross- 
ville felt that neither could protect their possessors 
against weariness and satiety. Delmour had taught 
her to despise the society of the neighbourhood, and 
since her return she had kept rather aloof from any 
intercourse; but she would now have been glad of 
any one to break the tedium of the maternal Ute-brtUe. 
Her reading, her music, her drawing, her embroidery, 
were all tried, and all failed to interest or amuse; 
for her ardent but ill-regulated mind sought in every 
occupation not the medicine to cure, but the aliment 
to feed her distempered fancy. Delmour voluntarily 
absent from her was the idea that haunted her day 
and night. To look at his picture, to shed tears over 
it, to begin letters of reproach only to be torn, to 
think of whether she ought ever to see him again, 



308 THE INHERITANCE. 

were the chief resources against the weariness of ex- 
istence. 

The third day of incessant rain was drawing to a 
close. The mother and daughter were together in the 
saloon, when the Countess rose and opened a window, 
for the fifth time within the last hour, to see whether 
the rain was not abating; but it fell thicker than 
ever ; everything was dripping, but there was not a 
breath of wind to relieve the surcharged trees of their 
moisture ; no living thing was to be seen, except now 
and then a bird which shot silently past ; not a sound 
was to be heard, except the sullen roar of the river, 
as it was urged along beyond its natural course. 

Lady Eossville in despair was about to shut the 
window, when, dimly discernible through the mist 
and rain, she descried a carriage approaching. 

"It is Delmour, after all," thought she, with a 
throb of delight ; "he has meant to take me by sur- 
prise !" and all sadness and ennui fled at that idea. 

"Mamma — it^is — he is — there is a carriage," cried 
she in all the flutter of joy, as a hack chaise-and-four, 
with one gentleman inside, wheeled rapidly round to 
the entrance, and was lost to sight. 

In a second the door was thrown open ; no name 
was announced ; but, preceded by the groom of the 
chambers, there entered — Lewiston ! 

At sight of him Gertrude stood immovable, while 
Mrs. St. Clair, uttering a shriek, clapped her hands 
before her eyes, as if to shut out the dreadful appari- 
tion. He only smiled at this salutation, and approach- 



THE INHERITANCE. 309 

ing the Countess, held out his hand to her with the 
freedom of an old acquaintance ; but her cheeks 
glowed with indignation while she turned from him 
with an air of lofty disdain. He looked at her for 
a moment with an expression half menacing, half 
ironical, then turned to Mrs. St. Clair, who, trembling 
and convulsed, rested her head upon a table, as if not 
daring to look up. 

" This intrusion is too much," said the Countess, 
as she moved towards the bell ; but in passing, her 
mother caught her gown with almost frantic energy, 
and without raising her head, exclaimed in a low 
gasping tone, "Gertrude, Gertrude — have mercy 
upon me !" Then making a violent effort, she rose, 
and tottered rather than walked, a few steps towards 
Lewiston, and extending her hands, tried to welcome 
him ; but her face was ghastly, and the words died 
upon her lips. 

"Why, what is all this f said he, in his usual tone 
of familiar assurance, as he took her hands in his; 
" you look as though you had secii a ghost, my good 
lady, instead of an old friend. But don't be afraid, I 
am not from the other world, only from the wrong 
side of this one, with my honest Trudge here," patting 
a great sneaking lurcher, which stuck to him like a 
bur. And he laughed. 

" Pardon me," said Mrs. St. Clair ; " but the sur- 
prise — I believed you — I " But her lips seemed 

parched, and her tongue as though it clove to the 
roof of her mouth ; she could not proceed. 



310 THE INHERITANCE. 

"It must be apparent to you, sir," said Lady Eoss- 
villa haughtily, while yet her heart trembled within 
her, "that your presence was unlooked for — is un- 
welcome," added she, as, even while she spoke, he 
seated himself, and smiled saucily. 

Her indignation got the better of her fear. 

"I know not who you are," said she, again ap- 
proaching the bell; "and I receive no visitors who 
are unknown to me." 

Again Mrs. St. Clair caught her. "Gertrude, 
dearest Gertrude, be quiet; all will be well." 

" The Countess was going to order her servants to 
show me to the door, was shef demanded Lewiston 
in the same insulting tone of irony ; " but her Lady- 
ship may spare herself the trouble ; I have sent off 
the chaise. This will be my home for some time, will 
it not f to Mrs. St. Clair. 

Lady Eossville disengaged herself from her mother, 
and rang the bell with violence. 

" Gertrude, will you destroy mef exclaimed Mrs. 
St. Clair, in a voice of agony that thrilled to her 
daughter's heart, and made her pause. When the 
summons was answered, " Nothing — nothing, Thomp- 
son," cried Mrs. St. Clair eagerly to the servant; " shut 
the door ; that's all." 

Gertrude's face was in a glow with the emotions 
that struggled in her breast. To be thus braved in 
her own house, her resentment mocked, her power, as 
it were, annihilated ; her mother trembling before a 
menial, or, at least, one whom she herself only recog- 



THE INHERITANCE. 311 

nised as the husband of a menial ; her brain felt as on 
fire, and she stood speechless from excess of agitation. 

" So you thought, I suppose, I had gone to Davy's 
Locker r' said Lewiston, addressing Mrs. St. Clair. 
" I read the account of the shipwreck of the Dauntless 
— by-the-bye, it was in the same paper with the old 
gentleman's death, for these things are sometimes a 
long while of reaching us on t'other side the Atlantic ; 
so, when I saw how the land lay, thinks I, 'tis time 
I was off to pay my respects to the Countess. She 
hasn't given me a very kind reception, though. But 
wasn't it a luckiness that I had changed my ship? 
Some poor devil of a Jack Lapslie it was, I think, 
was in a hurry to be off, and I gave up my berth to 
him, and waited for the next, the Hebe; wasn't I 
good-natured? But I am very good-natured, and 
virtue, you know, is always its own reward — eh ? " 

"If such are your friends," said Lady Eossville, 
addressing her mother, in a voice almost inarticulate, 
"this house is no longer a residence for me;" and 
again ringing the bell, which was instantly answered 
(probably from Mr. Thompson having stationed him- 
self outside the door), she desired her carriage to be 
got ready immediately; then rushing past the servant, 
she flew to her own apartment. There her exas- 
perated spirit gave way to tears, and she wept in 
uncontrollable agony. In a few minutes she was 
followed by Mrs. St Clair ; but on her entrance 
Gertrude turned away her head from her, as if deter- 
mined to listen to nothing she could say. 



312 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Gertrude ! " said her mother in a deep and 
agitated voice ; but she made no answer. 

"Gertrude!" cried she again, as she would have 
taken her hand ; but the Countess withdrew it. 

"Gertrude!" repeated she, and she sank on her 
knees at her daughter's feet. 

Lady Eossville started up in horror; but her 
mother clung to her gown. 

"Do not turn from me," cried she wildly; "but 
tell me — can I do more to soften you 1 On my knees 
I beg of you to have mercy upon me !" 

"Oh !" exclaimed Gertrude, with a shudder, as she 
sought to raise her mother. 

" No ; I have to beg for my life — for my fame — 
at your hands " 

"This is too dreadful!" exclaimed the Countess. 
"If you would not drive me to distraction, rise." 

" Will you then hear me ? " 

"I will — I will — anything but this." 

Mrs. St Clair rose. "Gertrude, you may bring 
me yet lower than you have now seen me — you may 
bring me to my grave. Oh, that I were already 
there !" cried she, with a burst of tears. 

"Tell me — only tell me — the meaning of this 
horrid mystery," said Gertrude, trying to speak 
calmly; "tell me why that man dares to treat me 
as he d oes ? " 

"Oh, do not — in mercy to yourself and me — do 
not ask me " 

Lady Eossville stood for some moments with her 



THE INHERITANCE. 313 

eyes bent upon the ground, while her colour gradually 
rose till her very brow was crimsoned; then, in a 
voice of assumed calmness, which only spoke repressed 
agony, she said, speaking slowly — 

"Am I the daughter of Thomas St. Clair?" Then 
raising her clasped hands to her forehead, she pressed 
them upon it, as if to still the throbbings of her brain. 

Mrs. St. Clair looked upon her with a wild and 
ghastly stare; her very lips turned white, and she 
seemed as if bereft of all power of reply ; but by a 
sudden revulsion, the blood flew to her face, and she 
said in a tone of bitterness — 

" Even this humiliation I will endure. As I hope 
to be saved, I was ever a true and faithful wife — so 
judge me Heaven ! " There was a fervour and solem- 
nity in the appeal which carried conviction. 

Lady Eossville uncovered her eyes, and fetched 
her breath, and a pause ensued, which, after some 
minutes, Mrs. St. Clair gathered courage to break — 

" It is in vain that you would seek to penetrate 
the mysterious tie which links my fate with that of 
Lewiston, and which extends even to you ; and it will 
be no less vain to attempt to free yourself from his 
power. Hear me, Gertrude — hear me ; you promised 
you would. If it were possible^ if it were in human 
endeavour, can you for a moment imagine that I would 
submit to what you have witnessed?" and tears of 
passion dropped from her eyes. 

" Still less can I imagine any cause which can make 
you submit to it," said the Countess ; " and it is im- 



314 THE INHERITANCE. 

possible that / should. I will not — I cannot do it, be 
the consequences what they may." 

At that moment her maid entered to say her Lady- 
ship's carriage was waiting, and while she spoke the 
rain fell like a water-spout. 

"That is enough; let it wait," said her mistress, 
who, in the tumult of her mind, forgot all f eeHngs of 
humanity for man or beast. The Abigail withdrew, 
to agree with Mr. Thompson that something strange 
was certainly going on, but what they could not divine; 
the gentleman in the saloon had ordered up some 
luncheon for himself, and was eating and drinking to 
his heart's content, while the ladies were above stairs 
all in tears. *"Twas strange, 'twas passing strange 1" 

No sooner was this interruption over than Mrs. St. 
Clair exclaimed, " Go — go, then ! but I will also go ; 
not in my carriage, attended as you are, but even as 
I am, on foot and alone, without even a cloak to cover 
me. It is no idle threat ; I here solemnly swear, that 
if you this day leave your house I too leave it — never 
to return!" 

It required no very high feelings of filial duty to 
turn with horror from such an alternative, aggravated 
as it was by every circumstance which could give effect 
to the picture — her mother but lately recovered from 
a severe illness, and yet far from well, driven from 
her daughter's house, exposed to the inclemency of 
the weather — it was too dreadful to be dwelt upon. 
Lady Rossville felt as though her senses would forsake 
her, and she said, in a vacant dejected manner, "Do 



THE INHERITANCE. 315 

what you will." Mrs. St. Clair seized her daughter's 
hands, and pressed them repeatedly to her lips, calling 
her at the same time by every endearing epithet ; but 
Gertrude sat in passive endurance, and as if scarcely 
conscious of the caresses lavished upon her. Her 
mother then rang for her maid to dismiss the carriage, 
and ordered her to bring some drops from her dress- 
ing-room for the Countess, who had been overcome, 
she said, at sight of an old friend of her father's ; and 
having both administered and partaken of them, she 
saw her laid upon a couch to rest, and leaving her in 
charge of Masham, she returned to the saloon to her 
guest. 



CHAPTER XL. 

"But that shall gall thee most, 
Will be the worthless and vile company 
With whom thou must be thrown into these straits. " 

Dante. 

" doux momens d'horreur empoisonnes ! " Alzire. 

The hour of dinner came, and when Mrs. St. Clair 
returned to her daughter's dressing-room she found 
her as she had left her, extended upon a couch, and 
deaf to all Miss Masham's hints of dressing. Mrs. St. 
Clair dismissed the maid, and then, in a soothing 
voice, said — " Gertrude, my dearest, you will come to 
dinner. I have had a long conversation with Lewiston; 
he has promised not to offend you with the bluntness 
of his American manners. But you ought to make 
allowance for them ; he is an independent citizen of 
a Eepublican State, where all, you know, is liberty 
and equality; but he means no offence, and will 
endeavour to adapt himself more to our notions of 
propriety while he remains, which I expect will be for 
a very short time." 

" While he remains I shall keep my own apart- 
ment," said Gertrude, without raising her head. 

" Impossible ! " exclaimed Mrs. St Clair in agita- 



THE INHERITANCE. 317 

tion; "he will never consent — that is, I cannot 
consent. Dearest Gertrude, if you would not have 
me on my knees again, rise and come with me." 

Lady Rossville sighed heavily and rose. 

" You will suffer Masham, my love, to dress you 



"No; I will not be dressed to-day," said the 
Countess in an absolute manner. 

"At least, you will have your hair arranged a 
little, my love ? " 

*'I will go as I am," said Lady Rossville in the 
same self-willed tone, " or not at all." 

Mrs. St. Clair saw that it would not do to con- 
tend. She gave up the point, and accompanied by 
her daughter, descended to the dining-room. 

Lady Rossville's appearance certainly was not in 
unison with the pomp and order and high -keeping 
of everything that surrounded her. Her dress was 
deranged, her hair was dishevelled, the cheek on 
which she had rested was of a crimson hue, while the 
other was of a deadly pale ; and though she passed on 
with an even loftier air than usual, it was without 
once lifting her eyes from the ground. 

"I hope your Ladyship feels recruited," said 
Lewiston, as she took her place at table. He 
evidently meant to be polite, but there was something 
in the tone that grated on her ear. She started at 
the sound of his voice, and a faint flush overspread 
her whole face as she slightly bent her head in 
reply. 



318 THE INHERITANCE. 

" I found the Countess fast asleep when I went to 
her," said Mrs. St. Clair quickly, as if answering for 
her daughter ; " but she has not slept away that vile 
headache, it seems. However, we are such a little 
quiet party that I persuaded her to appear. We shall 
not expect you to talk, my love, but do eat some- 
thing. The soup is very good ; I think Brumeau has 
even surpassed himself to-day." 

*' You keep a French cook ? " demanded Lewiston ; 
" that's a confounded expense, is it not ? " 

" Not for Lady Eossville," said Mrs. St. Clair, with 
a blush at the vulgarity of her friend, as she saw a 
sneer on the faces even of the well-bred gentlemen of 
the second table. 

"Ah, but there are better ways and worse of 
spending money. However, another plateful of it, if 
you please, my Lady. You may give me two spoon- 
fuls : there — that's it. Now, will you do me the 
favour to drink a glass of wine ? " 

" The Countess is so poor a wine-drinker," again 
interposed Mrs. St. Clair, " that you had better accept 
of me as her substitute." 

"Come, we shall all drink together. Come, my 
Lady, take a glass to drive away the blue devils this 
bad day." 

Gertrude's agony was scarcely endurable ; but she 
still sat immovable, with her eyes bent upon her plate, 
though without even attempting to taste what Mrs. 
St. Clair had put upon it. 

" What have we got here ? " said Lewiston, as he 



THE INHERITANCE. 319 

uncovered one of the dishes and looked at it as at 
something he had never seen before. 

" Blanquette de poularde, sir," said the mattre d^hdtel. 

"Blankate day pollard ! " repeated he. " Shall I 
help your Ladyship to some of them 1 Come, let me 
persuade you." 

Gertrude with difficulty made out a "No, thank 
you;" but Mrs. St. Clair was ready, as usual, to atone 
for her deficiencies. 

" You seldom eat, I think, my love, till the second 
course. I hope there is something coming that you 
like. What was it you liked so much t'other day, do 
you remember 1 " 

" I don't know," said the Countess, with a sigh and 
an absent look. 

" Jourdain, you ought to observe what Lady Ross- 
ville likes. How stupid that I can't think what it was 
you said was so good. Was it perdreau sauU au 
truffes?" 

" Perhaps ; I can't tell," said Lady Eossville, with 
an air that showed she was rather oppressed than 
gratified with this show of attention. 

Meanwhile, Lewiston was eating and drinking with 
all the ardour of a hungry man, and the manners of a 
vulgar one. He tasted of everything, evidently from 
curiosity ; and, though it was apparent that the style 
was something he had not been accustomed to, yet he 
maintained the same forward ease, as though he were 
quite at home. 

" Well, that may do for once," said he, after having 



320 THE INHERITANCE. 

finished; "but in America we should scarcely call 
this a dinner. Eh, Trudge ? " to his dog. " Why, 
another such as myself would have looked silly here ; 
I like to see a good joint or two." 

Mrs. St. Clair tried to laugh, but she coloured 
again, as she said — "Lady Rossville and I make such 
poor figures by ourselves at anything of a substantial 
repast, that our dinners have, indeed, dwindled away 
into very fairy -like entertainments. But, Jourdain, 
you will remember to let us have something more 
solid to-morrow." 

" What do you think, for instance, of a fine, jolly, 
juicy, thirty -pound round of well -corned beef and 
parsnips 'i or a handsome leg of pork and pease- 
pudding, and a couple of fat geese well stuffed with 
sage and onions, swimming in apple -sauce? Ah! 
these are the dishes for me ! " and he rubbed his hands 
with horrid glee. 

It was a relief when dinner was over, and the 
servants had withdrawn; for although the degrada- 
tion was not lessened, at least there was no one to 
witness it, unless it were the portraits of the Rossville 
family, as they frowned from their frames on the rude 
plebeian who seemed thus to have usurped their place. 
Gertrude had wrought herself up to a pitch of forbear- 
ance which it required all her powers of mind to 
maintain. A thousand times she was on the point of 
giving way to her feelings and ending this hateful 
scene ; but as she caught her mother's eye fixed on 
her with a look of imploring agony she checked her- 



THE INHERITANCE. 321 

self. "No," thought she, "I will bear all for this 
night ; but worlds shall not tempt me to submit to 
such another;" and she sat in a sort of marble endur- 
ance, while yet every nerve and fibre were stretched 
as upon a rack. Like all vulgar people, Lewiston told 
so many good stories of and about himself, and talked 
so very loud, and laughed so very heartily, reason or 
none, that he completely deadened every other sound. 
A slight commotion in the hall, caused by an arrival, 
had not therefore been heard by any of the party ; 
when suddenly a servant entered, and approaching 
the Countess said, *' Colonel Delmour, your Ladyship;" 
and scarcely had he spoken when Delmour himself 
advanced with eager step. Gertrude rose to welcome 
him with a rush of delight, which for the moment 
absorbed every other consideration. But the first 
rapturous emotion over, it was instantly succeeded by 
the painful consciousness of the strange and unac- 
countable situation in which he found her. 

"Mr. Lewiston, Colonel Delmour," said Mrs. St. 
Clair in almost breathless agitation ; " a friend of the 
family," added she, as she marked the haughty, con^ 
descending bow with which Delmour acknowledged 
the introduction. But before Lewiston had opened 
his lips, his assumed overdone air of nonchalance, 
his vulgar but confident deportment, the very cut of 
his clothes — all at a single glance betrayed to Colonel 
Delmour's practised eye and refined tact that this 
friend of the family was no gentleman. There was 
something so commanding in his own presence, such a 

VOL. II. Y 



322 THE INHERITANCE. 

decided air of superiority about him, that even the 
American, coarse and blunt as he was in feehng and 
perception, seemed for the moment overawed, or at 
least was silenced. Gertrude began to breathe as she 
thought her lover had come to deliver her from the 
hateful bondage in which she was held by this man 
and her mother, who were both, in the jockey phrase, 
evidently thrown out by his arrival. It was not till 
he saw the Countess seated at table that Delmour was 
struck with her appearance, as contrasted with all 
around her ; she who was always so gay and splendid 
in her evening dress was now in a morning deshaUlU ; 
her hair was beautiful even in disorder, but still it was 
in disorder ; and although nothing could bereave her 
of her loveliness and her grace, yet she looked ill, and 
was embarrassed, and altogether unlike herself. 

" You have been ill, Gertrude f said Delmour in a 
low voice, and speaking in Italian, while he gazed 
upon her with looks of the deepest interest. 

"No, nothing; only since the morning," answered 
she. 

"And what has happened since the morning?" 
inquired he, still speaking in the same language, while 
he turned a quick glance upon the stranger. 

"Of all those pictures," said Lewiston, throwing 
himself back in his chair, and addressing Mrs. St. 
Clair in very bad French, as he pointed to the family 
portraits, "which do you reckon worth most money?" 

Mrs. St. Clair's face crimsoned while she replied 
she was no judge of pictures ; and Gertrude already 



THE INHERITANCE. 323 

wished Delmour had not come. She could not answer 
his question, but scarcely knowing what she said, she 
asked whether he had dined. 

"Yes; I was detained at Darleton for want of 
horses, and was obliged to have recourse to a greasy- 
mutton-chop and a bottle of bad port by way of pas- 
time; and after all I could only get one wretched 
pair, who " 

" I had the start of you there, sir," said the Ameri- 
can, rudely interrupting him ; " I had four horses from 
Darleton. By Jupiter ! how one does go with four 
horses !" and he chucked and made a gesture as 
though he were driving. 

This was too much. Lady Eossville started up, 
and forgetting all her mother's cautions, said to Del- 
mour, " Since you have dined there is no occasion to 
remain here;" and taking his offered arm, with a 
haughty air she led the way to the drawing-room, 
leaving Mrs. St. Clair and Lewiston confounded at her 
temerity ; but as they passed on Mrs. St. Clair's voice 
was heard in accents of entreaty to her guest. 

" In the name of Heaven what does all this meani" 
said Colonel Delmour when the Countess and he were 
alone. But pride, shame, indignation, checked Ger- 
trude's utterance, and she could not answer. 

" Something is wrong ; tell me what it is. Who is 
that man 1 " 

Gertrude tried to repress her feelings while she 
answered — 

" He is an American." 



324 THE INHERITANCE. 

"That may be; but certainly not an American 
gentleman." 

"He is an old acquaintance of my father's, it 
seems." 

"Then you have seen him before f 

" Yes, but he only arrived to-day, and, I trust, will 
depart to-morrow ; it is unfortunate that you should 
have come at the very time when we are encumbered 
with such a guest." 

"You don't think I have come too soon, I hope?" 
said Delmour, with a smile. 

" Sooner, certainly, than I had reason to expect 
you," said Gertrude, roused to recollection of the slight 
put upon her by her lover, " considering what interest- 
ing pursuits you were engaged in." 

Delmour coloured sHghtly, and in some confusion 
said — 

" So you really were taken by my excuses, lame as 
they were ? The fact was I was rather unwell at the 
time I wrote, and not caring to say so to you, I wrote 
— I forget what; something about making a fishing 
party with Arabin, was it not ? " 

" No matter what it was," cried Gertrude, " since 
it was not so ; though I would rather you had told me 
the truth at once." But the fact was even so as he 
had first stated it; but, whether he had taken the 
alarm at receiving no letter from the Countess, or that 
he had tired of his company, or that some sudden 
freak had seized him, he suddenly left his party and 
set off by himself for Eossville, leaving them to follow 



THE INHEEITANCE. 325 

at their own time. Gertrude's heart felt lightened of 
half its load. Delmour loved her as much as ever, 
and he was there to protect her. What had she to 
fear ? And again her sanguine, buoyant spirit danced 
in her heart and sparkled in her eyes. 

" Well, you will endure this odious American for 
to-night," said she; "and to-morrow will surely rid us 
of him; but he is so rude and overbearing in his 
manners that I fear you will scarcely be able to 
tolerate him. Promise me, then, that you won't 
notice him; I am so afraid of your quarrelling." 

"Quarrelling!" repeated Delmour, with a smile of 
contempt; "no, I expect to be much amused with 
him ; but as for quarrelling with such a person ! " 

" Oh ! he is not a person to be amused with," said 
Gertrude in alarm; "he is coarse and violent, and 
must not be provoked. Do not, for Heaven's sake, 
attempt to make game of him ! " 

"What has brought such a person heref 

" I cannot tell ; but promise me that you will, for 
this night, bear with him, such as he isV 

Delmour promised, but smiled at the same time at 
the importance she attached to so insignificant a being. 
Nothing more was said, for just then Mrs. St. Clair 
entered, with traces of agitation still visible on her 
countenance. Gertrude expected that her mother 
would have taken notice of her abrupt retreat from 
the dining-room, but she did not speak. She seated 
herself with assumed calmness, and began stringing 
some pearls belonging to one of her bracelets; but 



326 THE INHERITANCE. 

her hand shook, and her thoughts were evidently 
otherwise employed. In a few minutes she rose and 
rang, the bell ; when it was answered, " Have you got 
the cigars for Mr. Lewiston?" inquired she of the 
servant. 

"I do not know, ma'am," replied Mr. Thompson, 
whose business it was to adjust chairs, not to furnish 
pipes, and who seemed to resent the question by the 
cold pomposity of his reply. 

"Inquire, then, and let me know immediately." 

"So, in addition to his other agreeable qualities, 
Mr. Lewiston is a smoker," said Lady Eossville, 
provoked at this pollution of her beautiful apartment. 
But she was sorry she had said it, for Mrs. St. Clair 
only answered with a sigh so profound that it seemed 
to come from the very bottom of her heart. Some 
minutes elapsed, and again she rang. "Have the 
cigars been taken to Mr. Lewiston V and she seemed 
relieved when an affirmative was returned. 

"While Mr. Lewiston is indulging his taste, then," 
said the Countess, "I must go and dress. The old 
adage of better late than never is certainly illustrative 
of my case to-night ;" and she turned from the mirror, 
ashamed for the first time of the image it reflected. 

" And the best apology I can make for my boots," 
said Colonel Delmour, " is to take them off as fast as 
possible;" and the Countess and her lover severally 
retired to their toilets. 



CHAPTER XLL 

'* What he did amiss was rather through rudeness and want of 
judgment than any malicious meaning. " — Hayward. 

Upon returning to the drawing-room, Gertrude found 
her mother and Colonel Delmour seated at opposite 
sides of the room — he lounging over some books of 
engravings, she with her head resting on her hands 
as if buried in thought. Upon her daughter's entrance 
she looked up. " Have we had coffee f inquired she, 
in a way which betrayed the wandering of her mind ; 
but at that moment Lewiston came into the room, in 
the loud noisy manner of an under-bred man who 
had taken rather too much wine, and she seemed 
instantly roused to recollection. She pointed to a 
seat on the sofa where she was sitting, but his eyes 
were riveted on the Countess, whom he did not at 
first recognise in her change of dress. When he did, 
he exclaimed, " By Jove ! I didn't know you, you're 
so rigged out — why, what's going to be acted now? 
The deuce ! I was almost thinking of my bed;" and 
he yawned. Lady Rossville crimsoned, but she caught 
her mother's eye, and she said in a low voice to Del- 
mour, "Take no notice;" and she began to talk 



328 THE INHERITANCE. 

earnestly to him about some of the engravings he was 
looking at, while Mrs. St. Clair said — 

" We have brought London hours to the country 
with us, but we must make a reform." 

"Ha, reform! yes, that's a very good word. I 
like the word reform," interrupted the American. 
"Eeform, reform," repeated he; "yes, it's a good 
thing, is it not, my Lady ^ And I will reform your 
fire in the first place ;" and he began to stir and beat 
it in the most annoying manner; then threw down 
the poker with a horrid clang, and drawing his chair 
close to the fire, he put his feet actually within the 
fender, and rasped and crunched the ashes which he 
had scattered all over the hearth. Lady Eossville 
was on the point of rising and leaving the room, 
when Mrs. St. Clair crossed to where she was sitting, 
and, under pretence of looking at one of the pictures, 
she pressed her daughter's hand in a significant man- 
ner, while, in a low voice, and speaking very rapidly 
to Delmour in French, she said, — 

"I must beg your forbearance for American man- 
ners — you will oblige me by it." 

This was the first time Mrs. St. Clair had ever 
addressed Colonel Delmour on easy or friendly terms ; 
their intercourse hitherto had been marked either 
by constraint or enmity, and now, all of a sudden, 
she condescended to sue to him. Gertrude could 
scarcely credit her senses, and even Delmour looked 
surprised, while he answered with a bow. 

After sitting two or three minutes whistling, with 



THE INHERITANCE. 329 

his hands clasping one of his knees, Lewiston started 
up, and pushing back his chair in the same rude, 
violent manner that marked his every action, he 
planted himself directly before the fire, so as to screen 
it from every one else, in the manner usually practised 
by vulgar ill-bred men. All this was excruciating 
to Lady Eossville and Colonel Delmour, both so ele- 
gantly quiet and refined in all their habits and move- 
ments, and they exchanged looks with each other, as 
much as to say, Ought this to be endured ? 

Mrs. St. Clair perceived it, and hastily said — 

" How shall we pass the evening 1 Gertrude, my 
dear, will you give us some music? Mr. Lewiston, 
are you fond of music ; or should you prefer 
cards 1 " 

" Quite agreeable to either, ma'am ; I like a song — 
none of your Italian gibberish though — and have no 
objections to a game ; but, by-the-bye, my Lady, can 
you play at draughts'? that's the game for me !" 

" No, sir," was the Countess's cold, laconic reply. 

"That's a pity, but I'll teach you; you have a 
draught-board, surely 1 Ah! there's a table — still 
better. Come, my Lady," and he touched her arm. 

Colonel Delmour looked as if he would have shot 
him. 

"Excuse me, sir," said Lady Eossville, drawing 
back, and colouring with indignation. 

" No, no, come away ; don't be afraid ; you'll soon 
learn ;" and again he took hold of her. 

" Lady Eossville is not accustomed to be so impor- 



330 THE INHERITANCE. 

tuned, sir," said Delmour, while his lip quivered with 
passion. 

" Is Lady Rossville, sir, accustomed to have you for 
her prompter ?" demanded Lewiston, fiercely. 

"Colonel Delmour — Mr. Lewiston!" exclaimed 
Mrs. St. Clair in violent agitation, " I entreat, I beg — 
Mr. Lewiston, I shall be happy to play at draughts 
with you. Lady Rossville cannot play — indeed she 
cannot." 

*' So much the better — so much the better; I like to 
teach people — their duty," added he, with an insolent 
smile, and looking at Colonel Delmour. 

"Another time, then," said Mrs. St. Clair; "but, 
for this evening, accept of me." 

" No, no, I will have my Lady," said the American, 
with all the determination of unconquerable obstinacy. 

"He is either mad or drunk !" exclaimed Delmour 
passionately, "and no company for you;" and rising, 
he took the Countess's hand to lead her away. 

" No, sir, I am neither mad nor drunk, as you will 
find," cried Lewiston, placing himself before them; 
" but I have something to say " 

"Mr. Lewiston !" cried Mrs. St. Clair, with almost 
a shriek, " for Heaven's sake — Gertrude — Colonel Del- 
mour — what is all this ? How childish ! Gertrude, I 
command you as a daughter to sit down to draughts 
with Mr. Lewiston." 

" That's it — that's right " said Lewiston, with 

exultation. Lady Rossville's cheeks glowed, and tears 
of pride and anger stood in her eyes ; she hesitated. 



THE INHERITANCE. 331 

"You must not," said Delmour impetuously. 
"You shall not." 

" For God's sake, obey me !" whispered her mother 
in a voice of agony ; and taking her hand she led her 
to the table. " Sit down, my love," whispered she, 
"and I will play for you — Gertrude, have mercy 
upon me!" and she wrung her daughter's hand as 
the Countess would have drawn back. 

"Do you submit to be so compelled?" cried Delmour, 
almost frantic with rage at the idea of his beautiful 
Countess sitting down to play at draughts with a rude, 
low-bred unknown. 

"Yes, yes," said Gertrude, moved to pity at her 
mother's appeal; " I will try for once ;" and she seated 
herself, and Mrs. St. Clair took a chair close by her. 

Lewiston, satisfied with having carried his point of 
getting Lady Eossville to sit down with him, allowed 
Mrs. St. Clair to play the game for her daughter. He 
entered into it himself with loud boyish delight, rubbed 
his hands, snapped his fingers, swore by Jove ! and 
by Jingo ! and when he came to the castling or 
crowning, always insisted that the Countess should 
perform that ceremony. 

" I will have all my honours from you," said he, 
laughing; "all — all — you shall crown me, you shall 
castle me — shan't she V to Mrs. St. Clair, who looked 
the picture of wretchedness, though she strove to keep 
up with his intemperate mirth. 

"He is certainly mad!" thought Lady Rossville, 
and she began to feel afraid ; she Avished for Delmour ; 



332 THE INHERITANCE. 

but Delmour, in displeasure, had left the apartment, 
and she heard him knocking about the billiard balls 
by himself in an adjoining room. Game after game 
was played, and won by Lewiston with unabated 
energy and delight; till at last Gertrude's patience 
could endure no longer, and she rose with an excla- 
mation of weariness. 

" Well, you have had a good lesson for one night, 
my Lady; let us see how much it has cost you;" and 
he began to count over his winnings, then putting 
them between his hands he rattled them with a glee 
that under other circumstances would have been 
ludicrous. 

"Now, give us a song, my Lady, do — come, 
mamma," to Mrs. St. Clair, "exert your authority; 
I must have a song. Why, I haven't heard you sing 
yet, and I've something of a pipe myself." 

"Lady Eossville has done so much for me that 
I am sure she will not refuse me this request," said 
her mother in an imploring manner, as she took her 
daughter's hand and pressed it tenderly in hers. 

"I cannot sing," said Gertrude, almost choking 
with the conflict of her feelings. 

" What's the matter ? not in tune^ Never mind, 
you'll do very well." 

"The night is nearly over," said Mrs. St. Clair, 
soothingly, but in a whisper, as Lewiston, tired of 
chucking his money, was busy transferring it to a 
large silk purse ; " your compliance may prevent a 
quarrel." 



THE INHERITANCE. 333 

"Would to heaven this were ended!" said Ger- 
trude with emotion, as her mother took her arm and 
led her into the music- room. " Never again shall I 
submit to what I have this day done !" and scalding 
tears burst from her eyes. 

"What! you seem rather piano, my Lady," said 
Lewiston, looking at her with a smile ; *' well, I'll give 
you a song since you won't give me one, and one of 
your own Scotch ones, too — I'm half a Scotchman now 
you know," with a wink to Mrs. St. Clair ; "so here's 
for your glorious Eobert Bruce ! " And he burst out 
with "Scots wha ha'e wi' Wallace bled," in a key 
that made the very walls reverberate the sound. Yet, 
to own the truth, he had a fine, deep, clear voice, and 
sung well in a very vulgar style, with a great deal of 
gesticulation, clenching of hands, stamping of feet, 
and suiting of the action to the words. To that suc- 
ceeded an American song, and another, and another, 
in rapid succession, for his lungs seemed inexhaustible, 
and he sung volumes of odious political songs with 
the same vehemence and enthusiasm, till both Mrs. 
St. Clair and Lady Eossville were ready to faint with 
the fatigue of listening to him. The former, indeed, 
encouraged him to go on by her applause, while at 
the same time she held her daughter's hand, and by 
her looks and gestures constrained her, in spite of 
herself, to remain. To add to the mortification, 
Delmour, attracted by the noise, had entered the 
room, but with a look, expressive of his indignation 
and contempt, had instantly quitted it. 



334 THE INHERITANCE. 

"Now, my Lady, I've done my part, haven't I^ 
I have a right to your song now ; come, I must have 
it ; I never gave up a point in my life. I've got a 
square head, and square heads as well as square toes 
are all obstinate, at least some people call it obstinacy; 
I call it firmness, and I'm firm for your song." 

"This insolence is not to be borne!" exclaimed 
Lady Rossville, starting up and endeavouring to wrest 
her hand from her mother's grasp, that she might 
leave the room ; but she clung to her with fear and 
agony in every lineament. " I will call my servants," 
gasped she. 

Lewiston only whistled. 

" Gertrude, Gertrude ! hear me but this once ; 
this is my last attempt. For such a trifle would you 
drive me to destruction ? It will come soon enough, 
but not now ; spare me, oh ! spare me now ! " 

"There's a pretty daughter for you, by Jingo!" 
exclaimed Lewiston, as the Countess stood with her 
face averted from her mother, who still held her 
hands in spite of her efforts to liberate them. 

Lady Eossville's passion rose. "Come what may 
I care not," cried she; "I command that man to 
leave my house." 

" That's easier said than done, my Lady," returned 
he with the most provoking coolness ; " is it not, my 
good Trudge?" as he pulled his dog by the ear. 
" But come now, give us the song — the night's v^-earing 
on ;" and he was going to have taken her arm to lead 
her to the instrument, when by a sudden effort she 



THE INHERITANCE. 335 

freed herself from her mother's grasp, and rushed into 
the adjoining room, where, throwing herseK on a seat, 
she almost sobbed in the bitterness of her feelings. 
Lewiston's voice, loud, as if in argument, and Mrs. 
St. Clair's, as if in entreaty, were distinctly heard; 
but they added nothing to Lady Eossville's emotion. 
In a few minutes her mother joined her in the wildest 
and most violent agitation. 

" Gertrude," cried she — " I no longer ask your for- 
bearance — your mercy; I see it cannot be!" And 
she wrung her hands in agony. " To-morrow must 
end it Oh that the earth would cover me before to- 
morrow !" 

Violent passion has always the effect of absorbing 
or annihilating all inferior degrees of excitement, and 
Lady Eossville was gradually composed at sight of 
her mother's real despair. She would even have tried 
to soothe her, but at that moment Lewiston entered, 
as if nothing had happened. 

"Well, you have made a fine row," said he, ad- 
dressing Gertrude — "and all for whati Because I 
asked you to sing a song 1 You must be deucedly thin- 
skinned, my Lady, to fly off like a witch in a storm for 
that; you've something to learn yet, I can tell you." 

"She will learn all soon enough," said Mrs. St 
Clair gloomily ; " to-morrow — but let this night pass 



"Not without some supper, I hope; for your 
hlanhUes lie very light upon me, I can tell you;" and 
he laughed heartily at his own witticism. 



336 THE INHERITANCE. 

Lady Rossville rang the bell for some refreshments, 
eager to end this hateful evening, and at the same 
time Delmour made his appearance with evident 
traces of ill-humour visible on his countenance. But 
she felt too happy to see him, on any terms, to resent 
his behaviour; there was protection — there seemed 
even a propriety in his presence; and her looks 
brightened, and her tears passed away, when he came 
and placed himself by her in a manner to screen 
Lewiston from her sight, who was on the opposite 
side of the room making a noise with his dog. 

" You have passed a gay, and of course a pleasant 
evening," said he in a bitter, ironical tone ; " one of 
your guests, at least, has no cause to complain of lack 
of courtesy." 

" Oh ! Delmour," said Gertrude in a tone of 
wretchedness, "do not add to my unhappiness by 
your reproaches ; it is unkind when you see me 

thus " and her heart swelled almost to sufifoca- 

tion. 

" It is degrading to you and myself to suffer this," 
cried he passionately : " This instant I will end it by 
ordering that fellow from your presence." And he 
made a movement towards Lewiston. Gertrude 
caught his arm. 

"No — not now. Suffer him for a little longer; 
to-morrow is to end it. If he does not leave this house 

to-morrow- " she stopped ; a faint red tinged her 

cheek as she gave her hand to Delmour, and said — 
"you shall take me from it." 



THE INHERITANCE. 337 

"Pray Heaven he may remain, then," said Del- 
mour earnestly, " if upon these terms you will indeed 
be mine!" 

Gertrude only sighed ; but it was her firm deter- 
mination, unless this mystery was cleared up, and 
Lewiston left the house, to throw herself on the pro- 
tection of her guardian. Lord Millbank ; and, holding 
herself absolved from her promise to her mother, 
there to have her marriage with Colonel Delmour 
solemnised. 

On Delmour's side the suspicion was that Mrs. 
St. Clair was privately married to Lewiston; and 
much as his pride revolted from such a connection, 
still his interest might benefit by it. Lady Eossville 
would instantly emancipate herself from her mother's 
authority and give him a legal right to protect her ; 
and it would be easy to get rid of the couple by 
agreeing to settle something upon them provided 
they retired to America for life. A tray with refresh- 
ments, such as Lady Eossville and Mrs. St. Clair had 
been in the habit of taking, was now brought in, but 
at which the American expressed great dissatisfaction. 

" Why, these are what we give to our porkers on 
t'other side the water," said he, contemptuously taking 
up a peach — "and as for your French wines and 
liquors, by Jingo ! I wouldn't give a glass of good grog 
for a dozen of 'em. Hark ye, my good friend," to 
one of the servants, " you'll please to lay a bit of a 
cloth for me ; and order your cook to send me up a 
good rasher of bacon, and a brace or two of eggs — a 

VOL. II. Z 



338 THE INHERITANCE. 

Virginian if you have him, and cut at least as thick 
as my finger ; and, Mr. Butler, I'll trouble you for a 
bottle of your best Hollands — that's the thing ; but, 
faith, I'll go down and see the porker cut myself — where 
does your kitchen lie V And away he marched. 

"Let us to bed," said. Mrs. St. Clair, in a tone of 
suppressed torment, and as if taking advantage of 
his absence to leave the room ; her daughter rose to 
accompany her, but she lingered behind a moment to 
say to Delmour — " You will not remain here, I hope ?" 

"No, I shall leave the butcher to use his knife 
upon his porker, and go to my own apartment; I 
pray he may make a good supper here for some nights 
to come," added he, with a smile. 

But Lady Eossville shook her head and sighed, then 
followed her mother to her dressing-room. 

" I will say nothing to-night," cried Mrs. St. Clair 
as she entered; "leave me, then — leave me." 

" At least, mamma, suffer me to stay with you a 
little." 

" Not an instant ; leave me, I say," cried she impa- 
tiently. " What would you have more than my ruin 
and your own? — that, I have told you, you have 
nearly accomplished." 

"Be it so, then," said Gertrude with emotion; 
"there can no ruin surpass the disgrace and igno- 
miny " 

"Peace!" exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair; "you will 
drive me mad;" and she put her hand distractedly 
to her forehead. 



THE INHERITANCE. 339 

Gertrude would have embraced her, but she re- 
pelled her. 

" To-morrow your embrace may be of some value 
to me; to-night it is of none ; it is worse than none — I 
will not have it," and she pushed her daughter from 
her. "Leave me, I command you," cried she vio- 
lently; and Gertrude was obliged to obey. No 
sooner was she outside the door than she heard the 
lock turned upon her, and when her maid came, she 
was refused admittance. Lady Rossville was terrified; 
and she lingered long at her mother's door, and heard 
her walk backwards and forwards, and groan as if in 
anguish ; but when she tapped or spoke to her, she 
was instantly silent, and would make no reply. As 
her apartment communicated with her mother's, several 
times in the course of the night she rose and listened, 
and the same thing went on, and the morning was far 
advanced before, exhausted as she was, she could 
compose herself to sleep. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

" visions ill foreseen ! Better had I 
Liv'd ignorant of future ! so had borne 
My part of evil only." 



Milton. 



When Lady Rossville awoke one subject naturally 
engrossed her mind to the utter exclusion of every 
other. This was the day of her cousin Anne's mar- 
riage, and she had promised to be present ; but the 
thoughts of that never once occurred to her; everything 
was absorbed in the intense interest she felt as to the 
disclosure that was to take place ; or failing that, the 
strong measure which she had determined upon as to 
her own disposal. Upon leaving her own apartment 
she hastened to her mother's, but the door was still 
fastened; she knocked repeatedly, but no answer 
was returned ; she listened, all was silent ; her heart 
trembled within her, and she was on the point of 
calling out, when she bethought her of a back-stair 
communicating with the dressing-room, by which she 
might probably gain access. She was not dis- 
appointed; the door was open, and she entered her 
mother's bedroom ; but it was dark, except here and 
there where a bright ray of sunshine chequered the 



THE INHERITANCE. 341 

floor, and the candles, which had been burning all 
night, cast a sickly gleam as they died away in their 
sockets. Gertrude hastily withdrew a window -cur- 
tain and opened a shutter, and there discovered her 
mother asleep in an arm-chair, in the dress she had 
worn the preceding evening, and which formed an 
imnatural contrast with her situation and appearance. 

A phial, marked Laudanum, stood on a table by 
her, and it was evident that she owed her sleep to 
medicine, not to nature. Such as it was, it was cer- 
tainly not rest that she enjoyed, for she was disturbed 
and agitated — sighed heavily, and muttered some 
unintelligible words, as if in an agony, and Gertrude's 
name was once or twice pronounced with a kind of 
shriek. Shocked beyond expression at beholding her 
mother thus haunted by her sense of wretchedness 
even in sleep. Lady Rossville felt it would be humanity 
to rouse her from such a state, and after a while she 
succeeded. Mrs. St. Clair opened her eyes, but it 
was some time before she came to her recollection, or 
that her daughter could make her comprehend per- 
fectly how and where she was. 

" I fear, mamma, you have taken too much lauda- 
num," said she in alarm, as she looked at the bottle. 

"Too much, and yet not enough," answered her 
mother, with a sigh. 

" Allow me to send for Doctor Bruce," cried the 
Countess in increasing agitation; " you are ill, mamma, 
indeed you are ;" as she pressed her mother's burning 
hand in hers. 



342 THE INHERITANCE. 

"I shall soon be better," said Mrs. St. Clair with 
a still deeper sigh. " What time is it ? I have been 
asleep, I believe; shall we supf as she looked upon 
her dress with a bewildered eye. 

" Oh mamma, suffer yourself to be undressed and 
put to bed." 

"No, I will go to — to breakfast, is it? yes, I re- 
member now, to breakfast," as she looked up to a 
blazing sun, then turned to a mirror. " Will my dress 
do, Gertrude 1" 

Lady Eossville was too much shocked to reply, 
for the contrast was frightful between her mother's 
gay, handsome dress, and her parched lips, haggard 
cheeks, and distended eyeballs. 

"The air will revive you, mamma," said she, as 
she led her mother to the window, and threw it open ; 
but the lovely landscape seemed as though it smiled 
in scorn upon her, for all things looked fresh and 
renovated and happy. Mrs. St. Clair sat for some 
time with her head resting on her hand ; at length 
she suddenly looked up, and said abruptly, " You are 
very fond of Eossville, are you not, Gertrude ?" 

" Oh ! it is Paradise to me," said the Countess, as 
she looked on her towering woods and far-spreading 
domain; "but why do you ask, mamma?" 

"Then you will never part with if?" cried Mrs. 
St. Clair in a tone of wild interrogation. 

" Never, never ! " exclaimed Lady Eossville em- 
phatically; then recalled to her mother's situation, 
she said in a soothing voice, " Do, mamma, allow me 



THE INHERITANCE. 343 

to ring for Lisle to undress you; it will refresh 
you." 

"And what thenf interrupted Mrs. St. Clair; 
" but I know what I have to do ; yet I would see that 
man once more before — perhaps — ^yes — I will — ring 
for Lisle then;" and she began impatiently to tear 
rather than to take off her ornaments. "Now go, 
leave me ; why do you stand there looking upon me f 
cried she angrily. 

Lady Eossville burst into tears. " It is distracting 
to me to see you thus, mamma, and to think I am 
perhaps the cause " 

" Perhaps ! " repeated Mrs. St. Clair bitterly ; 
" there is no perhaps ; you are the cause." 

" Only say in what way — tell me how — trust me, 
and I will do all " 

"All but the very thing I require of you," inter- 
rupted Mrs. St. Clair impatiently ; " all but obedience 
and forbearance ; all but duty and patience ; all but 
love and tenderness. Answer me, then, once for all — 
'tis for the last time I put the question — its conse- 
quences be upon your own head. Can you — will you 
be guided by me in your behaviour to Lewiston ?" 

" I cannot," said Lady Rossville, in an agony of grief. 

"Then go," cried her mother, ringing the bell 
violently for her maid, "not another word; if your 
fate is sealed do not blame me;" then, as her maid 
entered she waved her hand for her daughter to leave 
her, and Gertrude withdrew, afraid to irritate her by 
further opposition. 



344 THE INHERITANCE. 

"What can this dreadful mystery be?" was the 
question that had naturally presented itself at every 
turning of her mind, till thought had been lost in the 
mazes of conjecture. The idea which most frequently 
occurred was, that her mother must have been pre- 
viously married to Lewiston, and, in the belief of his 
death, had become the wife of St. Clair. But then 
his youthful appearance ill accorded with such a sup- 
position — indeed, seemed to render it altogether 
impossible; and again the idea was rejected for 
others which were no less improbable. " Be it what 
it may," thought she, "this day must end it;" and at 
that moment, in crossing the hall, she suddenly en- 
countered the object of her dread and her wonder. 
He looked heated and ruffled, and as if he had been 
engaged in a squabble. "So," said he, seizing her 
hand before she was aware, and looking earnestly in 
her face, which bore traces of her agitation. " So you 
have been with the old lady, I see ! Well, has she 
let the cat out of the bag, or has she left it to me V 

Some of the servants just then entered the hall, 
and Lady Eossville, without answering, passed on to 
the saloon, where she hoped to find Delmour ; but he 
was not there. Lewiston followed, and again began — 

" What, all in the dark yet 1 What's the old lady 
about ? But, by Jove ! I'll not wait another day to 
be treated as I have been by you and your confounded 
rapscallions. But I've given one of your grooms, as 
you call them, a settler. I've given him a bit of a 
knob on the side of his head to keep him in mind of 



THE INHERITANCE. 345 

his duty, and I'll have them all broke in for you, by- 
and-bye ;— a set of lazy, insolent, eating and drinking 
scoundrels that you keep about you ; and one of these 
low-lived rascals to pretend to pass off his airs to a 
gentleman like me " 

"This is past all bearing!" cried Lady Eossville, 
as her face flushed with shame and indignation at 
having been thus disgraced to her servants — " I com- 
mand you instantly to quit my house, or my servants 
shall compel you to it;" and she stretched out her 
hand to ring the bell. Lewiston hastily snatched it, 
and looked at her with an expression which made her 
tremble even in spite of her resentment. 

"Do you know who it is you are speaking to?" 
said he. 

" I neither know nor care," said the Countess, while 
her heart beat as though it would have burst. Lewis- 
ton was silent for a minute ; he then said abruptly, 
but in some agitation — 

"What if I am your father f 

Gertrude gazed upon him with a look almost 
bordering on idiocy; her lips were apart, but no 
sound came from them. 

" It's wery true though — ask the old lady, her you 
call your mother, if it an't ; she'll confess it — that she 
will She'll tell you you're no more Countess of Ross- 
viUe than I am ; you're the daughter of Jacob Lewis- 
ton here and your nurse " 

But Gertrude could hear no more ; she had fainted. 

" The deuce !" exclaimed he, in some consternation 



346 THE INHERITANCE. 

at this unlooked-for result. "Why, I'd better have 
let the old one manage it her own way, after all;" 
and, ringing the bell, he desired the servant to fetch 
Mrs. St. Olair cleverly, for that her Ladyship the 
Countess was in a fit. The alarm was instantly com- 
municated, and the whole house was presently in 
commotion. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

" What ! shall such traces of my birth appear, 
And I not follow them ? It may not be !" 

Sophocles. 

Long ere Gertrude had power to unclose her eyes the 
frantic exclamations of her lover had pierced her ear, 
as he hung over her in an agony of apprehension ; 
and joy sent the first faint blush to her cheek, and 
spoke in the look with which she met his anxious 
gaze. For a moment all was forgot by her, or rather 
seemed as a hideous dream, and Delmour, kneeling 
by her side in all the agitation of love and fear, was 
the only image that presented itself. 

"I hope, my Lady, your Ladyship feels better," 
said Lewiston, thrusting himself forward ; but at the 
sound of his voice a deadly paleness again overspread 
her face, and her senses forsook her. 

" Will none of you drag that madman away ?" cried 
Delmour passionately, to some of the servants, who were 
bustling pompously about with glasses and decanters. 

*' No — no — no," shrieked Mrs. St. Clair, throwing 
herself between Lewiston and them, as they ap- 
proached him ; " Marshall — Jourdain — on your peril 
touch him." 



348 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Send instantly for advice," cried Delmour, wildly, 
as Gertrude's lifeless hand grew colder even in his 
grasp; "make haste — bring Bruce — Smith — all of 
them. Why do you stand there ? By Heaven ! she 

will be gone " and snatching every restorative 

offered by the housekeeper and ladies' maids, he would 
administer them himself. Once more Gertrude slowly 
opened her eyes, and again they rested on her lover. 

"It was — all — a dream — was it not?" said she in 
a low gasping voice. 

" Ah ! our Countess is herself again," cried Lewiston, 
in a loud significant tone, as much as to say, " Keep 
your own secret." 

" Protect me ! " murmured she, as she convulsively 
held Delmour's hand, and again relapsed into a death- 
like swoon. 

"For Heaven's sake retire !" cried Mrs. St. Clair to 
Lewiston, dreading some scene of violence when Del- 
mour should extricate himself from Gertrude's uncon- 
scious grasp — "only to the next room, till this is 
over — if," added she in a whisper — "if you would 

prevent discovery, go " and she led him to an 

adjoining room, and shut the door. Once more Ger- 
trude's marble features showed signs of returning life; 
but she neither spoke nor opened her eyes. She 
remained motionless, as if unwilling to be scared by 
sight or sound, or aught that could break the death- 
like repose in which she lay. 

" Lady Eossville, dearest " exclaimed Mrs. St. 

Clair, as she would have lifted her hand, but when 



THE INHERITANCE. 349 

she spoke, a tremor shook Gertrude's whole frame, 
and she recoiled from her touch with a shudder. 

"Gertrude, my life! suffer Mrs. Roberts and 
Masham to assist you to your dressing-room. You 
will be quieter there j no one shall enter but those 
you wish to see — they shall not indeed, my angel." 

But a low convulsive sigh was Gertrude's only 
answer. 

" Gertrude, speak to me ; say what it is that has 
alarmed you ; tell me what you wish, and it shall be 
done," cried Delmour, in an accent of grief and tender- 
ness which seemed to thrill to her heart. " Shall I 
order the carriage to take you to Lord Millbank's ?" 
added he in a low voice. 

" Oh — no — no," cried she, putting her hands to her 
face. 

"Colonel Delmour, I must entreat that you will 
not thus agitate Lady Rossville," cried Mrs. St. Clair; 
" this is neither a time nor a place for such questions ; 
when she has had a little quiet repose in her own 
apartment " 

"I will not lose sight of her again," interrupted 
Delmour, passionately, "till I see her in safer hands 
than any here." 

"This is too much," cried Mrs. St. Clair, struggling 
to preserve her composure, and dreading every in- 
stant lest the disclosure (which she at once perceived 
had taken place) should burst from Gertrude's lips 
if Delmour persisted in talking to her, " but I submit. 
Suffer her to be removed to her own apartment, 



350 THE INHERITANCE. 

with Mrs, Eoberts and Masham to attend upon her 
till this nervous attack has subsided, and I consent to 
remain here till the arrival of Dr. Bruce." 

Delmour could not object to this arrangement, for 
Mrs. Eoberts was a discreet and respectable person in 
her way, and both she and Masham were devoted to 
their lady. He therefore consented, and she was 
accordingly conveyed there and left to the care of 
her two faithful attendants, who received the strictest 
injunctions upon no account to speak to her. Mrs. 
St. Clair felt secure that, unless in a fit of delirium, 
she would not betray herself to them, and if, in that 
state, she did drop anything of the truth, it would all 
pass for the raving of fever. Gertrude was therefore 
left to silence and to darkness, while Mrs. St. Clair 
and Colonel Delmour, by a sort of mutual understa,nd- 
ing, seemed resolved not to lose sight of each other. 
He indeed was bent upon more than that; he was 
determined that instant to force an explanation of 
the mystery which involved such a person as Lewiston 
(and that in no common way) in the family concerns 
of Lady Eossville, and, ringing the bell, he ordered 
the servant to inform Mr. Lewiston, who was in the 
next room, that his presence was desired in the saloon. 

At this message Mrs. St. Clair turned pale and 
trembled. She rose from her seat ; she would have 
stopped the servant, but she knew not what to say ; 
and before she could summon recollection, Lewiston 
entered, and her confidence returned at sight of his 
free unabashed air. 



THE INHERITANCE. 351 

" Well," said he, accosting Mrs. St. Clair with an 
air of freedom; "you see I am yours to go and to come; 
but what have you made of my Lady f 

" You are not here to ask questions but to answer 
them, sir," said Delmour, his lip quivering with 
passion. " I insist upon knowing by what right you 
have intruded yourseK into this house 1" 

" I must first know what right you have to ask the 
question," retorted the other boldly. 

"Colonel Delmour," exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair 
eagerly, as she saw his flashing eyes, and dreaded 
some act of violence, "Mr. Lewiston is a friend of the 
family — ^he is my friend, that is enough " 

" Your friend!" repeated Delmour contemptuously; 
"that is indeed enough, quite enough, to warrant 
Lady Kossville seeking other protection." He rang 
the bell furiously. "Desire Lady Eossville's travelling- 
carriage and my riding-horses to be ready at a minute's 
warning," called he to the servant. 

"Hark ye, my man, there's no hurry about the 
first," cried the intolerable Lewiston ; "we shall have 
two words about that yet, by Jove !" 

But the servant, evidently disregarding him, bowed 
his acquiescence to Delmour, and withdrew. 

" What is the meaning of this. Colonel Delmour?" 
cried Mrs. St. Clair in the most violent agitation. 

Delmour endeavoured to speak coolly while he 
said — 

" It was settled last night by Lady Kossville, that 
while Mrs. St. Clair's unknown friend remained here 



352 THE INHERITANCE. 

this was no fit residence for her. She leaves it, there- 
fore, for the protection of her guardian, Lord Millbank ; 
and when Dr. Bruce arrives I intend that he shall 
accompany her." And he looked with the sort of 
resolute indifference of one whose determination could 
not be affected by any circumstances. 

"This is the most extraordinary proceeding, 
Colonel Delmour," said Mrs. St. Clair, pale and trem- 
bling, " You can have no authority for such inter- 
ference in my in Lady Eossville's situation, to 

take her from her own house, from my protection — it 
shall not be. 

" No, faith — by Jove ! she shall not stir a foot from 
this house to-day," said Lewiston, "nor any day, with- 
out the leave of those who have something of a better 
right to dictate to her Ladyship than you have, sir;" 
and he nodded to Mrs. St. Clair as if to encourage 
her. 

Delmour's passion was at its climax, and he could 
no longer suppress it. 

" What is this infernal mystery," cried he to Mrs. 
St. Clair, " which allows such a person to dare to talk 
in this manner ? I will know it ! Something is at the 

bottom of all this — if " and he seemed almost 

choked to utter it — " if this man is, as I suspect, your 
husband " 

" No— oh no !" shrieked Mrs. St. Clair wildly. 

" Well, and if I am the lady's husband, sir, what 
then ? What is your objection to me, sir 1 My Lady 
Countess's proud stomach, it seems, can't put up with 



THE INHERITANCE. 353 

me for her father, but what is that to you 1 you're 
not my Lord yet, and one gentleman's as good's 
another." 

" Colonel Delmour — oh no — help me — I am not — 
I " exclaimed Mrs. St. Clair, in a state of distrac- 
tion at finding herself caught in such horrible toils. 
But again Lewiston interposed — " Come, come, 'tis of 
no use to deny it now; the thing's over, and my Lady 
will come to herself by -and -bye, when she finds she 

can't make a better of it ; there, I told you " as 

a servant entered to say that his Lady wished to see 
Mrs, St. Clair immediately. 

Delmour, who had been pacing the room in a per- 
fect tumult of passion, stopped short at this, and de- 
manded of the servant who had brought this message? 

" Miss Masham, sir," was the reply. 

" Then desire Miss Masham to come and deliver it 
herself, sir," cried he, fiercely ; and Masham, not with- 
out fear and trembling, confirmed the fact. He then 
al^ruptly quitted the room to traverse the gallery 
opposite the Countess's apartment, and see that no 
one else obtained entrance. 

At sight of Mrs. St. Clair, all Gertrude's tremors 
returned upon her, and again she relapsed into suc- 
cessive fainting-fits, from which her attendants with 
difficulty recovered her. At length she became more 
composed, whether from strength or weakness, and in 
a faint voice inquired for Mrs. St. Clair, who, con- 
scious of the impression she made upon the victim of 
her guilt, had retired out of sight. 

YOU II. 2 A 



354 THE INHERITANCE. 

" Mrs. St. Clair is there, my Lady," whispered 
Mrs. Eoberts. 

" Then leave me, Eoberts. Masham, go — I will 
ring when I want you." 

But they still lingered. 

"Colonel Delmour, my Lady, forbade that we 
should lose sight of your Ladyship, upon no account, 
till the doctor's arrival." 

" Colonel Delmour ! " repeated Gertrude. " Ah ! " 
— and tears, the first she had shed, burst from her eyes ; 
they gave her a temporary relief, and she with some 
difficulty dismissed her faithful attendants, and Mrs. St. 
Clair once more approached her. Many and bitter were 
the tears shed on both sides before either had power 
to utter a syllable. At length Mrs. St. Clair said — 

*' Can you forgive me, Gertrude V' 

But Gertrude only turned away her head and wept 
the more ; then suddenly looking up, by a violent 
effort she stopped her tears ; and while they yet hung 
round her eyes, and her pale lips quivered, she said — 

" Tell me all " 

"Oh, not now — spare yourself — spare me," cried 
Mrs. St. Clair, with a fresh burst of weeping. 

" No, no, there is nothing to spare — say that it is 

not — that he " and again she seemed as though 

she would have fainted, as the thoughts of Lewiston, 
her father, rushed upon her. 

" Oh, tell me all— I must— I will know all ! " And 
Mrs. St. Clair was obliged to commence a broken and 
Aveeping narrative of the events of her early days. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

" O light ! thy beams no more 

Let me behold, for I derive my birth 

From those, to whom my birth I should 

Not owe." SorHQCLES. 

She dwelt upon the injurious and exasperating treat- 
ment she had received from the Eossville family, as 
though she sought in their conduct an excuse, or at 
least a palliation, for her own. She spoke of the 
exile and the poverty in which she had for so many 
years dragged out a joyless existence, of her hus- 
band's disinheritance, of the utter hopeless insig- 
nificance of their lot, as outcast, childless annuitants 
on the one hand, or the brilliant destiny which seemed 
to court them on the other, where riches and honours 
awaited them in the person of their offspring. 

"It was at this time," continued the wretched 
narrator of her own guilt, " that accident brought me 
acquainted with — with Marian La Motte " 

"With my mother — was she not?" interrupted 
Gertrude in a voice of repressed agony. Mrs. St. 
Clair's only answer was a burst of tears. Gertrude 
hid her face on the cushion of the couch on which she 
lay, and without looking up, in the same tone, said 
— " Go on; tell me all." 



356 THE INHERITANCE. 

"In her I discovered the daughter of Lizzie 
Lundie, whose name and history had been familiar to 
me in my younger days. She had emigrated to 
America with her husband, and upon his death had 
married a French Canadian. Marian was the child of 
that union, but at this time her parents were both 
dead, and she was the wife of Jacob Lewiston, an 
American trader, whom she had accompanied to Bor- 
deaux. She was then in absolute want, for his vessel 
had been wrecked, and the whole cargo lost ; but, at 
the time I became acquainted with them, he obtained 
a situation on board a merchantman, and went to sea 
again, leaving his wife in delicate health to earn her 
livelihood, as she best could, till his return. To com- 
plete her wretchedness, she looked forward to giving 
birth to a child " 

Here Mrs. St. Clair stopped, overcome with her 
feelings, then suddenly seizing Gertrude's hands — 

" Gertrude ! Gertrude ! God knows I had then no 
evil thoughts! I had not, indeed; but when she 
besought me on her knees, that if she should die a 
stranger in a strange land, and leave an orphan baby, 

I would be as a mother to it Oh, then the tempter 

assailed me ! " 

" Would that I had died ere I saw the light ! " ex- 
claimed Gertrude in an agony of grief. 

" Oh, Gertrude, do not tear my heart by forcing 
me to retrace what can be of no avail. What can 
it signify now to tell you of the thoughts, the fears, 
the struggles I endured myself, of the arguments and 



THE INHERITANCE. 357 

entreaties I used with her and my husband to induce 
them to co-operate in my schemes ? It is enough to 
tell you that it was done ; that we quitted Bordeaux 
on pretence of returning to Scotland, and that at Bag- 
nolet you were brought into the world as the heiress 

of Eossville and such you still are, Gertrude ; the 

secret is known but to yourself, and those who " 

" Hush ! " exclaimed Gertrude wildly, and with a 
shudder. 

" There cannot be the possibihty of discovery if you 
will but " 

"You have not told me all," cried Gertrude 
hurriedly. 

"Gertrude, I will not survive the shame — the 
infamy " 

" Tell me all — all quickly. Why did he leave her 1 
Why has he so long — it is about him," gasped she, 
"I would know." 

"From the day that he left her, his wife never 
heard any tidings of him, and we at last naturally 
concluded he had perished at sea. Still there was no 
positive certainty of this being the case, and she 
always cherished the hope of seeing him again — for 
she loved him, Gertrude, indeed she did." But Ger- 
trude only wept the more to think that she could 
not love her father. 

" Your mother — oh, Gertude, how dreadful is it to 
me to call another by that title ! " and again Mrs. St 
Clair wept long and bitterly, then went on. " Your 
mother had been long threatened with a consumption, 



368 THE INHERITANCE. 

and when she found herself dying, she had, it seems 
unknown to me, written a letter containing the secret 
of your birth, which she had had attested by her priest 
(for you know she was a Catholic) ; this she confided 
to his care, receiving his solemn promise in return 
never to divulge its contents, or part with it to 
another than Jacob Euxton Lewiston, of Perth- 
Amboy, New Jersey. 

"Years after, this man went to America as a 
missionary ; and there, alas ! it was our evil fortune 
that he should find your father ! I need not tell you 
that he came immediately to Britain to claim you. 
You must well remember our first meeting, and the 
mysterious interviews that followed ; he would even 
then have made himself known to you, that he might 
have established his authority over you ; but I pre- 
vailed upon him to forego his claims, at least till the 
Earl's death. Oh ! had he known you as I do, he 
would never have dared the disclosure ; but you will 
not, Gertrude — you cannot be so infatuated — he is 
your father — as such he is entitled to your duty, your 
obedience " 

" Now, now — no more," cried Gertrude, covering 
her face with her hands. 

" Gertrude, only say you will not be so mad — for 
Heaven's sake, promise me you will not. Gertrude, 
he threatens to carry you off to America should you 

drop a hint of Oh ! for the love of Heaven, be 

calm — think of your mother. You loved her, Ger- 
trude, for her sake then " 



THE INHERITA.NCE. 359 

" My mother ! Oh, how could she sell her child ! " 
exclaimed Gertrude, wringing her hands in an agony. 

" She did not sell you, Gertrude. Never mother 
loved her child as she doted upon you. While she 
lived, you may remember you were never out of her 
sight; worlds would not have bribed her to have 
parted with you; and now could she see you thus 
great, and " 

" Oh ! that she had suffered me to remain the 
beggar I was born ! " 

" Do not talk thus, dearest Gertrude, if you would 
not kill me ; compose yourself, and all will yet be well 
— it will indeed your father " 

" Do not — oh ! do not call him God ! forgive 

me, wretch that I am ! " exclaimed she, almost frantic 
with horror for so abhorring his name. 

" Well, your mother, my dearest, think of her — 
think how you loved her ; had she lived you would 
not have shamed her with this disclosure. You will 
not bring disgrace upon her memory." And Gertrude 
wept softer tears, as she called to mind the well- 
remembered proofs of her mother's love. 

"How could she do it?" cried she again, roused to 
agony. 

" Ah, Gertrude ! can you wonder the temptation 
was too strong to be resisted"} Consider how we 
were both situated. You could bring nothing but 
additional care and poverty to her ; to me you would 
ensure riches and honour. Do not condemn us. 
Gertrude, say you forgive me ! " 



360 THE INHERITANCE. 

Gertrude's whole frame shook with emotion, but 
she remained silent. 

"Gertrude! Gertrude!" cried Mrs. St. Clair, 
seizing her hands. " Have I not been as a mother to 
you ? Will you not say you forgive me "? " 

" I cannot ! " gasped Gertrude in a wild suffocating 
voice, and she turned shuddering away. 

Her maid now entered to announce the arrival of 
Dr. Bruce, adding that Colonel Delmour hoped her 
Ladyship would see the Doctor without delay. 

"Lady Eossville will ring when she is ready," said 
Mrs. St. Clair in violent agitation. Then when 
Masham withdrew she cried, " Gertrude, you will not 
betray yourself to Dr. Bruce ! Promise me — promise 
me that, for the love of Heaven ! " and she wrung her 
hand. 

" To him ! " repeated Gertrude. " No ; I will not 
see him at all. Why should I"? 'Tis a mockery — 
leave me — leave me to myself," cried she, with a fresh 
burst of grief. 

But just then Masham returned to say that 
Colonel Delmour was very impatient for her Ladyship 
to see the Doctor ; and as she spoke, Delmour's voice 
was heard outside the door. At the dear loved 
sound again Gertrude's pale cheek glowed for a 
moment, and her eyes brightened; but in another 
instant she dropped her head with an air of hopeless 
dejection, and Dr. Bruce was now ushered in. 

Mrs. St. Clair anticipated all questions by taking 
the Doctor apart and telling him candidly, as she 



THE INHEEITANCE. 361 

called it, that the Countess was suffering under a 
severe nervous attack, and that something of a com- 
posing nature was what was wanted. Gertrude was 
therefore spared answering any questions, and having 
felt her pulse, administered some drops, and recom- 
mended quietness, the Doctor withdrew to make his 
report to Delmour, who was impatiently waiting for 
liim. Mrs. St. Clair, at the same time, hastened to 
Lewiston to prevent him, if possible, from doing more 
mischief ; and Gertrude was once more left to the 
care of her attendants, who imagined she slept, from 
the still and silent state in which she lay. 



CHAPTER XLV. 

*'0 fortune ! with what weight 
Of misery dost thou crush me ! . . . 
This is a stain fixed by some vengeful power, 
Surpassing thought ; all that remains of life 
Must waste away in anguish ; such a sea 
Of woe swells o'er me, that never can I rise 
Again, or stem the surge of this affliction. " 

Euripides. 

But sleep was far from Gertrude's eyelids, and in the 
multitude of her thoughts within her, she felt as 
though she should never know repose again. Her 
very soul sickened and her brain whirled at the 
horrible destiny just opened to her : to fall from her 
high estate to a condition so vile and abject ; instead 
of the heiress of a mighty house, the daughter of a 
noble line, to be a beggar, an impostor, the child of 
one against whom her whole being revolted ! Yet 
voluntarily to proclaim this to the world — to stand 
forth a mark for the finger of scorn to point at; to be 
laughed at by some, despised by others ; to leave each 
thing beloved most dearly ; to become an outcast, an 
alien — could she do this and live? No! she would 
pass away in secret ; she would consume her days in 
grief and in penitence ; she would abjure, renounce, 



THE INHERITANCE. 363 

fly all that she had loved and enjoyed ; she would 
dwell in darkness and in solitude ; few and sad would 
be her days, but she would go down to the grave as 
Countess of Eossville ; her " soul was ready to choose 
strangling rather than life," for what had life now to 

off'er to her of good or fair ? Delmour ah ! there 

her heart trembled within her : this day she had pro- 
mised to be his ! At that instant a note was delivered 
to her, which Colonel Delmour himself had brought 
to the door of her apartment, and insisted on its being 
instantly delivered. 

*'I claim your promise, dearest Gertrude. Dr. 
Bruce is of opinion you may be removed to Millbank 
with perfect safety. If you wish it, he and Masham 
will accompany you in the carriage, and I shall attend 
it. Say but yes, my angel, to your adoring F. D." 

Here was a fresh wave of misery to overwhelm the 
unhappy Gertrude ! The cup of happiness was held 
to her lips by the hand she loved, and she herself 
must dash it to the ground for ever ! Poor, low-born, 
degraded as she was — what a bride for the proud 
high-minded Delmour ! 

"And Delmour — would even Delmour despise and 
reject me if he knew alU" thought she, as for a 
moment she covered her face with her hands and 
bowed beneath the humiliation. But soon a loftier 
feeling succeeded. "No," thought she, as a bitter 
pang shot through her heart ; "if we must part, it 
shall be nobly ; he shall learn all from myself. He 
loves me, and he will love me still ; but he loved me 



364 THE INHERITANCE. 

as Countess of Rossville ; he must now love me as an 
outcast, a beggar " 

She desired her maid to say to Colonel Delmour 
that she would see him in the library. Then, rising, 
she bathed her eyes and adjusted her hair, and en- 
deavoured to dispel, as much as possible, the traces of 
grief and agitation from her face. 

" I will not go to him a weeping supplicant ! " 
thought she. " I will owe nothing to his pity ;" and 
she repressed each rising emotion, and with a calm 
and lofty air entered the apartment where her lover 
awaited her. But what a change had a few hours of 
intense suffering made upon her ! Her mutable 
countenance had now all the fixedness and the pale- 
ness of marble, and those eyes — those lovely eyes — 
which had so often met him with smiles, and which 
always " seemed to love whate'er they looked upon " 
— now heavy and brimful, drooped beneath the weight 
of her swollen eyelids. 

" Gertrude, my own — my adored," cried Delmour, 
as he took her passive hand and led her to a seat. 
" Speak to me, dearest — it is death to me to see you 
thus." 

Gertrude opened her lips and vainly tried to articu- 
late ; but her tongue seemed to cleave to her mouth. 

" This is dreadful ! it will kill you to remain in this 
house; you must leave it— indeed you must, my love ; 
your carriage is ready — sufifer me to order it," and he 
was going to ring the bell, when Gertrude laid her 
hand upon his arm. Again she strove to speak, but 



THE INHERITANCE. 365 

a sigh so deep, so sad, burst from her heart, as told 
the unutterable anguish of her soul. 

" Gertrude ! my life ! " exclaimed Delmour, terror- 
struck, as he felt her hand grow colder, and saw her 
features gradually becoming more rigid ; "for God's 
sake speak to me!" 

Gertrude spoke, but her voice was so changed that 
Delmour started at the sound. 

"You love me,^Delmour, I know you do; and I 

but no matter; I never can be yours now. Delmour, I 
have a strange, a frightful tale to tell you. I — I am 
not what I seem; I am not Countess of Eossville — I am 
a beggar !" she hid her face for a moment, while Del- 
mour, too much amazed to answer, remained silent. 

" It is true; they have told me all, all, all. I am his 
daughter; he is my father," and her voice grew wilder 
in her attempts to speak calmly and firmly. 

" My dearest Gertrude, you take this matter too 
violently ; although your mother has made a degrading 
marriage that ought not to affect you in this manner; 
it does not interfere with your rights, or diminish my 
attachment to you ; why then " 

" Ah ! Delmour, you are deceived ; she is not my 
mother. I am his daughter — the daughter of Jacob 
Lewiston. I have been an usurper, but I did not know 
it." 

Tne dreadful truth now flashed upon Delmour with 
the force and the rapidity of a stroke of lightning, and 
he remained horror-struck beneath its shock. For 
some minutes neither of them spoke ; but Gertrude's 



366 THE INHERITANCE, 

breast heaved with agitation she would not betray, 
and her eyes were distended in endeavours to retain 
her tears within the brim. 

" Good God !" at length exclaimed Delmour, strik- 
ing his forehead in a distracted manner ; " Gertrude, 
dearest Gertrude !" and he seized her hands. "No, 
it cannot be, you are mine — my own " 

"Not now, Delmour," said Gertrude, and her 
heart almost broke in the efibrt to appear calm in re- 
signing him. " Not now — you are free ! " added 

she in an accent of despair. 

" Free — oh! Gertrude, my life !" and he paced the 
room with disordered steps; then suddenly stopping — 
" No, you must — you shall be mine ! I will not believe, 
it — by Heaven 'tis false ! you — You the daughter of 
that " 

"Oh! he is my father!" cried Gertrude, shud- 
dering. 

" No, there is some infernal plot at the bottom of 
this — it shall be cleared up," and he was hurrying 
towards the door, when Gertrude called to him — 

" Stay, Delmour, 'tis from me you shall hear it all ; 
I will not that you should hear it from another, that 
you have loved an imposter — a beggar;" and with 
desperate energy she recapitulated to him the evidence 
of her birth, as detailed by Mrs. St. Clair. When she 
had ended Delmour said nothing, but he buried his 
face in his handkerchief, as in an agony of grief, and 
Gertrude's high-wrought fortitude almost forsook her 
as she beheld her lover thus overcome ; she felt she 



THE INHERITANCE. 367 

could not long support the continuance of the scene, 
and she said — 

"Now I have told you all, Delmour. I am no 
longer what I have been ; from this hour let my 
shame, my disgrace, be proclaimed, and — let us part." 

"Gertrude, if you would not drive me mad, do 

not Oh ! you know not how I love — how I adore 

you ! " and he pressed her hands to his lips, and 
Gertrude felt his burning tears fall upon them, and 
every drop was as a life-drop from her heart. 

" Gertrude!" exclaimed he passionately, "you have 
never loved as I do, or you could not be thus unmoved." 

A faint smile of anguish was on Gertrude's pale 
lip, and a single tear rolled slowly down her bloodless 
cheek. 

Again a long and bitter pause ensued. Delmour 
still held her hands in his, while he seemed to struggle 
with contending emotions. Suddenly Lewiston's loud 
voice was heard, as if issuing some orders in his usual 
authoritative tone. The blood rushed to Delmour's 
face; he started up, and dropped the hands he had but 
a moment before clasped in his own. Gertrude too 
rose ; cold drops were upon her brow, and she shook 
in every joint ; but by a desperate effort she gained 
the door. She thought she heard her name pro- 
nounced by Delmour in an accent of tenderness and 
despair ; but a thousand sounds were ringing in her 
ears, a thousand figures were before her eyes ; and she 
only reached her own apartment when all sights and 
sounds had vanished, for she had fainted. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

" What greater gryefe may come to any lyfe 
Than after sweete to taste the bitter sower ? 
Or, after peace, to fall at warre and stryfe, 
Or, after myrth, to have a cause to lower ? 
Upon such props false Fortune buylds her tower, 
On sodayne chaunge her flitting frames be set, 
Where is no way for to escape her net. " 

Thomas Chukchyard. 

Delmour's whole mind was a chaos of conflicting 
passions. That he loved was undoubted, but his love 
was compounded of many ingredients — pride, vanity, 
ambition, self-interest ; and now all these were up in 
arms to oppose each purer or more generous sentiment 
that might have found place in his heart. In this 
state of excitation he sought Mrs. St. Clair, who was 
yet ignorant of what had passed in her absence ; but 
Delmour's disordered looks and wild incoherent ex- 
pressions soon proclaimed that all was disclosed. To 
deny or prevaricate she felt would be in vain. The 
terrors of guilt and of shame were upon her; infamy 
and ruin had overtaken her. There was nothing left 
to suspicion or conjecture ; the evidence was infallible 
— it was her own. Still, while her very soul sank be- 
neath the weight of her crime, her proud spirit refused 



THE INHERITANCE. 369 

to humble itself before the man she hated ; and her 
only reply to his reproaches and invectives was, that 
he would now have an opportunity of proving the 
sincerity and the disinterestedness of his attachment. 

More than ever exasperated, Delmour hastened 
from her to shut himself up in his own apartment. 
Distracted at the thoughts of the evil which had come 
upon him, his soul was tossed in a whirlwind of con- 
tending passions. To resign Gertrude — his own 
beautiful, his betrothed Gertrude — there was despair 
in the thought ; but to marry the descendant of the 
huntsman, the daughter of Lewiston, it was madness 
to dream of such degradation ! Innocent as she was 
in herself, there was a stigma affixed to her name 
which never could be effaced — a changeling ! the child 
of wretchedness and imposture ! No ! he never could 
dishonour himself and his family by such an alliance. 
Then the image of Gertrude, rich in native loveliness, 
the tender, confiding, noble-minded Gertrude, rose to 
view, as if to mock the littleness of that pride that 
would have spurned her. 

Delmour passed a sleepless night, and the morning 
found him resolved to renounce Gertrude for ever. 
But how to do it was the difficulty; to see her again 
was impossible. He attempted to write to her, but 
could not. He felt that he was about to pierce a 
heart which beat but for him, and his hand shrank 
from the barbarous task. But something must be 
done ; it was impossible that Lewiston and he could 
remain under one roof. He shuddered at the thoughts 
VOL. II. 2 B 



370 THE INHEEITANCE. 

of meeting him — meeting him as the father of Ger- 
trude — the man who, but for her disclosure, might 
even now have been his father-in-law ; yet to order 
him from the house would be to turn Gertrude also 
from the home which but yesterday she had held as 
her own, and that was too cruel even for Delmour's 
selfish heart. The result of his deliberations was, 
that he would leave things as they were, and repair 
to London to consult with his brother upon what 
ought to be done ; and having formed this resolution, 
he wrote as follows to Gertrude : — 

"Dearest, Adored Gertrude — I will not at- 
tempt to paint to you what I have suffered since that 
sad disclosure took place. Would to Heaven it were 
in my power to raise you to that height from which 
you have fallen, or rather from which you have so 
nobly cast yourself ; but, alas ! my beloved, by unit- 
ing your fate with mine, I should only involve you 
in deeper ruin. I have neither wealth nor power to 
bear you through this overwhelming tide of misfor- 
tune ; and yet to lose you — voluntarily to renounce 
one a thousand times dearer to me than my own 
existence. No, Gertrude, I cannot — I will not resign 
you ; mine you are in soul and in love — are you not, 
Gertrude? You never can love another, and what 
other ever could love you as I have done ? My brain 
is on fire ; I scarcely know what I write, but you will 

understand me, dearest, most beloved It is better 

that we should not meet. I will depart, but you shall 



THE INHERITANCE. 371 

remain here as mistress for the present. I will see 
my brother, but until then let nothing more be said 
on this heartrending disclosure. Farewell, dearest. 
Pity your distressed but adoring, F. H. D." 

Meanwhile, Gertrude had remained in a state of 
morbid woe, infinitely more alarming than the wildest 
ebullitions of grief. She neither spoke nor wept, but 
remained silent and passive, her glassy eyes fixed on 
vacancy, and her ear unconscious of every sound. 

When Delmour's note was brought to her, she 
closed her eyes and turned away her head from it, 
while she thought, "It is all over — he has cast me 
from him ! " 

"It is from Colonel Delmour, my Lady," said 
Masham soothingly, who concluded there was a 
lover's quarrel in the case. "He is most petiklarly 
anxious to hear how your Ladyship is this morning." 

Still her Lady remained motionless. 

" The Colonel looks so ill, my Lady — I'm sure it 
will break his heart entirely if your Ladyship does 
not take his letter." 

A deep sigh burst from Gertrude's heart; but 
Masham hailed it as a happy omen, and went on. 

" Dear, my Lady, if you did but see the Colonel, I 
don't think you'd have known him. His face, my 
Lady, is as white as your handkerchief, and his 
beautiful eyes, my Lady, quite red, for all the world 
as he had been crying — indeed, my Lady, I could 
scarce keep from crying to look at him;" and, upon 



372 THE INHERITANCE. 

the faith of this pathetic appeal, Masham made another 
attempt to prevail upon her mistress to take his letter; 
but again Gertrude rejected it. 

" Dear, my Lady ! what shall I do ? I could no 
more tell the Colonel that you would not look at his 
letter than I could put a knife into his heart, my 
Lady — just the same thing. Oh ! my Lady, Smith 
says he hasn't been in bed all night ; but has been 
walking up and down his room, tearing his hair, my 
Lady, and taking on so that he says he's sure he'll 
lose his senses, unless something is done, my Lady." 
And Masham ended with a sob; for Delmour's gaiety, 
his good looks, and his liberality had completely won 
Masham's favour. " I'm sure, my Lady, he'll either 
kill himself or somebody else if your Ladyship refuses 

him, for " but at the horrid idea of Delmour and 

her father engaged in mortal strife Gertrude shuddered; 
then taking the letter she tore it open, and, as she 
read it, tears again found their way to her eyes — 

" Rash — unjust — misjudging that I am ! " thought 
she. " He does not — he will not renounce me — in- 
volve me in deeper ruin by uniting my fate with his ! 
Ah ! no, no ; 'tis I who would involve him in ruin. 
Yes, I am his in soul and in love ;" and the hard un- 
natural tension of mind under which she had laboured 
gradually melted into softer feelings. " But he loves 
me, why — why then does he leave me?" and again 
her doubts and her fears returned; but then there 
was so much delicacy in wishing to have the discovery 
of her disgrace kept secret until he could have made 



THE INHERITANCE. 373 

arrangements for her, she had no doubt, to soften 
the blow as much as possible, that again her sanguine 
spirit exulted in the truth and honour of her lover. 
Had she followed the dictates of her own feelings she 
would instantly have declared herself to her whole 
household ; but Delmour had besought her not ; and, 
painful as it was, she thought, for his sake, she would 
submit for a while to carry on the deception. 

But she would not appear, she would not see the 
light, she would pass the time in darkness and in 
solitude ; and her soul sickened at the very idea of 
ever again beholding Mrs. St. Clair and Lewiston. 
That lady and she had not met since the disclosure 
had been made ; she had then hastened to her own 
apartment, and there, under the influence of guilt, 
shame, and passion, had swallowed the remainder of 
the laudanum contained in the phial, which, although 
not sufficient to make her sleep the sleep of death, 
had the effect of throwing her into a convulsive 
stupor from which she could not be roused. Dr. 
Bruce had taken leave, after prescribing for Gertrude, 
whose disorder he soon discovered was altogether 
of a mental nature, and as such beyond his skill 
Lewiston had therefore been left to carouse by him- 
self, and to be his own master of the revels. He was 
a man of much too coarse a mind to conceive the deli- 
cacy of such a char?.oter as Gertrude's, and had always 
laughed at the idea of her being such a fool as to 
betray her own secret; ho therefore remained quite 
unconscious of the storm which was ready to burst 



374 THE INHERITANCE. 

upon him. Being always on the watch to spy every- 
thing that was going on, he soon came to the know- 
ledge of Colonel Delmour's intended departure, which 
he heard of with great exultation, and thought the 
field was now his own. His vulgar curiosity, there- 
fore, led him, as usual, into the midst of the prepara- 
tions, and he lounged about the carriage while it was 
packing, questioned the servants, examined and 
patted the horses, and waited till Delmour appeared, 
when he briskly accosted him with — 

" So, you're for the road, sir ^ Fine morning ! My 
Lady's four bays will carry you at a famous rate; 
you only have them as far as Barnford, I guess. I 
had some thoughts of taking them out myself to-day 
to give the ladies a ride, but you're welcome to them, 
sir — quite welcome ! The grays will do for us." 

Delmour with difficulty refrained from spurning 
him, but he repressed his rage, and as he passed said 
in a low voice — " Beware how you abuse the indulg- 
ence shown you in the name of the Earl of Eossville, 

for the sake of one " He could not finish, but, 

throwing himself into the carriage, drove off. 

There was something so stern and commanding in 
his eye and voice, and yet so melancholy and subdued 
in his manner, that Lewiston felt alarmed. "The 
Earl of Rossville, who the deuce is he?" was his 
exclamation as he turned quickly round, and entered 
the house. Could anybody have blabbed 1 Not Mrs. 
St. Clair — not Gertrude, for it was the interest of 
both to conceal it. No, the thing was impossible, 



THE INHERITANCE. 375 

but he must see them; and he immediately sent a 
message to Mrs. St. Clair, demanding an interview. 
But it was answered by her maid in great agitation, to 
report that her lady had with the utmost difficulty been 
roused from her stupor, and that she was not herself, 
her mind was wandering ; the doctor must be sent for. 

" Come, come, I'm for none of your doctors," cried 
Lewiston. "A confounded, prying, useless, swind- 
ling pack. Why, what did that pompous fellow do 
for my Lady Countess yesterday 1 felt her pulse, and 
gave her a glass of water — eh? and for that he 
pockets his five guineas, the deuce ! Why, a man 
would be ruined in this country if he were to give 
way to women's nonsensical vagaries. Come, I'm 
something of a doctor myself; I'U go and see your 
lady — come along," and drawing Mrs. Lisle's arm 
within his he marched along, and in spite of her 
remonstrances made his way to Mrs. St Clair. 

But she was, as her maid had represented her, in 
no condition to answer questions or receive company; 
there was a total aberration of intellect, and even 
Lewiston's presence made no impression on her. He 
was so far relieved to find she was not in the way of 
endangering the secret, as she merely muttered to 
herself a few unintelligible words about her daughter, 
then repeated the word daughter to herself many 
times over, without ceasing. 

" She'll come to herself by-and-bye if you'll let her 
alone," said Lewiston, as he left her with the resolu- 
tion of next seeing his daughter. 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

" Non, je ne serai point complice de ses crimes." 

Racine. 

Gertrude's restored confidence in her lover had 
given an impulse to her mind, and she was beginning 
to recover in some degree from the dreadful shock 
she had sustained, when Lewiston's message, desiring 
to see her again, deprived her of the little composure 
she had regained. Her agitation was so excessive 
that Masham in alarm summoned Mrs. Roberts, and 
both agreed that it would be as much as their lady's 
life was worth to see anybody that was not particularly 
agreeable to her at present; and this opinion Mrs. 
Roberts delivered in person to Lewiston, who, from 
some hints he had thrown out that morning to the 
servants, was generally considered as the husband of 
Mrs. St. Clair, and consequently the stepfather of their 
lady. This idea was further confirmed by Colonel 
Delmour's sudden departure ; and in that capacity he 
found himself feared and obeyed, where he would 
otherwise have been ridiculed and despised. After 
swearing a little at Mrs. Roberts's communication, he 
said — 

" Well, Goody, take you care of your lady ; feed 



THE INHERITANCE. 377 

her well; give her plenty of good stout meat and 
drink — none of your slip-slops, none of your meal and 
water and poultices, your gruels and panadas, as you 
call 'em ; by Jove ! I'd have a fit of hysterics myself 
if I was to be fed upon such gear. Hark ye, Goody, 
if there's such a thing as a nice plump little sucking 
pig to be had, now's the time ; have it killed directly, 
and it will be prime for my lady's dinner. And, do 
you hear 1 tell that French fellow of a cook to take 
care to have the ears crisp, or, by Jingo ! I'll slit his 
own for him! Stop, Goody," as Mrs. Roberts was 
retiring in silent horror, and he pulled out his watch, 
"Now, go you to my Lady Countess and say that, 
as I'm a reasonable, good-natured man, and always 
behave handsomely when I'm treated handsomely, I 
shall allow her twenty-four hours to settle her brains, 
or her spirits, or whatever is wrong ; and then, remem- 
ber, she must be to a minute ! I shall expect her to 
do her duty, and wait upon me here in this very 
room, and at this very hour, with a merry face, as 
much sooner as she likes. To-day she'll be welcome, 
but not a minute after the twenty-four hours ; not a 
second. Now trot. Goody; don't forget the pig — a 
three weeks' old will serve my Lady Countess." Mrs. 
Roberts here suggested the propriety of medical advice 
being called, but she was cut short with — " By Jupiter ! 
if any of your doctors come here I'll show 'em the 
way out at the window ; there's no doctor like meat 
and drink ;" and he went off singing a vulgar sea song. 
He thou went to order out all the horses, which he 



378 THE INHERITANCE. 

made the servants parade before the house, while he 
tried some of them himself; then ordered a chaise- 
and-four, and two outriders, as if he had been going 
a journey; but he merely drove up and down the 
avenue, till, tired of that, he fell to coits with the 
servants ; and, in short, completely illustrated the 
homely adage of, " Set a beggar on horseback," etc. 

Gertrude felt grateful for the respite allowed her, 
and she resolved, if possible, to prove her obedience 
by meeting her father, and at the same time declaring 
to him what she had done, even although she trembled 
to think of all she would have to encounter. Should 
he persist in his threat of carrying her off to America, 
what would become of her? Who could interpose 
between a father and his child 1 Who could — alas ! 
who would — save her 1 There was no one to whom she 
could appeal, for there was no one with whom she 
could claim any kindred, save him to whom she 
owed her being. Where was Delmour at this trying 
moment ? Why had he deserted her 1 His was the 
voice to have whispered peace to her soul; his the 
arm to have supported and protected her; but he, 
her only earthly prop, had left her ! 

She was roused from the overwhelming conviction 
of her own utter helplessness, and the frightful des- 
tiny that perhaps awaited her, by the indefatigable 
Masham, who, in her softest accents, besought her 
Ladyship's pardon. But there was a box of new 
dresses just arrived for her Ladyship from Madame 
Delacour — such beauties! they were fit for a princess! 



THE INHERITANCE. 379 

Would her Ladyship be pleased only just to take a 
look of them — "See what a ddsIiabilU, my Lady; 
when you please to rise, how charming it will be ! " 

Time was when Gertrude's eyes would have sparkled 
with pleasure at sight of the beautiful dresses now 
displayed ; but she turned from them with a shudder, 
and desired they might be taken away. 

" These were for the Countess of Eossville," thought 
she, with a bitter pang; "and I, impostor — beggar 
that I am — shall I ever again dare to appear as such?" 
She covered her face with her hands, and groaned in 
spirit ; then, as if struck with some sudden thought, 
she called her maid — 

"Masham, I would have a dress very different 
from any of these. I would have one made of the 
coarsest of stuffs, such as — as poor people or charity 
children wear." She stopped to wipe away the tears 
which covered her face, while Masham stood in speech- 
less amazement. " It must be very coarse and quite 
plain, Masham ; and you must set about getting such 
a one for me directly." 

"Sure, my Lady, you don't mean it for yourself?" 
cried the amazed Masham, doubting either her own 
or her lady's senses had gone astray. But her lady 
repeated her commands in so peremptory a manner 
that Masham dared not expostulate on the subject, 
but set about obeying the order, strange and unseemly 
as it appeared. 

Gertrude had inquired for Mrs. St. Clair, and she 
was told she was keeping her room ; and she asked 



380 THE INHERITANCE. 

no further, for the mention of her name was an effort 
almost too much for her, associated as it was in her 
mind with all the degradation and ruin she had 
brought upon her. 

Heavily as the time wore away in tears and soli- 
tude, the hour appointed by Lewiston drew near too 
soon. In the interval he had sent many messages, 
which, rough and wayward as they were, yet showed 
a species of kindness in their way ; but his ideas of 
affection seemed to be of the lowest description ; and 
the only way in which he testified his was through 
the medium of meat and drink ; and many was the 
savoury mess he despatched to Gertrude, who turned 
with loathing from such coarse demonstrations of 
paternal regard. 

Gertrude clothed herself in the sordid garb which 
had been prepared for her ; but her beauty was of too 
noble and decided a character to be dependent upon 
adventitious aid ; the regularity of her features, their 
touching expression, the sadness of her dove-like eyes, 
the paleness of her complexion contrasted with the 
dark ringlets which fell negligently around her face, 
the exquisite form of her head and throat, her distin- 
guished air, even in humility — all these only appeared 
the more pre-eminent in the absence of aught to dis- 
tract the attention. Averse to having the appearance 
of being compelled to meet her father, she repaired 
to the saloon rather before the appointed time ; she 
entered, with downcast eyes and a throbbing heart, 
unconscious of everything but that she was to meet, 



THE INHERITANCE. 381 

for the first time, as her father, he who had so long 
been the object of her fear and her abhorrence. But, 
what was her surprise, when, upon entering, the 
person who sprang forward to meet and to welcome 
her, and to press her hands in his — was Lyndsay ! 

" Gertrude, dear Gertrude ! " exclaimed he, as he 
gazed upon her sad and colourless countenance, " How 
ill you look ! Something is wrong." But as the re- 
collection of their last meeting rushed upon Gertrude's 
mind, her heart swelled at the thoughts of her abase- 
ment, and the blush of shame rose almost to her brow. 

" I have heard — and it is that report has brought 
me here now — that the man whom you have such 
cause to dread is an inmate of your house ; at 
least, I guess it is the same. Tell me, Gertrude, is 
it so?" 

" You will hear all soon enough," said Gertrude 
in a low suffocating voice. "Leave me — oh! leave 
me now!" 

" Now, nor never, Gertrude, till I see you safe and 
happy," cried Lyndsay with emotion. "Gertrude, 
I am your cousin — your friend — your brother if you 
will Oh ! speak to me then as such — say, what can 
I do to serve you*?" 

But Gertrude only answered with her tears ; then 
repeated — 

"Leave me — oh ! leave me !" 

"I will, if there is any one here to protect — to 
save you " 

At that instant Lewiston entered with the swagger 



382 THE INHERITANCE. 

of a man who wished to show he was quite at home. 
At sight of Lyndsay he started, and was evidently 
disconcerted; but quickly recovering, he said, with 
his usual assurance — 

" So, sir, I didn't expect to find you here ; I've 
just been seeing some young puppies have their ears 
cropped. Sit down, sir ;" then approaching Gertrude, 
who rose to meet him, and bowed her head towards 
him, he took her hand and shook it. "Well, my 
Lady Countess, how goes it now*? By Jingo!" — as 
he surveyed her dress — "you women are always in 
extremes. Why, to-day, you're dressed like a charity- 
school girl!" 

Lyndsay was too much confounded to speak ; he 
had heard, in a vague way, that a foreigner, whom 
no one knew anything about, was living at Rossville 
with the ladies, and that Colonel Delmour had left it 
abruptly in consequence of a quarrel ; with various 
other particulars, some true, some false, which had 
been circulated by the servants, and soon reached the 
ears of their masters and mistresses. No sooner had 
Lyndsay heard them than, forgetting all Gertrude's 
unkindness and ingratitude, he thought only of how 
he could serve her, and instantly set off with that 
purpose. 

He had only arrived the moment before she 
appeared, and the first glance at her had told him a 
tale of woe and suffering that filled him with grief 
and amazement. The gay, proud, brilliant Countess 
of Eossville was gone, and there stood the sad, humble, 



THE INHERITANCE. 383 

downcast Gertrude, in passive endurance of, if not 
actually inviting, familiarity which formerly her high 
spirit would have spurned. He looked at her for a 
moment in silence, and again the deadly paleness 
w^hich had overspread her face at Lewiston's entrance 
was succeeded by a deep flush, and she raised her 
hand as if to hide it from his view. 

"Well, sir," said Lewiston, seating himself on a 
sofa, and placing Gertrude beside him, while he still 
held her hand, " this is not our first meeting — but let 
that pass ; you're my Lady Countess's cousin, I under- 
stand, ehl — that's enough. Sit down." 

*' You have the advantage of me, sir," said Lynd- 
say, bridling his indignation for Gertrude's sake; "it 
seems you know who I am ; who you are, I have yet 
to learn." 

" All in good time, sir. Would you choose to take 
a glass of anything after your ride, or a bit of cold 
meat! There's a nice little fellow of a pig that I 
ordered for my Lady's dinner yesterday, and she 
wouldn't look at him, it seems, so I've ordered him 
for my lunch to-day — as fat as an eel and as tender 
as a chicken, I'll answer for him. I saw him scalded 
myself." 

Agony was painted in every feature of Gertrude's 
face. Lyndsay saw it, and wishing to end this 
strange scene, he said calmly to Lewiston — 

"Lady Rossville seems too unwell to take an 
interest in such discussions; if you will accompany 
me to another room " 



384 THE INHERITANCE. 

" With all my heart," cried Lewiston, jumping up, 
" You say true, my Lady is a little nervous or so, 
but she will soon get over it," with a wink to her. 

Gertrude rose too ; her colour changed from white 
to red, and from red to white, and she gasped as 
though she were suffocating. At length, by a violent 
effort, she said — 

"Go, then — but, Lyndsay — remember he is 

my father!" 

Lyndsay stood speechless, and for a moment 
Lewiston was thrown into consternation, but quickly 
recovering himself, he said. "Ay — come along, it 
shall all be explained," and he took hold of Lyndsay 
and moved impatiently towards the door; but Lyndsay 
saw only Gertrude standing motionless in shame and 
anguish, her head bent beneath her humiliation, and 
the cold drops of agony on her brow ; he flew towai'ds 
her. 

" Gertrude," cried he, wildly; " what do you mean? 
your father ! speak, tell me " 

" Well, since the cat's out of the bag," cried Lewis- 
ton ; " you may as well catch it at once. I'm married 
to my Lady Countess's mother, so I am; that's all, 
what is there so wonderful in that?" And again he 
cast a fierce and threatening look at Gertrude. 

" Is it even so, Gertrude ?" said Lyndsay. " Then, 
this can be no home for you at present " 

" The deuce !" cried Lewiston fiercely ; " what right 
have you to meddle between a father and his daughter? 
I am her stepfather, and I have the best right to 



THE INHERITANCE. 385 

manage her;" and he would have taken her hand, but 
Lyndsay placed himself between them. " Lady Ross- 
ville once chose me for her guardian, she will yet 
acknowledge me as such. Will you not, Gertrude ? 
You will trust yourself with me, and I will place you 
in safety." 

" Oh, he is my father — my own father !" cried Ger- 
trude in an accent of despair. 

" Surely, surely !" exclaimed Lewiston, hastily. *' I 
am the husband of her mother — her own father ; you 
say true — I am, I am." 

"No — no — no," cried Gertrude, wildly; "she is 
ncit my mother ; she told me all — he is my father," 
and she almost shrieked as she uttered it. 

"She is mad," cried Lewiston, "I say she is mad." 

"'Tis you have made her so, then," said Lyndsay, 
passionately ; then turning to Gertrude— " Dearest 
Gertrude, try to compose yourself; retire, I will " 

"Oh, he is — he is my father !" repeated Gertrude 
convulsively. 

" Confound you for an idiot, as you are ! " cried 
Lewiston fiercely, and he seemed ready to strike her, 
had not Lyndsay stood between them. 

" Save me, oh, save me from him !" cried Gertrude, 
as she clung to Lyndsay 's arm ; " but he is " 

"I will, dearest Gertrude, do not be afraid ;" then 
turning to Lewiston, he said in a voice of forced 
calmness, but \vith an air of the most resolute deter- 
mination — " You are mistaken if you suppose that, 
as the husband of Mrs. St. Clair, you have acquired 

VOL. II. 2 c 



386 THE INHERITANCE. 

any lawful authority over this lady. If you claim it 
by any other tie you must first bring forward your 
evidence, and have it recognised before it can be 
acknowledged; in the meantime, Lady Rossville is 
under my protection. I am her guardian, and from 
her own lips only will I listen to what has passed. 
You will do well, then, to leave this room without 
altercation, otherwise it may be unpleasant for you." 

"Oh! no — no," cried Gertrude, in an agony of 
terror ; " he is my father ; do not use him ill." 

"Don't you hear her acknowledge my authority?" 
cried Lewiston ; " and what title have you, then, to 
interfere, you confounded meddling blockhead?" 

"Gertrude, will you go into the next room for a 
few minutes?" said Lyndsay, and he would have led 
her to the door. 

"Ay, do — go along," cried Lewiston; "women 
are always better out of the way when there's business 
on hand." 

" I will not leave you," said Gertrude, as pale and 
trembling she still held by Lyndsay. 

" But I order you to " 

"Speak but another syllable to this lady," inter- 
rupted Lyndsay, on the point of losing all self-com- 
mand, " and I will instantly call the servants to force 
you from her presence." 

"Coward !" cried Lewiston furiously. 

The blood rushed to Lyndsay 's brow. 

"Edward — dear Edward!" cried Gertrude, "do 
not; he is my father." 



THE INHERITANCE. 387 

" I know you only as Lady Eossville, and as such 
I will speak to you alone," said Lyndsay. He rang 
the bell ; and when the servant answered it, desired 
him, in a calm but firm manner, to show that gentle- 
man to the library; then waving his hand to Lewiston 
in a way that showed he would be obeyed, he said, 
" I will join you there in half-an-hour ;" and Lewiston, 
casting a threatening look at Gertrude, and muttering 
imprecations to himself, was thus compelled to with- 
draw. 



CHAPTER XLVIIL 

"He whose mind 
Is virtuous, is alone of noble kind ; 
Though poor in fortune, of celestial race ; 
And he commits the crime who calls him base. " 

Dryden. 

But it was with difficulty Gertrude could be brought 
to repeat to Lyndsay all that she had already recapi- 
tulated to Delmour. She had then been under an 
excitement of mind to which everything had given 
way ; she had felt as though she were then about to 
cast the die for life or death, and, in the energy of 
desperation, she had told all with the eloquence of feel- 
ings which mocked control. But here there was no 
such stimulus, and she shrank from repeating the 
hateful and ignominious detail of her disgrace. It 
was throwing herself too much upon the sympathy 
and the commiseration of one on whom she had no 
claim ; one whom, in the hey-day of her prosperity, 
she had treated with coldness and ingratitude ; and 
she leant her burning brow on her head, and strove 
to steel herself against the kind and ajffectionate 
entreaties Lyndsay used to gain her confidence. At 
length he gathered from her such particulars as en- 
abled him to trace out the whole of the dark trans- 



THE INHERITANCE. 389 

action which had involved her in ruin. For a time 
his emotion kept him silent, while Gertrude sat with 
her elbows resting on a table, and her face buried in 
her hands. But Ljmdsay was ever more intent on 
allaying the afflictions of others than in indulging his 
own feelings; and he soon mastered his own agita- 
tion, that he might be the better able to calm Ger- 
trude's ; but his voice faltered as he spoke. 

"Dearest Gertrude," said he, "I know it will be 
in vain to talk of comfort to you in the first anguish 
of your mind ; but, ah ! Gertrude, could you discern 
the hand that has thus smitten you — could you look 
up to Heaven, and say. It is my Father's will" 

" I do," cried Gertrude in a low suffocating voice. 
But, alas ! the feeling burnt feebly in her breast 
" And anything but this I could have borne — but dis- 
grace, infamy " her emotion choked her utterance. 

"No, Gertrude, you are unjust to yourself, un- 
mindful of God, if you attach such ideas of personal 
degradation to what has befallen you. 'Tis true you 
have no longer a title, a vain empty title, or wealth 
to spend, perhaps to satiety ; but how much nobler a 
being are you now, thus dignified by voluntary self- 
abasement, and rich in all the native gifts of your 
Creator, than ever you were, or would have been, as 
the mere favoured child of this world ? Ah ! Ger- 
trude, dear Gertrude, could you but view yourself 
with my eyes ! " 

"To have been an impostor — an usurper!" ex- 
claimed she. 



390 THE INHERITANCE. 

" How perverse sorrow has made you, Gertrude ! 
You are neither ; you have been the victim of impost- 
ure ; but your own name is pure and spotless; it is 
more. To those who can appreciate virtue, it will carry 
a nobler sound along with it than any that heraldry 
could have bestowed. How poor is the boast of 
ancestry compared with that lofty sense of honour 
which has made you trample under foot all those 
allurements to which your soul still cleaves, even in 
renouncing ! This is greatness ! " 

" Who but you will judge me thus "? " 

"All who love virtue, — all who love you, Ger- 
trude " 

" Love me ! " repeated she, relapsing into an 
agony of grief — " Oh ! who could love me, base, vile, 
abject as I am ^ " 

" Gertrude ! " cried Lyndsay, in emotion almost 
equal to her own, "do you, indeed, ask who could 
love you ? " 

But Gertrude was silent, for her thoughts were all 
of Delmour. Lyndsay's agitation increased. 

"You ask me who could love you, Gertrude? he 
who has once loved you truly will love you still — 

will love you more than ever — I " he stopped, 

then took two or three turns about the room in great 
disorder, while Gertrude, absorbed in grief, and think- 
ing only of his words, as applied to her lover, was 
little aware of what was passing in Lyndsay's generous 
heart. In a few minutes he regained his usual calm- 
ness, and approaching her, took her hand and said — 



THE INHERITANCE. 391 

"Gertrude, you are unable to stand this storm 
which has come upon you ; you must retire to your 
own apartment, and allow me to act for you. I 
promise you that nothing shall provoke me to violence 
— I promise you that I will bear everything." 

" Oh ! you have borne too much already for me," 
cried Gertrude, with a burst of weeping. " My best — 
my only friend," added she in a voice choked with 
emotion. 

" You will then look upon me as your friend, as 
your guardian, as your brother — will you not, Ger- 
trude? such and all will I be to you, so help me 
God!" 

Gertrude could not speak, but she pressed the 
hand which still held hers in grateful acknowledg- 
ment, and relying on Lyndsay's promise, as she knew 
she well might, she at last consented that he should 
see her father alone, and that she should await the 
result of the conference. 

After seeing her mind somewhat strengthened and 
her spirits more composed, Lyndsay then repaired to 
the library, where he found Lewiston vainly attempt- 
ing to hide his rage by affecting to busy himself in 
coolly turning over the books, while it was evident he 
was only exercising his fury upon them. He took 
no notice of Lyndsay's entrance, but went on tossing 
over the leaves of a splendid folio, in a manner enough 
to have made a bibliopolist faint; then began to 
whistle with an air of unconcern, which, however, did 
not sit very easily upon him. 



392 THE INHERITANCE. 

Lyndsay waited a few minutes in silence, then 
said — 

"I have been hearing a strange tale, sir, from 
one " 

" Have you so, sir ?" rudely interrupted Lewiston, 
looking at an engraving in the book, as if deeply 
interested in it; "have you so, and what then?" 

" Then I would have your account, sir, of the same 
story." 

"You would? then I must trouble you, sir, to let 
me know what your story is in the first place, that 
we may understand each other, sir." 

Lyndsay repeated what Gertrude had communi- 
cated to him, and added — 

" It is therefore in vain to attempt to carry on any 
further concealment — the truth must be proclaimed ; 
but for the sake of one whom hitherto I have only 
known as a dearly loved relative, I would fain have it 
softened, as " 

"Confound her for an idiot !" exclaimed Lewiston, 
furiously, as he hurled the book from him with 
violence, and pushed over an inkstand ; then kicked 
back his chair, and drove everything aside, while he 
took two or three strides across the room, biting his 
thumb in the manner of one who must have some- 
thing, no matter what, on which to wreck his passion. 

Lyndsay was too judicious to interrupt him ; dis- 
gusting as the spectacle of uncontrolled passion was, 
for Gertrude's sake he submitted to it in silence. At 
length Lewiston stopped, and said abruptly — 



THE INHERITANCE. 393 

" Has the fool blabbed to anybody else, or are you 
her only father confessor V 

*'I cannot tell whether the disclosure has been 
made known to any one else," said Lyndsay, for 
Delmour's name had not been mentioned between 
them; "but it can signify little, since it must soon 
be made public." 

" Well, she deserves to suffer for her confounded 
folly; but — you seem to have a liking for the girl, 
fool as she is ? " then, as if communing with himself, 
" She is handsome, very handsome ; I've seen nothing 
like her ; she'll make a figure in New Jersey ; she'll 
go well off there." 

Lyndsay tried to be calm, even at the idea of the 
beautiful high-souled Gertrude taken to America to 
be bartered, sold, by such a savage, and said, "Even 
if you are the person you give out, it does not neces- 
sarily follow that this unfortunate lady must be com- 
pelled to reside with you." 

" Why, what's to become of her f 

" It is unnecessary to discuss that question at pre- 
sent; but be assured, she possesses friends, whose 
influence and fortune — neither of them inconsiderable 
— will be devoted to her service." 

" That is to say, you would marry her such as she 
is ? Well, as you seem to have a liking for her, I'll 
tell you what — if the thing has gone no further, and 
I don't think it has, or t'other spark wouldn't have 
set off as he did, why, since you're fond of her, I'll 
give my consent that you should have her, upon con- 



394 THE INHERITANCE. 

dition that all's to be kept snug ; she'll come to her 
senses by-and-bye, and be sorry that she's played the 
fool this way. And more than that, if you'll agree to 
settle handsomely upon me, I'll engage to go back to 
my own country, which is the best after all; and, 
since we don't put up together, let us keep on differ- 
ent sides of the Atlantic. What do you say to that, 
sir 1" 

"I say you are a villain," burst from Lyndsay's 
lips; "and I must have the most clear, undeniable 
evidence that you are the person you profess to be 
before I will give credit to it ; I do not believe you 
are the father of Gertrude;" and he fixed his eyes 
upon him, as though he would have searched his very 
soul. 

The blood rushed to Lewiston's face, and for some 
minutes he was silent; then recovering himself, he 
said in his usual manner — 

" I'm all you'll have for him, though, sir, whether 
you believe it or not. I am Jacob Ruxton Lewiston 
of Perth- Amboy, New Jersey ; and that you'll find, if 
you'll be so good as step over the way and inquire." 

"That may be; but there may have been more 
Jacob Euxton Lewistons than one." 

" Why, haven't I got my wife's letter here V taking 
out a pocket-book, and holding it up with triumph — 
"haven't I the testimony of the priest who witnessed 
it? And he is still alive, too, and forthcoming if 
wanted ; and who swore to her never to give it into 
any hand but her husband's ? And isn't there Mrs. 



THE INHEEITANCE. 395 

St. Clair ready to swear to me when she comes to 
herself? What the plague would you have, sir?" 

" All that is insufficient " 

" Perhaps you judge by my looks. I've wore well, 
I grant you; but I'm eight-and thirty for all that; 
married at nineteen — the more fool " 

" Nothing you can now say will have the slightest 
effect in removing my doubts," said Lynsday. 

"Faith, I care very little about it," said Lewiston, 
with affected coolness; "you may keep your doubts, 
and welcome, for me." 

"That I shall certainly do, till I have obtained 
better evidence than your own. I will send a person, 
on whose fidelity and prudence I can perfectly rely, 
to the place from whence you say you came, to pro- 
cure proofs of your identity. When he returns with 
these you may then claim your daughter, but not till 
then. I am her guardian, and will be answerable for 
her safety " 

Here Lewiston burst out in a strain of the coarsest 
invective and imprecations; but Lyndsay remained 
calm and resolute, and only said — 

" In these circumstances, you must be aware this 
can be no residence for you. You will do well, there- 
fore, to prepare to leave it as soon as you can make 
your arrangements ; and, if the means are wanting, I 
am ready to furnish you with what is necessary." 

He then left the room, and hastened to Gertrude, 
who was waiting him in an agony of apprehension. 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

" Tout se salt t6t ou tard et la verite perce." — Gresset. 

It was with caution Lyndsay communicated to 
Gertrude the suspicions which he entertained ; but, 
to one of her sanguine spirit, the slightest surmise 
was sufficient to kindle hope in her breast. It was 
certain she was no longer Countess of Rossville, but 
not to be the daughter of this man — not to loath and 
shudder at him to whom she owed her being, even 
this seemed almost happiness. But then, as she 
thought of the difficulty of procuring evidence from 
so distant a quarter of the world, her spirit sank, and 
she exclaimed — "But how impossible for me to 
obtain information, and how vague and unsatisfactory 
must it be ! " 

** Trust that to me, dear Gertrude," said Lyndsay; 
"I will send by the first ship a person who will 
thoroughly investigate into this man's history, and on 
whose testimony you may safely rely. I would go 
myself if that would be more satisfactory to you, and 
if I saw you in a place of safety." 

"Oh, Lyndsay!" cried Gertrude, with a burst of 
tears which for a moment choked her utterance ; then 



THE INHERITANCE. 397 

passionately exclaimed — " You protect and save me, 

while he ! " She uttered a sob as though her 

heart had broke ; then remained silent. 

Blinded as Gertrude was by romantic passion, she 
could not but be struck with the contrast between her 
lover's conduct and that of Lyndsay ; and the convic- 
tion rushed upon her heart with a bitterness which 
for a time absorbed every other consideration. With 
emotion scarcely less than her own, Lyndsay now in- 
quired whether she had divulged the secret to any one 
else. Gertrude struggled for a few moments to regain 
her composure, then said — " Yes ; to one whom it more 
nearly concerned than any other, and now I wait but 
to hear from him to make known my disgrace to the 
whole world." 

" How false, how worldly, are your notions of dis- 
grace, dear Gertrude ! " said Lyndsay ; " but I will not 
stop to combat them now. Tell me what you wish to 
have done ; what are your plans 1 " 

" It is Colonel Delmour's wish that I should remain 
here until I hear from him," said Gertrude, in a falter- 
ing voice. 

" Be it so, then," said Lyndsay, with emotion ; 
"but remember, Gertrude, you have a home if you 
will deign to accept of it ; my house is yours to com- 
mand. My aunt, Mrs. Lyndsay, whom you have heard 
me mention, is now in Scotland, and will reside there 
with you. You would love her if you knew her, for 
she is good and gentle, and knows what suffering is. 
For myself, I shall possibly go abroad for a while ; or, 



398 THE INHERITANCE. 

— but, in short, I can be at no loss ; so promise, that 
if " 

"No, no; I never will be a pensioner on your 
bounty," cried Gertrude, in violent agitation. " I will 
work, beg. Oh ! Lyndsay, how you wring my heart ! " 
And she leaned her head on a table, and wept bitterly. 

" Forgive me, dearest Gertrude, if I have hurt you. 
God knows, it was far from my thoughts. And now, 
let me recommend to you to retire to your own apart- 
ment ; you will be safe from intrusion : and leave 
everything to me. Rest assured there shall no 
violence be used ; he shall be treated as your father, 
though not recognised as such." 

" But ought I not to see him once more 1 And — 
oh! Lyndsay — if I should have turned my father 
from the house ! Oh ! no ; I cannot. Suffer him to 
remain. He is — nay, must be, my father ; he could 
not have imposed upon her ! " 

" At such a distance of time it is quite possible he 
might ; but, dear Gertrude, confide in me — I will do 
nothing harshly. But you cannot remain under the 
same roof ; it will kill you. He shall go to my house ; 
he shall be well treated — indeed he shall." And 
Gertrude, calmed by these assurances, at length con- 
sented to shut herself up in her own apartment, and 
even to refuse to see Lewiston if he should attempt it. 
Lyndsay's next business was to visit Mrs. St. Clair, in 
hopes of elucidating something from her ; but he was 
shocked at the situation in which he found her, and 
immediately sent off for medical assistance, and also 



THE INHERITANCE. 399 

to Mr. and Miss Black, requesting them to come to 
Rossville as soon as possible. He had scarcely done 
all this, when Lewiston entered the room where he 
was, with a mingled air of confusion and effrontery. 

"So, sir, you're going to raise the country, it 
seems. Two men on horseback galloping away there 
as if the deuce were in them : what's the meaning of 
all this 1 I must see my daughter," added he abruptly. 

" When you have established your claim to that 
title you shall see her. Till then, I have already told 
you I act as her guardian, and as such I will not 
consent to your meeting. If you had the feelings of 
a parent you would see the propriety of this." 

"Feelings!" exclaimed Lewiston; "by Jove, my 
feelings have been prettily treated since I came 
amongst you ; may I be flayed if ever I met with 
such usage. Feelings, by Jingo ! I say my feehngs 
have been confoundedly ill-used, and I feel it too ;" 
and he walked up and down in great discomposure. 

" She whom you call your daughter is not unmind- 
ful of your feelings," said Lyndsay ; " although by my 
advice she declines a meeting wliich could serve no 
purpose but to agitate and distress her. But she is 
very desirous that you should be treated with con- 
sideration ; that you should have every comfort and 
indulgence which you may require ; and I shall there- 
fore make a point of seeing you properly accom- 
modated." 

" What does she mean by all this palaver ? Does 
she mean by comfort and indulgences, and so forth, 



400 THE INHERITANCE. 

a round sum of money 1 If she does, I comprehend 
that; give me money, and faith I'll soon find comforts 
and indulgences for myself." 

"You must be conscious that, as your daughter, 
she can have nothing to bestow," said Lyndsay ; " but 
I possess the means ; and when assured that you 
have told me the truth, one way or other — for the 
truth is all I require from you — we shall then per- 
haps be able to come to an agreement." 

Lewiston remained thoughtful for a few minutes, 
then said, "Has the goose quacked to any but your- 
self 1 I want to know." 

. ** Colonel Delmour has been made acquainted with 
all the particulars, and is gone to consult with his 
brother, now Earl of Eossville, as to what is to be 
done. Be assured at their hands you will meet with 
little indulgence." 

Here Lewiston broke out into an execration against 
Delmour and against Gertrude, both of whom he 
denounced in the bitterest terms; then suddenly 
changing his tone, he said, "It will cost you some- 
thing, I can tell you, to send to New Jersey — that 
it will; a few dollars, I can tell you." 

"I have already told you I am ready to pay a 
good price for the knowledge of the truth, be it what 
it may," said Lyndsay. 

"What! even supposing — only supposing, you 
know — that I were not the girl's father '? " 

" Perhaps I should be inclined to pay more for 
that discovery than for any other," said Lyndsay, 



THE INHERITANCE. 401 

trying to hide his emotion ; " but I again repeat it is 
the truth, and the truth only, I require ; and that, 
sooner or later, I am sure of arriving at; a few 
months will bring me the knowledge of that." 

" I tell you it will cost you money ! " 

"And I have told you I am ready to pay it." 

"Why, how much do you reckon upon — what 
lengths are you ready to go — eh ? " 

" I am willing to go any lengths to detect fraud 
and villainy, but not to reward it. I am perhaps 
wrong in offering to come to any compromise with 
you, but regard for the peace of one who is suffering 
from your villainy induces me " 

"Will you give a thousand pounds?" interrupted 
Lewiston abruptly. 

"No. I will give more if necessary to discover 
the truth, but I will not reward falsehood in the 
same measure." 

" Confound your distinctions ! Will you give five 
hundred 1 — by jingo ! I won't bate a halfpenny." 

" Upon condition that you swear solemnly to tell 
the whole truth," said Lyndsay, "I will do more for 
you than I am perhaps justified in doing. I will pay 
your expenses from America and back to it, and I 
will settle an annuity upon you of fifty pounds per 
annum, upon condition that you give up that letter, 
and never set foot in Britain again." 

"I'd rather have a good round sum at once. I 
want " 

"It is in vain to say more on the subject," said 

VOL. II. 2 D 



402 THE INHERITANCE. 

Lyndsay; "if you wish to have an hour to reflect 
upon it you may, but that must be all. I shall 
immediately set about the necessary steps to be taken 
in this afl'air, and it is likely you will repent having 
refused my offer when too late." 

He was moving away, when Lewiston caught his 
arm. 

"Well, will you put in black and white what you 
have agreed to give, and — and then — we shall see ? " 

Lyndsay immediately took up a pen and wrote his 
offer. Lewiston took it, looked at it, hemmed, 
coloured, and became confused ; at last, plucking up 
effrontery, he said — 

" Well, then, I am not the girl's father — and that's 
as true as that God made me." 

At this acknowledgment Lyndsay's heart thrilled 
with rapture, and he could scarcely refrain from flying 
to Gertrude with the joyful tidings. Lewiston went 
on — "But I am of the same blood, the only one, by- 
the-bye, remaining, and the same name. I was her 
father's cousin, and when the old dotard of a priest 
came to Perth- Amboy, and inquired for Jacob Euxton 
Lewiston, to be sure he found me ; 'twas by way of 
humbug, at first, that I passed myself off for the man 
who had been drowned nearly twenty years before ; 

but when I found what his business was but that's 

enough — I hate long stories ; and so, as soon as you 
can let me have this on a proper bit of parchment" — 
pointing to the paper Lyndsay had given him — " then 
111 wish you a good afternoon." 



THE INHERITANCE. 403 

" But how came you to impose yourself so easily 
upon Mrs. St. Clair 1 " inquired Lyndsay, anxious for 
Gertrude's sake to ascertain everything. " She had 
seen the person you represented 1 " 

"She had so, but it was near twenty years ago, 
and there was a family likeness, it seems ; besides, I 
had the letter to shut her mouth, and since I was 
master of her secret it signified little to her whether 
I were the girl's father or not. 1 had got the upper 
hand of her anyhow." 

Having got all the information that was wanted, 
Ljniday was now only desirous of being rid of so 
worthless an inmate, and after admonishing him upon 
the iniquity of his ways, he gave him a letter to his 
agent directing the money to be paid and the bond 
to be made out for his annuity, then only waited to 
see him fairly out of the house before he communi- 
cated to Gertrude the happy result. 



CHAPTER L. 

" Plus nous etions jeunes, tnoins nous avions de resignation ; 
car dans la jeunesse, surtout Ton s'attend au bonheur, Ton croit 
en avoir le droit ; et Ton se revolte a I'idee de ne pas I'obtenir." 

Madame de SxAfeL. 

For a time Gertrude felt as though she were again 
restored to all she had lost in her joy at finding she 
was not the daughter of the man whom her very soul 
abhorred ; and, at the moment, all other evils seemed 
light compared to that she had just escaped. 

She could not find words to thank Lyndsay for his 
generous interference (though that was only known 
to her in part) ; but her looks, her tears, her broken- 
exclamations, spoke more forcibly the feelings of her 
heart. But, the first flush of joy over, many a bitter 
thought arose ; she was still the fallen, degraded, de- 
pendent being, without a home, without a friend save 
one — he to whom she owed all — and Delmour ! but 
on Delmour she would not think; she would wait in 
all the unnatural calmness of patience, which knew 
not resignation, till she heard from him, and then ! 
and her heart heaved in agony as she thought what 
might then be the result. 

Lyndsay seemed to guess something of what 



THE INHERITANCE. 405 

was passing in her mind, for he said with some 
emotion — 

" Those who, like yourself, have been imposed upon 
in this fraud, ought not they also to be undeceived 'i 

Shall I perform that duty for you ? shall I write " 

he stopped ; but Gertrude knew to whom he alluded, 
and, for a moment, she wished that Delmour were 
indeed apprized of the discovery which had been 
made, that she was not the daughter of the horrid 
Lewiston, but in another instant she rejected the 
idea. 

" No," thought she ; "I will not seem to court his 
notice. As heiress of Rossville I gloried in avowing 
my preference for him ; but as the poor homeless 
Gertrude, 'tis he must now seek me ; my heart may 
break, but it will not bend. I will wait — I will be to 
him all or nothing ! " But she almost gasped as she 

repeated to Lyndsay — " I will wait " then, after 

a pause, she added, with a deep blush, " but do you 
what you think right for me." 

And Lyndsay's generous, disinterested spirit, guided 
upon every occasion by that heavenly principle, " Do 
unto others even as you would that others should do 
unto you," prompted him to write and acquaint 
Delmour with the truth. As the daughter of Lewis- 
ton, he was certain he never would have stooped to 
an alliance with Gertrude ; but whether, as she was 
now situated, he would still fulfil his engagement 
was a doubtful question. At any rate, it was due 
to him to be undeceived ; and though he compre- 



406 THE INHERITANCE. 

hended and approved of the delicacy which kept 
Gertrude silent, he deemed it but the more incumbent 
on him to declare the truth. He therefore wrote a 
simple and brief statement of what had passed, with- 
out noticing or alluding to anything else, and having 
despatched his letter, he awaited the answer in an 
agitation of mind little inferior to Gertrude's. 

Meanwhile, Dr. Bruce and Mr. and Miss Black had 
successively arrived, and it was Lyndsay's painful 
task to make the two latter acquainted with the 
guilty transaction, which he did in the gentlest and 
most delicate manner. But, however desirous he was 
of sparing their feelings, it was impossible to soften 
the disgraceful fact, which fell upon them like a 
thunderbolt, and affected them each according to the 
difference of their mind and feelings. When the 
first shock had been surmounted, it was settled that 
Miss Black should remain at Eossville for the pre- 
sent in attendance upon Mrs. St. Clair, whose situa- 
tion was such as to disarm every hostile feeling, even 
could such have found harbour in her sister's breast. 
But it was in sorrow, not in anger, that she acknow- 
ledged the disgrace which had fallen upon them ; and 
Lyndsay hoped that her soft unupbraiding spirit might 
tend to calm Gertrude's wilder grief ; but Gertrude 
refused to see her. 

" Do not," said she to Lyndsay, with an agitation 
that shook her whole frame — " do not ask me to see 
any one at present — never ask me to see the sister of 
" she stopped, shuddering. 



THE INHERITANCE. 407 

"But you forgive her, Gertrude"?" said Lyndsay. 

Gertrude was silent for some moments, then ex- 
claimed with a burst of emotion — 

" Oh ! it is dreadful to have been thus striving 
against nature — striving to love as my mother she who 
was my bitterest enemy. She has broken bands which 
God himself had knit ; my mother ! — and I knew her 
not as such ! — gentle and uncomplaining, I treated her 
as my servant Oh ! may God forgive me, but do not 
ask me to forgive her." 

" Ah ! Gertrude, it was not thus we were taught 
to pray by Him who forgave us." 

But Gertrude only wept in bitterness of heart. 

" Dear Gertrude ! you have been heroic, -svill you 
not be forgiving ? Do not let me think you find it 
easier to be great than to be good." 

" For you I would do much," said Gertrude in in- 
creasing emotion; " I would do even this if I could, but 
I cannot; do not then — do not name her to me," 
cried she passionately, while she pressed her hands on 
her bosom, as if to still the tumult of her soul. 
"She it is who has made me the lost, degraded, 
wretched being that I am, and ever must remain ; " 
and again her tears burst forth. 

" How you disappoint me, Gertrude !" said Lyndsay, 
with a sigh ; " I had flattered myself that the same 
greatness of mind which led you to cast far from you 
all that you most prized on earth, would at the same 
time have taught you the worthlessness of those mere 
worldly objects. Ungrateful that you are ! Which of 



408 THE INHERITANCE. 

all the gifts a liberal Creator has endowed you with 
would you exchange for those empty distinctions 
which one creature bestows upon another*? Would 
you exchange your beauty for rank, your talents for 
wealth, your greatness of mind for extended power ; 
for all of them would you exchange your immortal 
soul ? Ah ! Gertrude, what avails it by what name 
you are called for the few short years of your earthly 
pilgrimage 1 If to be made fit partakers of immortal 
life is, as I believe it is, the sole end of existence, all 
that we are called upon to endure here are but means 
for that end. Do not impute your trials, then, severe 
as they are, to a being such as yourself ; but look 
upon them as instruments in the hand of God, it may 
be to bring you unto Him. Even in this world, 
Gertrude, you may yet live to reap in smiles what has 
been sown in tears, if you will look for happiness where 
it is only to be found." 

Gertrude shook her head, and still wept ; but her 
tears were softer, and her agitation less violent. 

Lyndsay's was not that indiscreet zeal which would 
break the bruised reed and quench the smoking flax 
in its blind misjudging enthusiasm; he looked not 
that the soil should be harrowed and the seed sown 
and the harvest reaped at one and the same time ; 
but he trusted that the influence of Divine truth 
would bring peace to the soul, still fainting with agony 
beneath the load assigned it; and that the heart 
which God had stricken would yet, in prostrating 
itself at the throne of grace, and acknowledging Him 



THE INHERITANCE. 409 

in all His ways, rise superior to the changes of this 
passing world. " virtue ! when this solemn page- 
antry of earthly grandeur shall be no more, when 
all distinctions but moral and religious shall vanish ; 
when this earth shall be dissolved, when the moon 
shall be no more a light by night, ileither the sun by 
day, thou shalt ' still survive thy votary's immortal 
friend — thou shalt aj^pear like thy great Author in 
perfect beauty; thy lustre undiminished, thy glory 
imperishable." 



CHAPTER LI 

" I grant that the stroke which has laid thy hopes low 
Is perhaps the severest that nature can know ; 
If hope, but deferr'd, may cause sickness of heart, 
How dreadful to see it for ever depart ! " Barton. 

Gertrude now experienced the agony of suspense in 
all its intensity. Eestless and unquiet she walked 
about her own apartment, or starting at every sound, 
stopped to listen with suspended breath, then pressed 
her throbbing heart, as though she could have stilled 
its tumults by the touch of her hand. 

"Why do 1 submit to this — why do I endure if?" 
inquired she of herself, as she bent her burning brow 
in shame at the tears that had fallen in showers on her 
lover's picture, on which she had been gazing. " He 
left me, and at what a time ! No, I will not wait 
to be rejected — cast off like something vile ; I will go 
if it were to beg ;" and for a moment she formed the 
desperate resolution of leaving Rossville secretly — of 
flying she knew not, cared not, where ; she would find 
some spot on which to lay her aching head till death 
should close her eyes. But then the madness of the 
scheme struck her ; she felt she could not mingle with 
the vulgar throng; young, distinguished, and deli- 



THE INHERITANCE. 411 

cately bred, where could she find a shelter 1 Lynd- 
say, 'tis true, had offered her a home ; but her spirit 
already bowed beneath the load of gratitude she 
owed to him. Then, with that ebb and flow of mind 
which is ever the effect of powerful excitement, re- 
turned her faith in Delmour. Yes, it was, it must 
be, his love for her which had hurried him from her; 
his was not that selfish passion — he had said so a 
thousand times — which would plunge the object he 
loved in all the wretchedness of poverty, and she 
knew that he was poor — that he was even in debt — 
that it was impossible he could support her as he 
would have his wife appear ; but he had gone to pre- 
vail upon his brother to provide for them, and he would 
come — Oh yes! hewouldcomeandclaimheras his own. 

It was thus Gertrude communed with herself — her 
mind either a prey to despair, or busied in vain 
fantastic dreams, which, even if they were destined 
to be realised, it was idleness to indulge. Her agita- 
tion was not lessened when, on the third morning after 
her lover's departure, inteUigence arrived of the death 
of Mr. Delmour. 

Gertrude was not so callous to right feeling as not 
to hear of this event with mingled grief and awe; and 
the moral was too striking not to fall with conviction 
on her heart. With tears she acknowledged the 
vanity, the emptiness, of worldly distinction; and 
kneeling, prayed for the moment fervently — devoutly 
prayed in all the humiliation of a contrite spirit and 
an awakened heart. 



412 THE INHERITANCE. 

Lyndsay did not omit the opportunity of enforcing 
the solemn lesson which came to shed its calming 
influence on her ruffled breast. It indeed required no 
very high sense of religion at such a time to feel the 
utter insignificance of mere worldly greatness, and 
to acknowledge that its grandeurs are vapours, its 
pleasures illusions, its promises falsehoods, when he 
on whom it seemed to have lavished all that it had 
to bestow, was now, as if in mockery — 

••A thing, at thought of which 
The roused soul swells boundless and sublime ! " 

But, alas ! these wholesome thoughts were yet 
strangers in Gertrude's heart; and the first sudden 
shock over, bright thoughts began to spring up even 
from the ashes of the dead. 

"Even in this hour of grief and fears 
When awful Truth unveil'd appears, 
Some pow'r unknown usurps my breast ; 
Back to the world my thoughts are led, 
My feet in folly's lab'rinth tread, 
And fancy dreams that life is blest." 

Again Gertrude's heart bounded as she thought 
her lover was now Earl of Eossville, able and — could 
she doubt — willing to restore her to all she had lost? 
She would have renounced all for him — she had stood 
the test; and a thousand, ay, ten thousand, times 
had he wished that it were in his power to prove to 
her the disinterestedness of his love in return. 

There was no longer room for uncertainty; although 



THE INHERITANCE. 413 

he might not choose to involve her in the hard- 
ships and privations of poverty, yet how would he 
exult in raising her to the height from which she had 
descended ! And again gay and vain-glorious visions 
began to swim before those eyes still wet with tears 
of penitence for former follies. 

Suspense was now changed into impatience scarcely 
less supportable, as she counted the days and hours 
which must elapse before she could receive the assur- 
ance of her lover's faith ; but at length the time came 
when she might hear from him, but no letter was 
there. Another, and another, and another day passed 
on, every instant of which was as an age of agony to 
Gertrude's throbbing soul, as again it was over- 
whelmed with a sea of doubts, and again the sickness 
of hope deferred crept like poison through her veins. 
But who can count the beatings of the lonely heart *? 
Once more she had watched from her window the 
arrival of the post ; again she had held her breath to 
listen for the footstep that was to bring her the letter 
on which her existence seemed to depend ; but a long 
and dreary pause followed. At length it was broken 
by a message from Lyndsay, requesting to see her. 

" Something is wrong," thought she. " He is dead, 

or " She could not finish the sentence even in 

imagination ; but pale, trembling, gasping for breath, 
she repaired to the library, where she was told he 
awaited her. 

Her own agitation was too great to permit her to 
notice Lyndsay's as he advanced to meet her, and 



414 THE INHERITANCE. 

would have spoken, but the words died on his lips. 
Then Gertrude looked on him, but it was not grief 
that was depicted in his countenance ; yet neither was 
it joy, but a strange mingled expression agitated his 
usually serene features, which she in vain strove to 
construe. He took her hand, but it was in a manner 
more respectful and an air more embarrassed than he 
was wont to testify towards her, with whom he had 
hitherto been on the very footing of a friend. 

"You have heard — you have heard — Lyndsay, 
cried Gertrude ; but she could say no more. 

" I have," said Lyndsay with an emotion he vainly 
tried to master. " Gertrude, dearest Gertrude !" He 
turned from her for a moment and paced the chamber 
in disorder, while Gertrude, bereft of all motion, stood 
pale and speechless. Suddenly he approached her, and 
putting a letter into her hands he held them locked in 
his, while he said in a voice, choked with agitation — 

" Gertrude, I cannot now say what I feel ; but if at 
this time you can think of me at all, think of me as 
your truest, your firmest friend, as one who shares 
your every feeling." He then quitted the apartment, 
but Gertrude was scarcely conscious he had spoken, 
for a glance of her eye told her the letter was from 
Delmour. It was an opened one, and addressed to 
Lyndsay. With desperate courage she unfolded it ; 
she began to read it with a beating heart and a 
trembling hand, but as she went on every nerve and 
fibre felt as though they were hardening into stone. 
It was as follows : — 



THE INHERITANCE. 415 

"Dear Lyndsay — The melancholy intelligence 
of my lamented brother's death would reach you some 
days ago. That, together with the heartrending 
scene I went through at Eossville, was almost too 
much for me, and must be my excuse for having so 
long delayed acknowledging your letter. Perhaps 
another motive, still more powerful, has also influenced 
me, which I know I need not hesitate to avow to you. 
It is the earnest heartfelt desire I have to do every 
justice to one who, though still dearer to me than 
life, and whom it is distraction to me even to think of 
relinquishing, yet at present I fear I may not venture 
to call mine ; yet mine I know she is, and ever will be 
in heart, as Heaven knows how wholly I am hers ! 
But circumstanced as we both are, it would be folly, 
madness — in short, you must be aware of the diffi- 
culties with which I have to contend. You know, 
and I do not hesitate to acknowledge, that I consider 
birth as the most important of all distinctions, and I 
believe I am not singular in my sentiments upon this 
subject — at least I know my uncle the Duke (whom 
I ventured to sound upon this matter) is still more 
decided in his opinion ; and as he is now in a very 
declining state and has much in his own power, I own I 
am unwilling to come to extremities with him at present. 
You are aware that the Rossville property, consider- 
able as it is, did not prove sufficient during the last 
year to support the dignity of the family, and that 
considerable debts have in consequence been incurred. 
I am far from intending to convey the most distant 



416 THE INHERITANCE. 

insinuation against the dear object of my affections, 
for if any blame was imputable it would be. perhaps 
more justly due to me ; but she only lived as her rank 
demanded, and as I should choose my wife to do ; and 
I merely mention this to prove to you that I am at 
present far from independent, as my own debts (that 
to yourself amongst others, dear Lyndsay) are of 
some magnitude, and both together leave me little 
choice as to what, in common prudence, I am called 
upon to do. Distressing as it is, I consider myself 
called upon for the present to relinquish those hopes 
which have so long formed the happiness of my life, 
and which I will still cherish even in spite of fate. A 
time may, and I trust will, yet come when no such 
heartrending alternative will be necessary. Mean- 
while, it is my most anxious wish that everything 
should be done that can possibly contribute to the 
peace and comfort of my adored Gertrude. I entreat 
you will therefore prevail upon her to remain at Ross- 
ville. It is my intention to go abroad for a year or 
two, and it will materially contribute to my tran- 
quillity to know that she is still mistress there, and 
in possession of all those enjoyments which I know 
she prizes so much. I must therefore entreat your 
good offices to have everything arranged on this 
point. Let her choose whom she will to reside with 
her; or should she persist in choosing another resi- 
dence, let eveything be arranged in the most liberal 
manner. I enclose you an order upon Coutts, that 
you may draw on my account for whatever is requisite. 



THE INHERITANCE. 417 

Let nothing be wanting that can in any degree tend 
to embellish an existence which, alas ! from hence- 
forth, like my own, I fear will be but a painful one. 
Dear Lyndsay, to your hands I commit my treasure ; 
on your friendship I place the utmost reUance. I 
know her affections are mine — wholly mine ; and I 

but who that has loved Gertrude could ever love 

another 1 I will endeavour to write to her myself 
when my nerves have regained some firmness ; but at 
present you may judge of the state of my mind from 
this distracted scrawl. Write to me, I entreat of you, 
dear Lyndsay ; teU me how my dearest love bears 
herself. Write by return of post ; tell me all — every- 
thing — and believe me your affectionate 

"Eossvillk" 
" P.S. — The law people are taking the necessary 
steps to have my rights recognised. Contrive to save 
my poor Gertrude's feelings as much as possible on 
this occasion." 



VOL. II. 2 E 



CHAPTER LIT. 

" Go to ; hatli life 

A blessing yet for me ? I have no country, 
I have no house, a refuge from my ills." 

EUEIPIDES. 

Such was the letter, and when Gertrude ended it she 
cast one look of anguish to heaven, as she murmured — 

" For him, oh, my God ! I would have abandoned 
all ! Thou knowest that I would !" 

She could not have found a name for the wretched- 
ness which wrung her heart, but yet, with a mien 
outwardly calm, save for her burning cheek and 
quivering lip, she passed to the adjoining room, 
where Lyndsay was waiting with the most intense 
anxiety the effect which this communication would 
produce. As Gertrude returned the letter she merely 
bent her head to him ; but he saw that her eyes were 
tearless, and her air was even loftier than it was wont. 
She moved on towards a door at the opposite end of 
the room, which communicated with her own suite of 
apartments, and Lyndsay made no attempt to detain 
her, but when her hand was upon the lock she 
turned round, and approaching him, took his hand 
and pressed it between hers^ 



THE INHEKITANCE. 419 

" My dear — my only friend," said she, " may God 
bless you ! " 

" Why do you say so now, dearest Gertrude ?" cried 
Lyndsay, fearing, he knew not what, from the un- 
natural calmness of her manner. 

" Because — because I feel it," said Gertrude, with a 
sigh, as though her heart had broke. 

"And I — may I too say all I feel for you?" said 
Lyndsay, with emotion. 

" No ; why should you feel for me ? I am well — 
quite well," said Gertrude, with the same sort of wild 
calmness, "but I will never forget your kindness to me ! " 

A tear gleamed in her eye as she turned away. 
Lyndsay made an effort to detain her, as he exclaimed, 
" Speak, then — tell me what you would have me do 
to serve you — to save you if I can from " 

Gertrude gently disengaged herself from him, while 
she said in a firm voice, " I will not remain here ; but 
I have arrangements to make before I go. Do not 
seek to detain me ! " 

" Where will you go, dearest Gertrude ? My house 
is yours, and my aunt " 

"I will not go to your house, Edward," said Ger- 
trude, and her voice began to falter ; then, making 
an effort to regain her composure, she quickly added, 
" I know not yet where I shall go. I must have time. > 
I have arrangements to make, but I cannot breathe 

here " and she gasped as she spoke, then waving 

her hand to Lyndsay, she hastily entered her own 
apartment. 



420 THE INHERITANCE. 

Still Gertrude's energy did not forsake her as she 
set about her preparations ; but she mistook for forti- 
tude what in reality was only fever of mind, and it 
was under that false excitement that she acted. She 
was alive but to one feeling — she had been deserted 
by him for whom she would have sacrificed the world 
itself, he whom she loved sufficiently, even to have 
renounced — he whom every hallowed obligation, every 
principle of honour, every feeling of tenderness, had 
bound to her by ties she had considered as indis- 
soluble. He had dared to insult her by supposing 
she would choose to be indebted to his bounty for 
her support. He deemed her unworthy of being his 
wife, and he would have her submit to become his 
pensioner ! — to live upon his alms ! — to be clothed 
and fed by him ! — to drag out a life of dependence 
amid those very scenes which had witnessed her in the 
full meridian of her prosperity ! She could not, she 
would not, consider what she was to do; whither she 
was to go ; it mattered not what became of her were 
she but away from Eossville. She would work, beg, 
starve, but she would not sink into a base stipendiary. 

But, alas ! Gertrude knew nothing of life and its 
ways when she reasoned thus ; she knew nothing of 
those various manners and degrees in which every 
human being, even those possessed of the loftiest 
feelings of independence, are bound more or less to 
one another. She only panted to escape from the 
degradation she felt she was enduring, and every other 
idea was absorbed in that single one. 



THE INHERITANCE. 421 

But when her arrangements were completed, then . 
the dreadful sense of her own utter loneliness came 
upon her, and she pressed her throbbing temples in 
agony, as she leant her head upon her hand, and vainly 
strove to think of whither and to whom she would go. 
But "the world seem'd all before her where to choose," 
for she had no claim upon any one being in it ; and 
who would claim her, abject, degraded, fallen as she 
was ? No one but the generous, noble-minded Lynd- 
say, and he was the last person she would have re- 
course to. She could not bear that he should look 
upon her in her humiliation. He knew that she had 
been rejected, forsaken ; he had seen that heart 
which had been so fondly sought, so proudly won, 
now cast back upon her as a thing of nought ! 

She was roused from this agony of thought by the 
entrance of her maid, to announce that Mr. Eamsay 
was in the saloon and wished to see her. 

" I will not see him — I will not see any one that 

" and again the horror which she felt for all 

connected with the author of her misery rushed upon 
her. 

"My Lady !" exclaimed Miss Masham. 

" I am not your Lady — I am — but no matter, you 

will know all when I am gone Gone ! Where, 

whither?" repeated she to herself. Then the sudden 
resolution seized her that she would see Mr. Eamsay. 
He would take her from Eossville — no matter what 
became of her after that; and not daring to deliberate, 
she hastily passed on to the apartment, still under 



422 THE INHERITANCE. 

the excitement of feelings strained to their utmost 
stretch. 

Mr. Eamsay had been made acquainted by Mr 
Black with the discovery which had taken place, and 
for some time indignation against Mrs. St. Clair was 
the only feehng that found place in his breast ; then, 
as that somewhat abated, his heart began to yearn 
with pity towards the victim of her guilt, and at 
length, that stranger sentiment (for Uncle Adam was 
not prone to the indulgence of such weakness) gra- 
dually grew into something almost akin to joy at the 
thought that she, whom he had always loved for her 
resemblance to his first and only love, was indeed her 
descendant. The resemblance, even in his mind's 
eye, grew twenty times stronger; and he felt that he 
should look upon her with greater delight as the 
grand-daughter of Lizzie Lundie than ever he had 
done as Countess of Eossville. She was his own 
nearest relation, too ; for Lizzie and he had been 
cousins -german, brother and sister's children, while 
his connection with the Blacks was only by half-blood. 
All this Uncle Adam had revolved over and over 
again, as he paced his little chamber, irresolute how 
to act. At length, unable to come to any fixed deter- 
mination, he took chaise from the Blue Boar, and set 
off for Eossville, where he arrived, as if Heaven- 
directed, at the very moment when his appearance 
seemed indeed as an interposition of Providence. 
For the first time he voluntarily extended his hand 
and grasped Gertrude's in it, with a vehemence which 



THE INHERITANCE. 423 

was indicative of the warmth and sincerity of his 
good-will; both were silent for some moments, for 
even Uncle Adam for the time seemed overcome; 
but at length he said — 

" It is needless to say onything aboot it, I dinna 
want to hear ony mair ; just tell me whether I can do 
you ony gude. Will you gang wi' tclgV 

" Oh ! yes, yes," cried Gertrude ; " take me from 
this. Oh ! take me now " 

"But stay, now, are you sure you're ready 1" said 
Mr. Eamsay, who was not quite so rapid in his move- 
ments ; and who, although perfectly sincere in his 
offer, had not expected it to be so promptly acted 
upon. Moreover, he was not quite sure that they 
perfectly understood each other, and he thought some 
explanation necessary before they set off together. 
He would fain have put the question in a delicate 
form, but he had never been accustomed to sounding, 
and delicacy was not his forte; he was therefore fain 
to have recourse to his own method of gaining infor- 
mation, which was to put the question in the most 
direct manner ; and he said with his usual bluntness — 

"Do you ken whar it is you're gawin"?" 

The question struck like a dagger to Gertrude's 
heart, and smote with the consciousness of her own 
desolation, she could not speak ; she turned away her 
head to hide the burning drops that forced their way 
from her eyes. 

"I have no home," said she in a voice choking 
with emotion ; " I am a beggar ! " 



424 THE INHERITANCE. 

"I'm very glad to hear't," said Uncle Adam 
warmly, "that's just the very thing I wanted. I 
rejoice that you're to owe naething to that prood 
thrawn pack, so come wi' me, my dawtie, and ye's no 
want for onything that I ha'e to gie you. Lizzie 
Lundie's bairn will be my bairn, so come your ways. 
' The bird maun flichter that flees wi' ae wing,' but 
ye's haud up your head yet in spite o' them a'." 

In the tumult of her mind Gertrude had entirely 
overlooked the ties which bound her, the daughter of 
Jacob Lewiston, to him whom she had only known 
as the uncle of Mrs. St. Clair ; but now it glanced 
upon her that in Uncle Adam she beheld a relation 
of her own, the only being with whom she might 
claim kindred. But she was too wretched even to 
feel pleasure at the discovery; she only considered 
that he would take her away ; that he would give her 
a shelter, and there she would die, and be heard of 
no more. 

"Is there naebody here you wad see before you 
gang 1 " said Mr. Eamsay, as she was hurrying wildly 
away. 

"No, no," cried she impatiently, then suddenly 
stopping — " Yes, I have one kind friend to whom I 
will say farewell once more," as the thought glanced 
upon her that Lyndsay would be glad to see her so 
protected, and she sent to say she wished to see him. 
He instantly hastened to her, and was made acquainted 
with the arrangement which had been made, though 
he was still left in ignorance of the relationship which 



THE INHERITANCE. 425 

subsisted between them ; for Gertrude, in the fervour 
of her mind, had already ceased to think of it, and 
Uncle Adam, from certain tender feelings, was un- 
willing to enter into particulars. 

Although he was not exactly the person to whose 
hands Lyndsay would have chosen to commit Ger- 
trude, yet, situated as she was, even Uncle Adam's 
home was better than none, especially as he most 
cordially invited him to come to it as often as he 
pleased. 

" There is one person you wished me to see, and 
I would not," said Gertrude in agitation to Lyndsay, 
as she was almost on the threshold to depart ; " but 
now I would see her sister before I go." 

And the wish was no sooner signified to Miss 
Black than she hastened to comply with it. At sight 
of her a slight tremor shook Gertrude's frame, but 
she neither wept nor spoke ; she merely kissed her 
twice with fervour, then turned away, and bade a long 
farewell to liossville. The same day Mrs. St Clair 
was removed to the house of her sisters. 



CHAPTER LIII. 

"Sorrows are well allow'd and sweeten nature, 
Where they express no more than drops on lilies ; 
But when they fall in storms they bruise our hopes, 
Make us unable, though our comforts meet us, 
To hold our heads up." Massinger. 

But this state of high-wrought feeling could not long 
continue. In vain Gertrude struggled against the 
burning sense of her wrongs and her wretchedness; in 
vain she repressed each rising sigh and starting tear, 
with lofty scorn at the weakness they would have 
betrayed ; in vain she repeated to herself a thousand 
times that she was calm, she was well. Her throbbing 
head and aching heart told another tale, and she was 
at length compelled to yield to the fever which for 
some time had been preying upon her. Then reason 
fled, and for many days her life was doubtful ; and 
during that time poor Uncle Adam, like some faithful 
mastiff, hung round the bed which contained his new- 
found treasure, in all the stern woe of rigid old age. 
Lyndsay was the only person (excepting the medical 
attendants) whom he would see; but to him he would 
utter the grief which filled his heart even to overflow- 
ing, long closed as it had been against each softer 



THE INHERITANCE. 427 

feeling ; and Lyndsay, even in the midst of his own 
anguish, strove to cheer and support the disconsolate 
old man. But the object of all this solicitude was 
once more restored to them ; the crisis of the fever 
was past, and Gertrude again awoke to consciousness. 
It was only then she was aware of the danger she had 
passed; she had walked unconsciously through the 
valley of the shadow of Death ; the gates of eternity 
had been before her, but she had not descried them. 
It was then, while still hovering on the confines of 
this world, that she felt all the emptiness and the 
vanity of its pleasures ; her dreams of greatness, her 
hopes of happiness, her gay-spent days, her festive 
nights, where were they now 1 Gone ! and where 
they had been was marked but with shame, dis- 
appointment, remorse. All earthly distinctions had 
been hers, and what was the account which she had 
now to render to God for the use of these His gifts 1 
On which of these was it that she would now build 
her hopes of acceptance with Him ; on which of them 
would she now rest her hopes of eternal happiness 1 
Alas ! miserable comforters were they all. 

A deep melancholy now took possession of Ger- 
trude's mind. Like all persons of an ardent and 
enthusiastic temperament she flew from one extreme 
to the other ; and what had formerly " whispered as 
faults, now roared as crimes," only to be expiated by 
a life of penitence and sorrow. She kept her own 
apartment; refused to see anybody, even Lyndsay; 
and passed her time in solitude and woe. In vain did 



428 THE INHERITANCE. 

Uncle Adam attempt to stem the tide of affliction 
which had thus broken in upon her shattered heart. 
She acknowledged his kindness with tears and with 
gratitude; but when he attempted to remonstrate 
with her, or urged her to see any one, she became 
violently agitated, and her only answer was, " If you 
love me, suffer me — oh ! suffer me to die in peace." 

The indulgence of her grief had now become a sort 
of strange unnatural luxury to her ; she loved to sit 
for hours brooding on her sorrows — to hoard them, 
as it were, in her own heart; she could not have 
borne that another should have shared in them ; she 
loved to think that no one could share in them — that 
she stood alone in the world, a wretched, forsaken, 
lonely thing. To a heart such as hers the existence 
of some powerful sentiment was necessary ; she had 
strove to tear from her heart every root, every fibre 
of her once cherished tenderness, but no flower had 
arisen to fill the void they had left. All was dreari- 
ness and desolation. 

Lyndsay had written to her repeatedly, urging and 
imploring her to see him, and using every argument 
to rouse her from this wasteful excess of grief; but she 
only wept when she read his letters, and wished that 
he would cease to think of one so wretched, so degraded 
as she was. 

Poor Uncle Adam was almost heartbroken at this 
pertinacity of suffering ; all that he possessed, he had 
told her again and again, should be hers ; she should 
go to Bloom Park, she should be mistress there ; she 



THE INHERITANCE. 429 

should have everything that gold and good-will could 
procure to make her happy ; but Gertrude would only 
exclaim — " No, no, once I had wealth and power, and 
how did I abuse them ! leave me, then, the beggar that 
I am — that I deserve to be!" 

She was in this state of mind when one day the 
door of her apartment was gently opened, and Anne 
Leslie slowly entered. At sight of her Gertrude 
turned away her head in displeasure at the intrusion ; 
but Anne caught her hand, and, as she respectfully 
kissed it, her tears dropped upon it. Gertrude stood 
some moments irresolute, then throwing herself on 
Anne's neck, she exclaimed with a burst of anguish — 

" You trusted in God, and He has not deceived you, 

while I " she stopped, overcome with the acute- 

ness of remembrance. 

" But you will trust in Him, and He will yet put 
gladness in your heart," said Anne, wiping away the 
tears from her own sweet serene face, where shone the 
peaceful calm of a heavenly mind. 

" No, never," said Gertrude. " I do not deserve to 
be happy," added she in an accent of despair. 

" Ah ! who has ever deserved that happiness which 
we owe to a Saviour's love ? ' If thou. Lord, sliouldcst 
mark iniquities, who shall stand?' Guilty and frail 
as we all are, which of us would dare to lift up our 
eyes to Heaven and say we merited its favour ?" 

" But I had power, and I misused it ; I had wealth, 
and I squandered it ; I had an idol ; oh ! my God ! — 
and Thou wast forgot." 



430 THE INHEllITANCE. 

" Alas ! said Anne meekly ; " who can weigh even 
their own actions in the balance ? If your errors were 
more glaring than mine, so were your temptations 
greater. He only who made the heart can judge it, 
for He only knows what have been its trials." 

" He knows," said Gertrude bitterly, *'that in the 
day of prosperity mine was far from Him." 

"And therefore has He dissolved those vain 
dehghts which had taken possession of the soul He 
had destined for Himself. Ah ! do not look to God 
merely as to an offended Judge from whose face you 
turn away, but as to a tender Father, who invites you 
to come unto Him and He will give you rest— happiness 
greater than any you have ever known." 

"Happiness!" repeated Gertrude. "No, my heart 
is for ever closed against that." 

" Ah ! do not say so," said Anne ; " God can put 
a heavenly calm into that heart which is shut against 
all earthly joys." 

Gertrude felt the truth of these simple words; 
and by degrees her soul emerged from the dreary 
stupor in which it had so long been buried, and her 
mind became soothed and composed beneath the calm- 
ing influence of that religion whose very essence is 
love and peace. She saw that her heart had gone 
astray in its own delusions, but these were dispelled. 
She had received a new impulse, and she had awakened, 
if not to happiness, at least to something less perish- 
able, less fatal. Hers had been "a young fancy, 
which could convert the sound of common things to 



THE INHERITANCE. 431 

something exquisite;" but now she bowed her heart 
in quietness ; she knew " her brightest prospects could 
revive no more, yet was she cahn, for she had Heaven 
in view." 

" Oh ! Thou who dry'st the mourner's tear, 

How dark this world would be 
If, when deceiv'd and wounded here, 

We could not fly to Thee ! 
The friends who in our sunshine live, 

When winter comes, are flown ; 
And he who has but tears to give 

Must weep those tears alone ; 
But Thou wilt heal the broken heart, 

Which, like the plants that throw 
Their fragrance from the wounded part, 

Breathes sweetness out of woe." 

MOOKE. 



CHAPTER LIV. 

" Forgiveness to the injur' d does belong ; 
But they ne'er pardon who commit the wrong." 

Deyden. 

It was with emotion that Gertrude and Lyndsay met 
once more, and both were struck with the change in 
each other's appearance, for Lyndsay too looked as 
though he had indeed borne a part in all her suffer- 
ings ; and she was smote with the selfishness which 
had caused her so long to indulge her sorrow, unmind- 
ful of the generous heart which had shared in it. 
But if the brilliancy of her beauty was dimmed by 
the blight which had fallen upon her, it had acquired 
a character of still deeper interest in the eyes of those 
who loved her. 

" Her pale cheek, 
Like a white rose on which the sun hath look'd 
Too wildly warm (is not this passion's legend ?), 
The drooping lid whose lash is wet with tears, 
A lip which has the sweetness of a smile, 
But not its gaiety — do not these hear 
The scorched footprints sorrow leaves in passing, 
O'er the clear brow of youth ?" 

"I would first see you to acknowledge the bound- 
less gratitude I owe for all your kindness to me." said 



THE INHEEITANCE. 433 
Gertrude, who was the first to speak ; " and then 



once you asked me to forgive her who had injured 
me, and I would not, for then I was proud, passionate, 
revengeful ; but now I would go to her, I would for- 
give her, even as I trust I have been forgiven !" 

"Dearest Gertrude !" said Lyndsay with emotion, 
" how happy this makes me ; but do not humble me 
by talking of your gratitude to me ; to have done less 
than I have done, when the means were in my power, 
would have been criminal ; if I have been enabled to 
serve you, that is recompense more than sufficient. 
I have borne a selfish part in your welfare, for your 
happiness was mine ; in vain my heart has tried to 
create a separate interest — it cannot." 

" Do not talk thus, my dear friend," said Gertrude 
in agitation. 

"Ah ! Gertrude, since the same true and immortal pas- 
sion has touched our hearts, sufi'er me now to avow the 
sentiments which I have so long cherished for you " 

"No, no — not now," cried Gertrude in increasing 
emotion; "be to me all that you have hitherto been — 
a friend, a guardian, a brother ; but " 

She sighed, and in spite of herself a tear rolled 
slowly down her cheek. 

" I will, then," said Lyndsay, for he feared that the 
ties which bound them might be broken in the efi"ort 
to draw them closer. 

Gertrude went to the house of the Miss Blacks, 
and was received by them with tears of tenderness 
and thankfulness. 

VOL. II. 2 F 



434 THE INHERITANCE. 

Mrs. St. Clair had recovered from the effects of 
the laudanum she had swallowed, and it was now her 
determination to go abroad for the remainder of her 
life, and in a few days she was to depart. 

" She talked much of you for some time," said Miss 
Black, " and said she could not die in peace till she 
had obtained your forgiveness; but of late, alas! since 
her health has been restored, she has thought, I fear, 
less seriously, and she has not spoken of you at all ; 
perhaps she may even be averse to see you." And 
she went to acquaint her that Gertrude . was 
there. 

Some time elapsed before she returned, and she 
said her sister had been violently agitated at the 
thoughts of seeing Gertrude, and had at first refused 
to do it; but that she was now more composed, and 
had consented to receive her, upon condition that she 
came alone. The room was darkened to which 
Gertrude was conducted; but there was a studied 
arrangement, an air of elegant seclusion about it, 
which at once indicated that the inmate was un- 
changed ; no symptom of penitence was there. She 
was attired in an elegant dishahilU; and her fauteuil^ 
her cushions, her footstool, her screen, her flowers, her 
perfumes, her toys, were all collected around her in 
the manner Gertrude had been so long accustomed to 
see them, and on the arrangement of which Mrs. St. 
Clair had been wont to pique herseK, as a combination 
of French elegance and English comfort. 

For a moment Gertrude felt a rising of disgust at 



THE INHERITANCE. 435 

this display of heartless selfishness ; but she repressed 
it, and extending her hand, said mildly — 

" I am come to off'er that forgiveness which I once 
refused ; but God has put better feelings in my heart ; 
and I now forgive you from the heart, as I hope to 
be forgiven." 

" I too have something to forgive," said Mrs. St. 
Clair vehemently ; "I have to forgive the cruel disre- 
gard — the unnatural, unrelenting violence, with which 
you treated one who had ever been as a mother to 
you in all but the natural tie. I had done all for 
your aggrandisement ; I had raised you from beggary 
and obscurity to wealth and greatness, and it is you 
who have brought me to shame and misery and 
poverty — and am I to have nothing to forgive? I 
humbled myself in the dust to you, and you were deaf 
to my prayers. I told you that my life was in your 
hands ; that it did not pay the forfeit of your rash 
and inhuman conduct is no merit of yours ; have I 
then nothing to forgive 1 But I do forgive," said she, 
extending the hand she had hitherto refused, but 
with an air and manner of haughty condescension ; 
" my wrongs and injuries have been great, but I for- 
give them." 

Gertrude almost recoiled with horror from the 
touch of one whose mind was still so perverted, and 
whose soul seemed to have been corroded instead of 
purified by the judgment that had fallen upon her ; 
but she meekly took her hand, and said — 

" You say true ; mere human forgiveness is, indeed, 



436 THE INHERITANCE. 

a thing of nought — more blessed to them who give 
than to them who receive. But I pray — God, 
do Thou hear my prayer, that Thy forgiveness may 
be vouchsafed !" 

She turned and left the apartment. She did not 
wound her sisters by repeating what had passed ; but 
her own heart felt lighter that she had been enabled 
to pray in sincerity of heart for heavenly forgiveness, 
even to her who had wrought all her woe. 



CHAPTER LV. 

** Good the beginning, good the end shall be, 
And transitory evil only makes 
The good end happier." SouTHEY. 

The following day a plain but handsome carriage, 
with suitable attendants, stood at Uncle Adam's door, 
which he at first seemed ashamed of; but after a 
little cojniess and confusion, he let Gertrude under- 
stand it was for her accommodation, and proposed 
that they should together make trial of it. 

Gertrude had never appeared abroad (except in 
her visit to Mrs. St. Clair) from the time of her 
arrival at Mr. Ramsay's, and a thousand painful feel- 
ings rushed upon her at the thoughts of exposing 
herself to the public gaze — and the public gaze of 
a small, idle, gossiping, impertinent country town ; 
she was therefore on the point of expressing her 
repugnance, but she thought it would be unkind, 
ungrateful, when he had sacrificed his feelings so far 
as to set up a carriage for her, if she did not appear 
to be gratified by this proof of his aff'ection. She 
therefore accepted of his proposal, and away they 
drove. She was not yet sufficiently mistress of her 
thoughts to bestow much observation on the shifting 



438 THE INHERITANCE. 

scenes as they passed along, and she was scarcely 
aware of where she was, or on what she looked, when 
she found herseK at the very door of Bloom Park. 
They entered, and a respectable-looking housekeeper 
and butler, with inferiors, stood ready to receive 
them. 

"There's your Leddy," said Uncle Adam, giving 
Gertrude a slight push, by way of introducing her ; 
" see that you a' behave discreetly, an' when ye want 
onything ye maun gang to her for't; for she kens 
mair aboot thae things than me." 

This was quite an oration for Uncle Adam, and 
having made it, he stotted into one of the public 
rooms, and Gertrude followed him. 

" My dear uncle," said she, for she still continued 
that appellation, "how your kindness overpowers me; 
I cannot express how much I feel it." 

" Hoot, it's naething," said he impatiently ; "so 
dinna gang to fash yourself aboot that; the best 
thanks you can gie me is to let me see the red on 
your cheek and the smile in your e'e that used to be 
there, and then I'll believe that I've done you some 
gude — but no till then." And he affectionately patted 
her shoulder, which was going great lengths for Uncle 
Adam. 

Everything had evidently been done with a view 
to gratify Gertrude's taste and feelings; and there 
was a good taste and elegance in the arrangements 
that had recently been made, for which, with all his 
good intentions, she could scarcely give Uncle Adam 



THE INHERITANCE. 439 

credit. It must be Lyndsay's doing — Lyndsay, who 
knew so well all her habits and pursuits, had provided 
every indulgence and facility for both ; and that, too, 
merely in a general way, without descending to all 
the little minufice which it is woman's prerogative to 
arrange. 

The news of Mr. Eamsay's establishment at Bloom 
Park soon circulated in the neighbourhood, and was 
not long of reaching the ears of Mrs. Major Waddell, 
and caused them to tingle with indignation and envy. 
In the midst of all her finery she was not happy, for 
Gertrude, as Uncle Adam's heiress, was the thorn in 
her side — the bitter drop in her cup — the black man 
in her closet — the Mordecai at her gate ! Such is 
ever the effect of any baleful passion, especially when 
operating on a weak mind, and so difficult is it to 
form an estimate of worldly enjoyment by the symbols 
of outward prosperity. Her only hope was that she 
would be able to prove Uncle Adam in his dotage, 
and for that purpose she would fain have established 
a system of espionage betwixt Thornbank and Bloom 
Park; but all her schemes were counteracted by Uncle 
Adam's sagacity. The only way in which she could 
therefore give vent to her malice was when in com- 
pany with Gertrude, by taking, or rather making, 
every opportunity of resting all claim to distinction 
solely on the ground of birth, family connections, 
and other such adventitious circumstances as the 
weak vulgar mind lays hold of to exalt itself in the 
eyes of those who must be weaker than itself to be so 



440 THE INHERITANCE. 

dazzled. But in this she was met by Uncle Adam, 
who guarded Gertrude, in aught that in any way con- 
cerned her, as a faithful shepherd's collie does the 
lamb committed to his charge, and he was now too 
happy to be discomposed even by Mrs. Waddell ; he 
had found something to love, which had long been 
the desideratum in his life, and he was gradually 
getting more benign and mellow beneath Gertrude's 
gentle influence. The first inconveniences of a 
change of residence and habits fairly over, he even 
began to take some interest in rural avocations, only 
stipulating that he was never to be spoken to on any 
of the numerous evils inseparable from extensive 
property, and which not unfrequently embitter the 
peace of the possessor, such as bad tenants, bad crops, 
bad weather, bad servants, poachers, robbers, tres- 
passers, and all the thousand ills that wealth is heir 
to, and which, perhaps, bring happiness more upon a 
par between the rich and the poor than is generally 
supposed. 

One of the first to pay her respects to the new 
heiress of Bloom Park was Miss Pratt. That lady's 
absence, or, at least, her silence, for so long a period, 
remains to be accounted for to such as take an in- 
terest in her fate. But the simple matter of fact was 
that she had been refreshing and invigorating herself 
at Harrowgate, at the expense of her friend and ally 
Sir Peter Wellwood, and had but just returned to 
give the lie direct to the current report of Gertrude's 
having been rejected by her lover on the discovery of 



THE INHEEITANCE. 441 

her birth. This, she roundly asserted, was so far 
from being the case, that she had with her own ears 
heard her refuse him again and again ; it was con- 
sistent with her knowledge that she had been long 
engaged to Edward Lyndsay ; and although the little 
episode of the turret scene was somewhat of a stag- 
gerer, yet even that Miss Pratt contrived to bolt, 
and settled the matter with herself by her having 
had a great cold and ringing in her ears all that day, 
which had prevented her hearing exactly what passed. 
She therefore boldly claimed her five guineas from 
Uncle Adam, though how far she was entitled to 
them was a doubtful question, and might have borne 
a dispute ; and time was when Uncle Adam would as 
soon have given her his five fingers as his five guineas 
upon such debatable ground ; but now he was not 
disposed to cavil at trifles, and he paid her the money 
at the first suggestion, only taking every possible pre- 
caution against the possibihty of his giving her a note 
more than enough. 

" Well, my dear," said she, displaying her winnings 
to Gertrude, "you see I can sing a blithe note at your 
wedding — ha ! ha ! ha ! and, by-the-bye, do you know 
the news is that a certain cast-off lover of yours is on 
the top of his marriage with his old flame the Duchess 
of St. Ives ? They're both together at Paris, it seems, 
and it's all settled. I wish them good of one another, 
for I fancy they're well met ; but whether they'll hang 
long together is another story." 

Gertrude could not hear of this event without some 
VOL. IL 2 G 



442 THE INHEEITANCE. 

degree of emotion, but it soon passed away ; and 
when, at the end of some months, she read a pomp- 
ous detail of it in the newspapers, it was with feeHngs 
far removed from either envy or regret. Still less 
would they have been called for could she have fore- 
seen the termination which a few years brought round. 
Without the cement of one virtuous principle, vice 
soon dissolved the tie which united them. Injured 
and betrayed by a faithless wife, the Earl of Rossville 
fought to avenge his honour, and fell in the cause. 
But long before then, Lyndsay's virtues and the fer- 
vour and disinterestedness of his attachment had 
insensibly created for him a warm interest in Ger- 
trude's affections. As has been truly said, " In con- 
sidering the actions of the mind it should never be 
forgotten that its affections pass into each other like 
the tints of the rainbow ; though we can easily dis- 
tinguish them when they have assumed a decided 
colour, yet we can never determine where each hue 
begins."^ 

The bewildering glare of romantic passion no 
longer shed its fair but perishable lustre on the 
horizon of her existence; but the calm radiance of 
piety and virtue rose with steady ray, and brightened 
the future course of a happy and a useful life ; and 
Gertrude, as the wife of Edward Lyndsay, lived to 
bless the day that had deprived her of her earthly 
Inheritance. To that, indeed, by the death of Lord 
Eossville, who, dying without a family, was succeeded 
1 " Quarterly Review." 



THE INHEPJTANCE. 443 

by Lyndsay, she was again restored, with a mind 
enb'ghtened as to the true uses and advantages of 
power and prosperity. Thus, 

". . . . All our ill 
^ay, if directed well, find happy end. " 



TIIE END. 



Printed by R S: R. Cij«ric, Edinlur^h. 
