THE 



SKETCH BOOK OF FASHION. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF 
- MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS." 



Invest me in my motley ; give me leave 

To speak my mind, and I will through and through 

Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world. 

AS YOU LIKE IT. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 

VOL. I. 

THE PAVILION. 

MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

THE SECOND MARRIAGE 



LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW^ BURLINGTON STREET, 

(SUCCESSOR TO HENRY COLBURN.) 

1833. 







PREFACE. 



The following Tales form the last of a series 
of Novels, of a class created by the peculiar 
spirit of the last reign, and manifestly at vari- 
ance with that of the present times. These 
sketchy performances, although favoured with 
critical praise far beyond their pretensions or 
deserts, have in some instances been blamed for 
pungency of satire, and in some for a character 
of levity. To both charges the writer is willing 

V to plead guilty. The only apology admissible 
for a fashionable novel, is the successful exposure 

^ of vices and follies daily and hourly generated 

by the corruptions of society, — 

>• 
^ Safe from the bar, the pulpit, and the throne, 

V And touch'd and shamed by ridicule alone : — 

by ridicule^ — which, if no longer admitted as 



^ 



4. 



a2 



IV PREFACE. 

the test of Truth, may be assayed in its turn 
by that only sterling standard. The sketches 
contained in " Mothers and Daughters" are 
sanctioned as correct, by the very class most 
interested in their refutation. 

Nor is a plea of extenuation wanting for the 
tone of frivolity pervading their pages. — The 
first object of even the severest moralist is to 
command attention for his lessons ; and modern 
society, " which refuses to hear the voice of the 
charmer, charm he ever so wisely, ^^ is well 
known to lend ready attention to the charmings 
of the light and gay. — If a single absurdity, — a 
single error, —have given way before the ex- 
tended finger of these "laughing satires," the 
object of the writer is fully accomplished. 



THE PAVILION. 



I would, if possible, represent the errors of life in 
such a manner as that people of pleasure may read me. 
In this case, I must not be rough to ladies and gentle- 
men ; but speak of sin as a gentleman. 



VOL. I. B 



CHAPTER I. 



No person, who possesses either piety, grace, or good 
manners, will use such jests as are bitter, poisoned, in- 
jurious, or which in any way leave a sting behind them. 

BUKTON. 

A VICE has been gaining ground of Jate 
vears among the higher orders of English so- 
ciety, which, although it may not strictly fall 
under the interdiction of the Decalogue, is un- 
questionabl}^ at variance with the spirit of every 
Christian principle, and every moral law. It 
seems admitted that, couched in a tone of irony, 
the grossest insults may be offered ; that, under 
the palliative name of quizzing, any species of im- 
pertinence may be inflicted ; and that, provided a 
sneer be unaccompanied by a menace or a blow, 
it must be received with good humour. Many 

B 2 



4 THE PAVILION. 

a person welcomes, as an evidence of wit, the 
reputation of being " very satirical," who would 
shrink from the imputation of that " scorn of 
the scorner," pointed out in Holy Writ as one 
of the most abundant fountains of human bit- 
terness. 

In one of those admirable letters in the 
" Heart of Mid Lothian," whereby Scott prac- 
tically demonstrates the progress of corruption 
which has transformed the selfish Effie Deans 
into the heartless Lady Staunton, she is made 
to allude to the hollow tone of fashionable irony, 
as " the drolling style of conversation now in 
vogue." But from the bantering of the reign of 
George H., to the mockery of that of William 
IV., how gigantic and lamentable the progress ! 
— Irony, is now the favourite and universal 
figure of speech ! The bar, the senate, the 
drawing-room, nay even the social fire side, is 
embittered by the caustic personalities of sneer- 
ing wit ; and of all contemporary writers. Sir 
Walter alone has disdained to enliven his pages 
with its flippancy, or adorn them with its false 
glitter. Even in their intercourse with each 



THE PAVILION. O 

Other, — " I pray thee do not mock me, fellow 
student,'' — is a prayer that falls as naturally 
from the lips of the modern " men of wit and 
fashion about town," as from those of the Prince 
of Denmark himself. 

But it is chiefly in fashionable society that 
the art of quizzing forms so important an ac- 
complishment ; and a total want of boniie foi, 
such as the practice necessarily produces, is a 
characteristic of the great world of London pe- 
culiarly striking to foreigners. They are amaz- 
ed to observe that a fact narrated at some distin- 
guished dinner- table, is received with a wonder- 
ful allowance for "errors excepted;" that Lord 

A listens to his friend Lord B , with a 

smile of polite incredulity ; and that, ever on the 
watch against being quizzed by an ironical com-^ 
pliment or rendered ridiculous as the subject of 
a hoax, the belle of St. James's receives as an 
injury, the same courteous salutations which 
a belle of the Chauss^e d'Antin claims as a 
right ! It is now, in short, admitted, that John 
Bull, our national impersonator, heretofore re- 
presented as endowed with the moral swallow 



i 



6 THE PAVILION. 

of a whale and digestion of an ostrich, — as a 
speaker of matter of fact, and a hearer of matter 
of fact, — has J^ecome a mere strainer at gnats, — a 
doctrinaire in creed and cant, — a scandal-monger 
pre-eminently addicted to frivolous and vexa- 
tious bantering and backbiting ! — Under the 
influence of the smiles and blandishments of the 
Exclusives, honest John has even been betrayed 
in his dotage into sneering at those who will 
not join with him in abjuring the simplicity of 
life and manners which he has recently learned to 
reprobate as an evidence of national barbarism. 

'' Who or what is this new Prussian ambas- 
sadress ? " inquired Lady Mary Milford of the 
Honourable Frederick Fitzgerald, as they stood 
together in the tea-room at Al mack's, at the 
close of the last ball of the season, waiting for 
the announcement of her carriage. 

" Is it possible that you do not know ?— The 
original of Gbedie's Charlotte ! Old Reppen- 
heim fell in love with her as she was cutting 
bread-and-butter for her little brothers and sis- 
ters, at some presbytery in Lithuania ; and, in- 
stead of renouncing the charming simplicity of 



THE PAVILION. 7 

cliaracter which she considers the origin of her 
promotion, she still sticks a moss-rose in her 
flaxen wig, — quotes Hermann and Dorothea; 
and CJanhenry protests that she actually ap- 
peared at Court, last winter at Berlin, leading a 
lamb, en lisieVe, with a blue riband." 

" Nonsense ! There is no believing a word 
you say. I have not forgotten your persuad- 
ing me that Lady Charlemore was the authoress 
of the Waverley novels. But really tliis Coun- 
tess Reppenheim promises to be impayable, 
Sophia tells me that she went out fishing with 
the king on the Virginia Water, after her au- 
dience of reception at Windsor, and inquired 
of his Majesty, in a tender whisper, whether 
he ever bestowed a tear on the memory of 
' Cette belle Robinson^ si interessante par ses 
graces et par ses malheurs T " 

" And by way of illustrating the adage, ' Ne 
faut point parler de corde dans la maison d^un 
pendu^'' passed a whole hour to-night in tortur- 
ing our friend, Lady Grasmere, with a disser- 
tation on the pleasures of a rustic life ; forget- 
ting that our English Viscountess is the daugh- 






8 THE PAVILION. 

ter of an Irish farmer, reared upon bite-and- 
sup, and highly accomplished in the manufac- 
ture of Eddish cheese ! " 

" A most unsophisticated individual, indeed ! 
Well, well ; a season in London will scarcely 
fail to endow her with the right use of her eyes, 
ears, and understanding. I can almost forgive 
her btvue, however, in the Grasmere affair. 
How is it possible for foreigners to be fore- 
warned against the extraordinary instances of 
mesalliance which betray them, in this country, 
into the society of parvenues of every descrip- 
tion ; actresses, opera dancers, farmer's daugh- 
ters, — all sorts and conditions of women. Far 
be it from me to blame the system which keeps 
our brothers and uncles (the cadets of the fa- 
mily) out of bedlam or the workhouse. But it 
is not surprising that a person like the Countess 
Reppenheim, qualified by her sixteen quarter- 
ings to enter any Chapter of the empire, should 
find it impossible to give credit to the existence 
of such degradation.*' 

" Ay, ay ! we'll teach her to ' think deep ere 
she depart.' We must improve her morals by 



THE PAVILION, ^ 

familiarising her with the majesty of the people, 
and the equality of the human race." 

" O est pour rire! You, who are the greatest 
aristocrat unguillotined !" 

" Am I ? — Only during tlie lifetime of my 
old aunt, the Duchess of Keswycke, whose acres, 
thank Heaven, are as loose as her principles are 
fixed. I intend her to make me her heir ; and 
there is no pleasing the doting widow of a Duke 
of twenty descents, without pinning a little faith 
upon the legends of Domesday Book. She has 
fifteen other needy nephews on the watch for 
her inheritance; and I am obliged to put my 
best leg forward — " 

" To convince her how well it would become 
the Garter ? — Well ! — we must get Countess Rep- 
penheim presented to her Grace ; to prove to the 
wife of this Silesian magnifico, that we really 
have a peeress or two whose grandfathers kept 
no chandler's shop ; and whose prejudices are as 
chivalrous and feudal as her own." 

Such was " the drolling style" in which one 
of the gentlest, purest, and most amiable of hu- 
man beinojs was discussed amonoj the fashion- 



B 5 



10 THE PAVILION. 

ables of the metropolis in which her lord was 
appointed to fill the honourable post of ambas- 
sador. Countess Reppenheim was scarcely 
thirty years of age; but the delicacy of her 
health had invested her with the tone and as- 
pect of a somewhat more advanced epocii. She 
was secured, however, from that besetting sin of 
coquetry which usually characterizes a foreign 
fashionable in the wane of her charms, by strong 
attachment to her husband, no less than by per- 
sonal indolence and constitutional infirmity. 
She seemed to have been, or to be on the 
point of becoming a beauty. But some- 
thing was deficient : either vivacity, or vigour, 
or intelligence ; or some one among the name- 
less nothings indispensable to female fascina- 
tion. The women called her faded, — the men, 
languid ; — but all were of opinion that she need 
only exert herself, — devote a little more care to 
her dress, and a little more animation to her 
manner, to be as captivating as the most capti- 
vating of her sex. 

The Countess had, in fact, been reared 
in a school which, instead of initiating her 



THE PAVILION. 11 

into the arcana of that hateful science call- 
ed "knowledge of the world," had involved 
her in scenes of such stirring and unpre- 
cedented anxiety and excitement as could not 
fail to produce a lasting injury to her na- 
turally fi-ail constitution; as well as to impart 
to her character a tone of sentiment and ro- 
mance, fatal to her success on that hollow stage 
of irony, the supreme bon ton of London. At 
a very early age the Baroness Helene von 
Edelstein was nominated Maid of Honour to 
the beautiful and unfortunate Louisa Queen of 
Prussia; had witnessed her bitter trials, her 

patient resignation, her untimely death. One 

• 
of the last actions of the royal sufferer had been 

to bestow the hand of her favourite on Count 
Reppenheim ; and instead of the origin as- 
signed by the fashionable and sneering Clan- 
henry for the alliance, it had been the favourite 
project of a dying queen. Scarcely, however, 
had the tears of the young Countess ceased to 
flow for the loss of her beloved mistress, when 
Reppenheim's appointment to a high command 
in that army of the Elbe to which the name of 



12 THE PAVILION. 

the queen afforded a rallying cry of vengeance, 
filled her with consternation. Instantly re- 
tiring from court, she made it at once a plea- 
sure and a duty to pass the period of his ab- 
sence in strict seclusion on his family estates; 
and thus the woman who, from early courtier- 
ship and late, might have been supposed a fair 
match for the intrigues of Carlton House or 
the affectations of Almack's, still retained the 
primeval simplicity and good faith of childhood. 
Four years indeed had elapsed since the battle 
of Waterloo secured the pacification of Europe, 
and caused the palaces of the continent to ring 
for joy. But they had been passed by the 
Count and the Countess in comparative ob- 
scurity on their Silesian estates; and the new 
ambassadress now made her appearance in 
London, having imbibed all her notions of 
English frankness and English hospitality from 
the national vaunts circulated in books of the 
last century ; and prepared to interpret au pied 
de la lettre all she saw and all she heard in 
moral London, She would as soon have ex- 
pected to find a scorpion hidden under the 



THE PAVILION. 13 

leaves of a garden rose, as that the languor of 
her air and the graciousness of her manners 
could be made a matter of ridicule among those 
who met her vi^ith such eager invitations and 
overtures of friendship. 

Had it been the commencement instead of 
the close of the season when the Reppenheims 
arrived in town, a single week's experience 
would have sufficed to place the Countess in 
the current of the vortex. But unfortunately, 
July and the last lingerers of the beau monde 
were taking their departure together. The 
closely-shuttered mansions of Grosvenor-square 
were already uninhabited ; saving by the ancient 
porter who sat, spectacles on nose, at the hall 
window, with one eye on the radiant blossoms 
of a pot of French marigolds, and the other on 
a well-thumbed copy of the Court Guide, —the 
literary vade mecum of his vocation. Not an 
equipage was to be seen in the streets, but 
those of a few sallow apothecaries and physi- 
cians; who, exhausted by the labours of the 
season, looked like the ghosts of their own 
patients escaped from the Styx. The gay 



14 THE PAVILION. 

haberdashers' shops of Regent-street stood strip- 
ped of their festoons of ribband, during the an- 
nual migration of Mr. and Mrs. Taffeta to 
Margate; long melancholy strings of hackney 
coaches, like funeral processions of departed 
business, ruralized certain commercial streets 
by the litter of their hay and straw ; while in 
Cumberland-place and the Squares, a luxu- 
riant crop of after grass was running to seed. 
The West End " smelt wooingly " — of mellow 
apples, and sounded hollow as the brazen gates 
of a giant's portal in a pantomime. 

The moment was doubtless unpropitious for 
the advent of a foreigner; and right glad was 
the Countess to take refuge in a damp diplo- 
matic villa on the banks of the Thames, be- 
queathed to the tenancy of the ambassador by 
the excellency his predecessor. 

" I grieve to leave you in this dull place," 
said Lady Beaulieu, the popular wife of the 
foreign secretary, (who had become slightly 
acquainted with Countess Reppenheim during 
the Aix la Chapelle negociations,) on taking 
leave of her for the season. ** I am, however. 



THE PAVILION. 15 

scarcely in a more enviable position than your- 
self; for Beaulieu and I are going on a con- 
ciliation pilgrimage to our Irish estates, and I 
have no hope of seeing you till we meet at 
Brighton in the winter." 

Unfortunately it did not occur to Lady 
Beaulieu that the new ambassadress could re- 
quire, in the interim, any hints for her guid- 
ance in the choice or formation of her society. 
She forgot that, although London is nominally 
a wilderness during the parliamentary recess, a 
few stray dandies are always to be found, who 
would be brought down to dinner by the 
attaches and secretaries, to quiz the simplicity 
of their noble hostess, and circulate reports of 
the rusticity of an ambassadress who actually 
exerted herself to render her house agreeable ; 
and who exposed herself to still more poignant 
ridicule by respectful attention to a husband many 
years older than herself. Neither was her lady- 
ship aware that a certain Lady Grasmere, who 
inhabited a neighbouring villa during the au- 
tumn months, had been already presented to 
the Countess ; and would present, in her turn, 



16 THE PAVILION. 

Other persons and personages equally ineligible. 
Nay, even had Lady Beaulieu been forewarned 
of these impending dangers, it may be doubted 
whether, with all her tact and good breeding 
and good humour, her ladyship's own mind was 
sufficiently schooled in the philosophy of fashion 
to enable her to set forth the worst features of 
the case. 

But had it been possible for the blue-eyed 
goddess of the Greeclan bard to have arrayed 
herself (instead of the venerable front and so- 
lemn tunic of Nestor) in the flowing satin and 
flowing ringlets of a patroness of Almack's, 
she would probably have whispered to the fair 
Prussian who sat contemplating the weeping- 
willows and aguish lawn of Maple Villa, in the 
persuasion, like Pope Gregory's of old, that 
Britain is peopled with angels, " Of all the 
capitals of Europe London is the place where 
the forms of society are loosest in definition 
and strictest in observation. The slightest in- 
fraction of the arbitrary code of conventional 
law is fatal to the convicted culprits ; and not 
the most pitiful little court of ceremonious Ger- 



THE PAVILION. IT 

many is half so scrupulous in the exaction of its 
etiquettes and the infliction of its penalties. In 
the beau-monde of May-fair, court any infamy 
rather than that of ridicule. Instead of the 
lambent flame which, in foreign society, sports 
alike innocuous round the head of the lance or 
the point of the fan, you will find the persiflage 
of the English a scorching and corroding fire, 
eating into your heart and bequeathing an in- 
effaceable scar. Be vile, — be prodigal, — be 
false, — but do not make yourself ridiculous. A 
butt or bore ranks with the worst of crimi- 
nals. Believe only half you hear ; say only half 
you think ; do nothing you are asked ; and in 
process of time you may achieve a tolerable de- 
gree of credit and popularity in fashionable 
society." 



18 THE PAVILION. 



CHAPTER II. 



There are no persons so solicitous about the preserva- 
tion of rank as those who have no rank at all. 

Shenstone. 

The Dowager Viscountess Grasmere, de- 
scribed by the two maligners of the Ahiiack's 
tea room as " an Irish farmer's daughter," was 
in fact the offspring of a man of decayed for- 
tune in a remote part of Connaught ; who, offi- 
ciating as baihff to the late Viscount her hus- 
band, had ended with becoming his father-in- 
law. It would be difficult to conceive any thing 
more dazzling than the beauty which effected 
this singular transition. Eleanor Cavanagh was 
tall, finely formed, uniting a countenance of 
the antique character, with a complexion of that 
pure poetical paleness which nothing but fine 



THE PAVILION. ID 

features can embellish, but which so well be- 
comes their delicate chiselling. She was un- 
questionably one of the loveliest women in the 
kingdom. 

Lord Grasmere, ever on the watch against 
provoking the sneers of society, had sedulously 
avoided collision with the London world till a 
prolonged residence on the continent, and the 
influence of society at Lausanne, Florence, 
and Rome, had tamed down his wild Irish girl 
into the soft, feminine, and dignified woman 
which his widow at the age of five-and-twenty 
was universally pronounced to be. A jointure 
of eight thousand per annum was perhaps the 
chief accomplishment that drew to her fee! 
the homage of hosts of lordlings dandylings, 
and needy honourables; but it could only be 
the charms of her manners and the merits of 
her character which attracted the friendship 
of so many distinguished individuals of her own 
sex. Lady Grasmere was not, however, what 
in London is termed " the fashion.*' When 
she entered a ball-room, no knot of impudent 
loungers gathered round to listen to her bon 



20 THE PAVILION. 

inots, or amuse themselves with her blushes ; 
no cortege of dashino: vauriens followed her 
horse as she took her daily airing in Rotten- 
row; or planted their kid gloves on the edge of 
her britschka as she jogged up and down the 
drive, swallowing the dust and their glaring 
adulation. She gave her name to no new foot- 
stool — no fashionable bonnet ; — nor was her 
opera-box a levelling mark for the glasses of the 
gallant, the gay, and the presuming. But she 
had achieved something far beyond all this. Her 
society consisted of young and lovely women, 
unbreathed on by the venomous lips of scandal; 
of agreeable and high-bred men, who knew how 
to unite the spirit and graces of their age, with- 
out slang, — without finery, — without undue as- 
sumption of any kind. A few of a still more 
distinguished order were sprinkled among the 
group, — a few leading politicans and men of let- 
ters, but not in sufficient numbers to provoke 
against her little circle the anathema of being a 
bureau d esprit. Now and then, indeed, a dandy 
lord or fashionable libertine would force his way 
into the coterie, to prefer his suit and receive a 



THE PAVILION. 21 

gentle dismissal ; and it was this latter circum- 
stance alone, which provoked theExclusives to set 
forth in loud and angry terms that Lady Gras- 
mere " was not one of them." They could not, 
however, succeed in stigmatising her as any thing 
she ought not to be. By her position in the 
world, Lady Grasmere was eminently qualified 
to form a centre of attraction to a social circle ; 
young, fair, free, rich, virtuous, good-tempered 
— she was not sufficiently secure on the pedestal 
of fashion to admit of trifling with her own dig- 
nity. Unsupported by high personal connexion, 
she was aware that pretension, or dulness, or in- 
discretion, or eccentricity, would suffice to pro- 
voke inquiry and impute the blame of all her 
errors to the obscurity of her birth. She saw 
that she must not venture out of her depth ; — 
but she also saw that there was ample space 
within given distance of the shore, for the 
gratification of her future life, without self- 
sacrifice or danger. Her house, instead of being 
extravagantly or gorgeously brilliant, was fur- 
nished with studied simplicity. Her equipage 
was plain, — her establishment remarkable only 



22 THE PAVILION. 

for its regularity and propriety ; but there was 
a tone of elegance pervading the whole, that 
spoke wonders for the taste and tact of the 
owner; — and Lady Grasmere gratified herself 
with the certainty that (her Cavanaghship apart) 
there was nothing the least quizzible in herself 
or her appertainments. For three years pre- 
vious to the arrival of the Countess she had 
assumed that distinguished part in London life 
which merit of any kind is sure to command 
from the unbribable jury of its coteries; — had 
refused more offers than half the heiresses or 
beauties of the day; — and it was a sole draw- 
back to her satisfaction that there was still a 
lofty sect which looked down with contempt 
upon her excellencies, and persisted in waving 
a flag of triumph above her head. 

Such was the woman assigned by chance to 
Countess Reppenheim, on her arrival in town, 
as her " glass of fashion and mould of form," 
Unsuspicious that the extreme retenu of Lady 
Grasmere's manners and conduct arose from the 
constant fear of committing herself by derelic- 
tion from the usages of society, the Ambassadress 



THE PAyiLION. 23 

could not contemplate without admiration the 
modest graces of the English neighbour who ex- 
erted herself so hospitably for her amusement. 
Accustomed in other countries to find none but 
the highly born and highly bred established in 
the circles of the great world, it never occurred 
to her to suspect roture in a head adorned with a 
coronet. To Lady Grasmere, accordingly, she 
addressed herself for information on all doubtful 
points connected with her new honours or the 
forms of society; — and nothing could be more 
injudicious than her choice of a Mentor. Al- 
though fully adequate to maintain her own sta- 
tion in life, her ladyship both was, and fcU her- 
self to be, incompetent to the perplexities (^ 
courtly etiquette. But she did not possess suffi- 
cient dignity of mind and strength of character 
to confess the truth, and admit her own defi- 
ciencies of birth and education. Preferrinjr 
Countess Reppenheim to the whole host of 
her female friends, and aware of the marvellous 
extent of German prejudices on the chapter of 
pedigree, there was nothing she more appre- 
hended than that some of the light, gaudy, but 



24 THE PAVILION. 

venomous insects fluttering in society, should 
buzz into the ear of the ambassadress the secret 
of her insignificance ; and it was partly in the 
hope of forestalling the report, that Lady Gras- 
mere, for the first time, began to affect a certain 
supercilious fastidiousness respecting men and 
things, very foreign to the usual amiability of 
her demeanour. 

There is nothing more vulgar among the sins 
of social life than what is termed finery. It is, 
in fact, a distinguishing mark of absence of 
caste ; for what can a person really distin- 
guished by birth or merit gain by presump- 
tuous disparagement of the rest of the human 
race ? \l is the policy of the eminent to elevate 
the claims of those beneath them, in order that 
by raising the standard of comparison, their 
own superiority may attain yet higher distinc- 
tion ; and the moment a man or woman affects 
to be fine^ — to shrink from contact with any 
but the elect, and to raise a glass of inquiry to 
the unknown physiognomies of plebeian life, 
it is to be inferred that " something is rotten 
in the state of Denmark ; '* that so studious an 



THE PAVILION. 25 

arrangement of the folds of the velvet mantle 
and ermined robe, purports the concealment ot 
some gash or blemish beneath, known only to 
the wearer. 

Among the idlers at Lady Grasmere*s villa, 
and pretendants to her favour, from whom, in 
the course of the autumn, the Countess uncon- 
sciously and unfortunately imbibed her no- 
tions of the character of an Ensjlish gentle- 
man, were Mr. Fitzgerald, the satirical hero 
already introduced to the reader, and a certain 
"fat," dark, and "forty" dandy, named Lord 
Clanhenry ; — the former a budding, the latter a 
full-blown exquisite; — the former professing good 
looks, the latter good manners ; — the former in- 
sinuating himself to be the idol of the sex, the 
latter the Coryphaeus of the clubs ; — the former 
the unresisting victim of the vortex — oppressed 
with balls, bewildered with dinner invitations, 
beguiled into water-parties, tormented into pic- 
nics, and on severe duty as a Park escort and 
caller of carriages ; — the latter, still more re-, 
cherche (having escaped the impertinence of 
similar importunities, and outlived the ardour 

VOL. I. c 



26 THE PAVILION. 

of popularity), a veteran of the war of society — 
medalled, promoted, pensioned — a Field Mar- 
shal of the fashion-list of his Majesty's dandies ! 
Both were favoured courtiers at Carlton-house, 
and reaped in general society the full advantage 
of that empty distinction. 

The main difference, however, between the two 
lay deep beneath the surface. Both were poor, 
both fortune-hunters ; but the handsome Frede- 
rick was a younger brother, who had never had a 
shilling in his life ; and the well-bred Clanhenry, 
a spendthrift, who had not a shilling left. Frede- 
rick accordingly strove to impress on the mind 
of the richly-jointured dowager that, although 
courted by the world, he resigned it all for he?'; 
while his lordship assumed still higher ground, 
and insinuated that the fervour of his devotion 
ought to determine her to resign all the world for 
him. Both were eminently ^W6 ; Fitzgerald from 
the consciousness of being deficient in every thing 
but a tolerable exterior ; Clanhenry, from know- 
ing that the dilapidated state of his finances 
had betrayed him into various acts of meanness, 
or what, in any but a man of many clubs and 



THE PAVILION. 27 

universal acceptance, would be termed disho- 
nesty. It required a considerable proportion 
of that self-possession patricianly denominated 
" knowledge of the world '* and plebeiauly 
termed " impudence," to carry them in safety 
through the shallow waters in which they were 
compelled to navigate. 

Now Lord Clanhenry and Fred. Fitzgerald 
(for although in some cases youth and good 
looks impart consideration, it is but just to give 
precedency to the peer), were equally though 
secretly of opinion, that it would have been 
more for their interest had Lady Grasmere's new 
friend continued to air her little Pomeraniau 
lap-dog unter den Linden of Berlin, instead of 
among the sooty elms of Hyde Park. Their 
tactics were disconcerted by the straightforward 
simplicity of her character. She was in the 
habit of asking plain questions, which they 
found it very difficult to answer ; and of giving 
a literal interpretation to their sayings, such as 
their doings were ill calculated to justify. There 
was no knowing how to dispose of such a wo- 

c2 



28 THE PAVILION. 

man. Her rank, fortune, unblemished repu- 
tation, and official dignity, rendered it impos- 
sible to decry her in society. The only alter- 
native was to impugn her authority in the eyes 
of Lady Grasmere, by betraying her into 
breaches of etiquette and violations of English 
notions of propriety, and then quizzing her into 
disrepute. Each, unavowedly to the other, 
accordingly commenced his system of opera- 
tions by insinuating to the idle babblers, their 
companions (the Lady Grandisons and Lady 
Mary Milfords), that the simplicity of the 
new ambassadress was the simplicity of mere 
folly, and her credulous good nature the fruit of 
mental imbecility. In a very short time people 
began to take advantage of these imputed de- 
fects, by addressing her with exaggerated civi- 
lities, and filling her mind with groundless 
notions of English eccentricity. It is true she 
had not readiness of tact to detect the impos- 
ture ; but it afforded no evidence of folly that, 
finding herself suddenly introduced into the 
society of a foreign nation, she respected its 



# 



THE PAVILION. 29 

usages, however absurd ; and reflected in re- 
spectful silence on the peculiarities to which she 
was required to conform, and which were pointed 
out to her by persons of seeming respectability 
and real distinction. 



30 THE PAVILION. 



CHAPTER III. 



Soft creeping, cups on cups, the feast compose ; 
At every pause tliey stretch, they yawn, they dose ; 
And now to this side, now to that they nod. 
As black or green infuse the drowsy god. 

DUNCIAD. 

The first experience of the Countess in the 
pleasures and penalties of fashionable life in the 
most hospitable country in Europe, occurred at 
Brighton ; where, in compliance with the cus- 
tom introduced by the Prince Regent, the hedu 
monde of that epoch made it a point of con- 
science to pass a shivering Christmas. 

" I do not much like travelling at this season 
of the year," observed the Countess to Lord 
Clanhenry, a few days previous to her depar- 
ture for the coast. " But it appears that it is 
no longer the fashion to settle in London for 



THE PAVILION. 31 

the winter till April or May ; and I do not wish 
to make myself particular/' 

" Quite right ! — Were it known that the 
Prussian minister remained in town during the 
holidays, it would induce a general suspicion that 
he was on less than the best terms with the 
court.'* 

" Du rested'' replied the Countess, wrapping 
herself up still closer in her Cashmere, " it does 
not much signify. Wherever one goes in Eng- 
land, comforts of every kind await and attend 
one. Mr. Fitzgerald assures me that in the 
poorest hovel they pique themselves on the 
luxury of carpets and curtains ; and my maitre 
d'hotel writes me word that he has engaged me 
one of the best houses in Brighton." 

One of the best lodging-houses in Brighton, 
in the year 1819, was not perhaps quite equal 
to the worst of the year 1833; and poor Ma- 
dame Reppenheim's notions of English " com- 
fort" were considerably puzzled by creaking 
stairs, smoky chimnies, doors that would not 
close, and windows that would not open; be- 
sides a host of minor deficiencies, all of which 



32 THE PAVILION. 

were maliciously ascribed by her evil genii, 
Clanhenry and Fitzgerald, to " les habitudes du 
paysP Unwilling to contemn what appeared 
so satisfactory to the rest of the nation, the 
Countess accordingly pronounced herself to be 
extremely well lodged ; politely ascribed a severe 
cold caught on settling in her "comfortable" 
house to the influence of the sea air ; and an 
attack of opthalmia, proceeding from her smoky 
dressing-room, to the misfortune of having been 
accustomed to stoves. Lady Grasmere being 
unable to visit Brighton during the first ten 
days of her stay, she was more than ever open 
to the mischievous influence of her two enemies. 

" I have received an invitation from your 
relation the Duchess of Keswycke," said the 
Countess to Fitzgerald, a few days after her 
arrival. " Her card specifies that it is a very 
small early party. What does that mean ? " 

"That you must go at eight o'clock in a 
morning costume. Her Grace is a very old- 
fashioned personage, and hates any thing like 



ostentation." 



In pursuance of this advice, the ambassadress 



THE PAVILION. 33 

in an elegant demie-toilette (to which a bonnet 
imparted the decided character of a morning 
dress), made her appearance just half an hour 
after the guests of the Duchess of Keswycke, in 
their satin gowns and diamond necklaces, were 
sitting down to dinner. Vexed and mortified to 
find herself so thoroughly deplagee, — for by a 
mistake of the servants she was ushered into the 
dining-room, — the Countess noticed that the 
members of the small early party arrived at ten 
o'clock; and when, two nights afterwards, she re- 
ceived a formal card from Lady Grandison to the 
same effect, she resolved to put in practice the 
hints he had received from Lord Clanhenry on 
the subject of English dress and English hours. 
Mistaking reverse of wrong for right, she made 
her appearance on this occasion between ten 
and eleven o'clock, radiant with jewels; and 
nothing could exceed the contemptuous surprise 
with which she found herself surveyed by the 
half dozen old women congregated round a soli- 
tarv whist- table, their chairs and carriages hav- 

t ^ CI 

ing been already announced for departure. 

c 3 



34 THE PAVILION. 

Sir Carmychael Domdaniel, the veteran beau 
of the antiquated coterie, bad the satisfaction of 
enlarging the following morning on the tale of 
the Countess's ill-timed splendours, at full fifty 
houses in Brighton, wherein he enacted the 
part of Court Circular. 

" I fear I shall never understand your ha- 
bits ! " cried she in a desponding tone to Lady 
Grasmere, on her arrival from town. " Even 
your friends Clanhenry and Fitzgerald, well as 
they are versed in les usages, can give me no 
infallible information. — I have already com- 
mitted a thousand blunders. The Duchess of 
Keswycke looks upon me as a Goth, and Lady 
Grandison as a fine lady. Your customs, like 
the pronunciation of your language, appear 
quite arbitrary." 

" Never mind such persons as the Duchess 
and Lady Grandison," replied her friend in a 
pacifying tone. " The great charm of Brighton 
society consists in little friendly parties, given 
without form or etiquette. Come with me to 
night to Lady Mary Milford's, — I see you 
have an invitation. Nothing can be more 



THE PAVILION. 



S5 



sociable or select than her soirees. It is her 
rule, both in London and Brighton, never to 
have large assemblies ; the consequence is that 
every one is always dying to go to her, and 
that she commands the best society. Just now, 
she has her niece the brilliant Lady Sophia 
Clerimont staying with her; and is giving a 
series of tea parties by w^ay of opening her house 
every night at a reasonable rate/' 

« The best society ! "— " quiet, sociable par- 
ties ! " — What could be more inviting to the ear 
of a foreigner, desirous of becoming acquainted 
with the far-famed, —the intellectual, — the 
hospitable,— the dignified coteries of English 
society ; so different, so superior to the selfish, 
frivolous, impure circles of Paris and Vienna !— 

" I am glad after all, that I came to Brighton," 
thought the Countess as she arrayed herself to 
accompany her friend to Lady Mary's, " it will 
serve to initiate me into the habits of England, 
before I launch upon the wider sea of London." 

The experience of her own mansion had some- 
what amended Countess Reppenheim's notions 
of the sort of "comfort" to be expected in the 



36 THE PAVILION. 

lodging-houses of a bathing place, the chief 
merit of which seems to consist in a free admis- 
sion of the sea breezes ; — nevertheless, she was 
somewhat surprised to observe that the best 
society in Brighton was about to assemble in 
two stuffy drawing-rooms, having scanty cur- 
tains of yellow cotton and a dingy carpet of 
green baize. The only sofa in the room was 
occupied on her entrance, by a group of young 
ladies who, on the appearance of a stranger, 
whispered behind their fans ; while several 
Hussar officers belonging to the regiment quar- 
tered in the town, lounged over the back of the 
sofa with the most intimate familiarity. 

At a little distance sat the chaperons ; three or 
four dull-looking middle-aged women (such as 
chaperons ought to be), saying, seeing, and even 
hearing nothing, except the mysterious rumours 
circulated by Sir Carmychael Domdaniel, a 
pompous little man with a military air, who went 
from one to the other whispering courtly no- 
things under screen and shelter of the enormous 
nose that served to impart importance to his 
whole person. Apart from the rest, lounged 



THE PAVILION. 37 

one very impudent, very chatty, very much 
rouged dowager; who gladly pounced upon so 
patient a listener as Countess Reppenheim. 

*• You perceive that we receive you a V Ang- 
laise^^ said Lady Mary to her new guest, point- 
ing to the tea-table ; and soon afterwards, on the 
arrival of a few supercilious young gentlemen in 
stiff cravats, headed by Fitzgerald and Clan- 
henry, the operation of tea-making commenced. 

" Now then,'' thought poor Madame de Rep- 
penheim, " I shall at last participate in this 
national feast. G 3neral conversation will enli- 
ven the ceremony: — and the colloquial supe- 
riority I have so often heard described, will 
render me insensible to the mingled odours 
of ill-trimmed lamps and an ill-dressed din- 
ner." 

But no ! — there was no attempt at general 
conversation. The three young ladies whispered 
on three chairs instead of one sofa. The stiff 
necked dandies exchanged monosyllables with 
the taciturn chaperons ; Domdaniel talked 
broad with the impudent dowager ; Lord Clan- 
henry sentimentalized with Lady Grasmere; 



38 THE PAVILION. 

and Mr. Fitzgerald with herself; a silver urn 
was brought in ; and, to her great surprise, 
two full-grown footmen were admitted into the 
drawing-room to assist the butler in his ope- 
rations. It was in vain that the handsome 
Frederick exerted himself for her amusement; 
she could not withdraw her eyes from the cere- 
mony of rincing tea-cups, and dispensing the 
boiling beverage that filled the room with steam. 

" Nothing so pleasant, nothing so sociable as a 
tea-table! " exclaimed Fred. Fitz. ; watching with 
delight the astonishment depicted on her face. 
" It is no longer the fashion to serve it ready 
made. In justice to ourselves, we cannot allow 
our servants to engross the enjoyments of making 
our tea as well as our soup ; or washing our cups 
and saucers as well as our plates and dishes." 

" It is indeed a most amusing operation," said 
Mcidame de Reppenheim, blaming only her own 
want of savoir vlvre in being unable to discover 
its peculiar charm. " I shall take care to have 
a tea-table at my soirees when I return to town.'* 

'' Charming creature. Lady Sophia Cleri- 
mont ! " whispered Mr. Fitzgerald, directing 



THE PAVILION. ' 3D 

her attention to one of the slender young ladies, 
who now presided at the tea-table. " A niece 
of Lady Mary's!" 

" Charming indeed ; " echoed the Countess, 
looking at the bare shoulders and red ringlets of 
the giggling Hebe ; satisfied that in this instance, 
as in that of the tea-cooking, she had only to 
blame her own incompetency of judgment. 

" She is so 7idive — so unaffected ; — says every 
thing that comes into her head. Did you hear 
her tell Lord Brancepeth just now that his nose 
feminded her of a macaw's beak ? Positively 
Lady Sophia is the most original creature in the 
world." 

" Very piquant, — very droll ! " replied the 
ambassadress, trying to force a laugh at an 
observation which struck her as singularly ill- 
bred. 

" She does the oddest thino^s ! " resumed 
Mr. Fitzgerald. " Did you hear of her having 
poor Clanhenry's favourite spaniel shaved, and 
sending it back to him painted m stripes like a 
zebra ? " 

" Excellent ! " replied Madame de R , 



40 THE PAVILION. 

perceiving, from the example of her companion, 
that she was expected to laugh heartily at the 
anecdote : — and she bent her eyes with un- 
feigned curiosity on this very original young 
lady, round whose chair, four of the hussars 
and three of the dandies were now clustered, 
bestowing immoderate applause upon her sallies. 

" No one is so much the fashion as Lady 
Sophia ! " said Fitzgerald. " She is quite a 
privileged person." 

. " Privileged indeed !" thought the wondering 
ambassadress, as she watched the familiarity 
with which she addressed and was addressed by 
the young men who disputed her notice. " And 
these, then, are fashionable manners ! — How 
cold — how dull — how formal must all these 
people think me ! — Since it is the custom to 
allow such latitudes to an unmarried woman, 
what must be the proceedings of women of my 
age and experience I" 

" Is it true," inquired she of Lady Gras- 
mere as soon as she could approach her, and 
striving to appear as little amazed as possible, 
" that Lady Sophia Clerimont is one of the 
most fashionable girls in town ? " 



THE PAVILION. 41 

" Oh, yes ! " was her friend's reply ; " she is 
a charming creature ; full of wit and anima- 
tion." She did not think it necessary to explain 
that this wit and animation consisted in the 
most flippant effrontery; that her popularity 
with the hussars and dandies arose from her 
possession of a fortune of ten thousand a year ; 
and with the ladies (her rival in loquacity the 
well-rouged dowager included) from the dread 
of being made the subject of her caricatures 
or pasquinades. 

There was only one point, meanwhile, among 
the many which excited her surprise in this her 
inauguration into the "sociable" parties of, 
Brighton, on which the Countess ventured to 
express her wonderment to her friend. 

" I thought," said she to Lady Grasmere, as 
they went out airing together in the snow the 
following morning, " that all these people were 
passing the winter at Brighton expressly to meet 
the Prince Regent?" 

" And so they are." 

" Impossible ! — your friend Mr. Fitzgerald 
announced last night that his Royal Highness 



42 THE PAVILION. 

was expected in a day or two, and every one 
instantly exclaimed that the pleasure of the 
Brighton season was over; — that the Pavilion 
spoiled every thing else ! " 

" And so it does." 

" Comment done ?^^ 

" In the first place by completely changing 
the characters of half one's acquaintance. Per- 
sons who are only men and women at present, 
will be converted into mere courtiers the mo- 
ment the Regent arrives." 

" Only such butterflies as Fitzgerald, surely?" 

" And then it breaks up all private par- 
ties. No one likes to send out cards with the 
chance of having their best people commanded 
away at the last minute. The society here is 
not extensive enough to admit of sparing fifty 
or sixty persons once or twice a week." 

" True ! but those whom I heard finding 
fault with the Pavilion, are precisely the people 
who form part of the set there." 

" Otherwise they would not have ventured to 
abuse it. You heard what Lady Edystone 



THE PAVILION. 45 

said about the rnaussaderie of the Prince's 
soirees : — 

" That chattering old dowager ? — I did ! *' 

" Should you have suspected from her tone 
and manner that it has been the object of her 
life for the last thirty years to be in favour with 
his Royal Highness?" — 

"You jest!"— 

" When he was young, she made love to him; 
when he grew older, she made hate, — striving 
to render herself important in his eyes by 
espousing an adverse political party ; — and now 
that he is no longer either an Adonis or a Whig, 
she affects to engage his attention par rtminis- 
cence, by being on excellent terms with all the 
people he likes best, and by following up all his 
plans of amusement as if they were her own." 

" How unaccountable ! — Had you but heard 
the impertinence in which she indulged respect- 
ing the Carlton House set ! — Did you but know 
the insinuations she threw out against the Pavi- 
lion party ! " 

" Of course ! — By those very circumstances 



44 THE PAVILION. 

you might have guessed that she moved in no 
other ; and that the persons she was slandering 
were her bosom friends." 

" If she talked so of her intimate associates, 
what will she not say of an unfortunate stranger, 
like myself?" 

" Nothing ! — unless you should happen to get 
into favour, and interfere with her own projects. 
England is a place where people are made to 
pay dear for distinction of any description." 

" You alarm me ! "—said the poor Countess, 
sinking into a corner of the carriage. " After all, 
then, it appears that ingenuousness and cordia- 
lity are merely Utopian virtues. After all, 
the English — the frank English — are growing 
as hollow and interested and artificial as the 
rest of the world ! " 

" Let us hope there are exceptions," said 
Lady Grasmere blushing deeply. " I should be 
sorry to distrust all my friends, or attribute 
unworthy views to even all my acquainances. 
Lady Mary Milford is a charming person." 

" I hope so ! — But it strikes me that there 
is something overstrained in her politeness — 



THE PAVILION. 45 

something Jesuitical in her excess of humility 
and deprecation. Before you have half done 
speaking, she answers you with a smile and a 
bow ; and whenever she catches your eyes from 
a distance, makes a sort of telegraphic signal of 
sympathy and intelligence. I observed her 
do it last night to every body in succession. 
You see, dear Lady Grasmere, how soon I am 
becoming infected with your national errors. 
You have already taught me to play the satirist.'* 

" Do not exercise your genius in the first 
instance on my friend Lady Mary. Believe me 
you quite mistake her character. The softness of 
her manner arises solely from the excessive gen- 
tleness and philanthropy of her disposition ; and, 
admitting to her house only those persons for 
whom she has the highest regard, nothing can 
be more natural than that she should favour 
them with tokens of interest." 

" I dare say I am wrong," said Madam de 
Reppenheim, vexed with herself for having 
spoken harshly of the friend of her friend — 
*' Besides she was the only one of the party 
who did not join in inveighing against 



46 THE PAVILION. 

the Pavilion ; but frankly admitting to me that 
nothintr could exceed the charm of the roval 
circle,'* 

"Did she ? " — replied Lady Grasmere, thought- 
fully. " That is indeed incomprehensible. I 
have always heard her assert such very different 
opinions ! Lady Mary is so indolent that she 
hates representation of any kind. She likes to 
wrap herself in an old gown and shawl, and sit 
gossiping in some odd corner with the Sir Car- 
mychael Domdaniel ; a manitre detre w^hich 
does not by any means recommend her to the 
fiivour of the Regent. He likes to see people 
in their best looks, spirits, and costume; and, 
for some reason or other (one of those caprices 
to which you will grow accusomed after a 
season or two in London), has not invited Lady 
Mary or her charming niece these two years." 
" Her praise, then, was at least disinterested." 
" I fear not. There must be something on 
foot of which I am at present ignorant ; " ob- 
served Lady Grasmere, falling into a reverie 
which lasted during the remainder of their drive. 
She did not think it necessary to degrade her- 



THE PAVILION. 47 

self ill the estimation of her friend, by admitting 
that she herself had never yet been included in 
his Royal Highness's invitations ; and that one of 
her chief inducements to visit Brighton, was the 
hope that her extreme intimacy with the Prus- 
sian ambassadress, Lady Edystone, and others 
particularly distinguished by his notice, would 
assist her in the accomplishment of an honour 
the more eagerly coveted from the precarious 
chance of its attainment. The parvenue Vis- 
countess saw others equally disqualified by birth, 
and far less recommended by nature, achieve 
the object of her ambition ; and could conceive 
no motive, unless her deficiency of political in- 
terest, herwantof a brother, father, husband, son, 
to support her claims in society, for the neglect. 
It did not occur to her indeed, that she was only 
too well recommended by nature ; — that her at- 
traction rendered her an object of jealousy to 
her own sex; — that she was, in short, far too 
pretty a woman to be admitted with safety into 
a circle, of which it was evident that she would 
form the brightest ornament. She had very 
little suspicion that, in spite of all the wires she 



48 THE PAVILION. 

was beginning to set in motion, her ostracism 
was already pre-determined by the rival jugglers 
of the Pavilion. Lady Mary Mil ford and her 
niece might very easily render themselves eligi- 
ble ; but the youthful dowager of Grasmere was 
out of the question. 



THE PAVILION. 49 



CHAPTER IV. 



A courtier is to bee found only about princes. Hee 
knowes no man that is not generally knowne. Hee puts 
more confidence in his words than his meaning, and 
more in his pronunciation than his words. Hee follows 
nothing but inconstancee ; admires nothing but beautie ; 
honours nothing but fortune. The sustenance of his • 
discourse is names. He is not, if he bee out of court ; 
and, fishlike, breathes destruction when out of his own 
element. Sir T. Overbury. 

It was about a week after this conversation, 
just as Countess Reppenheim was beginning to 
form an opinion that English bathing-places 
are by no means so amusing as les eaux, and 
that the society of Brighton was pretty nearly 
on a par with a fifth-rate provincial town in 
Germany, that a sudden fermentation became 

VOL. I, D 



50 THE PAVILION. 

apparent throughout the town. From the plebeian 
groups on the Steyne to the patrician one of 
Lady Mary Mil ford's drawing - room, every 
body assumed an air of fussy importance. The 
hussars jangled their spurs. Lady Sophia waved 
her ringlets, and the Brighton Chronicle an- 
nounced with a tone of sentiment becoming the 
occasion, " The Prince Regent is once more 
amongst us, and this gay little town is itself 
again. His Royal Highness alighted at the 
Pavilion yesterday evening at about twenty 
minutes past six ; having accomplished the 
journey in five hours and seventeen minutes. 
We noticed with regret that our august patron 
looked somewhat thinner than when he quitted 
us last Easter. He wore a light brown wig, in- 
clining a shade nearer to auburn than usual ; 
which perhaps contributed to the change 
of his appearance. All is now activity at Brigh- 
ton. — This morning will be devoted by the 
nobility and gentry, and visitors, to leaving their 
inquiries at the Pavilion. A select party will 
have the honour of dining with his Royal High- 
ness this day ; and invitations are already issued 



THE PAVILION. 51 

for a grand ball to celebrate the annual festival 
of Twelfth Night. The Duke and Duchess of 
Gloucester are expected in a day or two." 

Such was the tenor of the bulletin announc- 
ing the event that produced so wonderful a sen- 
sation ! — With the exception of the issue of in- 
vitations for a Twelfth Night ball, ("a thought" 
to which the wishes of the good people of Brigh- 
ton were both " father " and mother) the 
whole was correct ; and whereas the two pre- 
ceding winters had been overcast by domestic 
calamities in the royal family, by the deaths of 
the royal mother and daughter of the Regent, 
it seemed determined that the present should, 
shine with redoubled splendour. Lady Gras- 
mere's nets were already spread ; she had paid 
her court in this quarter, and strengthened an 
intimacy in the other ; had given three dinners 
a la cordon bleu to a gouty old Earl who was 
supposed to possess peculiar influence at the 
Pavilion ; and made a sacrifice of a favourite 
edition of the Florence gallery to a lady of 
fashion, who was supposed to dictate the predi- 
lections of a lady of rank, who was believed to 

d2 



5^ THE PAVILION. 

actuate those of the Delhai Lama. All was in 
excellent train ; and" having hinted in a general 
way to Countess Reppenheim that, in conse- 
quence of her long residence abroad and the 
unfortunate domestic circumstances of the 
Prince Regent since her return to England, she 
had not yet been personally made known to him, 
except in a general way at the drawing-room, 
sne waited the event in patient persuasion of 
being included in the invitations to the ap- 
proaching fete. 

Nothing could be more problematical than the 
state of society among the higher classes at the 
period in question. For some time it had been 
difficult to determine which held the greater in- 
fluence over the circles of the aristocracy : — the 
nominal court of Queen Charlotte, or the virtual 
court of the Regent ; while the dawning pros- 
pects of the heiress apparent opened new vistas 
for the calculations of courtiership. But now 
all doubt on the subject was over. The good 
old Queen was no more ;— Claremont, by one of 
the most cruel bereavements that ever frustrated 
the hopes of a nation, was closed ; — and there 



THE PAVILION. 53 

was nothing left but Carlton House and the 
Pavilion to invite the intrigues of the courtly- 
minded. The Regent had already held his 
first independent drawing-room ; where Lady 
Grasmere, among a host of other beauties, was 
for the first time presented to his notice. But 
what availed the drawing-room ? — Unless distin- 
guished by invitation either to the fetes of the 
season or the private circle of the Pavilion, she 
felt that the one great step of her elevation was 
still unachieved ; and that jointure, jewels, 
beauty, popularity, all were insufficient for her 
happiness. 

The weakness of the sex Is rendered the. 
scapegoat of so many follies, that it would be 
easy. to ascribe this sole infirmity of a virtuous 
mind to feminine vanity, and the overweening 
influence of fashion. But nine times — nay, 
nine times and three-quarters in ten, every 
darling folly of womankind may be traced to 
the artifices of the wiser or more crafty moiety 
of the human race. It was Lord Clanhenry's 
pleasure, or rather he wished to make it his 
profit, that the lovely widow should find herself 



54> THE PAVILION. 

wanting in the only point enabling him to afford 
her support. During the six months which 
had elapsed since the amount of his Christmas 
bills (a collection of antiquities of singularly 
ancient date) had made it apparent to him that 
lie must either marry or starve,— either possess 
himself of an heiress or follow his friend Bru- 
mell to Calais, — he had never ceased throwing 
out insinuations in Lady Grasmere's presence 
that a Viscountess by itself Viscountess, was a 
very paltry thing ; that the narrow sphere of a 
secondary woman of fashion was infinitely less 
distinguished than sturdy plebeianism ; that in 
England, as in all civilized countries since the 
reign of Louis le Grand, society was composed 
of two circles, the court and the nation, — per- 
sonages and persons, — entities and non-entities ; 
and that in spite of her charming house, excel- 
lent establishment, and lovely person, she would 
be more enviable as wife to an eminent haber- 
dasher, than as a Peeress unnoticed by the 
^Prince Regent. 

Women in possession of every thing to gratify 
their reasonable desires, are apt to sigh for 



THE PAVILION. 55 

Straws ; and poor Lady Grasmere actually be- 
gan to fancy herself a slighted and unhappy 
woman ! — But her morbid sensibility led her to a 
very different conclusion from that anticipated 
by Clanhenry. Instead of resolving to give her 
hand to the man whose favour with the Regent 
would lead her triumphantly into the centre of 
the royal circle (devoting her fortune to a spend- 
thrift and her person to a libertine), she pre- 
ferred the safer course of attaching herself to the 
train of half a dozen old women, such as Lady 
Edystone, and relying on the bosom friendship 
of Countess Reppenheim. But Clanhenry was not 
to be so defeated. He had already succeeded in 
spreading a thousand ridiculous reports at the 
expense of the Countess, and producing an un- 
favourable impression concerning her in the 
highest quarter; and determined to turn the 
mischief he had created to his own account. 

" That Countess Reppenheim is a most de- 
cided bore ! " sent round by means of the court- 
speaking-trumpet, Sir Carmychael Domdaniel, in 
a certain circle, in a certain tone, produced an 
effect even more certain than had even been an- 



56 THE PAVILION. 

ticipated by the man of ton ; and the Count her 
husband soon observed with surprise, regret, 
and mortification, that while he himself was 
especially distinguished by the notice of the Re- 
gent, and while other women far less remark- 
able for beauty, grace, or accomplishments, were 
welcomed at the Pavilion with the most flatter- 
ing attention, his own beloved Helene was re- 
ceived with courteous but formal solemnity. 

There was no remedy, no appeal against this 
silent verdict of royal disapprobation ; and the 
ambassador was cautious only to conceal from 
his wife his own opinion that she had uncon- 
sciously given offence at the English Court; an 
opinion which he knew would overcome her with 
vexation. 

But Countess Reppenhelm, however simple 
and confiding, was not so destitute of tact as to 
be unobservant that, although a frequent guest 
at the Pavilion, she was never voluntarily ad- 
dressed by the Regent with more than the saht- 
tation d^usage, 

" Surely it is very strange,'' said she, one 



THE PAVILION. 57 

niglit to Mr. Fitzgerald, (who, unaware of her 
extreme unpopularity in the circle, caused by 
Lord Clanhenry's aspersions, had ventured to 
seat himself by her side during one of the ex- 
quisite concerts executed by the private band of 
his Royal Highness), " It is very strange that 
the Prince Regent should have been sitting op- 
posite for the last half hour talking to old Lady 
Molyneux, who is so deaf and tiresome ; and 
that he has twice passed the vacant chair by my 
side, to address himself to some other person. 
Chez nous, it would be considered a breach of 
etiquette to treat the wife of a foreign minister 
with such marked neglect." 

'' You do not understand the customs of our 
eccentric country," said Fitzgerald, gladly seiz- 
ing an occasion for quizzing a person whom it 
was his interest and pleasure to render ridi- 
culous. " At other courts, royalty is expected 
to make the first advances. With us, the case 
is reversed. The Regent is doubtless surprised 
that you neglect to enter into conversation 
with him. All who are ambitious of his Royal 



D 5 



58 THE PAVILION. 

Highness's notice, follow up his bow of recep- 
tion by some friendly inquiry." 

" I could never venture on so extravagant a 
piece of presumption ! " cried the courtieress of 
the Spree, in utter amazement. 

'' Nevertheless, unless you conform to the 
Prince's notions you will find yourself al- 
ways on the black list. The first time he ap- 
proaches, make some inquiry about his health 
(he is fond of being condoled with about his 
health) ; and wounded as he has been in his 
domestic affections, nothing delights his Royal 
Highness so much as allusions to the felicity 
of wedded life. It is a favourite topic." 

And away went Mr. Fitzgerald, to enjoy from 
a sly post of observation the amusing spectacle 
caused by his mystification ! A man less 
practised or less bold in the art of quizzing, 
would have been almost alarmed at the air of 
amazement with which the most gracious, but 
most dignified Prince in Europe, suddenly 
found himself singled out and interrogated by 
the timid Prussian ambassadress. The theme 
so perversely selected was matter of only secon- 



THE PAVILION. 59 

dary surprise. His Royal Highness was more 
astonished at her Excellency's abrupt advances 
than his high-breeding permitted him to evince ; 
or than his powers of self-command could wholly 
disguise. 

The slightest cloud, the most trifling gesture 
of coolness on the countenance of any illustrious 
personage is sure to be perceived by one or 
other of the " small deer'' ever on the watch to 
browze on some tiny leaf of royal favour, and 
proportionately curious respecting the sweet or 
bitter herbage cropped by the rest of the herd. 

" What a woman that Countess Reppenheim 
is !" — yawned Lord Meerschaum, (who had 
achieved some little distinction at the Pavilion* 
by his fastidious curiosity in tobacco; who 
was said to freight an annual ship to the 
Havannah, and keep a resident agent at Mary- 
land:) " She is actually boring his Royal High- 
ness about his health, who has an antipathy to 
that sort of thing." 

" How ill-judged of Reppenheim to bring 
his wife down to Brighton," said Theodosiiis 



60 THE PAVILION* 

Bogg, a man of considerable backstairs in- 
fluence, in the habit of following about the 
court from place to place as a fetcher and car- 
rier of nothings ; a trustworthy envoy between 
my Lord Privy this and Mr. Secretary that. 
" He must perceive that she is e7i mauvaise odeur 
in a certain quarter, and consequently a mere 
millstone tied round his neck." 

" How I should hate to be that Prussian 
ambassadress ! " cried the wife of a minister 
high in the royal favour, to Lord Brancepeth, 
one of the most distinguished members of the 
coterie of Carlton House. 

" Every thing she has done and said since 
her arrival has manqut ! Handsome Fitzgerald 
calls her, the ' Berghe Chatelaine ;^ and she 
really boasts a most pastoral simplicity." 

" Reppenheim certainly mistook her vacation 
when he made her a grande dame" said Lord 
Clanhenry carelessly. 

" Made her a grande dame ! " cried Lord 
Brancepeth, disgusted by the party spirit he 
saw exercised against a lovely and interest- 



THE PAVILION. 61 

resting woman, merely because she chanced to 
" sail in the North " of royal opinion. " Surely 
you are aware that the Countess is issued of one 
of the noblest houses in Germany, — that she was 
a favourite maid of honour to the late Queen of 
Prussia, — that her father married one of the Saxe 
Hildburghausen family, — and — " 

" Her mother may have been Field Marshal 
Suwarrow without improving her capacity for 
diplomatic representation," said Clanhenry, 
vexed to find a man of Brancepeth's high stand- 
ing in society upholding the claims of one it was 
his pleasure to depreciate. " I say again, as I 
said before, that she has no vocation for courts or 
courtiership." 

" Of late years, so little has been kno^vn in 
England of courts or courtiership,'* observed 
Lord Brancepeth drily, " that perhaps the less 
we set ourselves up as arbiters on such points 
the better. Countess Reppenheim's manners 
possess the highest dignity, — the dignity of sim- 
plicity. She is not perhaps quite sufficiently on 
her guard against the liollowness of the world; 
but all she loses in this respect, as a woman of 



62 THE PAVILION. 

fashion, she gains in the regard and veneration 
of those whom she honours with her friendship." 

" Including of course Lord Brancepeth and 
the order of the Rationals ! " sneered Clanhenry. 

*' No," rephed her amiable partizan, " I am 
not, at present, so fortunate. I have hitherto 
stood on terms of distant acquaintance with 
Countess Reppenheim. But henceforward I 
I shall take particular pains to cultivate the in- 
timacy of one who doubtless boasts peculiar 
merits and accomplishments, since she has drawn 
upon herself, during less than half a year's resi- 
dence in this country, so much envy and so 
much misrepresentation." 

In a few minutes after this strong declaration 
in her favour. Lord Brancepeth was seated 
in earnest conversation by the side of .one 
on the point of being rebutted as a Paria 
from the high caste by which she was sur- 
rounded; enjoying the gratification so power- 
ful with a generous mind, of affording protec- 
tion to an injured and vmoffending person. 

Now of all the persons assembled in those ra- 
diant apartments, his was the suffrage Clan- 



THE PAVILION. 63 

henry was least willing to concede to the object 
of his animosity. Lord Brancepeth was pre- 
cisely the sort of person against whom the arrows 
of ridicule are launched in vain. Straightfor- 
ward, plain, manly, resolute, he was unassuming 
in his dress, equipage, and demeanour; and 
without any fastidious affectation of refinement, 
was so perfectly gentlemanly in mind and man- 
ners, that he might have appeared in a coat 
of the Cheltenham cut on a cabriolet of the 
Bath build, without the slightest fear of passing 
for any thing but what he really was — a first 
rate man of fashion. Leaving it to boys or 
parvenus to attract notice by the variety of their 
carriages or the finicality of their costume, he' 
felt that his own place in society was definite ; 
that it fulfilled all his ambition, and could be 
forfeited only by a base or unworthy action. 
Supported by this first greatprinciple, he had been 
on the turf without a squabble or a duel ; was a 
whist player to a considerable extent at the 
fashionable clubs, without risking his fortune, his 
honour, or his temper; and a first favourite 
with the Prince Regent, without having courted 



64 THE PAVILION. 

the royal smiles by adulation, or turned them 
to account by solicitation. The favourites were 
not jealous of him, the public did not mis- 
trust him, even the public journals, whether mi- 
nisterial or opposition, did not abuse him. 
Lord Brancepeth was, in fact, an upright and 
honourable man ; and was estimated accordingly. 
He might have been as upright as he pleased, 
however — as honourable, and even as highly es- 
teemed, — for any thing that Lord Clanhenry 
cared ; had it not been for the general opinion 
that he was a pretendant to the favour of Lady 
Grasmere, and for his lordship's particular opi- 
nion that the pretension was not regarded by the 
lady as either saucy or overbold. Clanhenry 
was well aware that his own suit had little to 
offer in competition with such rivalship ; that 
whether in respect to character, rank, fortune, 
person, or talents, his own endowments were im- 
measurably below those of Lord Brancepeth ; 
and his only hope was to prevent a liking from 
warming into passion, and a passion from pro- 
ceeding to declaration, which threatened utter 
ruin to his matrimonial projects. He had fore- 



THE PAVILION. 65 

boded evil from the moment of Brancepeth's ar- 
rival at Brighton; and now that he publicly 
vouchsafed his protection to Lady GrasmereV 
friend, a fatal presentiment whispered that he 
about to vouchsafe the offer of his hand to Lady 
Grasmere's self. For a moment Clanhenry mis- 
trusted his own previous line of policy. Perhaps 
he had acted injudiciously in exposing Countess 
Reppenheim to ridicule and unpopularity, and 
leaving to his rival the advantage of redeeming 
her from ignominy. Perhaps he might have 
done better by enlisting the sensibility of the 
fair Prussian in favour of his suit : and assailing 
the heart of the well-jointured widow, boldly 
and at once, backed by the influence of a bosom 
friend, as well as by his own influence with the 
fountain head of honour. Lord Clanhenry thought 
of the fatal first of January, and his bale of un- 
paid bills, and trembled ! He had still a se- 
cond string to his bow in the lady with the 
poppy-coloured ringlets. But even to his de- 
based and vitiated taste there was a considerable 
difference between selling his coronet to the 
graceful Lady Grasmere or the giggling Lady 
Sophia Clerimont. 



66 THE PAVILION. 



CHAPTER V. 



Courts are too much for such weak wits as mine. 
Charge them with Heaven's artillery, bold Divine ; 
From such alone the great rebukes endure. 
Whose satire 's sacred and whose rage secure. 
'Tis mine to wash a few light stains ; but theirs 
To deluge sin, and drown a court in tears. 

Donne's Satires. 

Twelve years ago Brighton did not form, as 
now, a remote but splendid parish of the metro- 
polis; whither, during successive portions of the 
year, the eastern and western extremities of 
London transport themselves, with their cha- 
racteristic customs and fashions ; but a small 
gossiping bathing-place, where, according to the 
Pythagorean precept, Echo was sedulously wor- 
shipped. Not a cathedral town in the realm 
was more addicted to les cancans of morning vi- 



THE PAVILION. 6T 

siting ; or to those little scandals which are 
nursed up like lapdogs among elderly ladies and 
gentlemen who have more leisure than wit or 
discretion. 

Instead of affording, as at the present mo- 
ment, an extensive circle of the best society 
wholly independent of the palace, it presented, 
during the winter months, a knot of people of 
fashion, waiting patiently like a crowd of boys 
on occasion of some public rejoicing, to huzza for 
every squib that explodes, and ready to throw 
up their caps at every effort made for their 
amusement. If it happened that his Royal High- 
ness was detained in town longer than usual, 
they felt aggrieved; and complained of the dul- 
ness of Brighton as if they were there only to do 
him honour. If, on his arrival, it suited his 
health or convenience to limit the gaieties of the 
Pavilion to his own immediate circle, they mur- 
mured yet more loudly. The Prince Regent 
was regarded as responsible for all that went 
amiss in the town to the discomfiture of its vi- 
sitors; and was rendered accountable to them in 
his turn, for every piece of new furniture, every 



68 THE PAVILION. 

Chinese lantern, or enamel miniature, hung up in 
his private dwelling-house. The gorgeous apart- 
ments so hospitably thrown open, were subjected 
to criticisms, public and private, such as would 
not have been ventured upon the mansion of 
any other individual in the kingdom; and 
Brighton, indebted to his royal patronage for 
the very breath of its existence, was always the 
first to note and bruit abroad those trivial oc- 
currences of domestic life which cannot be re- 
corded without offence to the actors of the 
drama. 

At that period, however, 
(In our hot youth, when George the Third was King) 

the place boasted in itself, and exhibited in its ha- 
bitual visitors a character of originality, such as an 
increased population tends to diminish. In 
a crowd of any kind, there is no room for the 
development of oddity ; and men and women, 
like horses, are apt to be subdued among multi- 
tudes of their own species. The Brighton of 
1833 only too closely resembles the London of 
1832 ; but the Brighton of 1820, resembled ra- 
ther the Bath of 1800. There were, at that 



THE PAVILION. G9 

period, ambling along the Steyne, no fewer than 
three professed imitators of its royal patron ; — 
three Prince Regents, in coat, wig, black stock, 
and cane; — who sneezed whenever it was ru- 
moured that his Royal Highness had a cold, — and 
kept their beds whenever Sir Henry Halford 
visited the Pavilion. 

There was the weazened beau, whom War- 
ren's milk of roses, aided by a well-furred 
roquelaire and cachemere waistcoat, enabled 
despite his threescore years and fifteen to con- 
front the Christmas breezes of the Marine Pa- 
rade ; and who still, among friends and sotto 
voce, ventured to qualify his royal pupil, as "that 
wild young dog." — There was the veteran bel 
esprit who, looking upon Sheridan and Jekyll 
as modern wits, had no great opinion of them ; 
but persisted in filling Lady Sophia Clerimont's 
album with stanzas a la Chesterfield, and macca- 
ronics in the style of Bishop Marley. There 
was the lofty Dowager in her moral farthingale of 
buckram; who, even in her peccadilloes, had 
erred with such an air of propriety and high- 
breeding, that nobody had a word of scandal to 



» 



70 THE PAVILION. 

breathe against her. There was the worldly- 
minded dowager Lady Edystone, who openly pro- 
fessed her faith in the Pavilion, as a sanctuary hal- 
lowing every object within its sphere. There were 
two or three bilious old K. C. B.s, with Sir Car- 
mychael Domdaniel at the head of the squadron; 
who, being occasionally invited to fill a corner 
of the dinner table at the Pavilion, commanded 
the respect and admiration of the town, by 
giving it to be understood that they were secretly 
employed as chief machinists of its scenery and 
decorations. There was the wife of the favourite 
Bishop, expanding and expanding like the frog 
in the fable, till her friends trembled for her 
safety; — there was the wife of the favourite phy- 
sician, whispering about her little anecdotes of the 
royal saloon, and comprehending herself and its 
illustrious master in the " we " which gave force 
to her narrative ; — there were fifty other tire- 
some women who retained the privilege of making 
themselves disagreeable throughout every grada- 
tion of Brighton society, in consideration of the 
circumstance that they were occasionally shone' 
upon by a ray from the royal countenance, or 



THE PAVILION. 71 

because the shaking mandarins, their husbands, 
were blest with the invaluable privilege of the 
royal button ! — 

It was, in fact, an act of heroism to ha- 
zard a rainy or snowy season in the midst of 
such a set of empty and incorrigible idlers ; the 
business of whose lives consisted in discussing 
things which did not concern them, and person- 
ages whom they did not concern. In point of 
scandal and gossiping it was worse than the 
worst state of the City of the Avon; where 
a succession of amusements served to divert 
public attention from private grievances ; 
while not a single glass of wine was drunk by 
the Prince Regent, not an airing taken by one 
of his guests, not a ride in the manege, not a 
turn on the lawn, but a palaver was held by the 
elders of the tribes of the East Cliff and the 
West, to decide upon the eligibility of the 
proceeding ! The Court did not, however, suf- 
fice to occupy the energies thus vehemently 
excited ; and the whole society of the place was 
successively subjected to the ordeal, by way of 
keeping in the hand of the inquisitors. 



72 ' THE PAVILION. 

Among these, the mansion of Lady Mary 
Milford was at once a sanctuary and a temple 
of adoration. The men crowded thither to do 
homage to the heiress, the women to manufac- 
ture scandals with the aunt ; and as Lady So- 
phia, in addition to her bare shoulders and 
golden tresses, possessed a mean and crafty 
spirit, her policy had suggested the adoption of 
Lady Grasmere as an ally, in the dread of her 
attractions as a rival. The coquette could not 
make up her mind to spare to the beautiful 
widow even so poor a conquest as Fitzgerald 
or Clanhenry; far less to leave her in undis- 
turbed possession of Lord Brancepeth, — to whose 
captivation, for the last two years, her own 
efforts had been secretly but sedulously di- 
rected. Frivolous and heartless as she was, 
Lady Sophia was steady in her preference; and 
though willing to giggle with lancers, hussai*s, 
and dragoons, her main object had never been 
neglected. 

" News — news — news ! " cried Lady Edystone, 
tripping into their room with affected juve- 
nility, the day after the concert; " What 



THE PAVILION. 73 

will you give me for being the first to tell you 
that the prudish Lord Brancepeth has struck up 
a flirtation with the mouton qui rive ambassa- 
dress ? " 

" Nothing," said Lady Mary, " unless you 
can bring us proof to back assertion; — the thing 
is impossible ! '* 

" By no means even improhable^'^ added her 
niece; her perception on the subject somewhat 
quickened by jealousy. " Countess Reppen- 
heim is the confidante of Lady Grasmere ; and 
Lord Brancepeth's pretensions in that quarter 
are sufficiently notorious." . 

" Young ladies are always espying symptoms . 
of matrimony," said the dowager maliciously. 
" For my part, I have no doubt that his incense 
burns to the goddess on whose shrine it is laid. 
Lady Grasmere was not there, last night, to be 
flattered by his patronage o her friend ; and I 
am persuaded that nothing but a strong per- 
sonal fancy would have induced him to act the 
Quixote as he did, in her behalf." 

" Who were his antagonists ? — " 

" The whole room was laughing at her." 

VOL. I. E 



74 THE PAVILION. 

"And why?'' 

" Never was any human being so absurd ! 
Clanhenry protests that she is bent on making a 
conquest of the Regent; and last night, she 
certainly followed him up and down, boring him 
to death. But here comes Mr. Fitzgerald ! — 
He will tell you all about it." 

" He seldom sees or hears any thing in which 
his own vanity is not concerned. I have no 
doubt he was sauntering past one of the great 
mirrors half the evening, observing nothing 
but the reflection of his own beautiful person ! — 
Ah! Fitzgerald ! — How do you do this morning ? 
— delighted to see you ! — why did not you come 
earlier? — We expected you at luncheon." 

" Did you ? " muttered the handsome Frede- 
rick, who, during the stay of the court at Brigh- 
ton, always grew mysterious and important. " I 
am sorry I was not aware of it, that I might have 
prevented your disappointment. I had engage- 
ments this morning to sing with the Trills, be- 
side my usual lounge at Lady Grandison's ; 
and instead of fulfilling either, I have been rid- 
ing in the school." 

" With his Royal Highness ? " — 



THE PAVILION. *l^ 

« With his Royal Highness." 

" Then you can tell us the true state of this 
mysterious business. What does he intend to 
do with her ? — 

« With whom ?'' 

" Countess Reppenheim ! — Lady Edystone 
assures us she made such bold advances last 
night, that no one knows what to think of it." 

" Has the thing got wind already ? " said 
Fitzgerald walking to the fire-place, and leisurely 
arranging his collar at the glass. 

" How much his Royal Highness must have 
been disgusted ! " said Lady Sophia in a tone 
of interrogation. 

" I really cannot advance an opinion ; I have 
never given it a minute^s concern," said Fred. 
continuing his labours of the toilet, and affecting 
diplomatic mystery. 

" I should think she would not be invited 
again ? " observed Lady Mary. 

" I cannot form an idea." 

" Probably she will go back to London ? " 

" Certainly, if her stay at Brighton is at an end." 

" What a bore for the Count? " 

E 2 



76 THE PAVILION. 

" He does not seem a man to be easily 
bored." 

" But they have always set themselves up for 
a domestic felicity couple ! *' sneered Lady 
Edystone. 

" Have they ? " — observed Fitzgerald, deter- 
mined to know nothing concerning any body. 
" Who are they ? — I really know nothing about 
them. Reppenheim is Prussian ambassador or 
some such thing, is he not ? — They asked me to 
dinner four or five times just before I came 
down here; but I never went." 

" Yet you seemed intimately acquainted with 
the Countess, when you met her here the other 
night with Lady Grasmerp," cried Lady Sophia, 
in a tone of pique. " You were sitting by her 
half the evening." 

" Was I ?— It is quite a chance where one is 
seated in large parties." 

" But it was a very small party," said Lady 
Mary indignantly, "you know I never have 
large parties ; — and the place was of your own 
selection. The Regent not being then arrived, 



% 



THE PAVILION. 77 

you were not quite so superfine and inaccessible 
as you are just now/' 

'^ Me fine ! — what an accusation ! " said the 
dandy, colouring slightly at her vehemence. 
" Believe me, my dear Lady Mary, there is no- 
thing I enjoy so much as your little coteries ; 
and as to this piece of Pavilion scandal, I know 
no more of it than yourself. What are you all 
talking about ? — Is his Royal Highness supposed 
to have afoiblesse for the fair Reppenheim ?" — 

" Exactly the reverse. You know very well 
that she is his bete noire ; and all we want to 
learn is the motive of Lord Brancepeth's sud- 
den declaration in her favour. 

" Lord Brancepeth ? — Encore du nouveau ! — I 
never heard their names mentioned together." 

"You will get nothing out of him," cried 
Lady Edystone peevishly. " Half an hour's trot 
in the royal manege has made him so very great 
a man, that there is no talking to him this 



morning." 



" At least, pray tell us," said Lady Sophia, 
" are the invitations out yet for the ball ? "-— 
" Not that I am aware of." 



78 THE PAVILION. 

" But there is to be a ball ? " — 

" So the newspapers assert." 

" But did you hear nothing of it at the 
Pavilion ? " — 

'' Not that I recollect. Why should there be 
a ball ? — Tt only produces a mob of Brighton 
people, just such as one meets at the Duchess 
of Keswycke's or Lady Grandison's ; whereas, so 
long as his Royal Highness restricts himself to 
his private circle, he can have exactly whom he 
pleases, and form the most perfect society in the 
world." 

This observation, — which was intended as a 
little punishment to Lady Mary for her attack 
upon himself, by rendering both aunt and niece 
painfully conscious of their own insignificance, 
was studiously echoed by Lady Edystone as one of 
the elect ; as well as by the dull old dormouse 
Sir Carmychael Domdaniel, whose military rank 
had obtained him a favourable reception at 
half the courts in Europe, while his tedious ina- 
nity excluded him from the more independent 
circles of unfashionable life. 

" If the most perfect society in the world 



THE PAVILION. 79 

affords no better amusement to Lord Brancepeth 
and the rest of you than to flirt with such a 
quiz as poor Countess Reppenheim, I wish you 
joy of the pleasure you find at the Pavilion ! " 
cried Lady Sophia with indignation. "Ah! my 
dear Lady Grasmere," she continued, affecting 
to catch a glimpse of the new visitor who had 
entered the room during her speech, "pray 
excuse me if you find me abusing your friend. 
But really all Brighton has found so much to 
say respecting her barefaced flirtation with 
Lord Brancepeth, that I scarcely consider it 
necessary to apologize for adding my voice to 
the majority." , 

" I shall really begin to fancy myself the 
keeper of Countess Reppenheim's conscience," 
said Lady Grasmere, returning Lady Mary's 
salutation, as she seated herself hurriedly in the 
circle. " Lord Clanhenry stopped my carriage 
just now on the Parade, to insinuate that she 
had been making love to the Regent ; and to 
declare, without circumlocution, that Lord 
Brancepeth is making love to her. I fancy 
both reports are equally authentic." 



80 THE PAVILION. 

" She make advances to the Prince Regent ! " 
snorted Domdaniel in his corner. 

" Brancepeth make advances to Aer / " re- 
iterated Lady Mary, who had long destined him 
for her niece. 

" He certainly paid - her great attention last 
night," said Fitzgerald, with affected careless- 
ness. " When he put her into the carriage, I 
really never witnessed a more pathetic farewell ; 
and in the face of a whole brigade of royal foot- 
men, who probably wished his lordship at the 
bottom of the West Cliff, for keeping them 
standing at the door of the vestibule, to face the 
night air." 

" It is very strange," exclaimed Lady Gras- 
mere, growing more and more uneasy, " that 
my friend the Countess should be the only 
woman in Brighton whom it is unlawful to hand 
to her carriage ! Sir Carmychael ! — Mr. 
Fitzgerald, — pray deign to inform me whether 
you put evil constructions upon the conduct of 
every woman who accepts your own services on 
similar occasions ? " 

" Give me an opportunity of proving the 



THE PAVILION. 81 

fact," whispered Frederick, approaching her, 
and assuming a loverlike tone, so as to be heard 
only by herself. " And yet, you well know that 
I should venture to put no construction on any 
proceeding of your's but such as your own will 
might instigate.'' 

But, notwithstanding the crouching attitude 
glozing smile and earnest look with which these 
words were uttered, they elicited no reply 
from the lady, not of his love, but of his court- 
ship. A possibility had just occurred to her, 
or rather an assertion had just been made, 
which absorbed all her interest ; nay, even suf- 
ficed to create an interest unknown before.. 
Lady Grasmere, in the thoughtlessness of wild 
seventeen and in obedience to her parents, had 
made an ambitious marriage with a man old 
enough to be her grandfather r but it was only 
in proportion as her experience of the world 
increased, that she became conscious of the ex- 
tent of the sacrifice. " 1 have resigned every 
thing for ambition,*' thought she, whenever she 
contemplated the brighter destinies of other 
households. "But let me at least be consistent in 

£ 5 



82 THE PAVILION. 

my worship to the idol I have adopted for my 
divinity. Having renounced both the pleasures 
and penalties of love, I will content myself 
exclusively with the gratification arising from 
my brilliant position in society. I have every 
thing the world can oifer. When once I com- 
mand a favourable reception at court, I shall 
not have a wish unaccomplished ; nor shall any 
thing induce me to give myself a second master, 
and sacrifice the independence I have bought 
so dear. The homage of Lord Clanhenry and 
the rest of them does me no harm ; but I trust I 
know myself and them too well to be deceived 
by their interested professions." 

Now " the rest of them," although a widely 
collective, was a very indefinite figure ef speech ; 
it included all London, and designated no one. 
But it consequently included many who formed 
no pretension to the honour, and neglected to 
except some, whom Lady Grasmere could have 
no plea for comprehending in the list of her 
mercenary suitors. Among these was Lord 
Brancepeth ; a man whom common report had 
often pointed out as her lover; but who, in 



THE PAVILION. 83 

his own person, had never given the slightest 
hint in confirmation of the rumour. As one of 
the most distinguished members of fashionable 
society she had received with pleasure his over- 
tures of acquaintance, when opening her house 
to the London world at the expiration of her 
widowhood ; and had occasionally received from 
him in return, those attentions which a well- 
bred man is in the habit of paying to every 
woman in whose house he is a frequent guest. 
But there his homage ended. He had never 
breathed a word resembling love ; had never 
fixed upon her those ardent looks which she was 
apt to detect in the eyes of others ; or besieged. 
her by those (falsely called) petits soins, which 
form in a woman's estimation the greatest atten- 
tions in the world. 

Lady Grasmere was accordingly wise enough 
to persuade herself that the pleasure she took in 
his courtesies arose solely from the gratification 
of her vanity, by proving to certain of the Ex- 
clusives by whom she was tacitly excluded, that 
their idol, the distinguished Lord Brancepeth, 
was to be found in her train; that he, the 



84 THE PAVILION. 

favourite of the Regent and darling of the 
coteries, was not too proud to call her carriage, 
or carry her shawl. Her ladyship's vanity must, 
however, have been indeed enormous, if the feel- 
ings of eager delight with which she saw him 
enter her opera box, or found him turn his 
horse's head to join her in the park — or if the 
accelerated pulsation of her heart when Brance- 
peth, in the course of a formal visit, was tempted 
to bestow some warmer expression of admiration 
on the embroidery or the drawing with which he 
found her occupied — arose solely from so con- 
temptible a source. That it could be love which 
caused her emotion under such circumstances, 
was of course out of the question. In the first 
place, because Lady Grasmere had formally 
renounced all allegiance to that most capricious 
of divinities;, and, in the second, because 
Brancepeth was an Adonis, nearly fifteen years 
her senior ; and Lady Grasmere, who had begun 
life at so early an age, fancied even herself, at 
six or seven and twenty, considerably advanced 
in years ! She had, however, no leisure for 
consideration of the business. All her thoughts 



THE PAVILION. 85 

for some months past, had been absorbed by 
the one great object of obtaining admission to 
the royal circle ; and to this even Lord Brance- 
peth was of secondary importance. 

But notwithstanding this engrossing project of 
self-aggrandizement, it certainly had occurred to 
her, during the three weeks of her residence at 
Brighton, that even the moderate measure of 
his lordship's attentions was strangely diminished. 
Although habitually admitted as a morning 
visitor at her house in London, he had been 
satisfied to leave a formal card at her door, 
without even attempting to profit by the pri- 
vilege; he had met her at several soirees at 
the Duchess of Keswycke's, and two or three of 
Lady Mary Milford's sociable tea-cookings, and 
contented himself with a gracious salutation, 
without attempting to approach her. She had 
sometimes flattered herself in town, that he pre- 
ferred her sober style of conversation to the 
flashy flippancy of the satirical Lady Sophia 
Clerimont, and the coarse double entendre of 
Lady Edystone ; that a friendly and confidential 
ease of intercourse was established between 



86 THE PAVILION. 

them, as agreeable to him as to herself. But it 
was plain that she had overrated her influence ; 
for he now bestowed his attentions on both — or 
rather on any one and every one rather than 
herself. 

Now the fair widow who, like all persons 
whose minds are dominated by a ruling preju- 
judice, was apt to ascribe every little slight she 
experienced to the inferiority of her birth, ac- 
tually lowered her estimation of Lord Brance- 
peth's character sufficiently to believe that, 
although in the wide wilderness of London he 
had no objection to waste a few hours of the sea- 
son on a young and handsome woman with a 
good establishment, and tolerable acceptance in 
society, was not anxious to compromise his own 
dignity by displaying at Brighton any thing ap- 
proaching to intimacy with an individual living 
without the pale of fashionable legitimacy.— 
Having observed that many silly persons of her 
acquaintance were no sooner admitted to move 
in that peculiar sphere, than they ceased to re- 
member even the existence of a planet unin- 
cluded in the one great system, — she ventured to 



THE PAVILION. 87 

believe that the noble-minded Brancepeth de- 
spised her for her inferiority to the higher 
thrones and dominions of exclusive life ! — The 
mere supposition, indeed, tended to magnify 
her desire for the notice of royalty far more than 
the sneers of young Fitzgerald, or the solemn 
irony of Lord Clanhenry. 

But on the suggestion of Lady Sophia Cleri- 
mont, a sudden light broke in upon her mind ! 
Brancepeth had more than once avowed in 
her hearing, his admiration of the feminine deli- 
cacy and simplicity of the new ambassadress ; 
and Countess Reppenheim unhesitatingly cited 
Lord Brancepeth as the most agreeable and. 
most high bred man she had met in England. 
But neither of them had expressed more than 
admiration. How should they ? — It was not to 
her they would make an avowal of a less lawful 
sentiment ; — it was not to a woman of blameless 
life and manners, such as herself, that a confes- 
sion of illicit passion was likely to be confided. 
She was now, however, enlightened ! — Her friend 
had doubtless formed an attachment to the 



88 THE PAVILION. 

sedate Brancepeth : which was not only returned, 
but had been the means of withdrawing his 
attentions from herself. Perhaps it was a 
hope of improving her intimacy with the object 
of her tenderness, which had originally sug- 
gested the preference testified for her society by 
the Countess? — Jealousy is a hasty traveller, 
and jumps at all conclusions! In a moment 
Lady Grasmere overstepped all boundaries of 
common sense, and succeeded in persuading 
herself that she was doubly a dupe ; — that 
Countess Reppenheim's assumed virtues, and 
Lord Brancepeth's pretended moderation of 
character, were equally frauds practised upon 
her credulity, and calling for exposure and con- 
tempt. And although, in Lady Milford's draw- 
ing-room, under the inquisition of the malignant 
Lady Sophia, the scandalous Lady Edystone, 
and that very universal circulating medium 
Domdaniel the diner-out and morning-visitor, 
she was careful to let no symptom of her irrita- 
tion escape, her heart waxed hot within her at 
the notion that those very Pavilion parties to 



t 



THE PAVILION. 89 

which Brancepeth affected indifference and the 
Countess aversion, had been made the means of 
cementing their connection secure from her own 
observation. It was but the day preceding that 
Helene had been protesting her extreme disin- 
chnation to join that evening's circle; and had 
even hinted to the Count her wish to put forth 
a pretext of indisposition as an apology for her 
absence. — -Hypocrite ! — Lady Grasmere could 
not pardon herself for having been imposed 
upon by such shallow artifices ! Helene, who 
pretended such attachment for her husband — 
such fondness for her children, — she to prove 
haggard ! — and with the blush of modesty still 
pure upon her cheek — the tears of sensibility 
still glittering in her eyes. — Hypocrite — hypo- 
crite — hypocrite ! — There appeared nothing so 
unprecented or unaccountable in the existence of 
an adulterous passion, to a person so experienced 
in the scandals or wickedness of society as 
Lady Grasmere, but that she readily gave ear 
to the imputation. But, alas ! amid all this vir- 
tuous indignation, all this mental excitement. 



90 THE PAVILION. 

all this disgust against both the sin and the sinner, 
a second discovery, still more appalling than the 
first, suddenly burst upon her mind ; — she was 
certainly in love with Lord Brancepeth herself, 
or she would not have cared half so much about 
the matter ! 



THE PAVILION. 91 



CHAPTER VI. 



O hard condition — twin -born with greatness, — 
Subjected to the breath of every fool 1 

Henry IV. Part II. 

Fitzgerald was but an echo to the general 
sentiments of the royal circle at the Pavilion, 
in reprobating those official entertainments to 
which all persons of a certain rank, having left 
their names, were invited as a matter of eti- 
quette, without regard to preference or preju- 
dice ; — causing a general disarrangement of the 
establishment, — considerable fatigue to the illus- 
trious host, — and no satisfaction to the persons 
chiefly concerned. A fete of any magnitude 
was regarded at the Pavilion as a sacrifice to 
propriety and popularity ; to be postponed as 
long as possible, and if possible, altogether 



92 THE PAVILION. 

evaded. It either did not occur to, or did not 
concern the chief movers of the pageant, that 
divers persons (in addition to the Lady Gras- 
meres and Lady Mary Milfords) had visited 
Brighton with no other object than the hope 
of being included in one of those universal 
gatherings ; that the Duchess of Keswycke had 
brought her diamonds fifty-nine miles, — that 
Lady Grandison had been at the cost of a 
velvet dress with trimmings of Brussels' point, — 
that the Bishop's lady had ordered a new grey 
satin gown, — and Colonel F. afforded a first 
rate dancing-master to his two awkward daugh- 
ters, — solely in anticipation of some such festal 
solemnity. Had his Royal Highness himself been 
sufficiently at leisure to conjecture the enormous 
importance attached by many respectable indi- 
viduals to an evening passed at the Pavilion, 
such was his proverbial good-nature that he 
would not for a moment have lent an ear to 
those who affected to consult his own health 
and inclination in persuading him that a ball 
was superfluous. The court was cautious, how- 
ever, against letting the result of these nefarious 



THE PAVILION. 93 

counsels transpire ; and day after day rumours 
grew stronger of an approaching issue of invi- 
tations. Velvet dresses continued to arrive 
from town, and white satin to glisten in the 
hands of the mantua-makers, without the slight- 
est suspicion that all their splendours would be 
wasted on the desert air. 

But Lady Grasmere was no longer one of 
the speculators on this important subject. The 
beautiful costume she had procured from Paris 
with a view to the momentous event, was laid 
aside and forgotten in its packing case. She 
scarcely recollected that such a superfluity as a 
diamond necklace existed in the world ; — cared 
nothing for the notice of King or Kaiser ; — and, 
if the notion of the illuminated halls of the 
Pavilion ever entered her mind, it was with a 
shudder of disgust at the remembrance that it 
was there her enemies had plotted against her 
peace. 

Resolved as she was that neither the Coun- 
tess nor the Countess's lover should detect her 
profound mortification at the discovery of their 
baseness, she was cautious that no abrupt rup- 



94 THE PAVILION. 

ture with her former friend should induce 
inquiry, expostulation, or explanation ; and 
accordingly determined to break off the con- 
nection as gradually and unconcernedly as pos- 
sible. With Lord Brancepeth, indeed, she must 
assume a totally different line of conduct; for 
whereas since her observation of his coldness 
towards herself, she had treated him with in- 
creasing distance and reserve, she now deter- 
mined to mask the true state of her feelings 
under an assumption of gay indifference ; — to 
accost him more familiarly ; — to defy him with 
all the reckless daring of despair. 

Meanwhile a train of circumstances was ar- 
rayed against her, over which, independent as 
she was, Lady Grasmere had no control. At 
the very moment she was forming these des- 
perate resolutions, the Countess, her beloved 
friend — her treacherous enemy — was giving au- 
dience in her dressing-room to Lady Beaulieu ; 
who, having arrived from town to pass the re- 
mainder of the holidays at the Pavilion, was 
struck with surprise and regret to learn in a 
mysterious whisper from Sir Carmychael, that 



THE PAVILION. 95 

her old acquaintance the Countess was so little 
in favour with the ruling powers, or their rul- 
ing powers. 

" I cannot make it out," replied she, with her 
usual frank goodnature. " Countess Reppen- 
heim is a charming woman, and can have done 
nothing that ought to give offence." 

Sir Carmychael Domdaniel was of course 
ready with the lesson that had been taught him ; 
and immediately pronounced, under the shadow 
of his intrusive proboscis, that " she was con- 
sidered a sad bore." 

" By whom ? " inquired the straightforward 
Lady Beaulieu. 

" By every body ! " 

" Every body is less than nobody. Besides, 
my dear Sir Carmychael, were every body who 
is pronounced a bore to be sneered out of so- 
ciety, which of us would be safe ? " 

A laugh immediately went round ; but Dom- 
daniel had not the slightest suspicion at whose 
expense. " She intrudes herself so officiously 
upon his Royal Highness," said he, " that it 
it is quite disgusting. She deserves to be sent to 



96 THE PAVILION. 

Coventry.'' And he twisted his nose with a 
gigantic expression of contempt. 

" But, my dear Sir Carmychael, supposing 
all the persons were to be sent to Coventry who 
intrude themselves officiously into the society of 
the Prince Regent, think what an increase of 
population that far-famed city would have to 
thank us for ! " 

Again a laugh went round, and again the 
little K.C.B. wondered what could make them 
all so merry. 

" And then she flirts so desperately with Lord 
Brancepeth," said he, impatient of any merri- 
ment which did net arise from one of his own 
stale puns. 

" Does she ? " cried Lady Beaulieu, to whom 
his Lordship was nearly related, and who had 
experienced considerable alarm lest he should 
degrade himself and his family by an alliance 
with the roturiere Lady Grasmere. " That is 
the best thing I have heard of her yet ! I must 
go instantly and thank her for her patronage of 
my cousin of Brancepeth," and, without waiting to 
ascertain what further inuendoes were going on 



THE PAVILION. 97 

under the gnomon of the indignant Sir Carmy- 
chael, she flew to the residence of the ambas- 
sadress, and received a cordial welcome. 

" I am so glad you are come at last ; — I have 
missed you very much," said the Countess. 
" Either Brighton is very dull, — or — " 

"You have been looking all this time at the 
reverse of the tapestry. I hear sad histories 
about you. I am told that you live with a set 
of people such as never were heard of." 

" Who can have told you so ? " — 

" Authority too high to be either quoted or 
impugned." 

" High as it may be, I have a right to take 
up my own defence." 

" Hush, hush, hush ! Can you in the first 
place deny that you have divers times made 
your appearance at the Pavilion soirees, look- 
ing very handsome, and, with malice afore- 
thought, striving to make yourself very agree- 
able?" 

" On the contrary, Mr. Fitzgerald assured 
me only last night that I did not strive half 

VOL. I. F 



98 THE PAVILION. 

enough. And yet when I followed his injunc- 
tions — " 

"Frederick Fitzgerald then is the traitor?" 
— interrupted Lady Beaulieu. " My cross ex- 
amination has been very soon successful ! 
Reste a savoir what could be his motive for 
so malicious a piece of advice. In the next 
place, my dear Countess, you are further ac- 
cused of the high crime and misdemeanour of 
a liaison with Lady Grasmere." 

" There, indeed, I plead guilty ; without 
admitting the libel implied in your arraign- 
ment. I cannot perceive the criminality of a 
friendship with one of the most amiable women 
at Brighton.'' 

" In the world, if you will ! But she is not 
one of us, and therefore does you a serious 
injury." 

" Not one of whom, — of what? — Surely Lord 
Grasmere was a man of the highest rank and 
distinction." 

" Of the highest fashion (which in England 
you will find a far more lofty distinction), till 
he chose to marry his bailiff's daughter." 



THE PAVILION. 99 

" Impossible !— my friend Lady Grasmere is 
accomplished, graceful, well informed — " 

"Very likely. — When a woman's education 
is completed by her husband, instead of her 
parents and the pastors and masters acting 
under their authority, I suppose, for the no- 
velty's sake, he takes care to do justice to his 
pupil. Au reste, this Lady Grasmere has done 
wonders in society, and gets on vastly well in 
her own humdrum way. But she does not 
even aspire to measure lances with those of 
the true faith. We know nothing about her, 
and wish to know nothing; and consequent!}^ 
you must know nothing, if you are anxious to 
be one of us." 

" I am anxious, it is true, to be on better 
terms in a certain quarter, for I fear it vexes 
Reppenheim to observe how very little satis- 
faction I have given. B^t neither for the 
accomplishment of that object nor of any other, 
will I give up the friendship of one who, from 
the moment of my arrival has overwhelmed me 
with kindness." 

" That was very impertinent of her ! — She 

F 2 



100 THE PAVILION. 

was well aware that her standing in society did 
not entitle her to pay you any such attentions." 

" What a notion ! — Do, pra}^, my dear Lady 
Beaulieu, allow me to present her to your 
acquaintance; and then you will judge more 
fairly." 

" To my acquaintance ? — Not for worlds ! 
Lady Grasmere is just the sort of woman I 
never permit myself to know, unless I have 
some immediate object in patronising and bring- 
ing her forward. Your friend has advanced 
beyond the necessity for that sort of kindness ; 
and therefore she must remain where she is, in 
all the infamy of too ostensible obscurity — of 
being one whom everybody and nobody knows. 
Take my word for it, Countess, she will never 
get a step further in the world." 

" In her place, I should be very well satisfied 
to remain where she is." 

" She is not exactly of that opinion, I fancy ; 
or she would now be at her beautiful villa in 
Surrey, instead of courting contempt from the 
heau monde at Brighton." 

" She is idolized by Lady Mary Milford and 
her set.'* 



THE PAVILION. 101 



cc 



Shocking, shocking ! — where could you pick 
up such people ? — They are the very superlative 
of mauvais ton ! " cried Lady Beaulieu, begin- 
ning to fear that the woman she had undertaken 
to exonerate and defend was after all an incor- 
rigible offender. " But tell me," she exclaimed, 
brightening up with a sudden reminiscence ; 
" what is all this history about you and my 
cousin Brancepeth ? " 

" Only that Lord Brancepeth is the most de- 
lightful of men," replied the Countess, blushing 
deeply at the remembrance of his kindness of 
the preceding night, but without by any means 
conjecturing the extent or nature of the " \\\s- 
tory" which had reached Lady Beaulieu's ears. 

" For once I can sympathize with your en- 
thusiasm," said her ladyship, not a little sur- 
prised at the naivete of the avowal. " He is in- 
deed a charming person — very different from 
the Lady Grasmeres and Lady Marys you seem 
to have taken under your protection." 

" They are no less under his. It was with 
them I first became acquainted with Lord 
Brancepeth." 



102 THE PAVILION. 

" Men go every where. It does not commit 
them,*' 

"But Brancepeth goes no where so much 
as to my friend Lady Grasmere's." 

" On your account of course. Quite right. 
We all understand that sort of thing." 

" What sort of thing ? — My dear Lady Beau- 
lieu, pray explain yourself. You are so enig- 
matical this morning that you have puzzled me 
to death ! " 

" Well, do not disturb yourself further ; 
but come to the Pavilion to-night with a deter- 
mination to give up this pernicious friend." 

" At least I shall not offend you by the sight 
of our intimacy. Lady Grasmere has resided 
so long abroad, that at present she has not the 
honour to be particularly known to his Royal 
Highness ; and — " 

" Yes, yes, yes ! I am perfectly aware of 
all that ; and the time will shortly come when 
you will understand it too, or my pains will be 
very much thrown away. Au revoir, chere 
Comtesse ; do not forget my injunctions." 

Meanwhile, Fitzgerald having ascertained 



THE PAVILION. 103 

that Lord Clanhenry was engaged to pass the 
morning at the Pavilion for a council of cos- 
tume touching certain changes to be made in 
the uniform of the household troops, of which 
models had been sent down from town, and in 
which Clanhenry, as a well-dressed man of 
twenty years experience, was supposed to be a 
cognoscente^ — resolved to profit by the occasion 
to address his homage to Lady Grasmere. 
Having shaken off the importunate arm of Sir 
Carmychael Domdaniel, who was apt to adhere 
like a barnacle to every goodly ship sailing to 
or from the port of the Pavilion, he made his 
appearance in her ladyship's drawing-room with 
an air very different from the tone of courtly 
apathy he had assumed to dazzle the eyes of 
Lady Sophia Clerimont. He was now the 
handsome Fred. Fitzgerald ; — eveille, anecdotic ; 
— almost as eveille and anecdotic as when 
labouring to attract the notice of his ro3'al 
patron by piquant narratives of all that was, or 
was not going on in society, — his miniicries of 
Domdaniel's mysterious whispers, and prolix 
manifestos ; his details of a new and wonderful 



104 THE PAVILION. 

remedy for the gout ; or description of "a mare, 
the most perfect thing of the kind in England, 
exactly calculated for his Royal Highness's 
weight/^ Perceiving that Lady Grasmere was 
miserably out of spirits, he judged the occasion 
favourable to a display of his entertaining 
powers, and a manifestation of his desire to 
devote them for life to her service. 

But all was unavailing. In defiance of his 
best stories, told in his best manner, — in defi- 
ance of his admirable style of quizzing Lady 
Mary and Lady Sophia, — his sneers at her 
friend Lady Edystone, his Mathews-like imi- 
tation of his own friend Lord Clanhenry's obese 
efforts at being graceful, which, as he observed, 
resembled the frisky play of a walrus, — the fair 
Viscountess could not, would not, might not 
be amused. — He abused all her intimates ; 
liinted that the whole fair group of Milfordian 
gigglers were paying their addresses to him; 
and more than hinted that he was desirous of 
paying his to herself. 

It would have formed an amusing study for 
Newton or Leslie, or any other of the delinea- 



THE PAVILION. 105 

tors of the lights and shadows of courtly beauty, 
to see the fine figure of Lady Grasmere thrown 
listlessly into her high-backed chair; for once 
careless of effect, and through that very careless- 
ness producing fifty times more effect than usual. 
Her exquisitely modelled hand, entangled in the 
luxuriant tresses of her hair; her large lustrous 
hazel eyes fixed vacantly on the carpet; her 
Grecian lips, compressed with the conscious- 
ness of injury ; while near her sat the grimacing 
dandy, labouring to throw all Lovelace into his 
countenance, all Grammont into his persiflage, 
all St. Preux into his eloquence ; — now affecting 
fashionable cynicism ; — now the laissez-aller self- 
possession of a man of the world;— now the air 
ptnetre of the tenderest of lovers. No Savoyard's 
monkey ever went through a greater variety of 
attitudes and evolutions ! — But the more he 
prated, the more evident became Lady Gras- 
mere's pre-occupation of mind. The more he 
laughed at his own bon-mots the graver grew 
her silence. 

" Confound the woman ! " thought the despair- 
ing wooer. " Will nothing provoke her to 

F 5 



106 THE PAVILION. 

smile — nothing excite her attention? — I must 
pique her, then, or she will go to sleep before 
my face." 

" By the way, I am so glad," he now observed 
in a tone of amiable candour, " that our poor 
friend the Countess is likely at last to creep out 
of the shades ! To be sure it must be miserably 
provoking to a woman entitled to play a certain 
part in society, to find herself distanced solely 
by her own manque d'usage. An ambassadress, 
— a woman really, I am told, (Tassez bonne 
maison ! and yet, managing to fall back into the 
mediocracy by the mere weight of her own want 
of tact. However, Brancepeth has now taken 
her by the hand, and no doubt she will do very 
well. At present, you know. Countess Rep- 
penheim is not at all known in London : fortu- 
nately she has not had an opportunity of com- 
mittinof herself there ; and she will make her 
debut, after all, under the happiest auspices." 

" Of course ! " replied Lady Grasmere, some- 
what roused by the name of her offending 
friend. " I understand Lady Beaulieu is ar- 



THE PAVILION. 107 

rived ; and it is her vocation to do the honours 
to the ladies of the corps diplomatique,^^ 

" Lady Beaulieu? — Lady Beaulieu has her 
own affairs to manage ! — No, no ! I alluded to 
Brancepeth. Brancepeth stands very well in a 
certain quarter, and will no doubt do away the 
impression produced hy the Countess's homely 
air and breaches of convenance. Nothing is so 
important for a 7iouvelle debar quee as to have 
some friendly guide to show her a little of the 
terrein. It is a distinct art to move well in a 
certain circle ; an art only to be acquired by ex- 
perience. '* 

This was intended as a side-wind illustratior* 
of his own value and importance to his fair 
friend. But, alas ! she replied only by a 
peevish exclamation : " It is an art the accom- 
plishment of which is dearly paid for by the for- 
feiture of one*s reputation and self-respect." 

" To be sure," persisted the Honourable 
Frederick, rolling the corner of his cambric 
handkerchief into the form of an allumette ; " re- 
putation, and all that sort of thing, is very good 
as far as it goes. But * I'd rather be a dog and 



108 THE PAVILION. 

bay the moon,' or even la tres honorte Madame 
VEv^que^s toddling poodle and bay an Argand 
lamp, than enrol myself at once in the deadly 
brigade of the humdrums. Now our dear 
Countess was born and educated a humdrum ; 
and entre nous, even Brancepeth (who is a de- 
vilish good fellow in his way) approaches to 
the humdrumatic style. One never heard of 
his doing or saying anything out of the common 
wav." 

" The very criterion of his excellence ! ** cried 
the Viscountess, piqued out of her self-posses- 
sion. " Lord Brancepeth does, says, and thinks 
exactly as he ought ; and consequently never 
renders himself a theme for the discussion of 
society or the scandal of the newspapers." 

" Content to dwell in decencies for ever/* 
quoted the dandy with a sneer. 

" The happiest and safest of all earthly taber- 
nacles ! " exclaimed Lady Grasmere, her natu- 
rally pale cheek flushing with a sudden glow. 
" A man who can afford to restrict himself to 
his allotted path of life, without any conscious- 
ness of defect or deficiency rendering it advis- 



THE PAVILION. 109 

able to attract or distract public attention by 
glaring absurdities or pompous displays, proves 
that he is master of himself and of the world ! " 

" Z)e la philosophie ! " sneered Fitzgerald, 
startled by this burst of enthusiasm from the 
recumbent statue. " T see I must apply for 
your ladyship's assistance in — " 

He was prevented concluding his retort by 
the announcement of Sir Carmychael Domda- 
niel ; who, with his usual self-assurance of being 
at all times, in all places, the most welcome of 
men, placed a chair as close to Lady Grasinere's 
as possible, and commenced his ordinary disclo- 
sures of profound secrets stolen from the daily 
papers, and bon-mots stolen from the jest-books 
of the eighteenth century. 

" And so, my dear Madam, after all, there is 
to be no ball at the Pavilion this Christmas ! 
For my part, I 'm delighted ; — there is nothing 
in which I luxuriate so much as those little 
private parties, where every one worth seeing, 
meets every one he wishes to see ; — eh ! Fitz- 
gerald." 

But Frederick was sulky and silent. 



110 THE PAVILION. 

"You see, my dear Madam, between ourselves, 
— you won't commit me, — for of course" (with a 
mysterious smile), of course / am speaking 
without authority, — you see Brighton enlarges so 
fearfully from season to season, and just at this ^ 
present moment there are such a vast number 
of persons here whose rank makes them fancy 
themselves entitled to an invitation, — and w«ho, — 
eh ! — Fitzgerald? — But perhaps the less we say 
about it the better ! I understand Lady Mary 
Milford is extremely angry ; (a case in point you 
know !) but as 1 w^as saying last night to Bogg, 
Meerschaum, and Clanhenry, if the Pavilion 
parties are to be crammed with all the nobodies 
in the land entitled to a coronet and supporters, 
they will be no better than the Duchess of Kes- 
wycke's or any other congregation of bores ; — 
eh, Fitzgerald?" — 

" Really, Sir Carmychael, you must excuse 
my becoming security for your aphorisms. I 
know nothing of the Pavilion projects, and 
have the honour to be her Grace's nephew." 

" A thousand pardons, my dear Sir ; but 
really the Duchess lives so completely out of 



THE PAVILION. Ill 

the world that one forgets to whom she belongs, 
or who belongs to her. And by the way, my 
dear Lady Grasmere, pray allow me to offer 
you my congratulations on our friend the 
Countess's new conquest. Really, Brancepeth 
is no every-day victory. A man against whom 
so many nanoeuvres have been directed — a man 
who stands so high with our illustrious friend— 
eh ! Fitzojerald ? "— 

" Really, Sir Carmychael, I must request you 
to—*' 

" I have long perceived," resumed Domda- 
niel, wholly insensible to the withering look of 
contempt launched against him by the hand- 
some dandy, " that Brancepeth had an attach- 
ment ; but I acknowledge it did not strike me 
that so very unpopular a person as Countess 
Reppenheim — a woman so universally pro- 
nounced to be so very decided a bore — was — " 

He sat confounded ; for the Countess having 
entered unannounced during his tirade^ now 
stood opposite to him, waiting its conclusion. 

Sir Carmychael consoled himself, as with a 
hasty bow he shuffled out of the room, with a 



]12 THE PAVILION. 

hope that her Excellency was not sufficiently 
well furnished with his illustrious friend the 
Prince Regent's English, to be fully conscious 
of the extent of his own insolence. 



THE PAVILION. 113 



CHAPTER VII. 



Joy to you, Mariana ! love her, Angelo ; 
I have confessed her, and I know her virtue. 
So, bring us to our palace ! 

Measure for Measure. 

Christmas was past and over ; — the first week 
of the new year nearly expired ; — the Steyne half 

a foot deep in snow , — the Duchess of Keswycke 

« 

shut up with the lumbago or (as her nephew re- 
verently defined it) " some hackney coachman's 
disorder ;" there was no hunting for the hussars ; 
— there were no balls for the slender young 
ladies ; — no new novels at the circulating libra- 
ries ;— no business doing, — no pleasure going on ; 
— and people began to find out that a country 
town, although boasting a royal Pavilion among 
its dwelling houses, can be as dull as the rest of 
the world during a foggy frost in the month of 



114 THE PAVILION. 

January. The Brighton newspapers, mean- 
while, attributed this general depression to the 
melancholy fact that his Royal Highness, their 
illustrious visitor, was sufFerinij from a severe 
cold; — Sir Carmychael Domdaniel secretly as- 
cribed it to the arrival of Lady Beaulieu, by 
whom his honourable office of butt to the Royal 
circle was rendered somewhat laborious: — Ladv 
Edystone declared— but her declarations are 
such as few people venture to repeat ; — and, 
Lady Grasmere, (poor Lady Grasmere !) al- 
though she declared nothing, was not the less of 
opinion that she was indebted for all her head- 
aches and heartaches to the astoundinjx dis- 
covery of Lord Brancepeth's passion for her 
friend the Countess. 

Byron has informed us that the heart of man 
has its ides and epochs of sensibility ; that March 
has its hares, and May must have its heroine. 
But if there be a month peculiarly consecrated 
to the tender perplexities of the female heart, 
it is decidedly that of January. Every thing is 
so cheerless, — so cold, — so desolate ; — there is so 
little communication between house and house, 



THE PAVILl^ON. 115 

man and man, or man and woman ; — no rides, 
no drives, no lounging visits, no sunshine, no 
flowers, no any thing to distract the attention 
of the fair afflicted from her own emotions. 
Seated in a well-scorched dress by the fire- 
side, a book in her hand, but her eyes engaged 
in building castles among the glowing coals, 
she reviews the past, and speculates concerning 
the future ; — talks o'er again antecedent conver- 
sations, — recalls to mind every look, — to heart 
every sigh ; — accuses herself of harshness, of 
want of candour, of blindness to her own hap- 
piness; — then, sauntering to the window and 
casting a wistful gaze upon the sloppy state of 
the pavement or the slippery condition of the 
roads, retreats back again to her chimney corner 
with the mournful certainty that it is " a naughty 
day to swim in," and that she has no chance of 
the visit she would give so much to secure. 

Never had Lady Grasmere taken so much oc- 
casion as now to complain of the climate, and 
sigh for a change of weather ; — never had she 
derived so little solace from those favourite pur- 
suits of reading, working, painting, music, which, 



116 THE PAVILION. 

in London or at Richmond, caused her time 
to pass so lightly. She began to fancy she 
wanted to be at home again ; and, but for 
the dread of provoking the quizzing of Lady 
Sophia Clerimont and the malice of the Dom- 
danielites, would have cut short her visit to 
Brighton, — making a resolute effort to get rid 
of her vexations, and commence a new career 
of happiness and activity. 

But if the first month of the year be unpro- 
pitious to ladies in love, what may it not be said 
to be to gentlemen in debt ? — How despondingly 
do they contemplate the unsatisfactory face of 
nature, — with all the blue noses, — red eyes, — 
and muddy boots haunting its surface ; — human 
beings looking their ugliest, and even the brute 
creation, rough, shaggy, and forlorn ! — A misty 
steam obscures the shop windows; — the water- 
pipes enveloped in wisps of straw and the hall 
doors sprinkled with sand, impart a vulgar air 
even to the dwellings of the lordly ; — people 
elbow their way along the streets to keep their 
blood from stagnation ; — the most courteous 
greetings are hastily and sharply bestowed ; — 



THE PAVILION. 117 

the carriages roll past with the inmates as care- 
fully secluded from sight as in so many hearses. — 
There is no satisfaction to be had in the external 
atmosphere ; — the lounger's occupation's gone ! 
The month of January was, in fact, a " lapse 
of time" which (like Cleopatra in her trou- 
bles) Lord Clanhenry had for many years past 
been anxious to " dream away." Whether by 
his residence at Melton or Brio^hton at that 
business-like crisis, he contrived that his afflic- 
tions should pour in upon him per post; — or 
whether, boldly facing his persecutors at his 
lion's den in the Albany, he was compelled 
to confront them face to face, — was comparatively 
imimportant. Between the first and fifteenth 
of January of every consecutive year, he found 
himself reduced to echo Sir John Falstaff's 
apophthegm that for consumption of the purse 
there is no remedy ; — and to sigh that so 
few simple-hearted Justice Shallows remain 
in the world. He had not, like Fitzgerald, so 
much as an infirm old Duchess on whom to 
build his speculations; like the locust in the 
wilderness, he had eaten up the last green leaf; 



118 THE PAVILION. 

sold every reversion, mortgaged every acre, 
every contingency, every security, real, per- 
sonal, or conjectural. There was nothing left 
for him but a compromise with his creditors, or 
an heiress ! 

This conviction had brought him to Brigh- 
ton. It is true he had no objection to dine 
three or four times a week at the best table in 
England, — listen three or four evenings to the 
most exquisite music in the most luxurious lo- 
cale, — and sun himself in all the pride, pomp, 
and circumstance of glorious royalty. But fatal 
experience had taught him, and an extensive 
correspondence with his solicitors, bill-brokers, 
and bill-makers, daily reminded him of the les- 
son, that even his royal patron was not likely to 
rob the Exchequer on his behoof; and that 
Lady Beaulieu's smiles, however glorious to 
bask in, would do nothing for the removal of his 
embarrassments. He had debts, both of honour 
and dishonour, to settle, that admitted of no 
delay ; — and let the town be as gloomy or the 
Pavilion as brilliant as it might, the main 



THE PAVILION. 119 

point was his acceptance by a widow with eight, 
or an heiress with ten thousand a year. 

To achieve this desirable object, he had 
spared no pain to Lady Grasmere, no pains 
10 himself: he had sneered away her confidence 
in the Countess, her satisfaction in her own po- 
sition in the world ; had quizzed her into odium 
in the Pavilion circle, — slandered her into 
contempt with the warm-hearted Brancepeth ; 
and he now hailed with delight the glow of fe- 
minine jealousy beaming in her restless eyes 
and transparent complexion, at the insinuations 
he was enabled to append to his edition of 
the state of affaii's between her excellency of 
Prussia, and Brancepeth the defender of the 
faithful. He almost lamented the superfluous 
trouble he had taken previous to quitting Lon- 
don, to insinuate to his lordship that he was 
himself about to visit Brighton, less with any 
view of paying his court at the Pavilion, than 
in compliance with the eager request of poor 
dear Lady Grasmere that he would meet her 
there, and act as her cavalier of the season ; a 
statement which, although it strongly provoked 



120 THE PAVILION. 

Lord Brancepeth to throw him out of the club 
window at which they were standing, he felt that 
he had no right to resent. The ignominy of the 
case rested with the Viscountess herself; who, 
for the sake of a little fashion — a collateral link 
with the unapproachable sphere of Exclusives— 
was induced to degrade herself by bestowing 
her smiles on a libertine of broken fortunes, 
approaching her with the undisguised intention 
of repairing them at her expense. Lord Brance- 
peth listened, less with indignation than disgust, 
to Clanhenry's allusions to the evenings he was 
in the habit of passing t^e-a-Ute with Lady 
Grasmere, and the billets with which she was 
daily, hourly, half-hourly in the habit of favour- 
ing him. 

Such were the misrepresentations which 
caused that sudden alteration in his sentiments 
and demeanour, detected by her ladyship on 
her arrival at Brighton ; and the coolness, with 
which her own quick sense of dignity induced 
her to mark the consciousness of the fact, only 
confirmed him in his belief of her attachment, 
or entanglement, or engagement with Clan- 



THE PAVILION. 121 

henry. Never, indeed, till that persuasion took 
possession of his mind, had he been fully aware 
of the admiration with which her beauty, her 
graces, and her feminine virtues had inspired 
him. His season for romance had long been 
over : at the sober age of two-and-forty, love 
and honeysuckles, and giggling young ladies, 
lose their attraction. He knew that his post of 
honour was not in a private station. He 
had official duties entailed on him by a high 
appointment in the household of the Regent, 
which, for some years to come, must render him 
a denizen of the Court. His anxiety, therefore, 
in the selection of a wife, was less directed to 
secure a pretty little doll to sit in his draw- 
ing-room, embroidering work-bags, or murder- 
ing Herz's sonatas for his amusement, after 
the fashionable pattern of domestic life, — than 
to find a woman worthy to adorn his rank in 
the eyes of the world, as well as in his own ; — 
qualified to walk hand in hand with him in the 
saloons of royalty; to participate with him in 
an endless round of festivity and dissipation, 
without any other object there than his ap- 

VOL. I. G 



122 THE PAVILION. 

proval ; and to encounter the perilous ordeal of 
public admiration, without risk or hazard to her 
honour or his own. 

On his first intimacy with Lady Grasmere, 
even before his eye was captivated and his 
powers of reasoning affected by her exquisite 
beauty, he hailed her as eminently qualified 
to fulfil his utmost exactions. He saw that she 
was graceful and highly accomplished. From 
all that he knew or could learn respecting her, 
he believed her to be as highly principled as 
she was mild and endearing. She was rich, and 
therefore above being swayed by interested mo- 
tives, sljould she deign to honour him with her 
hand ; and that she would deign, he gazed and 
gazed upon her beautiful face, fine figure, 
and radiant smiles, till he flattered himself 
into believing. The Viscountess had herself 
announced her intention of passing the win- 
ter at Brighton ; and he had already formed his 
own of devoting himself there to her society, 
and tendering his hand, and coronet, and 
Brancepeth Court, to her acceptance. He 
felt that an over jealous susceptibility had only 
too long prolonged his celibacy, and would soon 



THE PAVILION. 123 

convert him into an old bachelor. He liad hi- 
therto cherished, with the tenacious egotism of 
his sex, an apprehension that his rank and for- 
tune might exert a stronger influence than his 
personal merits, in aid of his courtship. But 
all these fears anxieties and misgivings were 
irrelevant in the case of a lovely Viscountess, 
in the independent possession of eight thousand 
a year ! 

Such were the auspicious prospects blighted 
by the cunning of Clanhenry, and the malice of 
Fitzgerald ; and such the motives which induced 
the former to watch with triumphant satisfaction, 
on the ensuing evening at the Pavilion, the in- 
creased and increasing intimacy between Brance- 
peth and Countess Reppenheim. He saw that 
all was safe ; that the Angelo of the Regent's 
Court (disappointed in his matrimonial projects 
on the wealthy widow) was fast falling into a 
snare of a very different description ; and not 
even Lady Beaulieu observed with greater satis- 
faction the flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes of 
the guilty pair, as they sat apart on the silken 
divan encircling the saloon. 

G 2 



124) THE PAVILION. 

Very little, indeed, did he suspect that the 
conversation, exciting so many surmises, had 
commenced, on the part of the Countess, with a 
confession of indisposition, arising from her sur- 
prise at the coldness, strangeness, inconsistency, 
with which her visit had been received by Lady 
Grasmere. Foreigners do not cherish that ex_ 
cessive delicacy on matters connected with the 
heart, which distinguishes the more reserved na- 
ture of our countrymen. They talk of Love and 
Friendship, as they would of the fine arts, and dis- 
cuss even their lovers and friends, as they would 
a favourite author or actress. Madame Rep- 
penheim had no hesitation in acknowledging 
herself to be souffrante, — accablee, — desolee, by 
the unaccountable caprice suddenly displayed 
towards her by a person so gentle, so considerate, 
and so warm-hearted as her dear Lady Gras- 
mere ! 

Nothing could be more natural than for the 
still partial Brancepeth to ascribe this unsatis- 
factory change of character to the influence of 
her ladyship's accepted lover, the worldly- 



THE PAVILION. 125 

minded Clanhenry ; nothing more indispensable 
than for the Countess to vindicate the outraged 
fame of her friend, by an assertion of Lady 
Grasmere's personal detestation of the obese 
dandy, — her abhorrence of his principles, — her 
contempt of his pretensions. 

*' 1 fear you are mistaken," replied his lordship. 
*' I have good authority for knowing that Clan- 
henry is in immediate correspondence with your 
friend; and that he has visited her on "the most 
familiar footing at Maplewood for some time 
past." 

" We have scarcely been apart for the last four 
months," cried the Countess, warming in de- * 
fence of her dear Lady Grasmere ; " and it has 
often given me concern to observe the annoy- 
ance caused her by Lord CI an henry's importu- 
nities. Nothing but the dread of his satirical 
wit, and the influence he exercises" in the great 
world, has prevented her from forbidding him 
the house. To be made the subject of one of 
Lord Clanhenry 's caricatures or lampoons, 
amounts, it appears, to banishment from so- 
ciety." 



126 THE PAVILION. 

" Had not Lady Grasmere originally expe- 
rienced some degree of predilection for those 
fashionable accomplishments — " Lord Brance- 
peth began : but the Countess would not suffer 
him to proceed. 

" No, no, no ! " she exclaimed. " Believe 
me, Eleanor has better taste. Nothing does she 
so unexceptionably revile, as the hollowness, 
persiflage, mockery, practised by such men 
as Clanhenry and Fitzgerald. Nay, I have even 
heard her adduce, as the noblest trait in your 
own character (when citing Lord Brancepeth to 
me as the model of an English gentleman), your 
perfect frankness and candour." 
, In the ardour of defending an absent friend, 
the Countess did not perceive how far — how 
much too far — she had ventured; and Brance- 
peth, gratified beyond description, was careful 
not to call her attention to her own indiscretion, 
so as to induce her retraction of the flattering 
inference. He had just then, indeed, no fur- 
ther opportunity of persisting in an investiga- 
tion so interesting to his feelings; for Lady 



THE PAVILIOM. 127 

Beaiilieu, bent on removing the unhandsome 
prejudices maliciously excited against the new 
ambassadress, had seized the opportunity of 
pointing out to their illustrious host, (with whom 
she was an old-established friend and favourite,) 
the extreme beauty of Countess Reppenheim's 
countenance, as she sat engaged in animated 
conversation with his favourite Brancepeth. 
Touching, with a woman's ready tact, on every 
point of the Countess's history calculated to in- 
vest her with interest or importance in the eyes 
of the Regent, she described her intimacy with 
the beautiful Louisa of Prussia, (that heroine of 
royal romance ! ) and the high distinction with 
which she was still endowed at the court of her 
native country by the force of that touching re- 
miniscence. No person was at hand to sneer, — 
to quiz, — or to decry ; and Lady Beaulieu had 
the satisfaction to perceive that her plain tale 
produced the desirable effect on a mind natu- 
rally imbued with noble and generous impulses. 
A few minutes afterwards, she had the grati- 
fication to perceive that his Royal Highness 



^^ 



128 THE PAVILION. 

was sharing with Lord Brancepeth the animated 
smiles of the Countess; who, too much engrossed 
by the interest of the conversation in which she 
had been previously engaged, to remember one 
word of Clanhenry's malignant lessons or Fitz- 
gerald's mystifications, now appeared before his 
discriminating eyes in her natural character 
of a mild, unassuming, simple, true-hearted 
woman. When the Prince, pleased by her gentle 
tones and graceful demeanour, proceeded to 
lead the discourse to her native court, her native 
country, her past life, her beloved mistress, — 
the genuine and unexaggerated tone of deep 
feeling with which she recurred to that almost 
sacred subject, interested him still more warmly 
in her favour. Countess Reppenheim possessed 
moreover a fund of valuable information con- 
nected with the late war and the imperial 
usurper, derived from actual observation ; she 
had been present at that memorable interview 
when the Queen was sent to intercede, and in- 
terceded in vain, for the cession of Magdeburg; 
and, on a topic upon which she was so fully 
informed as well as so earnestly interested, was 



THE PAVILION. 129 

eloquent and impressslve beyond the ordinary 
powers of her sex. It was not till he re- 
tired for the night, that his Royal Highness 
abandoned the post by her side, so long neg- 
lected, and now so highly and justly appre- 
ciated. 

The circle was petrified. Domdaniel having 
retreated to a corner, was writhing his trunk 
from side to side in speechless agony. — The 
bore ! — the mouton qui reve ! — the rejected, con- 
temned Countess Reppenheim had held the 
Prince Regent entranced in familiar conversa- 
tion for one hour and forty minutes, by the 
musical pendule that told the golden hours on 
the chimney piece ! — Lady Beaulieu triumphed ; 
and nothing was talked of next day but the 
caprices of fortune, and the caprices of royalty. 
A more startling scene, however, was still in 
reserve. Before the close of the afternoon, 
cards were issued for an impromptu ball to be 
given on that very evening ; and amid the flut- 
ter of silks and satins occasioned by the sudden- 
ness of the event, a thousand mysterious rumours 
became partially audible. 

g5 



130 THE PAVILION. 

Lord Clanhenry, was perhaps, the only man 
in Brighton whose ear they did not reach. 
In addition to his ordinary packet of long 
wafer-sealed epistles, the mail of that fatal night 
had brought down from town his man of busi- 
ness, wearing what the newspapers call a most 
imposing attitude. An interview w^as appointed 
between them that could not be neglected ; and 
two large tin cases filled with deeds of mortgage, 
annuity, insurance, assurance, and all the other 
paper currency of a ruined man, accompanied Mr. 
Cursitor to his lordship's lodgings. Argument 
was unavailing, evasion useless, compromise out 
of the question, procrastination impossible. Mr. 
Cursitor rendered it as apparent, not only as 
words, but as deeds could make it, that his 
lordship was an insolvent debtor, a bankrupt 
Peer; and that, unless the matrimonial redemp- 
tion announced in his recent letters were already 
secured, all was over with him ! 

On that point, Clanhenry took defensive 
ground. If not secured, it was secure ; and if 
Mr. Cursitor w'ouid do him the honour to dine 
with him, and remain four-and-twenty hours 



THE PAVILION. 131 

at Brighton, all should be satisfactorily ar- 
ranged. He admitted it had cost him some 
scruples to sacrifice himself for money ; but the 
call of honour should now be obeyed. He 
would dispatch his proposals in the course of 
the afternoon ; and Mr. Cursitor might bear 
back to London, early on the following morn- 
ing, intelligence that Lady Grasmere was at his 
disposal, and her eight thousand a year at 
the disposal of his creditors. And while he 
hastened to pen an epistle to the Viscountess, 
profuse in protestations of disinterested and 
unlimited attachment, it certainly did impart 
some little additional triumph to his feelings to 
reflect on the mortification with which Fitz- 
gerald, and the pain with which the outwitted 
Brancepeth would hear of his acceptance. 
Apprehensive that some latitude of speech 
might circulate a rumour of the object of Cur- 
si tor's visit, should he suifer the man of busines;;; 
to become a man of pleasure and escape out of 
his sight, his lordship renounced for that day 
his morning lounge and daily visits ; and, hav- 
ing received with the rest of the court circle an 



132 THE PAVILION. 

invitation for the evening, contented himself 
with the certainty that before it was time for 
him to dress and go to the ball, it would be 
time for his solicitor to undress and go to bed. 

The fatal hour arrived ; and, nauseated by 
the first bad dinner he had eaten for six weeks 
and the first bottle of port he had tasted for 
six years, — heated, flushed, indigestive, having 
vainly waited till the last moment for Lady 
Grasmere's expected answer, he at length shook 
hands with Cursitor (who now saw two fat 
clients before him instead of one) and stepped 
into his cabriolet. He was very late ! When 
the great portal of the illuminated hall unclosed 
to receive him, the exhilarating sound of music 
instantly greeted his ear; and groups of gay 
and glancing figures within, warned that the fete 
had already commenced ; he beheld the Bi- 
shopess plumhig herself like a peacock, and 
the Physicianess strutting like a jackdaw. 
When lo ! just as he entered the ball room at 
one door, a general stir and subsequent stillness 
throughout the apartment warned him that the 
Prince Regent was entering on the other. All 



THE PAVILION. 133 

eyes were directed towards the spot. A lady 
splendidly attired was leaning on his Royal 
Highnesses arm ; a lady, whose exquisite beauty 
now seemed to strike the beholders for the first 
time. It is true they had often seen her before ; 
often radiant as now with diamonds ; often ar- 
rayed as now in pearly satin. But never before 
had they beheld her dignified by the graceful 
homage of the Regent ; never before had they 
seen her blush so sweetly as when presented by 
his Royal Highness to Lady Beaulieu and 
others of his peculiar circle, as " my new and 
amiable friend. Lady Grasmere." 

" What the devil is the meaning of all this? " 
inquired Clanhenry (frighted from his pro- 
priety by port wine and consternation) of the 
panic-struck Domdaniel by his side. 

" Only that Brancepeth having this morning, 
announced his approaching marriage to our 
illustrious friend, our illustrious friend most 
condescendingly resolved to — *' 

" Ay, ay ! I understand," interrupted Clan- 
henry, shivering with the shock. " Poor Fitz- 
gerald, eh ! — One can't help feeling a little for 



134 THE PAVILION. 

poor Fitzgerald," he continued; suddenly striv- 
ing to recover himself, and disguise his vexation 
from the K.C.B. of many echoes. 

" Fitzgerald ? — What can it signify to him ? 
Have you not heard that Fred.'s engagement 
with little Clerimont is formally announced by 
Lady Mary ? And the worst of it is, he has 
sold himself a blind bargain ; for the Duchess of 
Keswycke died this morning, and has left him 
universal legatee ! Handsome Fred, by waiting 
half a day longer, might have escaped a wife 
with a fiery head and still more fiery temper. 
But see ; liere comes Brancepeth to be con- 
gratulated. Clanhenry ! where are you ? — Has 
any one seen Lord Clanhenry ? — God bless my 
soul ! he must have disappeared while I was 
talking to him ! " 

No one had seen, no one did see his lordship 
again that night. But two days afterwards, 
when the Morning Post announced an ap- 
proaching alliance between the Right Hon. 
Lord Brancepeth and the Dowager Viscountess 
Grasmere, the solemnization of which was to be 
honoured widi the preseoce of his Royal High- 



THE PAVILION. 135 

ness the Prince Regent, an extract from the 
Brighton paper furthermore edified the creditors 
of the luckless Clanhenry with intelligence that 
his lordship was one of the passengers on board 
the last packet from Newhaven to Calais ; an 
incident which caused no little scandal and 
speculation in the illustrious circle of — The 
Pavilion. 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 



II n'y a rien dont on voit mieux la fin qu'une grande 
fortuner. 

La Bruyere. 



CHAPTER I. 



To secure our own enjoyment is happiness ; — to secure 
the enjoyment of others, is virtue. Saadi. 

Mr. Martindale was considered a very for- 
tunate man to return from the Cape of Good ^ 
Hope with a fortune of ninety thousand pounds, 
shortly after he had attained the age of forty- 
four. Ages and their influences are comparative. 
An individual, who during twenty-two of his four- 
and-forty years has scarcely missed as many days 
of being seen on the pave of St. James's Street 
or in the dust of Hyde Park, — whose visage has 
been as stationary in the bay window of White's, 
Arthur's, or the Cocoa Tree, as that of the 
ijreat Saladin over the Saracen's Head coach- 



140 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

office, passes for a middle-aged man, or ra- 
ther for a man of a certain age: but one 
who has passed his time in purveying camels 
for the East India Company in the vicinity 
of the Himalaya, or planting indigo, or chew- 
ing betel in any other oriental settlement, is ac- 
counted a young man, should his final settlement 
with Leadenhall- street be completed within his 
first half century. Richard Martindale, thanks 
to currie, magnesia lozenges, and other bilious 
preventatives, had been so lucky as to lose sight 
of Table Mountain without the loss of his 
liver or the reduplication of his spleen; — his 
fortune was invested in a very safe house ; — ^and 
on his arrival at Nerot's Hotel from the Downs, 
he thought himself, and was thought by the 
waiters, a very important personage. He was 
not indeed the inheritor of an aristocratic name, 
but his lineage was respectable and irreproach- 
able ; his father having been an eminent physician 
in the town of Hertford, where his elder bro- 
ther still practised as the leading attorney. One 
younger brother was a clergyman ; and his two 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 141 

sisters were married to small squires in the 
neighbourhood of their hereditary home. 

In such a family, secure from all pretension 
to fashion or distinction, the sum of ninety thou- 
sand pounds was as the treasury of the pre- 
Adamite sultans ! They had been talking for 
five years past of all Richard would do when he 
arrived ; and now that he was really come, and 
really pleaded guilty to the possession of a sum 
so nearl}' approaching to one hundred thousand 
pounds, they hardly knew how to make too 
much of him, or too little of themselves. A for- 
tune recently acquired or still floating, which 
has not yet been subjected to matter-of-fact 
calculations respecting interest, investment, 
and net produce, always assumes double im- 
portance. To say that a man has an income 
of foiu* thousand a year, is to say nothing. One 
set of people regard him as a pauper ; another 
set observe that, with management, he may 
live handsomely enough ; a third declare that 
he must not attempt to launch out in Lon- 
don society ; and the fashionable world vote him 
admissible only as a giver of moderate dinners, 



142 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

and a proprietor of moderate equipages. But 
give him boldly out as recently arrived in Eng- 
land with a hundred thousand pounds, and the 
whole world (with the exception of the mer- 
cantile classes) hail him at once as a wealthy 
man. What may not a man do with a hun- 
dred thousand pounds ! — " No stud, — no service 
of plate 5 — no French cook, — no opera box ? 
Shabby fellow ! — If a man with a hundred thou- 
sand pounds cannot afford to be comfortable, 
who can ? " People talk of the earnings of his 
thirty years' exile, — of the whole provision for his 
future family, — as of a year's income. 

Such was the case with Richard Martindale. 

His elder brother the At , but no, he called 

himself " the Solicitor," had long fixed a greedy 
eye on a small estate of fifty or sixty acres, ad- 
joining his paddock, in the suburbs of Hertford. 
" Now Richard is come home," said he, to his 
smart wife, " I shall get him to manage it for 
me." The Reverend Jacob, like his namesake, 
proprietor of twelve blooming children, was no 
less anxious to build a wing to his parsonage, in 
order that the fathers of the twelve future tribes 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 143 

might not sleep above three in a bed. " Now 
jRichard is come home," said he to his dowdy 
wife, " I shall get him to manage it for me." 
His elder sister, Mrs. Marriott, had an elder 
son ripe for college ; and, in his mother's opi- 
nion, needing only that stepping-stone to ad- 
vancement to reach the highest dignities of 
church or state. It had long been her ambition 
to behold him in trencher cap and gown. " Now 
JRichard is come home," said she to her somno- 
lent spouse, " I shall get him to manage it for 
me." His younger sister, Mrs. Millegan, whose 
husband, in addition to his own farm, managed 
the large estates of the Earl of Mowbray, and 
who was accordingly much noticed by the ladies' 
at Mowbray End, had long been desirous of 
possessing some sort of carriage, even a pony 
cart, in which she could make her appearance 
there when company was staying in the house, 
without dust or mud upon her shoes or traces of 
plebeian moisture on her brow. " Now Rich- 
ard is come home," cried she to her three eager 
daughters, " I shall get him to manage it for 
me." 



144 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

For these cogent reasons, the different mem- 
bers of his family were severally though si- 
multaneously careful not to grace the exile's 
welcome home with any demonstration of per- 
sonal comfort. Both brothers and sisters were 
really and unaffectedly delighted to see him ; 
but they were just ninety thousand times as 
fond of him as when, in his hobble-de-hoyhood, 
a passage was taken for him in the outward- 
bound ship fated to convey him to the Hotten- 
tots and cobra-de-capellas. But instead of re- 
joicing heartily with him on his safe return, 
slaying the fatted calf, and listening politely if 
not attentively to his Eastern romances, each 
had a tale to tell of " moving accidents by flood 
and fell;" — of the badness of the times; the 
defaulture of parishioners ; the rise of dry goods 
and tobaccos ; the fall of stocks ; the unpromis- 
ing aspect of affairs both public and private; — 
and instead of their usual hearty joviality, each 
spoke in a plaintive tone with elevated eye- 
brows and depressed mouth. Each wanted but 
a little, however, of being able to face with cheer- 
fulness the ills of life. Robert, the solicitor, 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 145 

honestly confessed that he had no doubt of 
making his way in the world, and bringing up 
his family respectably, if he were only able to 
accomplish the purchase of Clammer Mill Farm. 
Jacob had no fault to find with his condition 
in life; but it was a grievous thing to see ten 
or a dozen fine boys cooped up like quails in a 
poulterer's cage, or turned out on the village 
green to play with vagabonds or trampers, be- 
cause there was no room for them in their poor 
father's confined and unwholesome house. Maria 
showed him albums full of her poor dear Dick's 
" Fugitive poetry;" and appealed to him, whether 
it would not be a thousand pities that so much 

genius should blush unseen for lack of the dis- 
cs 

r 

tinctions of the University;— while Nancy hinted 
that if she could but manage to keep up appear- 
ances a little better, she had very little doubt of 
securing one of the young Mowbrays as a hus- 
band for her daughter Anne ; only when the poor 
girls made their appearance in the saloon at 
Mowbray End, panting and puffing after their 
walk, with the complexion of a cook in the 

VOL. 1. H 



146 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

basting act, it was not to be supposed they could 
look to advantage. 

Poor Richard was at first mightily distressed 
to observe the desponding condition of his 
kinsfolk. There could not apparently be four 
more uncomfortable families than those which 
had unceasingly favoured him, during his resi- 
dence among the Hottentots, with glowing pic- 
tures of their domestic happiness, and entreaties 
that he would hasten his return to witness 
and share it. Their pretensions, however, were 
far from exorbitant. He was in hopes that five 
thousand pounds would cover the whole amount 
of their ambition ; and what was five thousand 
out of ninety ? — Within a week, therefore, after 
his arrival at the dapper residence of his brother 
Robert, he had promised universal happiness to 
the family ; purchased the Clammer Mill estate ; 
presented to Jacob the fifteen hundred pounds 
necessary to build and furnish the new wing; 
settled eighty pounds a year on Richard Mar- 
riot ; and bestowed on the astonished Mrs. 
Millegan a handsome chariot and set of horses. 
He cursed the whole family in short ** with 
many a granted prayer ;" and never was a 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRT. 147 

finer or more glowing specimen of the short- 
sightedness and ingratitude of the human race 
exhibited, than by the dynasty of Martin- 
dale. Having so readily obtained all they asked 
for, they were now prodigiously vexed they had 
not asked for more. Bob had little doubt that 
his dear Richard would have made very little 
difficulty in adding the Springfield Farm to his 
purchase ; which would, in fact, have made the 
whole a most complete thing — a most valuable 
investment — a most saleable property : — while 
Jacob thought it a great oversight to expend so 
large a sum as fifteen hundred pounds on a 
college living, while four thousand would have 
purchased the advowson of Bramfield, where the 
parsonage and gardens were calculated for the 
reception of a large family (six more sons if he 
liked), and fit to step into at once, without incur- 
ing the perplexities of brick and mortar: — Mrs. 
Marriot woke her unhappy husband three or 
four times during his after-dinner doze, to lament 
that while she was about it she had not begged 
her brother to send Tom to Westminster, as well 
as Dick to Trinity ; and, as to Mrs. Millegan, 

H 2 



148 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

she had an attack of the jaundice in honour of 
her good fortune. She, who had been the most 
abundantly rewarded of all, — she who had 
spunged for a pony cart and obtained a yellow 
chariot with a light blue bullion hammer-cloth, 
— she was the most disappointed, — the most 
indignant of the whole family ;— and knew not 
whether most to blame her own improvidence 
or the injustice of her brother. He was no 
longer her " dear " brother — no longer even 
Dick— but merely "Richard Martindale." — 
Nothing could be more unfair than Richard 
Martindale's partiality in the family ; and to 
make her the sufferer, — his next, and once his 
favourite sister ! — she who had been " little 
Nancy " in his early letters from the Cape ; — 
and who had sent him out year after year, for 
fifteen seasons, a case of high-dried hams and 
tongues of her own curing. It was too bad ! 

Richard Martindale had expended c£2754. 
Is. Sd. on the purchase of the Clammer Mill 
estate; — Richard Martindale had paid in hard 
cash to his brother Jacob, a sum of of 1500 ; 
— Richard Martindale had settled on Dick Mar- 
riot the interest of c£'2,000 ; while on herself,-— 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTR 149 

on little Nancy,— on poor little Nancy, — he had 
bestowed a London built chariot, with a pair of 
harness and iron-grey horses ! — Even allowing 
for Richard Martindale's absurd ignorance of 
the value of things, and predisposition to be 
cheated, the whole gift would not have cost him 
of 600 ; and, by a prudent purchaser, might have 
been secured for c£470. And this was to be 
her portion of his opulence ; this her share of 
the family bounty amounting in the aggregate 

to ^"6,854. 75. Sd. ! ! ! 

While poor Mrs Millegan railed at the cru- 
elty of her brother, — her husband and daughters 
railed at her own bad management ; till, in the • 
exuberance of her wrath, she set forth in the 
town-built chariot aforesaid with its blue ham- 
mer-cloth, to quarrel with her sister Harriot 
for having so shamefully overreached poor 
Richard. Nay, before the month was over, 
hard words had passed between Robert Mar- • 
tindale and Jacob (in whose parish, the momen- 
tous farm of Clammer Mill happened to be 
situated) ; and Richard, on his second arrival 
in Hertfordshire from Nerot's Hotel, found that 



150 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

those he had left desponding, were grown 
despairing ; and that their complaints were now 
no longer of their circumstances, but of each 
other. No two of the four families could meet 
without bickering ; and in consequence of this 
novel disunion, it came out that young Dick of 
Trinity was privately engaged to his cousin 
Clotilda Martindale, sole heiress to the solicitor 
and to Clammer Mill farm ; and that the eldest 
of Jacob's dozen had been writing verses to 
Miss Helena Millegan the Mowbray hunter ! 
War was now openly declared among them; 
and Richard Martindale, accustomed to the 
pococurante existence of Africa, and the dreari- 
ness of oriental lassitude, was amazed that they 
could all take so much pleasure in talking so 
loud and so fast; and above everything, was 
seriously disgusted by the mercenary character 
betrayed by every member of his family. He 
had not been in England long enough to know 
the value of a guinea, the burdensomeness of 
a numerous progeny, and the mortification of 
being overreached ! 

At length, growing somewhat irritable, he be- 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 151 

gan to fancy himself bilious ; and having packed 
himself and his York-tan coloured serving-man 
(it is impossible to designate him a valet) into a 
yellow chariot resembling, with the exception 
of the hammercloth, his ill-starred present to 
the wife of Lord Mowbray's agent, he set off' 
for Cheltenham as fast as four post horses would 
carry him. If he could not get rid of his indi- 
gestion, it would be something to get rid of his 
family. 



152 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 



CHAPTER II. 



So thistles wear the softest down 
To hide their prickles, till they 're grown ; 
And then declare themselves, and tear 
Whatever ventures to come near. 

HUDIBRAS. 

Poor Martindale felt as if released from the 
house of bondage as he walked jauntily along 
the Montpelier Parade, arrayed in a new coat, 
new boots, new gloves, new every thing; be- 
traying in every look and movement the luxu- 
rious nabob, intent on his own rejuvenescence, 
and enchanted with the stir and cheerfulness of 
an English watering-place. 

And if his object in visiting Cheltenham 
were to recruit his health and spirits, the effort 
was speedily effectual ; for at the close of ten 
days, he made his way to the spring, not only 
more spruce and self-complacent than ever, but 



# 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 153 

having a very pretty w^oman appended to his 
arm. Discouraged in his attempt to diffuse 
happiness and sow contentment in his oivn 
family, he had conceived a determination to be- 
come the founder of a new family for a renewal 
of the experiment. 

Although forty- four in years, and fifty in com- 
plexion (his face having very much the appear- 
ance of a last year's russeting apple), Richard 
was by no means an ill-looking man ; and, 
but for a little excess of showiness in his cos- 
tume, might have passed for a gentlemanly 
one. Having tontined his way to a high ap- 
pointment at the Cape, he had lived there in^ 
the best official society ; and was in fact a bet- 
ter bred man than either Robert or Jacob, his 
brethren, who, between themselves, affected to 
look upon him as a Hottentot. But whether 
ill-looking, ill-dressed, ill-bred, or well, it mat- 
tered not. A handsome equipage, and the re- 
ports circulated by his York-tan coloured ser- 
vant, had induced an opinion that he was a man 
of millions: and it naturally followed that he 
soon became an object of universal esteem and 

H 5 



154 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

admiration. It happened that a Scotch banker, 
the brother or cousin of his own agent, was so- 
journing at Cheltenham; through whose busy 
intervention, divers loo-playing dowagers and 
mammas of many daughters, managed to make 
the acquaintannce of the bachelor-nabob. They 
found Richard Martindale quite ready to fall 
in love, and be fallen in love with; and with 
the natural hankering after a little bit of dignity 
so remarkable among the wise men and the 
foolish who visit us from the East, he soon an- 
chored his affections on Miss Mary-Matilda 
Grinder well, daughter of a Dorsetshire Baronet; 
a bewitching creature, with pink cheeks, flaxen 
hair, a stiff muslin frock and coloured shoes, 
exactly after the pattern of an angel in a panto- 
mime, or a doll at a bazaar. Sir John and Lady 
Grinderwell were enchanted with the prospect 
of securing such a son-in-law; and though, on 
examination into his exchequer and treasury 
estimates, Mr. Martindale proved to have ex- 
actly four hundred and fifteen thousand pounds 
less than common fame had led them to expect, 
he had quite as much as warranted them in 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY, 155 

calling him '• a man of four or five thousand a 
year/' (for a Baronet of landed estate knew 
better than to talk about eighty-five thousand 
pounds,) and they had the satisfaction to per- 
ceive that nothing could be more liberal and 
docile than his notions about settlements for his 
dear Mary-Matilda, and her future family. 

As Mr. Martindale was somewhat out of con- 
ceit of his Hertfordshire relatives, and as Lady 
Grindervvell was of opinion that it would make 
room in the family coach if she were able to 
travel back to Grinderwell House without the 
addition of her third daughter's company, it 
was agreed that the marriage ceremony should, 
be performed (without ceremony) at Chelten- 
ham. Richard Martindale's chariot was as good 
as new, — his wardrobe quite that of a bride- 
groom ; and as to his dear Mary-Matilda, the 
Cheltenham mantua-makers and milliners far 
exceeded any notions of fashion she had ever 
been permitted to indulge. A showy flimsy 
trousseau was therefore speedily gathered together. 
Martindale made a flying journey to Bath for 
the purchase of trinkets and wedding presents ; 



156 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

and, within two months from the day when his 
travelling-carriage first drew up under the gate- 
way of the Plough Hotel, it made its exit 
in an opposite direction on a bridal tour into 
Wales. Richard was the happiest of men; 
Mrs. Richard, in her bonnet and feathers, 
the smartest of women; and if the York-tan 
domestic in the rumble did not show his white 
teeth by grinning quite so broadly as formerly, 
it was because a very sententious lady's-maid 
was seated by his side, who affected a taste for 
the romantic, and sobered him by her allusions 
to the pleasures of the mind. 

A bridal tour, in fine weather, with an easy 
carriage and a travelling-desk full of bank-notes, 
is thought to constitute the height of human 
felicity. Mr. and Mrs. Richard Martindale 
travelled hand in hand for nearly seven hundred 
miles, enlivened by Mary- Matilda's somewhat 
diffuse reminiscences of Grinderwell House, and 
the two preceding summers at Weymouth and 
Hastings, " where Pa had had to fight a duel 
with a Captain of Hussars about her elder sister, 
and where Julia, the second, had been very near 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 157 

marrying a very handsome young man with 
mustachios, a Lieutenant- Colonel in the service 
of Don Pedro, who had since been tried for 
shop-lifting;" — as well as by Richard Martin- 
dale's repertory of anecdotes of hair-breadth 
'scapes from boa constrictors and lion-cubs, — an 
expedition to the Court of Congo, — the horrors 
of the tail of a typhoon he had encountered on 
his outward-bound voyage, and the head of a 
shark on his return. It would be irrelevant to 
vary the picture of their pilgrimage by a hint of 
all the damp beds, tough beef-steaks, sloe-juice 
wine, and sloe-leaf tea, they confronted by the 
way. All these minor miseries served as texts • 
for Richard's protestations to his bride, that 

With her conversing, he enjoyed hard beef, 
Sour veal, or musty lamb, — all pleased alike ; 

while Mary-Matilda maintained, for the first six 
weeks, that the tenderness of her dear Richard 
fully compensated the toughness of the steaks. 

At length the November fogs set in. Mar- 
tindale could no longer travel with the windows 
down, and was obliged to plead guilty to the 
twinges of a flying rheumatism. The loving 



158 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

couple having now been acquainted for four 
months, and united for two, had confided and 
re-confided to each other (Hke two benighted 
princesses meeting in a wood in one of Made- 
moiselle de Scudery's novels) all the incidents 
of their past lives. Mary-Matilda was beginning 
to yawn wider and oftener than was either be- 
coming or safe, considering the state of the at- 
mosphere ; and it was at length agreed between 
them that, although travelling was a delightful 
thing, it would be still more delightful to settle 
in a good warm residence for the winter. 
The world was all before them where to choose : — 
Richard spoke of Hertfordshire ; Mary- Ma- 
tilda thought of London ; — and lest either should 
obtain ascendancy in this their first matrimonial 
privy-council, they mutually determined on 
Bath. They could not have chosen better. Bath 
was precisely the place for the man who could se- 
lect a carriage for country use with a blue bullion 
hammercloth, and for a lady who could set off 
on a tour to the mountains in a white satin hat 
and feathers. To Bath they went ; engaged a 
handsome house, gave dinners, were "visited 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 159 

by every body ;" and before the return of spring 
made manifest to Richard that he would shortly 
be the happy father of a little Dick, Mrs. 
Martindale, the daughter of Sir John Grinder- 
well, — Mrs. Martindale, whose fine clothes were 
now replaced by still finer, and who wore such 
beautiful pearls and such a quantity of ostrich 
feathers, — was pronounced to be one of the beau- 
ties of Bath, and " quite the woman of fashion." 
Richard grew more persuaded than ever that 
he was the luckiest and happiest of men ; and 
Mrs. Millegan (whose daughters had been 
finished at a Bath boarding-school, and retained 
several correspondents there) was ready to ex- 
pire of indignation on learning in what style her 
brother lived, and that Mrs. Richard Martin- 
dale's ball had been the most splendid of the 
Circus and the Season. The whole of the Mar- 
tindale family had, in the first instance, received 
the announcement of his marriage as a personal 
injury; and their only comfort was in pointing 
out that one of a Baronet's many daughters 
could not but prove a very unthrifty helpmate. 
They had fancied Richard, at forty-four, a man 



160 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

of more sense than to be captivated by the 
first pretty face that came in his way ; and 
now that he had actually become the prey of a 
girl of whom he was old enough to be the fa- 
ther, and who would doubtless make him father 
of as large a family as that which blessed 
the union of her own prolific father and mother, 
they cared not how little they heard about him. 
Clammer Mill proved a profitable bargain ; — 
Jacob's wing had been finished by contract so 
as to leave him two hundred pounds in pocket ; 
Dick Harriot was doing wonders at Cam- 
bridge ; and all congratulated themselves on 
having been so prompt in screwing what they 
wanted out of the pocket of " that silly fellow, 
Richard." 

Mrs. Millegan was the only one of the family 
who was implacable. Had she dreamed on 
Dick's arrival in England that he was likely to 
make a fool of himself by marrying, she cer- 
tainly would have spoken out at the period of 
his insulting her by the present of that useless, 
showy carriage; a thing, as Millegan observed 
at the time, that "would require a couple of hun- 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 161 

^dreds a year to keep it up;*' a thing, as Lady 
Charlotte and Lady Jemima Mowbray had been 
observing ever since, "quite inconsistent with their 
establishment and style of living ;'' a thing she 
had never sought — never wished for. Had he 
given her a pony-cart, as she hinted to him, 
there would have been some sense it. But a 
London chariot and horses ! — and such horses ! 
lame, blind, spavined, windgalled: — " Mr. Mille- 
gan had sold them for a song to the Red Dragon 
at Hertford, and they were actually running in 
the mail ! " 

" Little Nancy " (who was now a woman of 
some fifteen stone) could by no means pardon 
her brother; and when the newspapers eventu-* 
ally announced that the lady of Richard Martin- 
dale, of the Circus, Bath, had given birth to a 
son and heir, the sole ejaculation of her sisterly 
tenderness on the occasion was, " Much good 
may it do him ! " It was but an augmentation 
of her wrath, when she learned from her brother 
Robert, whom as her husband's man of busi- 
ness it had not been convenient to her to include 
in her family quarrel, that this addition to the 



162 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

tribe of Martindale had been christened Grin- 
derwell. " Grinderwell Martindale ! — Perhaps 
some day or other to become Sir Grinderwell 
Martindale ! — The euphony of such a title ! — 
Why could not Dick content himself with one 
of the family names, Richard, Robert, or Jacob ? 
Between a Miss Clotilda, and a Master Grin- 
derwell, the Martindale family was likely to 
descend in a pretty way to posterity." 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 163 



CHAPTER III. 



All quit their homes, and rush into the sea. 

COWPER. 

Much as Mr. and Mrs. Martindale were de- 
lighted, and had reason to be delighted with 
Bath, the summer season of course suggested 
that, although that lively spot is the country to 
London, it is a city to the country. It was 
indispensable too, to secure a change of air for 
the accoucMe ; but as unfortunately the period 
for Sir John and Lady Grinderwell's annual mi- 
gration from Grinderwell House was already 
arrived, it was useless to think of accepting the 
invitations with which, from the moment of their 
marriage, they had been weekly favoured by the 
Baronet. Martindale suggested, however, (per- 
haps in consideration for Mrs. Richard's family 



164 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

feelings, perhaps for the advantage of restoring 
his sister-in-law Julia to the care of her affection- 
ate parents, the young lady having arrived at Bath 
with her brother Captain Grinderwell soon after 
their settlement there) that they should join Sir 
John and Lady Grinderwell at Exmouth, where 
the family was about to pass the autumn ; a pro- 
ject seconded with rapture by Mary-Matilda, 
who was dying to show her baby and her new 
set of pearls to Ma and sisters, and to whisper 
in confidence to Harriet and Anne how very 
strangely Julia had been flirting with a half-pay 
Captain of the Gloucestershire militia. The 
Martindales were therefore soon established at 
Exmouth, within a few doors of the Grinder- 
wells; and, as Richard repeatedly observed to 
an old Cape chum whom he accidentally met 
there, nothing could be pleasanter or more 
cheerful than their little family party. So many 
young people ; so much music ; so much riding, 
driving, and dancing ; so many little supper 
parties ; so many large dinner parties at his own 
house ; besides gipseyings, picnics, and other 
manoeuvres invented by Baronets of large 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 165 

family and small fortune ; the budding beauties 
of Master Grinderwell, and the promise of a 
second olive branch to make glad his heart ;— all 
was auspicious, all was cheering, all was satis- 
factory ! — 

" Ay, ay ! " growled Edward Warton, a cun- 
ning old bachelor, who, like his friend, had 
amassed a considerable fortune on the shores of 
Table Bay, but was too wise to squander a shil- 
ling of it even on himself. " I see you have 
married half a dozen wives instead of one. — Good 
look out for old Grinderwell, deuced bad one I 
take it, for your weekly bills ! — Nunky pays for 
all, eh, Dick ? — Sharp woman, that old mother- 
in-law ! — Sad do, I fear, this match of your's ! 
—Always a sister or two staying in the house, eh 
Dick? — Take care they don't eat you out of 
house and home ! — But I forgot; you've got no 
home, I fancy ? — Only a gimcrack lodging-house 
at a watering place ! " — 

" I have a very excellent mansion in Bath," 
said Martindale with indignation, " where 1 
hope you will come and see me — that you may 



166 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

humanize your notions a little respecting my 
wife and her family." 

" Bath I—what a place to live in ! a mob 
of swindlers, dowagers, and decayed spinsters ! 
Bath ! — Why not purchase a good substan- 
tial country seat at once; which would have 
given you a stake in the country, and a respect- 
able roof under which to bring up your chil- 
dren, eh Dick ? " — 

" I had none when I hired my house in the 
Circus." 

" Now only just see what /have done. — Last 
year, I had an opportunity of buying an estate 
in Shropshire. Capital purchase, — eligible in- 
vestment ! Got seven per cent for my money, 
and had an excellent freestone dwelling-house 
and offices, thrown into the bargain ! — Let it 
immediately for two hundred a year. — Too large 
for an old bachelor like me. — /, you know, have 
not been lucky enough to meet with a Miss 
Grinderwell." 

" There are three very much at your service," 
said Richard drily. 

" Thank you, thank you ! — Not half such a 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 167 

good investment as my Shropshire estate. For- 
tunes of fifteen hundred pounds a piece, I un- 
derstand; eh Dick? — The interest scarcely pays 
for their daily visits to the confectioners' shops, 
I fancy." 

"I never hear of Mary- Matilda's visits, I 
assure you. Julia, Harriet, and Anne, may have 
been occasionally seen taking an ice, by way of 
excuse for flirting with the officers.'* 

" The officers ? Poison ! — Marry into a family 
of such a description ? I would as soon look out 
for a Mrs. Warton in a stroller's barn ! — Ay, ay, 
Dick, you'll soon get tired of this ragamuffin 
watering-place sort of life ; and when you 've got 
a comfortable place in the country, let me know, 
and I'll come and pass a month with you." 

Long before the close of the autumn, Ned 
Warton's predictions were partly verified. Mar- 
tindale grew heartily sick of watering places; 
and was beginning to think the Grinderwell 
young ladies too flippant, and the Grinderwell 
young gentleman too noisy. Sir John was a 
grumpy, discontented radical, — a professed libe- 
ral and domestic tyrant ; and as to her ladyship, 



168 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

since she left off her maternal exercises, the 
poor woman had done nothing but stuff and 
sleep. It sometimes occurred to poor Richard, 
moreover, that he was made a butt by the 
captains of hussars, lancers, dragoons, carabi- 
neers, fusileers, and fencibles, who lounged in 
his house, drank his claret, and flirted with his 
sisters in law. He began to be tired of a round 
of company, and to long for a quiet study or 
bookroom to spell the newspapers in ; and 
almost regretted that there were still three 
months unexpired of his year's residence in the 
Circus. To be sure the waters were supposed 
to be useful to his rheumatism ; and he liked his 
Whist Club, and found his neighbours Sir 
Hookah Smith, and Sir Sangaree Brown ex- 
tremely agreeable. But at his time of life (it 
was the first time he had ever been heard to 
allude to " his time of life," even in soliloquy) 
people wanted to be quiet. There was too much 
bustle at Bath for a man of five-and- forty, worn 
out by a hot climate. 

Nevertheless when the term of his stay there 
was on the point of expiring, his resolution to 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 169 

quit was almost shaken by the numerous argu- 
ments brought forward by Mary-Matilda for a 
renewal of the lease.—" She should so much 
like to be confined again at Bath : — and Ma 
had promised that Anne and Harriet should 
come and pass the winter with her ! " — This last 
declaration was decisive. Martindale immedi- 
ately protested that to prolong their residence 
at Bath was out of the question, that the air 
disagreed with him ; and after one or two floods 
of tears more nearly approaching to hysterics 
than any thing she had attempted since her 
scene in the vestry on her wedding-day, Mrs. 
Richard consented to accompany her lord and 
master to Nerot's Hotel, till they could procure a 
suitable residence in town. It was not that she 
disliked the notion of figuring in London ; but 
she had a shrewd suspicion that, although a 
somebody at Bath and a very considerable 
somebody at Exmouth, she should be a nobody 
in the metropolis. " Tel brille au second rang 
qui s^ eclipse au premier ; " and, after shining as 
a fixed star in the Circus, it was very hard to 
dwindle into one of the thousandth magnitude 

VOL. I. I 



170 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRV. 

in Baker-Street, or Gloucester-place. Unused 
to London, she was certain she should find it 
very dull ; — nor did her arrival in Clifford- 
street on a foggy evening in November, tend Iq 
brighten her opinions on the subject. It was 
not till, at the close of a week, she found herself 
comfortably settled in a handsome house in 
Harley-street, with an equally handsome estab- 
lishment, that she began to admit the possibility 
of living in London. 

Richard Martindale was now happier than he 
had been since the first fortnight of his orioinal 
arrival at -Cheltenham. 

In Harley and the half-dozen adjoining streets, 
he had at least half a dozen dozen oriental ac- 
quaintances, with whom he could sit gossipping 
about things, people, and places, — events past, 
present, and to come, — wholly uninteresting to 
the kingdom in general. Instead of one whist 
club, as at Bath, he had now four ; and instead 
of the captains of hussars, lancers, dragoons, 
carabineers, fusileers, and fencibles, — he had his 
friend Ned Warton, besides eight Directors, six 
Calcutta nabobs, and two yellow Knights Com- 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 171 

panions who had served with distinction at 
Bhurtpoor. With the assistance of a speculative 
agent, he still contrived to receive four thou- 
sand a year income from his eighty-five thousand 
pounds: and as his brother Robert often ob- 
served, " a man might really live like a prince on 
such a fortune ; — and do something for his 
family into the bargain.'* 



I 2 



172 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 



CHAPTER IV. 



A woman moved is like a fountain troubled. 
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty. 

Shakspeare. 

In every great metropolis there must neces- 
sarily exist as great a variety of circles and 
coteries, as of classes in the vegetable or animal 
creation. It is absurd to attempt the sweeping 
distinctions of equestrian and pedestrian, patri- 
cian and plebeian, in a city numbering a million 
and a half of inhabitants. Even the minority 
of the patricians may be subdivided into several 
classes ; and as to the plebeians, Linnaeus him- 
self vy^ould be puzzled to dispose of the varieties ! 

Now the coterie to which the Martindales 
instinctively attached themselves, was of the 
genus called " dinner-giving people," a large and 
(as the newspapers say) "influential" bod} 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 173 

(chiefly resident in the N.N.W. of London), who 
make it the business of their lives to assemble at 
their tables three or four times a month sixteen 
well-dressed individuals, severally possessed of 
an amount of plate, linen, china, and domestics, 
equal to their own ;— and who, in reward for this 
mechanical act of hospitality, are entitled to dine 
on all the other days, in a company equally 
numerous, and on viands equally delicate. The 
ambition of displaying at their own board, meat 
in due season and fruit out of it, — of obtaining 
Sir Thomas's opinion that their hock is superior 
to that of Sir Charles, and securing Lady Char- 
lotte's verdict that their peaches are three weeks 
earlier than those of Sir Thomas, — suffices for 
their happiness; and there is a steadiness of dull 
decorum about the tribe, an affectation of ra- 
tionality and "charming people"-sort of excel- 
lence, essentially different from the sprightli- 
ness of ball-haunters and the brilliancy of 
ijenuine fashionables. Fashionables and ball- 
haunters of course occasionally dine out ; but 
they always remain distinct from the lumber- 
ing class of regular dinner-giving people. 



174 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

In this vocation, the Martindales shone supe- 
rior. Their plate was new and handsome, their 
establishment numerous ; and among all the 
mercantile baronets and oriental dignitaries fre- 
quenting the house, it was decided that except 
Mr. Calicut the Director (whose table was sup- 
plied by his own farm in Surrey), not a fatnily 
in Harley-street, " did the thing in better style." 
Nothing can be easier than to become the nu- 
cleus of a little knot of society on similar terms. 
An exchange of dinners among persons ever 
so slightly acquainted, is no robbery; but a 
sort of mutual benefit company, whose cre- 
dits and debits are honestly and accurately ba- 
lanced. But in addition to this, the business of 
his life, Richard Martindale was not without his 
pleasures. Like all orientals, he was a lounger 
by profession. There was nothing so delightful 
to him as to saunter into his club (a club 
well deserving the name of " The Mil- 
lion ary"), and gossip tchow tchow with a knot 
of other elderly gentlemen of equally gam- 
bouged complexion ;^to hear and contribute to 
the last new rumours from Calcutta, Madras, 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 175 

Bombay, Ceylon, the Mauritius, the Cape ; — to 
wonder over old jungle stories, and new ro- 
mances concerning the cholera ; — to elephantize 
in Asiatic grandiloquence, revel in Asiatic remi- 
niscences, and grov/ poetical concerning theturbot 
and lobster-sauce of the preceding day and the 
anticioated haunch of the following. And then 

1 o 

he loved to wander up and down St. James 's- 
street, linked bv either arm to some well- 
fed, well-dressed, middle-aged, middle-talented 
man ; ready, like himself, to measure inch 

by inch, with Lilliputian labour, the last ar- 
guments of Peel, or the latest eloquence of 
Brougliam ; to sneer at Macaulay as a the- 
orist, or break their heads ag^ainst the cast-' 
iron compactness of an article by Fonblanque ; 
to give their opinions upon all things and 
all people as lengthily and emphatically as 
if they were worth listening to ; and to take 
their ease and their ice at Grange's, or their 
sandwich at the Cocoa Tree. Esentially a 
good-humoured, happy, and happy-making 
man, poor Richard Martindale, exulting in 
comfort at home and popularity abroad, was 



376 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

one of the most contented and inoiFensive among 
the do-nothings of the west end. 

Even his wife, — who, as a very silly woman, 
with three giggling sisters, four impudent bro- 
thers, and a spunging father and mother, might 
have been expected to form some drawback on 
his domestic enjoyments, — turned out far better 
than could have been anticipated ; for, following 
the destinies of her sex, she was fated to behold 
a little Richard Martindale arrive so soon after 
a little Grinderwell, — a little George so shortly 
after little Richard, — and a little Clara, Maria, 
and Sophia, in the three following years, that 
she had no leisure to do more than sit at the 
head of Richard's dinner-table, and exhibit her 
expansive person at a few annual balls in the 
neighbourhood of Portland-place. Her eldest 
sister had married the Grinderwell curate ; Anne 
had eloped with an Irish lieutenant of infantry ; 
and Julia had become the wife of a General Mac 
Glashun, chief agent of Bolivar, or prime minister 
of the Cacique of Poyais, or Chancellor of the Ex- 
chequer at Lima, or some such apocryphal dig- 
nity, whom she met at Bath, and with whom she 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 177 

shortly afterwards sailed for South America ; — 
but Mrs. Martindale had very little share in 
promoting either of these three suitable alliances. 
On her own account, too, she had given up all 
interest in the attractions of captains of hussars, 
lancers, or dragoons, carabineers, fusileers, or 
fencibles ; and, following the usual routine of an 
empty-headed, hollow-hearted woman, had laid 
aside the coquette to become the dawdle. Al- 
though still devoted to dress, her finery was a 
mere aiFair of competition with Mrs. Calicut;, 
or Lady Kedgeree, or Lady Hookah Smith ; 
and the greater part of her time was spent, as 
a matter of routine, in gossipping with her head 
nurse or the apothecary. In the autunm, they 
all went to the sea, for change of air for the chil- 
dren ; at Christmas, they either paid a family 
visit to Grinderwell Hall, or took a course of 
the Cheltenham waters; but they were always 
back again in Harley-street by February, to be 
ready for the east wind, and their favourite Satur- 
day dinner parties. They were regular in their 
appearance at the gay church of St. Marylebone 
on Sundays ; regular in their drive afterwards in 

i5 



178 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

Hyde Park ; regular in an annual exhibition at 
the drawing-room ; and regular in all the other 
evolutions of the opulent mediocracy. 

It is not to be supposed that such a career of 
contentment and ease could fail of attracting 
the notice of that busy enemy of mankind, who, 
from the days of Job to those of George III., 
has been so apt to interfere in the household 
happiness of the human race. Though the 
Martindale family had kept up nothing of that 
cordial intercourse with poor Richard which 
marked his original advent at Nerot's hotel, and, 
though their indiiference towards him had un- 
questionably increased in proportion to the 
sprouting and spreading of his olive branches, 
there was a decent degree or exhibition of 
friendliness kept up among them. Whenever 
Robert or Jacob visited London on business, 
they dined in Harley-street ; and usually 
returned the compliment by a leash of par- 
tridges on the first of September, or a brace of 
pheasants on the first of October, when they 
w^ere sure the family were out of town ; and on 
occasion of Mrs. Richard's annual accouche- 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 179 

ment, her spouse, in the fulness of his joy, made 
it a point to despatch a letter of announcement 
to each of his sisters and sisters-in law. 

But various changes had now taken place in 
the united Martindale clan. Marriot senior, 
the drowsy, was now sleeping his last sleep ; and 
Marriot junior, the genius (to whose education 
uncle Richard had so absurdly dedicated the 
sum of two thousand pounds), was reigning in 
his stead. Having augmented his paternal 
estate by the sum of fifteen thousand pounds 
reluctantly ceded with the fair hand of his 
daughter Clotilda, by his uncle the attorney, Mr. 
Marriot of Starling Park had become, or fan- 
cied himself to have become, a man of some con* 
sequence in the county. As the relative of 
their agent the worthy Millegan, the Mowbrays 
were in the habit of honouring him with a gra- 
cious bow when they saw him at the Hoo races, 
or the cricket matches or archery meetings of 
the county ; and of inviting him with his showy 
bride to all their public days at Mowbray 
End. 

But on the spring succeeding his fortunate 



180 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

marriage, Richard Harriot, giving loose per- 
haps to the inspirations of that genius so much 
lauded bv his mother, took it into his head to 
pass a month or two in town. He was now in 
possession of nearly three thousand a year, and 
shrewdly suspected himself to be almost as great 
a man as his uncle Richard ; and having, by 
means of a house agent, settled himself in a half 
dirty, Jialf tawdry house in Welbeck-street, 
flew to secure an introduction for his talking, 
showy, superficial bride, to Mrs. Richard ; who, 
as a baronet's daughter, was accounted the gran- 
dee of the Martindale family. Marriot had 
hinted to Clotilda, previous to their arrival in 
town, that very likely aunt Richard might be 
moved to introduce her into society and present 
her at court ; and the belle of the country town 
had preconceived a notion of the matron of 
Harley-street as of the most fashionable, or as 
she called it tonish woman in London. 

A large and rapid increase of family is said to 
be as bad for the temper as for the figure ; and 
however copiously developed Mrs. Richard Mar- 
tindale's organ of philoprogenitiveness, certain 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 181 

it is that she was by no means so mild and con- 
ciliating as when figuring of yore in die Bath 
pump-room ; or playing the chaperon to her 
sisters on the esplanade at Weymouth. Her 
nephew Marriot, moreover, was precisely one 
of the human beings towards whom her milk of 
human kindness was thoroughly soured. She 
could never forgive him the sacrifice of two 
thousand pounds (two thousand pounds, robbed 
as it were by anticipation from her unborn 
progeny) to affix an empty initial honour to 
the name of an individual whose obscure ex- 
istence at Starling Park certainly demanded no 
such evidence of scholarship. She had always 
disliked Mr. Marriot as a presuming conse- 
quential young gentleman : and now that he had 
assumed new dignity, both squirearchical and 
matrimonial, she prepared herself to dislike him 
more than ever. She would have borne almost 
any other relative of her husband's. Poor Wil- 
ham, the son of the Rev. Jacob, who was now 
married to one of his Millegan cousins, and 
settled as an under master at Charter House 
School, was always warmly though patronizingly 



182 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

welcomed in Harley-street ; but Mr. and Mrs. 
Marrlot, with their bright green carriage, and 
passion for finery and sight-seeing, were poor 
Mrs. Richard's aversion, or, as Liston says, " I 
may say, hev favourite aversion." 

Now Clotilda was one of those impenetrable 
persons, to whom it was almost impossible to 
give ofFence. An only daughter, — the sole 
heiress of one of the most opulent and influential 
residents in a small country-town, who, from pos- 
sessinof considerable electioneerino; tact, was al- 
ways very much courted in his own person as 
well as in those of his wife and daughter, — she 
had been in the habit of considering, herself of 
so much importance, that she could not for an 
instant suppose that any one was inclined to 
think of her disparagingly, or treat her disre- 
spectfully. She had considered herself a very 
fine thing when worshipped at the country balls 
as Miss Clotilda Martindale; but she thought 
herself a much finer as Mrs. Marriot of Starling 
Park, with a new carriage of her own, a new vi- 
siting ticket, a new set of pearls mounted in cor^ 
nucopias, and above all, — a " Place in the 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 183 

Country." That Mrs. Richard Martmdale could 
be inclined to slight a person thus variously and 
richly endowed, was of course out of the ques- 
tion'; and when young Mrs. Marriot paid her 
first visit in Harley-street, laughing and talking 
as loud as possible to show the ease of her man- 
ners, and the indignant aunt received her with 
the coldest and most repellent taciturnity, the 
self-satisfied bride determined that the apathy of 
the Baronet's daughter was but a distinguishing 
ti'ait of fashionable manners ; and that it was 
now da hon ton to look sulky and affect a mono- 
syllabic terseness in conversation. 

Being well aware (from the long-standing je- 
remiads of aunt Millegan and uncle Jacob, 
against the wasteful extravagance of such a prac- 
tice) of the Martindales' addiction to dinner- 
giving, the young couple were for some time in 
daily expectation that a festival would be con- 
cocted in their honour; and Mrs. Marriot had 
already determined to make her dt^mt on the 
occasion in her wedding dress of Urling' lace, 
with her. new set of pearls. But when three 



184 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

weeks of their stay in town expired without 
the appearance of the anticipated invitation 
card, Mrs. M., instead of growing affronted, 
assured her husband that it was no longer the 
custom of the great world to give wedding din- 
ners; and that, as a point of etiquette, their 
uncle and aunt Martindale were waiting for an 
invitation to Welbeck- street. Upon this hint, 
a " requests the honour '' was despatched to 
them at ten days' notice, and Mr. and Mrs. 
Richard, from their natural or acquired predi- 
lection for dinner parties, could not find it in 
their hearts to be dignified and say " no." 

Little, indeed, did the sullen aunt imagine, as 
she took leave on the appointed day of the little 
family of Martindales, busy at their evening 
trough of bread and milk, how mighty an influ- 
ence that same dinner party was to exercise over 
her future destinies. During its progress, in- 
deed, nothing occurred which did not tend to- 
wards her satisfaction. She saw that Mrs. Mar- 
riot was totally unaccomplished in the science 
of dinner giving. There was no cucumber for 
the salmon, although the month of April was 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 185 

half over. The white soup tasted of washballs; 
veal-tendrons were made to match with sweet- 
breads ; and the dish of a large boiled turkey was 
garnished with parsley sufficient to have decorated 
a jack-in- the-green ! An old fashioned blanc- 
mange was among the sweet dishes of the second 
course, and altogether the dinner was a con- 
temptible affair:— just such as might have been 
expected at the table of an attorney's daughter, 
whose experience did not exceed the apple-tart 
and custard delicacies of an election supper. 

But if, by the supercilious way in which she 
raised her eyeglass to her eye to investigate the 
arrangements of the table, Mrs. Martindale con- 
trived to excite the choler of her niece, Clotilda 
managed shortly to return the compliment, and 
with compound interest. She had invited to 
meet the woman of consequence of her own fa- 
mily, the woman of consequence of her own 
neighbourhood. The Welbeck-street party 
consisted, in addition to the four Martindalians, 
of Mr. Blickling, the county member, and the 
Hon. Mrs. Blickling his wife; a Mr. and Mrs. 
Cleverley, of Poplar Grove, in the same neigh- 



186 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTKY. 

bourhood ; besides two Honourable Mowbrays, 
a younger Marriot (a man of wit and fashion 
about town), and one or two college friends 
of the host. In such a circle, the Richard 
Martindales had very little to say. There 
was no opportunity for orientalisms from uncle 
Richard, or nursery anecdotes from his lady ; 
nothino; was discussed but the ao-ricultural in- 
terests and Hertfordshire topics ; and instead of 
Portland-place balls, Wimpole-street concerts, 
and the beauties of the new Easter piece, Mr. 
and Mrs. Richard were compelled to hear of 
Hatfield, Gorhambury, Panshanger, and the 
theatricals of the Hoo. 

Even when the ladies retreated to the draw- 
ing-room, and the par tie qiiarree formed by 
Mrs. Blicklin(T and Mrs. Cleverlev on one 
sofa, and Clotilda and her aunt on the other, 
commenced the usual tittle-tattle peculiar to 
such occasions, Mrs. Richard was struck dumb 
by perceiving that neither of her three com- 
panions were in the slightest degree interested 
on her account of a family-squabble between 
her first and second nurses about a dose of 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 187 

rhubarb for her second boy, such as she was in 
the habit of quoting after dinner at her friend 
Mrs. Calicut's. , Mrs. Blickling had the polite- 
ness to cry " indeed ! " more than once in the 
course of her narrative ; but it was clear she 
did not enter into the history with riglit maternal 
interest ; and like Constance, Mrs. Martindale 
was tempted to exclaim, 

She talks to me, that never had a son. 
Mrs. Cleverley and the bride, meanwhile, having 
none either, turned a decidedly deaf ear to the 
whole anecdote ; and when M rs. Richard arrived 
at the close of the tale with " and next day, poor 
Nurse came to me with tears in her eyes, and 
told me she should have no objection to stay,* 
provided I made it a rule in my nursery that the 
under nurse was not to stir the children's tea;" 
she found that Clotilda and the lady of Poplar 
Grove were deep in housewifely details of a dif- 
ferent nature. 

" Oh, yes ! " cried Clotilda, who, no longer 
having the fear of aunt Martindale so strongly 
before her eyes, had re-assumed her loud volu- 
bility ; " I assure you we have up all our 



188 MY PLAGE IN THE COUNTRY. 

poultry and vegetables from Starling Park. It 
is really impossible to keep a decent table in 
London unless one has a Place in the Country." 

" I have generally heard," observed Mrs. 
Richard contemptuously, " that Covent Garden 
is the best garden in England." 

" For those who are accustomed to adulterated 
London provisions, no doubt it is," retorted her 
niece ; " but when people require things to be 
pure and wholesome and in a natural state, 
there is something so nasty, something so revolt- 
ing, in the way in which Battersea vegetables are 
forced, and London poultry fattened." 

" Horrible indeed ! " exclaimed Mrs. Blick- 
ling, " I own I never can prevail on myself to 
touch that tell-tale colossal asparagus, or those 
disgustingly bloated fowls. We have a cart 
twice a week throufjh the season from oio^ Place 
in the Country." 

" Mr. Cleverley will eat none but his own 
mutton," cried the lady of Poplar Grove. 

" And I own 1 never fancy any but the Blick- 
ling venison !" observed the Member's lady, with 
c grand, parkish sort of air and tone. 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 189 

" What lovely jonquils ! " interpolated Mrs. 
Richard, anxious to get rid of these details of 
the buttery hatch. And the double violets 
are really quite luxurious ! How very fra- 
grant ! " 

" Pray let me offer you a bunch if you are 
fond of them," cried her niece with patronizing 
graciousness. " We have quantities sent us up 
from Starling almost every day." 

" It is so convenient to have one's place 
within a certain distance of town,'* said Mrs. 
Blickling. " When I hear people parading 
about their estates in Yorkshire or Devonshire, 
I always recollect the convenience of driving 
down to peace and tranquillity with as much 
ease as if we were going to a dejeuner at Wim- 
bledon ! Three hours take us to Blickling. 
We even have up all our cream for ices, and 
home-made bread. In short I look upon Blick- 
ling as the farm which supplies our table. I 
should hate a place in one of the remote coun- 
ties. I hope, however, I am not oifending Mrs. 
Martindale by saying so ? — In what county is 
Mrs. Martindale's seat?" 



190 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

Mary-Matilda, thus interrogated, could not 
but reply; and though it was with a visage 
the colour of a stick of red sealing-wax, she 
managed to make her answer as dignified as 
periphrasis could render it. 

" My father. Sir John Grinderwell, lives in 
Dorsetshire. At present, Mr. Martindale has 
no country-seat." 

The " at present" conveyed of course to the 
mind of two out of the three ladies, that Mr. 
Martindale was a landed proprietor in expect- 
ancy. Mrs, M. herself was probably in the 
entail of the Grinderwell estates. 

" No country-seat ? — How very tiresome that 
must be ! " drawled M rs. Cleverley of Poplar 
Lodge, leaning back on the cushions of the sofa 
with a singular augmentation of self-importance. 
" And what do you do with yourself at the close 
of the season ? " 

"We generally go the sea," snarled Mrs. 
Richard ; " where, I observe, we meet all our 
friends who have fine seats of their own, of 
which they are for the most part horribly tired : 
so that if Mr. Martindale and myself had any 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 191 

taste for a place in the country during the au- 
tumn, we might find hundreds to be let, and the 
satisfaction of a choice." 

" But that is so different from a place of one's 
own ! " — ejaculated Clotilda, looking sentimental, 
and twisting her ermine boa till she pulled off a 
tail. " I declare I know every bush and briar 
at Starling ; and there is not a flower in the gar- 
den which does not inspire * thoughts too deep 
for tears.' " 

" Nothing like a place of one's own ! " cried 
Poplar Lodge. 

" No, — nothing like a place of one's own ! " 
exclaimed Blickling Hall. . 

" No, — 7iothing like a place of one's own ! " 
echoed Starling Park, 

^ " Besides, one cannot hire a place for the 
Easter holidays, or Whitsuntide, or every now 
and then when one's children require a week's 
change of air." 

" We change the air hy going to Brighton," 
said Mrs. Richard, trying to subdue herself into 
an air of mildness. " Most medical men are of 
opinion that sea-air is the best thing for chil- 



19.2 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

dren ; and I am told Sir Henry Halford is de- 
cidedly of opinion that the West Cliff at Brigh- 
ton equals Montpelier or Madeira." 

"I fancy it 15 /" said Mrs. Cleverley. "At 
least, we make it a point to give our little ones 
the chance of six weeks there every year. But 
I own I can't endure Brighton in the summer ; 
when all the cits, who have no country resi- 
dence, go down there just by way of getting out 
of London. I like to go when one finds a little 
society." ' . - - 

" And then it is so delightful to get back to 
one's own shrubberies, after being cramped up 
to walk on that odious Chain Pier ! " exclaimed 
the Hon. Mrs. Blickling. " I declare Blickling 
never appears half so fresh and green to me, as 
after staring upon chalk and shingles for a week ; 
and really the enjoyment of the Hall after those 
miserable card-paper houses ! " — 

It was lucky for Mrs. Richard Martindale 
that the gentlemen just then made their appear- 
ance for coffee. The agricultural interest was 
getting too much for her. 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 193 



CHAPTER V. 



Papillia, wedded to her amorous spark. 

Sighs for the shades — How charming is a park ! 

Pope. 

From the day of this fatal dinner-party 
Richard Martindale*s fate was fixed. Mrs. 
Richard, hke the dying Falstaff, could do no- 
thing but "babble of green fields;" and her 
head-nurse began to assure her that it was plain 
she had a " longing for a place in the country." 
Almost before the close of the season, she ex- 
pressed a determination to avoid Brighton 
"while those odious citizens were there, who 
only went because they had no place of their 
own ; " and yet, though protesting against 
every spot along the coast from Scarborough 
and Cromer to Ilfracomb and Tenby, she per- 
sisted in declaring that the seven little Martin- 

YOL. T. K 



194 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

dales would not be able to exist seven days 
longer without country air. 

It was in vain that Richard suggested expe- 
dients. " Ramsgate," she observed, " was so 
glaring; Broadstairs so glum; Margate so vul- 
gar; Dover so bustling; Worthing so tame; 
Hastings so gossipping ; Weymouth so country- 
fied; Exmouth, Sidmouth, Torquay, and the 
Welch coast, so inconveniently remote. Harro- 
gate smelt like a gunsmith's shop; Buxton was 
full of Irish dowagers ; Malvern was a mere stare 
over a tailor's book of patterns; Cheltenham re- 
minded her too much of old times, and Lea- 
mington of new people. The water did not 
agree with her at Tunbridge; and a week at 
Southend would condemn the whole family to 
the ague." 

Richard then proposed a family crusade 
against Grinderwell House. But Sir John Grin- 
derwell had only been dead six months; Sir 
Joseph, her elder brother, had not yet taken 
possession ; and the Dowager Lady was living 
there pro tempore. As a last resource, there- 
fore, he asked her what she thought of a round 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 195 

of visits in Hertfordshire? — His brothers and 
sisters, she knew, had often invited them ; and 
his niece Clotilda would be enchanted to have 
them all for a month at Starling Park. 

This was pouring oil upon the flame. Mrs. 
Richard, half whimpering half sulky, took 
this opportunity of pointing out to his notice 
that he, — the richest of the family, — was the 
only one of its members who was not blest 
with a country-seat; and the unhappy man, 
not venturing to suggest that he was also the 
only one who possessed a house in town, — was 
wise enough to look penitent, and very much 
ashamed of being but a second son. Even when 
assured by his wife that, accustomed from her 
infancy to the pride, pomp, and circumstance 
of Grinderwell House, she had no taste for a 
country attorney's square red-brick house, the 
front and offices looking into the by-street of a 
provincial town while the rear commanded only 
the damp Clammer Mill meadows, — those mea- 
dows purchased with his own money, and of 
right the property of poor dear little Grinderwell, 
— he had not courage for reply or explanation 

K 2 



196 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

" As to a country visit at the Parsonage," 
muttered the discontented fair one, " I declare 
I would as soon introduce my poor babes into a 
kennel of foxhounds, as among those great rude 
bears of Mr. Jacob Martindale. A boy in a 
leather cap and corderoys, is my moral aversion : 
and five of them \—five ! I am certain I should 
have one of my nervous fevers before I left the 
place." 

" Well, my love, what say you to a little visit 
to my sister Millegan ? She, you know, has no 
bears of boys to kill the children with hugging. 
One only of her girls is now unmarried : and I 
assure you nothing can be more orderly than 
her establishment, nothing more compact and 
comfortable than her house." 

" Very likely. When people have a place 
of their own in the country, it is worth their 
while to make it comfortable, and to keep their 
establishment in order. A house in town is only 
half a home ; one never feels settled in it ; and 
the sort of rambling life we lead in going from 
watering place to watering place, is little better 
than sauntering away our best years without aim 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 197 

or purpose. It is so different — so very different, 
when people have a place of their own, which 
they embellish and improve for the sake of the 
children who come after them ! — Heigho ! *' 

" The child, you mean, my love ; except the 
eldest son, I know not who benefits by the out- 
lay. Now at Grinderwell, for instance, your — '* 

" Where there is rank to be kept up, as is 
the case with my family," said the Baronet's 
daughter, looking like an empress, " the thing 
is very different. But at worst a mortgage for 
the benefit of the younger children will always 
bring matters straight. However, it is useless 
discussing the subject. We are never likely to 
have a place in the country, and it therefore 
signifies very little how other people arrange 
their affairs. I know not, indeed, why I should 
ever for a moment fancy you would desire such 
a thing. Your family having always been con- 
tent to reside in a country town, and you having 
passed your life in a colony, it is scarcely to be 
expected that you should be sensible to the 
charm of an hereditary house ; — a place where 
people strive to be respected, in order that their 



198 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

children after them may enjoy the odour of their 
good name." 

" I don't see why people may not be respected 
in town," cried Richard, somewhat piqued by 
this last taunt. " People may always bequeath 
an honest name to their children. In profes- 
sions, for instance, in trade, in — " 

" Professions, — trade ! '^ cried Sir Joseph 
Grinderwell's sister, despising the Hertford 
doctor's son, as heartily as if he had not elevated 
her to a condition of life far beyond her claims 
or pretensions. " I really hope you will not 
talk so before the children, for they are getting 
old enough to understand you ; — and what will 
little Grinderwell think ? " 

" And how do you decide about this visit to 
the Millegans ? " — asked Richard, afraid of being 
too angry unless he changed the subject. 

" What visit ? — I'm sure I never thought of 
any. There is nothing that would be more dis- 
agreeable to me than to be staying in a house 
like that of the Millegans, standing in the very 
shadow of a great establishment such as Mowbray 
End ; and accepted on suflPerance there like a 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 199 

poor relation, or the curate of the parish ; hav- 
ing Lord Mowbray's carriage sent to take you 
to dinner, and her ladyship ringing the bell, and 
ordering it to take you home again, when she is 
tired of you ! — From what I heard pass between 
your niece Mrs. Marriot and the young Mow- 
brays the day I dined in Welbeck-street, such, 
I am certain, are the terms on which Lord 
Mowbray lives with his agent's family." 

" Millegan is his lordship's auditor^ it is true," 
observed Richard Martindale. " But his own 
family is of very ancient standing in the county. 
The Millegans have been respectable yeomen 
on their estate, ever since the reign of Edward 
the Sixth ; while the Mowbrays have been heard 
of in the county only within the last century." 

" Perhaps so ; " replied Mary- Matilda, re- 
verting within herself to the spreading genealo- 
gical tree adorning the dining-room chimney- 
piece of Grinderwell House ; in which Grin- 
waldus (its acorn) figured as cup-bearer to 
King Edgar. " You see that all the importance 
of either family, such as it is, appears to be de- 
rived from having a place in the country." 



200 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

A few days after this conversation, Richard 
Martindale, whose passion for home, whether in 
town or country, was not likely to be increased 
by the bitter tone recently acquired by his wife, 
boldly announced his intention of running down 
into Hertfordshire for a few days, to visit his 
relations ; or more properly speaking, and more 
wisely acting, took his departure without any 
previous announcement. Mrs. Richard had 
therefore all the delight and glory of becoming 
an oppressed individual, of assuming a plaintive 
tone, wearing an invalid cap, and hoping that 
when she was dead and gone, her husband might 
not repent too severely his cruelty and neglect 
of so devoted a wife. It is true she had now 
been married nearly ten years, during which 
time Richard had never before been ten hours 
absent from her apron string. It is true, that 
Richard was now fifty-four, an age scarcely 
consistent with libertinism or frivolity ; yet still 
there was something very suspicious about this 
sudden journey. The freak had entered his head 
while he was perusing " The Morning Post.'* 
How did she know that he was gone into Hert- 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 201 

fordshire at all ? — How did she know but that 
the staid and sober Mr. Martindale had re- 
ceived some kind of assignation or appointment 
through its columns, such as — " # # 's letter 
is received ; and Rosa will meet him at the 
time and place appointed, if he can make it 
convenient to leave town." — 

Mary- Matilda hated mysteries. Why had her 
husband kept so secret his desire of a visit to Hert- 
fordshire ? Perhaps he was gone to consult with 
his brother the attorney, about some means of get- 
ting rid of her, and forming a separate establish- 
ment. Perhaps — But why enumerate the vagaries 
feeding the fancy of a peevish woman, parted 
for the first time from her husband, without any 
means of employment for her vacant mind. It 
was some comfort that she could send for the 
apothecary ; declare herself indisposed ; lie on 
the sofa ; take hartshorn ; and sentimentalize 
herself into languor upon a diet of green tea 
and custard pudding. She was determined that 
at least, when the truant did think proper to 
return to the home he had so basely abandoned, 
he should find her looking as pale as the cam- 

k5 



202 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

brie handkerchief she now incessantly applied to 
her eyes. If she did not favour him with a scene 
on such an occasion, she might never have ano- 
ther opportunity. 

Five tedious days had passed away. Poor 
Mrs. Richard, having scolded all her children 
and as many of her servants as she dared, and 
being too bent on playing the victimized invalid 
to admit visitors, was growing very tired of her- 
self and her heroics. At last, on the fifth even- 
ing, half famished by her perseverance of sullen 
abstinence, and satisfied that as it was Saturday 
night, she had no chance of hailing her culprit's 
marital knock at the door till Monday morning, 
she suddenly rang the bell, and ordered a sup- 
per tray into her dressing-room. When lo ! 
just as she had filled her plate with a provision 
of cold lamb and sallad enough to have dined a 
corporal of dragoons, the door was flung open, 
and Richard rushed into her arms. The sur- 
prise and disappointment were alike overwhelm- 
ing. She, who had been picturesquifying in her 
dressing gown for five long tedious days ; who 
had purchased a new bottle of salts for the occa- 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 203 

sion ; who had rehearsed her shrieks, and pre- 
pared her agonizing flood of tears— she to be 
caught in the fact of a tumbler of Madeira 
negus, and a fat shoulder of lamb ! — It was too 
ignominious. 

" So you are come at last," cried the morti- 
fied victim, compelled to wipe her mouth in- 
stead of her eyes, as she accepted his warm em- 
brace. 

" The business was not settled till six o'clock 
this evening," cried Richard. " But it is ouis, 
and Heaven send us health to enjoy it." 

" I don't understand you? " 

" Have you a clean plate there, my dear ? " 
inquired Richard Martindale, seating himsejf 
beside her before the fatal tray, having al- 
ready rung a bell for a further supply of knives 
and forks. " Do you know I have had no din-^ 
ner. I was in such haste to get up to you, to 
tell you the news, that I jumped into a post- 
chaise the moment it was over. How are the 
children ? " 

" You will positively drive me distracted 
TVJiat news ?— You have told me none." 



204 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

" Your health, my love. How refreshing is 
a glass of wine, after a fatiguing day and a dusty 
drive! I suppose you expected me, as you 
have prepared supper ? — '* 

" How was I to expect you ? — I may think 
myself lucky that I see you any time within 
these six weeks. How could I possibly guess 
when it would suit you to return home ? " 
" Didn't you receive my letter ? — " 
" What letter ?— " 
" By this morning's post ? — " 
" I have heard nothing of you, Mr. Martin- 
dale, since you started off on pretence of a visit 
to your family, nearly a week ago.*' 

" How very extraordinary, — how devilish pro- 
voking ! " cried Richard, setting down his glass. 
" I was so very particular about that letter. I 
inquired so often about the post hour from my 
brother's clerks. By Jove, — here it is !"^— cried 
he, suddenly detecting the neglected dispatch safe 
in his waistcoat pocket. " In my hurry, I must 
have forgotten to put it in the post." 
" A very convenient excuse." 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 205 

" Well, I am not sorry for it. The surprise 
will be all the greater." 

" What surprise ? — " 

'' Nay, since you know nothing about the 
matter, I shall punish you for that cross face by 
making you guess." 

" You are really too vexatious ! — After the 
week of dreadful suspense I have been passing, 
to break in upon me in this sudden way, and 
perplex me with all these mysteries. How am 
I to know what you mean ? " 

" My dearest love, do not irritate yourself," 
said poor Richard, drawing his chair nearer to 
hers, when he perceived that she was on the 
verge of a genuine flood of tears. " I will ex- 
plain the whole business to you from the very 
beginning." 

" No ; I don't want to hear a word about it," 
cried the lady, retreating to the sofa in a mag- 
nificent fit of the pouts. " Believe me, I have 
no curiosity about any of your family affairs. I 
dare say you and your brothers can manage 
them very well amongst you without any inter- 



206 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

ference of mine. Doubtless Mr. Robert Mar- 
tindale's professional advice — '^ 

" My dear, dear Mary- Matilda ! " exclaimed 
her husband, somewhat provoked after a long 
day's fast to be obliged to procrastinate his cold 
lamb in honour of her ill-humour. " You 7nust 
be aware that my sole motive in making this 
purchase is to gratify the desire you have so long 
expressed of — " 

" What purchase? " ejaculated the breathless 
lady, jumping up from her reclining position. 

" The Marygold Hill estate, my love. You 
know how eagerly you have beset me lately for 
a place in the country." 

" You have actually bought a place in the 
country? — " 

" The papers were signed this afternoon. 
A great bargain, I am told ; but the purchase 
was a serious affair. Five-and-forty thousand 
pounds ! — But it is the most beautiful thing ! 
All within a ring fence; — a trout stream running 
through the lawn ; — best preserves in the coun- 
try ;;— timber magnificent, — gardens superior to 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 20T 

those at Grinderwell Hall ! The Harriots* 
place a citizen's villa by comparison ! — Drawing 
room and library opening into a conservatory of 
rare exotics ; saloon forty feet by eighteen. 
But here is George Robins's advertisement of 
the place, which originally led me into temp- 
tation. Don't you remember how I started in 
the midst of reading the newspaper that morn- 
ing at breakfast ? — I could not hear or answer 
^ word you said to me, after the notice of sale 
had caught mine eye." 

" My dear, dear Richard ! " exclaimed the 
vanquished lady, holding the crumpled news- 
paper in one hand, and throwing the other arm 
round his neck. " Why did you not tell me 
at once ? — " 

" I think you must now be satisfied that I 
have neglected nothing to fulfil your wishes ? " 

" I never was so delighted in my life ! — A 
finer place than Starling Park !- — Forty- five 
thousand pounds ! — Saloon, library, conserva- 
vatory ! — Show me the advertisement, Richard ; 
show me the description." 

" I can't, — ah, — here it is. * That unique resi- 



208 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

dence known by the name of Marygold Hill ; 
situate five miles from the stirring little county 
town of Hertford.' " 

"Good Heavens! In Hertfordshire! Just 
in the midst of all your odious family ! How 
very provoking ! I 'm sure when I told you that 
I should like a country seat, I never dreamed 
that, without consulting me^ you would think of 
going and buying a place in Hertfordshire. — I 
would as soon go to — " 

" The devil 1 '* cried the indignant husband ; 
and his new place in the country was the origin 
of his first serious quarrel with his wife. 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 209 



CHAPTER VI. 



Abused mortals ! did you know 

Where joy, heart's-ease, and comfort grow. 

You'd scorn proud tow'rs 

And seek them in these bow*rs ; 
"Where winds sometimes our woods may shake. 
But blustering care can no vile tempest make. 

Sir W. Raleigh. 

The bustle of a removal is admitted to be so 
fatiguing to the body and irritating to the mind, 
that it cannot be too rapidly passed over. We 
might otherwise be compelled to admit that even 
the mild Richard was stimulated into a fit of 
profane swearing, on finding the leg of his mag- 
nificent billiard table very clumsily dislocated, 
and a sword-stick poked through the canvas of 
a fine Gainsborough. As to Mary-Matilda, 
an attack of nervous fever, consequent on the 
fatigues of the march, threatened to lay her in 



210 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

the family-vault forming part and parcel of the 
purchase of the Marygold estate; while the 
seven little Marti ndales, from Grinderwell the 
Great down to the ultima Thule or Fooley, 
little Miss Clotilda, were as inconvenient and 
inconvenienced as their nurses could manage to 
make them. 

Let us therefore suppose the nineteen waggon 
loads of domestic furniture (including the thir- 
teen grumbling menials from Harley-street) 
fairly deposited and fairly settled. But to im- 
agine this, we must also admit the expiration of 
a calendar year ; for full twelve months were 
required to adjust the rival claims of the 
butler and housekeeper, to " this 'ere cupboard 
and them 'ere shelves," — no less than to enable 
Mrs. Richard to determine whether the young 
ladies should sleep in the front nursery or the 
back; or whether the Worcester china vases 
would look better in the blue drawing-room or 
the chintz breakfast-parlour. It required a 
winter to ascertain which of the chimnies 
smoked, and which of the doors required list- 
ing; and a second summer to find out whether 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 211 

the general clearage of evergreens from the court- 
yard they had been supposed to render damp, 
and the fall of a grove of chesnuts protecting 
the house from the western sun, would prove a 
seasonable benefit. Mr. Richard had from the 
first asserted that they could not expect to be 
comfortable in less than a year. The new 
plantations could not be completed, the new 
offices finished, or the workmen got out of the 
house in less time. 

The year was gone; the second tolerably ad- 
vanced ; but the fair proprietess of Marygold 
Hill could by no means be persuaded to pro- 
nounce herself comfortable. A new little mary- 
gold was budding ; and the fractious invalid * 
could neither bring herself to like the neigh- 
bouring apothecary, nor reconcile herself to the 
loss of Lady Kedgeree's daily calls of inquiry, 
or her Harley-street neighbour Mrs. Calicut's 
hourly councils of gossip. Richard Martindale 
already affected the cockney country gentleman ; 
sported a fustian jacket, leathern gaiters and a 
bill-hook; went out before breakfast, spud in 
hand, to make war upon the thistles and 



212 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

dandelions ; and above all, during the shooting 
season was never to be heard of (except by the 
distant report of his Manton) from breakfast till 
dinner, or during the hunting season from 
breakfast till luncheon. Mary-Matilda conse- 
quently found her time hang somewhat heavy 
on her hands. She was not yet on easy terms 
with her new neighbours; and her own pre- 
vious experience of a country life had been 
made in a house full of giggling sisters and 
riotous brothers. But her own girls were too 
young to giggle, her boys too dull for mischief; 
and moreover a termagant head nurse, the inse- 
parable prime minister of every silly indolent 
mother having more than two thousand a year, 
would only allow her the children's company at 
her own pleasure and convenience. She had no 
hereditary interests in the condition of the 
neighbouring poor, or the prosperity of the 
neighbouring farmers. All were alike strangers ; 
and though the Martindale family were very 
kind in volunteering visits toMarygold Hill, they 
always came with prying, investigating, arithmeti- 
cal looks ; Mrs. Robert begging her to take her 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 213 

daughter Harriot's advice in the management 
of her dairy and housekeeper's accounts ; 
Mrs. Jacob, spunging for cuttings from the 
greenhouse or a breed of her choice Dorkings ; 
Mrs. Millegan annihilating the utmost efforts of 
her fine ladyism by a sketch of the superior 
splendours of Mowbray End; and Mrs. Mar- 
riot sen'' the widow, who was living in a cottage 
in her son's village, overwhelming her with 
tracts and controversy. Mrs. Richard was 
never so ill as after some of these envious, pre- 
suming people had been staying at Marygold 
Hill ; and at length, though reluctantly, and 
with the lonelinesss of a long winter in perspec- 
tive bethought her of renewing her corres- 
pondence with her own married sisters. She 
longed to figure before them in her new dignities 
of patroness of a village and proprietress of a 
country seat; and nothing was more easily ar- 
ranged. — Mrs. Mac Glashun, who had fancied 
herself the wife of a Lieutenant General of 
Poyais dragoons, now found herself the widow 
of an ensign of Irish militia, with two young 
children, whom she was very glad to quarter on 



214 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

the charity of any member of the family willing to 
provide them with bread aud butter ; and Har- 
riet, whose union with the Grinderwell curate had 
caused him to be ejected from his cure by the 
rector nominee of the late Sir John, was now 
settled with him on a vicarage of forty pounds 
a year on the Lincolnshire coast, living on 
conger eels and lived upon by the fen-flies. 
Both, on the first hint of an invitation, hastened 
agerly to Marygold Hill ; and it was no small 
affliction to the pride of the arrogant Mrs. 
Richard Martindale, that Mrs. Trotter made her 
appearance by the north mail, and Mrs. Mac 
Glashun and her children by the day coach. 

Poor Richard, always kind and well-inten- 
tioned, was only the more cordial in his mode of 
reception in consideration of their mode of tra- 
velling ; indeed, he was far better pleased at the 
idea of having his two sisters-in-law as his in- 
mates, now that they were tamed by misfortune, 
than during the heyday of their partiality for cap- 
tains of hussars, dragoons, lancers, carabineers, 
fusileers, and fencibles. Moreover, if the truth 
must be told, he was not sorry to have an excuse 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 215 

V 

for occasionally prolonging his day's sports, and 
taking a bachelor-dinner with the Harriots, 
Millegans, Martindales, or his new friend, Jack 
Cleverly, of Poplar Lodge. 

Now this new friend Jack Cleverley, was 
perhaps of all poor Mrs. Richard's Hertford- 
shire grievances the most enormous ; being a 
huge, large-limbed, cheery, back-slapping in- 
dividual, with the strength and eke the 
lungs of an ox, who looked npon the fair and 
frail sex (like the mares in his stable and the 
cows in his meadow) as useful animals, created 
for the service and delectation of mankind. 
Despising the great lady of Harley-street with 
all his soul, as too lazy to nurse her own chil- 
dren and too helpless to drive herself round the 
farm like his own stirring housewife, he was 
never to be persuaded into the slightest defer- 
ence towards her nervous headaches; shouting 
whenever he sat by her at dinner as if he had 
been tally-hoing to the hounds, and slamming 
the doors after him whenever he was staying in 
the house, as if he were bullying the waiters at 
a travellers' inn. He was, indeed, a hateful 
creature in her eyes and ears ; talking with his 



216 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

mouth full, wiping it on the table-cloth, breath- 
ing like a grampus, and sucking in his tea from 
the saucer with the impetus of the fanious Ame- 
rican whirlpool that swallows up ships of the 
line. Mary-Matilda^s first topic of lamenta- 
tion (after listening to Mrs. Mac Glashun's 
moving tale of those Occidental adventures which 
had terminated with seeing the unhappy ex- 
lieutenant-general hanged higher than Haman, 
on a Mexican gallows erected between two 
cabbage-palm-trees, — and trying to seem inter- 
ested in poor Mrs. Trotter's description of her 
little parsonage-garden, with its slimy fen- 
ditches and fetid exhalations,) was the misfor- 
tune of possessing a loud vulgar neighbour like 
Jack Cleverly, who had no greater satisfaction 
than in decoying Martindale away from home, 
brutalizing him with strong ale, and persuading 
him that it was a mark of manliness to defy the 
influence of an " affectionate domestic partner." 
It was in vain that Mrs. Mac Glashun described 
her sufferings when left a nursing mother in a 
torrid climate ; — Mary- Matilda interrupted her 
to complain that poor little Dick had a chil- 
blain in his little finojer, thanks to Martindale*s 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 21*7 

obstinacy in choosing to purchase an estate in a 
county notoriously the coldest in England ; and 
while Mrs. Trotter was pointing out to her com- 
miseration, that for three years she had been 
living in a fishing-hamlet, without a neighbour 
within forty miles saving the officers of excise 
and coast blockade and their spirituously-inclined 
consorts, — the lady of Marygold Hill begged to 
assure her that such a spot was infinitely pre- 
ferable to a country house, placed under watch 
and ward of a husband's vulgar family. She 
appealed to the judgments of both, whether any 
thing could afford stronger proof of Martindale's 
want of knowledge of the world, than to sink • 
half his fortune in the purchase of an estate in 
the only county in England where no extent of 
landed possessions would obliterate the recol- 
lection, that " after all he was nothing but a 
second son of old Doctor Martin'ale of Hereford, 
who had made money in Indy;" — and to their 
feelings, as daughters of the house of Grinder- 
well, on the ignominy of being introduced into 
the neighbourhood under the patronage of 
Richard's eldest brother's wife (the heiress of 

VOL. I. L 



218 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

a rich brewer), and to the county in general, 
per favour of Mrs. Millegan's favour with the 
great people at Mowbray End. Somehow or 
other, both Julia and Harriet were disposed to 
harden their hearts towards the picture of 
their sister's distresses. They, who had been 
subdued in a rougher school, who had contended 
with cold and heat, hunger and bereavement 
smce they flirted at Weymouth or pouted at 
Grinderwell House, could not connect the idea 
of misfortune with the wife of an affectionate 
husband, the mother of seven fine children, and 
the owner of a handsome country seat in one of 
the best counties in England. 

Perhaps it was this obduracy which gave 
them a sinister position in Mrs. Richard Mar- 
tindale's opinion. Other causes of dissatisfac- 
tion soon however became apparent. Mary- 
Matilda had been originally considered by far 
the prettiest of the four sisters; but now, 
though the ten years which had passed over 
her head since the tour into Wales still left 
her flaxen hair and pink cheeks, — habits of 
luxurious idleness, and other natural causes had 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 219 

produced an expansion of outline far from 
conducive to her reputation as a beauty. 
Her cheeks were bloated, her eyes ofFuscate ; 
little yellow ringlets hung scantily round the 
enlarged oval of her rubicund face; and, at 
eight-and-twenty, she might have passed for the 
age proverbially connected with the qualification 
" fat and fair." Mrs. Mac Glashun and her 
sister, on the contrary, attenuated by privations, 
had preserved their shapes, and therewith that air 
of gentility with which the choicest costume can 
never invest a dumpy woman ; and no sooner 
did the good air and good fare of Marygold 
Hill restore animation to their features and 
bloom to their cheeks, than they shone forth as 
very pretty women, and came to be talked of as 
Mrs. Richard Martindale's beautiful sisters. The 
Hon. Mrs. Blickling insisted upon being fa- 
voured with their company at a popularity ball 
her husband, the member, was giving to the free 
and independent gentlemen of the county of 
Herts ; and it was indeed wormwood to Mary- 
Matilda, who had made herself obnoxious in a 
cheerful social neighbourhood by stickling for 

L 2 



220 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

precedency as a baronet's daughter, to have her 
two sisters appear on so ostensible an occasion in 
dyed silk gowns, as a curate's wife and adven- 
turer's widow ; and yet to know that they were 
fiftyfold as much liked and admired as herself. 
Now in London this never could have hap- 
pened. Her Harley-street friends would never 
have dreamed of pressing their civilities on a 
Mrs. Mac Glashun and a Mrs. Trotter, who 
had no houses of their own in which to requite 
the obligation ; and even had they been capable 
of such a waste of magnanimity, the general 
indifference to family connections prevalent in 
London society, would have prevented any one 
from knowing, caring, or commenting upon the 
relationship, or instituting comparisons between 
the parties. They had not been established two 
months at Marygold Hill, before Mary- Matilda 
wrote to her favourite sister Anne (the wife of 
the Irish captain, w4io was now on half-pay, and 
setded on a small hereditary estate on the bor- 
ders of Connemara), to describe how very trou- 
blesome she found those wild heathens, the little 
Mac Glashuns, in her nursery ; and how much 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 221 

she was apprehensive that Harriet and Julia 
would assume the command of her establishment, 
and probably give offence in the family and 
neighbourhood during her approaching con- 
finement. ' 

There was no resisting this sororal appeal ! 
Mrs. O'Callaghan certainly had intended to pass 
a happy domestic winter in the bogs. But she 
would not allow poor little Mary- Matilda to be 
put upon ; nobody could say what might be the 
result of her suffering any annoyance during the 
ensuing delicate crisis. So having persuaded 
Captain O'Gallaghan to become her escort; 
away she went by long sea to London; and, from 
the Tower Stairs, straight to those of Marygold 
Hill. The heroine was already in the straw ; 
but her husband (albeit somewhat startled by 
this third addition to his family circle) gave 
them a hearty welcome. All colonial people 
are hospitably inclined ; and though he could 
certainly have dispensed with the Captain's 
company, against whom, during his courtship 
of Anne Grinderwell he had conceived an 
antipathy, yet still any connection of his dear 



222 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

Mary-Matilda was welcome. It was still winter. 
And is it not the custom in Great Britain for 
people to collect as many as possible of their 
friends and relations at Christmas under their 
roof? Is not hospitality an almost religious 
duty on the part of the proprietor of a " Place 
in the Country ? " 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 223 



CHAPTER VIL 



There are a set of joyless fellows who, wanting capa- 
city to make a figure among mankind upon benevolent 
and generous principles, try to surmount their insigni- 
ficance by laying oflfences in the way of such as make it 
their endeavour to excel upon the received maxims and 
honest arts of life. Arbuthnot. 



It was an awful visitation to the irritable 
nerves of Mrs. Richsrd Martindale, who, during 
her annual indispositions, had been accustomed 
by her kind husband to have things kept so 
quiet in the house, that the blind mole heard 
not a foot-fall — when the little Mac Glashuns, 
instigated by uncle O'Callaghan, set up their 
war-whoops in the hall ; or when uncle O'Cal- 
laghan himself, after a second bottle of Madeira 
at luncheon, stumbled along the corridor to the 
billiard-room, singing " I am the boy for be- 



224 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

witching them," in a tone that would have 
drowned Jack Cleverley's loudest view halloo ! 
Her head-nurse gave her warning, and even 
the nursery-maid " warn't going to stay to be 
made keeper to them twolitde heathen savages." 
Forced into a premature assumption of strength 
and authority, the nervous lady exerted herself 
to resume her post in the drawing-room : — and 
then things went worse than ever. 

The treacherous Anne had evidently coalesced 
with Julia and Harriet ; and great was the art 
with which all three prevented their nefarious 
proceedings from coming under Martindale's 
observation, by soothing him with their flatteries 
and pretended regard. It was vain for Mary- 
Matilda to hint to Mrs. Trotter that her poor 
husband doubtless found his solitary situation in 
the fens extremely disagreeable ; or to Captain 
and Mrs. O'Callaghan that the weather was 
growing delightful for a voyage. They always 
contrived that the worthy Richard should seize 
that very opportunity for assuring them that his 
house was their own ; that if Trotter found it 
dull at Swamperton, he had better join his wife 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 225 

at Marygold Hill ; and that the state of Irish 
affairs was not such as to justify his Connemara 
brother-in-law in a precipitate return to his Sa- 
bine farm. His wife could have found it in her 
heart to burke him for his officious hospitality 
to her encroaching family. 

Nor was it only that their innovations pro- 
duced real inconvenience and annoyance in the 
establishment ; but the Martindale family, living 
near enough to have an eye upon their pro- 
ceedings, and enchanted to have an opportunity 
of paying off to the nabob's wife the innumerable 
slights and insults with which she had beset 
them, took care to let her see they were fully 
aware that her hungry swarm of poor relations 
had alighted like locusts upon poor Richard's 
property, to devastate and devour. The elder 
brother Robert had died a few months before ; 
expressly for the purpose, Mrs. Richard thought, 
of bequeathing sixty thousand pounds to the 
Harriots, and making Clotilda more vulgar 
and presumptuous than ever ; but the remainder 
of the Martindale clan (rejoiced to find out, 
and to show they had found out, that the family 

l5 



226 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

of "my father Sir John Grinderwell," with 
which they had been so frequently twitted, was, 
in fact a tribe of needy beggars) constantly wrote 
her word that they would drop in upon her and 
their brother or uncle Richard, "when her 
own family had quitted her. They would not 
think of intruding so long as she had so much 
good company about her.'' — Wretches ! not one 
of them but knew she had as much chance of 
getting rid of her sisters, as of that capital man- 
sion known by the name of Marygold Hill. 

Ned Warton, too, who had so long refrained 
from intercourse with his Cape Town friend, 
thought proper at this unlucky juncture to pro- 
pose the month's visit with which, nine years be- 
fore, he had threatened his dear Richard Martin- 
dale ; and the lady, who, at any other period, 
would have rebelled against the merest hint of 
such a favour, dared not provoke the report he 
would doubtless circulate among their mutual 
rice-and-currie acquaintance in town, that he 
could not be received at Marygold Hill because 
the house was garrisoned with the poor relations 
of poor Dick's poor wife. She would have done 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 227 

better, however, to incur the imputation ; for, 
after having vainly hinted to the O'Callaghans the 
propriety of giving up their comfortable room, 
and perceived that there was a confederacy among 
her sisters to keep possession of their original 
quarters, she was obliged to consign Mr. War- 
ton to a little poky chamber without a fire-place, 
commanding a picturesque view of the bottle- 
racks and knife-houses. 

" Very well indeed ; this will do very com- 
fortably for my man, Sam ! you don't mind 
sleeping in a room without a chimney, for once 
in a way ? " said the crafty Ned, when Richard 
Martindale, followed by his own respectable 
body servant, showed him to his glte, " And 
now let me see my own apartment." 

Upon this hint, Martindale, stung by his 
irony, yet trembling at his own audacity, actually 
conducted him to his own bed-room ; and War- 
ton, who could not bring himself to feel the 
slightest compassion for a hen-pecked man, had 
the comfort, while he watched the unpacking of 
his portmanteau, to hear the altercation that 
ensued in the adjoining dressing-room, between 



228 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

Richard and his wife, on the subject of this un- 
precedented exercise of marital interference. 

"We can very easily have a French bed put 
up for ourselves in this room," exclaimed the 
husband ; " I really had not the face to make 
my respectable friend Warton sleep in that 
corner cupboard. Since you could not prevail 
on the O'Callaghans to give up the south bed- 
room, we must make up our minds to be incon- 
venienced for a short time. Remember, my 
love, it is for the sake of one of my oldest 
friends; and people are often obliged to re- 
concile themselves to such shifts in their own 
Place in the Country." 

" I shall sleep with my poor children in the 
nursery," said Mrs. Martindale, her throat dry 
with rage : " you may do as you please. I should 
like to know whether any other woman in Eng*- 
land was ever turned out of her own bed to 
make way for a crackbrained fool, with the 
tricks of a baboon, and the insolence of — " 
Warton threw his slipper against the dressing- 
room door to warn the irate lady that he was 
within hearing ; and Mrs. Richard Martindale, 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 229 

unable to face him immediately after such an 
exposure, chose to be indisposed, and dine up 
stairs. Shouts of laughter and the fumes of 
cigars and whisky toddy ascending from the 
hall, soon warned her that the monster Warton, 
and the brute O'Callaghan, were colleaguing 
over their saturnalian orgies ; and very proba- 
bly engaging poor Richard himself in a career 
of libertinism. " And this," said she, as she 
wept over a plate of partridge and bread sauce 
furtively brought up by her own maid, " this is 
the comfort of having a Place of one's own in 
the Country ! — " 

It affords unlucky proof of the evil particles 
floating in our nature, that no compacts are 
more effective than those founded on malicious 
calculations, and a common animosity. Ned 
Warton, who, though he would as soon have 
put to sea in a sparrow's eggshell, as marry 
with Sir John Grinderwell's daughter, had 
never forgiven his chum and contemporary 
Richard for carrying off a young and lovely 
wife ; — and who entertained a rooted antipathy 
to the fubsy doll by whom his friend Dick had 



230 My place In the country. 

been so often prevented dining with him at the 
club, and going half-price to laugh at Munden, 
— no sooner discovered that the coarse, rampant, 
rollicking, Captain O'Callaghan entertained a 
similar dislike to his cold-hearted sister-in-law, 
than he entered into a league with him, offensive 
and defensive, to rescue Richard from her sub- 
jugation, or make the house too hot to hold her. 
Dick Harriot, too, the genius of Starling Park, 
who retained a strong sense of his obligations to 
his uncle, and who consequently despised the 
shallow woman by whom he was despised, — 
having taken a chance dinner at Mary gold Hill 
after a hard day's hunting, — instinctively joined 
the unholy alliance, and even suggested a new 
mode of mischief to their adoption. 

He undertook to point out to the notice of 
Mrs. Cleverly the frequency of her dear Jack's 
visits to Marygold Hill, as connected with the 
charms and ingenuous sprightliness of the widow 
Mac Glashun; leaving it to the well-known 
susceptibility of the lady of Poplar Lodge to 
favour her friend and neighbour Mrs. Martin- 



t 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 231 

dale, whom she detested as heartily as friends 
and neighbours in a dull country neighbour- 
hood are compelled to do for want of better 
employment, with her opinion of the conduct of 
her sister in encouraging the attentions of a 
married man : — and to persuade the jovial Jack 
that the party at his uncle Richard Martindale's 
could not get on without him, and were much 
hurt by the infrequency and brevity of his visits. 
Jack was not the man to resist such an appeal. 
A house filled with three amateurs of whisky 
toddy, and three lively chatty women, presented 
a real attraction ; and even Richard Martindale, 
his friend, was no less surprised than delighted to . 
observe how unreservedly he came among them, 
and how ready he was for a carouse with the 
brawling O'Callaghan or his nephew Mar- 
riot. Old Warton looked on with his cunning 
eye and puckered face, and saw with delight 
that a catastrophe was brewing. 

Now, Mrs. Richard Martindale, on her in- 
auguration into the circles of the neighbourhood, 
had not been so inattentive to her own interests 
as not to secure a partizan ; and the same in- 



232 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

cipient ambition which prevented her from rest- 
ing on her pillow till she had magnified her own 
dignity by the acquisition of a place in the coun- 
try, had suggested her choice of the County Mem- 
ber to be her knight and champion. There was 
something in the solemn dull impracticability of 
the well-looking, well-conducted Mr. Blickling, 
which forbad all possibility of scandal; — and it 
was therefore highly satisfactory to her feelings 
to roll into the Hertford ball-room on the arm 
of this mighty dignitary ; or to hear the Hert- 
fordshirians from the south-western extremity of 
the county inquire at the Hatfield Tuesdays, 
to whom their favourite member was paying 
such marked attention ? — Mrs. B. like most 
county members' wives, was too much accus- 
tomod to see him bowing, and beauing, and 
philandering, after the fashion of Sir Christo- 
pher Hatton with Queen Elizabeth, to take the 
least note of his proceedings ; and Richard was 
gratified to perceive that his wife, her pearls, 
and ostrich feathers, were received with becom- 
ing attention. Nothing could be further from 
gallantry than such a liaison. Blickling himself 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 233 

was a man who sometimes ''spoke," but never 
talked. Deeply imbued with a sense of his per- 
sonal dignity as the representative of the county, 
and proprietor of one of its finest estates, he 
considered loquacity derogation; and having- 
made it his maxim that men often repent of 
saying too much but never of saying too little, 
was looked upon as one of the most sensible 
men either in the House or out of it. Thou- 
sands of people said " there was no one on 
whose opinion they relied so much as on that 
of the Member for Hertfordshire," without per- 
ceiving that he was never known to give one 
but contented himself with bowing gracefully and 
assentingly to the expression of their own. 

To her growing intimacy with this senatorial 
tumefaction, the recent occurrences in her family 
had opposed some obstacles ; but now that she 
was out again, and that the weather permitted 
her to drive over to Blickling Park, she con- 
trived to make her way there unaccompanied, 
and to take a long stroll in the shrubberies with 
a party staying in the house. Satisfied by 
the profound reverence of the Member's bow 



234 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

that she was still as great a favourite as ever, 
Mrs. Martindale no sooner found herself, by 
one of the turns of the shrubbery, alone upon 
his arm, than she seized the opportunity to re- 
new all her former declarations of relying solely 
and singularly upon his guidance in the direc- 
tion of her own conduct; assuring him that 
" his superior wisdom could alone extricate her 
from a most unpleasant dilemma. It was im- 
possible to place even Mr. Martindale in her 
confidence; for the delicate relation in which 
the offending parties stood towards him, might 
lead to the most unpleasant results." Mr. 
Blickling paused, and looked stedfastly and in- 
quiringly at his fair companion, but said nothing. 
He was very much in the habit of saying nothing. 
" During her recent indisposition," she re- 
sumed, " the families of the neighbourhood had 
been so kind as to show a great deal of attention 
to her sisters. They had been to as many din- 
ner-parties, as many Christmas balls, as if she 
had not been confined to her room. Mrs. 
O'Callaghan had been kind enough to stay with 



'■T 



» 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 235 

her; but Julia and Harriet had been constantly 
out. Pobably he had frequently met them?" 

The Member bowed as to the Treasury 
Bench, but said nothing ; — he was very much in 
the habit of saying nothing. 

" All this, she was sorry to admit, — sorry for 
the sake of her own family, sorry for the sake of 
a respectable family in the neighbourhood, — 
had been productive of much mischief!" 

Mr. Blickling started and stared. He even 
spoke; he cried " Indeed !" and much as Kean 
himself might have lago-ed the word ; and when 
his friend Mrs. Richard Martindale proceeded 
to unfold to him the agonized apprehensions 
entertained by Mrs. John Cleverly of Poplar 
Lodge, and her own terror lest "any thing 
unpleasant'' should happen during her sister's 
visit at Marygold Hill, he seemed quite as much 
shocked and alarmed as she could possibly de- 
sire. But, although she expressly asked his 
advice, and in her unwillingness to involve Mar- 
tindale in a quarrel with his friend Jack, begged 
to know whether it was not plainly her duty to 
get rid of the indiscreet Mrs. Mac Glashun as 



236 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

quietly as possible, the great man of Blickling 
Park could not be induced to express a decided 
opinion. He shook his head, waved his hands, 
elevated his eyebrows, cleared his voice ; and 
Mary- Matilda finally quitted the shrubbery 
under a persuasion that her platonic knight had 
advised her to do exactly what she had driven 
over to Blickling determined to effect; viz. to 
bring matters to a crisis by bringing all the par- 
ties concerned publicly together. It had always 
been a Martindale custom to celebrate the 
christenings of the family by some showy fes- 
tivity ; and as she had done nothing since her 
arrival in the county to conciliate her neigh- 
bours, she now resolved to give a splendid ball 
land supper. This measure would serve to re- 
place her in all her abdicated authority. An 
evening, at ten days distance, was fixed for the 
<;eremony ; and Mr. and Mrs. Blickling, who 
were already engaged to act as sponsors for the 
new little Hertfordshire Martindale, promised 
to dine and sleep at Marygold Hill. The 
rest of the company were simply invited for the 
evening. 



*» 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 237 

Nothing makes people so popular in any 
neighbourhood as the act of giving a ball. Even 
Mrs. Richard Martindale, though in general 
very little liked, was now pronounced to be a 
good-natured, well-meaning woman in the main. 
Mrs. Cleverlev forgot her domestic woes, Mrs. 
Marriot her filial mourning, the Ladies Mow- 
bray their dignity, and the Millegans their aver- 
sion ; nobody remembered any thing about Ma- 
rygold Hill and its inhabitants, except that it 
was to be opened on the fourth of March, with a 
ball and supper, Weippert, and the Hatfield 
band. The Lieutenant General's widow and 
the Curate's wife contrived to coax poor Richard 
out of new white crape christening dresses ; and 
Ned Warton who wished for nothing better 
than to see his friends in a scrape, looked upon 
the whole as a "ploy,'' and trusted that Mes- 
dames Martindale and Cleverly, and as many 
of the gentlemen as possible, would make fools 
of themselves on the occasion. 

The morning arrived, and the Blicklings (to 
whom Mrs. Trotter had volunteered to surren- 
der her apartment) arrived also ; and while poor 



328 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

Richard paraded the lady round his improve- 
ments and broke her shins over his patent cast- 
iron fences, his wife managed to get the County 
Member tete-d-tete into her l)ook-room to relate 
to him all that had been going on since she saw 
him last. They sat opposite each other ; Mrs. 
Richard with compressed lips, looking rigid, 
stern, and moral ; — Blickling like the " Portrait 
of a Member of Parliament " in the Somerset 
House exhibition, with his hand picturesquely 
resting on the writing table, and his legs crossed 
a la Knight Templar. Whenever Mrs. Mar- 
tindale terminated a sentence in reprobation of 
the wickedness of the world, and more especially 
of married men who run after other men's wives 
or widows, the senator gravely uncrossed these 
impressive limbs, and (as if in mute reply to her 
appeal) re-crossed them in an opposite direction. 
He was too cautious for words. 

"Yes! — my dear Mr. Blickling," — faltered 
Mary-Matilda in an under-tone ; "you will, I 
am sure, sympathize with my feelings, when I ac- 
knowledge I have now more than ever reason 
to believe that villany has been going on under 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 239 

my roof. The other evening, after dusk, my own 
maid actually discovered a female in a white 
dress (it could be nobody but the ill-advised 
Mrs. Mac Glashun) clandestinely receiving a 
letter over the paling of the shrubbery from a 
gentleman on horseback, who could be nobody 
but that wretch Cleverly ! " — 

Mr. Blickling replied affirmatively by ma- 
noeuvring his right leg over his left, and thus 
altering the balance of his whole attitude. 

" Several times lately, the house-dogs have 
been heard to bark at undue hours; and I have 
every reason to believe that the alarm was given 
by these faithful creatures on account of strangers , 
loitering about the premises to favour this vile 
— this detestable correspondence ! " 

Her auditor gravely and silently resumed his 
original position. 

" To-night, however, I am determined to be 
on the alert, and so is poor dear Mrs. Clever- 
verley. They will come early. The guilty par- 
ties will not entertain a suspicion that they are 
watched ; and my eyes shall never be off their 
movements throughout the evening. It is a me- 



240 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

lancholy thing that the iniquity of mankind 
should compel one to have recourse to such pre- 
cautions with one's own sister. But Julia so 
positively persists in denying the charge, that, 
without procuring distinct proof, I have no 
excuse for forbidding that vile fellow the 
house, and preserving the honour of my family." 

Again the prim and prudish Blickling executed 
his favourite evolution ; when, startled by a sud- 
den burst of laughter at the bookroom window, 
both looked up, and perceived the blooming face 
of the widow Mac Glashun laughing under her 
gipsey-hat; wliile Ned Warton stood by her 
side, with a countenance as malignantly signifi- 
cant as that of Vathek's Giaour. Mary- Matilda 
rose with ineffable dignity; and the County 
Member again uncrossed his legs, and was on 
them in a moment. 

" Observe, my dear madam, the corrupt con- 
dition of modern society," said he sententiously, 
as he threw open the door into the saloon. " Such 
is the depraved state of those unfortunate peo- 
ple's minds, that they are putting an evil con- 
struction on the innocent friendship existing 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 241 

between a woman so exemplary as you, a 
man so unsusceptible of immoral impressions as 
myself. Ah ! madam ! — ah ! Mrs. Richard 
Martindale ! — what is the world coming to ! " 

The evening arrived — the evening passed ;—^ 
the eyes of Jack Cleverley's wife and M rs. Mac 
Glashun's sister were carefully fixed upon the pro- 
ceedings of the delinquents; — but nothing trans- 
pired. The little widow was certainly looking 
very handsome, and danced beautifully and with 
great animation ; but, as Mr. Blickling observed 
aside to his fair friend, "If she flirted at all, it was 
clearly quite as much with that eccentric old 
humourist Warton as with the valiant Jack." 
The ball passed off, as announced by the Hertford 
paper next morning, "with unexampled eclat" 
Most of the county grandees were absent from 
indisposition. Weippert's music was supposed to 
have gone by the wrong coach, for it never made 
its appearance. The Argands would not burn. 
The white soup was sour, and the lobster sallad 
sweet. Still, for a country-ball, the thing went 
off tolerably. When a great number of youno* 
people meet together, and are willing to be 

VOL. I. M 



242 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

amused, criticism is misplaced ; and as Captain 
O'Callaghan had affronted the butler by volun- 
teering to concoct the negus, and been conse- 
quently carried up to bed half an hour before 
the commencement of the ball, there was no 
person present of whom Mrs. Richard had any 
particular reason to feel ashamed. 

To say the truth, the old or middle-aged 
people seemed quite as well amused at Mary- 
gold Hill as their juniors. Ned Warton was 
growing quite humanized, Richard Martindale 
was in the best of spirits, and the Blicklings 
themselves were so much gratified by the hospi- 
tality of their reception, that they actually pro- 
posed, of their own accord, to pass another day 
at Mrs. Martindale's seat. Mary-Matilda had 
the satisfaction, after breakfast next morning, of 
holding another jeremiad with the Member over 
the sinfulness of this corrupt generation, and of 
whispering to him that, notwithstanding all her 
vigilance of the night before, her own maid had 
detected the lady and gentleman stealing away 
together from the ball-room. Mr. Blickling 
shook his head, and was evidently much hurt 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 243 



that so much turpitude should exist under the 
same roof with himself and his family; — but still 
he said nothing. 

^ Mrs. Richard Martindale dwelt much on this 
flagrant instance of his hypocrisy, when discuss- 
ing the subject with her husband a few days af- 
terwards, in consequence of a disgraceful disco- 
very which had set Marygold Hill into conster- 
nation, and sent little Mrs. Trotter back in dis- 
grace to the fens ;— besides very nearly driving 
the County Member from his seat, both in 
Herts and the House. Mrs. Trotter's had been 
the white dress in the shrubbery ; Mr. Blick- 
ling's the bay mare that stood so quiet beside 
the railings of the shrubbery. But Mrs. 
Mac Glashun had no leisure to upbraid either 
of her sisters with the aspersions thrown on her 
fair fame at Jack Cleverley's expense. Appre- 
hensive of the coming storm and the demur it 
might occasion in her old beau's intentions, she 
was already off to Hertford in a postchaise, 
with Edward Warton, Esq. and a special license ! 
" A pretty example have we set in the neigh- 
bourhood," faltered poor Mrs. Richard, who 

M 2 



244 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

was confined to her bed with genuine indisposi- 
tion occasioned by this double shock. " In 
London this disgraceful affair would very soon 
blow over ; but I foresee no end to the tittle- 
tattle it will produce, happening at this season of 
the year, and at — our Place in the Country!" — 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 245 



CHAPTER Vin. 



The park when purchased with disgust she sees. 
And sighs for town, " Oh ! odious, odious trees ! '* 

Pope. 

After all that had occurred, the Martindales 
had no longer any hesitation in informing the 
O'Callaghans, that it was their intention to go 
to town for a few weeks to be out of the way of 
their country neighbours; and the captain, who 
had made himself mighty comfortable at Mary- 
gold Hill with his whisky toddy, — shooting his 
brother-in-law's pheasants, and laming his 
hunters, — now began to look big, and to talk 
about " the paltry upstartness of a new-bought 
place, compared with a fine ould ancient castle 
discinding from father to son from gineration 
to gineration." Poor Richard, who was all phi- 



246 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

Ian th ropy, contrived, however, to get rid of 
him without a quarrel, by paying his way back 
again to Connemara, via Holyhead. The head- 
nurse came back; and Marv^jold was itself 
again. To remain there, however, was impos- 
sible. Mrs. Martindale felt that she had not 
courage to encounter the hearty laugh of the 
Cleverleys, the sneers of the Harriots, or to 
pass in her daily drives the accusing lodge-gates 
of Blicklins: Park. It had been understood, and 
promised, indeed, on the purchase of the fatal 
place in the country, that she was to go to town 
for the season when she pleased, — every spring 
if it suited her, — either to an hotel or a ready fur- 
nished house. Recollections of the miseries of 
removal had hitlierto alone prevented her from 
exercising the right ; but now, she was ready 
and willing to occupy a comfortable furnished 
house engaged for her by her good-natured hus- 
band in Queen Anne Stieet. She longed to be 
once more within reach of the Kedgerees and 
Calicuts, and all her former dinner-giving 
friends and acquaintance. 

Numerous, indeed, are the mortifications 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 247 

which await a country family arriving, after some 
years* absence, in town for the season. They 
find themselves out of fashion, — behind the time, 
— eclipsed, — disparaged, — forgotten by many, 
and even deliberately cut by a few. Mrs. 
Richard, in addition to the discovery that her 
own wardrobe and that of her children must 
be re -modelled, had the mortification of discover- 
ing that Lady Kedgeree had already acquired 
another bosom friend to gossip with in her stead; 
and that Mrs. Calicut was quite as intimate with 
•her successor in the Harley-street house, as she 
had ever been with herself. Richard, meanwhile, 
on coming home every day from his solicitor's, 
where he had now three lawsuits in progress 
connected with the Marygold Hill estate, (one 
concerning a flaw in the title ; another for hav- 
ing closed up a foot-path, and a third, for an 
action for trespass,) no longer made any secret 
of the superior attraction he discovered in a 
metropolis so rich in clubs, and so adapted to 
the habits of a lounger. He was now approach- 
ing his sixtieth year ; it was necessary that Master 
Grinderwell should go to Eton ; " and when 



248 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

the lad is at school," said he, in a desponding 
tone, " what on earth shall I have to amuse me 
at Marygold Hill ? My hunting days are gone 
by;— that impudent fellow, O'Callaghan, has 
thinned all my preserves ; — I make but a poor 
hand at farming;— and altogether, I feel that the 
country is no place for me. Besides, it requires 
an immense fortune to live like a gentleman on 
one's own estate ; and what with the five-and- 
forty thousand pounds so rashly sunk in the 
purchase, and the ten thousand I have frittered 
away, hundred by hundred, since I married — 
my circumstances are becoming considerably 
embarrassed. As my poor brother's partner, 
Latitat, says, ' unless I can make the Marygold 
estate yield somewhat of a more profitable re- 
turn, I may look upon myself as a ruined man.' " 
" No man can press oil out of a stone," says 
the Italian proverb ; and Richard found to his 
cost, that it was impossible to extract a pro- 
fitable return from a fancy-place, consisting of 
lawn, shrubbery, paddock, and woodlands in 
their nonage. His brother Robert's successor, 
however, who had a keen eye for speculation. 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 249 

had the good luck to discover an excellent stra- 
tum of brick earth on the estate ; and accord- 
ingly, by the time Mary-Matilda had blushed 
her last blushes for the delinquencies of her two 
sisters and made up her mind to return home, 
she had the satisfaction of finding the only pic- 
turesque point of the grounds disfigured by kilns 
and littered by brick straw, and the whole at- 
mosphere, the " precious country air " she had 
sacrificed so much to secure for her children, 
foully impregnated with hydro-sulphuretted gas. 
Poor Richard assured her, that the success of 
his brick-kiln could alone redeem him from the 
difficulties into which he had been plunged by 
his rash purchase of the estate ; and at length 
compromised the matter by undertaking to build 
her a splendid new steam-conservatory round 
the basement story of the house, capable of 
removing all the bad effects of the gas. 

Mrs. Richard had ample need for this little 
smoothing down of her ruffled pride. During 
her spring in town, the Marriots had been busy 
turning their sixty thousand pounds to account, 
in making magnificent improvements, and re- 

M 5 



250 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

furnishing Starling Park. Thanks to the mo- 
dels afforded them at Mowbray End, the man- 
sion was completed in the best taste ; and, as 
Clotilda admitted to her aunt, while parading 
her through every room in the house from the 
attics to the housekeeper's room, " they really 
flattered themselves it was the most perfect thing 
in that part of the country."— Mrs. Martindale 
thought of the two thousand pounds settled by 
poor Richard on his nephew, to insure him a 
college education, and wondered when she 
should be able to have a white marble bath in 
her dressing-room, or lace trimmings to her 
muslin curtains. 

With her own family, meanwhile, Mrs. 
Richard had resigned all intercourse. Sir 
Joseph Grinderwell affected to resent her neg- 
lisfence as the orioin of his sister's indiscretion ; 
and her younger brothers were eating govern- 
ment bread in different parts of the globe ; — 
one as a resident in Newfoundland, one as a 
consul in Cochin-China, and one thirty feet be- 
low the level of the Thames, as clerk in a frog- 
trap at Somerset House. She had no one to 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 251 

quarrel with, no one to molest; — even the humble 
Jacob Martindale treated her with that frigid 
deference which forbids all approach to famili- 
arity ; and Mary-Matilda, who had been so 
lively at Grinderwell House, so merry at Chel- 
tenham, so happy in Wales, so contented at 
Bath, so dissipated at Weymouth, so courted in 
Harley-street, discovered that in the country, to 
which she had restricted the remainder of her 
days, she was likely to be dull, dispirited, de- 
spised, and lonely. It was very little consola- 
tion to her to feel that she was proprietress of a 
place in the country, now that her means no 
longer permitted her to enliven it with enter- 
tainments, fill it with company, and assume a 
leading part in the neighbourhood. She took 
it into her head they were designated all over the 
county as " the Martindales of the Brickfield ; " 
while the more moral circles probably pointed 
her out to abhorrence, as a member of that ob- 
liquitous ilimily which had induced the County 
Member into backsliding. 

" Ah, Richard ! " she exclaimed, when ano- 
ther winter was about to set in, and they had 



252 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

not SO much as the O'Callaghans at their dis- 
posal to assist them in making war against the 
long evenings and snowy mornings, " I shall 
never forgive you for having made me renounce 
that comfortable Harley street house for this 
desolate place. To live as we did there, forms 
the utmost limit of my desires ; — good establish- 
ment, pleasant dinner parties, winter at Brigh- 
ton, summer at Hastings ; — the children always 
well, the servants always happy ; — the Kedgerees, 
the Calicuts, and poor dear Camphor the apothe- 
cary within a stone's throw. — It really was mad- 
ness on your part to set your heart upon a coun- 
try life. You are not fit for it, my dear, you are 
really not fit for it.— You cannot do without your 
club; or your morning's lounge with Sir Hookah 
Smith and Sir Brown Kedgeree. I wish to 
Heaven I had been as well aware when you 
took this place, as I am now, of your inaptitude 
for rural pleasures ; nothing should have in- 
duced me to allow you to bury us for life, in 
order that you might gratify the pride of the 
Martindale family by purchasing a place in their 
native county. There are the poor girls, who 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 253 

will soon be wanting masters, and who will be 
brought up mere Hottentots (I beg your pardon, 
— believe me, I intended no allusion to your early 
avocations), and turn out perhaps vulgar fine 
ladies, like your niece Clotilda.'* 

" Or worse, like your two flirting sisters," 
might have burst from the lips of a man less 
mildly quiescent than the patient Richard. He 
however, contented himself with observing, 
" Well, my love, we must hope for the best. 
Your mother may perhaps take it into her head 
to leave you enough to enable you to make a 
little visit to town every spring ; or perhaps — '' 

" A letter by express, Sir," said the footman,, 
placing a voluminous dispatch in the hands of 
Mr. Martindale, and quitting the room. 

" What is it, what is it?" — cried his wife, 
breathless with consternation. " Is it any thing 
about little Grinderwell? — any thing from 
Eton ? "~ 

"No." 

" Any thing regarding my sisters ? " 

« No." 

" In a word, are the tidings good or bad ? 
— your banker, your agent?"— 



254 MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 

" I hardly know whether to call them good or 
bad," said Richard, much perplexed ; " for you 
women are so confoundedly capricious, that one 
can never anticipate on what opinion you may 
finally anchor." 

" For Heaven's sake, do not prose so when I 
am dying with curiosity. Give me the letter ! '* 

" Tell me first," said Martindale, grown 
cunning with experience and placing the folded 
epistle carefully in his pocket, " tell me first, 
candidly and explicitly, do you repent having 
purchased Marygold Hill ; — and would you, if 
yOu could, return to the freedom of a London 
life ? " 

" That I would ! " — ejaculated Mrs. Richard, 
firmly believing such a release to be beyond her 
husband's power. " If we could but get rid of 
this estate, I should be the happiest woman in 
the world." * 

"I give you joy then, my .dear Mary-Ma- 
tilda," continued he, drily. " Latitat informs 
me that we have lost our suit. The title can- 
not be made good ; and, after all, Marygold 
Hill returns to the possession of its lawful owner. 



MY PLACE IN THE COUNTRY. 255 

I shall be a loser to the amount of some thou- 
sands by the money I have expended on the 
improvements; in consideration of which, the 
adverse party have very liberally offered me a 
long lease of the place on easy terms; and 
should you feel any reluctance in quitting it — '^ 
" No, no, no ! " cried Mrs. Martindale. 
" Pray let us return to the mode of life for 
which we were born, and which suits us best. 
I have had quite enough of Mary gold Hill. 
Believe me, I have lost all predilection for 
a Place in the Country.'* 



W'' 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 



Qui se marie avec un veuf, epouse nu liomrae et un 
fantome." Montaigne. 






# 



y V 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 159 



CHAPTER I. 



By Tre and Pen 

You know the Cornish men. 

Old adage. 

Julia was the only daughter of Mr. Treve- 
]yan. But although her father's county may be 
implied in his patronymic, his fortune and condi- 
tion must remain problematical, unless the 
reader's mind is set at rest by the assurance that 
he was rich in five thousand per annum, some- 
what more substantially founded than Cornish 
fortunes in general ; and in a landed estate which 
would have looked much better on Stanfield's 
canvas than in its rude reality. Trevelyan Hall 
and its surrounding landscape were, in fact, so 
much more picturesque than pleasing to their 



260 THE SECOND IMARRIAGE. 

hereditary denizen, that no sooner did the gene- 
ral pacification of Europe sanction the measure, 
than Mr. Trevelyan caused its rocks and woods 
and waterfalls to be specified in language far 
more efflorescent than the soil which gave them 
a local habitation, — inserted in the folios of Bates 
and Gillow, as " To be let for a term of years,'* — 
and without waiting for a lessee, who might be 
some time in making his way to the Land's End, 
— the Squire, Squiress, and their only daughter, 
" departed from Kirkham's Hotel, in Lower 
Brook-street, on a tour of the Continent.*' 

The field was a wide one ; the heroine ad- 
mirably qualified to feel and increase its vast 
variety of interests. Julia was scarcely eighteen ; 
handsome, intelligent, and good - humoured ; 
with the lustre of youth still beaming in her 
character and countenance, unimpaired by the 
vigils and affectations of London life. Julia 
Trevelyan had, indeed, as much cause for gaiety, 
both of heart and manners, as can be well ima- 
gined. What are called the good things of this 
world were largely at her disposal ; and the only 
shadow intermingled with her sunshine, was 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 261 

attributable to a circumstance with which most 
human beings would be content to compromise. 
The only child was too much an object of affec- 
tion to those about her, to be allowed the free 
use of her time and limbs; and after running 
much chance of being killed with kindness in her 
childhood, ran some hazard of being made 
miserable for the remainder of the life thus 
fortunately preserved, by the anxiety of her 
father and mother to render her the happiest of 
human beings. It is very difficult to be rational 
on the subject of an only daughter ; more par- 
ticularly a lovely and loving only daughter — 
framed 
*^ " In the very poetry of nature/' 

and springing up to womanhood under our eyes. 
Trevelyan and his wife were what is termed 
" the best people in the world ;" a definition 
far from implying that they were the most 
agreeable. The Cornish couple were unlucky 
in seeing the light at a period when the march 
of intellect was less universal in its recruiting 
system than at the present day. A long avenue 
afforded, even in the eighteenth century, a pro- 



162 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

digious fortification to a squirearchical mansion 
against the innovations of education and re- 
formation ; and the misses and masters of a fa- 
mily too " particular " to have recourse to school 
education, were allowed to remain almost as 
innocent as they were born of all branches of 
polite education, beyond the indispensable ac- 
complishments of reading and writing. Even 
the feculty of turning these to account was re- 
garded as superfluous or professional ; and Mrs. 
Trevelyan, as Miss Trevanion, with fifty thou- 
sand pounds for her fortune, had been afflicted 
with very little literature beyond a few books of 
devotion, such as the " Whole Duty of Man," 
and the " Economy of Human Life;" — in addi- 
tion to an almost Alexandrian library of " oc- 
casional" Sermons. The family recipe book 
teemed with specimens of the laxity of her early 
orthography ; and the chintz room, and north 
room, and half a dozen other " best bed rooms" 
at Trevelyan Hall were still disfigured by 
samples of shell work, needle pieces, and lambs- 
wool. Such as had obtained for the Cornu- 
bian heiress a reputation for " fine taste," 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 263 

rivalling that which turned the head of Clarissa 
Harlowe. In becoming the wife of a neigh- 
bouring squire, and changing only two out of 
the three syllables composing her maiden name, 
Mrs. Trevelyan fixed herself for life in a sphere 
for which she was admirably fitted; and the 
happy couple went on step by step, and hand in 
hand, through life ; passing a season in the me- 
tropolis once in three years, to prove to their 
friends in general that time had not overlooked 
them in his task of making the sons and daugh- 
ters of clay hourly older and daily uglier : — and 
fancying they were marching with the times and 
fulfilling the great purposes of existence, by the 
occasional introduction of a new piece of furni- 
ture or set of china at the Hall ; a new annual 
or exotic in the gardens, a new agricultural im- 
plement on the estate, or a new set of sermons 
into the bookcase. 

Every thing, indeed, went smooth and straight 
with them, saving in the nursery department; 
and Mrs. Trevelyan's career might have proved 
insipid even to her limited capacities of enjoy- 
ment, but for the annual triumph of producing 



264 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

a little olive-branch and going through the cere- 
monial of bonfires, bellringings, and oxen 
roasted whole, in honour of half a dozen suc- 
cessive heirlings to the Hall; and the annual 
affliction of their half dozen subsequent sick- 
nesses, deaths, and burials. 

Julia, the last of the Trevelyan generation, 
seemed to bring with her change of sex, a change 
of fortune. No bonfires blazed, no bells were 
rung, no oxen roasted, no doles distributed, for 
a mere Miss Trevelyan. She was received into 
the family with very lukewarm rejoicing (like 
Shakspeare's Elizabeth), as only 

A girl. 



Promising boys hereafter : 

but, as if in defiance of destiny, the young lady 
grew and grew, and throve and throve, till her 
parents almost forgot to despond over the fate 
which limited their inheritance to her single self. 
At length, with the tardy conviction that she was 
to be the last of her little flock, came the re- 
doubled tenderness, rendering her existence at 
once a pain and pleasure ; and no sooner were 
poor Mrs. Trevelyan and her nurse moved to 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 265 

acknowledge that " the nursery chair had best be 
moved to the lumber room,'' than poor little 
Julia became enshrined, an unwilling idol, in the 
golden niche destined to her future safe-keeping. 
An idol has but a sorry life of it ! — Incense and 
isolation are sickening things ; and could the 
little girl have conjectured, in her pink sash and 
shoes, to what concatenation of events her per- 
sonal importance was owing, she would assuredly 
have evoked from the vault beneath the family 
pew, a line of evanished baby squires, emulating 
the ghastly exhibition of Banquo's crowned suc- 
cessors. The loss of Trevelyan Park would 
have been pure gain, coupled with the forfeiture 
of that morbid tenderness which induced her 
father to worry her and himself to death, 
whenever her finger ached ; and her mother 
to live a martyr to imaginary evils hereafter 
likely to assail the " sole daughter of her house 
and heart." Mr. Trevelyan was in a perpetual 
tremor lest Julia should die and leave him 
childless ; Mrs. Trevelyan in an unceasing 
flurry lest by some omisssion, some maternal 
negligence, a weak point should be left un- 

VOL. I. N 



266 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

guarded in her daughter's desthiies, where sorrow 
might break in or the troubles of life gain foot- 
ing, to molest this bright exemption from the 
sentence of fallen humanity. Between both, and 
solely in their excess of zeal to secure her health 
and happiness, the poor girl was fairly plagued 
to death. 

The whole mischief arose from their want of 
better occupation. The squire and his wife had 
no employment either for mind or body. He 
was neither a reading man nor a sportsman ; she 
was neither afflicted with a musical taste, — nor a 
botanical, — nor a puritanical; planted no gar- 
dens, superintended no Sunday schools ; nay, she 
had not so much as a pet spaniel or a pet album 
over which to potter away her leisure. 

When little Julia was rescued at last from 
Papa and Buchan, from the village apothecary 
and family medicine chest, to be inaugurated into 
the mysteries of the school-room, a new era 
dawned upon poor stupid Mrs. Trevelyan, re- 
doubling in her estimation the importance of 
maternal nature. She had at length something 
to do, besides losing her keys and finding them 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 26T 

again. She came to be consulted about back- 
boards and stocks, grammars and dictionaries, 
Genlis and Edgworth. Her opinion was as 
regularly asked by the new governess as if it had 
been worth having ; and Miss Wilmot, during 
the twelve years she presided over Julia's 
education, actually managed to have her own 
w^ay with her pupil, by persuading the lady 
of the Hall that way was of her own exclu- 
sive pointing out; that not a pincushion was 
planned, nor a sonata selected, except under her 
special jurisdiction. Old Trevelyan, indeed, 
occasionally interfered in the regimen of the 
future heiress of his honours ; prescribed ground- 
rice pudding instead of whole, and advised beef- 
tea in alternation with mutton-broth. He even 
insisted on a pony as an interlude to the severe 
studies to which he saw the precious victim sub- 
jected ; and managed, in spite of all his wife's 
hysterics, to accomplish the all-accomplished 
Miss Trevelyan as the best horsewoman in the 
county. 

At first, indeed, it appeared the sole object of 
these doating parents to render Julia worthy of 

N 2 



268 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

the auspicious destinies already provided for her. 
The elaboration of study to which she was sub- 
jected purported only to qualify her for her sta- 
tion in her own county and country, as the heiress 
of Trevelyan Hall. But no sooner was the miracle 
accomplished,— no sooner was her father con- 
vinced that (without having attained the long- 
predicted spine complaint) she had been made 
mistress of several languages, and that her 
drawings and etchings, bravuras and ballads, 
fairly warranted the annuity settled upon Miss 
Wilmot on her dismissal from office, than he 
discovered that she was much too good, fair, 
and clever for the atmosphere of Cornwall. 
His heiress had a right to become something 
more distinguished than his mere heiress. No 
one in the neighbourhood was worthy of her 
hand. Julia must see the world, must visit 
foreign countries; and whereas a prolonged 
tour on the continent promised an extension of 
her father and mother's domestic happiness by 
delaying her settlement in life, the project of 
going abroad for a year or two, was readily 
?idopted in lieu of their triennial visit to Lon- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 269 

don. With a huge patent medicine chest, and 
pocket editions of Mrs. Chapone and Gregory's 
Legacy, they accordingly entered the travelling 
carriage about to become their home ; and al- 
though, by the time they rattled out of the court- 
yard of Quillacq's hotel, poor Julia had discovered 
that the hurry of travelling would not emanci- 
pate her from the troubles of her filial estate so 
much as she had hoped, it was indeed delightful 
to be released from the one gravel walk to 
which her daily exercise at Trevelyan Park had 
been for many years restricted; and the early 
to bed and early to rise, — the bread and butter 
breakfasts and roast mutton dinners, — swallowed 
on the unsilenceable authority of the great tur- * 
ret-clock, by which all her proceedings, moral 
and active, had been regulated from her child- 
hood upwards. 



270 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 



CHAPTER II. 



A cheerful temper, joined with innocence, makes 
beauty attractive, knowledge delightful, and wit good 
natured. Addison. 

The Trevelyans, visiting the continent for 
somewhat more than the usual purpose of 
catching a glimpse of the Louvre, crossing the 
Simplon, gaping at the Duomo and St. Peter's, 
and returning through Paris for the purpose of 
smuggling over a collection of Herbault's last, 
— had wisely provided themselves with the best 
letters of introduction. It was their intention, 
after passing the summer in Switzerland, to 
winter in Florence ; Mr. Trevelyan having 
taken it into his nervous head that it was neces- 
sary to attemper Julia's constitution to the fervid 
suns of Italy, before he permitted her to bask in 
the utmost blaze of the sweet south. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 271 

In Florence, accordingly, they were very soon 
settled. The lovely and gifted heiress was ac- 
counted a charming acquisition to the musical 
circle of the embassy and the theatricals of the 
Normanbys ; where even the hypochondriac 
father and prosy mother were excused and 
accepted, in favour of a beautiful girl in the en- 
tail of a fine estate and the possession of a host 
of charms. The Carnival came, with its sugar- 
plumbs and balls, and Miss Trevelyan at the 
close of its enchantments found herself on the 
road to Lucca for the bathing season;— having 
refused an Irish baronet, — a Cumberland squire 
travelling to be polished, — an honourable Colo- 
nel of grenadiers on his way to join his regiment* 
at Corfu, — and a little chicken-faced lordling far 
gone in consumption, and bear-led by a reverend 
dominie, who already carried in his pocket the 
programme of his pupil's funeral ceremonies. 
Of these adorers, Julia laughed at some, and 
with others ; sincerely regretting that there was 
not merit enough among the whole squadron to 
form one tolerable hero of rumance ; and that 
she was compelled to wander forth into the land 



272 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

of poesy, without having imbibed a little touch 
of sentiment to animate the landscape into 
brighter beauty, and lend new softness to the 
language of love. 

Julia was gratified to perceive that her father 
and mother had no intention of parting with 
her on easy terms ; but she little knew how in- 
dispensable she was to them, as a tenant for 
their empty hearts. In her childhood, the anx- 
ieties of her teething, measles, whooping-cough^ 
and scarlatina, had kept their feelings from 
stagnation: — Mr. Trevelyan had been saved from 
a severe fit of blue devils, one rainy winter in 
Cornwall, by an alarm of small-pox; and Mrs. T. 
had derived all the tragic interest of her life, from 
the duty of supervising Julia's interviews with the 
dentist, and first experience of her pony. But 
never had she been so valuable to either, even 
at the crisis of her typhus fever, as now ; when 
the daily arrival of some new adorer afforded 
them occasion for new alarms, new investiga- 
tions, new inquiries touching the endowments, 
temporal and spiritual, of the aspirant. — The 
excitement was delightful ! 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 273 

" With such a treasure to dispose of," whis- 
pered poor Mrs. T. to her friend the Dowager 
Lady Wadham, as they sat gossipping together 
at one of Torlonia's soirees, " I feel that I can- 
not be too vigilant. One meets with so many 
adventurers on the continent, even in the best 
society ; and I declare 1 never feel easy when I 
see Julia danchig with a stranger, till I have 
informed myself of his name, nation, and all 
that is known respecting him. — Ah ! my dear 
Lady Wadham, it is an awful charge to have 
an only daughter ! " 

" So I should imagine," replied the old lady, 
who possessed about as much sensibility as the 
velvet fauteuil in which she was seated. " I am 
sure my five girls never gave me so much un- 
easiness, all put together, as Miss Trevelyan 
does yoii. Yet mine were sad wild creatures, 
and we lived near a garrison town ; — while your 
daughter appears prudence itself." 

"Very true, my dear Madam. But one 
should do one's best to prevent a young creature 
from falling in mischief's way." 

" And pray, who is that very handsome 

N 5 



274 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

piece of mischief in Miss Trevelyan*s way 
just now? — *' 

" I left her in the other room dancing with 
the young Duke of Brancaleone." 

" Then, I suppose she grew tired of him ; 
for there she stands," continued Lady Wadham, 
raising her glass to her eye, " in earnest con- 
versation with a very fine young man, whom I 
never saw before ; — there, next to the old Mar- 
chioness in the yellow turban." 

" God bless my soul ! — whom can he possibly 
be ? " exclaimed Mrs. Trevelyan, in rising agi- 
tation. " Who can have introduced him to my 
daughter ? — They are talking together very 
familiarly on so short an acquaintance ; I must 
speak to Mr. Trevelyan about it. — Mr. Treve- 
lyan never allows Julia to be introduced to peo- 
ple without his previous sanction — Where can 
Mr. Trevelyan be ! He ought to be made 
aware of what is going on. — My dear Lady 
Wadham, you don't happen to see Mr. Treve- 
lyan any where ? — Really Julia should be more 
guarded. She is no longer a child. She is old 
enough to be aware of the imprudence of com- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 275 

mitting herself by making promiscuous acquaint- 
ance. I wish I could find Mr. Trevelyan." 

A similar anxiety on the part of the Squire 
soon brought him from the further end of the 
room, to reciprocate his inquiries respecting 
Julia's new partner ; but their united investiga- 
tion yielded no further information than that he 
was a nouveau dtbarque, just arrived from Eng- 
land. 

" Perhaps it may turn out to be the young 
Lord Avenmore," whispered Mrs. to Mr. T. 
" I know he is bringing us letters from our 
friends in Yorkshire.'* 

" Or perhaps it is the new attache who is ex- 
pected to pass through, on the Neapolitan Mis* 
sion. I received a hint about him from the 
Turbervilles. Lord Durlingtor/s second son ; 
but with his mother's fortune settled upon him 
to the amount of five-and-twenty thousand a 
year. To be sure the Durlingtons are people 
of a very suspicious complexion ; I should 
scarcely like Ju. to marry into a family with 
that clear transparent skin. There must be 
pthisis or scrophula at the bottom of the business. 



276 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

Not even Gowland could work such a miracle 
as Lady Durlington's face/' 

" Then the stranger yonder can have nothing 
to do with them ; for he is as swarthy as a Moor. 
I declare, Mr. Trevelyan, I begin to feel a 
little fidgetty about the business. You must re- 
monstrate seriously with Julia as soon as she has 
done dancing." 

To remonstrate seriously with a creature 
whose light footsteps approach us in the confi- 
dence of perfect innocence, her chesnut ringlets 
carelessly shaken aside, her blue eyes glancing 
beneath them, — half-shy, half-tender — her white 
teeth exhibited by an incessant play of smiles 
and dimples — her sweet voice ringing like the 
carol of birds, is a difficult task. Instead of ques- 
tion or reproval, the old man found that nothing 
was required of him but to bow very low to the 
stranger, on his daughter's announcement of — 
" Sir Alan Redwood, a friend of my uncle 
Trevanion." 

Mrs. Trevelyan instantly rose from her seat, 
to prove by the length and depth of her curtsey 
how much she was satisfied to find him an Eng- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 277 

lishman — how much more to find him a Sir 
Anything Anybody — how, most of all, to learn 
that he was blest with the friendship of her 
worthy brother Trevanion. 

Sir Alan, meanwhile, seemed to limit the ex- 
tent of his personal importance to the conscious- 
ness of having been recently the partner of the 
loveliest girl in the ball-room. He bowed 
gravely, stiffly, Englishly, to the profound obei- 
sance of his countrywoman ; and Julia was for 
a moment mortified by the coldness of his re- 
plies to her father's polite inquiries touching 
the health and journey of an individual he was 
addressing for the first time ; and the dry repul- 
sive way in which he suddenly quitted thfe 
group, and made his way to a sneering coterie 
of diplomats who stood strung together near the 
door. 

^ What a pity that he should be so ungra- 
cious!" thought Miss Trevelyan, as her mother 
toddled back to Lady Wadham to communicate 
all she knew respecting the illustrious stranger, 
and solicit further information. " He is very 
handsome — very well-informed : — I did not fore- 



278 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

see he could be so disagreeable.*' — And it 
afforded her real gratification, in the course of 
the evening, that Sir Alan Redwood should see 
how assiduously her hand was sought by the 
most distinguished partners in the room ; and 
still more, with how much respect her father 
and mother were treated by the leading per- 
sonages of the society. She almost wished, in- 
deed, that her friend Lady Clairiville had not 
introduced this same surly English Baronet to 
her acquaintance. But it did not much signify. 
He had already informed her that he was on his 
way to Naples; and birds of passage are too 
frequent in Rome at the commencement of the 
winter to render them of much account. Sir 
Alan would be off in a day or two, and would 
probably leave little occasion to regret his 
departure. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 279 



CHAPTER HI. 



There was no great disparity of years. 

Though much in temper, but they never clash'd ; 

They mov'd like stars united in their spheres. 

Or like the Rhone by Leman's waters wash'd. 

Where mingled and yet separate appears 

The river from the lake. Byron. 

In spite of his own announcement, however, 
and in spite of the announcement of all the 
gossips, Sir Alan Redwood loitered on from 
day to day, from week to week. It was not, as 
Lady Wadham ill-naturedly insinuated, that he 
was disappointed of his remittances from Eng- 
land, and pretended a predilection for Rome 
merely from an inability to get forward to 
Naples. The English Baronet lived (as the 
English love to live) at the most expensive hotel 
in the most expensive manner ; not only paying 
his way as he went, but paying a great deal of 
way that he did not go. Moreover he was a 



280 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

dilettante or cognoscente (as the English travellers 
love to be, in things that delight them not and 
concerning which they know nothing) ; and dis- 
plaj-ed much liberality among the studios and 
ateliers which are frequented by his youthful 
countrymen in Rome, much as Tattersall's and 
Hoby's are frequented in London, and where 
they seldom display much beyond their own 
ignorance. It was plainly no deficiency of 
means to go further and fare worse, which de- 
tained him so long in the Eternal City. 

It is almost superfluous to notice that where- 
ever the inhabitants of the British Islands much 
do congregate, there must inevitably be dinner- 
parties : — not dinners only, — not good eating and 
drinking, — but parties of gentlemen and ladies, 
dressed in their best attire, to sit round a table, 
and partake of it in the most formal and dis- 
agreeable manner, precisely at the moment de- 
voted by other nations to the enjoyment of 
lighter entertainment, the theatres and the pro- 
menades. Even in the campaigns of the Peninsu- 
lar war, even when superannuated cows and 
mules furnished the best part of the bill of fare. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 281 

and the leg of an ass-foal was accounted a deli- 
cacj^j regular cards of invitation are known to 
have been sent out by more than one gallant 
Colonel, whose baggage consisted chiefly in 
saucepans and gridirons; and even at Rome, 
instead of " doing as Romans do/' it is the cus- 
tom of our countrymen to gather together, per 
dozen, precisely at the hour and in the fashion 
they would do in Berkeley-square or Grosvenor- 
place. The Trevelyans, who enjoyed the exact 
amount of popularity ensured by great respect- 
ability of tone, equipage, and establishment, 
were greatly in request at these ultramontane 
feasts. Sir Thomas and Lady Dunderhead, or 
Mr. and Mrs. Bumble Drone, were urgent fo* 
" the favour of their company," because they 
knew that the favour of their own company 
would be requested in return on the following 
week, to meet pretty nearly the same company, 
and feed on exactly the same quality of viands 
and wines, enlivened by a prosy recital of their 
morning exploits, and a general lamentation 
over the dulness of the English papers. They 
were asked every where; they went every 



282 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

where; and every where they went, it was now 
their fortune to meet Sir Alan Redwood ; who, 
thanks to the taciturnity of his manners, had 
attained the renown of being a very sensible 
young man, — and thanks to his hrusquerie, of 
being a very distinguished one. It is singular 
how much some people gain by making them- 
selves disagreeable ! — 

Julia Trevelyan's estimate of the English Ba- 
ronet who " said farewell and went not," was 
however very different from that of Lady Wad- 
ham and the rest of the cassino playing com- 
munity. She did not think him a Solon, she 
did not think him a Saint. She did not con- 
jecture that he would ever set the Thames or the 
Tiber on fire, drink up Eisel, or eat a crocodile. 
She only thought him the most charming man 
in the world ; and herself the most unlikely 
woman to attract his notice. 

Dinner parties of twelve seldom include more 
than one lovely Julia, or one distinguished young 
Baronet; and it was consequently their fortune 
to be placed side by side by the benevolent pro- 
vidence of their hosts, much oftener than seemed 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 283 

to suit the inclinations of the supercilious Sir 
Alan, or the delicacy of the sensitive Miss Tre- 
velyan. She saw plainly that he did not think 
her worth conversing with; that the long-winded 
inanity of her father and mother had inspired 
him with a very disparaging notion of the intel- 
lect of the family ; that, beyond the courtesy of 
placing a heccafico on her plate, he was in fact 
ver}' little cognizant of her being seated on the 
chair beside liim. Her pride at length sug- 
gested, that he might suppose she had some 
share in the arrangements for their danc- 
ing, riding, sitting, and talking together, made 
by the unanimous consent of society, without re- 
ference to her inclinations. * 
Dismissing the artless cordiality of her general 
address, Julia accordingly strove to insinuate an 
unwonted air of dignity, and even disdain, into 
her intercourse with her handsome countryman. 
But by this she gained nothing. Her reserve 
rendered him only more reserved, — her scorn, 
more fastidious ; and whereas she had been pre- 
viously amazed and distressed by rumours, that 
" Sir Alan Redwood and Miss Trevelyan were 



284 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

going to be married," she had now the vexation 
to find that public report only modified the lie 
into " Sir Alan and Miss Trevelyan had been 
engaged, but had broken off the engagement." 
All this was mortifying enough ; and the more 
so, that Mrs. Trevelyan evinced no great indig- 
nation either at the first or second falsehood. 
" Nothing has prevented more marriages," said 
she, in answer to her daughter's expostulations, 
" than premature disavowal. Were I to set 
about denying the report. Sir Alan might say 
that it would have been as Mell to wait till we 
were asked ; and perhaps make it an excuse for 
never proposing at all." 

" But, my dear mother, believe me, he is 
never likely to propose at all," exclaimed poor 
Julia, reddening to the temples, at this specimen 
of her mother's discretion. " Surely you must 
have observed, from the very first night of our 
introduction, his coldness, his moroseness, his 
every thing short of incivility towards us all ? — " 

" Nonsense, my dear ! — Sir Alan is a very 
well-bred young man, who does not go about 
shaking hands with and whispering to every one, 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 285 

like Sir Lucius Blarnymore; or pass his time 
in morning visiting, like poor little Lord Dwin- 
dleham. He pays us as much attention as he 
pays any one." 

" Granted ! — and an additional proof that he 
is very unlikely to make me an offer of his hand. 
He talks to me just as he talks to Lady Wad- 
ham or the paralytic Princess Ronsiglione. Is 
that the tone for a lover ? " — 

" Why what in the world do you imagine 
detains him here at Rome, except the view of 
recommending himself to our family ? " — 

" Indeed I imagine nothing on the subject : 
and least of all that Sir Alan entertains the 
smallest interest concerning me or mine. Par- 
don me, dear mother, if I express a hope, that 
you have not allowed your conjectures to tran- 
spire among Lad}^ Wadham and her set ? " — 

" My dear love, the fact is too apparent. 
They all see it as well as myself: they cannot 
help seeing it, and they cannot help saying so, 
and I cannot blame them. Consider for a mo- 
ment ! — Sir Alan arrives here with the intention 
of refreshing himself on his journey by a few 



286 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

days rest. Every thing is arranged for his de- 
parture ; — passports made out, — trunks packed. 
He comes to Torlonia's , — dances with you,— 
burns his passport, unpacks his trunks, — and, on 
pretence of some nonsense or other, lingers on 
week after week, meeting you day after day, and 
dailv more intent on the connexion." 

" I scarcely know how to answer so partial a 
statement. But as it must be plain to you that 
he cannot marry me without your consent and 
my own, you will admit that he takes very little 
pains to conciliate either or any of us ? " — 

'-' Oh ! that is his way. He is not a fop, — he 
is not a courtier; — and being probably aware that 
nothing would be more gratifying to your father 
and myself than to secure so eligible a con- 
nexion, perhaps he thinks a waste of courtship 
superfluous." 

" My dear, dear mother ! — this is worse and 
worse ! " — cried Julia, hiding her face in her 
hands. — " If you say only half so much to Lady 
Wadham, I no longer wonder at the cold con- 
tempt of his demeanour. To fancy that I am 
sitting patiently in the hopes of finding his 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 287 

handkerchief thrown into my lap: — and willing 
and eager to become Lady Redwood on any 
terms upon which he may vouchsafe to grant me 
the opportunity ! — Oh ! mother, mother ! — why 
have you exposed me to such a humiliation." 

" What can be the matter with you, child ? 
I don't like to see you crying for such trifles ! — 
Freally begin to believe, with your father, that 
you are not well. He says the Sicilian wines 
here don't agree with you, — that you look 
heated ; — and wants you to take some Seidlitz 
powders." 

" I should do very well could I but per- 
suade you to dismiss the absurd notion that Sir 
Alan Redwood has any particular object, any 
object in which / am concerned, for prolong- 
ing his sojourn here." 

" But why wish to persuade me of such a 
thing ? — It would be a great disappointment to 
me ! I have set my heart upon the match." 

" You, who love me so tenderly, would 
entrust my happiness to the care of a man we 
have only known six weeks ! " 

** Ah ! but every one sees that you are very par- 



288 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

tial to him. In my opinion. Sir Alan is the only 
man you have ever really liked. I was telling 
Lady Wadham so, last night at the Cardinal's." 

" Ah, mother, mother ! — and a man too with 
whose principles and connexions we are utterly 
unacquainted." 

" My dear Julia, you don't suppose that your 
father and I have been proceeding blindfold in 
this business ? — From the very night of Sir Alan 
Redwood's introduction to us, from the moment 
I perceived that you had taken such an instan- 
taneous fancy to each other, I wrote over to my 
brother Trevanion (with whom he said he was 
acquainted), to make the most minute investiga- 
tion into the particulars of his family, fortune, 
and character." 

And supposing they have reached his 



« 



ears ? " 



" Supposing they have, — what can be more 
natural than the solicitude of parents situated 
as we are situated? — I have little doubt that he 
is fully aware of the circumstance, and highly 
applauds our prudence." 

" And what must he have been thinking of 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 289 

me all this time," faltered Miss Trevelyan ; 
looking more like a heroine than she ever looked 
in her life. 

" But, my love, you don't inquire the parti- 
culars of your uncle's reply ? " 

" It is quite a sufficient misery that the inquiry 
was ever made." 

" Ah ! you will change your mind, my dear 
Ju., when you hear that Sir Alan has nearly 
thirty thousand a year, and one of the most 
beautiful seats in Yorkshire; and that he is con- 
nected on all sides in the most unexceptionable 
manner." 



C( 



I am only glad to find that he has some 
little excuse for the self-importance I have 
always found so disagreeable." 

" It is certainly some drawback, that the child 
survives ; but, as it is only a girl, there would 
be nothing to interfere between your children 
and the entail. Trevelyan Park might be set- 
tled on your second son, with a provision for 
change of name." 

" Children ? — daughter? — son ? " — 

" Yes, my love. She died in childbed, you 

VOL. I. o 



290 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

know; and her family have the care of the 
child." 

«* To what family and what child are you 
alluding ? '' — 

" To Sir Alan Redwood's, to be sure." 

" Sir Alan a married man ? " — 

" A widower, my dear Julia. Your uncle 
Trevanion writes me word that the young man 
is travelling on the continent only to dissipate 
his affliction for the loss of his wdfe. A charm- 
ng creature, he says ; — so beautiful, so accom- 
plished, and poor Sir Alan so tenderly attached 
to her ! " — 

" And this is the man we have been pestering 
with invitations to fetes and operas ! — No won- 
der he was so much disgusted with our proceed- 
ings. How frivolous must all my girlish folly 
have appeared in his eyes." 

" We met him first, you know, in a ball- 
room. Lady Redwood has been dead a year, 
or you would scarcely have seen him capering 
about in weepers." 

" Capering about ! " — 

" And from the moment people re-appear in 



.i5fl 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 291 

society, they must expect to be treated like the 
rest of the world. Sir Alan Redwood cannot 
expect that we are all to be pensive and grave 
becauses he chooses to be sorry for his wife. 
Hush ! here he comes." 

" Pray, pray mamma," whispered Miss Tre- 
velyan, as the baronet's steps were heard tra- 
versing the ante-chamber, "do not let him sup- 
pose we have been discussing his affairs ; consi- 
der how officious and impertinent we should 
appear ! " 

It was probably an apprehension that Mrs. 
Trevelyan would commit her by some new indis- 
cretion, that lent so beautiful a flush to Julia's 
cheek when Redwood entered the room. It was 
probablv the new interest he had recently ac- 
quired in her eyes, which caused her voice to 
tremble when she addressed him. A husband 
and a. father ! — a bereaved husband — a father 
separated from his only child ! Such sorrow as 
he must have undergone ; such painful remem- 
brances as must still haunt his mind ! — Fn volun- 
tarily her eyes filled with tears, as she remarked 
for the first time that his brow was hollow, and 

o 2 



a 



292 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

his lips feverish and compressed. How ofteu 
must she have insensibly wounded his feelings — 
how often vexed and offended him ! — Julia Tre- 
velyan never discovered how far her predilec- 
tions had outstripped her intention, and how 
deeply, tenderly, and irrevocably her affections 
were pledged to Sir Alan Redwood, till she had 
reason to believe that his own were wedded to 
the grave — that he was a heartbroken and mis- 
anthropic man \ 

It was probably the sympathy thus developed, 
which softened even the harsh Englishman's in- 
tonation, as he addressed a few uninteresting in- 
quiries to the lovely heiress. Blind as he was — 
blinded either by prejudice, pride, or mental 
affliction, — the perturbation, the tenderness of 
Miss Trevelyan's manner could not escape him. 
He drew his chair nearer to hers, and for a mo- 
ment affected to interest himself in the drawing 
at which she was diligently working with a view to 
escape his coldly scrutinizing glances. Julia felt 
her breath grow shorter, and her cheeks of a more 
burning crimson. She was determined that he 
should have no plea for supposing that she had 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 293 

participated in her mother's investigations ; and 
replying to his questions with an abruptness 
almost as startling and ungracious as any he had 
'ever practised towards herself. Sir Alan was for 
the first time induced to consider the beautiful 
Julia as wayward and capricious. He was indig- 
nant. He had thought better of her ; had re- 
garded her as the least spoiled child of the most 
spoiling parents that the weakest human nature 
could furnish ; and intent perhaps on making 
his dissatisfaction apparent, assumed in his turn 
a harshness of tone such as induced Julia sud- 
denly to let fall her pencil, and lift her large dark 
grey eyes to his, with an expression that coul4 
not be mistaken ; — with the deprecating, de- 
voted, doubting, timid tenderness, of first and 
iinreturned affection. There was no resisting 
this mute and involuntary appeal. Sir Alan 
Redwood, silently seizing the hand of the lovely 
artist, pressed it fervently in his, and would pro- 
bably have raised it to his lips, had she not forci- 
bly disengaged it, — risen abruptly from her seat, 
— and quitted the room. Mrs. Trevelyan 
was too busy with her knitting, and too slow 



294 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

of apprehension to notice what was going on. 
As Juha passed her chair, she saw indeed that 
the tears were streaming down her face ; and 
attributed her daughter's emotion to the agi- 
tating nature of the conversation they had re- 
cently held together. — She only hoped that Sir 
Alan was not so clear-sighted as herself ! 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 295 



CHAPTER IV. 



I love him not, — nor hate him not ; and yet 
I have more cause to hate him than to love him. 
For what had he to do to chide at me ? 

As You Like It. 

Fortunately for the happiness of man-and- 
womankind, those subtleties of sentiment which 
agonized the sensibilities of young ladies- and 
young gentlemen of the days of the Harlowes 
and Grandisons, have vanished from the com- 
mon-place routine of life. For many years 
past, we have heard of no female victims to the 
delicate distress of having given away an un- 
wooed heart ; nor do we know a single marriage 
embittered by a recurrence of the Richardsonian 
paradox of who loved first, and why. It does 
not, however, appear certain that the moral tur- 



296 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

pitude of the action is by any means diminished; 
and it is with fear and trembling we admit that 
poor Juha Trevelyan's heart was exclusively 
dedicated to the flinty Sir Alan, long before he 
had vouchsafed to press her hand, or even com- 
passionate the tears he wrung from her gentle 
eyes. We admit that the conduet of our he- 
roine was very blameable. — It was, however, very 
natural ; for the young Baronet was not alone 
the most attractive man with whom she had ever 
been acquainted ; but the only one, young and 
unmarried, who had evinced no pretensions to 
her hand ! — 

But now, — now that she had so completely 
betrayed herself, now that the unguarded weak- 
ness of her demeanour afforded him greater ex- 
cuse for triumph than even Mrs. Trevelyan's 
manoeuvres, — did he now^ did he still maintain 
that frigid reserve, that mortifying apathy, 
which had so long borne testimony to the pre- 
engrossment of his feelings ? — Impossible ! — He 
could not longer close his heart against a young, 
beautiful, gentle, accomplished, rich, well-born 
girl ; whose devotion to himself was manifest. 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 297 

notwithstanding all her efforts, all her struggles, 
all her delicacy ; who loved him in spite of 
himself — and of herself also. 

Yes ! — Things went worse between them than 
ever ! — A new shade of embarrassment seemed 
added to a mutual position, already only too 
embarrassing. JuUa, ashamed of the emotion 
involuntarily betrayed, grew almost sullen with 
its object; while Sir Alan, instead of throwing 
himself at her feet as the happiest and most 
grateful of men, scarcely even deigned to oc- 
cupy the place by her side forced upon him by 
the misjudging zeal of Mr. or Mrs. Trevelyan. 

Whenever he addressed her it seemed by in» 
voluntary impulse; and though a close observer 
might have noticed that his eye from a distance 
was constantly directed towards her, and his 
lips, when he did speak, compressed, as if by a 
strong effort to restrain his declarations, poor 
Julia saw nothing in his demeanour but in- 
creased reserve, increasing alienation. Very 
earnestly did she long for the first symptoms of 
the return of spring; for in the spring they 
were to quit Rome ; and she had actually sue- 

o 5 



298 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

ceeded in persuading her parents to a voyage to 
Sicily, in order to avoid the appearance of tra- 
velling in company with the surly Redwood by 
pursuing their original plan of a journey to 
Naples. But the first symptoms of spring were 
fated to waft new projects upon their balmy 
gales. 

It was about the end of February; and a continu- 
ation of cold weather, such as, to use the Roman 
proverb, had " hung beards on the frost-bitten 
Tritons of the fountains in the Piazza Navona," 
rendered a change of temperature peculiarly 
welcome ; when a few days of sunshine .brought 
forth at once the ready verdure of that accessi- 
ble soil, and, as if by a magic touch, the gar- 
dens of Monte Pincio grew suddenly bright 
with flowers. Tulips, anemones, and hyacinths, 
started up as if long impatient for a summons ; 

the intense verdure of the yellow jasmine-leaves 

grew glossier and greener than ever ; — the bright 
bay and peaked phyllerea seemed to wake into 
vivid existence; — even t^he eternal pine-trees 
threw aside their mourning habits, and, if they 
still siglied, imparted a spicy sweetness to their 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 299 

sighs, as though grateful to the sunshine, that dis- 
dained not to smile upon their desolation. All 
the world was astir again. Superlatives were 
audible in the streets: '^Bellissimo! — dolcissi- 
mo ! — beatissimo ! " were heard on every side. 
The Romans began to dream of their vUleggia- 
tura, — and the English to project picnics. Lady 
Wadman was wild to go and eat pigeon-pies 
at Adrian's villa; and Mrs. Green Smith and 
Miss Brown Thompson thought that a gypsey 
party to Tivoli would be the most delightful 
thing in the world. 

In these expeditions, and fifty others of an 
equally incongruous nature, the TrevelyanS 
were necessarily included; and although the 
old gentleman entertained a notion that malaria 
and the picturesque are two airy nothings very 
frequently to be met with in one and the same 
" local habitation," yet, for the sake of seeing 
Julia scramble over broken columns on Sir Alan 
Redwood's arm, or hunt for wild anemones 
with Sir Alan Redwood by her side, he was 
very willing to eat his ham sandwiches or cold 
chicken in any ruined temple or desolated 



300 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

villa, selected by the bad taste of the indifferent 
society by which he was surrounded. 

It would have tasked Miss Trevelyan's can- 
dour to decide whether it was by consent or 
compulsion that she found herself included in a 
party of this description, made by Lady Clairi- 
ville, to visit Horace's villa, and dine tant Men 
que mal in the beautiful ruins adjoining the 
village of Roua Giovane. They were to pass 
the morning in wandering beside the shallow 
waters of the Licenza ; or explore, on mules 
provided for the purpose, the woods and preci- 
pices of Mount Lucretilis, overhanging the 
favourite haunts of the poet. But when she 
found herself gradually led apart by Sir Alan, 
and conducted among the green thickets of arbu- 
tus, where the violet and orchis seemed springing 
under her feet, she saw no cause to repine at hav- 
ing accepted the invitation, nor any reason to 
doubt that the object of her affection was for 
once intent on securing a tete-a-Ute. The clear 
Italian sky was bright over their heads; the 
song of the distant goatherd, reaching their 
ears at intervals from the mountain side, alone 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 301 

disturbed the stillness of the landscape; — and 
never had Redwood conversed with her in 
terms of such endearing familiarity. There 
was nothing of love, indeed, in his language ; 
but a great deal in his tone. He talked 
of poetry and poets ; — of nature and religion ; 
— of every thing that people talk of when love 
is uppermost in their hearts and souls ; and 
moreover, having persuaded her to rest her- 
self bv his side on one of those moss-covered 
stones marking the limits of the winter chan- 
nel of the Licenza, which seem to have been 
lying there in their hoariness since the very days 
of Horace, bent his looks upon hers with an 
expression whence all his former reserve was 
banished ; — an expression such as marks the 
glance of a human eye towards the object on 
earth upon which it most delights to gaze. He 
became abstracted, incoherent, — and Miss Tre- 
velyan saw in a moment that the long-wished, — 
long-despaired of confession was at hand; — when 
lo ! just as she was beginning to tremble with 
emotions of mingled joy and fear, a loud halloo 
from a dandy dragoon, a brother of Lady Clairi- 



302 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

ville's (who being a jester by vocation was pro- 
nounced to be a great acquisition to all the plea- 
sure haunts of the ennuyees of Rome) announced 
that Lady Wadham and her Huns were at hand. 
Julia and Redwood had just time to start up 
from their sentimental post, and assume a tone 
that might better assimilate with the flippant 
bantering of their companions. But it was im- 
possible to divest themselves of a certain air of 
consciousness, such as induced Lady C. to assure 
her young friend that she saw clearly " how 
things were ;" and Lady W. to offer her con- 
gratulations in an audible whisper to both. 

Greatly, however, as poor Julia was distressed 
by their officious impertinence, she was far more 
so on perceiving that Sir Alan, instead of com- 
passionating the dilemma in which she was 
placed, studiously withdrew from her side. 
They were now making their way to a disman- 
tled fortress near Roua Giovane, where the 
banquet was already prepared ; and leaving 
her to the charge of the noisy blockhead by 
whom they had been molested, he now affected 
to offer his arm as the escort of Lady Clairi- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 303 

ville ; beside whom he sat during the repast de- 
voting himself ostensibly and exclusively to her 
entertainment. 

The tables being at length removed, dancing 
was proposed in the quadrangle ; and in a mo- 
ment she beheld Redwood guiding the trium- 
phant Lady Clairiville through the mazes of 
a waltz ! — Twilight stood her friend. Gradu- 
ally extricating herself from the merry group, 
poor Julia stole silently away through the inner 
courts of the venerable edifice ; — tripped hastily 
over the short green grass, by which the inter- 
vening mounds of earth were covered as by a 
carpeting of green velvet; — and having reached 
a little desolate nook of glacis bounded round 
by the hoary walls and a wooden paling, sat 
herself down on the ground and covered her 
face with her hands ; the better, it may be con- 
cluded, to collect her thoughts and shape her 
projects for the future. Of course she would 
not have done so ignominious a thing as weep 
for the world ! 

But after a few minutes indulgence of these 



304 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

solitary ruminations, she suddenly started up ; 
and would have quitted her lonely oratory 
almost as eagerly as she had sought it, but that 
she was forcibly detained, — forcibly compelled to 
reseat herself, — forcibly compelled to listen to a 
voice, the faintest accents of which, whispered 
softly into her ear, had caused her a moment 
before to withdraw the hand from her face and 
prepare to retrace her steps back to the com- 
pany. 

" Dearest, dearest Julia ! " — exclaimed Sir 
Alan Redwood, " you are weeping ! — What 
brings you here ? — What has impelled you 
to quit yonder merry group for this dreary 
spot ? " 

Sir Alan seemed resolved to compensate him- 
self for five months of self-restraint, by the sud- 
den assumption of unlimited license ; for he not 
only ventured upon the familiarity of Julia- 
izing the astonished recluse, but actually pre- 
sumed to encircle Miss Trevelvan's slender 
waist with his arm. It was not surprising that 
she should turn pale and tremble at so extra- 
ordinary an irregularity on the part of so regu- 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 305 

lar a maind , nemtihuess of encreasing twilight 
and in the stillness of so remote a spot. She 
began heartily to wish she had kept with the 
rest of the company ; for she had little doubt 
that the elated Baronet was under the influence 
of champagne. 

Alas ! his was an intoxication quaffed at a 
still more perilous source ; — his was an intoxica- 
tion against which both soda and seltzer are in- 
effectual correctives ; — his was the intoxication of 
a passion long repressed, long increasing ; of a 
tenderness only the more potent and the more 
exquisite, that it had been subdued by all the 
arguments and all the efforts which human 
resolution could suggest. 

" You think me wild," cried he, in answer to 
the silent shudder with which she repelled his 
touch. " You attribute my impetuosity to 
audacity, — perhaps to wine, — perhaps to mad- 
ness. — No, Julia — dearest, most beloved 
Julia, no ! — I am only too sober, — too sane, — 
too sad. — It is with the full force of my reason 
I am compelled to acknowledge how long, how 
intensely I have loved you; how painfully I 



306 THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 

have striven to conceal ;— how vainly attempted 
to subdue my attachment ! " 

" Your attachment ! " ejaculated Miss Tre- 
velyan, astonished out of her terrors; and already 
relapsing into the credulous confidence ever 
ente^rtained by a woman towards the object of 
her affections. " Do not imagine me so easily 
deceived.'^ 

" I do not imagine you deceived ! — No ! it 
was impossible to deceive you : — I felt that it was 
impossible. With all my efforts to appear un- 
constrained in your presence, with all my 
anxiety that nothing should transpire to betray 
the troubled state of my feelings, nothing could 
blind your penetration ; — you saw and have seen 
from the first moment of our acquaintance ; the 
unlimited extent of your influence over my 
feelings." 

It would have been much more to the pur- 
pose, had Miss Trevelyan persisted in feeling or 
feigning astonishment and incredulity. But 
Julia was incapable of art. If no longer sur- 
prised, she was at least gratified and penetrated 
by all she felt and all she heard. Moreover, the 



THE SECOND MARRIAGE. 307 

tears were very near the surface, — quite ready to 
spring forth again ; and without the least regard 
to her own dignity, she actually relapsed into 
a most unheroic flood of tears. Sir Alan re- 
ceived no very intelligible negative to his re- 
quest for leave to hope, — and for permission to 
tender his proposals to Mr. and Mrs. Trevelyan. 



END OF VOL. I. 



J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT-STREET. 
