PUBULSHEB 1-v II^RV COIJRUKH 



GLENARVON. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. II. 



Les passions sont les vents qui enflent les voiles du vais- 
seau: elles le submergent quelquefois, mais sans elles il ne 
pourroit voguer. Tout est dangereux ici-bas, et tout est 
necessaire. 



®\)itt> @ti(tton. 



LONDON. 

PRIN1ED FOR HENRY COLBURN, CONDUIT STREET. 

1816. 



London : Printed Dy Schulze and Dean. 
13, Poland Street. 



GLENARVON 



CHAPTER I. 

In the morning Calantha beheld crowds 
of discontented catholics who thronged 
the outer courts waiting to see her father. 
Petitions for redress were thrown in at 
the windows ; and whilst they were at 
breakfast, Sir Everard entering* without 
even waiting to see who was present, 
asked eagerly if the. Duke were at home : 
he, at the same moment gave a huge paper 
closely written, into the hands of one of 
the servants, desiring it to be instantly 
delivered to the Duke; " and tell him, 
sir," vociferated the doctor, " it is my 
case written out clear, as he commanded 
— that which I had the honour to present 
to him t'other day, when he had not lei- 
sure to look upon it:" then turning round, 
Vol. II, B 



"Z GLENARVON, 

and seeing Calantha, " By my soul/' he 
exclaimed, "if here ain't my own dear 
Lady Calantha; and God be praised Ma- 
dam, you are come amongst us ; for the 
devil and all is broke loose since you've 
been away. Let's look at you : well, and 
you are as tall and handsome as ever ; but 
I — Oh! Lady Calantha Delaval, begging 
your pardon, what a miserable wretch am 
I become. Lord help me, and deliver 
me. Lord help us all, in unmerited af- 
fliction." 

Calantha had not heard of SirEverard's 
misfortunes; and was really afraid to ask 
him what had occurred. He held her 
hand, and wept so audibly, that she al- 
ready saw some of those present turning 
away, least they should not be able to 
conceal their laughter : his strange gestures 
were indeed a hard trial. " Be pacified, 
calm yourself my good Doctor," said Mrs. 
Seymour, giving him a chair: " Heaven 
forfend," said Sir Everard: " Nature, 
Madam } will have a vent. I am the most 



©LENARVON. O 

miserable man alive : I am undone, you 
well know ; but Lord ! this dear child 
knows little if any thing about it. Oh ! 
I am a mere nothing now in the uni- 
verse/' Gondimar, with a smile, assured 
Sir Everard that could never be the case, 
whilst he retained, unimpaired, that full 
rotundity of form. " Sir, are you here? 
cried the Doctor fiercely: " but it is of 
small importance. I am no longer the 
soft phlegmatic being you left me. lam 
a wild beast, Sir — a dangerous animal.— 
Away with your scoffs.— I will fight, Sir 
— murder, Sir — aye, and smile whilst I 
murder/ ■ 

There was something in these words 
which turned Lady Margaret's cheeks to 
a deadly pale ; but the Doctor, who had 
sought for forcible expressions alone, 
without the least heeding the application, 
continued to storm and to rage. " Fm a 
man," he cried, " accustomed to suffer- 
ings and to insult. Would you credit it 
dear Lady Calantha: can you comprehend 
b 2 



4 GLENARVON. 

itj? — that lawless gang — those licentioui 
democrats — those rebellious libertines, 
have imposed on the inordinate folly of 
my wife and daughters, who, struck mad, 
like Agave in the orgies of Bacchus, are 
running wild about the country, their 
hair dishevelled, their heads ornamented 
with green cockades, and Lady St. Clare, 
to the shame of her sex and me, the pro- 
perty of a recruiting serjeant, employed 
by one of that nest of serpents at the ab- 
bey, to delude others, and all I believe, 
occasioned by that arch fiend, Glenar- 
von." 

" Oh!" cried Gerald Mac Allain, who 
was in attendance at the breakfast table, 
" saving your honour's pardon the young 
Lord of Glenarvon has been the cause of 
my two brave boys being saved from the 
gallows. I will rather lose my life, than 
stand to hear him called an arch fiend." 
" He is one, old Gerald, whether you or 
I call him so or no. Witness how, the 
other night, he set the rabble with their 



GLENARVON 



torches to burning Mr. O'Flarney's barns* 
and stealing his sheep and oxen and all 
his goods/' " Och it's my belief the 
Rector of Belfont, when he comes, will 
speak a word for him thoft," returned 
Gerald Mac Allai n ; " for, save the presence 
of the Duke, who is not here to hear me, 
he has been our guard and defence all the 
while his grace's honour has been out of 
the kingdom." " Curses light upon him 
and his gang," cried Sir Everard, furi- 
ously. Are not Miss Laura and Miss Jes- 
sica after him at this very time, and my 
pretty niece, my young, my dear Elinor, 
and Lady St. Clare, more crazy than all, 
is not she following him about as if he 
were some god ?" 

" The whole country are after him," 
cried Gerald Mac Allain, enthusiastically: 
" Tis a rage, a fashion." " Tis a phren- 
zy," returned the Doctor, — " a pestilence 
which has fallen on the land, and all it is 
my belief, because the stripling has not 
one christian principle, or habit in him: 



6 GLENARVON. 

he is a heathen/' " If it is the young 
Glenarvon," said Gondimar, approaching 
the irritated Doctor, " he is my friend." 
" Do not I beseech you, bring any of 
your knock me down arguments to me, 
Sir. His being your friend, only gives 
in my opinion*" a blacker shade to his 
character, " Sir, I hate personal at- 
tacks." " A blow tbat hits, Count, and 
a cap that fits, are sure to make the 
sufferer look foolish, excessively foolish : 
I never believed in baseness and 
malignity till I knew the Count Gondi- 
mar." " Nor I in arrogance and stupi- 
dity, till I knew Sir Everard." " Count, 
you are the object of my astonishment." 
" And you, Sir, of my derision." " Ita- 
lian, I despise you." " I should only feel 
mortified, if Sir Everard did otherwise." 
" The contempt, Sir, of the meanest, 
cannot be a matter of triumph." " It is 
a mark of wisdom, to be proud of the 
scorn of fools." Passion makes me 
mad." " Sir, you were that before." 



GLENERVON. 7 

" I shall forget myself." " I wish you 
would permit me to do so/' 

" A truce to these quarrels, good 
doctor/' said the Duke, who had entered 
the room during the latter part of the dis- 
cussion. " I have been reading some 
papers of a very serious nature; and 1 
am sorry to say it appears from them 
that Sir Everard has very great cause for 
his present irritation of mind: he is an 
aggrieved man. This Lord Glenarvon, 
or whatever the young gentleman styles 
himself, has acted in a manner not only 
unjustifiable, but such as I am afraid will 
ultimately lead to his entire ruin. Count 
Gondimar, I have often heard you speak 
of this unfortunate young man, with 
more than common interest. Could not 
you make use of your friendship and in- 
timacy with him, to warn him of the dan- 
ger of his present conduct, and lead him 
from the society of his worthless associ- 
ates. He seems to be acting under the 
influence of a mad infatuation. " Gondimar 
b 4 



8 GLENARVON. 

assured the Duke that he had no sort of 
influence with the young Lord. " Read 
these papers, at your leisure/' said the 
Duke: " they are statements, you will 
find, of a number of outrages committed 
by himself and his followers, on people 
highly respectable and utterly defence- 
less. For the common follies of youth, 
there is much excuse ; but nothing can 
palliate repeated acts of licentious wick- 
edness and unprovoked cruelty. I am 
inclined to believe these accounts are 
much exaggerated ; but the list of griev- 
ances is large ; and the petitioners for re- 
dress are many of them my most worthy 
and long-tried servants, at the head of 
whom O'Flarney's name is to be found." 
" No, my Lord, — mine is at the head 
of the list," cried the doctor; " and in 
every other part of it, no injuries can be 
equal to mine. What are barns, pigs, fire- 
arms, compared to a father's wrongs — 
a husband's injuries. Ah, consider my 
case first. Restore Miss St. Clare, and I will 



GLENARVON* 9 

be pacified. Why do I raise laughter 
by my cry ? It is my niece, my favourite 
child, who has been taken from me/' 
44 Pray explain to me seriously, Sir," 
said Lady Augusta, approaching the doc- 
tor, with much appearance of interest, 
41 how came your family to fall into the 
unfortunate situation to which you al- 
lude?" " How came they," said the 
Count? can you ask, when you see Sir 
Everardatthe head of it?" " Madam," 
said the Doctor with equal solemnity, 
" this momentous crisis has been ap- 
proaching some time. St. Clara, as we 
called her, my most lovely and interest- 
ing Elinor's affections have long been 
seduced. We all knew, lamented and 
concealed the circumstance. The old 
lady's conduct, however, was quite an 
unexpected blow. But since they took to 
their nocturnal rambles to St. Mary's, St. 
Alvin's, and all the saints around, their 
sanctity has not been much mended that 

b & 



10 GLENARVON. 

I see, and their wits are fairly overset. 
My own disgrace I can easily support: 
but oh my Elinor ! 

" What nocturnal meetings have taken 
place at St. Mary's and St. Alvin's?" said 
Lady Trelawney, with a face of eager cu- 
riosity. " The discontented flock toge- 
ther in shoals," said the Doctor, indig- 
nantly, " till by their machinations, they 
will overturn the State. At Bel font, op- 
posite my very window, — aye, even in 
that great square house which Mr. Ochal- 
lavan built, on purpose to obstruct Lady 
St. Clare's view, have they not set up a 
library? The Lord help me. And was it 
not there I first saw that accursed pamphlet 
Lord Glenarvon wrote ; which rhapsody 
did not I myself immediately answer? 
Lady Calantha, strange things have oc- 
curred since your departure. General 
Kennedy, commander of the district, 
cannot keep his men. Cattle walk out 
of the paddocks of themselves: women, 
children, pigs, wander after Glenarvon; 



GLENARVON. 1 I 

and Miss Elinor, forgetful of her old 
father, my dear mad brother, her aunt, 
her religion, and all else, to the scandal 
of every one in their senses, heads the 
rabble. They have meetings under 
ground, and over ground ; out at sea, and 
in the caverns: no one can stop the 
infection : the poison is inthe fountain of 
life ; and our very persons and estates are 
no longer in safety. You know not, 
you cannot know, what work we have had 
since you last left us," Sir Everard 
paused, and then taking a couple of 
pamphlets from his pocket, entreated 
Galantha to peruse them. " Cast your 
eye over these," he said : " I wrote them 
in haste ; they are mere sketches of my 
sentiments; but lam going to publish. 
Oh ! when you see what I am now going 
to publish. It is intituled a refutation of 
all that has or may be said by the dis- 
affected, in or out of the kingdom. 



12 GLENARVON, 



CHAPTER II 



The party at the castle had postponed 
their visit to St. Alvin Priory till the feast 
of St. Kathereen and St. Mary, which 
in that neighbourhood was always cele- 
brated with much observance. A fair 
was held upon the downs in honour 
of these two martyrs. The rocks near 
which the ruins of the convent stood* 
were called the Black Sisters, and it was 
there and in the Wizard's Glen, which 
stretched from the top to the foot of the 
mountain, that the meetings of the dis- 
contented had been held. The day proved 
fair ; and at an early hour the carriages 
and horses were in attendance. Mrs. Sey- 
mour and many others declined being of 
the party ; but Lady Margaret took Gon- 
dimar's arm with a smile of good hu- 
mour, which she could at times put on, 



©LENARTON. 13 

Buchanan drove Calantha in his barouch. 
Sir Everard rode by Calantha's side on a 
lowly white palfrey, as if to protect her. 
Lady Mandeville was with her ; and Lady 
Trelawney took Sophia*and Lady Augusta 
Selwyn in her carriage. The rest of the 
gentlemen were some on horseback and 
some in curricles. 

The whole country smiled around. 
There were ringers, and pipers, and hur- 
lers upon the down . The cliff, towards 
the sea, was covered with booths and 
tents. Flocks, herds and horses had 
been brought from far for sale, orna- 
mented with ribbands ; green being the 
favourite colour. Scarcely ever was wit- 
nessed a scene more gay. This, and the 
vessels laden with fish, crow ding into the 
harbour below, and the high mountains 
beyond, struck even the Italian, whose 
eyes had been accustomed to all that 
nature can produce of picturesque and 
majestic. The beauty of the girls, with 
their long blue mantles thrown aside 



14 GLENARVON. 

from their shoulders, their dark hair fas- 
tened behind with a knot of ribband, was 
the subject of discussion. Comparisons 
of the difference of form between one 
nation and another arose. All descended 
from their carriages and horses. Lady 
Mandeville repeated poetry ; Gondimar 
became sentimental ; Buchanan looked 
at the horses, enquired their prices, and 
soon joined the hurlers, in whose combat 
he grew so much interested, that no one 
could draw him from thence until the 
moment when they left the fair, where 
they remained till they were all much 
fatigued. 

" What are you laughing at so im- 
mensely }" cried Lady Augusta Selwyn, 
approaching Lord Trewlawney, who was 
nearly enclosed in a circle of some hun- 
dreds. The moment Lady Augusta ap- 
proached, with a courtesy seldom seen 
but in Ireland, the crowd made way for 
her. " I am listening," he said, " to a 
preacher-— a most capital preacher, whom 



GLENARVON. 15 

they call Cowdel O'Kelly. Only observe 
him : what a rogue it is, with that hypo- 
critic mildness of manner, that strait 
black hair, that presbyterian stiffness 
and simplicity. " " Bat what is he say- 
ing ?" enquired Lady Augusta. The 
preacher, standing upon a cart, was de- 
livering an exhortation in a very emphatic 
manner, to a vast concourse of attentive 
hearers. The presence of the party from 
the Castle had no effect upon him : he 
was inveighing against the insolence of 
his superiors in rank, and pleading in 
favour of the rights of man. 

When he had concluded his discourse, 
the crowd dispersed, some laughing at 
him, and some edified by his dis- 
course. O'Kelly looked after them : — 
" That is the way of the world/' he said : 
" it gets all it can from a man, and then it 
leaves him ; but all that is, is for the best ; 
therefore, amen, your honours; so be it/* 
Lord TreJawney laughed to an excess. 
" Yourname," hesaid,"Itake it,itisCow- 



16 GLENARYON. 

del O'Kelly." •« If you take it to be my 
name, your honour can't be any ways 
wrong in calling me by it ; but I call 
myself citizen Wailman." " And why 
the devil, my honest friend, do you call 
yourself so?" " To please myself, and 
trick my master." " And pray who is 
your master?" " When I know that 
Til let you know." " What ! not know 
your master ?" " Why what master 
knows his servant ? There's nothing ex- 
traordinary in that, my Lord." " But 
pray, my good citizen Wailman, where 
do you live, and where does your master 
live ?" " I live where I can, your honour; 
and as to my master, every one knows he 
lives under ground, in the family vault." 
" Is he dead then* or what can he be 
doing under ground ?" said Lady Tre- 
lawney. " Looking for friends, Miss, 1 
believe ; for he has none, that I see, above 
board." " I am sure this is a rebel in 
disguise," whispered lady Trelawney. 
Her Lord laughed. 



SLENARVOtf. Mi 

A beautiful little boy now pushing his 
way through the crowd, plainly pro- 
nounced the words, " O'Kelly, come 
home ; I am very tired/' The man, has- 
tily descending from the cart, called him 
his young prince — his treasure ; and 
lifted him up in his arms. " He is about 
the same age as Harry Mowbrey," said 
Calantha, " and very like him." What 
is your name, my pretty child ?" " Clare 
of Costolly," said the boy ; "and it should 
by rights be Lord Clare — should it not, 
O'Kelly ?" As he spoke, he smiled and 
put his little rosy hands to O'Kelly's 
mouth, who kissed them, and making a 
slight bow would have retired. " What, 
are you going ? will you not stay a mo- 
ment ?" "I fear I intrude too much on 
your honour's time." " Not in the least — 
not in the least, good Mister Wailman ; 
pray stay a little longer." " Why, fair 
and honest, if I don't intrude too much 
on your time, my Lord, you do on mine ; 
and so your servant." 



18 GLENARVON. 

V I really believe he belongs to the 
abbey," said Lady Trelawney, who had 
re-entered jier barouche, and was driving 
with the rest. of the party towards St. 
Alvju -Priory. -".See how he steals along 
by the cliff in ,the same direction we are, 
going." "It was a lovely child," said Lady 
Augusta, " but to be sure no more like 
Harry ; only Lady Avondale is always in 
the seventh heaven of romance." " Look, 
pray look," interrupted Frances : " I as- 
sure you that is Sir Everard St. Clare's 
wife, and Lauriana and Jessica are with 
her. I am certain of it," she continued, 
throwing herself nearly out of the car- 
riage to gaze upon them. Lord Trelaw- 
ney was extremely diverted. " And 
there is the recruiting serjeant : only ob- 
serve the manner in which they are 
habited." The two unhappy girls, drest 
in the most flaunting attire, singing in 
chorus the song of liberty, both covered 
with green ribbands, were walking in 
company with a vast number of young 



GLENARVON. 19 

men, most of them intoxicated, and all 
talking and laughing loudly. Calantha 
begged Buchanan to stop the carriage, 
that she also might see them pass : which 
they did, marching to the sound of the 
drum and fife : but her heart sickened 
when she saw the beautiful recluse of 
Glenaa amongst them. Elinor came 
near : she raised her full black eye, and 
gazed with fearless effrontery upon Ca- 
lantha. 

It was the same face she had seen a 
few years back at the convent : but alas, 
how changed ; — the rich and vivid crim- 
son of her cheek, the deep dark brown 
of the wild ringlets which waved above 
her brow, the bold masculine manners 
and dress she had assumed, contrasted 
strongly with the slender beauty of her 
upright form. She was clrest in uniform, 
and walked by the side of a young man, 
whose pale and thoughtful countenance 
struck every one. Elinor appeared des- 
perate and utterly hardened : her pre- 



20 GLENARVON. 

sence inspired Calantha with a mixed 
feeling of horror and commiseration, 
which Lady St. Clare's ludicrous figure, 
and Jessica and Lauriana's huge and 
clumsy personages turned into disgust. 

" Oh did you behold her ? — did you 
see my poor deluded Elinor ?" cried Sir 
Everard, riding up to Calantha, as she 
still gazed from the open carriage upon 
the procession: " did you see my unfor- 
tunate girls ?" " I did, indeed," said 
Lady Avondale, the tears springing into 
her eyes: " I saw them and stopped; for 
it occurred to me, that, perhaps, I might 
speak to them — might yet save them." 
" And would you have condescended 
so much ? Oh ! this is more than I 
dared to ask or hope." Saying which, 
the Doctor w$pt, as was his custom, 
and Buchanan laughed. " You are so 
good," continued he, " you were in tears 
when you saw your former playmates 
disgracing themselves, and their sex ; 
but in the rest of the carriages I heard 



GLENARVON. 21 

nothing but jesting and loud laughter. 
And oh ! would you credit it, can you 
believe it, Lady St. Clare had the auda- 
city to drop me a courtesy as she passed." 
" Was the tall young man, who was 
walking by the side of Elinor, Cyrel 
Linden ?" " It was the same," cried the 
Doctor — "gone mad like the rest, though 
they tell me it is all for the love of Miss 
Alice ; and that since her loss, he is 
grown desperate, and cares not what 
becomes of him. They'll be hang'd, 
however ; that is one consolation — Lady 
St. Clare, as well as the rest. Indeed," 
cried he, drawing closer, " I am credibly 
informed that the officers of justice have 
an eye upon them, and wait only for fur 
ther evidence of their treasonable prac- 
tices, before they secure them." During 
this discourse, the carriage drove slowly 
up the hill; but soon proceeding at a 
brisker pace, the Doctor was obliged to 
draw in his steed and retire. The party 
now entered the park. 



22 GLENARTON, 



CHAPTER III. 



Belfont Abbey and St. Alvin's ruined 
Priory appeared in view. The ivy 
climbed around the turret ; and the grass 
grew upon the paved courts, where deso- 
lation and long neglect prevailed. At a 
distance from the convent, a ruin, a lone- 
ly pile stood upon the cliff in solitary 
grandeur. Not a tree, nor any appearance 
of cultivation was seen around : barren 
moors, the distant mountains, and the 
vast ocean, every where filled the eye. 
The servants rang at the bell of the outer 
gate : it resounded through the vaulted 
passages with a long repeated echo. — 
A boy immediately answered the sum- 
mons ; and with a look of stupid asto- 
nishment, waited in expectation of their 
commands. 

Buchanan enquired of the boy, if they 



GLENARVON. 23 

might see the Priory. "I suppose so/' was 
his reply. And without further preamble, 
they alighted. " It must be rather me- 
lancholy to live here during the winter 
months," said Calantha to the boy, as 
she passed him. " And summer too," 
he answered. " We are told," said 
Frances, " that this Priory is haunted by 
ghosts : have you ever seen any i" He 
shook his head. " I hears them some- 
times, an* please your honour," he said ; 
but I never meddles with them, so they 
never comes after me as I see." Are you 
going to shew us the house ?" cried Sir 
Everard advancing ; or, if not, why do 
you keep us waiting in this dark passage? 
go on ; we are in haste." The boy, pro- 
ceeding towards an inner apartment, 
knocked at the door, calling to. the 
housekeeper, and telling her that there 
was company below who wished to take 
the round of the castle. The old dame 
courtesying low, in a mysterious manner, 



24 GLENARYON. 

led the way : the boy immediately re- 
treated. 

Calantha was much tired ; her spirits 
had undergone a severe shock ; and the 
sight of Linden and St. Clara, as she wai 
still called, made an impression upon her 
she scarcely could account for. The 
gaiety of the dresses, the fineness of the 
evening, the chorus of voices laughing and 
singing as they marched along, indifferent 
apparently to their future fate — perhaps, 
hardened and insensible to it — all made 
an impression which it is impossible the 
description of the scene can give ; but 
long it dwelt in her remembrance. Un- 
used to check herself in any feeling, she 
insisted upon remaining in front of the 
Castle, whilst the rest of the party ex- 
plored its secret mysteries and recesses. 
"I am sure you are frightened/' said Lord 
Trelawney ; " but perhaps you will have 
more cause than we : it looks very gloomy 
without, as well as within. " 

They went, and she remained upon the 



GLENAHYON. 25 

cliff, watching the calm sea, and the boats 
at a distance, as they passed and repassed 
from the fair . ."And can a few short years 
thus harden the heart ?" she exclaimed, 
"was St. Clara innocent, happy, virtuous? 
Can one moment of error thus have changed 
her ? Oh ! it is not possible. Long before 
the opportunity for evil presented itself, 
her uncontrouled passions must have 
misled her, and her imagination, wild 
and lawless, must have depraved her 
heart. Alice was innocent : he who first 
seduced her from peace, deceived her ; 
but St. Clara was not of this character, 
1 understand — I think I understand the 
feelings which impelled her to evil. Her 
image haunts me : I tremble with appre- 
hension. Something within seems to 
warn me, and to say that, if 1 wander 
from virtue, like her, nothing will check 
my course, all the barriers, that others 
fear to overstep, are nothing before me. 
God preserve me from sin ! the sight of 
St. Clara fills me with alarm. Avondale, 
Vol. II. C 



26 GLENARVON. 

where art thou ? save me. My course is 
but just begun : who knows whither the 
path I follow leads ? my will — my un- 
governed will, has been hitherto, my 
only law." 

Upon the air at that moment she heard 
the soft notes of a flute. She listened 
attentively: — it ceased. There are times 
when the spirit is troubled; when the 
mind, after the tumult of dissipated and 
active life, requires rest and seeks to be 
alone. Then thoughts crowd in upon us 
so fast, that we hardly know how to bear 
them ; conscience reflects upon every 
former action ; and the heart within 
trembles, as if in dread of approaching 
evil. The scene around was calculated 
to inspire every serious reflection. The 
awful majesty of the ruined building, ill 
accorded with the loud laugh and the 
jests of the merry party now entering its 
walls. Once those walls had been, per- 
haps, inhabited by beings as thoughtless 
and gay; Where were they now ? had 



©LENARVON. 27 

they any memory of the past ? knowledge 
of the present ? or are they cold, silent, 
and insensible as those deserted scenes ? 
how perishable is human happiness ! what 
recollection has the mind of any former 
state ? in the eye of a creator can a mite, 
scarcely visible, be worth either solicitude 
or anger? "Vain the presumptuous hope," 
said Calantha to herself. " Our actions 
are unobserved by any but ourselves ; let 
us enjoy what we can whilst we are here; 
death only returns us to the dust from 
whence we sprung; all hopes, all interests, 
all occupations, are vain : to forget is the 
first great science ; and to enjoy, the only 
real object of life. What happiness is 
there here below, but in love." 

So reasoned the unhappy victim of a 
false judgment and strong passion. I 
was blest ; I am so no more. The world 
is a wilderness to me; and all that is 
in it, vanity and vexation of spirit. 
Whilst yet indulging these fallacious 
opinions — whilst gazing on the western 
c2 



28 GLENARVON. 

turret, and watching the shadows as they 
varied on the walls, she again heard the 
soft notes of music. It seemed like the 
strains of other times, awakening in the 
heart remembrances of some former 
state long passed and changed. Hope, 
love and fond regret, answered alternately 
to the call. It was in the season of the 
year when the flowers bloomed : it was 
on a spot immortalized in ancient story, 
for deeds of prowess and of fame. Ca- 
lantha turned her eyes upwards and be- 
held the blue vault of heaven without 
a cloud, The sea was of that glassy 
transparency— thatshiningbrightness,the 
air of that serene calm that, had it been 
during the winter months, some might 
have thought the halcyon was watching 
upon her nest, and breathing her soft and 
melancholy minstrelsy through the air. 

She endeavoured to rouse herself. 
She felt as if in a dream, and, hastily 
advancing to the spot from whence the 
sounds proceeded, she there beheld a 



GLENARVON. 29 



youth, for he had not the form or the 
look of manhood, leaning against the 
trunk of a tree, playing at intervals upon 
a flute, or breathing, as if from a suffer- 
ing heart, the sweet melody of his un- 
taught song. He started not when she 
approached: — he neither saw nor heard 
her — so light was her airy step, so fixed 
were his eyes and thoughts. She gazed 
for a moment upon his countenance— 
and she marked it. It was one of those faces 
which, having once beheld, we never 
afterwards forget. It seemed as if the 
soul of passion had been stamped and 
printed upon every feature. The eye 
beamed into life as it threw up its dark 
ardent gaze, with a look nearly of inspi- 
ration, while the proud curl of the upper 
lip expressed haughtiness and bitter con- 
tempt ; yet, even mixed with these fierce 
characteristic feelings, an air of melan- 
choly and dejection shaded over and 
softened every harsher expression. Such 
c3 



30 GLENARVON. 

countenance spoke to the heart, and filled 
it with one vague yet powerful interest — 
so strong, so undefinable, that it could 
not easily be overcome. 

Calantha felt the power, not then 
alone, but evermore. She felt the em- 
pire, the charm, the peculiar charm, those 
features, that being must have for her. 
She could have knelt and prayed to hea- 
ven to realize the dream, to bless the 
fallen angel in whose presence she at that 
moment stood, to give peace to that soul, 
upon which was plainly stamped the hea- 
venly image of sensibility and genius. 
The air he had played was wild and 
plaintive: he changed it to one more 
harsh. She now distinctly heard the 
words he sung : — 

This heart has never stoop'd its pride 
To slavish love, or woman's wile ; 

But, steel' d by war, has oft defy'd 
Her craftiest art and brightest smile. 



GLENARVON. 31 

This mind has trac'd its own career, 
Nor followed blind, where others trod; 

Nor, mov'd by love, or hope or fear, 
E'er bent to man, or worshipp'd God. 

Then hope not now to touch with love, 
Or in its chains a heart to draw, 

All earthly spells have faiPd to move; 
And heavVs whole terrors cannot awe: 

A heart, that like some mountain vast, 
And cold with never-melting gno^f, 

Sees nought above, nor deigns to cast 
A look away on aught below. 

An emotion of interest — something she 
could not define, even to herself, had im- 
pelled Calantha to remain till the song 
was ended: a different feeling now 
prompted her to retire in haste. She 
fled ; nor stopped, till she again found 
herself opposite the castle gate, where 
she had been left by her companions. 

While yet dwelling in thought upon 
the singular being she had beheld — 
c 4 



32 GLENARVON. 

whilst asking herself what meant this 
sudden, this strange emotion, she found 
another personage by her side, and recog- 
nized, through a new disguise, her 
morning's acquaintance, Wailman the 
preacher, otherwise called Cowdel O'Kelly . 
This recontre gave an immediate turn to 
her thoughts, She enquired of him 
if he were an inhabitant of Belfont Ab- 
bey? " No, madam/' he answered, "but 
of St« Alvin Priory." She desired him 
to inform her whether any one resided 
there who sung in the manner she then 
described. " Sure, then, I sing myself 
in that manner," said the man, " if that's 
all ; and beside me, there be some who 
howl and wail, the like you never heard. 
Mayhap it is he you fell in with ; if so, it 
must have moved you to tears." 

" Explain yourself," said Calantha 
eagerly. " If he is unhappy, it is the 
same I have seen and heard. Tell me 
what sorrows have befallen him?" " Sor- 
rows! why enough too, to plague any 



GLENARVOX. 33 

man. Has he not got the distemper ?" 
" The distemper !" " Aye, Lady? for did 
he not catch it sleeping in our dog-ken- 
nel, as he stood petrified there one night, 
kilt by the cold ? When my Lord found 
him, he had not a house to his head then, 
it is my belief ; but now indeed he's got 
one, he's no wiser, having, as I think, no 
head to his house." " Och ! it would sur- 
prise you how he howls and barks, when- 
ever the moon shines bright. But here 
be those who fell on me at the fair. In 
truth I believe they be searching for the 
like of you." 



c > 



34 GLENARVON, 



CHAPTER IV 



The party from the castle now joined 
Calantha. They were in evident discom- 
fiture. Their adventures had been ra- 
ther less romantic than Lady Avondale's, 
and consequently had not given them 
such refined pleasure ; for while she was 
attending to a strain of such enchanting- 
sweetness, they had been forcibly detained 
in an apartment of the priory, unwillingly 
listening to very different music. 

The housekeeper having led them 
through the galleries, the ladies, escorted 
by Count Gondimar, Lord Trelawney 
and Sir Everard, turned to examine some 
of the portraits, fretted cornices and high 
casements, till the dame who led the 
way, calling to them, shewed them a 
large dreary apartment hung with tape- 
stry, and requested them to observe the 



GLENARVON. 35 

riew from the window. " It is here," 
she said, " in this chamber, that John de 
Ruthven drank hot blood from the skull of 
his enemy and died." A loud groan, at 
that moment, proceeded from an inner 
room. " That must be the ghost," 
said Lord Trelawney. His Lady shrieked. 
The dame, terrified at Lady Trelawney's 
terror, returned the shriek by a piercing 
yell, rushed from the apartment closing 
the heavy door in haste, which fastened 
with a spring lock, and left the company 
not a little disconcerted. 

" We are a good number, however," 
cried Frances, taking fast hold of her 
Lord, who smiled vacantly upon her. 
" We certainly can match the ghost in 
point of strength : but it is rather unplea- 
sant to be confined here till that old wo- 
man recovers her senses. Groans most 
piteous and terrible interrupted this re- 
mark — groans uttered as if in the agony 
of a soul ill at rest. Sophia grasped Sir 
Everard St. Clare's hand. Sir Everard 



36 GLENARVON. 

looked at Lady Margaret. Lady Marga- 
ret disdainfully returned the glance." " I 
fear not," she said ; " but we will assured- 
ly have this affair examined. I shall speak 
to my brother the moment I return : 
there is possibly some evil concealed 
which requires investigation. " " Hark? 
I hear a step," said Frances. " If I were 
not afraid of seeing a ghost," cried Lord 
Trelawney, " faith, I would climb up to 
that small grated window." 

" I fear no ghosts," replied Count Gon- 
dimar, smiling. " The sun has not set, 
therefore I defy them thus.— Only take care 
and hold the stool upon the table, that I 
may not break my neck." " What do you 
see?" "A large room lighted by two 
candles: — would it were but a lamp." 
" Truly this is a fair beginning. — What 
is the matter now ? — why what the de- 
vil is the matter ? — If you come down so 
precipitately I cannot support you. Help ! 
the Count is literally fainting." It was 
true. " A sudden dizziness — a palpita- 



GLENARVON. 37 

tion" — He only uttered these words and 
fell ; a ghastly paleness overspread his 
face ; the cold damps stood upon his 
forehead. 

" This is the most unfortunate con- 
firmation of the effects of terror upon an 
evil conscience," exclaimed Sir Everard, 
" that ever I beheld. Til be bound there 
is not an Irish or Englishman here, that 
would have been so frightened." " It is 
a dizziness, a mere fainting fit," said Gon- 
dimar. " Let me feel his pulse," cried 
Sir Everard. " Well Doctor," " Well, 
sir, he has no pulse left :— give him air :" 

" I am better now," said Gondimar, with 
a smile as he revived. " Was 1 ill enough 
for this ?" Sir Everard called in. Lord 
Trelawney's curiosity engaged him to 
climb to the grated window ; but the 
candles had been extinguished, probably, 
for all beyond the window was utter 
darkness. 

Whilst some were assisting the Count, 
the rest had been vainly endeavouring to 



38 GLENARVON. 

open the door. A key was now heard on 
the outside ; and the solemn boy entering , 
said to Lady Margaret, " I am come to 
tell your honour that our dame being 
taken with the qualms and stericks, is no 
ways able of shewing you any further 
into the Priory." " I trust, however, 
that you will immediately shew us out of 
it, Sir," said Gondimar. " It not being 
her fault, but her extrame weakness," 
continued the boy : she desires me to 
hope your honours will excuse her." 
" We will certainly excuse her ; but," 
added Lady Margaret, " I must insist 
upon knowing from her, or from some of 
you, the cause of the groans we heard, 
and what . all those absurd stories of 
ghosts can arise from. I shall send an 
order for the house to undergo an imme- 
diate examination, so you had better tell 
all you know." 

" Then, indeed, there be no mischief 
in them groans," said the boy, who ap- 
peared indifferent whether the house were 



GLENARVON. 39 

examined or not. " It's only that gen- 
tleman as howls so, who makes them 
queer noises. I thought yeM heard some- 
thing stranger than that. There be more 
singular noises than he makes, many's the 
time." " Sirrah, inform me who inha- 
bits this d d Priory ?" said Count 

Gondimar. " What, you're recovered 
from your qualms and stericks, I per- 
ceive, though the old dame is so ill with 
them ?" " No jesting, Sir Everard. I 
must sift this affair to the bottom. Come, 
Sir, answer straitly, who inhabits this 
Priory ?" " Sure, Sir, indeed none as 
can get a bed in the Abbey." " You 
evade, young one : you evade my enquiry: 
to the point : be plain." " That he can't 
help being," said Lord Trelawney. " Pro- 
ceed, Sir, lead us as fast as possible out of 
these cold damp galleries ; but talk as you 
go." " Like the cuckoo." " Lord Tre- 
lawney, your jests are mighty pleasant ; 
but I have peculiar reasons for my enqui- 
ries." " And I for my jokes." " Come, 



40 GLENARVON. 

Sirrah, proceed : I shall say no more at 
present." " Do you like being here ?" 
said Lady Trelawney, taking up the ques- 
tion. " Well enough," returned the stu- 
pid boy. " I hear," continued Frances, 
" there are some who play upon the harp 
in the night, and sing so, that the country 
people round, say they are spell-bound." 
" Oh musha ! there be strange things 
heard in these here old houses : one must 
not always believe all one hears." 

Count Gondimar and Lady Margaret, 
were engaged in deep discourse. " I can 
hardly believe it," she said. " It is most 
true — most terribly true," said Gondi- 
mar. " I will question the boy myself," 
she cried ; " he is subtle with all that ap- 
pearance of clownish simplicity ; but we 
shall gather something from him. Now, 
Lady Trelawney, give me leave to speak, 
and do you lead these gentlemen and la- 
dies into the fresh air. Lady Augusta 
savs she longs to behold living objects- 
and day-light. I shall soon overtake 



GLENARVON. 41 

you. Come here : I think, from what I 
have gathered, that St. Alvin Priory has 
not been inhabited by any of the Glenar- 
von family since the year **** : in that 
case, who has had charge of it ?" " None 
but Mr. Mackenzie and Dame since the old 
Lord de Ruthven's and his son the young 
Colonel's time. There's been no qua- 
lity in these parts till now ; but about 
three years and better, the young Lord 
sent some of his friends here, he being 
in Italy ; and as they only asked for the 
auld ruin, and did not wish to meddle 
with the castle, they have done their will 
there. The steward lets them bide/' 

" Have they been here above three 
years ?" " Indeed then, that they've not, 
your honour ; for sometimes they've all 
been here, and sometimes there's not a 
soul alive : but since last Michaelmas, 
there's been no peace for them." " Can 
you tell me any of their names ?" " All, 
I believe ; for isn't there one calls himself 
Citizen Costolly, whom we take to be the 



42 GLENARVON. 

master, the real Lord ; but he cares not to 
have it thought : only he's such a manner 
with him, one can't but think it. Then 
there's Mister O'Kelly, he as calls him- 
self Citizen Wailman — the wallet ; and 
there's another as sings, but has no name, 
a famale ; and there's a gentleman cries 
and sobs, and takes care of a baby ; 
and his name, I think, is Macpherson ; 
then there's the old one as howls ; and 
IVirs. Nelly O'Grady ; and St. Clara, the 
Prophetess ; besides many more as come 
to feast and revel here." " And what 
right have they to be here ?" " Why to 
be sure, then, they've not any right at 
all ; that's what we are all talking of ; ex- 
cept them letters from my Lord ; and 
they all live a strange wicked life under 
ground, the like of thaves ; and whatever 's 
the reason, for some time past, that young 
gentleman as was, is disappeared : no- 
thing's known as to what's gone with 
him — only he's gone ; and the child — 
och ! the young master's here, and the 



GLENARVON. 43 

only one of 'em, indeed, as looks like a 
christian/' " Is his name Clare of Cos- 
toly?" " Ah! sure your honour knows 
him." 

Having reached the front porch, hy the 
time the boy had gone through his exa- 
mination, Lady Margaret perceiving 
O'Kelly, sent for him, and tried, vainly, 
to make him answer her enquiries more 
satisfactorily ; which not being able to 
accomplish, she set forth to return hosie- 
in an extreme ill humour. Lord Trelaw- 
ney rallied her about the ghost. Casting 
an angry glance at him, she refused po- 
sitively to return home in either of the 
carriages ; saying, she was resolved to 
walk back across the cliff, the short wav. 
Some of the gentlemen proposed escort- 
ing her; but she haughtily refused them, 
and desired permission to be a few mo- 
ments left to herself. They, therefore, 
re-entered their carriages, and returned 
without any further event. 

Calantha was tired and grave during 



44 GLENARVON. 

the drive home ; and, what may perhaps 
appear strange, she named not her ad- 
venture. "It is himself — it must be," 
" Who ?" said Lady Mandeville. Con- 
fused at having betrayed her own 
thoughts, — " Young Linden," she cried, 
looking out of the carriage ; and then 
feigned sleep, that she might think over 
again and again on that countenance, that 
voice, that being, she had one moment 
seen. 



GLENARVON. 45 



CHAPTER V. 



Lady Margaret walking hastily off, 
had arrived near the Convent of St. 
Mary, as the last ray of the setting sun 
blazed in the west, and threw its golden 
light over the horizon. Close to the 
convent, is built the chapel where the 
young Marquis and all the family of Al- 
tamonte are interred. It stands upon a 
high barren cliff, separated by a branch 
of the sea from the village of Belfont, to 
which any one may pass by means of the 
ferry below. To the north of the cha- 
pel, as far as the eye can trace, barren 
heaths and moors, and the distant view 
of Belfont and St.Alvin Priory, present a 
cheerless aspect; while the other side 
displays the rich valley of Delaval, its 
groves, gardens and lake, with the adja- 
cent wood. 



46 GLENARVON. 

At this spot Lady Margaret arrived, as 
has been said, at sun-set. She thought 
she had been alone; but she heard a step 
closely following her: she turned round, 
and to her extreme surprize, beheld a 
man pursung her, and, just at that mo- 
ment, on the point of attaining her. His 
black brows and eyes were contrasted 
with his grizzly hair ; his laugh was hol- 
low; his dress wild and tawdry. If she 
stopped for a moment to take breath, he 
stopped at the same time ; if she ad- 
vanced rapidly, he followed. She heard 
his steps behind, till passing near the 
convent he paused, rending the air with 
his groans, and his clenched fist repeat- 
edly stiking his forehead, with all the 
appearance of maniac fury, whilst with 
his voice he imitated the howling of the 
wind. 

Terrified, fatigued and oppressed, Lady 
Margaret fled into the thickest part of the 
wood, and waited till she conceived the 
cause of her terror was removed. She soon 



GLENARVON. 47 

perceived, however, that the tall figure be- 
hind her was waiting for her reappearance. 
She determined to try the swiftness of her 
foot, and sought with speed to gain the 
ferry: — she durst not look behind — the 
heavy steps of her pursuer gained upon 
her: — suddenly she felt his hand upon 
her shoulder, as, with a shrill voice and 
loud laugh, he triumphed at having over- 
taken her. She uttered a piercing shriek ; 
for on turning round she beheld 

His name cannot at present be declared ; 
yet this may be said : it was terrible to her 
to gaze upon that eye — so hollow, so wild, 
so fearful was its glance. From the se- 
pulchre, the dead appeared to have arisen 
to affright her; and, scarce recovering 
from the dreadful vision, with a faltering 
step, and beating heart, she broke from 
that grasp — that cold hand — that dim- 
fixed eye — and gained with difficulty the 
hut of the fisherman, who placed her in 
safety on the other side of the cliff. 

The castle bell had already summoned 



48 GLENARVON, 

the family; dinner awaited; and the 
duke having repeatedly enquired for 
Lady Margaret, was surprised to hear 
that she had returned home alone and 
after dusk. The servant, who informed 
him of this circumstance, said that her 
ladyship appeared extremely faint and 
tired ; that her women attendants had 
heen called ; that they apprehended she 
was i/iore ill than she would acknowledge. 
He was yet speaking, when with a blaze 
of beauty and even more than her usual 
magnificence of dress, she entered, apo- 
logised for the lateness of her appearance, 
said the walk was longer than she had 
apprehended, and, taking her brother's 
arm, led the way into the dining room. 
But soon the effort she had made, proved 
too great: — her colour changed repeat- 
edly ; she complained that the noise dis- 
tracted her ; she scarcely took any part in 
the conversation ; and retiring early, 
sought a few hour's repose. 

Mrs. Seymour accompanied her 



GLENARVON. 49 

whilst the rest of those whose curiosity 
had been much excited in the morning, 
narrated their adventures and enquired 
eagerly concerning Lord Glenarvon's 
character and mode of life. At the 
mention of his name, the colour rush- 
ed into Calantha's face. Was it him- 
self she had seen ? — She was convinced it 
was. That countenance verified all that 
she had heard against him: it was a full 
contradiction to all that Lady Trelawney 
had spoken in his favour ; it expressed a 
capability of evil — a subtlety that led the 
eye of a stranger to distrust; but, with 
all, it was not easily forgotten. The ad- 
dress tothepeople of Ireland, whichLady 
Avondale had read before with enthu- 
siasm, she read now with a new and unde- 
finable sensation. She drew also those fea- 
tures — that countenance ; and remember- 
ed the air he had sung and the tones of his 
voice. — She seemed to dive into the feel- 
ings of a heart utterly different from 
what she had ever yet observed ; a sort of 
Vol. II. D 



50 GLENARVON. 

instinct gave her power at once to pene- 
trate into its most secret recesses ; nor was 
she mistaken. She listened, with eager cu- 
riosity, to every anecdote narrated of him 
by the country esquires and gentry who 
dined at the castle ; but she felt not sur- 
prised at the inconsistences and absurdities 
which she heard repeated. Others discre- 
dited what was said: she believed the 
worst ; yet still the interest she felt was un- 
diminished. It is strange; she loved not 
— she admired not that countenance ; yet, 
by clay, by night, it pursued her. She 
could not rest nor employ her mind in her 
customary occupations ; yet the fear of 
again seeing that countenance, was greater 
than the desire of doing so. She felt as 
sured that it was Lord Glenarvon : — there 
was not a doubt left upon her mind re- 
specting this circumstance. Mrs. Sey- 
mour saw that Calantha was pre-occu- 
pied : she thought that she was acquaint- 
ed with the secret which disturbed Lady 
Margaret — that horrid secret which mad- 
dened and destroyed her : for, since her 



GLENARVON. 51 

adventure at the Priory, Lady Margaret 
had been ill. 

But it was not till after some days re- 
tirement, that she sent for Calantha, and 
when she visited her in her own apart- 
ment, she found her silent and trembling". 
' ' Where is your boy ?" Lady Margaret said. 
" He sleeps: would you that I should 
bring him you ?" " I do not mean your son : 
I mean that minion — that gaudy thing, 
you dress up for your amusement — that 
fawning insect, Zerbellini." Calantha 
shuddered ; for she knew that a mother 
could not thus speak of her child without 
suffering acutely. " Has my pretty Zer- 
bellini done any thing to deserve such 
unkind words from you ? If so, I will 
chide him for it. Why do you frown? 
Zerbellini haste here: make your obei- 
sance to Lady Margaret." The boy ap- 
proached : Lady Margaret fixed her eyes 
steadily upon him: the colour rushed 
into her cheeks, then left her pale, as the 
hue of death. " Oime si muoja?" exclaim- 
ed 

UMivtasflff Of 

Illinois iffifiARY 



52 GLENARVON. 

ed Zerbellini: " Eccelenza si muoja " 
and he leant forward to support her ; but 
Lady Margaret moved not. 

Many moments passed in entire silence. 
At last, starting as if from deep reflection, 
"Calantha," shesaid, "I know your heart 
too well to doubt its kindness: — the pre- 
sence of this boy, will cause the misery of 
your father." " Of my father!" " Do 
you not guess wherefore? I read his feel- 
ings yesterday : and can you, my child, 
be less quick in penetrating the senti- 
ments of those you love ? do you not 
perceive that Zerbellini is of the very 
age and size — your lost — and — lamented 
brother would have been ?. . . .and cer- 
tainly not unlike the duchess." She he- 
sitated — paused— recovered herself. " I 
would not for the world have you sug- 
gest this to a human being. I would not 
appear to have said— what you, out of 
an affectionate regard might — should— 
have considered." — " I am astonished : 
you quite amaze me," replied Calantha : 
yet she too well guessed her feelings. 



GLENARVON. 53 

You heard your father, yesterday, say 
how necessary it was for him to attend 
the general meeting at Belfast : he flies 
us to avoid this boy — the likeness — in 
short, oblige me, place him at the garden 
cottage, or at the Rector of Belfont's — he 
will attend to him. I am told you mean to 
leave your children with Mr. Challoner : 
if so, he might likewise keep this boy. 
His strong resemblance — his age — his 
manner — have given me already the 
acutest pain. — My brother will never de- 
mand any sacrifice of you ; — but I, Lady 
Avondale, — I solicit it. — " Shall I be re- 
fused?" "Dearest aunt, can you ask this? 
Zerbellini shall be immediately sent 
from the castle." " Oh no : such pre- 
cipitate removal would excite curiosity." 
" Well then, allow me ta place him, as you 
say, under the care of the Rector of Bel- 
font and his wife — or — " " But how 
strange — why — did you never observe 
this before ?" 

" Calantha," said Lady Margaret in 
d3 



54 GLENARVON. 

a hollow tone, <c it is the common talk ; 
every one observes it: every eye fixes it- 
self upon him, and seems to — to — to — re- 
proach — to-morrow — morn — to-morrow 
morning, I must quit this place — business 
of importance calls me away — I hope to 
see you shortly : I shall return as soon as 
possible — perhaps I shall not go. — The 
trifle I now suggest, is solely for my 
brother's sake. — If you mention one 
word of this to any one, the sacrifice I 
ask will lose its value. Above all, if the 
Count Gondiraar is made a confidant/' 
" Fear not : I shall request as of myself, 
that Zerbellini may be placed with my 
little son: but you cannot think how 
much you surprise me. My father has 
seen the boy so often ; has spoken so fre- 
quently with him ; has appeared so per- 
fectly at his ease." 

"The boy," said Lady Margaret, "is the 
living picture of — in short I have dreamt 
a dreadful dream. Shall I confess my 
weakness, Calantha : I dreamt last night. 



GLENARVON. 55 

that I was with a numerous and brilliant 
assembly, even in this very castle; and of 
a sudden, robed in the white vestments 
of an angel, that boy appeared — I saw 
his hand closely stealing behind — he had 
a dagger in it, and coming towards me — 
I mean towards your father — he stabbed 
him. These phantasies shew an ill con- 
stitution — but, for a short time, send the 
child away, and do not expose my weak- 
ness, do not love. I have many sorrows, 
my nerves are shattered — bear with me; 
you know not, and God forbid you should 
ever know, what it is to labour under the 
pressure of guilt — guilt ? aye — such as 
that brow of innocence, that guileless 
generous heart, never can comprehend. 
" My aunt, for God's sake, explain your- 
self." Lady Margaret smiled. " Oh 
not such guilt either, as to excite such 
looks as these : only I have suffered my 
heart to wander, child ; and I have been 
pun i shed." 

Calantha was less surprised at this con- 
d4 



56 GLENARVON. 

versation, from remembering the secret 
Gondimar had communicated, than she 
otherwise must have been ; but she could 
not understand what had given rise to 
this paroxysm of despair at this particular 
moment. A singular circumstance now 
occurred, which occasioned infinite con- 
jecture to all around. Every morning, as 
soon as it was light, and every evening 
at dusk, a tall old man in a tattered garb, 
with a wild and terrible air, seated him- 
self in front of the Castle windows, 
making the most lamentable groans, and 
crying out in an almost unintelligible 
voice, " Woe, on woe, to the family of 
Altamonte." The Duke was no sooner 
apprised of this circumstance, than he 
ordered the supposed maniac to be taken 
up : but Lady Margaret implored, en- 
treated, and even menaced, till she ob- 
tained permission from her brother to 
give this wretched object his liberty. 

Such an unusual excess of charity — 
such sudden, and violent commiseration 



GLENARVON. 57 

for a being who appeared to have no 
other view than the persecution and an- 
noyance of her whole family, was deemed 
strange ; but when they no longer were 
molested by the presence of the fanatic, 
who had denounced their ruin, they 
ceased to converse about him, and soon 
the whole affair was forgotten. Calantha 
indeed remembered it ; but a thousand 
new thoughts diverted her attention, and 
a stronger interest led her from it. 



DO 



58 GLENARYON 



CHAPTER VI. 



The Rector of Belfont had willingly per- 
mitted the little Zerbellini to be placed 
under his wife's care. The distance from 
thence to the Castle was short ; and Ca- 
lantha had already sent her children 
thither for the benefit of sea-bathing. On 
returning one day from thence, she called 
upon Gerald Mac Allain, who had ab- 
sented himself from the castle, ever since 
Mr. Buchanan had appeared there. She 
found him mournfully employed in look- 
ing over some papers and drawings, 
which he had removed to his own habi- 
tation. Upon seeing Lady Avondale he 
arose, and pointed to the drawings, 
which she recognized: " Poor Alice/' he 
said, " these little remembrances tell me 
of happier days, and make me sad ; but 
when 1 see you, my Lady, I forget my 



GLENARVON. 59 

sorrows." Linden's cottage was at a 
short distance from Gerald Mac Allain's. 
Calantha now informed him that she had 
met young Linden at the fair, and had 
wished to speak to him : but that she did 
not immediately remember him, he was 
so altered. Gerald said " it was no use 
for her to speak to him, or for any one 
else, he was so ' desperate-like •* and," 
added he, "Alice's misconduct has broke 
all our hearts : we never meet now as 
formerly ; we scarce dare look at each 
other as we pass." 

" Tell me, Gerald," said Calantha, 
" since you have spoken to me on this 
melancholy subject, what is the general 
opinion about Alice? Has Linden no 
idea of what has become of her ? — had he 
no suspicion, no doubt of her, till the 
moment when she fled?" " Oh yes, 
my Lady," said the old man, " my poor 
girl estranged herself from him latterly ; 
and when Linden was obliged to leave 
her to go to county Leitrim for Mr. 



60 GLENARTON. 

O'Flarney, during his absence, which 
lasted six weeks, he received a letter from 
her, expressing her sorrow that she never 
could belong to him. Upon his return he 
found her utterly changed ; and in a few 
weeks after, she declined his further visits; 
only once again consenting to see him. 
It was on the very morning before my 
Lady Margaret conveyed her away from 
the Castle." 

" But did you never suspect that things 
were going on ill before? — did Linden 
make no attempt to see her at the Doc- 
tor's? It seems strange that no measures 
should have been taken before it was too 
late." " Alas! my dear young Lady, you 
do not know how difficult it is to sus- 
pect and chide what we love dearly. I 
had given up my child into other hands ; 
she was removed entirely from my hum- 
ble sphere; and whilst I saw her happy, 
I could uot but think her deserving; and 
when she became otherwise, she was mi- 
serable, and it was not the moment to 



GLENARVON. 61 

shew her any severity. Indeed, indeed, 
it was impossible for me to mistrust or 
chide one so above me as Alice. As 
to young Linden, it turned his mind. I 
walked to his father's house, ill as I was, 
just to shake hands with him and see him, 
as soon as I was told of what had passed. 
The old gentleman, Cyril's father could 
not speak. The mother wept as soon as 
she beheld me ; but there was not one 
bitter word fell from either, though they 
knew it would prove ihe ruin of the 
young man, their son, and perhaps his 
death." 

" From that time till the present," con- 
tinued Gerald, " I seldom see Linden; 
he always avoids me. He altered very 
much, and took to hard drinking and bad 
company ; his mind was a little shaken ; 
he grew very slack at his duty ; and 
listed, we suppose, with that same gangfc 
which seduced my two poor boys from 
their allegiance and duty. He was repri- 
manded and punished bv his commander; 



62 ©LENARV0N. 

but it seems without effect, for Mr. Chal- 
loner was telling me, only a few days since, 
that in the last business there with Squire 
Flarney, Linden was taken notice of by 
the justice. There's no one can save 
him, he seems so determined-like on his 
own ruin ; and they say its the cause 
why the old father is on his death-bed 
at this present. There is no bitterness 
of heart like that which comes from thank- 
less children. They never find out till it 
is too late, how parents loved them : — 
but it was not her fault — no — I don't 
blame her — (he knit his brow) — no — I 
don't blame her. — Mr. Buchanan is wo 
child of our own house, though he fiua 
the place of that gracious infant which it 
pleased the Lord to take to himself. Mr. 
Buchanan is the son of a strange father : 
— 1 cannot consider him »s one of our 
own so arbntrary : — but that's not the 
thing." 

" Gerald," said Calantha, you are not 
sure that Buchanan is the culprit : we 



GLENARVOM. 63 

should be cautious in our judgments. " 
" Oh, but I am sure, and 1 care not to look 
on him ; and Linden, they say menaces 
to revenge on the young lord, my wrongs 
and his own ; but his old father begs him 
for God's sake to be peaceable. Perhaps, 
my Lady, you will look on the poor gen- 
tleman : what though ' tis a dying man — 
you'll be gratified to see him, there is 
such a calm upon his countenance. " 
" Must he die ?" " Why, he's very pre- 
carious-like : — but your noble husband, 
the young Lord Avondale, is very good 
to him — he has done all a man and a sol- 
dier could do to save him." " I too will 
call," said Calantha, to hide from Gerald 
how much she was affected ; " and, as to 
you, I must entreat as a favour, that 
you will return to the castle : to-morrow 
is Harry's birth-day ; and it will not be 
a holiday, my father says, if you are not 
as you were wont to be, at the head of 
the table with all the tenants." " I will 
come," said Gerald, if it were only on 



64 GLENARVON. 

account of my Lord's remembering me : 
and all the blessings of the land go with 
him, and you, and his noble house, till 
the end of time, and with the young Lord 
of Glenarvon beside, who saved Roy and 
Conal from a shameful death — that he 
did." 

" But you forget," saidCalantha, smil- 
ing, " that by your own account, he was 
the first to bring them into danger." 
" By my heart, but he's a noble spirit for 
all that : and he has my good wishes and 
those of many beside." As he spoke, his 
eye kindled with enthusiasm. Calantha's 
heart beat high : she listened with eager 
interest. " He's as generous as our own," 
continued he, " and if he lets his followers 
take a pig or two from that rogue there, 
Squire Flarney, does not he give lialf he 
has to those in distress ? If I could ever 
meet him face to face, I'd tell him the 
same ; but we never know when he's 
among us ; and aint there St. Clara the 
prophetess, why he went to see her 



GLENARVON. 65 

©nee, they say, and she left her aunt the 
Abbess, and the convent, and all the nuns, 
and went off after him, as mad as the rest. 
Och ! you'd bless yourself to see how the 
folks crowd about him at the season, but 
they're all gone from these parts now, in 
hopes of saving Linden I'm told ; for you 
know, I suppose that he's missing, and if 
he's deserted, its said they are sartain to 
shoot him on account of the troubles." 

' f Three times there have been meetings in 
that cleft there," continued Gerald, point- 
ing towards the Wizard's Glen : " it was 
that was the first undoing of Miss St a 
Clare : for they tell me she's all for our 
being delivered from our tyrants ; and she 
prophecies so, it would do you good to 
hear her. Oh, they move along, a thousand 
at a time in a silence would surprise you 
— justin the still night, and you can scarce 
hear them tread as they pass ; but don't I 
know well, when they're coming, aye r 
and indeed is there one of us who live 
here about the town, would betray them 



(56 GLENAKVON. 

though the reward offered is very stupen- 
dous." 

" But see, here are some of the military 
coming. "..." That officer is General Ken- 
nedy," said Lady Avondale, approaching 
towards him : " he is not a tyrant at 
least:" as she said this, she bowed to him, 
for she knew him well. He often dined 
at the castle. He was saying a few words 
to her upon common un interesting topics, 
when, a soldier beckoning to him, two 
horsemen appeared. — " He's found, Sir," 
said one: " there is no doubt of his guilt ; 
and twenty other names are on the list." 
" I trust in God it is not Linden, of whom 
you are speaking," said Calantha. Ge- 
neral Kennedy made no answer : he only 
bowed to her, as if to excuse himself ; and 
retired. 

Calantha observed a vast number of 
people assembled on the road, close to 
the village. Gerald Mac Ailain could 
scarcely support himself. She enquired 



GLENARVON. 67 

what they were waiting for. " To see 
the deserters/' they answered. It was 
women, children, parents who spoke: 
some wept aloud ; others stood in silent 
anguish ; many repeated the name of him 
in whom they took deepest interest, ask- 
ing if he were of the number. Linden's 
she heard most frequently. " 111 luck to 
the monsters! — ill luck to the men of 
blood \ n was vociferated the whole way 
she went. " This will kill the old man," 
said Gerald ! " it will be his aeaui l he 
has been all night fearing it, ever since 
Linden has been missing." 

The crowd, seeing Calantha, ap- 
proached in all directions. " Oh beg our 
king, your father, to save them," said 
one : " Jesus reward you :" and they 
knelt and prayed to her. She was too 
much affected to answer. Some of the 
officers approached her, and advised her 
to retire. " The crowd will be im- 
mense," they said: " your Ladyship had 



68 GLENARVON. 

better not remain to witness this heart- 
breaking scene. " Twenty names are 
on the list," continued the officer, " all 
deserted, as soon as Linden did. Mercy, 
in this instance, will be weakness : toe 
much has already been shewn/' 



GLENARVON. 69 



CHAPTER VII. 



Calantha returned home with a heavy 
heart ; and spoke to Lord Avondale and 
her father. They both intreated her not 
to interfere. The moment indeed was 
alarming and eventful; whatever mea- 
sures were necessary, it was not for her to 
judge; and while enthusiasm in the cause 
of liberty beguiled some, it was, she felt 
it was, the duty of a woman to try to soften 
and conciliate every thing ; but as Linden's 
fate was peculiarly unfortunate, Lord 
Avondale generously interested himself 
for him. Had money been able to pur- 
chase his release, there was no sum he 
would not have offered. They soon 
heard however, though with the deepest 
regret, that it was a case where mercy 
could not be shewn, without apprehend- 
ing the most fatal effects from it. Lin- 



70 GLENARVON. 

den and Seaford had together entered 
the militia not above three years back. 
Linden, an only son, was now in his 
twentieth year, and Seaford, was scarce 
eighteen. Their example was deemed 
the more necessary for the general safety, 
as so many in the same regiment had de- 
serted upon hearing of their disaffection. 
In the month of December last, they had 
all taken the treasonable oaths ; and their 
rash conduct and riotous proceedings had 
already more than once rendered them 
liable to the severity of the law. 

All intercessions were utterly fruitless ; 
they were tried, found guilty and con- 
demned. Linden was so much beloved 
by his companions, that several attempts 
were made, to rescue him from the 
hands of justice; but he disdained to be 
so released ; and when he heard of the 
tumult his condemnation had excited, he 
asked his captain's permission to be 
spared the last bitter conflict of walking 
through his own native town. The re- 
quest was denied him. 



GLENARVON. 91 

On the 18th of May, at the hour of 
four, the time appointed to assemble, 
twenty-three men, who had taken part 
in the riot, were called out. The regi- 
ment, after this, slowly advanced in so- 
lemn procession through the town, fol- 
lowed by the cavalry, and all the horse 
artillery. The streets were thronged — 
the windows were crowded — not a word 
was spoken ; but the sobs and cries of 
friends, parents and old acquaintance, who 
came out to take a last farewell, were 
heard. After passing through Belfont, 
they turned to the high road, and conti- 
nued the march util they reached the 
plains at the foot of Inis Tara, about two 
miles from the town. 

Linden and Seaford were then brought 
forward with a strong escort. They con- 
tinued silent and firm to the last. Just 
as the pause was made, before the com- 
mand was given that they should kneel, 
the mother of Linden, supported by Mac 
Allain, forced her way through the 



72 GLENARTON. 

crowd, and implored permission to take 
a last farewell of her son. The officer 
desired that she might pass ; but the 
crowd was so great that it was with diffi- 
culty she could arrive at the spot : — when 
there, she only once shook hands with the 
young man, and said she had brought 
him his father's blessing : — he made no 
answer, but appeared very deeply af- 
fected. He had shewn the most de- 
liberate courage till that hour. It 
now forsook him, and he trembled ex- 
cessively. 

" Thank God I am spared this," said 
his companion : "I have no mother left." 
The signal was immediately given to fire; 
and the party prepared to do their duty. 
A troop of horse at that moment, in the 
green uniform of the national guards, 
appeared from an ambush, and a despe- 
rate struggle ensued. The mutineers set 
up a terrible yell during the combat. 
The inhabitants, both of the town and 
country, joined them in every direction. 



GLENARVON. 73 

Lord Avondale and many other officers 
present came up to the assistance of Ge- 
neral Kennedy's small force, and soon 
restored order. The party of horse were 
put to flight. The colonel of the r gi- 
ment immediately ordered a court-mar- 
tial ; and three prisoners, who were taken, 
were with Seaford and Linden, executed 
on the spot. 

In the skirmish, the young man who 
headed the party of horse, and had exposed 
himself most eagerly to rescue Linden, 
was wounded in the left arm : his person 
was described; the circumstance was 
mentioned ; and a high reward was of- 
fered for his head. It was supposed by- 
many that he was Lord Glenarvon. 

The severity of these proceedings 
struck an immediate panic throughout 
the disaffected. The inhabitants of the 
town of Belfont arrayed themselves in 
black, A long and mournful silence 
succeeded ; and few there were who per- 
ceived through the veil of submissive ac- 

Vol. II. E 



74 GLENARVOW 

quiescence, the spirit of rebellion and 
vengeance, which was preparing to burst 
forth. Gerald Mac Allain, forgetful of 
his wrongs, appeared at the castle ; Lady 
St. Clare wrote the most penitent letters to 
Sir Everard ; and with her two daughters 
Jessica and Laura, entreated permission 
to return. Every one of the tradesmen 
and farmers, of any respectability, erased 
their names from the new club which 
had been established opposite to Sir 
Everard's house ; and a sort of mournful 
tranquillity and terror seemed to reign 
throughout. 

A few days after this melancholy trans- 
action, Linden's mother died ; and as 
Calantha was returning from Belfont, she 
met the crowd who had followed her to 
the grave. They all passed her in si- 
lence, nor gave her one salutation, or 
smile of acknowledgment, as on other 
occasions ; yet they were her father's 
own tenants, and most of their counte- 
nances she remembered from childhood. 



GLENARVON. 75 

When she mentioned this circumstance 
at the castle, she was informed that Lord 
Avondale's having taken an active part 
against the party, who had come forward 
to save the deserters, was the cause of 
this, their unusual deportment. 

To such height at this time, was the 
spirit of party carried that the whole 
kingdom, was in a state of ferment and 
disorder. Complaints were made, re- 
dress was claimed, and the people were 
every where mutinous and discontented. 
Numerous absentees, it was popularly said 
nad drawn great part of the money out 
of the country; oppressive taxes were 
continued ; land was let and sub-let to 
agents and stewards to the utter ruin of 
the tenants. 

Some concessions were now granted 
in haste — some assurance of relief given ; 
but the popular spirit of indignation, 
once excited, was not to be allayed by 
the same means which had, perhaps, 
prevented its first rise. The time for 



76 GLENARVON. 

conciliation was past. A foreign enemy 
lost no opportunity of adding to the in- 
creasing inward discontent. The friends 
of government had the power of the 
sword and the weight of influence on 
their side ; but the enemies were more 
numerous, more desperate, more enthu- 
siastic. The institution of political clubs, 
the combination of the United Irishmen, 
for the purpose of forwarding a brother- 
hood of affection, a communion of rights, 
amongst those of every different persua- 
sion, even the establishment of a military 
force was now attempted ; and the con- 
stant cry of all the inhabitants of either 
town or country was a total repeal of the 
penal statutes, the elective franchise, re- 
form of parliament, and commutation of 
tythes. 

Whilst, however, the more moderate 
with sincerity imagined, that they were 
upholding the cause of liberty and reli- 
gion ; the more violent who had eman- 
cipated their minds from every restraint 



GLENARVON. 77 

of prejudice or principle, did not conceal 
that the equalization of property, and the 
destruction of rank and titles was their 
real object. The revolutionary spirit 
was fast spreading, and since the appear- 
ance of Lord Glenarvon, at Belfont, the 
whole of the county around might be 
considered in a state of actual rebellion. 



£3 



78 GLExVARVON, 



CHAPTER VIII 



Glenarvon seemed, however, to differ 
in practice from his principles ; for whilst 
many of those who had adopted the same 
language had voluntarily thrown off their 
titles, and divided their property amongst 
their partizans, he made a formal claim 
to the titles which his grandfather had 
forfeited ; and though he had received 
no positive assurance, even that his right 
would be recognized, he called himself 
by that name alone, and insisted on his 
followers addressing him in no other man- 
ner. This singular personage of whom 
so many, for a long period, had heard the 
strangest reports, whom some imagined 
to be dead, and who seemed, whenever 
he appeared, to make no light impression 
upon all those with whom he conversed, 
had passed his \outh in a foreign country, 



GLENARVON. 79 

and had only twice visited the abode of 
his ancestors until the present year. 

It was amidst the ruins of antient ar- 
chitecture, and the wild beauties of Ita- 
lian scenery, that his splendid genius and 
uncommon faculties were first developed. 
Melancholy, unsocial, without a guide 
he had centered in himself every strong 
interest, and every aspiring hope. Dwell- 
ing ever in the brilliant regions of fancy, 
his soul turned with antipathy from the 
ordinary cares of life. He deeply felt the 
stigma which had been cast upon his 
family in the person of his grandfather, 
who, from the favourite of the lawful 
prince, had become the secret accomplice 
of a bloody conspiracy. The proofs of 
his guilt were clear; his death was a 
death of shame ; and the name of traitor 
was handed down with the coronet to 
which his only surviving heir so eagerly 
aspired. 

By his nearest friends he was now 
e 4 



SO GLENARVOJV. 

called Glenarvon ; and so jealous did he 
appear of his rank, that he preferred dis- 
guise, straits and difficulties, to a return 
to his own country without those titles, 
and that fortune, which he considered 
as his due. One object of interest suc- 
ceeded another; a life of suspense was 
preferred to apathy ; and the dark coun- 
sels of unprincipled associates, soon led 
one, already disloyal in heart, to the very 
brink of destruction. 

He had embraced his father's profes- 
sion, wherein he had distinguished him- 
self by his courage and talent; but to 
obey another was irksome ; and the 
length of time which must elapse before 
he could obtain the command of a ship, 
soon disgusted him with the service. 
He quitted it, and returned to Italy — 
there amidst the luxurious dissipation of 
Rome or Florence, he gave up his days 
and nights to every fierce excess ; and soon 
the high spirit of genius was darkened, 



GLENARVON. 81 

the lofty feelings of honor were debased, 
and the frame and character sunk equally 
dejected under the fatigue of vigils and 
revels, in which reason and virtue had no 
share. He had been wronged and he 
knew not how to pardon . Many had de- 
ceived him and he existed henceforward 
but to mislead others. The victim of his 
first attachment had fallen a prey to the 
revengeful jealousy of an incensed hus- 
band ; but her death was not more sudden, 
more secret, than that of the tyrant who 
had destroyed her. Every one knew by 
whose hand the fair and lovely Fiorabella 
had perished ; but no eye bore witness 
against the assassin, who, in the depths 
of night had immediately revenged her 
loss. The murderer and the murdered 
were both alike involved in the impene- 
trable veil of mystery. The proud and 
noble family who had been injured, had 
neither the power, nor the inclination 
to seek redress. Lord Glenarvon was 
seen no more at Florence ■ he had been 
■ 5 



82 GLENARVOtf. 

the cause of this tragic scene. It afflicted 
his generous heart when he reflected 
upon the misery he had occasioned ; but 
not even his bitterest enemy could have 
suspected him of deeper guilt. His 
youth was untainted by the suspicion of 
crime, and the death of Giardini had, 
with greater show of justice been attri- 
buted to another, and a more dangerous 
hand. 

Fascinated with the romantic splendour 
of ideal liberty, and intent upon flying 
from the tortures of recollection, he had 
visited Ireland in the spring of the year 
..-,., and had remained there some 
months, unknown even to his adherents, 
who flocked around him, attracted by 
his eloquence, and won by his address. 
One only victim returned with him in 
his voluntary exile from his native land. 
One only miserable enthusiast devoted 
herself to his fortunes, and accompanied 
him in his flight. O'Kelly, the son of 
a tenant of his father, recognized his 



GLENAKVON. 83 

youthful lord, and early ingratiated him- 
self into his favour. 

With this sole attendant, and the un- 
.happy girl who had renounced her coun- 
try and her virtue for his sake, he de- 
parted ; nor was seen again at St. Alvin 
Priory till the present year. 

Indeed the report of his death was so 
often affirmed, that when he again pre- 
sented himself, so changed in manner 
and in form, before his adherents, they 
questioned one with another whether he 
was in reality their lord. " I am not 
what I seem/' he would frequently say ; 
" I am not him whom you take me for." 

Strange things were rumoured of 
him. There was a man in his service 
who had returned with him, who spoke 
to none, who answered no enquiries, 
who had never before been seen with 
him in his former visits. It was said 
that he knew many things if he durst 
but utter them. All feared and avoided 
this man. His name was Macpherson, 



84 GLENARVON. 

the same whom Gondimar had seen in 
town; but all felt irresistibly attracted 
by his youthful master. Glenarvon's pro- 
jects — his intentions were now but too ge- 
nerally suspected ; — it was a critical mo- 
ment ; and his motives for visiting Ireland 
in such a conjuncture could not be mis- 
interpreted nor mistaken. 



GLENARVON. 85 



CHAPTER IX, 



In this his second visit to his native 
country, Glenarvon desired his servant, 
O* Kelly, to find a person of respectability 
who would take charge of a child, then 
only in his second year. Clare of Cos- 
tolly was his name ; but whether the boy 
was the son of Lord Glenarvon, or some 
little favorite who, for the moment, had 
excited his interest, none knew, nor durst 
enquire. 

Indeed , the impenetrable my stery which 
surrounded Lord Glenarvon was involved 
in a deeper shade of concealment at this 
time, then at any former period ; for 
scarce had he set foot in his new habita- 
tion when a singular and terrific inmate 
appeared also at the Priory — a maniac ! 
who was however welcomed in with the 
rest of the strange assemblage, and aroom 



86 GLENAItVON. 

immediately allotted for his reception, 
In vain the affrighted nurse remonstrated ; 
the maniac's eyes were fixed upon the 
child, with frantic wildness ; and Gle- 
narvon, deaf to her entreaties, permitted 
Clare to attend upon the unwelcome 
stranger and saw him in his arms without 
alarm . 

Even in his most dreadful paroxysms, 
when all others were afraid of approach- 
ing him, Glenarvon would calmly enter 
into his chamber, would hear his threats 
unawed, — would gaze on him, as if it 
gave him delight to watch the violence of 
misguided passion ; to hear the hollow 
laugh of ideotsy, or fix the convulsed eye 
of raving insanity. 

That which was disgusting or terrific 
to man's nature, had no power over Gle- 
narvon. He had looked upon the dying 
and the dead ; had seen the tear of agony 
without emotion ; had heard the shriek 
of despair, and felt the hot blood as it 
flowed from the heart of a murdered 



. GLENARVON. 87 

enemy, nor turned from the sickening 
sight — Even the storms of nature could 
not move Glenarvon. In the dark night, 
when the tempest raged around and the 
stormy ocean beat against the high im- 
pending cliffs, he would venture forth, 
would listen to the roaring thunder with- 
out fear, and watch the forked lightening 
as it flashed along the sky. 

The rushing winds but seemed to sooth 
his perturbed spirit ; and the calm of his 
brow remained unaltered in every chang- 
ing scene. Yet it was the calm of hope- 
less despair, when passion, too violent to 
shew itself by common means, concen- 
trates itself at once around the heart, 
and steels it against every sentiment of 
mercy. 

Who had dared to enquire of that eye 
the meaning of its glance ? or who had 
trusted to the music of that soft voice, 
when it breathed forth vows of tenderness 
and love ? or who, believing in the light 



88 GLENARVON. 

of life which beamed upon that counte- 
nance, had considered the sportive jests 
of fancy — the brilliant sallies of that 
keen wit as the overflowing testimony of 
a heart at rest ? None — none believed 
or trusted in Glenarvon. — Yet thousands 
flocked around and flattered him ; amidst 
this band of ruffians, this lawless unprin- 
cipled gang, the recluse of Glenaa — the 
lovely, but misguided Elinor was now 
too often seen. She was the spirit and 
soul of the tumultuous party : her wit en- 
livened ; her presence countenanced ; her 
matchless beauty attracted. Scarce in 
her sixteenth year, the pride of her fa- 
mily, the wonder and ornament of the 
whole country, she forsook her solitude 
and hopes of heaven — she left the aunt, 
who had fostered and cherished her from 
childhood, to become avowedly the mis- 
tress of Glenarvon. On horse, or on 
foot, she accompanied him. In the at- 
tire of a boy she unblushingly followed 



GLENARVOX. b\) 

his steps ! his former favorites were ne- 
ver even named, or alluded to — his pre- 
sent mistress occupied all his attention. 

When St. Clara described the suffer- 
ings of her country, every heart melted 
to compassion, or burned with indigna- 
tion ; but when her master, when Gle- 
narvon played upon her harp, or sung 
the minstrelsy of the bards of other times, 
he inspired the passions which he felt, 
and inflamed the imagination of his 
hearers to deeds of madness — to acts of 
the wildest extravagance. Crowds fol- 
lowed upon his teps ; yet it was me- 
lancholy to see them pass — so fair, so 
young and yet so utterly hardened and 
perverted. Who could behold St. Clara 
and not compassionate her fate ? What 
was to become of her when Glenarvon 
had ceased to love ; and did he love ?— ~ 
Never: in the midst of conquests, his 
heart was desolate ; in the fond embrace 
of mutual affection, he despised the vie* 
iimof his art, 



90 GLENARVON. 

Of all the friends, flatterers and fol- 
lowers, he had gained by his kindness, 
and lost by his caprice, not one remained 
to fill, in his bosom, that craving void 
which he himself had made. Wherever 
he appeared, new beauty attracted his 
worship, and yielded to his power : yet 
he valued not the transient possession, 
even whilst smiling upon the credulous 
being who had believed in his momen- 
tary affection. Even whilst soothing her 
with promises and vows, which he meant 
not for one hour to perfom, he was seek- 
ing the means of extricating himself from 
her power — he was planning his escape 
from the thraldom of her charms ? Was 
he generous ? Aye, and prodigal by na- 
ture ; but there was a part of his cha- 
racter which ill accorded with the rest : 
it was a spirit of malignity which, if ir- 
ritated, never rested, till it had satisfied 
its vengeance. An enemy, he could have 
pardoned and have loved ; but he knew 
not how to bear with or forgive a friend. 



GLBNARTON. 91 

His actions appeared the immediate re- 
sult of impulse ; but his passions were all 
subject to his controul, and there was a 
systematic consistency even in his most 
irregular conduct. To create illusions, and 
raise affection in the breasts of others, 
has been the delight of many : to dispel 
the interest he had created was Glenar- 
von's care. Love he had studied as an 
art : he knew it in all its shades and gra- 
dations ; for he had traced its progress 
in his own and many another breasts. Of 
kno wledgeand wisdom, he had drank deep 
at the fountain head, nor wanted aught 
that could give liveliness and variety to 
his discourse. 

He was, besides, a skilful flatterer, and 
knew in what weak part, he best might 
apply his power. But the sweetness of 
his praise, could only be exceeded by the 
bitterness of his contempt — the venomed 
lash of his deadly wit. 

That in which Glenarvon most prided 
himself— -that in which he most excelled, 



92 GLENARVON. 

was the art of dissembling. He could 
turn and twine so near the truth, with, 
more than Machiavelian subtlety, that 
none could readily detect his falsehood ; 
and when he appeared most frank and 
unguarded, then he most deceived. 
Falsehood and craft were stamped upon 
his countenance, written upon his brow, 
marked in his words, and scarce conceal- 
ed beneath the winning smile which oft 
times played upon his lips. 

" If I could but see him once," said 
Lady Augusta, " I should be satisfied ; 
but to hear his name from morning till 
night — to have every fault, folly, nay 
even crime attributed to him by one 
party, and every virtue, charm and fasci- 
nation given him by the other, — it is 
enough to distract women in general, and 
me in particular. Is there no mercy for 
curiosity ? I feel I shall do something ab- 
surd, extremely absurd, if an interview 
it not contrived." u Nothing can be 
more easy/' said the Duke : " you shall 



GLEXARVON. 93 

dine with him, at the next public day. 
I have already sent him a card of invi- 
tation." " Under what title ?" " To 
Captain de Ruthven." " He will as- 
suredly not come/' said Lady Trelaw- 
ney. " That I think probable," said 
the Duke, laughing. " The malicious af- 
firm that his arm is in a sling ; and if so, 
his appearance just at present would be 
unwise." The conversation soon took 
another turn; and Lord Avondale en- 
tering, informed Calantha that he had a 
letter from Sir Richard, and must imme- 
diatly join him at Cork. 



04 GLENARVtTC. 



CHAPTER X, 



Admiral Buchanan and Sir Richard 
Mowbrey had, in the month of January, 
returned to England, where they had re- 
ceived the thanks of Parliament for 
their distinguished conduct on the me- 
morable 1st of June. They were now 
appointed to command upon the Cork 
station, with a considerable force, as se- 
rious apprehensions were entertained 
lest the enemy should attempt a descent in 
the south of Ireland. The enthusiasm 
with which the heroes were greeted on 
their return, did honour to the feelings 
of the Irish nation. They were invited 
to every house in the neighbourhood ; 
and fetes and balls were given to shew 
them respect. The Duke and Lord Avon- 
dale went forward to receive them. 
Commodore Emmet, an old acquaint- 



6LENARV0N. 95 

ance of theirswho resided atCork, sent to 
offer his house, not only to them, but to the 
whole party at Castle Delaval ; if they 
determined to accept Sir George's invita- 
tion, and dine on board the Royal 
William on the 1st of June, in comme- 
moration of that day and its success. 
There were few, if any, of those invited 
who refused ; but none accepted the invi- 
tation with so much enthusiasm as Calan- 
tha. The letter from Sir George Buchanan 
to Lady Margaret was as follows : — 

Cork, May 28th. 17§6, 

" My dear Lady Margaret, 

" In answer to a letter which 1 received 
this morning, dated May 26th, ult., I re- 
quest the honour of your Ladyship's com- 
pany on board the Royal William, now 
in harbour at the Cove. The Duke and 
the rest of his family and party have al- 
ready promised me this favour, and I am 
not prepared to accept from yourself any 
denial on account of those circumstances 



96 GLENARVON. 

to which you allude, and which, I entreat 
you sincerely to believe are, on my part, 
utterly forgotten. Let me request you, 
then, to banish from your memory every 
trifling disagreement, and to meet me, 
upon an occasion so flattering as is the 
present to my feelings and those of our 
friends, with the good-will and kindness 
you will ever find in the heart of your 
Ladyship's most obedient and affec- 
tionate brother and servant, 

" George Buchanan." 

• 

In consequence of this invitation, Lady 
Margaret and the rest of the Duke's 
family set out on the morning of 
the 31st, and arrived about the hour 
of dinner at Commodore Emmet's — a 
large brick building about a quarter of 
a mile beyond the town of Cork. The 
Duke and Lord Avondale, and their lo- 
quacious host, had been awaiting them 
some time. The latter gave to each 



GLENARVON. 97 

the most cordial welcome ; boasted that he 
could lodge them all ; talked incessantly, 
as he shewed them to their apartments ; 
entreated them not to dress, as dinner 
awaited; and left them, assuring them 
all, that they were the exact image of the 
Duke, whom he concluded to be, like the 
Patriarchs of old, the father of the whole 
company. His voice murmured on as 
he descended the stairs, whilst Cassandra 
and Heloise, his daughters, appeared to 
offer their services in his place. 

The dining-room was small ; the 
guests were numerous; the table was 
crowded with huge pieces of meat : the 
Commodore talked incessantly ; his chil- 
dren, his servants, his brother, seemed all 
gifted alike with the same spirit of acti- 
vity : it was incessant bustle, hurry, 
noise and contrivance. Music, cards, 
and tricks of every kind were displayed 
during the evening ; and in the morning, 
Jong before the sun had arisen, carpen- 
Vol. II. F 



98 GLENARVON. 

ters mechanics, ship-builders and cooks, 
awoke the guests by the noise of their 
respective pursuits. 

Sir George Buchanan had sent to re- 
quest the Duke's company at an early 
hour on the morrow. The day proved 
fair, the boats were ready, and they set 
forth on their expedition in high spirits. 
Many ships and smaller vessels were spread 
over the harbour ; and bands of music 
played as they passed. The beauty of 
the Cove of Cork, the trees bending to the 
water side, the fortress, and the animated 
picture which a mercantile city presents, 
— delighted all. But feelings of enthu- 
siasm kindled in every heart, when they 
appj oached the Royal William, and be- 
held us venerable commander. The sea 
was rough, and the spray of the waves 
was at times blown over the boat. The 
Miss Emmets thought of their new 
dresses; Sophia of danger; and Calantha 
of the glory of thus proudly riding over 
the billowy ocean. 



GLENARVON. 99 

Lady Margaret, though silent, was 
more deeply agitated: — her mind re- 
curred in thought to scenes long past. 
She was now to behold, after a lapse of 
many years, her husband's brother, whom 
she had treated with the most marked in- 
dignity, and for whom she had vainly at- 
tempted to feel contempt. He had ever 
conducted himself towards her with cour- 
teous, though distant civility; but had 
yet shewn the most decided disapproba- 
tion of her conduct. When she had last 
beheld him, she was in the full splendour 
of youth and beauty, surrounded by an 
admiring world, and triumphant in the 
possession of every earthly enjoyment. 
Time had but little changed the majesty 
of her form ; but something worse than 
time had stamped upon her countenance 
an expression never to be effaced ; while 
her marked brow assumed an air of sul- 
len pride and haughty reserve, as she as- 
cended from the boat into the ship ; she 
gazed upon the long forgotten features of 
f2 



100 GLENARVOJf. 

her brother ; and she seemed to be deeply 
affected. Age had bleached his once 
dark locks ; but he was still unimpaired 
in mind and form. He bent lowly down 
to receive her: she felt him clasp her to 
his bosom ; and overcome by this unex- 
pected kindness, her tears streamed upon 
his hand: — he, too, could have wept; but 
recovering himself, with a commanding 
air, he came forward to receive his other 
guests. 

The ship was in the highest order ; the 
feast prepared was magnificent ; and when 
the Duke stood up and bowed with grace 
to drink the Admiral's health, the sailors 
cheered, and the toast was repeated from 
the heart by every individual. But he, 
though greatly affected and pleased at 
the homage shewn him, bowed to the 
Duke, returning him the compliment; 
and afterwards, drinking the health of Sir 
Richard Mowbrey, said, that he owed 
every thing to his assistance — that, in 
the glorious action of the 1st, his ship 



GLENARVON. 101 

had conferred new honours on the Bri- 
tish Navy, and that he had received the 
warmest commendations of their great 
Commander and famed Admiral Howe ! . . 
At that name, every individual arose. 
The name of Howe was repeated from 
mouth to mouth with an expression of 
exalted admiration ; his applauses were 
spoken of by every tongue ; and many an 
eye that had never shewn weakness, till 
that moment, filled with tears at the 
name of their venerable, their dear com- 
mander. Captain Emmet, during this 
scene, was employed in eating voraciously 
of whatever he could lay hands on. Miss 
Emmet, who thought it a great honor to 
converse with a lord, had seated herself 
by the side of Lord Avondale, narrating 
her own adventures, freely stating her 
own opinions, and pleased with herself 
and every one present ; while her father 
likewise talked at the other end of the 
table, and Admiral Buchanan laughed 

f3 



102 GLENARVON. 

heartily, but good humouredly at his 
friend's oppressive eloquence. 

Suddenly Lord Avondale turned to 
Calantha and asked her if she were ill ? 
She knew not, she could not define the sort 
of pain and joy she felt at that moment. 
Her eyes had long been fixed upon one 
who took no part in this convivial scene 
— whose pale cheek and brow expressed 
much of disappointed hope, or of joyless 
indifference. He had that youthful, nay 
boyish air, which renders this melan- 
choly the more singular. — It was not 
affected, though his manner had in it 
nothing of nature, but the affectation 
was rather that of assumed respect for 
those he cared not for, and assumed in- 
terest in topics to which he hardly at- 
tended, than the reverse. He even af- 
fected gaiety; but the heart's laugh never 
sounded from his lips; and if he uttered 
a sentence, his eye seemed to despise the 
being who listened with avidity to his 
observation. It was the same, — oh ! yes. 



GLENARVON. 103 

it was, indeed, the same, whom Calantha 
had one moment beheld at St. Alvin 
Priory. 

His face, his features, were the same, 
it is true, but a deeper shade of sadness 
now overspread them ; and sorrow and 
disappointment had changed the glow of 
boyish health to a more pallid hue. 
What ! in a month ? it will be said. — A 
day might, perhaps, have done it. How- 
ever, in the present instance, it was not 
as if some sudden and defined misfor- 
tune had opprest the soul by a single 
blow : it was rather as if every early 
hope had long been blighted ; and every 
aspiring energy had been destroyed. 
There was nothing pleasing to gaze 
upon : it was mournful ; but it excited 
nor sympathy, nor confidence. The 
arm was in a sling — the left arm. There 
could be no doubt that he was the hero 
who had risked his life to save young 
Linden. Was it, indeed, Lord Glenar- 
f 4 



104 GLENARVON. 

von whom Calantha beheld ? Yes, it 
was himself. Sir George Buchanan had 
long since known, observed, and distin- 
guished him in his profession, and the 
firm friendship of the seaman, would not 
be deterred by any rumours, however 
current or however unfavourable, from 
paying him that respect, which he knew 
to be due not more to his rank, than to his 
merit and prowess. Glenarvonhad availed 
himself of the invitation, and face to face 
Calantha now stood before him, and 
gazed with eager curiosity upon him. 

Never did the hand of the sculptor, in 
the full power of his art, produce a form 
and face more finely wrought, so full of 
soul, so ever-varying in expression. Was 
it possible to behold him unmoved ? Oh ! 
was it in woman's nature to hear him, 
and not to cherish every word he uttered ? 
And, having heard him, was it in the 
human heart ever again to forget those 
accents, which awakened every interest, 
and quieted every apprehension? The 



GLENARVON. 105 

day, the hour, that very moment of time 
was marked and destined. It was Gle- 
narvon — it was that spirit of evil whom 
she beheld ; and her soul trembled within 
her, and felt its danger. 

Calantha was struck suddenly, forcibly 
struck; yet the impression made upon 
her, was not in his favour. The eye 
of the rattle - snake, it has been sad, 
once fixed upon its victim, overpowers 
it with terror and alarm : the bird, thus 
charmed, dares not attempt its escape ; it 
sings its last sweet lay ; flutters its little 
pinions in the air ; then falls prone be- 
fore its destroyer, unable to fly from 
his fascination. Calantha bowed, there- 
fore with the rest, pierced to the heart at 
once by the maddening power that de- 
stroys alike the high and low; but she 
liked not the wily turn Oi his eye, the 
contemptuous sneer of his curling lip, 
the soft passionless tones of his voice ; — 
it was not nature, or if it were nature, not 
f 5 



106 GLENARVON. 

that to which she had been accustomed ; 
— not the open, artless expression of a 
guileless heart. 

Starting from the kind of dream, in 
which she had for one moment been 
wrapped, she now looked around her, 
and with a sudden affectation, to which 
she had hitherto been a stranger, assumed 
a new manner, in order to conceal the in- 
terest which she felt, and which she feared 
she was betraying. 

Lord Glenarvon was the real object of 
her thoughts, yet she appeared alone to 
be occupied with every other. She 
laughed with Lord Trelawney ; talked to 
the Miss Emmets ; examined with in- 
terest every part of the ship, carelessly 
approaching the very edge of it ; yet once 
she met that glance, which none ever, 
who had seen, could forget, and she 
stopped as if rivetted to the earth. — He 
smile d ; but whether it was a smile of 
approbation, or of scorn, she could not 
discover: the upper lip was curled, as 



GLENARVON. 107 

if in derision ; but the hand that was 
stretched out to save her, as she stood on 
the brink of tha vessel, and the soft 
silvery voice which gently* admonished 
her to beware, lest one false step should 
plunge her headlong into the gulph be- 
low, soon re-assured her. 

It was late before the Duke took leave 
of the admiral, who promised to breakfast 
with the Commodore the ensuing day. 
The guns once more were fired ; the band 
played as for their arrival ; but the music 
now seemed to breathe a sadder strain ; 
for it was heard softened by distance, and 
every stroke of the oars rendered the 
sounds more and more imperfect. The 
sun was setting, and cast its lustre on the 
still waves: even the loquacity of the 
Emmets was for a few moments sus- 
pended; it was a moment which im- 
pressed the heart with awe; it was a 
scene never to be forgotten. The splen- 
dour of conquest, the tumult of enthu- 
siasm, the aged veteran, and more than 



108 GLENARVON. 

all, perhaps, that being who seemed early 
wrecked in the full tide of misfortune, 
were all fixed indelibly in Calantha's me- 
mory. Future times might bring new 
interests and events ; magnificence might 
display every wonderful variety ; but the 
impression of that hour never can be 
effaced. 



GJ.ENARVON. 109 



CHAPTER XL 



Calantha could not speak one word 
during the evening ; but while Miss 
Emmets sung — indifferently, she listened 
and even wept at what never before had 
excited or interest, or melancholy. At 
night, when in sleep, one image pursued 
her, — it was all lovely — all bright: it 
seemed to be clothed in the white gar- 
ments of an angel ; it was too resplendent 
for eyes to gaze on : — she awoke. Lord 
Avoudale slept in the inner room ; she 
arose and looked upon him, whilst he 
reposed. How long, how fondly she had 
loved those features — that form. What 
grace, what majesty, what beauty was 
there ! But when those eyes awake, she 
said, they will not look for me. That 
heart is at peace, and thou canst sleep, 
Henry, and my sorrows are not known 



110 GLENARVON. 

or heeded by thee. Happy Avondale: — 
Miserable, guilty Calantha ! when the 
mind once cherishes a discontented 
spirit, every event that occurs tends to 
strengthen it in the delusion it loves to 
indulge. Calantha only thought herself 
neglected. To her perverted eyes every 
thing appeared in a false light. Thus she 
accused Lord Avondale when in fact she 
herself was alone to blame. 

At an early hour the ensuing day, 
Captain Emmet proposed a drive to 
Donallan Park, which he said was a fair 
domain, fully deserving the attention of 
the Duke of Altamonte. Cassandra and 
Eloise clamorously seconded this pro- 
posal. In this energetic family, Mrs. 
Emmet alone gave the eye and the ear a 
little repose. Stretched upon a couch in 
languid, listless inactivity, she gazed upon 
the bustling scene before her, as if en- 
tirely unconnected with it : nor seemed 
to know of greater suffering than when 
roused from her reveries, by the acute 



GLENARVON. Ill 

voices of her family, to the bustle and 
hurry of common life. To the question 
of whether she would accompany them 
to Bonallan Park, she answered faintly, 
that she would not go. A fat and 
friendly lieutenant, who fondly hung- 
over her, urged her to relent, and 
with some difficulty, at length, persuaded 
her. 

Every one appeared much pleased 
with their excursion, or possibly with 
some incident during their drive, which 
had made any excursion agreeable. Of 
Donallan Park, however, Calantha re- 
membered little : this alone, she noted, 
that as they walked through a shrubbery, 
Lord Glenarvon suddenly disengaging 
himself from Miss Emmet, who had seiz- 
ed upon his arm, gathered a rose — the 
only rose in bloom (it being early in the 
summer) and turning back, offered it to 
Calantha. She felt confused — flattered 
perhaps; but if she were flattered by his 
giving it to her, she had reason to be 



112 GLENARVON. 

mortified by the remark which accom- 
panied the gift. " I offer it to you," he 
said, " because the rose at this season is 
rare, and all that is new or rare has for 
a moment, I believe, some value in your 
estimation/' She understood his mean- 
ing : her eye had been fixed upon him 
with more than common interest; and 
all that others said and Miss Emmet af- 
fected, he thought, perhaps, that she 
could feel. There was no proof she gave 
of this, more unequivocal, than her si- 
lence. Her spirits were gone ; a strange 
fear of offending had come upon her ; 
and when Lady Trelawney rallied her 
for this change, " I am not well," she 
said; " I wish I had never come to 
Cork." 

On the ensuing morning, they returned 
to Castle Delaval. Previous to their 
departure, Admiral Buchanan had a long- 
interview with Lady Margaret, during 
which time Lord Gienarvon walked along 
the beach with Calantha and Sophia. 



GLENARVON. 113 

" Shall you be at Belfont again this 
year ?" said Miss Seymour. " I shall be 
at Castle Delaval in a few days," he an- 
swered, smiling rather archly atCalantha, 
she knew not wherefore. But she turned 
coldly from him, as if fearing to meet 
his eyes. Yet not so was it her custom 
to behave towards those whom she 
sought to please, and what woman upon 
earth exists, who had not wished to 
please Glenarvon ? Possibly she felt of- 
fended at what he had said when giving 
her the rose in Donallan garden ; or 
it may be that her mind, hitherto so en- 
thusiastic, so readily attracted, was grown 
callous and indifferent, and felt not those 
charms and the splendour of those talents 
which dazzled and misled every other 
heart. 

Yet to fly, to feel embarrassed, to 
scarcely dare to look upon the person 
who addresses us ? Are these such very 
marked signs of indifference ? It is not 
probable that Lord Glenarvon thought 



114 GLENARVON. 

so. He appeared not to hate the being 
who was thus confused in his presence, 
but to think that he felt what he in- 
spired were presumption. With all the 
wild eagerness of enthusiasm, her infa- 
tuated spirit felt what, with all the art 
of well dissembled vanity, he feigned. 
She quitted him with a strong feeling of 
interest. She, however, first heard him 
accept her father's invitation, and agree 
to accompany Sir George Buchanan in his 
promised visit to Castle Delaval. 



GLENARVON. 115 



CHAPTER XII. 

On their return thither, they found the 
guests they had left in a lamentable state 
of dullness. Lord Glenarvon was the 
first subject of enquiry. Is he arrived? 
— have you seen him? — do you like 
him ? — were repeated on all sides. 
« Who?— who?" " There can be but 
one — Lord Glenarvon !" " We all like 
him quite sufficiently, be assured of that," 
said Sophia, glancing her eye somewhat 
sarcastically upon Calantha. " He is a 
very strange personage," said Lady 
Margaret. " My curiosity to see him 
had been highly excited : I am now per- 
fectly satisfied. He certainly has a slight 
resemblance to his mother." " He has 
the same winning smile," said Gondimar ; 
" but there all comparison ceases." 
" What says my Calantha?" saioV Lady 



116 GLENARVON. 

Mandeville, " does her silence denote 
praise ?" " Oh ! the greatest," she re- 
plied in haste, " I hope, my dear girls," 
said Mrs. Seymour, rather seriously ad- 
dressing her daughters, " that you will 
neither of you form any very marked 
intimacy with a person of so singular a 
character as is this young lord. I was 
rather sorry when, by your letter, I 
found he was invited here." " Oh, there 
is no need of caution for us !" replied 
Lady Trelawny, laughing : " perhaps 
others may need these counsels, but not 
we : we are safe enough ; are we not, 
Sophia?" 

Lord Glenarvon, the object of discus- 
sion, soon appeared at the castle, to si- 
lence both praise and censure. There 
was a studied courtesy in his manner — 
a proud humility, mingled with a certain 
cold reserve, which amazed and repressed 
the enthusiasm his youth and misfor- 
tunes had excited. The end was as usual : 
— all were immediately won by this un- 



GLENARVON. 117 

expected demeanour: — some more, some 
less, and Mrs. Seymour the last. But, to 
Calantha's infinite amusement, she heard 
her speaking in his defence a few hours 
after his arrival ; and the person she ad- 
dressed, upon this occasion, was Sir Eve- 
rard St. Clare, who vehemently asse- 
verated, though only in a whisper, that 
the Duke must be mad to permit such a 
person to remain at the castle in times 
like the present. 

Sir Everard then stated, that Lady 
St. Clare and her daughters were re- 
turned to Belfont, and so eager to be 
again received into society, that if they 
dared hope that any of the Duke's family 
would accept their invitation, they in- 
tended to give a concert on the night of 
the great illumination for the Admiral's 
arrival at Belfont. Mrs. Seymour smiled 
in scorn ; but Lady Margaret kindly pro- 
mised to go ; and as soon as Mrs. 
Seymour heard that it was merely in a 
political light they were to counte- 



118 GLENARVOX. 

nance them, she was satisfied. For the 
present terror of all those who upheld the 
government, was lest the rebels should 
prove superior, and murder them for 
their opinions 

It is unnecessary to relate what Lord 
Glenarvon said to Calantha very shortly 
after his arrival at the castle ; it was 
made up of a thousand nothings ; yet 
they were so different from what others 
had said : they shewed her so marked 
a preference ; at least they seemed to do 
so ; but it was not a preference that 
could alarm the most wary, or offend the 
most scrupulous. Such as it was, however, 
it flattered and it pleased ; it gave a new 
interest to life, and obliterated from 
her memory every long cherished feeling 
of bitterness or regret. 

It chanced one day, that, when seated 
at dinner, by Mrs. Seymour, to whom he 
paid no little attention, he enquired of 
her concerning Mac Allain, who waited 
upon that occasion behind the Duke's 



GLENARVON. 119 

chair. " Why looks he so miserable?" 
he said. " Why turn his eyes so inces- 
santly towards Mr. Buchanan ?" Mrs. 
Seymour hesitated, as if fearing to allude 
to a transaction which she never thought 
of without horror and dislike ; but she 
no sooner pronounced the name of Mac 
Allain, than Lord Glenarvon's counte- 
nance altered : he started ! and, watching 
Buchanan with a look of loathing anti- 
pathy, exhibited such a variety of male- 
volent passions, in the space of a few 
moments, that Sophia, who sat near Ca- 
lantha on the opposite side of the table, 
asked her, as she read countenances so 
well, to tell her what her new friend's 
expressed at that instant ? She raised 
her eyes ; but met Glenarvon's. He saw 
he was the object of attention: he 
smiled ; and the sweetness of that smile 
alone being considered: " I know not," 
she said, in some confusion ; " but this 
I believe, that the hand of Heaven never 
impressed on man a countenance so 



J 20 GLENARVON". 

beautiful, so glorious !" " Calautha !" said 
Sophia, looking at her. Calantha sighed. 
" What is it even so ? — Heaven defend 
us!" somewhat confused Calantha turn- 
ed to the Count Gondimar; and, talk- 
ing with affected spirits, soon appeared 
to have forgotten both the smile and the 
sigh. 

" You once, when in London, gave 
me permission to warn you," said the 
Count, who observed every thing that 
was passing, " when I thought you in 
danger. Now," continued he, — " now 
is the moment. It was not when 
dancing with Mr. Clarendon, or playing 
the coquette with Buchanan and the 
Duke of Myrtlegrove, that I trembled 
for you. Lord Avondale was still dear, 
even in those days — but now — O ! the in- 
constancy of the human heart. You, even 
you, are changed." " Not I," she re- 
plied ; " but alas ! that time is arrived 
which you predicted : he cares no more 
for me; but I can never forget him. 



GLEI^ARVON. . 121 

See," she continued, " how utterly in- 
different he appears, yet I would die for 
him." " That will be of little service: 
you will prove his ruin and misery. Mark 
my words, Lady Avondale ; and, when 
too late, remember what I have dared to 
say." 

" Every woman complains," she con- 
tinued, smiling, " therefore, let me prove 
an exception. I have no reproaches to 
make Lord Avondale ; and, except in your 
suspicious mind, there is no evil to ap- 
prehend." " Tell me, candidly ; if the 
trial were made, if the hour of tempta- 
tion were to come, could you, do you 
think — could you have strength and 
courage to resist it ?" " Could I ! Can 
you ask ! It will not be accounted pre- 
sumption to affirm, that I feel secure* 
But possibly this arises from my convic- 
tion, that there can be no temj Nation for 
me : I love my husband ; there is no 
merit then in being true to what we 
love." 
Vol. II. G 



122 GLENARVO.N. 

As she yet spoke, Zerbellini approached 
and asked her, in Italian, to read a note* 
Lord Glenarvon had sent her. It was 
written with a pencil, and contained but 
few words : it requested her to speak no 
more with the Count Gondimar. He saw 
the manner in which the paper was de- 
livered, and guessed from whom it came. 
" I told you so," he cried. " Alas ! 
shall I affect to offer you advice, when 
so many nearer and dearer friends are 
silent — shall I pretend to greater wisdom, 
—greater penetration ? Is it not inordi- 
nate vanity to hope, that any thing I can 
suggest will be of use ?" " Speak," 
said Caiantha ; for the subject was inte- 
resting to her ; '•< at all events I shall not 
be offended." " The serpent that is che- 
rished in the bosom," said Gondimar, 
fiercely, "will bite with deadly venom— 
the flame that brightly dazzles the little 
wanton butterfly, will destroy it. The 
heart of a libertine is iron : it softens when 
heated with the fires of passion, but 



GLENAKVOX. 123 

it is cold and hard in itself. As whirl- 
winds they are strong" and irresisti- 
ble ; but when they subside, the calm of 
insensibility will succeed. Remember 
the friend of thy youth ; though he 
appear unkind, his seeming neglect is 
better worth than the vows and adulation 
of all beside. Oh ! Lady Avondale, let 
one that is lovely, and blest as you are, 
continue pure even in thought." 

Calantha looked up, and met Gondi- 
mar's eyes : the fire in them convinced 
her that love alone dictated this sage 
advice ; and none ever can conceive how 
much that feeling had been encreased 
by thus seeing a rival before him, whom 
he could not hope to render odious or 
ridiculous. 

On the following day Lord Glenarvon 
took his leave. The Duke appeared de- 
sirous of conciliating him ; Lady Marga- 
ret was more even than usually brilliant 
and agreeable; Mrs. Seymour relaxed 
something of her frigidity \ and the rest 



124 •LENARV0N. 

of the ladies were enthusiastic in their 
approbation. 

From that time Calantha spoke much and 
often apart with Gondimar. Every thought 
of her heart seemed concentrated on the 
sudden in one dark interest ; yet it was not 
love that she felt : it could not be. By day» 
by night, one image pursued her : yet 
to save, to reclaim, to lead back from 
crime to virtue — from misery to peace, 
was, as she then apprehended, her sole 
hope and view. Mere not all around 
alike infatuated ? Was not the idol of 
her fancy a being to whom all alike paid 
the incense of flattery — the most lowly, 
the most abject ? 

" Let them pursue," she cried ; " let 
them follow after and be favoured in 
turn. I alone, self-exiled, will fly, will 
hide myself beneath every concealment. 
He shall hear their words and believe 
in their adulation ; but never, whilst 
existence is allowed me, shall he know 
the interest with which he has inspired 



GLENARTON. 126 

me." Resolved upon this, and dreading 
her own thoughts, she danced, she rode, 
she sang, she talked to every one, sought 
every amusement, and seemed alone to 
dread one instant of repose — one single 
moment of time devoted to self-examina- 
tion and reflection. Ceaseless hurry, 
joyless mirth, endless desire of amuse- 
ment varied the days as they flitted by, 
" Oh, pause to reflect !" said Gondimar. 
But it was vain : new scenes of interest 
succeeded each other : till suddenly she 
started as if already in the dark labyrinth 
of sin, and shuddering on the very edge 
of the bottomless chasm, which opened 
before her feet. 



g 3 



12$ GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XIII 



Lord Glenarvon was now a favoured 
guest at the castle. He came, he went, 
as it suited his convenience or his hu- 
mour, — But every time he came, the se- 
cret interest he had excited was strength- 
ened ; and every time he went, he left 
apparently deeper marks of regret. 

Sir Richard Mowbrey and Sir George 
Buchanan were at this time also at the 
castle. Sir Everard, forgetful of his 
wrongs, and his Lady of her projects for 
the emancipation of her countrymen, 
kept open house during their stay ; 
Lady St. Clare, in pursuance of her 
plan of restoring herself to society, as- 
sisted with her daughters, at a concert 
in the great assembly-rooms at Belfont, 
given in honour of the Admiral's arrival. 



GLENERVON. 127 

On the eventful evening, the whole party 
at the castle resolved to make a most 
wonderful eclat, by their brilliant appear- 
ance and popular condescension. The 
Duke addressed himself to every indivi- 
dual with his accustomed affability. Lord 
Avondale attended upon his uncle, who 
amused himself by walking up and down 
that part of the room which was pre- 
pared for the dancers, bowing to all, 
shaking hands with all, and receiving 
those compliments which his brave con- 
duct deserved. Pale, trembling, and 
scarcely heeding the scene, Calantha 
watched with breathless anxiety for one 
alone ; and that one, for what cause she 
knew not, spoke not to her. 

" Where is he?"—" Which is he ?"— 
Was whispered now from mouth to 
mouth. The Admiral, the Duke, the 
concert were forgotten. One object 
appeared suddenly to engage the most 
boundless curiosity. " Is that really Lord 
Glenarvon ?" said a pretty little woman 
g4 



128 GLENARVON; 

pushing her way towards him* " Oh 
let me but have the happiness of speaking 
one word to him : — let me but say, when 
I return to my home, that I have seen 
him, and I shall be overjoyed/' Calantha 
made room for the enthusiastic Lady : 
— she approached — she offered her hand 
to the deliverer of his Country as she 
called him. He accepted it with grace, 
but some embarrassment. The rush was 
then general : everyone would see — would 
speak to their Lord — their King ; and 
the fashionable reserve which affectation 
had, for a moment* taught the good peo- 
ple of Belfont to assume, soon vanished, 
when nature spoke in their bosoms : so 
that had not the performers of the grand 
concerto called to order, Lord Glenarvon 
had been absolutely obliged to make his 
retreat. The mystery in which his fate 
appeared involved, his youth, his misfor- 
tunes, his brave conduct, and perhaps 
even his errors awakened this interest 
in such as beheld him. But he turned 



GLENARVON. 129 

form the gaze of strangers with bitter- 
ness. 

" Will you allow me to seat myself near 
you ?" he said, approaching Calantha's 
chair. " Can you ask ?" " Without 
asking, I would not. You may possibly 
stay till late : I shall go early. My only 
inducement in coming here was you." 
" Oh ! do not say, what I am well 
assured is not true." " I never say what 
I do not feel. Your presence here alone 
makes me endure all this fulsome flattery, 
noise, display. If you dance — that fa, 
when you dance, I shall retire." 

The concert now began with frequent 
bursts of applause. Suddenly a general 
murmur proclaimed some new and unex- 
pected event : — a young performer ap- 
peared. Was it a boy! Such grace — such 
beauty, soon betrayed her: it was Miss St. 
Clare. She could not hope for admittance 
in her own character ; yet, under a feigned 
name, she had promised/ to assist at the 

performance ; and the known popularity 

g5 



130 GLENARTOX. 

of her songs, and the superior sweetness 
of her voice, prevented the professors 
from enquiring too much into the pro- 
priety of such an arrangement 

Messieurs John Maclane and Creigh- 
ton had just been singing, in Italian, an 
opera buffa. The noise they had made 
was such, that even the most courteous 
had been much discountenanced. A mo- 
ment's pause ensued ; when, without 
one blush of diffidence, but, on the con- 
trary, with an air of dauntless and even 
contemptuous effrontery, the youthful 
performer seized her harp — Glenarvon's 
harp — and singing, whilst her dark bril- 
liant eyes were fixed upon him alone, 
she gave vent to the emotions of her own 
bosom, and drew tears of sympathy from 
many another. The words were evi- 
dently made at the moment; and breathed 
from the heart. She studied not the com- 
position, but the air was popular, and for 
that reason it had effect. 



GLENAIIVOJ*. 131 

If to lose all that love thee, should e'er be thy lot, 
By the world, that now courts thee, contemn'd or forgot 3 
When thy own fickle heart has all others estranged, 
Then remember St. Clara, who never had changed. 

Who had followed thy steps, though in sickness and sadness., 
More firm to the last than the foes who upbraid her; 

Who had followed thy steps, though to death and to madness, 
Then mourn o'er the grave where thy falsehood has laid her. 

Ah, say not! Ah, think not ! she e'er can recover, 
The blow never fails from the hand of a lover ; 
Full home it was struck, and it fell on a breast 
By remorse and uukindness already deprest. 

A smile oft, in death, may illumine each feature, 
W'henhope, fondly cherished, for ever is past j 

And the heart that is noble and high in its nature, 
Though deserted and scorn'd, will be firm to the last. 



132 GLENARVON. 

The admiration for the young enthu- 
siast was checked by the extreme disgust 
her shameless ill conduct had occasioned. 
The tears, too, of Sir Everard, who was 
present, and audibly called upon his cruel 
ungrateful niece, excited a strong feeling 
of sympathy and indignation. She re- 
tired the moment she had ended her 
song, and the commotion her presence 
Tiad excited subsided with her de- 
parture. 

The heiress of Delaval, decked in 
splendid jewels, had not lost, by compa- 
rison, with the deserted Elinor. She was 
the reigning favourite of the moment : 
every one observed it, and smiled upon 
her the more on that account. To be the 
favourite of the favoured was too much. 
The adulation paid to her during the 
evening, and the caresses lavished upon 
her had possibly turned a wiser head than 
her!s ; but alas ! a deeper interest em- 
ployed her thoughts, and Glenarvon's 
attention was her sole object. 



GLENARVON. 133 

Calantha had felt agitated and serious 
during Miss St. Clare's performance. 
Lord Glenarvon had conversed with his 
customary ease ; yet something had 
wounded her. Perhaps she saw, in the 
gaze of strangers, that this extreme and 
sudden intimacy was observed ; or pos- 
sibly her heart reproached her. She felt 
that not vanity alone, nor even enthusi- 
asm, was the cause of her present emo- 
tion. She knew not, nor could define 
the motive ; but, with seeming inconsis- 
tency, after refusing positively to dance, 
she sent for Buchanan and joined in 
that amusement ; and, as if the de- 
sire of exercise had susperseded every 
other, she danced on with an energy 
and perseverance, which excited the 
warmest approbation in all. " What 
spirits Lady Avondale has I" said one. 
w How charming she is !" cried another. 
She herself only sighed. 

" Have you ever read a tragedy of 
Ford's ?" whispered Lady Augusta to Car 



134 GLENARVON. 

lantha, as soon as she had ceased to exhi- 
bit — " a tragedy entitled The Broken 
Heart" " No," she replied, half vexed, 
half offended. " At this moment you put 
me vastly in mind of it. You look most 
woefully. Come, tell me truly, is not 
your heart in torture ? and, like your 
namesake Calantha, while lightly danc- 
ing the gayest in the ring, has not the 
shaft already been struck, and shall you 
not die ere you attain the goal r" She 
indeed felt nearly ready to do so ; and 
fanning herself excessively, declared, that 
it was dreadfully hot — that she should 
absolutely expire of the heat : yet while 
talking and laughing with those who 
surrounded her, her eye looked cau- 
tiously round, eager to behold the re- 
sentment and expected frowns of him 
whom she had sought to offend ; but 
there was no frown on Lord Glenarvon's 
brow — no look of resentment. 

" And are you happy ?" he said, ap- 
proaching her with gentleness. " Per- 



GLEXARVON. 135 

haps so, since some can rejoice in the 
sufferings of others. Yet 1 forgive you, 
because I know you are not yourself. I 
see you are acting from pique : but you 
have no cause ; for did you know my 
heart, and could you feel what it suffers 
on your account, your doubts would give 
way to far more alarming suspicions." 
He paused, for she turned abruptly from 
him. u Dance on then, LadyAvondale," 
he continued, u the admiration of those 
for whose society you were formed — the 
easy prey of every coxcomb to whom that 
ready hand is so continually offered, and 
which I have never once dared to ap- 
proach. Such is the respect which will 
ever be shewn to the object of real admi- 
ration, interest and regard, although that 
object seems willing to forget that it is 
her due. But," added he, assuming that 
air of gaiety he had one moment laid 
aside, " I detain you, do I not ? See Co- 
lonel Donallan and the Italian Count 
await you." You mistake me," she said 



136 GLENARVOtf. 

gravely ; " I could not presume to imagine 
that my dancing would be heeded by you: 
I could have no motive." " None but the 
dear delight of tormenting," he replied, 
" which gave a surprising elasticity to 
your step, 1 can assure you. Indubitably 
had not that impulse assisted, you could 
not thus have excelled yourself." "If you 
knew," she said, " what I suffer at this 
moment you would spare me. Why do 
you deride me?" " Because, oh Lady 
Avondale, I dare not — I cannot speak to 
you more seriously. I feel that 1 have no 
right — no claim on you. I dread offend- 
ing ; but to-morrow I shall expiate all ; 
for I leave you to-morrow. — Yes, it must 
be so. I am going from Ireland. Indeed 
I was going before I had the misery of 
believing that I should leave anything in 
it I could ever regret." W hat Calantha felt 
when he said this, cannot be described. 

" Will you dance the two next dances 
with me ?" said Colonel Donallan, now 
approaching. " I am tired : will you ex- 



GLENARVdN. 137 

cuse me ? I believe our carriages are or* 
dered." "Oh, surely you will not go away 
before supper." " Ask Lady Mandeville 
what she means to do." " Lady Tre- 
lawney and Miss Seymour stay." " Then^ 
perhaps I shall." The Colonel bowed 
and retired. — " Give me the rose you 
wear," said Glenarvon in a low voice, 
" in return for the one I presented you at 
Donallan Park." " Must I ?" " You 
must," he said, smiling. With some 
hesitation, she obeyed ; yet she looked 
around in hopes no vigilant eye might ob- 
serve her. She took it from her bosom, and 
gave it tremblingly into his hands. Alarge 
pier glass reflected the scene to the whole 
company. The rose thus given, was re- 
ceived with transport. It said more, thus 
offered, than a thousand words : — it was 
taken and pressed to a lover's lips, till all 
its blushing beauties were gone, then it 
was cast down on the earth to be tram- 
pled upon by many. And had Calantha 
wished it, she might have read in the 



138 GLENARVON. 

history of the flower, the fate that ever 
attends on guilty love. 

And was it love she felt so soon — so 
strongly ! — It is not possible. Alarmed, 
grieved, flattered at his altered manner, 
she turned aside to conceal the violent, 
the undefinable emotions, to which she 
had become a prey : — a dream of ecstasy 
for one moment fluttered in her heart ; 
but the recollection of Lord Avondale 
recurring, she started with horror from 
herself — from him; and, abruptly taking 
leave, retired. 

" Are you going ?" said Glenarvon. 
" I am ill," she answered. " Will you 
suffer me to accompany you ?" he said, 
as he assisted her into her carriage ; " or 
possibly it is not the custom in this coun- 
try : — you mistrust me — you think it 
wrong." — " No," she answered with em- 
barrassment ; and he seated himself by 
her side. The distance to the castle was 
short. Lord Glenarvon was more re- 
spectful, more reserved, more silent than 



tJLENARVON. 139 

before he had entered the carriage. On 
quitting it only he pressed her hand to 
his heart, and bade her feel for the agony 
she had implanted there. None perhaps, 
ever before felt what she did at this 
instant 



140 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



If any indifferent person approach us, it 
either is disagreeable, or at least unim- 
portant ; but when it is a person we love, 
it thrills through the heart, and we are 
unable to speak or to think. Could she 
have imagined that Lord Glenarvon felt 
for her, she had been lost. But that was 
imposible; and yet his manner; — it was 
so marked, there could be no doubt. She 
was inexperienced, we may add, inno- 
cent; though sufficiently prepared to 
become every thing that was the re- 
verse. Yet in a moment she felt her 
own danger, and resolved to guard 
against it. How then can so many affirm, 
when they know that they are loved, that 
it is a mere harmless friendship ! how can 
they, in palliation of their errors, bring 
forward the perpetually repeated excuse 



GLENARVON. 141 

that they were beguiled ! The heart that 
is chaste and pure will shrink the soonest 
from the very feeling that would pollute 
it: — in vain it would attempt to deceive 
itself: the very moment we love, or are 
loved, something within us points out the 
danger: — even when we fly from him, to 
whom we could attach ourselves, we feel 
a certain embarrassment — an emotion, 
which is not to be mistaken ; and, in a 
lover's looks, are there not a thousand 
assurances and confessions which no de- 
nial of words can for a moment disguise? 
Lord Glenarvon had denied to Calantha 
the possibility of his ever again feeling at- 
tachment. This had not deceived her; 
but she was herself too deeply and sud- 
denly struck to the heart to venture to 
hope for a return. Besides, she did not 
think of this as possible: — he seemed to 
her so far above her — so far above every 
thing. She considered him as entirely 
different from all others; and, if not su- 



142 GLEtfARTO'?*'. 

peri or, at least dissimilar and consequently 
not to be judged by the same crite- 
rion. 

It is difficult to explain Calantha's pe- 
culiar situation with respect to Lord Avon- 
dale. Yet it is necessary briefly to state 
in what manner they were situated at this 
particular period. They were dearer to 
each other perhaps, than any two who 
had been so long united in marriage. 
They loved each other with more passion, 
more enthusiasm than is often retained ; 
but they were, from a thousand circum- 
stances, utterly estranged at this time; 
and that apparently by mutual consent — 
like two violent spirits which had fretted 
and chafed and opposed each other, till 
both were sore and irritated. 

In the course of years, they had said 
every thing that was most galling and 
bitter; and though the ardent attachment 
they really felt, had ever followed those 
momentary bursts of fury, the veil had 



GLEXARVON. 143 

beeri torn aside — that courtesy, which 
none should ever suffer themselves to for- 
get, had been broken through, and they 
had yielded too frequently to the sudden- 
impulse of passion, ever to feel secure that 
the ensuing moment might not produce a 
scene of discord. 

Calmness and deliberation had van- 
quished Calantha; violence could not. 
When provoked, Lord Avondale was 
too severe ; and when he saw her mi- 
serable and oppressed, it gave him more 
suffering than if he had himself been 
subdued. There are few spirits which 
cannot be overcome if dexterously at- 
tacked ; but with the fierce and daring, 
force will generally be found useless. 
It should be remembered that, like mad- 
ness, these distorted characters see not 
things as they are ; and, like martyrs 
and fanatics, they attach a degree of glory 
to every privation and punishment in the 
noble cause of opposition to what they 



144 GLENARV0*. 

conceive is unjust authority. Such a 
character is open and guileless; but 
unhappily, the very circumstance that 
makes it sincere, renders it also, if it 
turn from the right course, desperate and 
hardened. Hypocricyand falsehood, how- 
ever disgusting, are perhaps less dange- 
rous symptoms than that fearless open- 
ness. The former at least proves a sense 
of shame, and whilst this exists all virtue 
is not extinct. 

During the first years of their mar- 
riage, these tumultuous scenes but 
strengthened the attachment they felt 
for each other ; but when Lord Avon- 
dale's profession absorbed his mind, he 
dreaded a recurrence of those quarrels 
and reconciliations which had once so 
entirely engrossed his thoughts. He left 
Calantha, therefore, to the guidance of 
that will, which she had so long and per- 
tinaciously indulged. Absent, pre -oc- 
cupied, he saw not, he heard not, the 



ULE'NARVGN* 145 

misuse she made of her entire liberty. 
Some trifle, perhaps, at times, reached his 
ear ; a scene of discord ensued ; much bit- 
terness on both sides followed: and the 
conviction that they no longer loved each 
other, added considerably to the violence 
of recrimination. They knew not how 
deeply rooted affection such as they had 
once felt, must ever be — how the very 
ties that compelled them to belong to 
each other, strengthened, in fact, the 
attachment which inclination and love 
had first inspired ; but, with all the 
petulance and violence of character 
natural to each, they fled estranged 
and offended from each other's so- 
ciety. 

Lord Avondale sought, in an active 
and manly profession, for some newer 
interest, in which every feeling of am- 
bition could have part ; and she, sur- 
rendering her soul to the illusive dream 
of a mad and guilty attachment 

Vol. II. II 



146 GLEXARVOX. 

boasted that she had found again 
the happines she had lost; and con- 
trasted the indifference of her husband 
with the ardour, the devotion, the re- 
fined attention of a newly acquired 
friend. 



GLENARTOK. 14? 



CHAPTER XV* 



O better had it been to die than to see 
and hear Glenarvon. When he smiled* 
it was like the light of heaven ; and when 
he spoke, his voice was more soothing 
in its sweetness than music. He was 
so gentle in his manners, that it was in 
vain even to affect to be offended ; and, 
though he said he never again could love, 
he would describe how some had died, 
and others maddened, under the power 
of that fierce passion — how every tie that 
binds us, and every principle and law, 
must be broken through, as secondary 
considerations, by its victims: he would 
speak home to the heart ; for he knew it in 
all its turnings and windings; and, at his 
will, he could rouse or tame the varying 
passions of those over whom he sought to 
exorcise dominion. Yet, when by every 
u2 



148 GLENERVOX. 

art and talent he had raised the flames 
of love, tearing himself from his victim, 
he would leave her, and then weep for 
the agony of grief by which he saw her 
destroyed. 

Had he betrayed in his manner to Ca- 
lantha that freedom, that familiarity so 
offensive in men, but yet so frequent 
amongst them, she would yet have shud- 
dered. But what was she to fly? Not 
from the gross adulation, or the easy flip- 
pant protestations to which all women are 
soon or late accustomed : but from a res- 
pect, at once refined and flattering — an 
attention devoted even to her least wishes, 
yet without appearing subservient — a 
gentleness and sweetness, as rare as they 
were fascinating ; and these combined 
with all the powers of imagination, 
vigour of intellect, and brilliancy of wit, 
which none ever before possessed in so 
iminent a degree ; and none ever since 
have even presumed to rival. Could she 
fly from a being unlike all others — 



«L EN ART ON. 149 

sought for by every one, yet, by his own 
confession, wholly and entirely devoted 
to herself. 

How cold compared with Glenarvon, 
was the regard her family and friends af- 
fected ! Was it confidence in her honour, 
or indifference? Lord Glenarvon asked 
Calantha repeatedly, which it most re- 
sembled — he appealed to her vanity 
even, whether strong affection could thus 
neglect, and leave the object of its soli- 
citude? Yet, had she done nothing to 
chill a husband and parent's affection — 
bad she not herself lessened the regard 
they had so faithfully cherished ? 

Calantha thought she had sufficient 
honour and spirit to tell her husband at 
once the danger to which she was ex- 
posed ; but when she considered more 
seriously her situation, it appeared to her 
almost ridiculous to fancy that it was so 
imminent. If upon some occasion, Lord 
Glenarvon's manner was ardent, the en- 
-suing* morning she found him cold, 
h3 



150 GLGNARYON. 

distant and pre-occupied, and she felt- 
ashamed of the weakness which, for one 
moment, could have made her imagine 
she was the object of his thoughts. In- 
deed, he often took an opportunity of 
stating, generally, that he never could feel 
either interest or love for any thing on 
earth ; that once he had felt too deeply 
and had suffered bitterly from it ; and 
that now his sole regret was in the cer- 
tainty that he never again could be so 
deceived. 

He spoke, with decision, of leaving 
Ireland, and more than once repeated, 
emphatically to the Duke, " I shall never 
forget the kindness which prompted you 
to seek me out, when under very unplea- 
sant circumstances ; I shall immediately 
withdraw my name from the directory — 
my sentiments I cannot change ; but you 
have already convinced me of the folly 
of spreading them amongst the unen- 
lightened multitude." 

Sir Everard, who was present, lifted up 



GLENARVON. 151 

his bands at such discourse. " He is a 
convert of mine, I verily believe," he 
cried ; " and Elinor"—" Miss St. Clare," 
whispered Glenarvon, turning to the 
Doctor, u has long' been admonished by 
me, to return to an indulgent uncle, and 
throw herself on your mercy." " My 
mercy !" said Sir Everard, bursting into 
tears, — " my gratitude. Oh! my child, 
my darling." " And believe me," con- 
tinued Lord Glenarvon, with an air which 
seemed haughtily to claim belief, " I re- 
turn her as innocent as she came to me 
Her imagination may have bewildered 
and beguiled her; but her principles are 
wncorrupted." " Generous } r oung noble^ 
man !" exclaimed Sir Everard, ready to 
kneel before him — "noble, mighty, 
grand young gentleman ! wonder of our 
age!" Lord Glenarvon literally smiled^ 
through his tears ; for the ridicule of Sir 
Everard did not prevent his excellent 
and warm feelings from affecting those 
who knew him well. " And will she 
ii 4 



152 GLENARVON. 

return to her poor uncle ?" " I know 
not," said Lord Glenarvon, gravely : " I 
fear not ; but I have even implored her 
to do so." " Oh, if you fail who are so 
fair and so persuasive, who can hope to 
move her r" " She may hear a parent's 
voice," said Glenarvon, " even though 
deaf to a lover's prayer." " And are you 
indeed a lover to my poor deluded Eli- 
nor ?" " I was," said Lord Glenarvon, 
proudly; " but her strange conduct, and 
stubborn spirit have most effectually cured 
me; and I must own, Sir Everard, I do 
not think I ever again can even affect a 
feeling of this sort : after all, it is a 
useless way of passing life." " You are 
right," said the Doctor ; " quite right ; 
and it injures the health : there is nothing- 
creates bile, and hurts the constitution 
more, than suspense and fretting : — I 
know it by myself." 

They were standing in the library 
during this discourse. Lady Avondale 
entered now : Lord Glenarvon approached 



GLEXARVON. 153 

her. They were for a few momenta alone : 
— he leant over her ; she held a book in 
her hand; he read a few lines ; it is not 
possible to describe how well he read 
them. The poetry he read was beautiful 
as his own ; it affected him. He read 
more ; he became animated ; Calantha 
looked up ; he fixed his eyes on hers ; he 
forgot the poem ; his hand touched hers, 
as he replaced the book before her ; she 
drew away her hand ; he took it and 
pressed it to his lips. " Pardon me," he 
said, " I am miserable, but I will never 
injure you. Fly me, Lady Avondale : I 
deserve not either interest or regard ; 
and to look upon me is in itself pollution 
to one like you." He then said a few 
words expressive of his admiration for 
her husband : — u He is as superior to me," 
he said, " as Hyperion to a satyr : — and 
you love him, do you not?" continued 
he, smiling. " Can you ask?" " He 
seems most attached, too, to you." " Far, 
far more than I deserve." 
H 5 



154 GLENARVON, 

" I can never love again, " said Cle- 
narvon, still holding her hand: " never. 
There will be no danger in my friend- 
ship," he said, after a moment's thought : 
*' none ; for I am cold as the grave — as 
death ; and all here," he said pressing 
her hand upon his heart, " is chilled^ 
lost, absorbed. They will speak ill of 
me," he continued rather mournfully ; 
" and you will learn to hate me." " I ! 
never, never. I will defend you, if 
abused ; I will hate those who hate you ; 
I — " He smiled : " How infatuated you 
are," he said, " poor little thing that 
seeks to destroy itself. Have you not 
then heard what I have done ?" * I have 
heard much," said Calantha, " but I 
know — I feel it is false." " It is all too 
true," said Lord Glenarvon carelessly : — 
" all quite true; and there is much worse 
yet : but it is no matter," he continued ; 
" the never dying worm feeds upon my 
heart ; I am like death, Lady Avondale ; 
and all beneath is seared." 



GLENARVON. 155 

Whilst the conscience wakes, and the 
blush of confused and trembling guilt 
yet varies the complexion, the sin is not 
of long standing, or of deep root ; but 
when the mind seeks to disguise from 
itself its danger — when, playing upon 
the edge of the precipice, the victim wil- 
lingly deludes itself, and appears hard 
and callous to every admonitory caution, 
then is the moment for alarm ; and that 
moment now appeared to realize Calan- 
iha's fears. 

Attacked with some asperity by her nu- 
merous friends, for her imprudent con- 
duct, she now boldly avowed her friend- 
ship for Glenarvon, and disclaimed the 
possibility of its exceeding the bounds of 
the strictest propriety prescribed. She 
even gloried in his attachment ; and 
said that there was not one of those who 
were admonishing her to beware who 
would not readily, nay, even gladly fill 
her place. Calantha had seen their let- 
ters to him : she had marked their ad- 



156 GLENARVON. 

varices ; she imagined that all others, like 
herself, were enamoured of the same 
idol ; and in this instance she was right : 
— the infatuation was general: he was 
termed the leader of the people, the libe- 
rator of his country, the defender of the 
rights of Ireland. If he wandered forth 
through Belfont, he was followed by ad- 
miring crowds ; and whilst he affected to 
disdain the transient homage, she could 
but perceive that he lost no opportunity 
by every petty artifice of encreasing the 
illusion. 



GLENARYON. 157 



CHAPTER XVI 



At this crisis the whole party at the 
castle were disturbed by the unexpected 
arrival of the Princess of Madagascar at 
Dublin. A small fleet had been seen 
approaching* the coast : it was rumour- 
ed that the French, in open boats, were 
preparing to invade Ireland ; but it 
proved, though it may sound rather ludi- 
crous to say so, only the great Nabob 
and the Princess of Madagascar. Their 
immense retinue and baggage, which 
the common people took for the heavy 
artillery, arrived without incident or ao 
cident at Belfont ; and the couriers 
having prepared the Duke for the recep- 
tion of his illustrious guest, they await- 
ed her arrival with considerable impa- 
tience. 
During the bustle and noise, this little 



158 GLENARYOX. 

event occasioned, Lord Glenarvon came 
to Lady Avondale and whispered in her 
ear, " I shall walk this evening : contrive 
to do so too, as I have something of im- 
portance to tell you." He gave her a 
ring. It was an emerald with a harp 
engraved upon it — the armorial bearing* 
of Ireland : " let us be firm and united," 
was written under. " I mean it merely 
politically/' he said smiling. " Even 
were you a Clarissa, you need not be 
alarmed : I am no Lovelace, I promise 

you." 

The princess was now announced, fifty- 
three attendants and twenty-four domes- 
tic friends, were her small and conscien- 
tious establishment, besides a cook, con- 
fectioner and laundress, to the total dis- 
comfiture of Irish hospitality. The high 
priest in the dress of the Greek Church, 
ever attended her, and eagerly sought to 
gain adherents to the only true established 
church, at whatever house he occasionally 
rested. The simplicity of Hoiouskim, 



GLENARVON. 159 

his eagerness, his abilities and informa- 
tion, added much to the rational pleasure 
of the society at Castle Delaval. 

But neither the presence of the Nabob 
nor the caresses of the Princess, who cast 
many a gentle glance upon Glenarvon, 
could for one moment detach his thoughts 
from Calantha. On the contrary he an- 
swered her with distant reserve and ap- 
peared eager to shew to every one the 
marked distinction he felt for the woman 
he loved. " Oh ! he is really sincere," 
she thought, as he left them all to attend 
to her. " I amuse, I soothe him," the 
hope rendered her blest and she felt in- 
different to every consequence. 

" You are not as handsome as Sophia," 
said Glenarvon, looking on her ; " but 
I admire you more. Your errors are 
such as you have frankly confessed ; but 
you have others which you wished me 
not to perceive. Few have so many 
faults ; yet how is it that you have wound 
yourself already round this cold, this 



160 GLENAAVQN. 

selfish heart, which had resolved never 
again to admit any inmate. You love your 
husband, Lady Avondale : I respect you 
too well to attempt to change your affec- 
tion ; but if I wished it, your eyes alrea- 
dy tell me what power 1 have gained : — I 
could do what I would." " No, no," she 
answered. " You are too vain." " None 
ever yet resisted me," said Glenarvon : 
" do you think you could ?" Calantha 
scarce knew how to answer ; but while 
she assured him she could resist any one 
and had no fear for herself, she felt the 
contrary ; and trembled with mixed ap- 
prehensions of joy and sorrow at her 
boast — when others approached, he did 
not change his manner to Calantha : he 
discontinued his conversation ; but he 
still looked the same : he was not fearful 
as some would have been, or servile, or 
full of what might be said : he seemed 
in all respects careless or desperate. He 
laughed, but his laugh was not the heart's 
laugh: his wit enlivened and dazzled 



GXEXARVON. 161 

others ; but it seemed not the effect of 
exuberent spirits. 

It was not unfrequently the custom at 
Castle Delaval, during the fine summer 
evenings, to walk after dinner, before 
cards or music. The flower gardens, 
and shrubbery were the most usual pla- 
ces of resort. Lady Augusta smilingly 
observed to Lady Mandeville and Sophia, 
that, for some evenings past, Lady Avon- 
dale had taken more extensive rambles, 
and that Lord Glenarvon and she were 
oftentimes absent till supper was an- 
nounced. The Count Gondimar, who 
overheard the remark, affected to think it 
malignant, and asked with a sarcastic 
sneer, whether Lord Avondale were with 
her on these evening excursions ? " Little 
Mowbrey seems a great favourite of Lord 
Glenarvon's," said Lady Augusta ; " but 
I do not fancy his father is often of the 
party, or that his being Lady Avondale's 
child is the cause of the partiality : the boy 
has a sprightly wit. We must not draw 



162 GLENARVOW. 

unfair conclusions : last year Mr. Bucha- 
nan gave us alarm ; and now it is quite 
natural we should all fall in love with Lord 
Glenarvon. I have myself ; only he will 
not return my advances. Did you observe 
what an eye I made him at breakfast ?.... 
but that never was a love making meal. 
Place me but near him at supper, and 
you shall see what I can do/' 

Gondimar suddenly left Lady Augusta., 
who was walking on the terrace. He had 
caught a glimpse of Calantha as she 
wandered slowly by the banks of Elle : — 
he hastened to the spot ; he saw her ; he 
penetrated her feelings ; and he returned 
thoughtful and irritated to the Castle. 
Snatching a pen he wrote for some time. 
Lady Trelawney and Lady Augusta, ob- 
serving him, approached and insisted 
upon being made acquainted with \m 
studies. " It is an ode you are inditing, 
I am certain," said the latter, " 1 saw you 
struck by the God as you darted from 
me/' " You are right," cried Gondimar, 



GLENAltVON. 163 

I am composing a song." "In English 
too, I perceive." " What if it be English ? 
you know one of my talents can write 
even in that damn'd language : so criti- 
cise my rhapsody if you dare. At all 
events Lady Avondale will admire it ; for 
it is about a rose and love — most senti. 
mental. And where is she ? for till her 
return, I will not shew it you." 

If that question where is Lady Avon- 
dale must be answered, it is with sorrow 
and regret that such answer will be made: 
— she was walking slowly, as Gondimar 
had seen her, by the banks of the river 
Elle : she was silent, too, and mournful ; 
her spirits were gone ; her air was that 
of one who is deeply interested in all she 
hears. She was not alone — Lord G3e- 
narvon was by her side. It was their 
custom thus to walk : they met daily ; 
they took every opportunity of meeting ; 
and when in their morning and evening 
rambles she pointed out the beautiful 
views around, the ranging mountains 



164 GLENARVON. 

and the distant ocean, — he would des- 
cribe in glowing language, the far more 
magnificent and romantic scenery of 
the countries through which he had 
passed — countries teaming with rich 
fruits, vineyards and olive groves ; luxu- 
riant vales and mountains, soaring above 
the clouds, whose summits were white 
with snow, while a rich and ceaseless ve- 
getation adorned the valleys beneath. He 
told her that he hated these cold northern 
climes, and the bottle green of the Atlan- 
tic ; — that could she see the dark blue of 
the Mediterranean, whose clear wave re- 
flected the cloudless sky, she would never 
be able to endure those scenes in which 
she now took such delight. And soon 
those scenes lost all their charms for Ca- 
lantha ; for that peace of mind which 
gave them charms was fast departing ; 
and she sighed for that beautiful land to 
which his thoughts reverted, and those 
Italian climes, to which he said, he so 
soon must return. 



GLENARVON. 165 



CHAPTER XVII. 



It was upon this evening, that, having 
walked for a considerable time, Lady 
Avondale felt fatigued and rested for a 
moment near the banks of Elle. She 
pointed to the roses which grew luxu- 
riantly around. " They are no longer 
rare," she said, alluding to the one he had 
given her upon their first acquaintance 
at Donallan : "but are they the less pri- 
zed ?" He understood her allusion, and 
pulling a bud from the mossy bank 
on which it grew, he kissed it, and 
putting it gently to her lips asked her, 
if the perfume were sweet, and which 
she preferred of the two roses which 
he had offered her ? She knew not 
what she answered ; and she afterwards 
wished she could forget what she had 
then felt. 

Gondimar passed them at that mo- 



166 GLENAllVOtf. 

merit: — He observed her confusion; he 
retired as if fearful of encreasing it ; and, 
but too conscious that such conversation 
was wrong, Calantha attempted once to 
change it. " I will shew you the new 
lodge," she said turning up a large gravel 
walk, out of the shrubbery. " Shew me 1 " 
Glenarvon answered smiling. " Trust me, 
I know every lodge and walk here better 
than yourself;" and he amused himself 
with her surprise. Some thought, how- 
ever, occurred, which checked his merri- 
ment — some remembrances made this 
boast of his acquaintance with the place 
painful to him. There was one, whom 
he had formerly seen and admired, who 
was no longer present and whom every 
one but himself appeared to have for- 
gotten — one who, lovely in the first bloom 
of spotless youth, had felt for him all 
that even his heart could require. She 
was lost — he should never see her 
more. 

A momentary gloom darkened his 
, countenance at this recollection. He 



GLBNARVON. 167 

looked upon Calantha and she trembled ; 
for his manner was much altered. Her 
cheeks kindled as she spoke : — her eye 
dared no longer encounter his. If she 
looked up for a moment, she withdrew 
in haste, unable to sustain the ardent 
glance : her step tremblingly advanced, 
lingering, but yet unwilling to pause or to 
retreat. Her heart beat in tumult, or 
swelled with passion, as he whispered to 
her that, which she ought never to have 
heard. She hastened towards the castle : 
— he did not attempt to detain her. 

It was late : the rest of the company 
were gone home. Thither she hastened ; 
and hurrying to the most crowded part of 
the room, flushed with her walk, she com- 
plained of the heat, and thought that 
every eye was fixed upon her with looks 
of strong disapprobation. Was it indeed 
so ? or was it a guilty conscience which 
made her think so ? 

Lady Mandeville observing her dis- 
tress, informed her that Count Gondimar, 



108 GLEN AR VON. 

had been composing a song, but Mould 
not sing it till she was present. She 
eagerly desired to hear it. " It is about 
a rose/* said Gondimar, significantly 
glancing his eye upon the one in Calan- 
tha's bosom. The colour in her cheeks 
became far redder than the flower. " Sing 
it," she said, " or rather let me read it. . . 
or . . . but wherefore are you not dan- 
cing, or at billiards ? How dull it must 
be for Clara and Charlotte" (these were 
two of Lady Mandeville's children). 
" You never thought of Lady Mande- 
ville's beautiful children, and our state 
of dullness, while you were walking," 
cried Lady Augusta, " and last night you 
recollect that when you made every one 
dance, you sat apart indulging vain phan- 
tasies and idle reveries. However, they 
are all gone into the ball-room, if dancing 
is the order of the night ; but as for me, 
I shall not stir from this spot, till I hear 
Count Goindimar's song." 

" 1 will sing it you, Lady Avondale," 



GLENARVON. 169 

said the Count, smiling at her distress, 
" the first evening that you remain at 
your balcony alone, watching the clouds 
as they flit across the moon, and listening, 
I conclude, to the strains of the nightin- 
gale/' " Then," she said, affecting un- 
concern, " I claim your promise for to- 
morrow night, punctually at nine." He 
approached the piano-forte. " Oh not 
now — I am engaged, — I must dance/' 
" Now or never," said the Count. " Never 
then, never," she answered, almost cry- 
ing, though she affected to laugh. Lady 
Augusta entreated for the song, and the 
Count, after a short prelude, placed the 
manuscript paper before him, and in a 
low tone of voice began : — 



(To the air of " Ik ne so?it plus.") 

Waters of Elle 1 thy limpid streams^ve flowing, 
Smooth and untroubled, through the flovv'ry vale : 

O'er thy green banks once more, the wild rose blowing, 
Greets the young spring,and scents the passing gale. 

Vol. II. I 



170 GLENARVON. 

Here 'twas at eve, near yonder tree reposing, 
One still too dear, first breath'd his vows to thee: 

Wear this, he cried, his guileful love disclosing, 
Near to thy heart, in memory of me. 

.Love's cherished gift, the rose he gave, is faded; 

Love's blighted flower, can never bloom again. 
Weep for thy fault — in heart — in mind degraded: 

Weep, if thy tears can wash away the stain. 

Call back the vows, that once to heaven were plighted, 
Vows full of love, of innocence and truth. 

Call back the scenes in which thy soul delighted: 
Call back the dream that blest thy early youth. 

plow silver stream, tho' threatening tempests lower, 
Bright, mild and clear, thy gentle waters flow ; 

Round thy green banks, the spring's young blossoms 
flower; 
O'er thy soft waves the balmy zephyrs blow. 

—Yet, all in vain; for never spring arraying 
Nature in charms, to thee can make it fair. 

Ill fated love, clouds all thy path, pourtraying 
Years pa.°t of bliss, and future of despair. 



Gondimar seemed affected whilst he 
sung; and Calantha felt nearly suffocated 
with every sort of feeding. Lady Augusta 



iTfiwflTtr 



/J//.^ /Hi 1/ '■ /ji 



Waters oi' EHf , thy limpid steams are flowing 



^pp 



mm 




t i i^^ m^i 



Smooth and untroubled o'er the Hoh'wt vale ; 



t^^mm mm 



§ J f r -^^^ 



M^ 



On thy ptwh banks once more the wild rose liimnn^ 



&=z&fMft=& mi& 



pu^ig mmm 



J 



Greets the vouuo- spring* and scents the passing gale- 






^M 



j-,1 



Greets the vouuo* spring' iinil scents the passing - gale 



^^m 



GLENARTON. 171 

pretended not to understand it, and has- 
tened with Calantha into the adjoining 
room. Lord Glenarvon followed and 
approached Lady Avondale : " Remember 
me in your prayers, my gentlest friend," 
he whispered. " E\en in the still night 
let some remembrance of Glenarvon 
occur. Think of me, for I am jealous 
even of thy dreams/' The angry glance 
of Gondimar interrupted the conference. 
Calantha could not sleep that night. 
A thousand fears and hopes rushed upon 
her mind. She retired 10 her room : 
atone time seized a pen, and wrote, in all 
the agony of despair, a full confession of 
Jier guilty feelings to her husband ; the 
next she tore the dreadful testimony of 
liar erring heart, and addressed herself to 
heaven for mercy. But vain the struggle. 
From childhood's earliest day she never 
hed refused herself one wish, or one in- 
dulgence. She knew not, on the sudden 
how to allay the fierce and maddening 
fever that raged within. " 1 am lost," 
i2 



172 GLENARVON. 

she cried, " I love — I worship, To live 
without him will be death — worse, worse 
than death. One look, one smile from 
Glenarvon, is dearer than ought else that 
heaven has to offer. Then let me not 
attempt, what I have not power to effect. 
Oh, as his friend, let me still behold him. 
His love, some happier, some better heart 
shall possess." Again she started with 
horror from herself. " His love!" she 
cried, " and can I think of him in so 
criminal — so guilty a manner ! I who 
am a wife — a mother! Let me crush 
such feelings even now in their birth. Let 
me fly him, whilst yet it is possible; nor 
imagine the grief, he says my absence 
will cause, can exceed the misery my dis- 
honourable attachment will bring upon 
both ! And did he dare to tell me that he 
loved me ? Was not this in itself a proof 
that he esteemed me no longer ? Misera- 
ble, wretched Calantha ; where shall I fly 
to hide my shame ? How conceal from a 
lover's searching eyes that he is too clear?" 



GLENARVON. 173 

With such thoughts she attempted to 
close her eyes ; but dreadful dreams dis- 
turbed her fancy ; and the image of Gle- 
narvon pursued her even in sleep. She 
saw him — not kneeling at her feet, in all 
the impassioned transports of love ; not 
radiant with hope, nor even mournful 
with despondency and fear ; but pale, 
deadly, and cold : his hand was ice, and, 
as he placed it upon hers, she shrunk as 
from the grasp of death, and awoke 
oppressed with terror. 



i 3 



174 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



No one had apparently observed Lady 
Avondale's feigned indisposition that 
evening — feigned, indeed, it was not; 
no one soothed her during her sleepless 
night; and in the morning when she 
awoke, at an early hour, Lord Avondale 
asked her not the cause of her disquiet, 
deeply grieved at her altered manner — 
too proud to seek the confidence he per- 
peceived that he had lost — disappointed 
in the character and conduct of the 
woman he had chosen as a companion 
and solace, he watched not her actions, 
he penetrated not her feelings, but finding 
that his presence was distasteful to her, 
he avoided her: he even thought that he 
no longer loved one who in every point 
had acted in the manner he least ap- 
proved. Some there are whose affections 



GLENARVON. 175 

change with their esteem and good opi- 
nion. Unhappily for Lord Avondale this 
was not his nature. Long habit had 
rendered Calantha dear. He thought 
that he had become indifferent, but he 
knew not that the empire with which she 
seized over his heart. She arose and 
descended upon the terrace : — her steps 
involuntarily led her to the banks of the 
Elle. The flowers, fresh with dew, 
sparkled in the sunshine, and scented the 
soft morning air. She hurried on, re- 
gardless of the distance. The flower 
Glenarvon had given her was faded: but 
its leaves were preserved by her with 
fondest care. 

Whilst yet she walked, at a little dis- 
tance she perceived Gondimar, and was 
in consequence preparing to return, 
when he abruptly accosted her; and with 
a manner too little respectful, rudely seiz- 
ed her hand. " Have you not slept ?" 
he cried, " my charming, my adored 
young friend, that you are thus early in 
i4 



176 GLENARVON. 

your walk ; or did you imagine that 
others, beside myself, would wander upon 
these banks, and await your fairy step ? 
O suffer one who admires — who loves, 
to open his heart to you — to seize this 
opportunity/' " Leave me, approach 
me not. What have I done to deserve 
this from you?" she exclaimed. " Why 
seize my hand by force ? Why press it — 
oh Heavens ! to those detested lips ? 
Leave me, Count Gondimar : forget not 
the respect due to every woman/' " Of 
virtue I" he replied, with a scornful 
smile. " But tell me, has Lady Avon- 
dale never suffered such insults from 
some who have no better claim ? Has 
she still a right to this amazing mockery 
of respect ? Ah ! trust me, we cannot 
command our love/' " Neither can we 
command our abhorrence — our disgust," 
she exclaimed, breaking from his grasp 
and hastening away. 

As Calantha re-entered the Castle, she 
met. Lady Margaret and Glenarvon, who 



GLENARVON. 177 

appeared surprised and disconcerted at 
seeing her. " Has Count Gondimar 
been speaking to you upon any subject 
of importance ?" said Lady Margaret in 
a whisper, trying to conceal a look of 
suspicion, and some embarrassment. 
Before ( alantha could answer, he had 
joined them ; and explaining fully that 
their meeting had been entirely acci- 
dental, they both walked away together 
and in earnest discourse, leaving Lord 
Glenarvon and Lady Avondale together. 
Calantha's heart was full, she could 
not speak, she therefore left him in 
haste and when alone she wept. Had 
she not reason ; for every indignity and 
grief was falling fast upon her. She 
could not tell what had occurred to Lord 
Avondale: he had a proud and dangerous 
spirit ; and to Glenarvon she would not 
upon every account. Glenarvon awaited 
her return with anxiety. " I was surprised 
to see you with my aunt/' she said, 
" what were you saying to her/' He 
i5 



178 OLENARVON. 

evaded the question, and tenderly en- 
quired of her the cause of her uneasiness 
and tears. He loved beyond a doubt — 
at least he convinced Calantha that he 
did so. 

Confused, perturbed, she, more than 
ever felt the danger of her situation : trem- 
bling she met his eyes, fearing lest he 
should penetrate her secret. Confident 
in her own strength: " I will fly," she 
said, " though it be to the utmost ex- 
tremity of the earth; but I will never 
yield — never betray myself. My fate is 
sealed — misery must, in future, be my 
portion ; but no eye shall penetrate into 
the recesses of my heart — none shaH 
share my distress, or counsel me in my 
calamity." Thus she reasoned, and 
struggling as she thought, against her 
guilty passion, by attempting to deceive 
the object of her devotion, she in reality 
yielded herself entirely to his power, self 
deluded and without controul. 

How new to her mind appeared the 



GLENARVON. 179 

fever of her distracted thoughts ! Love 
she had felt — unhappy love, she had once 
for a time experienced ; but no taint of 
guilt was mingled with the feeling ; and 
the approach to vice she started from 
with horror and alarm." Lord Glenarvon 
had succeeded too well — she had seen 
him — she had heard him too often ; she 
fled in vain: he read his empire in the 
varying colour of her cheeks; he traced 
his power in every faultering word, in 
every struggling sigh : that strange si- 
lence, that timid air, that dread of be- 
holding him — all confirmed, and all 
tempted him forward to pursue his easy 
prey. " She is mine," he cried exult- 
ingly. — " mine, too, without a struggle : 
this fond wife, this chaste and pure CV 
lantha. Wherever 1 turn, new victims 
fall 'before me — they await not to be 
courted." 

But Lord Glenarvon had oftentimes 
said, that he never again could feel af- 
fection for any woman. How then was 



180 GLENARVON. 

the interest he shewed Calantha to be 
accounted for ? What name was he to 
give it? It was the attachment of a 
brother to the sister whom he loved ; it 
was all devotion — all purity ; he would 
never cherish a thought that might not 
be heard in heaven, or harbour one wish 
detrimental to the happiness of his friend. 
This was said, as it often has been said : 
both felt that it was false ; but both 
continued to repeat, what they wished to 
believe possible. His health and spirits 
had much declined ; he looked as if 
sorrows, which he durst not utter, af- 
flicted his heart; and though, in the 
presence of others he affected gaiety, 
when alone with Calantha he did not 
disguise his sadness. She sought to 
console him : she was grave — she was 
gentle, she could be both ; and the oc- 
casion seemed to call for her utmost 
kindness. 

He spoke much to her ; and sometimes 
read as Lord Avondale once had done ; 



GLENARVON. 18l 

and none ever but Lord Avondale read 
as well. His tears flowed for the sorrows 
of those whose poetry and history he re- 
peated. Calantha wept also ; but it was 
for Glenarvon, that she mourned. When 
she had ended the tale of love and sorrow, 
his eyes met hers and they spoke more — 
far more than words. Perhaps he gene- 
rously resolved to contend against his 
own feelings ; even at times he warned her 
of her danger. — But, when he bade 
her fly him, he held her hand, as if 
to detain her ; and when he said the 
passion he cherished would cause the 
misery of both, he acknowledged that 
her presence alleviated his sufferings, 
and that he could not bear to see her 
less. 



182 GLENARVON, 



CHAPTER XIX. 



There are scenes of guilt it would be 
horrible to paint — there are hours of 
agony it is impossible to describe ! All 
sympathy recedes from triumphant vice, 
and the kindest heart burns with indig- 
nation at the bare recital of unpunished 
crime. By night, by day, the tortures of 
remorse pursued Lady Avondale. In a 
husband's presence, she trembled ; from 
a parent's tenderness she turned with af- 
fected coldness ; her children, she durst 
not look upon. To the throne of heaven, 
she no longer offered up one prayer : 
upon a sleepless bed, visions of horror 
distracted her fancy; and when, at break 
of day, a deep and heavy slumber fell on 
her, instead of relieving a weary spirit, 
feverish dreams and maddening appre- 
hensions disturbed her rest, Glenarvon 



GLENARVON. 183 

had entirely possessed himself of her 
imagination. 

Glenarvon had said, there was a horrid 
secret, which weighed upon his mind. 
He would start at times, and gaze on 
vacancy ; then turn to Calantha, and ask 
her what she had heard and seen. His 
gestures, his menaces were terrific. He 
would talk to the air ; then laugh with 
convulsive horror ; and gazing wildly 
around, enquire of her, if there was not 
blood upon the earth, and if the ghosts 
of departed men had not been seen by 
some. 

Calantha thought that madness had 
fallen upon his mind, and wept to think 
that talents such as his were darkened 
and shrouded over by so heavy a cala- 
mity. But when the fierce moment wa& 
passed, tears would force their way into 
his eye, and placing her hand upon his 
burning head, he would call her his sole 
comforter, the only hope that was left him 
upon earth ; his dearest, his only friend ; 



184 GLENARVON. 

and he would talk to her of happier times; 
of virtues that had been early blighted; 
of hopes that his own rashness and errors 
had destroyed. 

It was one day, one dark and fatal day, 
when passion raging in his bosom, and 
time and opportunity at hand, he sud- 
denly approached her, and seizing her 
with violence, asked her if she returned 
his love. " My friendship is ruin," he 
cried ; "all alliance with me must cast 
disgrace upon the object of my regard. 
But, Calantha, you must be mine ! May 
I not even now call you thus ? Shall they 
ever persuade you to abandon me ? Vain 
is all attempt at disguise," he continued ; 
" I love you to madness and to distrac- 
tion — you know it too well. Why then 
suffer me to feel the tortures I endure, 
when a word — a look from you could re- 
lieve me. You are not indifferent : say 
then that you are not — thou, who alone 
canst save me. Here even, in the pre- 
sence of heaven, I will open my whole 



ttLENARVON. 185 

heart before you — that heart is seered 
with guilt ; it is bleeding with venomed 
wounds, incurable and deadly. A few 
short years, I have perhaps yet to linger : 
thou may est accelerate my fate, and plunge 
me still lower, whilst I cling to thee for 
mercy ; but will you do it, because you 
have the power ?" 

Calantha scarce could support herself. 
After a moment's pause, he continued, 
" You shall hear me. — Never, since the 
hour of my birth, never— I make no ex- 
ception of either the living, or, what is 
far dearer and more sacred to me, the 
dead — never did I love with such mad 
and frantic violence as now. O seek not 
to disguise it ; that love is returned. I 
read it even now in thine eyes, thy lips ; 
and whilst, with assumed and barbarous 
coldness, you would drive me from you, 
your own heart pleads for me ; and, like 
myself, you love." 

Faint and trembling, Calantha now 
leant for support upon that arm which 



186 OLENARVON. 

surrounded her, and from which she, in 
vain, attempted to shrink. It was a dread- 
ful moment. Glenarvon, who never yet 
had sued in vain, marked every varying 
turn of her countenance which too well 
expressed his empire and her own weak- 
ness. " I cannot live without you. — 
Mine you are — mine you shall ever be," 
he said, " whilst this heart beats with 
life." Then, with a smile of exultation, 
he seized her in his arms. 

Starting, however, with all the terror 
which the first approach to guilt must 
ever cause, " Spare me," she cried, ter- 
rified and trembling: " even though my 
heart should break in the struggle, let 
me not act so basely by him to whom I 
am bound." — " Say only, that you do not 
hate me — say only," he continued, with 
more gentleness, and pressing her hand 
to his lips — " say only, that you share the 
tortures of agony you have inflicted — say 
that which I know and see — that I am 
loved to adoration — even as I love you." 



GLENARVON. 187 

With tears she besought him to spare 
her. " I feel your power too much/' she 
said. " All that I ought not — must not 
say, I think and feel. Be satisfied ; your 
empire is complete. Spare me — save me ; 
I have not power to feign." Her tears 
fell now unrestrained. " There is no 
need of this," he said, recovering him- 
self; " you have sealed my fate. A mo- 
ment of passion beguiled me : I am calm 
now, as when first 1 met you — calm and 
cold, even as yourself. Since it is your 
wish, and since my presence makes your 
misery, let us part. — I go, as I have often 
said ; but it shall be alone. My country 
I leave without regret ; for the chain of 
tyranny has encompassed it : friends, I 
have none ; and thou, who wert as an 
angel of light to me — to whom I knelt 
for safety and for peace — mayst thou be 
blest: this is all I ask of heaven. As for 
me, nothing can increase the misery I 
feel. I wish you not to believe it, or to 
share it. This is no lovers despondency 
— no sudden and violent paroxysm occa- 



188 GLENARVON* 

sioned by disappointed passion. It is 
uttered/' he continued, " in the hope- 
lessness of despair : it is the confession, 
not the repining of a heart that was early 
blighted and destroyed." 

Calantha now interrupted him. " I 
alone am guilty/' she replied, " talk not 
of leaving me ; we may still be friends — 
we must never be more." " Oh ! pro- 
mise that we shall never be less." Gle- 
narvon looked on her with kindness, 
" Let no fears dissuade you until I shew 
myself unworthy of the trust. Forsake 
not him, whose only happiness is in 
your affection. I was joyless and without 
hope, when first I met you ; but the re- 
turn, to loneliness and misery, is hard to 
bear. Be virtuous, and, if it may be so, 
be happy." " That I never more can 
be," she answered. " You are young in 
sin yet," said Glenarvon ; " you know 
not its dangers, its pleasures, or its bit- 
terness. All this, ere long, will be for- 
gotten." " Never forgotten," she replied, 
" oh never !" 



GLENARVON. 189 



CHAPTER XX. 



Glenarnon wandered forth every even- 
ing, by the pale moon, and no one knew 
whither he went, and no one marked but 
Calantha how late was his return. And 
when the rain fell heavy and chill, he 
would bare his forehead to the storm ; 
and faint and weary wander forth, and 
often he smiled on others and appeard 
calm, whilst the burning fever of his 
blood continued to rage within. 

Once Calantha followed him, it was 
at sunset, and he shewed when he beheld 
her, no mark of surprise or joy. She 
followed him to the rocks called the Black 
Sisters, and the cleft in the mountain 
called the Wizzard's Glen ; there was a 
lonely cottage near the cleft where St, 
Clara, it was said, had taken up her 
abode. He knocked ; but she was from 



190 GLENARVON. 

home : he called ; but no one replied 
from within. Her harp was left at the 
entrance of a bower ; a few books and a 
table were also there. Glenarvon ap- 
proached the harp and leaning upon it, 
fixed his eyes mournfylly and steadfastly 
upon Calantha. " Others who formerly 
felt or feigned interest for me," he said, 
" were either unhappy in their marriage, 
or in their situation ; but you brave every 
thing for me. Unhappy Calantha ! how 
little do you know the heart for which 
you are preparing to sacrifice so much/' 

The place upon which they stood was 
wild and romantic ; the sea murmured 
beneath them ; distant sounds reached 
them from the caverns; and the boats 
passed to and fro within the harbour. The 
descent was rugged and dangerous. Ca- 
lantha looked first upon the scene, and 
then upon Glenarvon : still he leant upon 
the harp, and seemed to be lost in me- 
lancholy remembrances. 

44 Sing once again, she said, at length 



GLENARVON. 191 

interrupting him — " Ah ! sing as I first 
heard you : — those notes reached the 
heart/' " Did they ?" he cried, approach- 
ing her, as his lips pressed, upon hers, 
one ardent kiss. The blood rushed from 
her heart in alarm and agitation : — she 
trembled and turned from him. " There 
is no cause," he said, gently following 
her: — " it is the first kiss of love, sweet 
one ; the last is full of bitterness." 

" Sing to me," she said, confused and 
terrified, " in mercy, approach me not 
— I am alone — I fear you." I will sing," 
he said, " and check those fears," saying 
which he began. It was not like a song, 
but a sort of soft low murmur, with an 
air of such expression and empassioned 
feeling, that every note said more than 
words : it vibrated to the soul. 

** Farewell." 

Ah! frown not thus— nor turn from me, 

1 musjt not — dare not — look on thee ; 

Too well thou know'st how dear thou art, 

Tis hard but yet 'tis best to part : 

I wish thee not to share my grief, 

It seeks, it hopes, for no relief. 



192 GLENARVON. 

" Farewell." 

Come give thy hand, what though we part,, 
Thy name is fixed, within my heart ; 
I shall not change, nor break the vow 
I made before and plight thee now ; 
For since thoumay'st not live forme, 
'Tis sweeter far to die for thee. 

" Farewell M 

Thou'lt think of me when I am gone, 
None shall undo, what I have done j 
Yet even thy love I would resign 
To save thee from remorse like mine ; 
Thy tears shall fall upon my grave : 
They still may bless — they cannot save. 

" Sing no more," said Calantha, " let 
us return home. I know not what I say, 
or do. Judge not of my feelings by 
those which predominate in your pre- 
sence. I may be weak, I acknowledge your 
power, I am lost irretrievably if you are 
resolved upon it." " Calantha", said Lord 
Glenarvon firmly, " you may trust impli- 
citly to my honor. — These are the last 
guilty words, I will ever suffer to pass 
my lips. Henceforward consider me only 
as your friend — as such accept my hand." 
He smiled in scorn as he said this. 



,"£"■' f ' ll"ff.rl" 



\&1 






'If V fe 



Wti tappet 



»tio[- -T! pnB p>rv id-im o.o j mi<>ii_\i' ( [i.>.v>j.>f| jj>: 



igigtifi ; ; -^ 



r " ' ' T| tTffH 



Hat 



^4 ^N 




y 



r X 



<i * 



jo nja.iao^iJDBd o> isaq^ si}- >aX>nq'p.retj sq.'>ic T»»ifV .re.»p mim is moiijj 

i-i 






£ 



"=^ 



n r 



*n» 



n 



w 



r 



a 



noi(* ^a*i o«v'*>n\ uo Jjnnj i«.u ftnp tow isnui ['am uio.i) ii.ui) .ion's in;) 



f^f-lfl Tfrf^ -qJlJ J W 



■TMi-Ji r J f i ^I SiA^d 



-->--^- 



j u r >j u- rtt-^ 



hewfiWiEtf?iccrJ-r^ 



o|..i|y'->Uu:(Mi^ 




;••/ jh'fil r.f>[ 



GLENARVON. 193 

At that moment they were interrupted; 
a bark from Inis Tara approached the 
shore, and O'Kelly, Lord Glenarvon's 
servant, and two other men descended 
from it. " To avoid observation, I will 
join my friends one moment," he said, 
" if you will walk gently home, I can 
overtakeyou, — but, perhaps you will await 
my return. " " I will go home : it is late/' 
said Calantha. He appeared much vexed ; 
" Well then I will await your return/' 
saying this Calantha descended with him 
the rugged path down the cliff, and 
watched the lessening bark, and heard 
the distant shouts from some of his fol- 
lowers who were assembled in the cavern, 
as they hailed his approach to land : after 
which a long silence prevailed, alone in- 
terrupted by the rippling of the waves. 
The meeting was apparently over: there 
were whole parties returning from below, 
in different directions. 

Whilst yet awaiting Lord Glenarvon's 
return, Calantha heard the same air re- 

Vol. II. K 



194 GLENARVON. 

peated which he had so lately played. It 
seemed as if the wind, as it blew along 
the wooded shores, had struck upon the 
chords. It was strange ; for Glenarvon 
was gone. She turned in haste, and from 
above beheld a young man. Ah no — it 
was St. Clara. Too soon she saw that it 
was her. Her ear had caught the last 
murmurs of Glenarvon's song, and her 
hand feebly repeated the strain. But, soon 
perceiving Calantha, she gazed with wild 
alarm one moment upon her, then throw- 
ing the plumed hat aside, with a grace and 
ease peculiar to herself, she struck the full 
chords, and her clear voice ascended 
upon the air in soft impassioned numbers. 
Lady Avondale heard the words of her 
song as it murmured along the breeze. 

(To the air of," Htarme swear hoio much I love." J 

By that smile which made me blest, 
And lefr j* ■•• <=oou the wn 'eh you see — 

By tha eart. I once possest, 
Which now, they say, is given to thee — 

By bt. Clara's wrongs and woes — 

Trust not young Glenarvon's vows. 



GLENARVON. 195 

By those lays which breathe around 
A poet's great and matchless art — 

By that voice whose silver sound 
Can soothe to peace th' imprisoned heart — 

By every bitter pang! prove — 

Trust not young Glenarvon's love. 

Each brighter, kinder hope forsaking, 
Bereft of all that made life dear ; 

My health impaired, my spirit breaking, 
Yet still too proud to shed one tear : 

O! lady, by my wrongs and woes. 

Trust not young Glenarvon's vows. 

And when at length the hand of death 
Shall bid St Clara's heart be still — 

When struggling with her latest breath, 
His image shall her fancy fill, 

Ah trust to one whose death shall prove 

What fate attends Glenarvon's love. 

Lady Avondale eagerly attempted to 
appraoch her. " J3eautiful, unhappy St. 
Clara, I will be your friend — will protect 
you. She ran forward, and climbed the 
steep ascent with ease: but the youthful 
harper arose — her dark sunny ringlets 
waving over her flushed cheek and eyes: 
she slightly bowed to Calantha as if in 
k2 



196 GLENARVON. 

derision ; and laughing as she upheld a 
chain with an emerald ring, bounded 
over the rocks with an activity, which 
long habit had rendered familiar. 

Calantha beheld her no more : but the 
distant shouts of applause re-echoed as at 
first among the caverns and mountains ; 
and the bark with Lord Glenarvon soon 
re-appeared in sight. She awaited his 
return. As he approached the beach, a 
loud murmur of voices from behind the 
rock continued. He joined her in a mo- 
ment. His countenance was lighted with 
the ray of enthusiasm : — his altered man- 
ner shewed the success his efforts had 
obtained. He told Calantha of his pro- 
jects ; he described to her the meetings 
which he had held by night and day ; 
and he spoke with sanguine hope of fu- 
ture success — the freedom of Ireland, and 
the deathless renown of such as supported 
her fallen rights. " Some day you must 
follow me," he cried : " let me shew you 
the cavern beneath the rock, where 1 



GLENARVON. 197 

have appointed our meeting for the en- 
suing week." 

" I will walk no more with you to 
Inis Tara : — the harp sounds mournfully 
on those high cliffs : — I wish never more 
to hear it." " Have you seen St. Clara ?" 
he said, without surprise. " She sings 
and plays well, does she not ? But she is 
not dear to me : think not of her. I could 
hate her, but that I pity her. Young as 
she is, she is cruelly hardened and vin- 
dictive." — " I cannot fear her: she is 
too young and too beautiful to be as aban- 
doned as you would make me think." — 
u It is those who are young and beautiful 
you should fear most," he said, approach- 
ing her more nearly. — " 1 may fear them," 
she replied, " but can you teach me to 
fly them ?" 

It was now late: very little more passed : 
they returned home, where they were re- 
ceived with considerate coldness. But 
Lady Mandeville, perce ving the stat of 
suffering to which Calantha had reduced 
k3 



198 GLENARVON. 

herself, generously came forward to sooth 
and to assist her. She appeared really 
attached to her ; and at this time more 
even than at any former period, shewed 
her sincere and disinterested friendship. 
And yet she was the person Mrs. Sey- 
mour distrusted ; and even Glenarvon 
spoke of her with asperity and disdain. 
" Adelaide ! though an envious world 
may forsake thee, a grateful friend shall 
stand firm by thee to the last." Such 
were Calantha's thougths, as Lady Man- 
deville, languidly throwing her rounded 
arm over her, pressed her to her bosom, 
and sighed to think of the misery she 
was preparing for herself. — " Yet, when I 
see how he loves thee," she continued, 
" I cannot blame, I will not judge thee." 
That evening Glenarvon wrote to Lady 
Avondale. His letter repeated all he had 
before said ; it was ardent : it was un- 
guarded. She had scarce received it, 
scarce placed it in her bosom, when 
Lady Margaret attacked her. " You 



GLENARVON. 199 

think," she said, " that you have made a 
conquest. Silly child, Lord Glenarvon 
is merely playing upon your vanity/' 
Lady Augusta whispered congratulations : 
Sophia hoped she was pleased with her 
morning walk ; Sir Everard coldly asked 
her if she beheld his niece, and then, 
with a sneer at Lord Glenarvon, said it 
was vastly pleasant to depend upon cer- 
tain people's promises. 

All this time Calanthafelt not grieved: 
Glenarvon had said he loved her : it was 
enough : his attachment was worth all 
else beside ; and Lord Avondale's in- 
creasing neglect and coldness steeled her 
heart against the crime of inconstancy. 

Before supper, Glenarvon took an op- 
portunity of speaking to her. " If you 
accept my friendship," he said frowning*, 
i; I must be obeyed : — you will find me 
a master — a tyrant perhaps ; — not a slave, 
if I once love, it is with fervor — with 
madness. I must have no trilling, no 
rivals. The being I worship must be 
k 4 



200 GLENARVON. 

pure even in thought ; and, if I spare her, 
think not that it is to let others approach 
her. No, Lady Avondale ; not even what 
appears most innocent to you, shall be 
endured by me. I shall be jealous of 
every look, word, thought. There must 
be no shaking of hands, no wearing of 
chains, but such as I bestow, and you 
must write all you think and feel without 
reserve or fear. Now, mark me, fly if 
you have the power ; but if you remain, 
you already know your fate. 

Calantha resolved to fly : yes, she felt 
the necessity. To-morrow, she said, 
she would go. That to-morrow came, 
and she had not strength. Glenarvon 
wrote constantly : she replied with the 
same openness. " Your letters chill me," 
he said, " call me your friend, your 
lover : call me Glenarvon — Clarence if 
you will. All these forms, these regula- 
tions are odious amongst those who are 
attached. Say that you love, beloved 
Calantha: my own heart's friend, say it; 



GLENARAON. 201 

for I see it, and know it." There is no 
greater crime in writing it than in feeling 
it. Calantha said it too soon — too soon 
she wrote it. " My dearest Clarence, my 
friend, my comforter:" such were the 
terms she used. Shame to the pen, the 
hand that dared to trace them. Days, and 
days passed, and soon Glenarvon was all 
on earth to her ; and the love he felt or 
feigned, the only hope and happiness of 
her existence. 



202 GLENARVON 



CHAPTER XXI. 



Lord Avondale now looked more and 
more coldly on Calantha : but all others 
courted and flattered her. The Princess 
and many others had departed. Mrs. 
Seymour alone appeared to watch her 
with anxiety. In vain Calantha affected 
the most thoughtless gaiety : remorse and 
suspense alternately agitated her mind. 
One evening she observed Lord Glenar- 
narvon and her aunt, Mrs. Seymonr, in 
earnest discourse — she knew not then that 
she herself was the subject. " She is 
pure, she is innocent/' said Mrs. Sey- 
mour : " her spirits wild and thoughtless, 
may have led her into a thousand follies ; 
but worse, never — never/' — " Fierce 
passion burns in her eye," said Glenar- 
von, scornfully: " the colour in her 
cheeks varies — 1 love her as well as you 



GLENARVON. 203 

can*" he continued, laughing : " but do 
you think she does not love me a little in 
return ?" — " Oh ! even in jest, do not 
talk thus of Calantha," said Mrs. Sey- 
mour : " you alarm me." — " There is no 
occasion," replied Glenarvon : " calm 
yourself. 1 only said, that were I to at- 
tempt it I could succeed ; she should be 
ready to leave you, and Lord Avondale, 
her dear husband and her babes, and her 
retinue, and all else ; and I could make 
her follow me as St. Clara did ; aye verily; 
but, in truth, I will not." Mrs. Seymour 
was angry ; she coloured : she was hurt. 
" You could not," she replied with warmth: 
" O I know her well and know you 
could not. Whatever her faults she is so 
pure, so chaste even in thought." — " She 
loves me." — " It is false," said Mrs. Sey- 
mour, still more eagerly. " Even if she 
had any foolish romantic liking to ano- 
ther than her husband, Buchanan is ihe 
favourite." — "Buchanan !" said Lord Gle- 
narvon with a sneer. " I will make her 
heart ache for this," after which he retired. 



204 GLENARVON. 

Calantha knew not then one word of 
what had passed ; the next morning she 
was informed by Mrs. Seymour that Lord 
GJenarvon was gone. ' % Gone ! where ?" 
she said rather in surprise, and agitated. 
" I know not," replied Mrs. Seymour, 
coldly enough. " I conclude to Belfont : 
his uncle Lord de Ruthven, is arrived 
there. But, indeed, I am glad he is gone : 
— you have not conducted yourself well. 
I, your aunt, have no doubt of you ; but 
others who know you less, Calantha 
blame you more." 

A letter was now delivered to Mrs. 
Seymour : she opened it : it was from 
GJenarvon ; she was dreadfully agitated 
upon reading it. It contained these words: 
— " As you seem to doubt the confidence 
and attachment with which your niece, 
he Countess of Avondale, has honoured 
me, I enclose you one of her own letters, 
that you may see my vanity alone did not 
authorise me in the conclusion that she was 
attached to me. Her duplicity to me can 
scarcely justify the means I take of open 



GLENARVON. 205 

ing an aunt's eyes ; but the peculiar cir- 
cumstances of my situation will, I hope, 
excuse it. 

" Your most obedient servant, 

" Glenarvon." 

This letter enclosed one of Lady Avon- 
dale's — one which, however, she had 
not blushed to write. She read it with 
terror when Mrs. Seymour placed it in 
her hands. Cruel Glenarvon ! could he 
have the heart thus to betray me — to my 
own aunt too. — Oh ! had that aunt been 
less indulgent, less kind, what had been 
my fate ? 

" You are innocent yet, my child," 
said Mrs. Seymour, placing her arms 
around her ; " and the early conviction 
of the meanness and wickedness of him 
for whom you were preparing to sacrifice 
so much, will render it easy to reclaim 
yourself from your present errors, and to 
be less hasty in reposing confidence 
hereafter." — " Never, never, will I pardon 



206 GLENARVON. 

him/' cried Calantha with indignation. 
M I will not hate ; that were too flattering 
to his vanity : I will not fly; that were a 
proof that there was cause for it : but, 
lowered to the dust as I ought to feel — 
humbled to the earth (and whilst she 
spoke, she looked and felt more proudly, 
more vainly than ever), even I can des- 
pise him. \V hat are superior talents, if 
he who possesses them can act thus ? Oh ! 
I had rather die in torture, than ever par- 
don this." 

" Be less violent," said Mrs. Seymour, 
with a look of heart-broken tenderness 
and affection : " that stubborn spirit must 

be subdued." — " i will revenge 

" Be calm, Calantha : think what you are 
saying : how unfeminine and how pue- 
rile ! Put off these frowns and this idle 
rage, and look reasonably upon your 
own conduct, not upon his." — " Shall you 
ever permit him to enter these doors 
again ?" — " Had I the power, assuredly 
never." — " Oh, let him return ; I care 



GLENARVON. 207 

not; I can see him with the scorn, with 
the indiiFerence he deserves. Do not 
look thus, my dearest aunt: dry your 
tears: I am not worth one single tear 
now ; but I will act in future so as to 
silence even these too just reproaches/' 

" Do you repent, Calantha?" — "Do 
not talk of repentance : 1 cannot feel it : 
my sin is light compared with his." — 
" Towards your husband/' — " Oh ! Lord 
Avondale, he is happy enough : he cares 
not." — " Indeed he does, my child. I 
tremble for you : every hour of your 
life is a continual warfare and peril. One 
danger no sooner ends than another 
arises. Will you never consider the du- 
ties of your situation, or the character 
you have to form and to preserve ?" — 
" Who is more loved than I am? On 
whom does even the world smile with 
greater kindness ? Beauties, wits, the vir- 
tuous — can they cope with me ? I am 
every one's friend, and every one loves, 
even though they blame Calantha." As 



208 GLENARVON. 

she said this, she smiled and threw her- 
self on h^r aunt's bosom. 

But all this Calantha did but to cheer 
her aunt. Though not false, she dreaded 
any one's seeing the real state of her 
mind: at this moment she thought 
Mrs. Seymour too gentle, and of too ten- 
der a nature to bear the violence of her 
headstrong character : she knew it would 
cause her misery were she to read her 
heart's secret, and she smiled therefore 
and spoke with levity, whilst her soul 
was in torture. But the very moment 
Mrs. Seymour had left her, Calantha gave 
way to the rage of fury, and the despon- 
dency she felt. To have lost Gleuarvon, 
was at this time the real source of her 
regret ; — to speculate upon the cause of 
his sudden cruelty and treachery her sole 
occupation. 

At the hour of dinner Mrs. Seymour 
again entered her room ; but without a 
single reproach. She had been crying — 
her eyes were swollen and red; but she 



GLENARVON. 209 

affected scarcely to remember what had 
passed, and urged Calantha to accompany 
her to dinner, as her absence on the day 
of Lord Glenarvon's departure, might 
appear strange. But Lady Avondale stub- 
bornly refused, and would not speak. She 
even appeared sullen, that her aunt might 
not see she was miserable. She even af- 
fected more anger, more violence than she 
felt against Glenarvon, that she might dis- 
guise from herself and her aunt the pang 
his loss had given her. She relented how- 
ever when she saw her aunt's grief; and, 
struggling with tears which never come 
till passion is over, and which she thought 
it weak to display, she dressed and ap- 
peared at dinner. It was alone to please 
Mrs. Seymour she had done so ; and, 
solely engrossed with the past, and ut- 
terly indifferent to the mortifying remarks 
her melancholy and silence occasioned, 
Calantha hated those who had the unkind- 
ness to censure and judge her, and re- 
garded her own conduct without com- 
punction or condemnation. 



210 GLENARVON. 

Towards evening Lord Arondale came 
to her, and said kindly enough that she 
looked ill. Then her heart smote her, 
and affecting a pettish ill temper, which 
she did not, could not feel, she replied 
that she was well, and took up a book, 
as if to read. May none ever experience 
the torture Calantha felt, when, instead 
of being offended, he gently pressed her 
hand. She had rather he had struck a 
dagger into her heart. 

Upon retiring to rest, Lady Avondale 
sent for Zerbellini, and asked him res- 
pecting Lord Glenarvon. The boy was 
a constant favourite and playmate of his: 
he carried notes and flowers, from each 
to the other; and artless as he was, he 
already felt delight in the eager interest 
so much mystery and secrecy required. — 
He told Lady Avondale a thousand anec- 
dotes of Glenarvon ; but he had told them 
so often that they failed to please. He 
then showed her the presents he had re- 
ceived from those who formerly professed 
to like her. " And did vou ever shew 



GLENARVON. 211 

them to Lord Glenarvon?" said Lady 
Avondale ! The thought occurring that 
this might have offended. " I did," said 
Zerbellini, with a shrewd smile. — "And 
was he angry ?" — " Oh, not in the least : 
only the more kind; and he did question 
me so }" and then the boy repeated a 
thousand things that he had asked, which 
shewed Calantha too well, how eager he 
was to ascertain, from other lips than 
her's, every minute detail of follies and 
errors she had committed. There was 
no need for this. 

Lady Avondale felt indignant ; for there 
was not a thought of heart she desired 
to conceal from him, or alas from any 
one. V. hat she had done wrong, she 
herself had confessed without reserve; 
and to be thus distrusted, deeply grieved 
her. She thought too, it lessened her re- 
gard ; it gave her a worse opinion of Gle- 
narvon ; and this god — this idol, to whom 
she had bowed so low, sunk at once from 
the throne of glory upon which herima- 



212 GLENARVON. 

gination had raised him. " If I pardon 
this/' she cried, as she sent Zerbellini 
away, and hastened to bed, — " if ever I 
waste a tear, or sigh, or thought, on him, 
again, may I suffer what I deserve. — But 
the thing is impossible/' 

Lady Mandeville at this time was all 
kindness to Lady Avondale. She was 
going from the castle ; and, as she parted, 
she gave her this advice : " Never place 
yourself in the power of any man : love 
of this sort is apt to terminate in a wreck ; 
and whoever puts most at stake will be 
the sufferer." Lady Augusta also de- 
parted. 



GLENARVON. 213 



CHAPTER XXII. 



From that day, Lady Avondale grew 
more calm : a degree of offended pride 
supported her; and she resolved, cost 
what it might, to continue firm. She 
saw, that private communications were 
taking place between Lady Margaret, her 
father, and even her aunt and Glenar- 
von. He had already contrived to inte- 
rest every individual in the castle in his 
affairs. — Lord Avondale often spoke of 
him with praise; Sir Richard, though 
he said he was a comical personage, ad- 
mired him, and the female part of the 
society were all eager and enthusiastic on 
the subject. 

Lady Avondale experienced every feel- 
ing that can be imagined during this 
short period ; and received the half con- 
cealed taunts of her acquaintance with 



214 GLEiYARVON. 

becoming fortitude — even their commi- 
seration for his having left her. She 
heard their boasts too of what he had 
written to them, without once repining; 
but envy, rancour, malice, hatred, rage 
and regret — all, more or less, arose and 
subsided in her breast, till she heard one 
morning, with a sort of trepidation, that 
Lord Glenarvon was in the adjoining 
room. Mrs. Seymour immediately came 
to her. " Tell me truly," she said, 
" have you any objection to his dining 
here ?" " Quite the contrary, said Ca- 
lantha, with indifference ; and she waited 
till she heard the sound of the horses 
galloping from the outer court; she then 
looked from the window, and her heart 
told her too well that she was not yet en . 
tirely recovered from her infatuation." 

At dinner they were to expect him; 
and 'till dinner Lady Avon dale could 
think of nothing else. Mrs. Seymour 
watched her with anxiety. — She strove 
anxiously to disguise what she felt, and 



GLENARVON. 215 

she succeeded better than before, for habit 
now rendered the effort less painful. 
But Lady Margaret whispered malicously 
in her ear, that every thought and 
feeling was more strongly exhibited by 
her, with all her attempts to hide them 
than by most others, when they wished 
them to be seen. " And I know/' she 
added, unkindly enough, " you would 
give any thing on earth to be friends 
with him again." " With whom?" 
" See he appears," she said, " shall I 
name him?" 

Lady Avondale had resolved to be firm. 
There is a degree of dignity, which every 
proud mind can assume. To have for- 
given so much treachery and cruelty, had 
been contemptible. She felt it, and pre- 
pared for the encounter. " He will do 
every thing to regain you," said Mrs. 
Seymour, " but I have confidence in 
your present feelings. Shew him, that 
you are not what he imagines; and prove 
to me, that I may still be proud of my 



216 GLENARVON. 

child." Lady Avondale had taken Gle- 
narvon's ring- from her finger, she had 
placed upon her neck a row of pearls 
her husband had given her, upon the 
eve of her marriage, and thus decorated, 
she thought her heart had likewise re- 
turned to its ancient allegiance. 

Lady Avondale entered the dining- 
room. Lord Glenarvon passed her at 
the moment; he was in earnest conver- 
sation with Lady Margaret, and slightly 
bowed to her. She was surprised, she 
had expected kindness and contrition. 
She was, however, resolved to act up to 
the very strictest bounds which decorum 
prescribed. With some haughtiness, 
gome appearance at least of dignity, she 
seated herself as far from him as he 
could desire, and by addressing herself 
calmly but entirely to others, she sought 
to attain that look of unconcern, which 
he had so readily assumed. 

Dinner was no sooner over than una- 
ble any longer to conceal her vexation, 



GLENARVON. 217 

Lady Avondale retired to her room to 
compose herself. Upon returning, the 
large society were employed either with 
billiards, cards, or work — except a few 
of the men, amongst whom she perceived 
Lord Glenarvon. Had he refrained 
from speaking to her, she could have 
borne it, — had he even looked as grave, 
as ill as usual ; but an unusual flow of 
spirits — a peculiar appearance of health, 
had taken place of that languor, to which 
he was at times subject. 

The evening and the supper passed 
without his saying one word in apology 
for his unkindness, or in the least at- 
tending to her increasing irritation. 
Lady Avondale affected unconcern as 
well as she could, but. it looked like 
any thing else ; and in the morning she 
awoke but to suffer new humiliations. 
She saw him smile as he named her in a 
whisper to Lady Trelawney. She heard 
him talk to others upon subjects he had 
once spoken of only to herself. Imme- 

Voi,. II. L 



218 GLENARVON. 

diately upon this apparent rupture, new 
hopes arose; new claims were consi- 
dered ; and that competition for his fa- 
vour, which had ceased, began again. 
Lady Trelawney laughed and talked 
with him ; at times turning her eye trium- 
phantly towards Calantha. Sophia con- 
fided her opinions to his breast ; affected 
to praise him for his present conduct, 
and the tear of agony, which fell from 
Calantha's eye, excited at least as much 
indignation as it deserved. 

" I have sacrificed too much for one 
who is heartless/' she said; " but, thank 
Heaven, it is yet time for amendment." 
Alas! Lady Avondale knew not, as she 
uttered these words, that there is no mo- 
ment in which it is so difficult to act with 
becoming dignity and firmness, as that 
in which we are piqued and trampled 
upon by the object of our devotion . Gle- 
narvon well knew this, and smiled at the 
pang he inflicted, as it proved his power, 
and exhibited its effects to all. Lady 



GLENARVON. 219 

Avondale summoned to her aid even her 
faults — the spirit, the pride of her charac- 
ter, her very vanity; and rested her 
hopes of firmness upon her contempt for 
weakness, her abhorrence of vice. She 
looked upon him, and saw his attempts 
to wound, to humiliate, to grieve; and 
she despised the man who could have re- 
course to every petty art to torture one 
for whom he had professed so much. If 
he wished to expose her weakness to every 
eye, too well he had succeeded. 



l2 



220 GLENARY0N. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

. 
Few women know how to conceal suc- 
cessful love, but none can conceal their 
doubt, resentment and jealousy. Men 
can do both, and both without a struggle. 
They feel less, and fear more. But this 
was not the case with Lord Glenarvon, 
nor did he wish to appear indifferent; 
he only wished Calantha to feel his 
power, and he delighted in the exhibi- 
tion of it. In vain she had formed the 
best resolutions, they were now all ren- 
dered useless. Lord Glenarvon had fore- 
stalled her wise intention, no coldness 
. — no indifference she could assume, 
had equalled that, which he either af- 
fected or felt. 

Upon the bosom of Mrs. Seymour, 
Calantha wept for her fault; it was infa- 
tuation, she said, she was cured: the 



GLENARVON. 221 

lesson, though somewhat harsh, had not 
been fruitless. Again, she made every 
promise, which affection and repentance 
could suggest. She heard the name of 
her husband pronounced, and longed to 
throw herself before him, and commend 
herself to his mercy. I do repent, in- 
deed I do, said Calantha, repeatedly in 
the course of the day ; and she thought 
her penitence had been sincere. Hum- 
bled now, and gentle, she thought only 
of pleasing her aunt, Lord Avondale, 
and her friends. She was desired to play 
during the evening : to shew her ready 
obedience she immediately obeyed. Lord 
Glenarvon was in an adjoining room ; 
he entered when she began : springing 
up, Lady Avondale left the harp ; then, 
seeing Lord Avondale surprised, she pre- 
pared to tune it. 

Lord Glenarvon approached and of- 
fered her his hand, she refused it. "Will 
you play ?" he said — and she turned the 
key with so much force that it broke the 
l3 



222 GLENARVON, 

chords asunder. " You have Mound 
them too tight, and played upon them 
too often/' he said. " Trifle not with 
me thus — I cannot play now," she re- 
plied. " Leave me, I entreat you/' 
" You know not what you have done," 
he replied. " All I ask — all I implore is, 
that you will neither come near me, 
nor speak to me more, for I am mad." 
" Women always recover from these pa- 
roxysms," said he, gaily. Calantha at- 
tempted to play, and did so extremely ill, 
after which she went to bed, happier, it 
must be owned, for she had seen in Lord 
Glenarvon's manner that he was not in- 
different, and this rendered it more easy 
for her to appear so. 

The next morning Lady Avondale 
went out immediately after breakfast, 
without speaking to Lord Glenarvon. He 
twice attempted it, but with real anger, 
she refused to hear him. It was late in 
the day, when, having sought for her 
before dinner, he at length found her 



GLENARVON. 223 

alone. His voice faultered, his eyes were 
filled with tears. " Lady Avondale— 
Calantha," he said, approaching her, 
" forgive me. — I ask it of you, and more, 
if you require it, I will kneel — will sue 
for it. You can make me what you 
please — I am wholly in your power/' 
" There is no need for this," she said 
coldly. 

" I will not rise till you forgive me. 

If you knew all — if but can you 

indeed believe me indiffeient, or cold? 
Look at me once: raise your eyes and be- 
hold him, who lives but in you." " All 
this is useless, 3 ou have grieved me ; but 
I do not mean to reproach ; the idle com- 
plainings of a woman are ever useless." 
" To think that she suffers," said Gle- 
narvon, " is enough. Look once — once 
only, look upon me." " Let us part in 
peace," she replied : " I have no com- 
plaint to make, I have nothing to for- 
give." " Raise your eyes, and look — Ca- 
lantha, look once on me." 

l4 



224 GLEJVARVOtf. 

She turned to him, she saw that face 
whose every feature was engraved deep 
in her very heart — that smile of sweet- 
ness — that calm serenity, she had not 
power to speak — to think ; and yet reco- 
vering from this strange enchantment, 
— " How could you betray me ?" she 
said. I judge you not, but I can never 
feel either interest, or friendship again." 
" Yet," said Glenarvon gravely, " I 
need both at this time, for I am miserable 
and ill too, only I do not wish to ex- 
cite your compassion by these arts, and I 
had rather die unforgiven, than use any 
towards you." 

" Wherefore did you betray me ¥' 
" Can you ask ? I was deeply wounded. 
It is not enough for me that you love 
me, all must and shall know it. I will 
make every sacrifice for you — run every 
risk ; but every risk and every sacrifice 
must be shared." " Whatever my feel- 
ings may be," she answered coldly, " you 
shall never subdue me again. I may be 



OLENARVON. 225 

infatuated, but I will never be criminal— 
You may torture me as you please, if you 
have the power over me which you ima- 
gine, but I can bear torture, and none 
ever yet subdued me." 

" Calantha," said Lord Glenarvon, 
taking her hand firmly, and smiling 
half scornfully, " you shall be my slave. 
I will mould f ou as I like ; teach you to 
think but with my thoughts, to act but 
with my feelings, you shall wait nor mur- 
mur — suffer, nor dare complain — ask, 
and be rejected — and all this, I will do, 
and you know it, for your heart is alrea- 
dy mine." " If 1 forgive you," she cried. 
" If you do not," he said, approaching 
nearer. "I never will." "And 'till 
you do, though your whole family should 
enter, I will kneel here — here, even at 
your feet." " You think to menace 
me." " I know my empire. Take off 
those ornaments; replace what I have 
given you: this too you shall wear," 
he said, throwing a chain around her, 
l5 



226 GLENARVON. 

" Turn from me if you can : the heart that 
I have won, you cannot reclaim; and 
though the hand be thus denied me, if 
the heart be mine of what avail ? I love 
you to madness, he said, and you distract 
me. Trust yourself entirely to me, 
it is the only means of safety left. Yes, 
Calantha, I will do for you, what no man 
ever did before. If it destroy me, I will 
never lead you to guilt, only rely upon me, 
be guided by me." " You ran the risk," 
she said, " of our being separated for ever, 

of making my aunt miserable. Of ." 

" Nonsense, child, I never risk any thing, 
it was necessary your aunt should know ; 
and the fear of losing you entirely will 
make her readily consent to my seeing 
you more than ever." " Oh Glenarvon, 
what guilt! Think not that my attachment 
is such as to bear it." " It shall bear all 
things," said Glenarvon; " but if you 
sacrifice what I desire, I will conquer 
every wrong feeling for your sake. Our 
friendship will then be innocent." " Not 



GLENARVOW. 227 

absolutely indeed I fear it ; and 

if " " Ah! leave these gloomy 

thoughts. If love should triumph — if 
you feel half for me, what I feel from 
my soul for you, then you shall accom- 
pany me from hence. Avondale may ea- 
sily find another wife, but the world 
contains for me but one Calantha." 

Lady Avondale felt happy. — Shame on 
the guilty heart that dared to feel so ! 
but alas, whilst Glenarvon thus addressed 
her, she did feel most happy. In a mo- 
ment, the gloom that had overshadowed 
her future hopes, was dispelled. She 
saw her lover — her friend, more than 
ever united to her. He consented even 
to respect what remaining virtue she had 
left, and from his gentle, his courteous 
words, it was not her wish to escape. 
Yet still she resolved to leave him. Now, 
that peace was again restored, that 
her irritated mind was calm, that her va- 
nity was flattered, and her pride satisfied, 
now the admonitions of her aunt recur- 



228 GLENARVON. 

ed ; and even while her heart beat fondest 
for him, she pronounced her own doom, 
and declared to him that she would tear 
herself away from him for ever. " Per- 
haps this must be," he said, after a mo- 
ment's pause ; "but not yet, Calantha: 
ah ! not yet." As he spoke his tears fell 
upon her hand. — Oh ! had he not thus 
wept, Calantha had not loved him. 
Struggling with his feelings for her, he 
generously resolved to save, to spare 
her. " Remember this," he said, 
" when they condemn me — remember, 
Calantha, what I have done for you ; 
how I have respected you ; and let not 
their idle clamours prevail." 

Lady Avondale was too happy to feel 
vain. Glenarvon loved, as she never 
had been loved before, every hour — 
every moment of each passing day he 
seemed alone intent, and occupied with 
her; he wrote his minutest thoughts; 
he counselled, he did not command. 
He saw that power, ambition, was her 



GLENARVON. 229 

ruling passion, and by affecting to be 
ruled, he completely mastered her — in 
word, in look, in thought, he was de- 
voted to her. Other men think only of 
themselves; Glenarvon conquered him- 
self a thousand times for her. What is 
a momentary, a degrading passion to the 
enjoyment she felt in his society? It 
only lowers the object of its fancy, he 
sought to raise her even in her own es- 
teem. " Forgive her, pity us," he said, 
addressing Mrs. Seymour, who saw in a 
moment, with alarm, their reconcilia- 
tion. " Drive us not to despair, I will 
respect her — will preserve her, if you 
do not attempt to tear her from me ; but 
dread the violence of madness, if you 
reduce us to the last rash step. Oh dread 
the violence of a mad and incurable at- 
tachment. 

Calantha's sole attention was now to 
hide from those it might grieve, the 
change which a few days had again 
wrought. She appeared at dinner, she 



230 GLENARVOtf. 

seated herself opposite to Glenarvon. 
There was no look of exultation in his 
countenance, his eyes met her's mourn- 
fully. The diamond bracelets that adorn- 
ed her arms, had been given her by him; 
thechain and locket, which contained his 
dark hair, had been placed around her 
neck in token of his regard ; the clasp that 
fastened the band around her waist, was 
composed of the richest jewels brought 
by him from distant countries ; and the 
heart that was thus girt round and en- 
circled with his gifts, beat only for him, 
regardless of every other tie. " Oh my 
child ! my child !" said Mrs. Seymour, 
gazing on her in agony. " I will never 
reproach you, but do not break my 
heart. You are ill in mind and health, 
you know not what you say or do ; God 
forgive and pardon you, my unhappy Ca- 
lantha?" "Bear with me afew moment's/' 
said Lady Avondale much agitated : " I 
will part from him; only give me time. 
Fear me not : I will neither leave you nor 



GLENARVON. 231 

act wickedly ; but if you seek too hastily 
to sever us, oh my aunt, you may be the 
means of driving* two desperate minds 
to misery and madness/' 

It may appear strange, but all this time 
the world and friends appeared more 
fond of Calantha than at any other: they 
courted, they flattered her — they no longer 
feigned that Glenarvon was insincere — 
and they seemed to gaze with new intent, 
new admiration upon the object of his 
attention. — Never was she apparently so 
beloved, so sought after — in particular by 
the Princess of Madagascar, her party 
and her followers. 



232 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



A few days previous to this quarrel and 
reconciliation, Sir Everard St. Clare had 
been thrown from his horse in conse- 
quence of a tumult, in which, having 
beheld his niece, a dimness came over 
his eyes, and he was no longer able to 
support himself. The fall, it was feared, 
had injured his spine. He was confined 
to his own room ; but no one could pre- 
vail upon him to lie upon his bed, or 
admit Lady St. Clare, who sat continually 
sobbing at his door, lamenting her con- 
duct and imploring his pardon. 

Whatever were the sufferings of Lady 
Avondale's mind at this time, she yet re- 
solved to visit this afflicted family, as she 
had a real regard for the doctor in spite 
of his singularities. She was preparing 
therefore the ensuing day, to call upon 



GLENARVON. 233 

him, when a servant informed her that 
a young' gentleman below desired to 
speak with her. Her heart beat upon 
hearing the name Clarence of Costolly: 
but upon entering the room she soon dis- 
covered, in the personage before her, 
the doctor's unhappy niece, Elinor, upon 
whom every counsel was lost — every 
menace and punishment powerless. 

Elinor had entered the castle with a 
look of bold defiance ; yet her lips trem- 
bled, as she twice vainly attempted to ad- 
dress Lady Avondale, who moved for- 
ward to enquire the cause of her visit. 
" I am come," said Miss St. Clare with 
haughty insolence, " to ask a favour of 
you — tell me shall it be granted ? My un- 
cle is ill: he has sent to see me. This 
may be a mere feint to draw me into his 
power. I will trust myself with no one 
but you: — if you will engage for me, 
that I shall not be detained, I will go to 
him ; if not, come what will, I will never 
more set foot into his house. " " Your 



234 GLENARVON. 

having listened to the prayers of Sir Eve- 
rard," answered Lady Avondale eagerly, 
" is a proof to me that you have a kind 
heart, and you are so young, that 1 feel 
sure, oh most sure, that you will return 
to a more virtuous course." " To virtue !" 
said Elinor with a smile of scorn, " never 
— never/' 

As she spoke, a letter dropped from 
her bosom. Lady Avondale saw from 
the superscription — the name of Glenar- 
von. Her heartsick ned at the sight; 
she tried to conceal her emotion ; but she 
had not yet learned sufficiently how to 
dissemble. Elinor, with ill suppressed 
rage, watched Lady Avondale: she could 
scarcely stand the fury of her glance, 
when in a voice, nearly choked with pas- 
sion, " Take it," she said, throwing the 
letter to her. " Yes, you shall give it him 
— give it to your lover. I would have 
hated you, I would have injured you; 
but I cannot. No wonder he admires 
you : I could myself; but I am misera- 



GLENARVON. 235 

ble." Lady Avondale raised her eyes : 
every fierce expression had left Eli- 
nor's countenance : with a subdued and 
mournful air, she turned aside as if 
ashamed of the weakness she had shewn ; 
then, taking a little miniature and chain 
from her neck, " He sent for this too," 
she cried. " He sent for all he gave 
me, to offer to his new idol. Take it 
then, Lady ; and tell him, I obeyed his 
last command." 

A tear dimmed her eye foramoment ; but 
recovering herself, " He has not power," 
she cried, " to break a heart like mine. 
'Tis such as you, may die for love — I have 
yet many years to live." Lady Avondale 
sprang forward to return the picture — 
the letter ; but St. Clare, with a preci- 
pitancy she was not prepared for, had 
left her; Lady Avondale arrived at the 
door of the Castle only in time to see 
her gallop off. 

While she was yet holding the letter 
and picture in her hand, Glenarvon was 



236 GLENARVON. 

announced. He looked at both without 
exhibiting any symptom of surprise, and 
having read the letter, shewed it to Ca- 
lantha. It greatly shocked her. " I am 
so used," he said smiling, " to these 
scenes, that they have lost all power with 
me." " Unhappy Elinor," said Lady 
Avondale. " In good truth," saidGlenar- 
von," you may spare your pity, Calantha: 
the lady has spirit enough: it is her lover 
who ought to claim compassion. Now 
do not frown, or reproach, or torment 
me about her. I know it was wrong 
first to take her with me — it was wrong 
to see her since ; but never more, you 
may rely upon it, shall I transgress ; 
and if you knew all, you would not 
blame me. She absolutely forced herself 
upon me. She sat at my door, and wept 
when I urged her to return home. What 
could I do? I might have resisted. — 
Calantha, when passion is burning in 
every vein — when opportunity is kind 
— and when those who from the modesty 



GLENARVON. 237 

of their sex ought. to stand above us and 
force us from them, forget their dignity 
and sue and follow us, it is not in man's 
nature to resist: Is it in woman's?" he 
continued smiling archly. 

"I blame you not," she replied; " but 
I pity her. Yet wherefore not shew her 
some little kindness?" ; " A look, a word 
would bring her back to me. She mis- 
represents every thing : she deceives 
herself." " Love is ever apt to do so." 
" Oh ! my adored Calantha, look not 
thus on me. You are not like this 
wretched girl : there is nothing femi- 
nine, or soft, or attractive in her ; in you 
there is every charm," " You loved 
her once ?" said Calantha. " It was pas- 
sion, phrenzy, it was not love — not what 
I feel for my Calantha." " As you re- 
gard me, be kind to her." " I was very 
kind once, was I not ?" " Oh not in that 
manner — not so." " How then, my soul ? 
explain yourself; you shall instruct me." 
" Counsel her to repent." ' ■ From the 



238 GLENARVOtf. 

lips that first taught her to err, how will 
such counsel prevail ?" " Why take your 
picture from her ?" " To give it to the only 
friend I have left." " I shall send it her 
again." " She will only laugh at you." 
" 1 had rather be the cause of her laughter, 
than of her tears." " Fear not : she is not 
prone to weeping ; but perhaps," he con- 
tinued in a tone of pique, " you would 
wish to give me back also, as well as the 
portrait." " Oh never — never." This 
was Lady Avondale's answer ; and Lord 
Glenarvon was satisfied. 



GLENARVON. 239 



CHAPTER XXV. 



Lady Avondale sent the portrait to 
Miss St. Clare, and vainly endeavoured 
to restore her to her uncle's protection. 
She again spoke of her toGlenarvon. 

" Cannot I yet save her ?" she said ; 
** Cannot I take her home, and sooth 
her mind, and bring her back to virtue 
and to peace ?" " Never more," he re- 
plied : " it is past : her heart is perverted." 
" Is there no recall from such perver- 
sion ?" " None, none, my friend/' His 
countenance, whilst he spoke, assumed 
much of bitterness. " Oh there is no re- 
call from guilty love. The very nature 
of it precludes amendment, as these 
beautiful, these emphatic lines express, 
written by the Scottish bard, who had 
felt their truth : 



240 GLENARVON. 

' The sacred lowe oVeel-plac'd love, 

Luxuriantly indulge it; 
But never tempt th'illicit rove, 

Tho' naething should divulge it : 
I wave the quantum o' the sin, 

The hazard of concealing; 
But och ! it hardens a 1 within, 

And petrifies the feeling.' " 

" Is it indeed so ! Alas ! then, what 
will become of me ?" " Calantha, your 
destiny is fixed/' he cried, suddenly start- 
ing as if from deep thought ; " there is a 
gulph before you, into which you are 
preparing to plunge. I would have saved 
you — I tried ; but cannot. You know 
not how to save yourself. Do you think 
a momentary pause, a trifling turn, will 
prevent the fall ? Will you now fly me ? 
now that you are bound to me, and the 
fearful forfeiture is paid ? Oh turn not 
thus away : — look back at the journey 
you have taken from innocence and 
peace : and fear to tread the up-hill path 



GLENARVON. 241 

of repentance and reformation alone. 
Remember when a word or look were 
regarded by you as a crime — how you 
shuddered at the bare idea of guilt. Now 
you can hear its language with interest: it 
has lost its horror : Ah soon it shall be 
the only language your heart will under- 
stand. Shrink not, start not, Calantha ; 
the road you pursue is that which I have 
followed. See and acknowledge then, 
the power I hold over your heart ; and 
yield to what is already destined. You 
imagine, when I speak of guilt, that you 
can shrink from me, that you can hate 
me ; but you have lost the power, and let 
me add, the right : you are become a 
sharer in that iniquity — you must be a 
sharer in my fate. The actual commis- 
sion of crime still excites horror ; but do 
you remember when you shuddered at 
every approach to it? And cannot he 
who has triumphed thus far gain all, 
think you, if it were his desire ? Yes, 
you are mine — a being wholly relying 
Vol. II. M 



242 GLENARVON. 

upon a wish, a breath, which I may 
chuse to kindle. Avondale's peace — your 
honour, are in my hands. If I resign 
you, my heart will break in the struggle; 

but if I give way " 

" Oh then," she cried, " then are we 
ruined for ever and for ever. Do not, 
even were I to consent, O ! do not lead 
me to wrong. What shall ever remune- 
rate us for the loss of self-approbation ? 
He smiled bitterly. " It is," he said, "a 
possession, I never yet cared greatly to 
retain." " And is self-approbation the 
greatest of all earthly enjoyments ? Is 
man so independent, so solitary a being, 
that the consciousness of right will suffice 
to him, when all around brand him with 
iniquity, and suspect him of guilt " He 
paused, and laughed. " Let us be that 
which we are thought," he cried, in a 
more animated tone. " The worst is 
thought ; and that worst we will become. 
Let us live on earth but for each other : 
another country will hide us from the cen- 



GJLENARVON. 243 

sures of the prejudiced ; and our very 
dependence upon each other, will endear 
us more and more/' Calantha with- 
drew her hand — she looked upon him 
with fear ; but she loved, and she forgot 
her alarm. 



m 2 



244 GLENARVOX 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



Strange as it may appear, a husband, 
unless his eyes are opened by the confes- 
sion of his guilty partner, is the last to 
believe in her misconduct ; and when the 
world has justly stamped disgrace upon 
her name, he shares in his wife's disho- 
nour, for he is supposed by all to know, 
and to connive at her crime. But though 
this be a painful truth, experience every 
day confirms, that a noble and confiding 
husband is too often, and too easily de- 
ceived. In the marriage state there is 
little love and much habitual confidence. 
We see neglect and severity on the part 
of the man ; and all the petty arts and 
cunning wiles on the side of his more 
frail and cowardly partner. Indifference 
first occasions this blindness; infatuation 
increases it; and in proportion as all in- 



GLENARVON. 245 

terest is lost for the object who so de- 
ceives, such husband lives the dupe of 
the wife, who despises him for his blind- 
ness, and dies in the same happy illusion, 
in which he has so long passed away his 
life. He even presses to his heart, as he 
leaves them his possessions, the children 
of some deceitful friend, who, under the 
mask of amity to himself, has fed upon 
his fortunes, and seduced the affections 
of his wife. 

Disgusting as such picture may be 
thought, is it not, unhappily for us, daily 
exhibited to the public view ? and shall 
they who tolerate and see it, and smile 
in scorn at its continued and increasing 
success, affect to start with horror from 
Calantha's tale? or to discredit that Avon- 
dale was yet ignorant of her guilt ? He 
was besides ofttimes engaged with the du- 
ties of his profession — nor thought that 
whilst risking his life in the service of his 
country, the woman he loved and confided 
in, had betrayed him. How different 
m 3 



246 GLENARVON. 

was he in mind, in person, and heart 
from other men ! His very nobleness of 
soul prevented him from conceiving what 
some perhaps had soon observed, and 
wounded pride estranged him from a 
woman who now appeared avowedly to 
shun his society. 

His cheeks were red with the hue of 
health ; his eyes shone bright with spark- 
ling intelligence ; he laughed the loud 
heart's laugh at every merry jest, and 
slept with unbroken slumbers, the sleep 
of the righteous and the just. Calantha 
looked upon him as we look afar off upon 
some distant scene were we once dwelt, 
and from which we have long departed. 
It awakens in our memory former pains 
and pleasures ; but we turn from it with 
bitterness ; for the sight is distressing 
to us. 

Harry Mowbrey loved his father and 
followed him ; the baby Anabel held out 
her arms to him when he passed ; but 
Calantha assumed a stern coldness in his 



GLENARVOX. 247 

presence, and replied to his few enquiries 
with all the apparent insensibility of 
a proud and offended mind : yet such is 
the imperfection of human nature, that it 
is possible Lord Avondale cherished her 
the more for her very faults. Certain 
it is, that he felt proud of her, and 
every casual praise which, even from the 
lips of strangers, was bestowed on Calan- 
tha, gave him more delight than any pro- 
fession, however flattering, that could 
have been made to himself. To see her 
blest was his sole desire ; and when he 
observed the change in her manner and 
spirits, it grieved, it tortured him : — he 
sought, but in vain, to remove it. At 
length business of importance called him 
from her. " Write," he said, at parting, 
44 write, as you once used. My presence has 
given but little satisfaction to you ; I dare 
not hope my absence will create pain." 
44 Farewell, ,, said Lady Avondale, with as- 
sumed coldness. " There are false hearts 
in this world, and crimes are enacted, 
m 4 



248 GLENARVOX. 

Henry, at home ofttimes, as well as 
abroad. Confide in no one. Believe not 
what your own eyes perceive. Life is but 
as the shadow of a dream. All here is 
illusion. We know not whom we love/' 
How happy some may imagine — how 
happy Calantha must have felt now that 
Lord Avondale was gone. Far from it. 
She, for the first time, saw her conduct 
in its true light. His departure filled 
her with gloom : every little act of kind- 
ness he had once shewed her recurred ; 
all his manly virtues : his open unsuspi- 
cious nature : — it was as if her last hope 
of safety were cut off ; as if her good an- 
gel had for ever abandoned her ; and with 
a reserve and prudence, which in his 
presence, she had failed to assume, she 
now turned with momentary horror from 
the near approach of crime. The 
thought of leaving her home and Lord 
Avondale, had not indeed ever seriously 
occurred, although she constantly listened 
to the proposal of doing so, and aded in 



GLENARVON. 249 

a way to render such step necessary. 
She had seen Lord Avondale satisfied, 
and whilst Lord Glenarvon was near her, 
only momentary fits of remorse obtruded 
— no lasting fear occurred — she formed 
no view for the future. To die with him, 
or to live but for that moment of time, 
which seemed to concentrate every pos- 
sible degree of happiness, this was the 
only desire of which she had felt capable. 
But now, she shuddered — she paused : 
— the baseness of betraying a noble, 
confiding husband, struck her mind, and 
filled it with alarm ; but such alarm ap- 
peared only to accelerate her doom. " If 
I can resist and remain without deeper 
guilt, I will continue here," she cried ; 
" and if I fail in the struggle, I will fly 
with Glenarvon." — This false reasoning 
consoled her. A calm, more dangerous 
than the preceding agitation, followed 
this resolve. 

Glenarvon had changed entirely in his 
manner, in his character ; all art, all 



250 GLENARVON. 

attempt at wounding or tormenting was 
passed. He seemed himself the sufferer, 
and Calantha, the being upon whose at 
tachment he relied, he was as fearful of 
vexing her, as she was of losing him. 
On earth he appeared to have no thought 
but her ; and when again and again he 
repeated, " I never loved as I do now, — 
oh never." It may be doubted whether 
that heart exists which could have dis- 
believed him. Others who affect only, 
are ever thoughtful for themselves ; and 
some plan, some wary and prudential 
contrivance frequently appears, even in 
the very height of their passion. The 
enjoyment of the moment alone, and not 
the future continuance of attachment, 
employs their hopes. But Glenarvon 
seemed more anxious to win every affec- 
tion of her heart ; to fix every hope of 
her soul upon himself; to study every 
feeling as it arose, sift every motive, and 
secure his empire upon all that was most 
durable, than to win her in the usual 



GLENARVON. 251 

acceptation of the word. And even 
though jealous that she should be ready 
to sacrifice every principle of honour 
and virtue, should he demand it, he had 
a pride in saving her from that guilt into 
which she was now voluntarily preparing 
to plunge. 

Day by day, the thought of leaving all 
for him appeared more necessary and 
certain. — She no longer shuddered at 
the mention of it. She heard him de- 
scribe their future life — the countries 
they should visit; and it even pleased 
her to see that he was sincere in his 
intentions. No disguise was now re- 
quired : he called not the fire that burnt 
in his heart by the name of friendship 
and of interest : " it is love," he cried, 
" — most guilty — most unconquerable. 
Hear it, mark it, and yet remain without 
alarm. Ah ! think not that to share 
it alone is required ; your soul must 
exult, that it has renounced every hope 
beyond ; and Glenarvon's love must 



252 GLENARVON. 

entirely fill your affections. Nay more, 
you shall sue for the sacrifice which is 
demanded of others. Yourself shall 
wish it ; for I will never wrest from you 
that which, unless freely given, is little 
worth. Perhaps, even when you desire 
to be mine. I, even I shall spare you, till 
maddening with the fierce fires that de- 
vour us, you abandon all for me." 

He now opened to her the dark re- 
cesses of his heart ; deeds of guilt con- 
cealed from other eyes, he now dwelt 
upon to Calantha with horrid pleasure. 
4: Shrink not ! start not!" he exclaimed, 
when she trembled at each new confes- 
sion. " Proud, even of my crimes, shalt 
thou become, poor victim of thy mad 
infatuation ; this is the man for whom 
thou leavest Avondale ! Mark me, Ca- 
lantha, — view me as I am, nor say here- 
after that Glenarvon could deceive." 
wi And do you never feel remorse ?" she 
said.—" Never." " Do you believe ?— " 



GLENARVON. 253 

His countenance for one moment altered. 
" I know not," he said, and he was grave. 
* ; Oh must I become as hardened as 
wicked," she said, bursting into tears* He 
pressed her mournfully to his bosom. 
u Weep," he replied, " I like to see your 
tears ; they are the last tears of expiring 
virtue. Henceforward you will shed no 



more." 



Those who have given way to the vio- 
lence of any uncontrouled passion know 
that during its influence, all other consi- 
derations vanish. It is of little use to 
upbraid or admonish the victim who 
pursues his course: the fires that urge 
him on to his ruin, prevent his return. 
A kind word, an endearing smile, may 
excite one contrite tear; but he ne- 
ver pauses to reflect, or turns his eyes 
from the object of his pursuit. In vain 
the cold looks of an offended world, 
the heavy censures, and the pointed, 



254 GLENARVON. 

bitter sarcasms of friends and depen- 
dants. Misfortunes, poverty, pain, even 
to the rack, are nothing if he obtain 
his view. It is a madness that falls upon 
the brain and heart. All is at stake for 
that one throw; and he who dares all, 
is desperate, and cannot fear. It was 
phrenzy, not love, that raged in Calan- 
tha's bosom. 

To the prayers of a heart-broken pa- 
rent, Lady Avondale opposed the ago- 
nizing threats of a distempered mind. 
" I will leave you all, if you take him 
from me. On earth there is nothing left 
me but Glenarvon. — Oh name not virtue 
and religion to me. — What are its hopes, 
its promises, if I lose him." The fever 
of her mind was such, that she could not 
for one hour rest : he saw the dreadful 
power he had gained, and he lost no 
opportunity of encreasing it. Ah did 
he share it? In language the sweetest, 



GLENARVOff. 255 

and the most persuasive, he worked upon 
her passions, till he inflamed them be- 
yond endurance. 

" This, this is sin," he cried, as he 
held her to his bosom, and breathed vows 
of ardent burning love. " This is what 
moralists rail at, and account degrading. 
Now tell them, Calantha, thou who didst 
affect to be so pure — so chaste, whether 
the human heart can resist it? Religion 
bids thee fly me," he cried: " every hope 
of heaven and hereafter warns thee from 
my bosom. Glenarvon is the hell thou 
art to shun: — this is the hour of trial. 
Christians must resist. Calantha arise, 
and fly me; leave me alone, as before I 
found thee. Desert me, and thy father 
and relations shall bless thee for the sa- 
crifice: and thy God, who redeemed thee, 
shall mark thee for his own." With 
bitter taunts he smiled as he thus spoke: 

All day, — every hour in the day, — 
every instant of passing time Glenarvon 



256 GLENARVON. 

thought but of Calantha. When near 
him, she felt ecstacy; but if separated, 
though for one moment, she was sul- 
len and desponding. He felt, he saw, 
that the peace of her mind, was gone for 
ever, and he rejoiced in the thought. 



GLENARVON. 257 



CHAPTER XXVL 



One night, as she retired to her room, 
Gondimar met her in the passage, leading 
from Mrs. Seymour's apartment. " Lost 
woman," he cried, fiercely seizing her, 
u you know not what you love ; — look to 
his hand, there is blood on it! .... That 
night was a horrid night to Calantha ; 
she slept, and the dream that oppressed 
her, left her feeble and disordered. Th€ 
ensuing day she walked by the shores of 
the sea: she bared her forehead to the 
balmy gales. She looked upon every 
cheerful countenance in hopes of im- 
bibing happiness front the smile that 
brightened theirs, but it was vain. 

Upon returning, she met Glenarvon. 
They walked together to the mountains : 
they conversed ; and half in jest she asked 
him for his hand, — ■" not that hand," 



258 GLENARVON. 

she said, " give me your right hand ; I 
wish to look upon it." " I believe I 
must refuse you, your manner is so 
strange," he replied. " Do if you please, 
for the reason I wish to see it is more so. 
It was a dream, a horrid dream, which 
made me ill last night. The effect, 
perhaps of what you told me yesterday." 
" I should like to hear it. Are you 
superstitious?" " No; but there are 
visions unlike all others, that impress us 
deeply, and this was one. I almost fear 
to tell it you." " I too have dreamt," he 
said, " shall I repeat my dream ?" " Not 
now, I am too sad for it : but mine, if 
indeed you wish it, you may hear." 

" I dreamt (but it is absurd to repeat 
it) that I was in some far distant country. 
J was standing by the sea, and the fresh 
air blew gently upon me, even as it does 
now;.... it was night. There was a 
dirge sung as in monasteries, and friars 
passed to and fro, in long procession 
before me. Their torches now and then 



GLENARVON. 259 

lighted the vaults, and the chaunt was 
mournful, and repeatedly interrupted — 
all this was confused. — That which was 
more striking, I remember better. A 
monk in black stood before me ; and 
whilst he gazed upon me, he grew to 
a height unusual and monstrous : he 
seemed to possess some authority over 
me, and he questioned me as to my 
conduct and affections. I tried to dis- 
guise from him many thoughts which 
disturbed me ; I spoke in a hurried 
manner of others; I named you not. He 
shook his head ; and then looking fiercely 
at me, bade me beware of Clarence de 
Ruthven (for so he called you). I never 
can forget his voice. " All others you 
may see, you may converse with ; but, 
Calantha, beware," he said, " of Clarence 
de Ruthven : he is a .... he is a .... " 
" A what?" enquired Glenarvon eagerly. 
" I dare not continue." 

Glenarvon, however, insisted upon 
hearing this. " I never, never can tell," 



260 GLENARVON. 

said Calantha, for you look so much 
offended — so serious. After all, what 
nonsense it is thus to repeat a dream." 
" That which seems to have made no 
little impression upon Lady Avondale's 
mind, cannot fail of awakening some 
interest in mine. It is a very strange 
vision," he continued, fixing his eyes on 
her. " These idle phantasies are but 
repetitions of the secret workings of 
the mind. Your own suspicions have 
coloured this. Go on, let me hear all." 
" Indeed I forget ; — it was confused. I 
seemed in my dream to doubt his words. 
Only this I remember : — he bade me 
ask you for your hand — your right hand ; 
he said there was a stain of blood on it ; 
and in a low solemn tone, he added, ' he 
will not give it you ; there is a mark 
upon it ; he dare not give it you ;' and I 
awoke." 

" To think me every thing, however 
bad, that your monk may chuse to make 
me out. Well foolish dreamer, look at 



GLENARVON. 261 

my hand : say, is there a mark on it ?" 
The laugh which accompanied this ques- 
tion was forced. Calantha started back, 
as she observed that almost demoniac 
smile. His eyes glared upon her with 
fierce malignity ; his livid cheeks became 
pale ; and over his forehead, an air of 
deep distress struggled with the violence 
of passion, till all again was calm, cold, 
and solemn, as before. She was sur- 
prised at his manner; for although he 
made light of it, he was certainly dis- 
pleased, and much moved by this foolish 
occurrence. 

Glenarvon continued absent and irri- 
table during the whole of the walk ; nor 
ceased enquiring oftentimes that day res- 
pecting what she had said. It appeared 
to her less extraordinary, when she re- 
membered the circumstances concerning 
Linden : yet he had so often acknow- 
ledged that event to her, — so often spoke 
of him with pity and regret, that had he 
merely thought she alluded to such 



262 GLENARVOJV. 

transaction, he had been proud of the 
effort he had made to save him, and of 
the blood he had shed upon that account. 
Whatever then occasioned this strange 
perturbation ; — however far imagination 
might wander, even though it pictured 
crimes unutterable, — under Glenarvon's 
form, all might be forgiven. Passion, 
perhaps, had misled its victim, and who 
can condemn another when maddening 
under its trying influence ! It was not 
for Calantha to judge him. It was her 
misfortune to feel everything with such 
acute and morbid sensibility, that what 
in others had occasioned a mere moment 
of irritation, shook every fibre around 
her heart. The death of a bird, if it had 
once been dear, made her miserable ; and 
the slightest insult, as she termed it, 
rendered her furious. Severity but caused 
a desperate resistance, and kindness alone 
softened or subdued her. Glenarvon 
played upon every passion to the utmost; 
and when he beheld her, lost beyond all 
recall he seemed to love her most. 



GLEN AR VON. 263 

How vain it were to attempt to paint 
the struggles, the pangs, the doubts, the 
fears, the endless unceasing irritation of a 
mind disordered by guilty love. Remorse 
had but little part now : passion soon 
absorbed every feeling, every hope ; and 
to retain Glenarvon was there anything 
his weak and erring victim had refused ? 
Alas ! the hour came, when even to leave 
all and follow him appeared incumbent. 
The very ruin such conduct must occasion 
to Calantha, engaged her more eagerly to 
agree to the proposal. 

Lady Margaret was now, at times, en- 
gaged with him in secret discourses, which 
occasioned much apparent dissention be- 
tween them; but Calantha was not the 
subject. " He has the heart of a fiend," 
Lady Margaret would often exclaim, as 
she left him ; and Calantha could per- 
ceive that, with all her power of dissimu- 
lation ; she was more moved — more irri- 
tated by him, than she ever had been 
before by any other. He also spoke of 



264 GLENARVON. 

Lady Margaret with bitterness, and the 
asperity between them grew to such 
height, that Calantha apprehended the 
most fatal effects from it. Still, however, 
the Duke wished to conciliate a danger- 
ous and malignant foe ; and though his 
visits to the Castle were short, compared 
with what they had been, they were as 
frequent as ever. 



GLENARVON. 265 



CHAPTER XXVIII 



It happened one morning that Calantha, 
having been walking with Lord Gle- 
narvon, upon her return entered the 
library rather unexpectedly, and per- 
ceived Zerbellini with the Count Gondi- 
mar and Lady Margaret. They all seemed 
in some confusion at her entrance. She 
was however too deeply occupied with 
other thoughts to enquire into their 
strange embarrassment ; and looking at 
Glenarvon, she watched the varying ex- 
pression of his countenance with anxious 
solicitude. At dinner, that day, he seated 
himself near her. Mrs. Seymour's eyes 
were filled with tears. " It is too late," 
he said, in a low whisper : "be firm : it 
makes me mad to see the arts that are 
used to separate us. Speak only to me — 
think only of me. What avail their frowns? 
Vol. IL N 



206 



GLEXARVON. 



their reproaches ? I am clearer, am I not 
than all?" 

Dinner being over, Calantha avoided 
her aunt's presence. She perceived it, 
and approaching her, " My child," she 
said, " do not fly me. My unhappy Ca- 
lantha you will break my heart if you 
act thus." At that moment Lady Mar- 
garet joined them ; " Ask Calantha," she 
said, " now ask her about the pearl neck- 
lace." 

The pearl necklace in question was 
one which Lord Avondale had given 
her on the eve of her marriage. She 
was now accused of having given it to 
Lord Glenarvon. It is true that she had 
placed in his hands all the jewels of 
which she was mistress, that his presents 
might not exceed in value such as she 
had power to offer; they had been too 
magnificent otherwise for her to receive ; 
and though only dear because they were 
his gifts, yet to have taken them without 
return had been more pain than pleasure : 



GLEtfARVON. 267 

one smile of his were worth them all — 
one approving look, far dearer. This gift 
of Lord Avondale's, however, she had con- 
sidered as sacred, and neither Lord Gle- 
narvon's love, nor her own perversion, 
had led her to touch it, She had received 
it when innocent and true ; it was pain to 
her even to look upon it now ; and when 
she heard the accusation made against 
her, she denied it with considerable 
warmth ; for guilt but irritates the 
mind, and renders the perpetrator im- 
patient of accusation. " This indigna- 
tion is rather ill-timed however/* said 
Lady Margaret, sarcastically : " there are 
things more sacred than pearls thrown 
away ; and if the necklace has not been 
given, it is, I believe, the only thing, 
retained ." 

Such unpleasant conversation was now 
interrupted by Sophia, who entered the 
room. — " The necklace is found," she 
said; " and who do you think had 
taken it ?" " I care not," said Calantha 
n 2 



268 GLENARVOX. 

proud and offended at their former sus- 
picions. " Zerbellini !" * Oh impos- 
sible !" " Some of Lady Margaret's ser- 
vants first suggested the possibility," said 
Sophia. " His desk and wardrobe were 
consequently examined, and scarce giv- 
ing credit to the testimony of their sight, 
the lost prize was discovered in his silken 
vest." Calantha indignantly resisted the 
general belief that the boy was the real 
culprit. Every one left the room, and 
eagerly enquired into the whole affair. 
*' If ocular proof be necessary to con- 
vince you," said Lady Margaret, return- 
ing to Calantha and leading her from the 
billiard room, accompanied by many 
others, " you shall now have it; and see," 
»he cried, pausing as she entered the 
boy's apartment, "how soundly crimi- 
nals can sleep !" " Aye, and how tran- 
quil and innocent they can appear/' con- 
tinued Gondimar smiling as he stood by 
the side of the page's bed. Glenarvon's 
countenance, rendered more terrible bv 



GLENARVON. 203 

the glimmering of the lamp, changed at 
these words. 

There, sleeping in unsuspicious peace, 
lay the youthful Zerbellini, his cheeks 
blooming, his rich auburn hair flowing 
in clusters about his face, his arms thrown 
over his head with infantine and playful 
grace. " If he be guilty," said Calan- 
tha, looking earnestly at him, " how 
much one may be deceived!" " How 
much one may be deceived !° said 
the Duke turning back and glancing 
his eye on the trembling form of his 
daughter. The necklace was produced : 
but a look of doubt was still seen on every 
countenance, and Lord Glen arvon, sternly 
approaching Gondimar, asked him whe- 
ther some villain might not have placed 
it there, to screen himself and to ruin 
the boy ? "I should be loath," replied 
the Italian, with an affectation of humi- 
lity, " very loath to imagine that such a 
wretch could exist." A glance of bitter 
scorn, was the only reply vouchsafed. 

n 3 



270 GLENARTON. 

" We can see the boy, alone, in the 
morning-," said Sophia in a low whisper 
to Calantha ; " there is more in this than 
we know of. Be calm ; fear not, and to- 
morrow, we can with caution discover 
all." " Do not talk of to-morrow," re- 
plied Calantha angrily : " an hour, a mo- 
ment is too long to bear injustice. I will 
plead with my father." So saying, she 
followed him, urging him to hear her. 
" Consider the youth of the child," she 
said, "even if guilty, remember he is 
but young." 4C His youth but aggravates 
the crime," said the Duke, haughtily re- 
pulsing her. " When the young can 
act basely, it shews that the heart's core 
is black. Plead not for him : look to 
yourself, child," he fiercely cried, and 
left her. The time was past when a 
prayer of Calantha's was never breathed 
in vain ; and struggling with a thousand 
strong emotions, she fled to her own 
room, and gave vent to the contending 



GLENARVON. 271 

passions, by which she Mas so greatly 
agitated. 

That night Lord Glenarvon slept not 
at the Castle. Zerbellini's guilt was now 
considered as certain. The Duke himself 
awakeniner the child, asked him if he 
had taken the necklace. He coloured 
extremely ; hid his face, and then ack- 
nowledged the offence. He was ques- 
tioned respecting his motive; but he 
evaded, and would not answer. His doom 
was therefore fixed. " I will take him 
from hence," said Gondimar. " He must 
not remain here a single hour ; but no se- 
verity shall be shewn to so youthful an 
ofiender. M 

It was at that dark still hour of the 
night, when spirits that are troubled 
wake, and calmer eyes are closed in sleep, 
that Lady Margaret and Count Gondimar, 
entering Zerbellini's room, asked him if 
he were prepared. " For what?" ex- 
claimed the boy, clasping his hands to- 
gether. " Oime! eccelenza che vuoif 

n 4 



272 GLENARVON. 

Save me," he cried, appealing to Lady 
Margaret. "I will not, cannot go." "Will 
no one pity me ? Oh Gondimar ! are 
these your promises — your kindnesses ?" 
" Help me to bear him away," said 
Gondimar to Lady Margaret. " If 
Glenarvon should hear us ?" and force 
was used to bear the struggling boy from 
the Castle ? 

In the morning Calantha was informed, 
by Lady Margaret, of the whole transac- 
tion. She said, however, that on account 
of his youth, no other notice would be 
taken of his fault, than that of his being 
immediately sent back to his parents at 
Florence. 

Calantha was unquiet and restless the 
whole of the day. " The absence of your 
page," said Lady Margaret sarcastically, 
as she passed her, " seems to have caused 
you some little uneasiness. Do you ex- 
pect to find him in any of these rooms ? 
Have you not been to Craig Allen Bay, 
or the Wizzard's Glen ? Has the Chapel 
been examined thoroughly ?" 



GLENARVON. 273 

A loud noise and murmur interrupted 
her. The entrance of the Count Gondi- 
mar, pale and trembling", supported by 
Lord Glenarvon and a servant, gave a 
general alarm. — " Ruffians," said Gon- 
dimar, fiercely glancing his eyes around, 
" attacked our carriage, and forced the 
child from my grasp." " Where ? — 
how?" "About twenty miles hence," 
said the Italian. " Curse on the dark- 
ness, which prevented my defending my- 
self as I ouolit." " Those honorable 
wounds," said Glenarvon, " prove suffi- 
ciently that the Count wrongs himself." 
" Trelawny," whispered Gondimar, " do 
me a favour. Fly to the stables ; view 
"well Glenarvon's steed ; mark if it bear 
any appearance of recent service : I strong- 
ly suspect him : and but for his presence 
at these gates, so calm, so cleanly ac- 
coutred, I could have staked my soul it 
was by his arm 1 received these wounds." 

" The horse," said Lord Trelawny, 
when he returned, " is sleek and far dif- 
n 5 



274 GLENARVON. 

ferent from the reeking steeds that fol- 
lowed with your carriage." Glenarvon 
smiled scornfully on the officious Lord : 
then fixing his eye sternly upon Gondi- 
mar, " I read your suspicions/' he said 
in a low voice, as he passed : w they are 
just. Now, serpent, do thy worst : thou 
art at my mercy." " Not at thine," re- 
plied Gondimar, grinding his teeth. 

" By the murdered " " Say no 

more," said Glenarvon, violently agi- 
tated, while every trembling nerve attes- 
ted the agony he endured. " For God's 
sake be silent. I will meet you at St. 
Alvin's to-night : you shall investigate the 
whole of my conduct, and you will not 
find in it aught to give you just offence." 
" The ground upon which you stand 
has a crimsoned dye," said Gondimar, 
with a malicious smile : " look at your 
hand, my lord. ..." Glenarvon, faint and 
exhausted, scarce appeared to support 
himself any longer; but suddenly col- 
lecting all his force? together, with a 



GLENARVON. 275 

struggle, which nature seemed scarcely 
equal to endure, he sprung upon the 
Italian, and asked him fiercely the mean- 
ing of his words. Gondimar now, in his 
turn, trembled; Lord Trelawney inter- 
posed ; and peace was apparently restored. 



276 GLEXARYOX. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 



The scene of the morning had caused con- 
siderable speculation. The count, though 
slightly indisposed — appeared at dinner : 
after which Lord Glenarvon took a hasty 
leave. It need not be said what Calan- 
tha's feelings were. Gondimar and Lady 
Margaret talked much together, during 
the evening. Calantha wrote in anxiety 
to Glenarvon. No one was now near to 
comfort her. As she retired slowly and 
sadly to her room in dreadful suspense, 
O'Kelly, Glenarvon's servant, passed her 
on the stairs. The sight of his counte- 
nance was joy to her. u My lord waits 
to see you, at the back door on the ter- 
race," he said, as he affected to hasten 
away with a portmanteau on his shoulder. 
She heard and marked the words, and 
watching an opportunity hastened to the 



GLENARVON. 277 

door. It was locked ; but O' Kelly awai- 
ted her and opened it. To be in the 
power of this man was nothing : he was 
Glenarvon's long tried and faithful ser- 
vant ; yet she felt confused when she met 
his eyes ; and thought it an indignity 
that her secret had been betrayed to him. 
Glenarvon, however, had commanded her 
to trust him ; and every command of his 
she too readily obeyed. " My lord is 
going," said the man. "Where?" she 
cried ; in the utmost agony. " From 
Ireland," saidO'Kelly. " But he waits for 
you by yonder tree," she hastened for- 
ward . 

" Ah speak to me," she said, upon 
seeing him : " my heart is tortured ; con- 
fide at least in me : let me have the corn- 
fort of believing that I contribute to the 
happiness of one human being upon earth ; 
I who cause the misery of so many." Gle- 
narvon turned from her. " Tell me 
the cause of your distress." " They 
will tear you from me," " 'Never, 



278 GLENARVON. 

never," she answered. " Look not on me, 
frail, fading flowret," he said, in a hollow 
mournful tone — "ah look not on me, nor 
thus waste thy sweets upon a whited se- 
pulchre, full of depravity and death. 
Could'st thou read my heart — couldst 
thou see how it is seared, thou would'st 
tremble and start back with horror," " I 
have bound myself to you," she replied, 
"lam prepared for the worst : it cannot 
be worse than the crime of which I am 
guilty ; grieve not then for me, I am 
calm and happy — oh most happy, when 
I am thus with you." 

There is a look of anguish, such as a 
slave might give when he betrays his 
master — such as a murderer in thought 
might shew previous to the commission 
of the bloody act, in presence of his 
victim • — such a look, so sad, so terri- 
ble, impressed a momentary gloom over 
the beautiful countenance of Glenarvon, 
Yes, when she said that she was happy, 
at that very time he shrunk from the joy 



GLENARVON. 279 

she professed ; for he knew that he had 
led her to that which would blast all 
peace in her heart for ever. 

" Calantha," at length he said, " let 
me pour out the agonies of my soul, 
to my only friend. I have promised 
your aunt to leave you : yes ; for thy 
dear sake, I will go ; and none shall 
hereafter say of me, that I led you to 
share my ruined fortunes, or cast dis- 
grace upon your name! Whatever my 
wrongs and injuries, to others, let one 
woman exist to thank me for her preser- 
vation. It will break my heart ; but I 
will do it. You will hear dreadful things 
of me, when I am away: you will learn 
to hate, to curse me." " Oh never, 
Glenarvon, never." " I believe you 
love me," he continued ; ** and ere we 
part, ere we forget every vow given 
and received — every cherished hope, 
now blighted so cruelly for me, give 
me some proof of your sincerity. 
Others perhaps have been my victims ; 



280 GLENARV0N. 

I, alas ! am your's. You do not know, 
you cannot know what I feel, you 
have made me insensible to every other 
pursuit. I seem to exist alone in you, 
and for you, and can you, can you then 
abandon me ? Go if it be your pleasure, 
receive the applause of the world, of 
friends, of those who affect the name ; and 
when they hear that Glenarvon has fled, a 
voluntary exile from his country without 
one being to share his sorrows, perishing 
by slow degrees of a cruel and dangerous 
malady, which long has preyed upon his 
constitution, then let your husband and 
your aunt triumph in the reflection, that 
they have hastened his doom. And you, 
wretched victim, remember, that having 
brightened for a few short hours my wea- 
ry path, you have left me at the last more 
lonely, more deserted even than when first 
you appeared before me. Oh Calantha, 
let others mock at my agony, and doubt 
the truth of one who has but too well 
deserved their suspicions; but do not you 



GLENARVON. 281 

refuse to believe me. Young as I appear, 
] have made many miserable : but none 
more so than myself; and, having cast 
away every bright hope of dawning fame 
and honor, I renounce even now the 
only being who stands like a guardian an- 
gel between myself and eternal perdition. 
Oh canst thou doubt such love ? and yet 
believing it, wilt thou consent that I should 
thus abandon thee ? I have sacrificed for 
thee the strong passions that, like vultures, 
prey upon my heart — fortune, honor, 
every hope, even beyond the grave, for 
thy happiness — for thy love ! Ah say 
canst thou — wilt thou now abandon 
me r 

" Glenarvon," Lady Avondale replied, 
weeping bitterly. " I am much more mise- 
rable than you can be ; I have more love 
for you than it is possible you can feel for 
me. I am not worth half what you inspire. 
I never will consent to part." " Then 
you must accompany me," he said, look- 
ing her full in the face. " Alas ! if I do 



282 



GLENARVOxV 



thus, how will yourself despise me. 
When society, and those whose opipion 
you value, brand her name with infamy 
who leaves all for you, where shall we 
fly from dishonor ? how will you bear 
up under my disgrace ?" " I will bear you 
in my arms from the country that con- 
demns you — in my heart, your name 
shall continue spotless as purity," he 
replied, — " sacred as truth. I will resist 
every opposition, and slay every one who 
shall dare to breathe one thought against 
you. For you I could renounce and des- 
pise the world ; and I will teach you that 
love is in itself such ecstacy, that all 
we leave for it is nothing to it." 

" How can I resist you ?" she answered. 
"Allow me to hear and yet forget the les- 
sons which you teach — let me look on 
you, yet doubt you — let me die for you, 
but not see you suffer thus." "Come with 
me now — even now," said Glenarvon 
fiercely; — " I must make you mine before 
we part: then I will trust you; but not 



GLENARVON. 283 

till then." He looked upon her with 
scorn, as she struggled from his grasp. 
" Calantha, you affect to feel more than 
I do," he cried; " but your heart could 
not exist under what I endure. You 
love! — Oh you do not know how to 
love." " Do not be so cruel to me: look 
not so fierce Glenarvon . For you, for you, I 
have tempted the dangers of guilt ; for you, 
I have trembled and wept; and, believe 
it, for you I will bear to die." " Then give 
yourself to me : this very hour be mine." 
^ And I am your's for ever :" "• But it 
must be your own free act and deed. Fear 
not ; Lady Margaret is in my power ; I am 
appointed to an interview with her to-mor- 
row; and your aunt dares not refuse you, 
if you say that you will see me. It is on 
your firmness I rely: be prudent: it is 
but of late I counsel it. Deceit is indeed 
foreign to my nature ; but what disguise 
would I not assume to see you ?" 

O'Kelly interrupted this conference 
by whispering something in his ear,— 



284 GLENARVON. 

" I will attend her instantly. " " Whom?" 
said Calantha. " Oh no one." u Ah 
speak truly : tell me what mean those 
words — those mysterious looks : you 
smile : that moon bears witness against 
you; tell me all." " I will trust you," 
said Glenarvon. " Oh, my Lord, for 
Heaven's sake !" said O'Kelly interfering, 
" remember your vows, I humbly en- 
treat." " Hear me," said Glenarvon, in 
an authoritative tone, repulsing him. 
" V\ hat are you all without me? Tremble 
then at daring to advise, or to offend 
me. Lady Avondale is mine ; we are 
but one, and she shall know my secret, 
though 1 were on the hour betrayed." 
"My Lady you are lost," said the man, " if 
you do not hasten home ; you are watched : 
I do implore you to return to the castle." 
Lord Glenarvon reluctantly permitted 
her to leave him ; he promised to see her 
on the following morning ; and she has- 
tened home. 



GLENARTON. 285 



CHAPTER XXX. 



Unable to rest, Calantha wrote during 
the whole of the night ; and in the morn- 
ing, she heard that the Duke was in pos- 
session of her letter. Lady Margaret 
entered, and informed her of this. 

She also stated that the note would 
soon be returned into her own hands, 
and that although much might be 
suspected from its contents, neither 
herself nor the Duke were of opinion 
that Lord Avondale should at pre- 
sent be informed of the transaction. 
While Lady Margaret was yet speaking, 
the Duke, opening the door, with a severe 
countenance approached Calantha, and 
placing the letter to Lord Glenarvon upon 
the table, assured her, with coldness, that 
he considered her as her own mistress, 
and should not interfere, Lady Margaret 



286 GLENARVOBf. 

without a word further being uttered on 
her part, left the room. 

As soon as she was gone, the Duke ap* 
proached his daughter. " This is going 
too far," he said, pointing to the letter: 
" there is no excuse for you." She asked 
him, with some vivacity, why he had 
broken the seal, and wherefore it was not 
-delivered as it was addressed. With cold- 
ness he apologized to her for the liberty 
he had taken, which even a father's right 
over an only child, he observed, could 
scarcely authorise. " But," continued he, 
"duty has of late been so much sacrificed 
to inclination, that we must have charity 
for each other. As I came, however, by 
your letter somewhat unfairly, I shall 
make no comments upon it, nor describe 
the feelings that it excited in my mind — 
only observe, I will have this end here ; 
and my commands, like your's, shall be 
obeyed." He then reproached her for 
her behaviour. " I have seen you 
give way," he said, " to exceeding low 



GLENARVOTV. 287 

spirits, and I am desirous of knowing 1 
why this grief has suddenly been changed 
to ill-timed gaiety and shameless effron- 
tery? Will nothing cure you of this love 
of merriment ? Will an angry father, 
an offended husband, and a contemning 
world but add to and encrease it? Shall 
I say happy Calantha, or shall I weep 
over the hardness of a heart that is in- 
sensible to the grief of others, and has 
ceased to feel for itself? Alas ! I looked 
upon you as my comfort and delight; but 
you are now to me, a heavy care — a ne- 
ver ceasing reproach ; and if you persist 
in this line of conduct, the sooner you 
quit this roof, which rings with your dis- 
grace, the better it will be for us all. 
Those who are made early sacrifices to 
ambition and interest may plead some ex- 
cuse; but you Calantha, what can you 
say to palliate your conduct? A father's 
blessing accompanied the choice your 
own heart made ; and was not Avondale 
a noble choice ? What quality is there, 



288 GLENARVON. 

whether of person or of mind, in which 
he is deficient ? I think of him with 
feelings of pride." — " I do so, too, my 
father." — " Go, poor deluded child," he 
continued, in an offended tone, " fly to 
the arms of yoar new lover, and seek 
with him that happiness of which you 
have rohbed me for ever, and which I 
fear you yourself never more will know. 
Do not answer me, or by those proud 
looks attempt to hide your disgrace. I am 
aware of all you would urge ; but am not 
to be swayed by the sophistry you would 
employ. This is no innocent friend- 
ship. Beware to incense me by uttering 
one word in its defence. Are you not 
taught that God, who sees the heart, looks 
not at the deed, but at the motive ? In 
his eye the murderer who has made up 
his mind to kill, has already perpetrated 
the deed ; and the adultress who. . . ." — • 
" Ah, call me not by that name, my father: 
I am your only child. No proud looks 
shall now shew themselves, or support 



GLENARVOtf. 289 

me ; but on my knees here, even here, 
I humble myself before you. Speak not 
so harshly to me: I am very miserable." 

" Consent to see him no more. Say it, 
my child, and all shall be forgotten — I 
will forgive you." — " I must see him 
once more — ah ! once more ; and if he 
consents, I will obey." — " Good God ! 
do I live to hear such words ? Is it then 
to Lord Glenarvon's mercy, and to no 
effort of your own, that I am to owe 
your amendment? See him then, but 
do it in defiance of my positive com- 
mands: — see him, Calantha ; but the 
veangeance of an offended God, the male- 
diction of a father fall on thee for thy 
disobedience: — see him if it be thy mad 
resolve ; but meet m) eyes no more. A 
lover may be found at any time ; but a 
father, once offended, is lost for ever : 
his will should be sacred ; and the God 
of Heaven may see fit to withdraw his 
mercy from a disobedient child." The 
Duke, as he spoke these words, trembled 

Vol. II. O 



i 



290 GLENARVON. 

with passion, and darting an angry eye 
upon Calantha, left her. The door closed. 
She stood suspended — uncertain how to 
act. — 

At length recovering, she seized a pen, 
and wrote to Glenarvon. — " I am indeed 
WTetched ; but let me, at all events, spare 
$ou. Come not to the Castle. Write to 
me: it is all I ask. I must quit you for 
ever. Oh, Glenarvon, I must indeed see 
you no more ; or involve all whom I love, 
and yourself, who art far dearer, in my 
disgrace. Let me hear from you im- 
mediately. You must decide for me : 
I have no will on earth but your's — no 
hope but in the continuance of your 
love. Do not call me weak. Write to 
me : say you approve ; for if you do not, 
I cannot obey." 

Having sent her letter with some fear, 
she went to Mrs. Seymour, who was far 
from well, and had been some days con- 
fined to her room. She endeavoured to 
conceal from her what had passed in the 



GLENARVON. 291 

morning respecting her father. Mrs. Sey- 
mour spoke but little to her, she seemed 
unequal to the task imposed upon her by 
others, of telling Calantha that which she 
knew would cause her pain. She was 
dreadfully agitated, and holding her 
niece's hand, seemed desirous she should 
not leave her for any length of time. 

Towards noon, Calantha went out for a 
few moments, and near the Elm wood 
met Glenarvon. "Oh, for Heaven's sake!" 
she cried, " do not come here : some 
one may see you." — " And if they do," 
he said calmly, " what of that?" — "I can- 
not stay now: — for your sake I cannot: — 
meet me to-night." — " Where ?" How?" 
— " At the Chapel."—" At what hour ?" 
— " At twelve." — " That is too early." — 
" Atthree." — " I dare not come." — " Then 
farewell." — " Glenarvon !" He turned 
back. " I cannot be thus trifled with," 
he said. " You have given yourself to 
me : I was not prepared for this wavering 
and caprice." — " Oh, you know not what 
o 2 



292 GLENARVON. 

has passed/'— " I know all." — " My 
aunt is ill/' He smiled contemptuously. 
" Act as you think right," he said; " but 
do not be the dupe of these machina- 
tions." — " She is really ill : she is incapa- 
ble of art."— " Go to her, then."—" And 
you — shall I see you no more?" — " Ne- 
ver." — " I shall come to-night." — " As 
you please." — 6J At all events, I shall be 
there, Glenarvon . — Oh look not thus on 
me. You know, you well know your 
power: do not lead me to infamy and ruin." 
Glenarvon seized Calantha's hand, 
which he wrung with violence. Passion 
in him was very terrible : it forced no 
fierce words from his lips ; no rush of 
blood suffused his cheeks and forehead ; 
but the livid pale of suppressed rage spread 
itself over every feature : even his hands 
bore testimony to the convulsive effort 
which the blood, receding to his heart, 
occasioned. Thus pale, thus fierce, he 
gazed on Calanthawith disdain.—" Weak, 
timid being, is it for this 1 have renounced 
so much? — Is it for such as you that 



GLE1VARV0N. 293 

I have consented to live ? How different 
from her I once loved. Go to the parents 
for whom I am sacrificed ; call back the 
husband who is so preferred to me ; note 
well his virtues and live upon his cares- 
ses : — the world will admire and praise 
you. I knew how it would be and am 
satisfied. Then with a rapid change of 
countenance from malice to bitter an- 
guish, he gazed on her, till his eyes were 
filled with tears : while his lips faltered 
as he said farewell. Calantha approached 
too near : he pressed her to his heart. 
" I am yours," she said, half suffocated. 
" Nor parents, nor husband, nor fear of 
man or Heaven shall ever cause me to 
leave you." — "You will meet me to-night 
then."— " I will."— " You will not play 
upon my irritated feelings by penitential 
letters and excuses — you are decided, are 
you ? Say either yes or no ; but be firm 
to either." — " I will come then, let dis- 
grace or death be the consequence." 
o 3 



294 GLENAIlVOft 



CHAPTER XXXI. 



In the course of the day, Glenarvon wrote 
to CaJantha, " I have never sought to 
win you to me after the manner other 
men might desire/' he said. " I have 
respected your opinions ; and I have re- 
sisted more than woman's feelings can 
conceive. But Calantha you have shared 
the struggle. I have marked in your eye 
the fire of passion, in the quivering of 
your lip and changing complexion, the 
fierce power which destroyed you. When 
in the soft language of poetry, I have 
read to you, or spoken with the warmth 
I knew not how to feign, you have turned 
from me, it is true ; but pride more 
than virtue, inclined your firm resis- 
tance. Every principle in your heart 
is shaken ; every tie that ought to bind 
thee most, is broken ; and I, who should 



&LENARV0N. 295 

triumph at my success, weep only for 
thy fall. I found thee innocent, confi- 
ding and sincere : I leave thee — but* oh 
God ! wilt thou thus be left ? wilt thou 
now that thy soul itself partakes in thy 
guilt, wilt thou forsake me ? Upon this 
night," continued Glenarvon, "you have 
given me a solemn promise to meet me 
in secret : it is the first time conceal- 
ment has been rendered necessary. I 
know your nature too well, not to be con- 
vinced that you are already preparing to 
retract. Do so, if it be your will : — I 
wish you not to take one step without 
fully appreciating its consequences, and 
the crime incurred. I have never dis- 
guised to you the guilt of our attachment 
since the moment in which I felt assured 
of my own sentiments. I wished you to 
feel the sacrifice you were making : how 
otherwise could I consider it as any ? 
my love is worth some risk. Every one 
knows my weakness; and did you feel 
half what you inspire, you would be 
o 4 



296 GLENARVON. 

proud, you would glory in what you now 
attempt to hide. The woman I love, 
must see, must hear, must believe and 
confide in no other but me. I renounce 
every other for you. — And, now that I 
claim you as my own, I expect the fulfil- 
ment of your many professions. Shew 
me that you can be firm and true : give 
yourself to me entirely : you are mine ; 
and you must prove it. I am preferred 
before every earthly being in my Calan- 
tha's heart — my dearest, my only friend. 
Of this indeed I have long ceased to enter- 
tain a single doubt ; but now I require 
more. Even in religious faith — even in 
hopes, in reliance upon the mercy of God, 
I cannot bear a competitor and a rival. 

" There is a rite accounted infamous 
amongst christians : — there is an oath 
which it is terrible to take. By this, by 
this alone, I will have you bound to me — 
not here alone, but if there be a long here- 
after then shall we evermore be linked 
together : then shall you be mine far 



GLENARVON. 297 

more, far dearer than either mistress or 
bride, ft is, I own, a mere mockery of 
superstition : but what on earth deserves 
a higher name ? Every varying custom 
and every long-established form, whether 
in our own land, or those far distant 
tracts which the foot of man has rarely 
traversed, deserves no higher name. The 
customs of our forefathers — the habit of 
years, give a venerable and sacred ap- 
pearance to many rites ; but all is a 
dream, the mere colouring of fancy, the 
frail perishable attempts of human inven- 
tion. Even the love we feel, Calantha — 
the beaming fires which now stimulate 
our hearts, and raise us above others is 
but illusion — like the bright exhalations 
which appear to mislead, then vanish and 
leave us more gloomy than before." 

Calantha's eyes were fixed ; her hand 
was cold ; no varying colour, no trepi- 
dation shewed either life or vigour ; there 
was a struggle in her mind ; and a voice 
seemed to call to her from her inmost 
o 5 



298 GLENARVOtf. 

soul : " For the last time, Calantha, it 
seemed to say, I warn thee, for the last 
time I warn thee. Oh hear the voice of 
conscience as it cries to thee for the last 
time ! — go not to thy ruin : plunge not 
thy soul into the pit of hell ; hurl not de- 
struction upon thy head. What is this 
sin against thy religion ? How canst thou 
throw off thy faith and reliance upon thy 
God ? It is a mere mockery of words ; 
a jealous desire to possess every avenue 
of thy heart's affections, to snatch thee 
from every feeling of remorse and virtue; 
to plunge thee into eternal perdition. 
Hear me : by thy mother's name I call : 

go not to thy soul's ruin and shame" 

" Am I mad, or wherefore is my soul 
distracted ? Oh Glenarvon, come again 
to me : my comforter — my heart's friend, 
oh leave me not. By every tie thou art 
bound to me : never, never will I forsake 
thee. What are the reproaches of con- 
science — what the fancied pangs of re- 
morse, to the glory, of being thine? Re- 



GLENARVON. 299 

turn Glenarvon, adored, beloved. Thy 
presence is the light of life : existence 
without thee would not be worth the pur- 
chase. — Come all the woes that may, upon 
me, never will 1 forsake Glenarvon/' 

The nurse entered Calantha's room, 
bearing her boy in her arms. She would 
not look on him: — " Take him away," 
she said ; " take him to my aunt." The 
child wished to stay : — for the first time 
he hung about her with affection ; for 
he was not of that character, and seldom 
shewed his love by infantine fondness 
and caresses. She started from his gen- 
tle grasp, as if from something terrible: 
" Take him away," she shrieked to the 
affrighted woman, " and never let him 
come near me more." 

There are many whose eyes may glance 
ppon these pages, who will regard with 
indignation the confession here made 
respecting the character of Calantha. But 
it is as if those who had never known 
sickness and agony mocked at its power 



300 GLENARVON. 

— as if those who had never witnessed the 
delirious ravings of fever or insanity rea- 
soned upon their excess, they must not 
judge who cannot understand. 

Driven to despair — guilty in all but 
the last black deed that brands the name 
and character with eternal infamy, Calan- 
tha resolved to follow Glenarron. How 
indeed could she remain ! To her every 
domestic joy was forever blasted ; and 
a false estimate of honour inclined her to 
believe, that it was right in her to go. — 
But not to-night, she said. Oh not like a 
culprit and a thief in the midst of the 
night, will I quit my father's house, or 
leave my aunt sick and ill to grieve her- 
self almost to death for my sake. 

Preserving, during the evening, a sul- 
len silence, an affectation of offended 
pride, Calantha retired early ; looked 
once upon the portraits of her husband 
and mother ; and then turned from them 
in agony. " He was all kindness to me 
— all goodness: he deserved a happier 



GLENARVON. 301 

fate. Happier ! alas he is blest : I alone 
suffer — I alone am miserable ; never, 
never can I behold him more." These 
were the last words Calantha uttered, as 
she prepared for an interview she dreaded. 
It was now but twelve o'clock : she threw 
herself upon her bed, and waited in tre- 
pidation and alarm for the hour of three. 
A knock at the door aroused her. It was 
O'Kelly ; but he waited not one instant : 
he left a gold casket with a ring, within 
was a letter : " My beloved," it said, "I 
wait for thee. Oh repent not thy pro- 
mise !" Nothing else was written. The 
hand she well knew : the signature was, 
" Ever and thine alone, Glenarvon." 



302 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 



It was past three o'clock, when Calantha 
opened the cabinet where the page's 
clothes were formerly kept, and drew 
from thence his mantle and plumed hat ; 
and, thus disguised, prepared herself for 
the interview. She slowly descended the 
stairs : the noisy revels of the servants 
might still at intervals be heard : in a 
moment she glided through the apart- 
ments and passages, till she found her- 
self at the door which led to the terrace. 
It opened heavily, and closed again with 
a loud noise. Alarmed, lest she should 
be discovered, she new with rapidity 
over the terrace and lawn, till she ap- 
proached the wood, and then she paused 
to take breath, and to listen if an were 
silent. 

Then she walked fearfully onwards. 
The first night on which she had met 



GLEXARVOK. 303 

Glenarvon the moon was bright and full, 
and the whole sce^ie was lighted by its 
rajs; but now, it was on the wane — the 
silver crescent shone alone, and the 
clouds continually passing over it, cast 
fearful shadows upon the grass. She 
found herself in the thickest part of the 
wood. She heard a hollow murmur: 
it was but the alders, waving in the wind, 
which made a tremulous noise, like voices 
whispering at a distance. She passed 
on, and the recollection that it was to 
Glenarvon that she was hastening, and 
that it was probably for the last time, 
made her indifferent to her fate, and ren- 
dered her fearless. Besides, the despe- 
rate and the guilty never fear: a deeper 
feeling renders them callous to all beside 
— a spirit of defiance deadens in th^m 
the very edge of apprehension. She j M o- 
ceeded to the appointed place. The sea 
dashed against the cliff below; and the 
bleak wind whistled through the ruined 
chapel as it came in hollow blasts over 
the heath. 



304 GLENARVON. 

Calantha perceived Glenarvon. He 
was leaning upon one of the broken 
rocks: he viewed, unawed, the melan- 
choly scene before him. No supersti- 
tious terrors had power to shake his soul: 
misery had done its utmost to subdue 
him. Nor hope, nor prosperity, could 
afford him comfort, or remove his de- 
jection. In the first transports of joy 
at seeing him, she darted towards 
him; but when she marked the pale- 
ness of his cheeks, the stillness of 
his attitude, she started back, and ad- 
vanced slowly : for she feared to disturb 
him. 

The evening breeze had blown back 
his dark locks, and bared his pale fore- 
head, upon which the light of the moon- 
beam fell. She gazed upon him; and 
while she contemplated the beautiful ma- 
jesty of his figure, his fixed and mourn- 
ful eyes, his countenance so fraught with 
feeling, she approached him. 4t My 
friend, my lover/' she said. " Ah! my 



GLENARVON. 



305 



little trembling page, my Zerbellini, wel- 
come to my heart," he answered: " I 
knew you would not fail ; but I have 
waited for you till every bright illusion 
of hope has been changed into visions of 
despondency and fear. We meet now : 
but is it indeed to part no more ! Glenar- 
von is your's, and shall never be severed 
from you." 

" Ah! triumph over yourself and 
me," she cried, clasping her hands in 
alarm. " Ask any sacrifice but this. 
Do not make me contemptible to you and 
to myself." " Calantha, the time for safety 
is past: it is too late now. I have linked 
my soul to your's ; I love you in defiance 
of myself; I know it to be guilt, and to 
be death ; but it must be. We follow 
but the dark destiny that involves us ; we 
cannot escape from fate. For you alone 
I live : — be now but mine. They tell you 
of misery, of inconstancy, of lover's per- 
juries, from the olden time ; but you shall 
prove them false. You leave much, it is 



306 GLEfrARVOtf., 

true — rank, fame and friends, a home 
and the dearest ties of a mother's heart — 
children ; but have you not embittered 
all that you relinquish ! Say that I yield 
you up and fly, — to what fate shall I then 
consign you ! to what endless repining, 
unjoyous solitary hours — remorse, re* 
gret, the bitter taunt of friends, the in- 
sulting scorn of strangers, and, worse than 
all— O! worse than all the recoiling 
heart can endure, the unsuspicious confi- 
dence and caresses of an injured hus- 
band, of him you have already betrayed. 
O Calantha, turn from these to a lover's 
bosom; seek for comfort here; and 
now, even now, accompany me in my 
flight. 

" I will leave all for you: — I love but 
you : be you my master." Scarce had 
she uttered the impious oath which bound 
her to him, when her heart, convulsed 
with terror, ceased to beat. " Ti's but in 
words — oh God ! 'tis but in words, that 
thy guilty servant has offended. No — even 



GLfiNARVON. 30? 

in the mad infatuation of passion, the 
fear of thy vengeance spake terrors into 
her soul, and ingratitude for all thy favours 
was not to be numbered with her sins." 
But the step she had taken was terrible. 
She considered herself as no longer under 
the protection of her father, she had dis- 
obeyed his sacred command, she had 
broken her solemn promise ; she trem- 
bled exceedingly ; and fear for one mo-* 
tnent overpowered her. Lord Glenar* 
von looked upon her, mournfully, as if 
sorry for the sin which he had cast upon 
her soul. " Now," he said, " you will 
look back upon these moments, and you 
will consider me with abhorrence. I have 
led you with me to ruin and remorse." 
" On me — on me, be the sin ; let it fall 
upon me alone," she replied ; " but if, after 
this, you forsake me, then shall the ven- 
geance of Heaven be .satisfied — the mea- 
sure of my crime be at its fulK It is not 
in my power — I cannot forsake you now: 
I will go with you, Glenarvon, if it were 



308 GLENTARVON. 

to certain death and ruin. lam yours alone. 
But this night I must return home/' she 
said. "I will not leave my father thus — I 
will not cause my aunt's death." " If you 
leave me now I shall lose you." "OGlenar- 
von, let me return ; and after seeing them 
once again, I will follow you firm until 
death." 

He placed a ring upon her finger, "It is 
a marriage bond," he said ; " and if there 
be a God, let him n- w bear witness to my 
vows: — I here, uncompelled by menace, 
unsolicited by entreaty, do bind myself 
through life to you. No other, in word or 
thought, shall ever hold influence or power 
over my heart. This is no lover's oath — no 
profession which the intoxication of pas- 
sion may extort : it is the free and solemn 
purpose of a soul conquered and enchain- 
ed by you. Oh Calantha, beloved, adored, 
look upon me, and say that you believe me. 
Lean not upon a lover's bosom, but upon 
a friend, a guardian and protector, a 
being wholly relying on your mercy and 



GLENARVON. 309 

kindness. My love, my soul, look yet 
once upon me." 

" Why fall our tears ? Is it in terror of 
approaching evil, or in regret for invo- 
luntary error ? My bosom's comfort, 
my soul's idol, leek not thus coldly on 
me ; for I deserve it not. Your will is 
mine : lead me as it delights your fancy : 
I am a willing slave." " If you abandon 
me," said Calantha, in tears. u May 
the curse of God burn my heart and con- 
sume me ! may every malediction and 
horror fall tenfold upon my head ! may 
frenzy and madness come upon my 
senses ! and tortures in this world and 
the next be my portion, if ever I change 
towards you !" 

With words like these, Glenarvon si- 
lenced her as she returned to the castle ; 
and, strange as it may seem, untroubled 
sleep — such sleep as in better days she 
once enjoyed, fell upon all her senses, 
quieted every passion, and obliterated, 
for a few hours, the scenes of guilt which 
tortured her with their remembrance. 



310 .GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 



To wake is terrible when the heaviness of 
sin is upon us ! — to wake, and see 
every object around us the same as be- 
fore ; but to feel that we are utterly 
changed ! I am still in a father's house, 
she thought, as late the ensuing morning 
she opened her eye. " My name is not 
yet branded with disgrace ; but I belong 
alone upon earth to Glenarvon. Mrs. 
Seymour sent for her : the nurse entered 
with the children. But* Calantha looked 
upon the ring and trembled. 

Lady Avondale ordered her horses, and, 
dressing in haste, entered Mrs. Seymour's 
room. Never had she found it easy to 
deceive till that moment. To tell her the 
truth had been to kill her : she feigned 
therefore with ease, for her aunt's life re- 
quired it, and she herself was desperate. 



GLENARVON. 311 

"Have you kept your resolution, my Ca- 
lantha ?" — " Yes," she replied, nor 
blushed at affirming it. " Two days, 
and you have not seen Glenarvon ?" Is 
this possible ? — " I thought one had kil- 
led me," replied Calantha ; " but I look 
well ; do I not ?" and she hurried from 
her aunt's presence. 

Her horses awaited : she rode out the 
whole of the day : it seemed to her as 
if a moment's pause or rest would have 
been agony unutterable. And yet, when 
the spirit is heavy there is something un- 
pleasant in the velocity of motion : throw- 
ing, therefore, the reins upon her well- 
trained steed, she paced slowly over the 
mountain's side, lost in reflections which 
it had been pain to interrupt. 

Suddenly a horse and rider, in full 
speed, darting along the moor, approached 
and crossed upon her path. " Whither 
ride you Lady, so slow ?" said Miss St. 
Clare, whom she now recognized, scarce 
reining in her swift-footed charger. " And 



312 GLENARVON. 

whither ride you, Lady, so fast ?" said 
Calantha, courteously returning her sa- 
lute. " To perdition," cried Elinor ; 
" and they that wish to follow must ride 
apace." The hat and plume of sacred 
green, the emerald clasp, the gift of Gle- 
narvon, were all but too well observed 
by Calantha. Deeply she blushed as St. 
Clara, fixing her dark eyes upon her, 
asked her respecting him, " Is thy young 
lover well ?" she said : " and wilt thou 
be one of us ? He slept last night at Bel- 
font : he could not rest : didst thou ? " 
Saying which, she smiled, and rode away. 
Oppressed with many bitter doubts, 
Calantha returned to the Castle ; and 
what is strange, she felt coldly towards 
Glenarvon. On her return, she found 
letters from him far the most ardent, the 
most impassioned she had yet received. 
He spoke with grief of her unkindness : 
he urged her by every tie most dear, 
most sacred, to see him and fly with him. 
Yet, thai night, she went not to meet 



GLENARVON. 313 

him ; she wrote not kindly ; she loved 
not. She retired early ; and her thoughts 
were painful and terrible. But such is 
the inconsistency of the human heart ; 
her coldness seemed but to encrease his 
ardour. She received that night, the 
warmest the most unguarded letters ; she 
even now dreaded the violence of his at- 
tachment. Remorse, she felt, had taken 
the place of passion in her own heart: for 
all within was chilled, was changed. 

As she thus sat in sullen silence, unwil- 
ling to think — unable to forget, she heard 
a step stealing along the passage ; and in 
a moment Glenarvon entered her apart- 
ment. " We are lost," she cried. " I 
care not/' he said, " so that I but see 
you." — " For Heaven's sake, leave me." 
— " Speak lower," he said, approaching 
her : " be calm, for think you that when 
you have risked so much for me, I dare 
not share the danger. After all, what is 
it ? Whoever enters must do it at their 
peril : their life shall pay the forfeit : I 

Vol. II. P. 



314 GLENARVON. 

am armed/' — " Glenarvon ! how terrible 
are your looks : I love you ; but I fear 
you." 

" Do you remember/' he replied, 
" that day when I first told you of 
my love ? You blushed then, and wept : 
did you not ? But you have forgotten to 
do either now. Why, then, this strange 
confusion ?" — " I am sick at heart. Leave 
me/' — " Never ! O most loved, most dear 
of all earthly beings, turn not thus away 
from me ; look not as if you feared to 
meet me ; feel not regret ; for if it be a 
crime, that be on me, Calantha — on me 
alone. I know how men of the world 
can swear and forswear : I know, too, 
how much will be attempted to sever you 
from me : but by that Being in whose 
sacred eye we stand ; by all that the hu- 
man heart and soul can believe and che 
rish, I am not one of that base kind, who 
would ever betray the woman that trusted 
in me, Even were you unfaithful to me, 
I could not change. You are all on earth 



GLENARVON. 315 

that I love, and, perhaps what is better 
worth, that I esteem and respect — that I 
honor as above every other in goodness, 
purity, and generous, noble feelings. O ! 
think not so humbly of yourself: say not 
that you are degraded. My admiration 
of you shall excuse your error: My faith- 
ful attachment whilst existence is given 
to either of us shall atone for all. Look 
on me, my only friend ; dry up the tears 
that fall for an involuntary fault ; and 
consider me as your protector, your lover, 
your husband/' 

There required not many words, not 
many protestations. Calantha wept bit- 
terly ; but she felt happy. " If you change 
now," she said, " what will become of 
me ? Let me go with you, Glenarvon, 
from this country : I ask not for other 
ties than those that already bind us. Yet 
I once more repeat it, I know you must 
despise me." — " What are words and 
vows, my heart's life, my soul's idol, what 
are they ? The false, the vain, the worldly- 
p2 



316 GLENARVON. 

minded have made use of them ; but I 
must have recourse to them, Calantha, 
since you can look at me, and yet mis- 
trust me. No villany that ever yet existed, 
can exceed that which my falsehood to 
you would now evince. This is no com- 
mon worldly attachment : no momentary 
intoxication of passion. Often I have 
loved : many I have seen ; but none ever 
sacrificed for me what you have done ; 
and for none upon earth did I ever feel 
what I do for you. I might have made 
you mine long ago : perhaps I might have 
abused the confidence shewn me, and 
the interest and enthusiasm 1 had created ; 
but, alas ! you would then have despised 
me. I conquered myself ; but it was to 
secure you more entirely. I am jour's 
only : consent therefore to fly with me. 
make any trial you please of my truth. 
What I speak I have written : my letters 
you may shew, my actions you may ob- 
serve and sift. I have not one thought 
that is unknown to you — one wish, one 



GLENARVON. 317 

hope of which you are not the first and 
sole object. Many disbelieve that I am 
serious in my desire that you should ac- 
company me in my flight. They know 
me not : I have no views, no projects. 
Men of the world look alone to fortune, 
fame, or interest ; but what am I ? The 
sacrifice is solely on your part : I would 
that it were on mine. If even you re- 
fuse to follow me, I will not make this a 
plea for abandoning* you : I will hover 
around, will protect, will watch over you. 
Your love makes my happiness : it is my 
sole hope in life. Even were you to change 
to me, I could not but be true to you." 

Did Glenarvon really wish Calantha to 
accompany him : he risked much ; and 
seemed to desire it. But there is no un- 
derstanding the guileful heart ; and he 
who had deceived many, could assu- 
redly deceive her. Yet it appears, that 
he urged her more than ever to fly 
with him ; and that when, at length she 
said that her resolution was fixed — that 
p 3 



318 GLENARVON. 

she would go, his eyes in triumph gloried 
in the assurance : and with a fervour he 
could not have feigned he called her his. 
Hitherto, some virtuous, some religious 
hopes had still sustained her ; now all 
ceased ; perversion led the way to crime, 
and hardness of heart and insensibility 
followed . 

One by one, Glenarvon repeated to 
her confessions of former scenes. One 
by one, he betrayed to her the confidence 
others had reposed in his honour. She 
saw the wiles and windings of his mind, 
nor abhorred them : she heard his mockery 
of all that is good and noble ; nor turned 
from him. is it in the nature of guilty 
love thus to pervert the very sonl ? Or 
what in so short a period could have ope- 
rated so great a change ? 1 ill this period 
the hope of saving, of guarding, of re- 
claiming, had led her on : now frantic 
and perverted passion absorbed all other 
hopes. 

Calantha had read of love, and felt it ; 



GLENARVON. 319 

she had laughed at the sickening rhapso- 
dies of sentiment, and turned with dis- 
gust from the inflammatory pages of 
looser pens; but, alas ! her own heart now 
presented every feeling she had most ab- 
horred ; and it was in herself she found 
the reality of all that, during her whole 
existence, she had looked upon with con- 
tempt and dislike. Every remaining 
scruple left her ; she still urged delay ; 
but to accompany her master and lover 
was now her firm resolve. 



320 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 



Glenarvon had retired unperceived by 
any, on the evening he had visited her, 
in her apartment. The following day 
he appeared at the castle ; they both 
avoided each other : she indeed trembled 
at beholding him. " Meet me at the 
chapel to night," he whispered. Alas ! 
she obeyed too well. 

They were returning through the 
wood : she paused one moment to look 
upon the sea : it was calm ; and the air 
blew soft and fresh upon her burning 
forehead. — What dreadful sight is that?... 
a female figure passing through the 
thicket behind, with a hasty step ap- 
proached them, and knelt down as if im- 
ploring for mercy. Her looks were wild ; 
famine had stamped its hollow prints in 
furrows on her cheeks : she clasped her 



GLENARTON. 321 

hands together ; and fixing her eyes wild* 
ly upon Glenarvon, remained in silence. 

Terrified, Calantha threw herself for 
safety at his feet ; and he clasping her 
closely to his bosom saw but her. " Oh ! 
Glenarvon," she cried, " look, look ; it 
is not a human form : it is some dreadful 
vision, sent to us by the power of Heaven, 
to warn us." " My soul, my Calantha, 
fear not : no power shall harm you." 

Turning from her, Glenarvon now gazed 
for one moment on the thin and ghastly 
form, that had occasioned her terror. 
" God bless you." cried the suppliant. 
He started at the hollow sound. It seemed 
to him indeed that the awful blessing 
was a melancholy reproach for his broken 
faith. He started, for in that emaciated 
form, in that wild and haggard eye, he 
thought he recognized some traces of one 
whom he had once taken spotless as 
innocence to his heart, — then left a prey 
to remorse and disappointment, For the 
p 5 



322 GLENARVON. 

sake of that resemblance*, he offered mo- 
ney to the wretch who implored his mercy, 
and turned away, not to behold again so 
piteous, so melancholy a spectacle. 

Intently gazing upon him, she uttered 
a convulsive groan, and sunk extended 
on the earth. Calantha and Glenarvon 
both flew forward to raise her. But the 
poor victim was no more : her spirit had 
burst from the slight bonds that yet re- 
tained it in a world of pain and sorrow. 
She had g-azed for the last time upon the 
lover ^ ho had robbed her of all happi- 
ness through life; and the same look, 
which had first awakened love in her 
bosom, now quenched the feeling, and 
with it life itself. The last wish of her 
heart, was a blessing, not a curse on 
him who had abandoned her : and the 
tear that he shed unconsciously over a 
form so altered, that he did not know 



* See Chaucer's Troilus and Creseide. 



GLENARVON. 323 

her, was the only tear that blessed the 
last hour of Calantha's once favorite com- 
panion Alice Mac Allain. 

Oh ! need a scene which occasioned 
her every bitter pang be repeated ? — need 

it be said that, regardless of themselves or 
any conclusions which their being toge- 
ther at such an hour might have oc- 
casioned : they carried the unconscious 
girl to the door of the castle, where 
O'Kelly was waiting to receive them. 
Every one had retired to rest ; it was 
late ; and one of Calantha's maids and 
O'Kelly alone remained in fearful anxiety 
watching for their return. 

Terrified at the haggard looks, and life- 
less form before her, Calantha turned to 
Glenarvon. But his countenance was 
changed; his eyes were fixed. " It is 
herself," he cried ; and unable to bear 
the sight, a faintness came over him : — the 
name of Alice was pronounced by him. 
O* Kelly understood his master. " Is it 
possible?" he exclaimed, and seizing the 



324 GLENARVON. 

girl in his arms, he promised Calan- 
tha to do all in his power to restore her, 
and only implored her to retire to her 
own apartment : fct For my master's sake, 
dear Lady, be persuaded/' he said. He 
was indeed no longer the same subser- 
vient strange being, he had shewn him- 
self hitherto ; he seemed to assume anew 
character, on an occasion which called 
for his utmost exertion : he was all acti- 
vity and forethought, commanding every 
thing that was to be done, and awaken- 
ing Lord Glenarvon and Calantha to a 
sense of their situation. 

Although Lady Avon dale was at last 
persuaded to retire, it may be supposed 
that she did not attempt to rest ; and 
being obliged in some measure to inform 
her attendant of what had passed, she 
sent her frequently with messages to 
O'Kelly to inquire concerning her unhap- 
py friend. At last she returned with a 
few lines, written by Lord Glenarvon. 
" Calantha," he said, " you will now 



GLENARVON. 325 

learn to shudder at my name, and look 
upon me with horror and execration. 
Prepare yourself for the worst : — it is 
Alice whom we beheld. She came to 
take one last look at the wretch who had 
seduced, and then abandoned her : — 
she is no more. Think not, that to 
screen myself, I have neglected the 
means of preserving her. — Think me not 
base enough for this ; but be assured 
that all care and assistance have been ad- 
ministered. The aid of the physician, 
however, is vain. Calm yourself, Ca- 
lantha : I am very calm." 

The maid, as she gave this note, told 
Calantha that the young woman, whom 
Mr. O'Kelly had discovered at the door 
of the castle, was poor Miss Alice — so 
altered, that her own father, she was sure, 
would not know her. " Did you see 
her ?" " O yes, my Lady: Mr. OTCelly 
took me to see her, when I carried the 
message to him : and there I saw my 
Lord Glenarvon so good, so kind, doing 



326 GLENARVON. 

every thing that was needed to assist her, 
so that it would have moved the heart 
of any one to have seen him." While 
the attendant thus continued to talk, 
her young mistress wept, at having at 
length dismissed her, she opened the 
door listening with suspense to every 
distant noise. 

It was six in the morning, when a 
loud commotion upon the stairs aroused 
her. Hurrying down, she beheld a 
number of servants carrying some one 
for air, into one of the outer courts. It 
was not the lifeless corpse of Alice. From 
the glimpse Calantha caught, it appeared 
a larger form, and, upon approaching still 
nearer, her heart sickened at perceiving 
that it was the old man, Gerald Mac Al- 
lain, who having arisen to enquire into 
the cause of the disquiet he heard in 
the house, had been abruptly informed 
hy some of the servants, that his daugh- 
ter had been discovered without any signs 
of life, at the gates of the castle. O'Kelly 



GLENARVON. 826 

and the other attendants had presssd 

forward to assist him. 

Calantha now leaving him in their 
hands, walked in trembling alarm, 
through the hall, once more to look upon 

her unhappy friend. There leaning against 
one of the high black marble pillars, 
pale, as the lifeless being whom, stretched 
before him, he still, continued to contem- 
plate, she perceived Glenarvon. His eyes 
were fixed : in his look there was all 
the bitterness of death ; his cheek was 
hollow : and in that noble form, the wreck 
of all that is great might be traced. " Look 
not thus," she said, " Oh Glenarvon: it 
pierces my heart to see you thus : grief 
must not fall on one like you." He took 
her hand, and pressed it to his heart ; 
but he could not speak. He only pointed 
to the pale and famished form before 
him ; and Calantha perceiving it, knelt 
down by its side and wept in agony : 
" There was a time," he said, " when I 
could have feared to cast this sin upon 



328 GLENARVON. 

my soul, or rewarded so much tender- 
ness and affection, as I have done. But 
I have grown callous to all : and now my 
only, my dearest friend, I will tear my- 
self away from you for ever. I will not 
say God bless you : — I must not bless 
thee, who have brought thee to so much 
misery. Weep not for one unworthy of 
you : — I am not what you think, my Ca- 
lantha. Unblessed myself, I can but give 
misery to all who approach me. All that 
follow after me come to this pass ; for 
my love is death, and this is the reward 
of constancy. Poor Alice, but still more 
unhappy Calantha, my heart bleeds for 
you : for myself, I am indifferent. 

Gerald now returned, supported by 
O'Kelly. The other servants, by his 
desire, had retired ; and when he ap- 
proached the spot where his child was 
laid, he requested even O'Kelly to leave 
him. He did so ; and Mac Allain ad- 
vanced towards Lord Glenarvon. " For- 
give a poor old man," he said in a fal- 
tering voice : "I spoke too severely. 



GLENARVOtf. 329 

my lord : a father's curse in the agony of 
his first despair shall not be heard. Oh 
lady Calantha," said the old man, turning 
to her, " lord Glenarvon has been very 
noble and good to me ; my sons had 
debts, and he paid all they owed : they 
had transgressed and he got them pardon- 
ed. You know not what I owe to my lord ; 
and yet when he told me, this night, as I 
upbraided the wretch that had undone 
my child and was the cause of her dishonor 
and death, that it was himself had taken 
her from my heart; I knelt down and 
cursed him. Oh God, Oh God ! pardon 
the agony of a wretched father, a poor 
old man who has lived too long." 

Calantha could no longer master her 
feelings ; her sobs, her cries were bitter 
and terrible. They wished to bear her for- 
cibly away. O'Kelly insisted upon the 
necessity of her assuming at least some 
self command ; and whispering to her, that, 
if she betrayed any violent agitation, the 
whole affair must be made public : he 



330 GLENARVON. 

promised himself to bring her word of 
every minute particular, if she would for a 
few hours at least remain tranquil. " I 
shall see you again," she said, recovering 
herself and approaching Lord Glenarvon 
before she retired : " You are not going?" 
" Going !" he replied : " undoubtedly I 
shall not leave the castle at this moment ; 
it would look like fear ; but after this, my 
dearest friend, I do not deceive myself, 
you cannot, you ought not more to think 
of me." " I share your sorrows," she 
said : " you are most miserable ; think 
not then, that 1 can be otherwise." " And 
can you still feel any interest for one like 
me ? If I could believe this, even in the 
bitterness of affliction, I should still feel 
comfort : but, you will learn to hate me." 
" Never. Oh would that I could ; but it is 
too late now. I love ^ou, Glenarvon, 
more than ever even were it to death ; — 
Depend on me." Glenarvoi* pressed her 
hand in silence ; then followingher, " tor 
your dear sake, I will live," he said. " Vou 



GLENARVON. 331 

are my only hope, now you will not 
believe! how from my soul I honour 

you." 

Calantha threw herself upon her bed ; 
but her agitation was too great to allow of 
her recurring in thought to the past, and 
fatigue once again occasioned her taking 
a few moment's resl. 



332 CLENARVOtt, 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



When Lady Avondale awoke from her 
slumbers, she found the whole castle in a 
state of confusion. Lady Margaret had 
twice sent for her. Every one was occupied 
with this extraordinary event. Her name, 
and Lord Glenarvon's were mentioned 
together, and conjectures, concerning the 
whole scene, were made by every indi- 
vidual. 

At Gerald Mac Allain's earnest entrea- 
ties, the body of Alice was conveyed to 
his own house, near the Garden Cottage. 
He wished no one to be informed of the 
particulars of her melancholy fate. He 
came, however, a few days after her remo- 
val, to ask for Calantha. She was ill ; but 
admitted him immediately. They talked 
together upon all that had occurred. He 
gave her a letter and a broach, which 



GLENARVON. . 333 

had be en found upon the body. The letter 
was addressed to Lord Glenarvon. There 
was also a lock of hair, which seemed, from 
the fineness of its texture, to belong- to a 
child. The letter was a mournful congra- 
tulation on his supposed marriage with a 
lady in England, written at some former 
period: it wished him every happiness, and 
contained no one reproach. r J he broach 
consisted of a heart's ease, which she en- 
treated him sometimes to wear in re- 
membrance of one, who had loved h m 
truly. " Heart's ease to you — mats triste 
pensee pour moi" was engraved upon it. 
" You must yourself deliver these," said 
Mac Allain looking wistfully at Calantha. 
She promised to do so. 

Mac Allain then drew forth a larger 
packet which was addressed to himself. 
" I have not yet read it," he said. " I 
am not able to see for my tears ; but it 
is the narration of my child's sorrows ; and 
when I have ended it, I will give it to 
you, my dear Lady, and to any other 



334 GLENARVON 

whom you may wish. "Oh Mac Allain!" 
said Lady Avondale, " by every tie of 
gratitude and affection which you profess, 
and have shewn our family, do not let 
any one read this but myself: — do not 
betray Lord Glenarvon. He feels your 
sufferings: he more than shares them. 
For my sake I ask you this. Keep this 
transaction secret ; and, whatever may be 
suspected, let none know the truth. — 
Say: may I ask it?" 

Calantha's agitation moved him great- 
ly. He wept in bitter anguish. " The 
destroyer of my child," he said, " will 
lead my benefactress into misery. Ah! 
my dear young Lady, how my heart 
bleeds for you." Impatiently, she tnrned 
away. " Will your hear my entreaties," 
she said. " You may command ; but 
the news of my child's death is spread : 
many are talking of it already: I cannot 
keep it secret." " Only let not Lord 
Glenarvon's name appear." Mac AUain 
promised to do all in his powe to silence 



GLENARVON. 335 

every rumour; and, with the help of 
O'Kelly, he, in some measure succeeded. 
The story believed was, that Mr. Bucha- 
nan first had carried Alice with him to 
England, where she had fallen into 
poverty and vice. No further enquiry 
was made; but Lord Glenarvon himself 
confided to many, the secret which Ca- 
lantha was so eager to conceal. 

The narrative of Alice's sufferings 
may be omitted by those who wish not 
to peruse it. Lord Glenarvon desired to 
read it when Calantha had ended it. 
He also took the broach, and pressing 
it to his lips, appeared very deeply af- 
fected. After this for a short time he ab- 
sented himself from the castle. The 
following pages, written by Alice, were 
addressed to her only surviving parent. 
No comment is made on them ; no a- 
pology offered for their insertion. If 
passion has once subdued the power 
of reason, the misery and example of 
others never avail, nor would they even 



336 GLENARVON. 

were we certain of a similar fate. If 
every calamity we may perhaps deserve, 
were placed in view before us, we 
should not pause — we should not divert 
our steps. To love, in defiance of virtue 
is insanity, not guilt. To attempt the 
safety of its victims, were a generous but 
useless effort of unavailing interference. 
It is like a raging fever, or the tempest's 
fury — far beyond human aid to allay or 
restore. ( a! an tha read, however, the his- 
tory of her friend, and wept her fate. 

ALICE'S NARRATIVE. 

" My dear and honoured father, 

" To you I venture to address this short 
history of my unhappy life, and if suffer- 
ings and pain can in part atone for my 
misconduct, I surely shall be forgiven by 
you ; but never, while existence, however 
miserable, is prolonged, never shall I 
forgive myseif. Perhaps even now, the 
rumour 01 my disgrace has reached you, 



6LEXARVON. 337 

and added still severer pangs to those you 
before endured. But oh! my father, I 
have in part, expiated my offences. Long 
and severe sorrows have followed me, 
since I left your roof, and none more 
heart rending — oh ! none to compare with 
the agony of being abandoned by him, 
for whom I left so much. You remember, 
my dear father, that, during the last 
year, which I passed at the castle, the 
attention which Mr. Buchanan had paid 
me, was so marked, that it occasioned 
the most serious apprehensions in Lady 
Margaret, on his account. Alas! I con- 
cealed from every one, the true cause 
of my encreasing melancholy; and felt 
happy that the suspicions of my friends 
and protectors were thus unintentionally 
misled. I parted with Linden, nor told 
him my secret. I suffered the severest 
menaces end reproofs, witheut a murmur ; 
for I knew myself guilty, though not of 
the crime with which I was charged. At 
Sir Everard St. Clare's I found means to 
Vol. II. Q 



338 GLENARVOiV. 

make my escape, or rather, the mad at- 
tachment of one far above me, removed 
every obstacle, which opposed his wishes 
and my own. 

"But it is time more particularly to ac- 
quaint you, my dear father, by what acci- 
dent I first met with Lord Glenarvon, to 
whom my fate was linked — whose attach- 
ment once made me blessed — whose incon- 
stancy has deprived me of every earthly 
hope. Do you remember once, when I ob- 
tained leave to pass the day with you, that 
my brother, Garlace, took me with him in 
his boat, down the river Allan, and Roy 
and yourself were talking eagerly of the 
late affray which had taken place in our 
village. I then pointed out to 3011 the 
ruins of St. Alvin Priory, and asked 
you the history of its unhappy owners. 
That evening, when yourself and Roy 
were gone on shore, my brother Gar- 
lace fixing the sail, returned with me 
flown the current with the wind : and as 
we passed near the banks from behind 



GLEN All VON. 339 

the rocks, we heard soft low notes, such 
as they say spirits sing over the dead ; 
and as we turned by the winding shore, 
we soon perceived a youth who was 
throwing pebbles into the stream, and 
ever whilst he threw them, he conti- 
nued singing in that soft, sweet manner 
I have said. He spoke with us, and the 
melancholy sound of his voice, attracted 
us towards him. We landed close by the 
place near which he stood. He accom- 
panied us to the front of the castle ; but 
then entreating us to excuse his proceed- 
ing further, he retired ; nor told us who 
he was. From that day, I met him in 
secret. Oh ! that I had died before I had 
met with one so young, so beautiful, but 
yet so utterly lost. Nothing could save 
him : my feeble help could not reclaim 
him : it was like one who clasped a 
drowning man, and fell with him in the 
struggle : he had cast sin and misery 
upon his soul. Never will I soil these 
pages with the record of what he uttered; 
Q 2 



340 GLENARVON. 

his secrets shall be buried as in a sepul- 
chre ; and soon, most soon shall I perish 
with them 

Calantha paused in the narrative ; she 
gasped for breath ; and wiping away the 
tears which struggled in her eyes: " If 
he treated my friend wiih unkindness," 
she said, " dear as he has hitherto been 
to me, I will never behold him more." 
She then proceeded. 

" All enjoyment of life has ceased : — I 
am sick at heart. The rest of my story is 
but a record of evil . To exhibit the strug- 
gles of guilty love, is but adding to the 
crime already committed. I accuse him 
of no arts to allure: he did but follow the 
impulse of his feelings: he sought to save 
— he would have spared me : but he had 
not strength. O my father, you know 
Lord Glenarvon — you have felt for him, 
all that the most grateful enthusiasm could 
feel ; and for the sake of the son whom 
he restored to you, }ou must forgive him 
the ruin of an ungrateful child, who 



GLLNARVON. 341 

rushed forward herself to meet it. Unused 
to disguise my sentiments, I did not at- 
tempt even to conceal them from him ; 
and when he told me I was dear, I too 
soon shewed him, how much more so he 
was to me. For when the moment of 
parting for ever came, when I saw my 
Lord, as I thought, for the last time, you 
must not judge me — you cannot even in 
fancy imagine, all I at that hour endured — 
I left my country, my home — I gave up 
every hope on earth or heaven for him. 
Heaven in mercy pardon me, for I have 
suffered cruelly ; and you, my father, 
when you read these pages, bless me, 
forgive me. Turn not from me, for you 
know not the struggles of my heart — 
you can never know what I have en- 
dured." 

Calantha breathed with greater diffi- 
culty; and paused again. She paced to 
and fro within her chamber, in strong 
agitation of mind. She then eagerly re- 
turned to peruse the few remaining pages, 



-342 GLENARVON. 

written by her miserable, her infatuated 
friend.—" She was not guilty," she cried. 
" The God of Heaven will not, does not 
condemn her. Oh she was spotless as 
innocence compared with me." 

" There were many amongst Lord Gle- 
narvon's servants who were acquainted 
with my secret. Through every trouble 
and some danger I followed him; nor 
boast much of having felt no woman's 
fear; for who that loves can fear. I will 
not dwell upon these moments of my 
life: they were the only hours of joy, 
which brightened over a career of mise- 
ry and gloom. Whilst loved by the object 
of one's entire devotion — whilst sur- 
rounded by gaiety and amusement, the 
voice of conscience is seldom heard; 
and, I will confess it, at this time I fancied 
myself happy. I was Glenarvon's mis- 
tress; and I knew not another wish upon 
earth. In the course of the three years, 
passed with him in England and in Italy, 
I became mother of a child, and Clare, 



GLENARVON. 343 

my little son, was dear to his father. But 
after his birth, he forsook me." 

We were in England at the time, at 
the house of one of his friends, when 
he first intimated to me the necessity of 
his leaving me. He had resolved, he 
said, to return to Florence, and I was in 
too weak a state of health to permit of 
my accompanying him. I entreated, I im- 
plored for permission to make the attempt. 
He paused for some time, and then, as if 
unable to refuse me, he consented — reluc- 
tantly, I will own it; but still he said 
that I should go. He never appeared 
more fond, more kind than the evening 
before his departure. That evening, I 
supped with him and his friends. He 
seemed tired ; and asked me more than 
once if I would not go to rest. His ser- 
vant, a countryman of ours, by name 
O'Kelly, brought me a glass with some- 
thing in it, which he bade me drink ; but I 
would not. Lord Glenarvon came to me^ 
and bade me take it. " If it were poison," 
Q 4 



#44 GLENARVON. 

I said fondly, " I would take it from 
your hands, so that I might but die upon 
your bosom." " It is not poison," he said, 
" Alice, but what many a fine lady in 
London cannot rest without. You will 
need repose ; you are going a long jour- 
ney, to-morrow ; drink it love ; and 
may est thou sleep in peace." I took the 
draught and slumbered even whilst re- 
posing in his arms 

Oh my father, he left me. — I awoke 
to hear that he was gone — to feel a misery 
J never can describe. From that day, I 
fell into a dangerous illness. I knew not 
what I said or did. I heard on recovering, 
that my lord had taken another mistress, 
and was about to marry ; that he had 
provided for me with money ; that he had 
left me my child. I resolved to follow ; 
— I recovered in that hope alone. 1 went 
over to Ireland : — the gates of the abbey 
were shut against me. Mr. Hard Head, a 
friend of my lord's whom I once named 
to you', met me as I stood au helpless 



GLENARVON. 345 

outcast, in my own country ; he spoke to 
me with kindness. I thought he had 
been my friend but it proved otherwise. 
I madly sought to enter the gates which 
were closed against me. — O'Kelly passed 
me : — I knelt to him. Was he man — 
had he human feelings ? In mercy, 
oh in mercy hear me, let me behold 
him again. I wrote, I know not what I 
wrote. My letters, my threats, my sup- 
plications were answered with insult — 

every thing was refused me 

" It was at night, in the dark night, my 
father, that they took my boy — my Clare, 

and tore him from my bosom 

Yes, my sleeping boy was torn by ruffian 
hands from my bosom. Oh ! take my 
life, but not my child. Villains ! by 
what authority do you rob me of my 
treasure ? Say, in whose name you do 
this cruel deed ? " It is by order of our 
master, Lord Glenarvon." I heard no 
more ; yet in the convulsive grasp of 
Q5 



.346 GLENARVON, 

agony, I clasped him to my breast. 
" Now tear him from his mother," I 
cried, "if you have the heart;" and my 
strength was such that they seemed asto- 
nished at my power of resistance. They 
knew not the force of terror, when the 
heart's pulse beats in every throb, for 
more than life. The boy clung to me 
for support. " Save, save me," he cried. 
I knelt before the barbarians — my shrieks 
were vain — they tore him from me. — I 
felt the last pressure of his little arms — 
my Clare — my child — my boy. — Never, 
oh never, shall I see him again. Oh 
wretched mother! my boy, my hope is 
gone. — How often have I watched those 
bright beaming eyes, when care and 
despondency had sunk me into misery ! — 
how oft that radiant smile has cheered 
when thy father cruelly had torn my 
heart! now never, never, shall I behold 
him more 

Linden had heard of my disgrace and 



GLENARVON. 347 

misery; he had written to me, but he 

knew not where I was. ^ 

I will sail to-morrow, if I but reach 
Cork. — I have proved the ruin of a whole 
family. — I hear Linden has enlisted with 
the rioters. A friend of his met me and 
spoke to me of him, and of you my 
father. He promised to keep my secret: 
yet if he betrays me, I shall be far away 
before you hear of my fate. — I grieve for 
the troubles of my country. — All the mal- 
contents flock together from every side to 
Belfont. Lord Glenarvon hears their 
grievances: — his house is the asylum of 
the unfortunate: — I alone am excluded 
from its walls. — Farewell to Ireland, and 
to my dear father. — I saw my brother 
Garlace pass ; he went through the court 
to St. Alvin, with many other young men. 
They talked loudly and gaily: he little 
thought that the wretch who hid her face 
from them was his sister — his own — his 
only sister, of whom he was once so fond. 
I saw Miss St. Clare too ; but I never saw 
Glenarvon * 



348 Olenarvon. 

From my miserable Lodging, Cork, 
Thursday Night. 

" The measure of my calamity is at its 
full. The last pang of a breaking heart 
is over. — We sailed: a storm has driven 
us back. I shall leave Ireland no more. 
The object of my voyage is over : I am 

returned to die what more is left 

me I cannot write I have 

lost every thing. " 

Sunday. 

" I have been very ill. — When I sleep 
fires consume me : I heard sweet music, 
such as angels sing over the dead : there 
was one voice clear and soft as a lute 
sounding at a distance on the water : it 
was familiar to me ; but he fled when I 

followed 

Every one talks of Lord Glenarvon. — 
Yes, he is come back — he is come back 

to his own country covered with glory. 

A bride awaits him, I am told. — He is 
happy ; and I shall not grieve, if I see 



GLENARVON. 349 

him — yes, if I see him once more before I 
die : — it is all I ask. . .1 am so weak I can 
scarcely write ; but my father, my dear 
father, I wish to tell you all. — I will 
watch for him among the crowd 



Tuesday night, Belfont. 

" I walked to Belfont ; — and now the 
bitterness of death is passed. — I have seen 
that angel face once again — I have heard 
that sweetest voice, and I can lie down 
and die ; for I am happy now. — He 
passed me ; but oh ! bitter, bitter sight 
to me, he turned from me, and looked 
upon another. They tell me it was my 
preserver and benefactress : they say it 
was Lady Avondale. He looked proud 
of her, and happy in himself. — I am glad 
he looked happy ; but yet I thought he 
turned his eyes on me, and gazed upon 
me once so sadly, as if in this mournful 
countenance and altered form, he traced 
the features of her whom he had once 
loved so well. — But no — it could not be ; 



350 GLENARVON. 

— he did not know me ; and I will see 
him again. II he will but say, " Alice: 
God bless you," I shall die satisfied. — 
And if my child still lives, and comes 
again to you, so cold, so pale — take him 
to your heart, dear father, and forgive his 
mother — I am ill, and cannot write. 
They watch me ; my pencil is almost 
worn out, and they will give me no other. 
— I have one favor to ask, and it is this : 
— when 1 came to Dublin, I gave all 
the money I had to buy this broach — 
take it to Lady Avondale. They say 
she is very good, and perhaps, when she 
hears how ill 1 am, she will pardon my 
faults, and give it for me to Lord Glenar- 
von. — I shall wait for him every day in 
the same wood, and who knows but I 

may see him again 

And Alice did see him again ; — and 
she did kneel to him ; — and she received 
from his hands the relief he thought she 
craved ; — and the unexpected kindness 
broke her heart. — She died ; and she 



GLENAJRVON. 351 

was buried in the church near Belfont. 
There was a white stone placed upon her 
grave, and her old father went daily there 
and wept ; and he had the tree that now 
grows there planted ; and it was railed 
around, that the cattle and wild-goats, 
might not destroy it." 

"Take the band from my head," said 
Calantha. " Give me air. This kills 

me " She visited the grave of 

Alice: she met Mac Allain returning from 
it, they uttered not one word as they 
passed each other. The silence was more 
terrible than a thousand lamentations. . . . 
Lady Margaret sent for Calantha. She 
looked ill, and was much agitated. " It 
is time," said Lady Margaret, to speak 
to you. " The folly of your conduct," — 
" Oh it is past folly," said Calantha 
weeping. Lady Margaret looked upon 
her with contempt. " How weak, and 
how absurd is this. Whatever your er- 
rors, need you thus confess them ? and 



352 GLENARVON. 

whatever your feelings, wherefore betray 
them to the senseless crowd ?" 

" Calantha," said Lady Margaret in a 
hollow tone, " I can feel as deeply as 
yourself. Nature implanted passions in 
me, which are not common to all ; but 
mark the difference between us : — a strong 
mind dares at least conceal the ravages 
the tempest of its fury makes. It as- 
sumes that character to the vulgar herd 
which it knows is alone capable of im- 
posing restraint upon it. Every one sus- 
pects me, but none dare reproach me. 
You, on the contrary, are the butt against 
which every censure is levelled : they 
know that your easy nature can pardon 
malignity and the hand that insults you 
to-day will crave your kindness to-mor- 
row. When you are offended, with pue- 
rile impotence and passionate violence, 
you exhibit the effects of your momen- 
tary rage ; and by breaking of tables, or 
by idle words, shew your own weakness. 
Thus you are ever subdued by the 



GLENARYON. 353 

very exhibition of your passions. And 
now that you love, instead of rendering 
him you love your captive, you throw 
yourself entirely in hispowei, and will 
deeply rue the confidence you have 
shewn. Has he not already betrayed you. 
You know not Glenarvon. His heart, 
black as it is, I have read and studied. 
Whatever his imagination idolizes, be- 
comes with him a sole and entire interest. 
At this moment he would fly with you 
to the extremity of the earth, and when 
he awakes from his dream, he will laugh 
at you, and at himself for his absurdity. 
Trust not that malignant and venomed 
tongue. The adder that slumbers in the 
bosom of him who saved it, recovers, and 
bites to the heart the fool that trusted it. 
Warned on all sides, beware ! and if no- 
thing else can save you, learn at least 
who this Glenarvon is, what he has done, 

He is " 

" Lord Glenarvon," said a servant : at 
that very instant the door opened, and he 



354 GLENARVON. 

entered. He started at seeing Calantha, 
who, greatly embarrassed, durst not meet 
his eyes. It seemed to her, that to have 
heard him spoken of with unkindness 
was a sort of treachery to an attachment 
like their's. Lady Margaret's words had 
wounded and grieved her ; but they had 
not shaken her trust ; and when she 
looked upon him and saw that beautiful 
countenance, every doubt left her. Before 
she quitted the room, she observed how- 
ever, with surprise, the smile of enchant- 
ing sweetness, the air of kindness, even 
of interest, with which Lady Margaret 
received him ; and one jealous fear cross- 
ing her fancy, she lingered as if re- 
proachfully enquiring what meant these 
frequent visits to her Aunt. Glenarvon, 
in a moment, read the doubt : — "Yes," he 
cried, following her, " you are right : if 
ever I have loved another with idolatry 
it was thy Aunt ; but be assured I loved 
in vain. And now Calantha, I would 
agree, whilst existence were prolonged. 



GLENARVON, 



355 



to see her no more, sooner than cause 
you one hour's uneasiness. Be satisfied 
at least, that she abhors me." 

" None of this whispering," said Lady 
Margaret, smiling gently, at least in my 
presence. " I never loved before as now" 
said Glenarvon, aloud. " Never," said 
Lady Margaret, with an incredulous and 
scornful smile. "No," said Glenarvon, still 
gazing on Calantha ; " all is candour, in- 
nocence, frankness in that heart ; the one 
I idolized, too long, was like my own — ut- 
terly corrupted." "You wrong the lady," 
said Lady Margaret carelessly. " She had 
her errors, I acknowledge ; but the cold- 
ness of Glenarvon's heart, its duplicity, 
its malignity, is unrivalled." Calantha, 
deeply interested and agitated, could not 
quit the room. Glenarvon had seized 
her hand; his eyes, fixed upon her, 
seemed alone intent on penetrating her 
feelings: she burst into tears: he ap- 
proached her. " You shall not tear her 
from me," he said, to Lady Margaret, 



356 GLENARVOX. 

4 She goes with me by Heaven ; she is 
bound to me by the most sacred oaths : 
we are married ; are we not dearest ?" 
4< Have you confessed to her," said La- 
dy Margaret contemptuously ? " Every 
thing." 

" She loves you no doubt the better 
for your crimes." " She loves me, I 
do believe it, in defiance of them," 
said Glenarvon, in an impassioned tone, 
" and may the whole world, if she 
wishes it, know that by every art, by 
every power 1 possess, I have sought 
her : provided they also know," he con- 
tinued with a sneer, " that I have won 
her. She may despise me ; — you may 
teach her to hate ; but of this be assured 
— you cannot change me. Never, never 
was I so enslaved. Calantha, my soul, 
look on me. — Glenarvon kneels to you. 
I would even appear humble — weak if it 
but gratify your vanity ; for humility to 
you is now my glory — my pride." 

64 Calantha," said Lady Margaret, in 
a protecting tone, " are you not vain :' 



GLENARVON. 357 

" This Glenarvon has been the lover of 
many hundreds ; to be thus preferred is 
flattering. Shall I tell you, my dear 
niece, in what consists your superiority ? 
You are not as fair as these ; you are not 
perhaps as pure ; but you are loved 
more because your ruin will make the 
misery of a whole family, and your dis- 
grace will cast a shade upon the only man 
whom Glenarvon ever acknowledged as 
superior to himself — superior both in 
mind and person. This, child, is your 
potent charm — your sole claim to his ad- 
miration. Shew him some crime of 
greater magnitude, point out to him an 
object more worth the trouble and pain 
of renderinge miserable, and he will 
immediately abandon you." 

Glenarvon cast his eyes fiercely upon 
Lady Margaret. The disdain of that 
glance silenced her, she even came for- 
ward with a view to conciliate : and af- 
fecting an air of playful humility — " 1 
spoke but from mere jealousy," she said. 
4t What woman of my age could bear to 



358 GLENARV01Y. 

see another so praised, so worshipped in 
her presence. It is as if the future heir 
of his kingdom were extolled in presence 
of the reigning sovereign. Pardon me, 
Glenarvon. I know, I see you love her/' 
" By my soul I do;" and look, he cried 
exultingly, " with what furious rage the 
little tygress gazes on you. She will 
harm you. I fear," he continued laugh- 
ing, " if I do not carry her from your 
presence. Come then Calantha : we shall 
meet again/* he said, turning back and 
pausing as they quitted Lady Margaret's 
apartment. The tone of his voice, and 
his look, as he said this was peculiar : 
nor did he for some moments regain his 
composure. 

Lady Margaret spoke a few words to 
Calantha that evening. " I am in the 
power of this man," she said, u and you 
soon will be. He is cold, hard and cruel. 
Do any thing : but, if you have any re- 
gard for yourself, go not with him." " I 
know his history, his errors," said Ca- 



GLENARVON. 359 

lantha ; w but he feels deeply." " You 
know him," said Lady Margaret, with a 
look of scornful superiority: " as he wish- 
es you to believe him, he even may 
exaggerate,werethat possible, his crimes, 
the more to interest and surprise. You 
know him, Calantha, as one infatuated 
and madly in love can imagine the idol 
of its devotion. But there will come a 
time when you will draw his character 
with darker shades, and taking from it 
all the romance and mystery of guilt, see 
him, as I do, a cold 'malignant heart, 
which the light of genius, self-love and 
passion, have warmed at intervals; but 
which, in all the detail of every-day life, 
sinks into hypocrisy and baseness. Crimes 
have been perpetrated in the heat of pas- 
sion, even by noble minds ; but Glenarvon 
is little, contemptible and mean, lie 
unites the malice and petty vices of a wo- 
man, to the perfidy and villany of a man. 
You do not know him as I do." 

" From this hour," said Calantha, in- 



360 GLENARVOX. 

dignation burning in her bosom, " we 
never more, Lady Margaret, will inter- 
change one word with each other. I re- 
nounce you entirely ; and think yon all 
that you have dared to say against my 
loved, my adored Glenarvon." 

Lady Margaret sought Calantha before 
she retired for the night, and laughed at 
her for her conduct. " Your rage, your 
absurdity but excite my contempt. Ca- 
lantha, how puerile this violence appears 
to me ; above all, how useless. Now, 
from the earliest day of my remembrance, 
can any one say of me that they beheld 
me forgetful of my own dignity, from the 
violence of my passions. Yet I feci, 
think you not, and have made others feel. 
Your childish petulance but operates 
against yourself. What are threats, blows 
and mighty words from a woman? When 
I am offended, I smile; and when I stab 
deepest, then I can look as if 1 had for- 
given. Your friends talk of you with 
kindness or unkindness as it suits their 



GLENARVON. 361 

fancy : some love ; some pity, but none 
fear Calantha. Your very servant", 
though you boast of their attachment, 
despise and laugh at you. Your husband 
caresses you as a mistress, but of your 
conduct he takes not even heed. What is 
the affection of the crowd? what the love 
of man? make yourself feared! Then, if 
you are not esteemed, at least you are out- 
wardly honoured, and that reserve, that 
self-con troul, which you never sought 
even to obtain, keeps ordinary minds in 
alarm. Many hate me ; but who dares 
even name me without respect. Yourself, 
Calantha> even at this moment, are ready 
to fall upon my bosom and weep, because 
I have offended you. Come child — your 
hand. I fain would save you, bur you 
must hear much that pains you, before 1 
can hope even to succeed. Only remem- 
ber: 'si vous vous faites brebis le lonp vous 
manger a 9 " She smiled as she said this, 
and Calantha, half offended, gave her the 
hand for which she solicited. 
Vol. II. R 



362 GLENARVON 



CHAPTER XXXIV 



Mrs. Seymour was now extremely un- 
well, the least agitation was dreaded for 
her. Calantha was constantly enquiring 
after her ; but could not bear to remain 
long in her presence. Yet at night she 
watched by her, when she did not know 
of it ; and though she had ceased to 
pray for herself, she prayed for hn\ 
Could it be supposed that, at such a mo- 
ment, any personal feelings would engage 
Calantha to add to her uneasiness. Alas ! 
she sought in the last resources of guilt 
to alleviate every apprehension she might 
cherish ; she feigned a calm she felt not ; 
she made every promise she meant not 
to fulfil; she even spoke of Glenarvon 
with some severity for his conduet to 
Alice ; and when Mrs. Seymour rejoiced 
at her escape, she pressed her hand and 



*LENARV0N. 363 

wept. Lady Margaret, from the day of 
their quarrel, cold and stern, ever arose 
to leave the room when Calantha entered 
it, and Mrs. Seymour, seeing resentment 
kindling in her niece's eye, in the gentlest 
manner, urged her to bear with her aunt's 
humour. 

Lord Glenarvon had not written to Ca- 
lantha for some days, he had left the 
castle : and she laboured under the most 
painful suspense. The narrative of Alice's 
sufferings was still in her possession. At 
length he sent for it. " My Calantha,'' 
he said, in a letter she received from him, 
" My Calantha, I have not heard from 
you, and my misery is the greater, as I 
fear that you are resolved to see me no 
more. I wish for the narrative in your 
possession ; I know the impression it 
must make ; and strange as it may ap- 
pear, I almost rejoice at it. It will spare 
you much future sorrow ; and it can 
scarce add one pang to what I already 
suffer. Had you accompanied me, it 
r 2 



364 GLENARVON* 

was, I will now acknowledge, my firm 
resolve to have devoted every moment of 
my life to your happiness — to have seen, 
to have thought, to have lived, but for 
you alone. I had then dared to presume, 
that the excess of my attachment would 
remunerate you, for all the sacrifices you 
might be compelled to make ; that the 
fame of Glenarvon would hide, from Hie 
eyes of a censorious world, the stigma of 
disgrace, which must, I fear, involve you ; 
and that, at all events, in some other 
country, we might live alone for each 
other. — The dream is past ; you have 
undeceived me ; your friends require it : 
be it, as you and as they desire. I am 
about to quit Ireland. If you would see 
me before I go, it must be on the instant. 
What are the wrongs of my country to 
me? Let others, who have wealth and 
power, defend her : — let her look to 
English policy for protection ; to English 
justice for liberty and redress. Without 
a friend, even as I first set foot upon these 
shores, I now abandon them." 



GLEXARVON. 365 

" Farewell, Calantha. Thou art the 
last link which yet hinds me to life, ft 
was for thy sake — for thine alone, that I 
yet forbore. It is to save thee, that I 
now rush onward to meet my fate: grieve 
not for me. I stood a solitary being till 
I knew you. 1 can encounter evils when 
I feel that I alone shall suffer. Let me 
not think that I have destroyed you. 
But for me, you might have flourished 
happy and secure. O why would you 
tempt the fate of a ruined man ? — I en- 
treat you to send the papers in your pos- 
session. I am prepared for the worst. 
But if you could bring yourself to be- 
lieve the agony of my mind at this mo- 
ment, you would still feel for me, even 
though in all else chilled and changed. — 
Farewell, dearest of all earthly beings — 
my soul's comforter and hope, farewell." 
" I will go with thee Glenarvon, even 
should my fate exceed Alice's in misery 
— I never will forsake thee." 

A servant entered at that moment, 
r 3 



366 GLENARVON. 

and told her that Lord Glenarvon was 
below — waiting for the answer. " Take 
these papers/' said Calantha, and with 
them she enclosed a ring which had 
been found upon Alice : " Give them 
yourself to Lord Glenarvon : I cannot 
see him. — You may betray me, if it is 
your inclination ; I am in your power ; 
but to save is not. Therefore, do not 
attempt it. . . ." The attendant had no 
difficult task in executing this errand. 
She met Lord Glenarvon himself, at the 
door of the library. 

Upon alighting from his horse, he had 
enquired for Lady Margaret Buchanan ; 
before she was prepared to receive him, 
the papers were delivered into his hands; 
he gave them to O* Kelly ; and after pay- 
ing a shorter visit to Lady Margaret than 
at first he had intended, he returned to 
the inn at Belfont, to peruse them. First 
however he looked upon the broach, and 
taking up the ring, he pressed it to his 
lips and sighed, for he remembered it 



GLENARVON. 3@7 

and her to whom it had been given. 
Upon this emerald ring, the words : 
" Eterna fede" had been inscribed. He 
had placed it upon his little favourite's 
hand, in token of his fidelity, when first 
he had told her of his love ; time had 
worn off and defaced the first impression ; 
and" Eterno dolor" had been engraved 
by her in its place — thus telling in few 
words the whole history of love — "the im- 
mensity of its promises — the cruelty of its 
disappointment." 

Calantha was preparing to answer Gle- 
narvon's letter : her whole soul was ab- 
sorbed in grief, when Sophia entered and 
informed her that the Admiral was ar- 
rived. It was, she knew, his custom to 
come and go without much ceremony ; 
but his sudden presence, and at such a 
moment, overpowered her. Perhaps too, 
her husband might be with him ! she 
fell : Sophia called for assistance« " Good 
Heavens! what is the matter ?" she said, 
* 6 You have just kilt my lady," said the 
r 5 



368 GLENARVON. 

nurse; " but shell be better presently ; 
let her take her way— let her take her 
way/' And before Calantha could com- 
pose herself, Sir Richard was in her 
room. She soon saw by his hearty open 
countenance, that he was perfectly igno- 
rant of all that had occurred; and to 
keep him so, was now her earnest endea- 
vour. But she was unused to deceit : all 
her attempts at it were forced : it was not 
in her nature; and pride alone, not bet- 
ter feeling prevented its existence. 



GLENARVON. 369 



CHAPTER XXXVII 



Sir Richard apologized for his abrupt 
appearance : and told Calantha that he 
had been with Lord Avondale to visit his 
relations at Monteith, where he had left 
him employed, as he said, from morning 
till night, with his troops in quelling dis- 
turbances and administeringjustice, which 
he performed but ill, having, as he ex- 
pressed it, too kind a heart. He then as- 
sured her that her husband had promised 
to meet him on the present day at the cas- 
tle, and enquired of her if she knew where- 
fore his return had been delayed. She 
in reply informed him, that he had no 
intention of joining them, and even pro- 
duced his last cold letter, in which he 
told her that she might visit him at Alleu- 
water, at the end of the month, with the 
children, if all continued tranquil in 
r 5 



370 GLENARVON. 

those quarters. She spoke this in an em- 
barrassed manner; her colour changed 
repeatedly ; and her whole appearance 
was so dissimilar from that to which the 
Admiral had been accustomed, that he 
could not but observe it. 

Sir Richard, having- with seeming care- 
lessness, repeated the words, " He'll be 
here this week, that's certain/' now ad- 
dressed himself to the children, telling 
Harry Moivbrey the same, "And per- 
haps he'll bring you toys." "He'll bring 
himself," said the child, " and that's 
better " " Right, my gallant boy," re- 
turned the Admiral ; "and you are a fine 
little fellow for saying so." Thus encou- 
raged, the chdd continued to prattle. 
" I want no toys now, uncle Richard. 
Si e 1 have a sword, and a seal too. Will 
you look at the impression: — the harp 
means Ire'and: 'Independence' is the 
motto ; we have no crown ; we want no 
kings." " Asid who gave you this seal?" 
said Sir iiidiard, fiercely. " Clarence 



GLENARVON. 371 

Glenarvon," replied the boy, with a smile 

of proud exultation. " D n your 

sword and your seal," said the Admiral. 
" I like no rebel chiefs, not I;" and he 
turned away. " Are you angry with 
me, uncle Richard ?" " No, I am sick, 
child — I have the head ache." The Ad- 
miral had observed Caiantha's agitation, 
and noted the boy's answers; for he left 
the room abruptly, and was cold and 
cross the rest of the day. 

Colonel Donallan having invited the 
whole family and party, to his seat at 
Cork, Lady Trelawney and the rest of 
the guests now left the castle. It was 
possibly owing* to this circumstance that 
the Admiral, who was not a remarkably 
keen observer, had opportunity and lei- 
sure to watch Calantha's conduct. In 
a moment she perceived the suspicion 
that occurred; but as he was neither 
'very refined, nor very sentimental, iv 
occurred without one doubt of her ac- 
tual guilt, or one desire to save her from 



372 GLENARVOtf. 

its consequences: — it occurred with hor- 
ror, abhorrence and contempt. Unable 
to conceal the least thing or to moderate 
his indignation, he resolved, without de- 
lay, to seize the first opportunity of taxing 
her with her ill conduct. In the mean time 
she felt hardened and indfferent ; and, 
instead of attempting- to conciliate, by 
haughty looks and a spirit of defiance, 
she rendered herself hateful to every 
observer. That compassion, which is 
sometimes felt and cherished for a young 
offender, could not be felt for her ; nor 
did she wish to inspire it. Desperate and 
insensible, she gloried in the cause of 
her degradation ; and the dread of causing 
her aunt's death, and casting disgrace 
upon her husband's name, alone retained 
her one hour from Glenarvon. 

On the very day of the Admiral's ar- 
rival, he heard enough concerningCalan- 
tha to excite his most vehement indigna- 
tion ; and at the hour of dinner, therefore, 
as he passed her he called her by a name 



GLENARVON. 373 

too horrible to repeat. Stung to the 
soul, she refused to enter the dining- 
room ; and, hastening with fury to her 
own apartment, gave vent to the storm of 
passion by which she was wholly over- 
powered. There, unhappily, she found 
a letter from her lover — all kindness, all 
warmth. " One still there is," she said, 
" who loves, who feels for the guilty, 
the fallen Calantha." Every word she 
read, and compared with the cold neg- 
lect of others, or their severity and con- 
tempt. There was none to fold her to 
their bosom, and draw her back from 
certain perdition. She even began to 
think with Glenarvon, that they wished 
her gone. Some feelings of false honor, 
too, inclined her to imagine that she 
ought to leave a situation, for which she 
now must consider herself wholly unfit. 

But there was one voice which still re- 
called her : — it was her child's. " My boy 
will awake, and find me gone — he shall 
never have to reproach his mother/' And 



S74 GLENARVON. 

she stood uncertain how to act. Mrs. Sey- 
mour, to her extreme astonishment, was 
the only person who interrupted these re- 
flections. She was the last she had expected 
to do so. She had read in the well-known 
lineaments of Calantha's face : — that face 
which, as a book, she had perused from 
infancy, some desperate project : — the ir- 
ritation, the passionate exhibition of grief 
was past — she was calm. Sophia, at Mrs. 
Seymour's request, had therefore written 
to Calantha. She now gave her the letter. 
But it was received with sullen pride : — 
" Read this, Lady Avondale," she said, 
and left Ihe room. Calantha never looked 
at her, or she might have seen that she 
was agitated ; but the words — " Read 
this, Lady Avondale," repressed all emo- 
tion in her. It was long before she could 
bring herself to open Sophia's letter. A 
servant entered with dinner for her. 
" The Admiral begs you will drink a 
glass of wine," he said. She made no 
answer ; but desired her maid to take it 



GLENARTOX. 375 

away, and leave her. She did not even 
perceive that Mac Allain, who was the 
bearer of this message, was in tears. 

Sophia's letter was full of common- 
place truisms, and sounding periods — 
a sort of treatise upon vice, beginning 
with a retrospect of Calantha's past life, 
and ending with a cold jargon of worldly 
considerations. A few words, written in 
another hand, at the conclusion, affected 
her more :— they were from her aunt, Mrs. 
Seymour. " You talk of leaving us, of 
braving misfortunes, Lady Avondaie," 
she said : " you do not contemplate, you 
cannot conceive, the evils you thus deride. 
I know ; yes, well 1 know, you will not 
be able to bear up under them. Ah ! be- 
lieve me, Calantha, guilt will make the 
proudest spirit sink, and your courage 
will fail you at the moment of trial. Why 
then seek it ? — My child, time flies ra- 
pidly, and it may no longer be permitted 
you to return and repent. You now fly 
from reflection ; but it will overtake yoa 



376 GLENARVON. 

when too late to recall the emotions of 
virtue. Ah ! remember the days of your 
childhood ; recollect the high ideas you 
had conceived of honor and purity 
i — what disdain you felt for those who 
willingly deviated from the line of duty : 
— how true, how noble, how just were 
all your feelings. You have forsaken all ; 
and you began by forsaking him who 
created and protected you ! What won- 
der, then, that having left your religion 
and your God, you have abandoned every 
other tie that held you back from evil ! 
Say, where do you mean to check your 
course? Are you already guilty in more 
than thought ? — No, no ; I will never 
believe it ; but yet, even if this were so, 
pause before you cast public dishonor 
upon your husband and innocent chil- 
dren. Oh 1 repent, repent, it is not yet 
too late." 

" It is too late," said Calantha, spring- 
ing up, and tearing the letter: " it is too 
late ;" and nearly suffocated with the 



GLENARVON, 377 

agony of her passionate grief. She gasped 
for breath. " Oh ! that it were not. I 
cannot — I dare not stay to meet the eyes 
of an injured husband, to see him un- 
suspicious, and know that I have betrayed 
him. This is too hard to bear : — a death 
of torture is preferable to a continuance 
of this ; and then to part, my aunt knows 
not, nor cannot even conceive, the tor- 
ture of that word. She never felt what 
I do — she knows not what it is to love, 
and leave .... These words comprise 
every thing, the extremes of ecstacy and 
agony. Oh ! who can endure it. They 
may tear my heart to pieces ; but never 
hope that I will consent to leave Glenar- 
von." 

The conciousness of these feelings, the 
agitation of her mind, and the dread of 
Lord Avondale's return, made her meet 
Sophia, who now entered her apartment 
with some coldness. The scene that fol- 
lowed need not be repeated. All that a 
cold and common-place friend can urge, 



378 GLEN/UIVON. 

to upbraid, vilify and humiliate, was ut- 
tered by Miss Seymour ; and all in vain. 
She left her therefore, with much indig- 
nation ; and, seeing that her mother was 
preparing to enter the apartment she had 
quitted: " O! go not to her/' she said ; 
" you will find only a hardened sinner ; 
you had best leave her to herself. My 
friendship and patience are tired out at 
last ; I have forborne much ; but 1 can 
endure no more. Oh ! she is quite 
lost." " She is not lost, she is not har- 
dened, " said Mrs. Seymour, much agi- 
tated. •' She is my own sister's child ; 
she will yet hear me." 

" Calantha," said Mrs. Seymour, ad- 
vancing, " my child;" and she claspsed 
her to her bosom. She would have 
turned from her, but she could not. u I 
am not come to speak to you on any un- 
pleasant subject," she said. " I cannot 
speak myself, answered Calantha, hiding 
her face, not to behold her aiu.t : " all I 
ask of you is not to hate me ; and God 



GLENARVON, 379 

reward you for your kindness to me : I 
can say no more ; but I feel much." 
" You will not leave us, dear child ?" 
M Never, never, unless I am driven front 
you — unless I am thought unworthy of 
remaining here." " You will be kind 
to your husband, when he returns — you 
will not grieve him." " Oh ! no, no : 
I alone will suffer; I will never inflict it 
upon him ; but I cannot see him again ; 
he must not return ; you must keep him 
from me. I never. ..." " Pause, my 
Calantha: make no rash resolves. I came 
here not to agitate, or to reproach. I ask 
but one promise, no other will I ever 
exact : — you will not leave us." This 
change of manner in her aunt produced 
the deepest impression upon Lady Avon- 
dale. She looked, too, so like her mother, 
at the moment, that Calantha thought it 
had been her. She gave her her hand: she 
could not speak. " And did they tell me 
she was hardened r" said Mrs. Seymour, 



380 GLENARVO^V. 

" I knew it could not be : my child, my 
own Calantha, will never act with cruelty 
towards those who love her. Say only 
the single words, " I will not leave you," 
and I will trust you without one fear." 
" I will not leave you!" said Calantha, 
weeping bitterly, and throwing herself 
upon her aunt's bosom. " If it break 
my heart, I will never leave you, unless 
driven from these doors !" Little more 
was said by either of them. Mrs. Sey- 
mour was deeply affected, and so was 
Calantha. 

After she had quitted her, not an hour 
had elapsed, when Sir Richard, without 
preparation, entered. His presence stifled 
every good emotion — froze up every tear. 
Calantha stood before him with a look of 
contempt and defiance, he could not bear. 
Happily for her, he was called away, and 
she retired early to bed. " That wife of 
Avondale's has the greatest share of impu- 
dence," said the Admiral, addressing the 



GLENARVON. 381 

company, at large, when he returned from 
her room, " that ever it was my fortune 
to meet. One would think, to see her, 
that she was the person injured ; and that 
we were all the aggressors. Why, she 
has the spirit of the very devil in her ! 
but I will break it, I warrant you." 



382 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 



The next morning, regardless of the 
presence of the nurses and the children, 
who were in Lady Avondale's apartment : 
regardless, indeed, of any consideration, 
but that which rage and indignation had 
justly excited, the Admiral again entered 
Calantha's room, and in a high exulting 
tone, informed her that he had written to 
hasten her husband's return. " As to 
Avondale d'ye see," he continued, " he 

is a d d fine fellow, with none of your 

German sentiments, not he: and he will 
no more put up with these goings on, 
than I shall; nor shall you pallaver him 
over: for depend upon it, I will open his 
eyes, unless from this very moment you 
change your conduct. Yes, my Lady 
Calantha, you look a little surprised, I 
see, at hearing good English spoken to 



GLENARVON. 383 

you ; but I am not one who can talk all 
that jargon of sensibility, they prate 
round me here. You have the road open ; 
you are young, and may mend yet ; and 
if you do, I will think no more of the 
past. And as to you, Mrs. Nurse, see 
that these green ribbands be doffed. I 
prohibit Lord Mowbrey and Lady Anna- 
bel from wearing them. I hate these re- 
bellious party colours. 1 am for the 
King, and old England ; and a plague on 
the Irish marauders, and my Lord Gle- 
narvon at the head of them — who will 
not take ye, let me tell you, lady fair, for 
all your advances. I heard him say so 
myself, aye, and laugh too, when the 
Duke told him to be off, which he did, 
though it was in a round about way ; for 
they like here, to press much talk into 
what might be said in a score of words. 
So you need not look so mighty proud ; 
for I shall not let you stir from these 
apartments, do you see, till my nephew 
comes; and then, God mend you, or take 



384 GLENARVOX. 

you, for we will not bear with these pro- 
ceedings, not we of the navy, whatever 
your land folks may do." 

" Sir Richard," said Calantha, " you 
may spare yourself and me this un kind- 
ness, — I leave this house immediately. 
I leave your family from this hour ; and 
I will die in the very streets sooner than 
remain here. Take this," she said, throw- 
ing the marriage ring from her hand ; 
" and tell your nephew I never will see 
him more: tell him, if it is your pleasure, 
that I love another, and had rather be a 
slave in his service, than Lord Avondale's 
wife. 1 ever hated that name, and now 
I consider it with abhorrence." " Your 
Ladjship's words are big and mighty," 
cried Sir Richard ; " but while this 
goodly arm has a sinew, and this most 
excellent door has a key, )ou shall not 
stir from hence." As he yet spoke, he 
advanced to the door ; but she, darting 
before him, with a celerity he had not 
expected, left him, exclaiming as she 



GLENARVON. 385 

went, " you have driven me to this : tell 
them you have done it" 

In vain the Admiral urged every 
one he met to pursue Calantha. The 
moment had been seized, and no power 
can withstand, no after attempt can re- 
gain the one favorable moment that is 
thus snatched from fate. The castle pre- 
sented a scene of the utmost confusion 
and distress. Miss Seymour was indig- 
nant ; the servants were in commotion ; 
the greatest publicity was given to the 
event from the ill judged indiscretion of 
the Admiral. Mrs. Seymour alone was 
kept in ignorance ; the Duke coldly, in 
reply to the enquiry of what was to be 
done, affirmed that no step should be 
taken, unless, of herself, the unhappy Ca- 
lantha returned to seek the pardon and 
protection of those friends whom she had 
so rashly abandoned, and so cruelly mis- 
used. Yet, notwithstanding the prohi- 

vol.ii. s 



386 GLENARVON. 

bition, every place was searched, every 
measure to save was thought of, and all 
without success. 

Sir Richard then sat down with Anna- 
bel in his arms, and the little boy by his 
side, crying more piteously than the nurse 
who stood opposite encreasing the general 
disturbance, by her loud and ill-timed 
lamentations. " If my Lord had not 
been the best of husbands, there would 
have been some excuse for my Lady/' 
" None, nurse — none whatever," sobbed 
forth Sir Richard, in a voice scarcely 
audible, between passion and vexation. 
" She was a good mother, poor Lady : 
that I will say for her." " She was a 

d d wife though," cried Sir Richard; 

" and that I must say for her." After 
which, the children joining, the cries and 
sobs were renewed by the nurse, and Sir 
Richard, with more violence than at first. 
" I never thought it would have come to 
this," said the nurse, first recovering. 



GLENARVON. 387 

' Lord, ma'am, I knew it would end ill, 

when I saw those d d green ribbands. 

Who would have thought such a pretty 
looking gentleman would have turned 
out such a villain !" " He is no gentle- 
man at all," said Sir Richard angrily. 
" He is a rebel, an outcast. Shame upon 
him." And then again the nurse's cries 
checked his anger, and he wept more 
audibly than before. 

" Would you believe it, after all your 
kindness," said Sophia, entering her 
mother's room, " Calantha is gone." At 
the words, " she is gone," Mrs. Seymour 
tainted ; nor did she for some time recover ; 
but with returning sense, when she saw 
not Calantha, when asking repeatedly for 
her, she received evasive answers ; terror 
again overcame her — she was deeply and 
violently agitated. She sent for the chil- 
dren ; she clasped them to her bosom. 
They smiled upon her ; and that look, 
was a pang beyond all others of bitter- 
s 2 



388 GLENARVON. 

ness. The Admiral, in tears, approached 
her ; lamented his interference ; yet 
spoke with just severity of the offender. 
" If I know her heart, she will yet re- 
turn/' said Mrs. Seymour. "She will 
never more return " replied Sophia. 
" How indeed will she dare appear, after 
such a public avowal of her sentiments — 
such a flagrant breach of every sacred 
duty. Oh, there is no excuse for the 
mother who thus abandons her children 
— for the wife who stamps dishonour on 
a husband's fame — for the child that 
dares to disobey a father's sacred will \" 
" Sophia, beware. Judge not of others — 
judge not ; for the hour of temptation 
may come to all. Oh judge her not," 
said Mrs. Seymour, weeping bitterly ; 
" for she will yet return." 

Towards evening Mrs. Seymour again 
enquired for Calantha. They told her 
she had not been heard of; her agitation 
proved too well the doubt she entertained. 



GLENARVON. 389 

<e Send again," she continually said, and 
her hand, which Lady Margaret held in 
hers, became cold and trembling. They 
endeavoured to comfort her ; but what 
comfort was there left ? They tried to 
detain her in her own apartment ; but 
the agony of her sufferings was too great; 
— her feeble frame — her wasted form, 
could ill endure so great a shock. The 
Duke, affected beyond measure, endea- 
voured to support her. " Pardon her, 
receive her with kindness," said Mrs. 
Seymour, looking at him. " I know she 
will not leave you thus : I feel that she 
must return." " We will receive her 
without one reproach," said the Duke. 
"I, too, feel secure that she will return." 
" I know her heart : she can never leave 
us thus. Go yourself, Altamonte," said 
Lady Margaret. — " Let me go," " Where 
would you seek her?" " At Lord Gle- 
narvon's," said Mrs. Seymour, faintly. 
" Oh! she is not there," said the Duke, 
s 3 



390 GLENARVON. 

" She never will act in a manner we must 
not pardon." Mrs. Seymour trembled at 
these words — she was ill, most ill • and 
they laid her upon the bed, and watched 
in silence and agony around her. 

The Duke repeated sternly : I trust 
she is not gone to Lord Glenarvon— all 
else I can forgive. 



END OF VOL. II, 



LONDON : PRINTED BY SCHULZE AND DEAN, 
13, POLAND STREET. 
