M E L M O T H 



THE 



WANDERER: 



TALE. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF " BERTRAM/' &c. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



VOL. IV. 



EDINBURGH: 

PRINTED FOR ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND COMPANY, 

AXD HURST, ROBINSON, AND CO. CHEAPSIDE, 



LONDON. 



1820. 



» "**• - ' ■ "■■'ft. A - I **• ■ !•"■ 1 






"^i 



•^- ^\M.,.> 



•^- 



^ • '".v;^::* 



i'-v-. ,..> -^^^ -i^- ■•':• :;. v ' '^"^ 



^23 



K1iX 



MELMOTH. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

If he to thee no answer give, 

I'll give to thee a sign ; 
A secret known to nought that live> 

Save but to me and mine. 

• • • JF 4^ 



Gone to be married.- 



Shakespeare. 

JL HE whole of the next day was occu- 
pied by Donna Clara, to whom letter- 
writing was a rare, troublesome, and 
momentous task, in reading over and 
correcting her answer to her husband's 
letter; in which examination she found 
so much to correct, interline, alter, mo- 

VOL. IV. A 



^ MELMOTH : 

dify, expunge, and new-model, that final- 
ly Donna Clara's epistle very much re- 
sembled the work she was now employ- 
ed in, namely, that of overcasting a piece 
of tapestry wrought by her grandmother, 
representing the meeting of king Solomon 
and the queen of Sheba. The new work, 
instead of repairing, made fearful havock 
among the old ; but Donna Clara went on, 
like her countryman at Mr Peter's puppet- 
show, playing away (with her needle) in a 
perfect shower of back- strokes, fore- strokes, 
side-thrusts, and counter- thrusts, till not a 
figure in the tapestry could know himself 
again. The faded face of Solomon was gar- 
nished with a florid beard of scarlet silk 
(which Fra Jose at first told her she must rip 
out, as it made Solomon very little better 
than Judas) that made him resemble a boil- 
ed scallop. The fardingale of the queen of 
Sheba was expanded to an enormous hoop, 
of whose shrunk and pallid wearer it might 
be truly said, " Minima est pars sui'' The 
dog that, in the original tapestry, stood 



A TALE. 3 

by the spurred and booted heel of the 
oriental monarch, (who was clad in Spanish 
costume), by dint of a few tufts of black 
and yellow satin, w^as converted into a ti- 
ger, — a transformation which his grinning 
fangs rendered as authentic as heart could 
wish. And the parrot perched on the 
queen's shoulder, with the help of a train 
of green and gold, which the ignorant mis- 
took for her majesty's mantle, proved a 
very passable peacock. 

" As little trace of her original epistle 
did Donna Clara's present one bear, as did 
her elaborate overcasting to the original 
and painful labours of her grandmother. 
In both, however, Donna Clara (who 
scorned to flinch) went over the same 
ground with dim eye, and patient touch, 
and inextinguishable and remorseless as- 
siduity. The letter, such as it was, 
was still sufficiently characteristic of the 
writer. Some passages of it the reader 
shall be indulged with, — and we reckon 
on his gratitude for not insisting on his 



MELMOTH : 



perusal of the whole. The authentic copy, 
from which we are favoured with the ex- 
tracts, runs thus. * * * 



^ 



" Your daughter takes to her religion 
like mother's milk ; and well may she do 
so, considering that the trunk of our fami- 
ly was planted in the genuine* soil of the 
Catholic church, and that every branch of 
of it must flourish there or perish. For a 
Neophyte, (as Fra Jose wills me to word 
it), she is as promising a sprout as one 
should wish to see flourishing within the 
pale of the holy church ; — and for a hea- 
then, she is so amenable, submissive, and 
of such maidenly suavity, that for the 
comportment of her person, and the dis- 
creet and virtuous ordering of her mind, 
I have no Christian mother to envy. Nay, 
I sometimes take pity on them, when I 
see the lightness, the exceeding vain car- 
riage, and the unadvised eagerness to be 
wedded, of the best trained maidens of our 
country. This our daughter hath nothing 



A TALE, 5 

of, either in her outward demeanour, or 
inward mind. She talks little, the?rfore 
she cannot think much; and she dreams 
not of the light devices of love, and is 
therefore well qualified for the marriage 
proposed unto her. * * * 

yf: * * * * 

" One thing, dear spouse of my soul, I 
would have thee to take notice of, ^nd 
guard like the apple of thine eye, — our 
daughter is deranged, but never, on thy 
discretion, mention this to Don Montilla, 
even though he were the descendant in 
the right line of the Campeador, or of 
Gonsalvo di Cordova. Her derangement 
will in no wise impede or contravene her 
marriage, — for be it known to thee, it 
breaks out but at times, and at such 
times, that the most jealous eye of man 
could not spy it, unless he had a fore- 
taught intimation of it. She hath 
strange fantasies swimming in her brain, 
such as, that heretics and heathens shall 
not be everlastingly damned — (God and 



6 MELMOTH : 

the saints protect us !) — which must clear- 
ly proceed from madness, — but which her 
Catholic husband, if ever he comes to 
the knowledge of them, shall know 
how to expel, by aid of the church, and 
conjugal authority. That thou may'st 
better know the truth of what I hereby 
painfully certify, the saints and Fra Jose 
(wj^o will not let me tell a lie, because he 
in a manner holds my pen) can witness, 
that about four days before we left Ma- 
drid, as we went to church, and I was 
about, while ascending the steps, to dole 
alms to a mendicant woman wrapt in a 
mantle, who held up a naked child for the 
receiving of charity, your daughter twitch- 
ed my sleeve, while she whispered, ' Ma- 
dam, she cannot be mother to that child, 
for she is covered, and her child is naked. 
If she were its mother, she would cover 
her child, and not be comfortably wrapt 
herself/ True it was, I found afterwards 
the wretched woman had hired the child 
from its more wretched mother, and my 



A TALE. 7 

alms had paid the price of its hire for the 
day ; but still that not a whit disproved 
our daughter insane, inasmuch as it show- 
ed her ignorant of the fashion and usages 
of the beggars of the country, and did in 
some degree shew a doubt of the merit of 
alms-deeds, which thou know'st none but 
heretics or madmen could deny. Other 
and grievous proofs of her insanity doth 
she give daily ; but not willing to in- 
cumber you with ink, (which Fra Jose 
willeth me to call atramentum), I will add 
but a few particulars to arouse your dor- 
mant faculties, which may be wrapt in le- 
thargic obliviousness by the anodyne of 
my somniferous epistolation." 

" Reverend Father," said Donna Clara, 
looking up to Fra Jose, who had dictated 
the last line, " Don Francisco will know 
the last line not to be mine — he heard it 
in one of your sermons. Let me add 
the extraordinary proof of my daughter's 
insanity at the ball." — " Add or diminish, 
compose or confound, what you will, in 
God's name !" said Fra Jose, vexed at the 



8 . MELMOTH : 

frequent eraziires and lituras which disfi- 
gured the lines of his dictation; " for 
though in style I may somewhat boast of 
my superiority, in scratches no hen on the 
best dunghill in Spain can contend with 
you ! On, then, in the name of all the 
saints ! — and when it pleases heaven to 
send an interpreter to your husband, we 
may hope to hear from him by the next 
post-angel, for surely such a letter was 
never written on earth." 

" With this encouragement and ap- 
plause, Donna Clara proceeded to relate 
sundry other errors and wanderings of her 
daughter, which, to a mind so swathed, 
crippled, and dwarfed, by the ligatures 
which the hand of custom had twined 
round it since its first hour of conscious- 
ness, might well have appeared like the 
aberrations of insanity. Among other 
proofs, she mentioned that Isidora's first 
introduction to a Christian and Catholic 
church, was on that night of penitence in 
passion-week, when, the lights being ex- 



A TALE. 79 

tinguished, the miserere is chaunted in 
profound darkness, the penitents macerate 
themselves, and groans are heard on every 
side instead of prayers, as if the worship of 
Moloch was renewed without its fires ; — 
struck with horror at the sounds she heard, 
and the darkness which surrounded her, 
Isidora demanded what they were doing. 
— ** Worshipping God," was the answer. 

" At the expiration of Lent, she was in- 
troduced to a brilliant assembly, where the 
gay fandango was succeeded by the soft 
notes of the seguedilla, — and the crackling 
of the castanets, and the tinkling of the 
guitars, marked alternate time to the light 
and ecstatic step of youth, and the silvery 
and love-tuned voice of beautv. Touched 
with delight at all she saw and heard, — 
the smiles that dimpled and sparkled over 
her beautiful features reflecting every 
shade of pleasure they encountered, like 
the ripplings of a brook kissed by the 
moon-beams, — she eagerly asked, " And 
are not these worshipping God ?" — " Out 

A % 



10 MELMOTH : 

on it, daughter !" interposed Donna Clara; 
who happened to overhear the question; 
*' This is a vain and sinful pastime, — the 
invention of the devil to delude the chil- 
dren of folly, — hateful in the eyes of heaven 
and its saints, — and abhorred and renoun- 
ced by the faithful." — " Then there are 
two Gods," said Isidora sighing, " the 
God of smiles and happiness, and the God 
of groans and blood. Would I could 
serve the former!" — '* I will take order 
you shall serve the latter, heathenish and 
profane that you are !" answered Donna 
Clara, as she hurried her from the assem- 
bly, shocked at the scandal which her 
words might have given. These and 
many similar anecdotes were painfully in- 
dited in Donna Clara's long epistle, which, 
after being folded and sealed by Fra Jose, 
(who swore by the habit he wore, he had 
rather study twenty pages of the Polyglot 
fasting, than read it over once more), was 
duly forwarded to Don Francisco. 

" The habits and movements of Don 



J^A TALE. 11 

Francisco were, like those of his nation, 
so deliberate and dilatory, and his aver- 
sion to writing letters, except on mercan- 
tile subjects, so well known, that Donna 
Clara was actually alarmed at receiving, 
in the evening of the day in which her 
epistle was dispatched, another letter from 
her husband. 

" Its contents must be guessed to be 
sufficiently singular, when the result was, 
that Donna Clara and Fra Jose sat up 
over them nearly the whole of the night, 
in consultation, anxiety, and fear. So in- 
tense was their conference, that it is re- 
corded it was never interrupted even by 
the lady telling her beads, or the monk 
thinking of his supper. All the artificial 
habits, the customary indulgences, the fac- 
titious existence of both, were merged 
in the real genuine fear which pervad- 
ed their minds, and which asserted its 
power over both in painful and exact- 
ing proportion to their long and hardy 
rejection of its influence. Their minds 
succumbed together, and sought and gave 



12 melmoth: 

in vain, feeble counsel, and fruitless conso- 
lation. They read over and over again 
this extraordinary letter, and at every read- 
ing their minds grew darker, — and their 
counsels more perplexed, — and their looks 
more dismal. Ever and anon they turn- 
ed their eyes on it, as it lay open be- 
fore them on Donna Clara's ebony writ- 
ing-desk, and then starting, asked each 
other by looks, and sometimes in words, 
" Did either hear some strange noise in 
the house ?" The letter, among other 
matter not important to the reader, con- 
tained the singular passage following. * 

* * *• ^r * 

" In my travel from the place where 
I landed, to that whence I now write, 
I fortuned to be in company with stran- 
gers, from whom I heard things touch- 
ing me (not as they meant, but as my 
fear interpreted them) in a point the most 
exquisite that can prick and wound the 
soul of a Christian father. These I shall 
discuss unto thee at thy more leisure. 
They are full of fearful matter, and such 



A TALE. IS 

as may perchance require the aid of some 
churchman rightly to understand, and ful- 
ly to fathom. Nevertheless this I can 
commend to thy discretion, that after I 
had parted from this strange conference, 
the reports of which I cannot by letter 
communicate to thee, I retired to my 
chamber full of sad and heavy thoughts, 
and being seated in my chair, pored over 
a tome containing legends of departed spi- 
rits, in nowise contradictive to the doc- 
trine of the holy Catholic church, other- 
wise I would have crushed it with the sole 
of my foot into the fire that burned be- 
fore me on the hearth, and spit on its cin- 
ders with the spittle of my mouth. Now, 
whether it was the company I fortuned to 
be into, (whose conversation must never 
be known but to thee only), or the book 
I had been reading, which contained cer- 
tain extracts from Pliny, Artemidore, and 
others, full-filled with tales which I may 
not now recount, but which did relate 
altogether to the revivification of the de- 



14 MELMOTH : 

parted, appearing in due accordance with 
our Catholic conceptions of Christian ghosts 
in purgatory, with their suitable accoutre- 
ments of chains and flames, — as thus Pliny 
writeth, " Apparebat eidolon senex, ma- 
cie et senie confectus" — or finally, the 
weariness of my lonely journey, or other 
things I know not, — but feeling my mind 
ill-disposed for deeper converse with books 
or my own thoughts, and though oppress- 
ed by sleep, unwilling to retire to rest,— 
a mood which I and others have often ex- 
perienced, — I took out thy letters from 
the desk in which I duly reposit them, 
and read over the description Avhich thou 
didst send me of our daughter, upon the 
first intelligence of her being discovered 
in that accursed isle of heathenism, — and 
I do assure thee, the description of our 
daughter hath been written in such cha- 
racters on the bosom to which she hath 
never been clasped, that it would defy the 
art of all the limners in Spain to paint it 
more effectually. So, thinking on those 



A TALE. 15 

dark-blue eyes,— and those natural ringlets 
which will not obey their new mistress, 
art,— and that slender undulating shape, — 
and thinking it would soon be folded in 
my arms, and ask the blessing of a Chris- 
tian father in Christian tones, I dozed as I 
sat in my chair; and my dreams taking 
part with my waking thoughts, I was 
a-dreamt that such a creature, so fair, 
so fond, so cherubic, sat beside me, and 
asked me blessing. As I bowed to give 
it, I nodded in my chair and awoke. A- 
woke I say, for what followed was as pal- 
pable to human sight as the furniture of 
my apartment, or any other tangible ob- 
ject. There was a female seated opposite 
me, clad in a Spanish dress, but her veil 
flowed down to her feet. She sat, and 
seemed to expect that I should bespeak 
her first. " Damsel," I said, " what seek- 
est thou ?— or why art thou here ?" The 
figure never raised its veil, nor motioned 
with hand or lip. Mine head was full of 
what I had heard and read of; and after 



16 MELMOTH : 

making the sign of the cross, and uttering 
certain prayers, I approached that figure, 
and said, " Damsel, what wantest thou ?" 
— " A father," said the form, raising its 
veil, and disclosing the identical features 
of my daughter Isidora, as described 
in thy numerous letters. Thou mayest 
well guess my consternation, which I 
might almost term fear, at the sight and 
words of this beautiful but strange and so- 
lemn figure. Nor was my perplexity and 
trouble diminished but increased, when 
the figure, rising and pointing to the door, 
through which she forthwith passed with 
a mysterious grace and incredible alacrity, 
uttered, m ti^ansitu, words like these : — 
" Save me ! — save me ! — lose not a mo- 
ment, or I am lost!" And I swear to 
thee, wife, that while that figure sat or de- 
parted, I heard not the rusthng of her gar- 
ments, or the tread of her foot, or the 
sound of her respiration — only as she went 
out, there was a rushing sound as of a 
wind passing through the chamber, — and 



A TALE. 17 

a mist seemed to hang on every object a- 
round me, which dispersed, — and I was 
conscious of heaving a deep sigh, as if a 
load had been removed from my breast. 
I sat thereafter for an hour pondering on 
.what I had seen, and not knowing whe- 
ther to term it a waking dream, or a dream- 
like waking. I am a mortal man, sensi- 
ble of fear, and liable to error, — but I am 
also a Catholic Christian, and have ever 
been a hearty contemner of your tales of 
spectres and visions, excepting always 
when sanctioned by the authority of the 
holv church, and recorded in the lives of 
her saints and martyrs. Finding no end 
or fruit of these my heavy cogitations, I 
withdrew myself to bed, where I long lay 
tossing and sleepless, till at the approach 
of morning, just as I was falling into a 
deep sleep, I was awoke by a noise like 
that of a breeze waving my curtains. I 
started up, and drawing them, looked a- 
round me. There was a glimpse of day- 
light appearing through the window- 



I 8 MELMOTH : 

shutters, but not sufficient to enable me to 
distinguish the objects in the room, were 
it not for the lamp that burned on the 
hearth, and whose hght, though somewhat 
dim, was perfectly distinct. By it I dis- 
covered, near the door, a figure which my 
sight, rendered more acute by my terror, 
verified as the identical figure I had be- 
fore beheld, who, waving its arm with a 
melancholy gesture, and uttering in a pi- 
teous voice these words, " It is too late," 
disappeared. As, I will own to thee, 
overcome with horror at this second visi- 
tation, I fell back on my pillow almost 
bereft of the use of my faculties, I remem- 
ber the clock struck three.'* 

'' As Donna Clara and the priest (on 
their tenth perusal of the letter) arrived 
at these words, the clock in the hall below 
struck three. " That is a singular coin- 
cidence," said Fra Jose. " Do you think 
it nothing more, Father?" said Donna 
Clara, turning very pale. " I know not," 
said the priest ; " many have told credible 



A TALE. 19 

stories of warnings permitted by our guar- 
dian saints, to be given even by the mini- 
stry of inanimate things. But to what 
purpose are we warned, when we know 
not the evil we are to shun ?" — " Hush ! — 
hark !" said Donna Clara, " did you hear 
no noise ?" — " None," said Fra Jose listen- 
ing, not without some appearance of per- 
turbation — " None," he added, in a more 
tranquil and assured voice, after a pause ; 
" and the noise which I did hear about 
two hours ago, was of short continuance, 
and has not been renewed." — " What a 
flickering light these tapers give !" said 
Donna Clara, viewing them with eyes 
glassy and fixed with fear. " The case- 
ments are open," answered the priest. *•' So 
they have been since we sat here," re- 
turned Donna Clara ; " yet now see what 
a stream of air comes rushing against 
them ! Holy God ! they flare as if they 
would go out !" 

" The priest, looking up at the tapers, 
observed the truth of what she said, — and 



20 melmoth: 

at the same time perceived the tapestry 
near the door to be considerably agitated. 
" There is a door open in some other di- 
rection," said he, rising. " You are not 
going to leave me, Father?" said Donna 
Clara, who sat in her chair paralyzed with 
terror, and unable to follov/ him but with 
her eyes. 

" The Father Jose made no answer. He 
was now in the passage, where a circum- 
stance which he observed had arrested all 
his attention, — the door of Isidora's apart- 
ment was open, and lights were burning in 
it. He entered it slowly at first, and gazed 
around, but its inmate was not there. He 
glanced his eye on the bed, but no human 
form had pressed it that night — it lay un- 
touched and undisturbed. The casement 
next caught his eye, now glancing with 
the quickness of fear on every object. He 
approached it — it was wide open, — the 
casement that looked towards the garden. 
In his horror at this discovery, the good 
Father could not avoid uttering a cry that 



A TALE. 21 

pierced the ears of Donna Clara, who, 
trembling and scarce able to make her 
way to the room, attempted to follow him 
in vain, and fell down in the passage. 
The priest raised and tried to assist her 
back to her own apartment. The wretch- 
ed mother, when at last placed in her 
chair, neither fainted or wept; but with 
white and speechless lips, and a paralytic 
motion of her hand, tried to point towards 
her daughters apartment, as if she wished 
to be conveyed there. " It is too late," 
said the priest, unconsciously using the 
ominous words quoted in the letter of 
Don Francisco. 



CHAPTER XXII. 



Responde meum argumentum— nomen est nomen 
'^ergo, quod tibi est nomen — ^responde argumentum. 

Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Wit at several Weapons. 

JL HAT night was the one fixed on for 
the union of Isidora and Melmoth. She 
had retired early to her chamber, and sat 
at the casement watching for his approach 
for hours before she could probably expect 
it. It might be supposed that at this ter- 
rible crisis of her fate, she felt agitated by 
a thousand emotions, — that a soul suscep- 



A TALE. 25 

tible like hers felt itself almost torn in 
pieces by the struggle, — but it was not so. 
When a mind strong by nature, but 
weakened by fettering circumstances, is 
driven to make one strong spring to free 
itself, it has no leisure to calculate the 
weight of its hindrances, or the width of 
its leap, — ^it sits with its chains heaped a- 
bout it, thinking only of the bound that 
is to be its liberation — or 

" During the many hours that Isidora 
awaited the approach of this mysterious 
bridegroom, she felt nothing but the aw- 
ful sense of that approach, and of the e- 
vent that was to follow. So she sat at 
her casement, pale but resolute, and trust- 
ing in the extraordinary promise of Mel- 
moth, that by whatever means he was en- 
abled to visit her, by those she would be 
enabled to effect her escape, in spite of 
her well-guarded mansion, and vigilant 
household. 

" It was near one (the hour at which 
Fra Jose, who was sitting in consul- 



24 MEL3WTH : 

tation with her mother over that melan- 
choly letter, heard the noise alluded to in 
the preceding chapter) when Melmoth ap- 
peared in the garden, and, without utter- 
ing a word, threw up a ladder of ropes, 
which, in short and sullen whispers, he in- 
structed her to fasten, and assisted her to 
descend. They hurried through the gar- 
den, — and Isidora, amid all the novelty of 
her feelings and situation, could not avoid 
testifying her surprise at the facility with 
which they passed through the well-secur- 
ed garden gate. 

" They were now in the open country, 
— a region far wilder to Isidora than the 
flowery paths of that untrodden isle, where 
she had no enemy, ^ow in every breeze 
she heard a menacing voice, — in the echoes 
of her own light steps she heard the sound 
of steps pursuing her." 

" The night was very dark, — unlike the 
midsummer nights in that delicious cli- 
mate. A blast sometimes cold, sometimes 
stifling from heat, indicated some extraor- 



A TALE. 25 

dinary vicissitude in the atmosphere. 
There is something very fearful in this 
kind of wintry feeling in a summer night. 
The cold, the darkness, followed by in- 
tense heat, and a pale, meteoric light- 
ning, seemed to unite the mingled evils of 
the various seasons, and to trace their sad 
analogy to life, — whose stormy summer al- 
lows youth little to enjoy, and whose chill- 
ing winter leaves age nothing to hope. 

*' To Isidora, whose sensibilities were 
still so acutely physical, that she could feel 
the state of the elements as if they were 
the oracles of nature, which she could 
interpret at sight, — this dark and trou- 
bled appearance seemed like a fearful o- 
men. More than once she paused, trem- 
bled, and turned on Melmoth a glance 
of doubt and terror, — which the dark- 
ness of the night, of course, prevented 
» him from observing. Perhaps there was 
another cause, — but as they hurried on, 
Isidora's strength and courage began to 
fail together. She perceived that she was 
VOL. IV. B 



26 MELMOTH : 

borne on with a kind of supernatural ve- 
locity,— her breath failed,— her feet faulter- 
ed, — and she felt like one in a dream. 

" Stay!" she exclaimed, gasping from 
weakness, " stay !— whither am I going ? 
— where do you bear me?"—*' To your 
nuptials," answered Melmoth, in low and 
almost inarticulate tones; — but whether 
rendered so by emotion, or by the speed 
wdth which they seemed to fly along, Isi- 
dora could not discover. 

" In a few moments, she was forced to 
declare herself unable to proceed, and 
leaned on his arm, gasping and exhaust- 
ed. " Let me pause," said she ominously, 
" in the name of God!" Melmoth return- 
ed no answer. He paused, however, and 
supported her with an appearance of anxie- 
ty, if not of tenderness. 

" During this interval, she gazed around 
her, and tried to distinguish the objects 
near; but the intense darkness of the 
night rendered this almost impossible, — 
and what she could discover, was not cal- 



A TALE. 27 

culated to dispel her alarm. They seemed 
to be walking on a narrow and precipitous 
path close by a shallow stream, as she 
could guess, by the hoarse and rugged 
sound of its waters, as they fought with 
every pebble to win their way. This path 
was edged on the other side by a few trees, 
whose stunted growth, and branches toss- 
ing wild and wide to the blast that now 
began to whisper mournfully among them, 
seemed to banish every image of a sum- 
mer night from the senses, and almost from 
the memory. Every thing around was 
alike dreary and strange to Isidora, who 
had never, since her arrival at the villa, 
wandered beyond the precincts of the 
garden, — and who, even if she had, would 
probably have found no clue to direct her 
where she now was. *•' This is a fearful 
night," said she, half internally. She then 
repeated the same words more audibly, 
perhaps in hope of some answering and 
consolatory sounds. Melmoth was silent — 
and her spirits subdued by fatigue and emo- 



28 MEL.MOTH : 

tion, she wept. " Do you already repent 
the step you have taken ?" said he, laying 
a strange emphasis on the word — already, 
" No, love, no !" replied Isidora, gently 
wiping away her tears ; " it is impossible 
for me ever to repent it. But this loneli- 
ness, — this darkness, — this speed, — this si- 
lence,— have in them something almost 
awful. I feel as if I were traversing some 
unknown region. Are these indeed the 
winds of heaven that sigh around me? 
Are these trees of nature's growth, that 
nod at me like spectres? How hollow 
and dismal is the sound of the blast ! — it 
chills me though the night is sultry ! — and 
those trees, they cast their shadows over 
my soul ! Oh, is this like a bridal night ?'* 
she exclaimed, as JNIelmoth, apparently 
disturbed at these words, attempted to 
hurry her on — " Is this like a bridal ? No 
father, no brother, to support me! — no 
mother near me! — no kiss of kindred to 
greet me ! — no congratulating friends !" — 
and her fears increasing, she wildly ex- 



A TALE. 29 

claimed, " Where is the priest to bless 
our union ? — where is the church under 
whose roof we are to be united ?" 

" As she spoke, Melmoth, drawling her 
arm under his, attempted to lead her 
gently forward. " There is," said he, " a 
ruined monastery near — you may have 
observed it from your window." — " No ! 
I never saw it. Why is it in ruins ?" — " I 
know not — there were wild stories told. 
It was said the Superior, or Prior, or — I 
know not what — had looked into certain 
books, the perusal of which was not alto- 
gether sanctioned by the rules of his or- 
der — books of magic they called them. 
There w^as much noise about it, I remem- 
ber, and some talk of the Inquisition, — 
but the end of the business was, the Prior 
disappeared, some said into the prisons of 
the Inquisition, some said into safer cus- 
tody — (though how that could be, I can- 
not well conceive) — and the brethren were 
drafted into other communities, and the 
building became deserted. There were 



30 MELMOTH : 

some offers made for it by the communities 
of other religious houses, but the evil, 
though vague and wild reports, that had 
gone forth about it, deterred them, on in- 
quiry, from inhabiting it, — and gradually 
the building fell to ruin. It still retains all 
that can sanctify it in the eyes of the faith- 
ful. There are crucifixes and tomb-stones, 
and here and there a cross set up where there 
has been murder, — for, by a singular con- 
geniality of taste, a banditti has fixed their 
seat there now, — and the traffic of gold 
for souls, once carried on so profitably by 
the former inmates, is exchanged for that 
of souls for gold, by the present." 

" At these words, Melmoth felt the 
slender arm that hung on his withdrawn, — 
and he perceived that his victim, between 
shuddering and struggling, had shrunk 
from Ms hold, " But there," he added, 
" even amid those ruins, there dwells 
a holy hermit, — one who has taken up 
his residence near the spot, — he will u- 
nite us in his oratory, according to the 



A TALE. 31 

rites of your church. He will speak the 
blessing over us, — and one of us, at least, 
shall be blessed."—'' Hold !" said Isidora, 
repelling, and standing at what distance 
from him she could, — her slight figure ex- 
panding to that queen-like dignity with 
which nature had once invested her as the 
fair and sole sovereign of her own island-pa- 
radise. " Hold !" she repeated — " approach 
me not by another step, — address me not 
by another word, — till you tell me when 
and where I am to be united to you, — to 
become your wedded wife ! I have borne 
much of doubt and terror, — of suspicion 

and persecution, — but" " Hear me, 

Isidora," said Melmoth, terrified at this 
sudden burst of resolution. " Hear 
me^'' answered the timid but heroic girl, 
springing, with the elasticity of her early 
movements, upon a crag that hung 
over their stony path, and clinging to 
an ash-tree that had burst through its 
fissures—" Hear me! Sooner will you 



52 MELMOTH : 

rend this tree from its bed of stone, than 
me from its trunk ! Sooner will I dash 
this body on the stony bed of the stream 
that groans below my feet, than descend 
into your arms, till you swear to me they 
will bear me to honour and safety ! For 
you I have given up all that my newly- 
taught duties have told me was holy ! — all 
that my heart long ago whispered I ought 
to love ! Judge by what I have sacrificed, 
of what I can sacrifice — and doubt not 
that I would be my own victim ten thou- 
sand times sooner than yours !" — " By all 
that you deem holy !" cried Melmoth, 
humbling himself even to kneel before her 
as she stood, — " my intentions are as pure 
as your own soul !— the hermitage is not 
an hundred paces off. Come, and do not, 
by a fantastic and causeless apprehension, 
frustrate all the magnanimity and tender- 
ness you have hitherto shewed, and which 
have raised you in my eyes not only above 
your sex, but above your whole species. 



A TALE. 33 

Had you not been what you are, and 
what no other but you could be, you had 
never been the bride of Mehiioth. With 
whom but you did he ever seek to unite 
his dark and inscrutable destiny ? Isi- 
dora," he added, in tones more potent and 
emphatic, perceiving she still hesitated, 
and clung to the tree—" Isidora, how 
weak, how unworthy of you is this ! You 
are in my power, — absolutely, hopelessly 
in my power. No human eye can see nie 
— no human arm can aid you. You are 
as helpless as infancy in my grasp. This 
dark stream would tell no tales of deeds 
that stained its waters, — and the blast that 
howls round you would never waft your 
groans to mortal ear ! You are in my 
power, yet I seek not to abuse it. I offer 
you my hand to conduct you to a conse- 
crated building, where we shall be united 
according to the fashion of your country 
— and will you still persevere in this fan- 
ciful and profitless waywardness ?" 

" As he spoke, Isidora looked round 
B 2 



$% MELMOTH : 

her helplessly — every object was a confir- 
mation of his arguments— she shuddered 
and submitted. But as they walked on in 
silence, she could not help interrupting it 
to give utterance to the thousand anxieties 
that oppressed her heart. 

" But you speak," said she, in a sup- 
pressed and pleading tone, — " you speak 
of religion in words that make me trem- 
ble — you speak of it as the fashion of a 
country,— as a thing of form, of accident, 
of habit. What faith do you profess ? — 
what church do you frequent ? — what holy 
rites do you perform ?" — ** I venerate all 
faiths — alike, I hold all religious rites — 
pretty much in the same respect," said 
Melmoth, while his former wild and scof- 
fing levity seemed to struggle vainly with 
a feeling of involuntary horror. " And do 
you then, indeed, believe in holy things ?" 
asked Isidora. " Do you indeed?" she 
repeated anxiously. ** I believe in a God,'* 
answered Melmoth, in a voice that froze 
her blood ; " you have heard of those who 



A TALE. 35 

believe and tremble, — such is he who speaks 
to vou !" 

" Isidora's acquaintance with the book 
from which he quoted, was too limited to 
permit her to understand the allusion. 
She knew, according to the religious edu- 
cation she had received, more of her bre- 
viary than her Bible; and though she pur- 
sued her inquiry in a timid and anxious 
tone, she felt no additional terror from 
words she did not understand. 

" But," she continued, " Christianity is 
something more than a belief in a God. 
Do you also believe in all that the Catho- 
lic church declares to be essential to salva- 
tion ? Do you believe that" And 

here she added a name too sacred, and ac- 
companied with terms too awful, to be ex- 
pressed in pages so light as these *. " I 
believe it all — I know it all," answered 

* Here Moncada expressed his surprise at this 
passage, (as savouring more of Christianity than Ju- 
daism), considering it occurred in the manuscript of 
a Jew. 



36 melmoth: 

Melmoth, in a voice of stern and reluctant 
confession. " Infidel and scoffer as I may- 
appear to you, there is no martyr of the 
Christian church, who in other times 
blazed for his God, that has borne or ex- 
hibited a more resplendent illustration of 
his faith, than I shall bear one day — and 
for ever. There is a slight difference only 
between our testimonies in point of dura- 
tion. They burned for the truths they 
loved for a few moments — not so many 
perchance. Some were suffocated before 
the flames could reach them, — but I am 
doomed to bear my attestation to the truth 
of the gospel, amid fires that shall burn for 
ever and ever. See with what a glorious 
destiny yours, my bride, is united ! You, 
as a Christian, would doubtless exult to 
see your husband at the stake, — and amid 
the faggots to prove his devotion. How 
it must ennoble the sacrifice to think that 
it is to last to eternity !" 

*' INIelmoth uttered these words in ears 
that heard no longer. Isidora had faint- 



A TALE. 37 

ed ; and hanging with one cold hand on 
his arm still, fell a helpless, senseless weight 
on the earth. Melmoth, at this sight, 
shewed more feeling than he could have 
been suspected of. He disentangled her 
from the folds of her mantle, sprinkled 
water from the stream on her cold cheek, 
and supported her frame in every direction 
where a breath of air was to be caught. 
Isidora recovered ; for her swoon was that of 
fatigue more than fear ; and, with her re- 
covery, her lover's short-lived tenderness 
seemed to cease. The moment she was 
able to speak he urged her to proceed, — 
and while she feebly attempted to obey 
him, he assured her, her strength was per- 
fectly recovered, and that the place they 
had to reach was but a few paces distant. 
Isidora struggled on. Their path now lay 
up the ascent of a steep hill, — they left the 
murmur of the stream, and the sighing of 
trees, behind them, — the wind, too, had 
sunk, but the night continued intensely 
dark, — and the absence of all sound seem- 



38 MELMOTH : 

ed to Isidora to increase the desolateness 
of the scene. She wished for something 
to listen to beside her impeded and pain- 
ful respiration, and the audible beatings of 
her heart. As thev descended the hill 
on the other side, the murmuring of the 
waters became once more faintly audible ; 
and this sound she had longed to hear 
again, had now, amid the stillness of the 
night, a cadence so melancholy, that she 
almost wished it hushed again. 

" Thus always, to the unhappy, the 
very fulfilment of their morbid wishings 
becomes a source of disappointment, and 
the change they hoped for is desirable only 
as it gives them cause to long for another 
change. In the morning they say. Would 
to God it were evening ! — Evening comes, 
— and in the evening they say. Would to 
God it were morning ! But Isidora had 
no time to analyse her feelings, — a new 
apprehension struck her, — and, as she could 
well guess from the increasing speed of 
Melmoth, and head thrown backward 



A TALE. 39 

impatiently, and often, it had probably- 
reached him too. A sound they had 
been for some time watching, (without 
communicating their feelings to each 
other), became every moment more dis- 
tinct. It was the sound of a human 
foot, evidently pursuing them, from the 
increasing quickness of its speed, and a 
certain sharpness of tread, that irresistibly 
gave the idea of hot and anxious pursuit. 
Melmoth suddenly paused, and Isidora 
hung trembling on his arm. Neither of 
them uttered a word ; but Isidora's eyes, 
instinctively following the slight but fear- 
ful waving of his arm, saw it directed 
towards a figure so obscure, that it at first 
appeared like a spray moving in the misty 
night, — then was lost in darkness as it de- 
scended the hill, — and then appeared in a 
human form, as far as the darkness of the 
night would permit its shape to be dis- 
tinguishable. It came on — its steps were 
more and more audible, and its shape al- 
most distinct. — Then Melmoth suddenly 



40 MELMOTH : 

quitted Isidora, who, shivering with ter- 
ror, but unable to utter a word that might 
implore him to stay, stood alone, her whole 
frame trembling almost to dissolution, and 
her feet feeling as if she were nailed to the 
spot where she stood. What passed she 
knew not. There was a short and dark- 
ened struggle between two figures, — and, 
in this fearful interval, she imagined she 
heard the voice of an ancient domestic, 
much attached to her, call on her, first in 
accents of expostulation and appeal, then 
in choaked and breathless cries for help — 
help — help ! — Then she heard a sound as if 
a heavy body fell into the water that 
murmured below. — It fell heavily — the 
wave groaned— the dark hill groaned in 
answer, like murderers exchanging their 
stilled and midnight whispers over their 
work of blood—and all was silent. Isi- 
dora clasped her cold and convulsed fin- 
gers over her eyes-, till a whispering voice, 
the voice of Melmoth, uttered, " Let us 
hasten on, my love." — " Where ?" said Isi- 



A TALE. 



41* 



dora, not knowing the meaning of the 
words she uttered. — " To the ruined mo- 
nastery, my love, — to the hermitage, 
where the holy man, the man of your 
faith, shall unite us." — " Where are the 
steps that pursued us ?" said Isidora, sud- 
denly recovering her recollection. — " They 
will pursue you no more." — " But I saw a 
figure." — " But you will see it no more." 
— " I heard something fall into that stream 
— heavily — like a corse." — " There was a 
stone that fell from the precipice of the 
hill — the waters splashed, and curled, and 
whitened round it for a moment, but they 
have sv;allowed it now, and appear to have 
such a relish for the morsel, that they will 
not be apt to resign it." 

" In silent horror she proceeded, till 
INlelmoth, pointing to a dusky and inde- 
finite mass of what, in the gloom of night, 
bore, according to the eye or the fancy, 
the shape of a rock, a tuft of trees, or a 
massive and unlighted building, whisper- 
ed, " There is the ruin, and near it stands 



42 MELMOTH : 

the hermitage, — one moment more of ef- 
fort,— of renewed strength and courage, 
and we are there." Urged by these words, 
and still more by an iindefinable wish to 
put an end to this shadowy journey, — these 
mysterious fears,— even at the risk of find- 
ing them worse than verified at its termi- 
nation, Isidora exerted all her remaining 
strength^ and, supported by Melmoth, be- 
gan to ascend the sloping ground on which 
the monastery had once stood. There had 
been a path, but it was now all obstructed 
by stones, and rugged with the knotted and 
interlaced roots of the neglected trees that 
had once formed its shelter and its grace. 
As they approached, in spite of the 
darkness of the night, the ruin began to 
assume a distinct and characteristic ap- 
pearance, and Isidora's heart beat less fear- 
fully, when she could ascertain, from the 
remains of the tower and spire, the vast 
Eastern window, and the crosses still visi- 
ble on every ruined pinnacle and pedi- 
ment, like religion triumphant amid grief 



A TALE. 48 

and decay, that this had been a building 
destined for sacred purposes. A narrow 
path, that seemed to wind round the edi- 
fice, conducted them to a front which over- 
looked an extensive cemetery, at the ex- 
tremity of which Melmoth pointed out to 
her an indistinct object, which he said was 
the hermitage, and to which he would has- 
ten to intreat the hermit, w^ho was also a 
priest, to unite them. " May 1 not ac- 
company you ?** said Isidora, glancing 
round on the graves that were to be her 
companions in solitude. — " It is against 
his vow," said IMelmoth, " to admit a fe- 
male into his presence, except when ob- 
liged by the course of his duties." So 
saying he hasted away, and Isidora, sink- 
ing on a grave for rest, wrapt her veil 
around her, as if its folds could exclude 
even thought. In a few moments, gasp- 
ing for air, she withdrew it ; but as her 
eye encountered only tomb-stones and 
crosses, and that dark and sepulchral ve- 
getation that loves to shoot its roots, and 



44 ]yiELMOTH: 

trail its unlovely verdure amid the joints 
of grave-stones, she closed it again, and 
sat shuddering and alone. Suddenly 
a faint sound, like the murmur of a 
breeze, reached her, — she looked up, but 
the wind had sunk, and the night was • 
perfectly calm. The same sound recur- 
ring, as of a breeze sweeping past, made 
her turn her eyes in the direction from* 
which it came, and, at some distance from 
her, she thought she beheld a human fi- 
gure moving slowly along on the verge 
of the inclosure of the burial-ground. 
Though it did not seem approaching 
her, (but rather moving in a slow cir- 
cuit on the verge of her view), con- 
ceiving it must be Melmoth, she rose 
in expectation of his advancing to her, 
and, at this moment, the figure, turning 
and half-pausing, seemed to extend its 
arm toward her, and wave it once or twice, 
but whether with a motion or purpose of 
warning or repelling her, it was impossible 
to discover, — it then renewed its dim and 
silent progress, and the next moment the 



A Tale. 45 

ruins hid it from her view. She had no 
time to muse on this singular appearance^ 
for Melmoth was now at her side urging 
her to proceed. There w^as a chapel, he 
told her, attached to the ruins, but not 
like them in decay, where sacred cere- 
monies were still performed, and where 
the priest had promised to join them in a 
few moments. " He is there before us," 
said Isidora, adverting to the figure she 
had seen; " I think I saw him." — 
" Saw whom?" said Melmoth, starting, 
and standing immoveable till his question 
was answered. — " I saw a figure," said 
Isidora, trembling — " I thought I saw a 
figure moving towards the ruin." — " You 
are mistaken," said Melmoth ; but a mo- 
ment after he added, " We ought to have 
been there before him." And he hurried 
on with Isidora. Suddenly slackening his 
speed, he demanded, in a choaked and in- 
distinct voice, if she had ever heard any 
music precede his visits to her, — any 
sounds in the air. " Never,*' was the an- 



46 MELMOTH : 

swer. — " You are sure ?"— " Perfectly 
sure." 

" At this moment they were ascending 
the fractured and rugged steps that led to 
the entrance of the chapel, — now they 
passed under the dark and ivied porch, — 
now they entered the chapel, which, even 
in darkness, appeared to the eyes of Isi- 
dora ruinous and deserted. " He has not 
yet arrived," said ^Melmoth, in a disturbed 
voice; " Wait there a moment." And 
Isidora, enfeebled by terror beyond the 
power of resistance, or even intreaty, saw 
him depart without an effort to detain 
him. She felt as if the effort would be 
hopeless. Left thus alone, she glanced 
her eyes around, and a faint and watery 
moon-beam breaking at that moment 
through the heavy clouds, threw its light 
on the objects around her. There was a 
window, but the stained glass of its com- 
partments, broken and discoloured, held 
rare and precarious place between the flut- 
ed shafts of stone. Ivy and moss darken- 



A TALE. 47 

ed the fragments of glass, and clung round 
the clustered pillars. Beneath were the 
remains of an altar and crucifix, but they 
seemed like the rude work of the first 
hands that had ever been employed on 
such subjects. There was also a marble 
vessel, that seemed designed to contain 
holy water, but it was empty, — and there 
was a stone bench, on which Isidora sunk 
down in weariness, but without hope of 
rest. Once or twice she looked up to the 
window, through which the moon-beams 
fell, with that instinctive feeling of her 
former existence, that made companions 
of the elements, and of the beautiful and 
glorious family of heaven, under whose 
burning light she had once imagined the 
moon was her parent, and the stars her 
kindred. She gazed on the window still, 
like one who loved the light of nature, and 
drank health and truth from its beams, 
till a figure passing slowly but visibly be- 
fore the pillared shafts, disclosed to her 
view the face of that ancient servant, 



48 MELMOTH : 

whose features she remembered well. He 
seemed to regard her with a look, first of 
intent contemplation, — then of compassion, 
— the figure then passed from before the 
ruined window, and a faint and wailing 
cry rung in the ears of Isidora as it disap- 
peared. 

" At that moment the moon, that had 
so faintly lit the chapel, sunk behind a 
cloud, and every thing was enveloped in 
darknesss so profound, that Isidora did 
not recognize the figure of Melmoth till 
her hand was clasped in his, and his voice 
whispered, " He is here — ready to unite 
us." The long-protracted terrors of this 
bridal left her not a breath to utter a word 
withal, and she leaned on the arm that 
she felt, not in confidence, but for sup- 
port. The place, the hour, the objects, 
all were hid in darkness. She heard a 
faint rustling as of the approach of ano- 
ther person, — she tried to catch certain 
words, but she knew not what they were, — 
she attempted also to speak, but she knew 



A TALE. 49 

nor what she said. All was mist and dark- 
ness with her, — she knew not what was 
muttered, — she felt not that the hand of 
Melmoth grasped hers, — but she felt that 
the hand that united them, and clasped 
their palms within his own, was as cold 
as that of death. 



VOL, IV. 



CHAPTER XXIIL 



Homer. 



Ill E have now to retrace a short period 
of our narrative to the night on which Don 
Francisco di Aliaga, the father of Isidore, 
" fortuned," as he termed it, to be among 
the company whose conversation had pro- 
duced so extraordinary an effect on him. 

" He was journeying homewards, full of 
the contemplation of his wea'th, — the cer- 
tainty of having attained complete security 
against the evils that harass life, — and being 



A TALE. 51 

able to set at defiance all external causes of 
infelicity. He felt like a man " at ease in 
his possessions," — and he felt also a grave 
and placid satisfaction at the thought of 
meeting a family who looked up to him 
with profound respect as the author of 
their fortunes, — of walking in his own 
house, amid bowing domestics and obse- 
quious relatives, with the same slow au- 
thoritative step with which he paced the 
mart among wealthy merchants, and saw 
the wealthiest bow as he approached, — and 
when he had passed, point out the man of 
whose grave salute they were proud, and 
whisper. That is Aliaga the rich. — So 
thinking and feeling, as most prosperous 
men do, with an honest pride in their 
worldly success, — an exaggerated expecta- 
tion of the homage of society, — (which 
they often find frustrated by its contempt), 
— and an ultimate reliance on the respect 
and devotion of their family whom they 
have enriched, making them ample amends 
for the slights they may be exposed to 



UBRARV 

UNiVERsmroFfumoo 



52 MELMOTHr 

where their wealth is unknown, and their 
newly assumed consequence unappreciated^ 
— or if appreciated, not valued ; — So think- 
ing and feeling, Don Francisco journeyed 
homeward. 

'' At a wretched inn where he was 
compelled to halt, he found the accommo- 
dation so bad, and the heat of the weather 
so intolerable in the low, narrow, and un- 
windowed rooms, that he preferred taking 
his supper in the open air, on a stone 
bench at the door of the inn. We cannot 
say that he there imagined himself to be 
feasted with trout and white bread, Hke Don 
Quixote, — and still less that he fancied he 
was ministered unto by damsels of rank ; — - 
on the contrary, Don Francisco was di- 
gesting a sorry meal with wretched wine, 
with a perfect internal consciousness of the 
mediocrity of both, when he beheld a person 
ride by, who paused, and looked as if he was 
inclined to stop at the inn. (The interval 
of this pause was not long enough to permit 
Don Francisco to observe particularly the 



A TALE. 53 

figure or face of the horseman, or indeed 
to recognize him on any future occasion 
of meeting ; nor was there any thing re- 
markable in his appearance to invite or ar- 
rest observation,) He made a sign to the 
host, who approached him with a slow 
and unwilling pace, — appeared to answer 
all his inquiries with sturdy negatives, — 
and finally, as the stranger rode on, re- 
turned to his station, crossing himself with 
every mark of terror and deprecation. 

" There was something more in this 
than the ordinary surliness of a Spanish 
innkeeper. Don Francisco's curiosity was 
excited, and he asked the innkeeper, whe- 
ther the stranger had proposed to pass the 
night at the inn, as the weather seemed to 
threaten a storm? " I know not what 
he proposes," answered the man, " but 
this I know, that I would not suffer him 
to pass an hour under my roof for the re- 
venues of Toledo. If there be a storm 
coming on, I care not — those who can 
raise them are the fittest to meet them !" 



54 MELMOTH : 

" Don Francisco inquired the cause of 
these extraordinary expressions of aversion 
and terror, but the innkeeper shook his 
head and remained silent, with, as it were, 
the circumspective fear of one who is in- 
closed within a sorcerer's circle, and dreads 
to pass its verge, lest he become the prey of 
the spirits who are waiting beyond it to 
take advantage of his transgression. 

" At last, at Don Francisco's repeated 
instances, he said, " Your worship must 
needs be a stranger in this part of Spain 
not to have heard of Melmoth the wan- 
derer." — " I have never heard of the name 
before," said Don Francisco ; " and I con- 
jure you, brother, to tell me what you 
know of this person, whose character, if I 
may judge by the manner in which you 
speak of him, must have in it something 
extraordinary." — " Senhor," answered the 
man, " were I to relate what is told of 
that person, I should not be able to close 
an eye to-night ; or if I did, it would be 
to dream of things so horrible, that I had 



A TALi:. 55 

rather lie awake for ever. But, if I am 
not mistaken, there is in the house one 
who can gratify your curiosity — it is a 
gentleman who is preparing for the press 
a collection of facts relative to that person, 
and who has been, for some time, in vain 
soliciting for a license to print them, they 
being such as the government, in its wis- 
dom, thinks not . fit to be perused by the 
eyes of Catholics, or circulated among a 
Christian community." 

" As the innkeeper spoke, and spoke with 
an earnestness that at least made the hearer 
believe he felt the conviction he tried to 
impress, the person of whom he spoke was 
standing beside Don Francisco. He had 
apparently overheard their conversation, 
and seemed not indisposed to continue it. 
He was a man of a grave and composed 
aspect, and altogether so remote from any 
appearance of imposition, or theatrical and 
conjuror-like display, that Don Francisco, 
grave, suspicious, and deliberate as a Spa- 
niard, and moreover a Spanish merchant, 



56 MELMOTH : 

may be, could not aviod giving him his 
confidence at sight, though he forbore 
any external expression of it. 

" Senhor," said the stranger, " mine 
host has told you but the truth. The 
person whom you saw ride by, is one of 
those beings after whom human curiosity 
pants in vain, — whose life is doomed to be 
recorded in incredible legends that moulder 
in the libraries of the curious, and to be 
disbelieved and scorned even by those who 
exhaust sums on their collection, and un- 
gratefully depreciate the contents of the 
volumes on whose aggregate its value de- 
pends. There has been, however, I believe, 
no other instance of a person still alive, 
and apparently exercising all the functions 
of a human agent, who has become already 
the subject of written memoirs, and the 
theme of traditional history. Several cir- 
cumstances relating to this extraordinary 
being are even now in the hands of curious 
and eager collectors ; and I have myself 
attained to the knowledge of one or two 



A TALE. 57 

that are not among the least extraordinar)-. 
The marvellous period of life said to be 
assigned him, and the facility with which 
he has been observed to pass from region 
to region, (knowing all, and known to 
none), have been the principal causes why 
the adventures in which he is engaged, 
should be at once so numerous and so si- 
milar." 

" As the stranger ceased to speak, the 
evening grew dark, and a few large and 
heavy drops of rain fell. " This night 
threatens a storm," said the stranger, look- 
ing abroad with some degree of anxiety — 
" we had better retire within doors ; and 
if you, Senhor, are not otherwise occupied, 
I am willing to pass away some hours of 
this unpleasant night in relating to you 
some circumstances relating to the w^an- 
derer, which have come within my certain 
knowledge. 

" Don Francisco assented to this pro- 
posal as much from curiosity, as from the 
impatience of solitude, which is never 

c 2 



58 MELMOTH : 

more insupportable than in an inn, and 
during stormy weather. Don Montilla, 
too, had left him on a visit to his father, 
who was in a decHning state, and was not 
to join him again till his arrival in the 
neighbourhood of Madrid. He therefore 
bid his servants shew the way to his a- 
partment, whither he courteously invited 
his new acquaintance. 

" Imagine them now seated in the 
wretched upper apartment of a Spanish 
inn, whose appearance, though dreary and 
comfortless, had in it, nevertheless, some- 
thing picturesque, and not inappropriate, 
as the scene where a wild and wondrous 
tale was to be related and listened to. 
There was no luxury of inventive art to 
flatter the senses, or enervate the atten- 
tion, — to enable the hearer to break the 
spell that binds him to the world of hor- 
rors, and recover to all the soothing reali- 
ties and comforts of ordinary life, like one 
who starts from a dream of the rack, and 
finds himself waking on a bed of down. 



A TALK. 59 

The walls were bare, and the roofs were 
raftered, and the only furniture was a ta- 
ble, beside which Don Francisco and his 
companion sat, the one on a huge high- 
backed chair, the other on a stool so low, 
that he seemed seated at the listener's foot. 
A lamp stood on the table, whose light 
flickering in the wind, that sighed through 
many apertures of the jarring door, fell al- 
ternately on lips that quivered as they 
read, and cheeks that grew paler as the 
listener bent to catch the sounds to which 
fear gave a more broken and hollow tone, 
at the close of every page. The rising 
voice of the stormy night seemed to make 
wild and dreary harmony with the tones 
of the listener's feelings. The storm came 
on, not with sudden violence, but with 
sullen and long-suspended wrath — often 
receding, as it were, to the verge of the 
horizon, and then returning and rolling its 
deepening and awful peals over the very 
roof And as the stranger proceeded in 
his narrative, every pause, which emotion 



60 MELMOTH : 

or weariness might cause, was meetly fill- 
ed by the deep rushing of the rain that fell 
in torrents, — the sighs of the wind, — and 
now and then a faint, distant, but long- 
continued peal of thunder. " It sounds," 
said the stranger, raising his eyes from the 
manuscript, " like the chidings of the 
spirits, that their secrets are disclosed !" 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



And the twain were playing dice. 

****** 

The game is done, I've won, I've won. 
Quoth she, and whistled thrice. 

Coleridge— i?/jj/7rte of the Ancient Mariner, 



W^t Cale of iSujman'e dfamili)* 

xJf what I am about to read to you," 
said the stranger, " I have witnessed part 
myself, and the remainder is established 
on a basis as strong as human evidence 
can make it. 



62 MELMOTH : 

" In the city of Seville, where I lived 
many years, I knew a wealthy merchant, 
far advanced in years, who was known by 
the name of Guzman the rich. He was 
of obscure birth, — and those who honoured 
his wealth sufficiently to borrow from him 
frequently, never honoured his name so 
far as to prefix Don to it, or to add his 
surname, of which, indeed, most were ig- 
norant, and among the number, it is said, 
the wealthy merchant himself. He was 
well respected, however ; and when Guz- 
man was seen, as regularly as the bell toll- 
ed for vespers, to issue from the narrow 
door of his house, — lock it carefully, — 
view it twice or thrice with a wistful eye, 
— then deposit the key in his bosom, and 
move slowly to church, feeling for the key 
in his vest the whole way, — the proudest 
heads in Seville were uncovered ac he 
passed, — and the children who were play- 
ing in the streets, desisted from their 
sports till he had halted by them. 

" Guzman had neither wife or child,— 



A TALE. 63 

relative or friend. An old female domes- 
tic constituted his whole household, and his 
personal expences were calculated on a 
scale of the most pinching frugality; it 
was therefore matter of anxious conjec- 
ture to many, how his enormous wealth 
would be bestowed after his death. This 
anxiety gave rise to inquiries about the 
possibility of Guzman having relatives, 
though in remoteness and obscurity ; and 
the diligence of inquiry, when stimulated 
at once by avarice and curiosity, is indefa- 
tigable. Thus it was at length discovered 
that Guzman had formerly a sister, many 
years younger than himself, who, at a very 
early age, had married a German musi- 
cian, a Protestant, and had shortly after 
quitted Spain. It was remembered, or re- 
ported, that she had made many efforts to 
soften the heart and open the hand of her 
brother, who was even then very wealthy, 
and to induce him to be reconciled to their 
union, and to enable her and her husband 
to remain in Spain. Guzman was inflexi- 



64j melmoth : 

ble. Wealthy, and proud of his wealth 
as he was, he might have digested the un- 
palatable morsel of her union with a poor 
man, whom he could have made rich ; but 
he could not even swallow the intelli- 
gence that she had married a Protestant. 
Ines, for that was her name, and her hus- 
band, went to Germany, partly in de- 
pendence on his musical talents, which 
were highly appreciated in that coun- 
try, — partly in the vague hope of emi- 
grants, that change of place will be attend- 
ed with change of circumstances, — and 
partly, also, from the feeling, that misfor- 
tune is better tolerated any where than in 
the presence of those who inflict it. Such 
was the tale told by the old, who affected 
to remember the facts, — and believed by 
the young, whose imagination supplied all 
the defects of memory, and pictured to 
them an interesting beauty, with her chil- 
dren hanging about her, embarking, with 
a heretic husband, for a distant country. 



A TALE. 65 

and sadly bidding farewell to the land and 
the religion of her fathers. 

" Now, while these things were talked 
of at Seville, Guzman fell sick, and was 
given over by the physicians, whom with 
considerable reluctance he had suffered to 
be called in. 

" In the progress of his illness, whether 
nature revisited a heart she long appeared 
to have deserted, — or whether he conceiv- 
ed that the hand of a relative might be a 
more grateful support to his dying head 
than that of a rapacious and mercenary 
menial, — or whether his resentful feelings 
burnt faintly at the expected approach of 
death, as artificial fires wax dim at the ap- 
pearance of morning ; — so it was, that Guz- 
man in his illness bethought himself of his 
sister and her family, — sent off, at a consi- 
derable expence, an express to that part of 
Germany where she resided, to invite her 
to return and be reconciled to him, — and 
prayed devoutly that he might be permit- 
ted to survive till he could breathe his last 



66 MELMOTH : 

amid the arms of her and her children. 
Moreover, there was a report at this time, 
in which the hearers probably took more 
interest than in any thing that related 
merely to the life or death of Guzman, — 
and this was, that he had rescinded his 
former will, and sent for a notary, with 
whom, in spite of his apparent debility, he 
remained locked up for some hours, dicta- 
ting in a tone which, however clear to the 
notary, did not leave one distinct impres- 
sion of sound on the ears that were strain- 
ed, even to an agony of listening, at the 
double-locked door of his chamber. 

" All Guzman's friends had endeavour- 
ed to dissuade him from making this ex- 
ertion, which, they assured him, would 
only hasten his dissolution. But to their 
surprise, and doubtless their delight, from 
the moment his will was made, Guzman's 
health began to amend, — and in less than 
a week he began to walk about his cham^ 
ber, and calculate what time it might take 
an express to reach Germany, and how 



A TALE. 67 

soon he might expect intelligence from his 
family. 

" Some months had passed away, and 
the priests took advantage of the interval 
to get about Guzman. But after exhaust- 
ing every effort of ingenuity, — after ply- 
ing him powerfully but unavailingly on 
the side of conscience, of duty, of fear, and 
of religion, — they began to understand 
their interest, and change their battery. 
And finding that the settled purpose of 
Guzman's soul was not to be changed, and 
that he was determined on recalling his 
sister and her family to Spain, they con- 
tented themselves with requiring that he 
should have no communication with the, 
heretic family, except through them, — and 
never see his sister or her children unless 
they were witnesses to the interview. 

" This condition w^as easily complied 
with, for Guzman felt no decided inclina- 
tion for seeing his sister, whose presence 
might have reminded him of feelings alie- 
nated, and duties forgot. Besides, he was 



68 melmoth: 

a man of fixed habits ; and the presence of 
the most interesting being on earth, that 
threatened the sHghtest interruption or 
suspension of those habits, would have 
been to him insupportable. 

" Thus we are all indurated by age and 
habit,— and feel ultimately, that the dear- 
est connexions of nature or passion may 
be sacrificed to those petty indulgences 
which the presence or influence of a stran- 
ger may disturb. So Guzman compro- 
mised between 1 is conscience and his feel- 
ings. He determined, in spite of all the 
priests in Seville, to invite his sister and 
her family to Spain, and to leave the mass 
of his immense fortune to them ; (and to 
that effect he wrote, and wrote repeatedly 
and explicitly). But, on the other hand, 
he promised and swore to his spiritual 
counsellors, that he never would see one 
individual of the family ; and that, though 
his sister nr'ght inherit his fortune, she 
never — never should see his face. The 
priests were satisfied, or appeared to be so^ 



A TALE. 69 

\vith this declaration; and Guzman, having 
propitiated them with ample offerings to 
the shrines of various saints, to each of 
whom his recovery was exclusively attri- 
buted, sat down to calculate the probable 
expence of his sister's return to Spain, and 
the necessity of providing for her family, 
whom he had, as it were, rooted from 
their native bed ; and therefore felt bound, 
in all honesty, to make them flourish in 
the soil into which he had transplanted 
them. 

" Within the year, his sister, her hus- 
band, and four children, returned to Spain. 
Her name was Ines, her husband's was 
Walberg. He was an industrious man, 
.and an excellent musician. His talents 
had obtained for him the place of 3faestro 
di Capella to the Duke of Saxony; and 
his children were educated (according to 
his means) to supply his place when va- 
cated by death or accident, or to employ 
themselves as musical teachers in the 
courts of German princes. He and his 



70 MELMOTH : 

wife had lived with the utmost frugality, 
and looked to their children for the means 
of increasing, by the exercise of their ta- 
lents, that subsistence which it was their 
daily labour to provide. 

" The eldest son, who was called Ever- 
hard, inherited his father's musical talents. 
The daughters, Julia and Ines, were musi- 
cal also, and very skilful in embroidery. 
The youngest child, Maurice, was by turns 
the delight and the torment of the family. 

*' They had struggled on for many years 
in difficulties too petty to be made the sub- 
ject of detail, yet too severe not to be pain- 
fully felt by those whose lot is to encoun- 
ter them every day, and every hour of 
the day, — when the sudden intelligence, 
brought by an express from Spain, of their 
wealthy relative Guzman inviting them 
to return thither, and proclaiming them 
heirs to all his vast riches, burst on them 
like the first dawn of his half-year's summer 
on the crouching and squalid inmate of a 
Lapland hut. All trouble was foi^ot,— 



A TALE. 71 

all cares postponed, — their few debts paid 
off, — and their preparations made for an 
instant departure to Spain. 

" So to Spain they went, and journeyed 
on to the city of Seville, where, on their 
arrival, they were waited on by a grave 
ecclesiastic, who acquainted them with 
Guzman's resolution of never seeing his 
offending sister or her family, while at the 
same time he assured them of his inten- 
tion of supporting and supplying them 
with every comfort, till his decease put 
them in possession of his wealth. The 
family were somewhat disturbed at this 
intelligence, and the mother wept at being 
denied the sight of her brother, for whom 
she still cherished the affection of memo- 
ry ; while the priest, by way of softening 
the discharge of his commission, dropt 
some words of a change of their heretical 
opinions being most likely to open a chan- 
nel of communication between them and 
their relative. The silence with which 



72 MELMOTH : 

this hint was received spoke more than 
many words, and the priest departed. 

" This was the first cloud that had in- 
tercepted their view of felicity since the 
express arrived in Germany, and they sat 
gloomily enough under its shadow for the 
remainder of the evening. Walberg, in 
the confidence of expected wealth, had 
not only K »ught over his children to 
Spain, but had written to his father and 
mother, who were very old, and wretched- 
ly poor, to join him in Seville ; and by 
the sale of his house and furniture, had 
been enabled to remit them money for the 
heavy expences of so long a journey. 
They were now hourly expected, and the 
children, who had a faint but grateful re- 
collection of the blessing bestowed on their 
infant heads by quivering lips an\i wither- 
ed hands, looked out with joy for the arri- 
val of the ancient pair. Ines had often 
said to her husband, " Would it not be 
better to let your father and mother re- 
main in Germany, and remit them money 



A TALE. 73 

for their support, than put them to the fa- 
tigue of so long a journey at their far ad- 
vanced age ?" — And he had always an- 
swered, " Let them rather die under my 
roof, than live under that of strangers." 

This night he perhaps began to feel the 
prudence of his wife's advice ; — she saw 
it, and with cautious gentleness forbore, 
for that very reason, to remind him of it. 

The wxather was gloomy and cold that 
evening, — it was unlike a night in Spain. 
Its chill appeared to extend to the party. 
Ines sat and worked in silence — the chil- 
dren, collected at the window, communi- 
cated in whispers their hopes and conjec- 
tures about the arrival of the aged tra- 
vellers, and Walberg, who was restlessly 
traversing the room, sometimes sighed as 
he overheard them. 

" The next day was sunny and cloud- 
less. The priest again called on them, 
and, after regretting that Guzman's reso- 
lution was inflexible, informed them, that 
he was directed to pay them an annual 

VOL. IV. D 



74 MELMOTH : 

sum for their support, which he named, 
and which appeared to them enormous ; 
and to appropriate another for the educa- 
tion of the children, which seemed to be 
calculated on a scale of princely munifi- 
cence. He put deeds, properly drawn and 
attested for this purpose, into their hands, 
and then withdrew, after repeating the 
assurance, that they would be the un- 
doubted heirs of Guzman's wealth at his 
decease, and that, as the interval would be 
passed in affluence, it might well be pass- 
ed without repining. The priest had 
scarcely retired, when the aged parents of 
Walberg arrived, feeble from joy and fa- 
tigue, but not exhausted, and the whole 
family sat down to a meal that appeared 
to them luxurious, in that placid contem- 
plation of future felicity, which is often 
more exquisite than its actual enjoyment. 
«* I saw them," said the stranger, inter- 
rupting himself, — " I saw them on the 
evening of that day of union, and a paint- 
er, who wished to embody the image of 



A TALE. 75 

domestic felicity in a group of living fi- 
gures, need have gone no further than the 
mansion of Walberg. He and his wife 
were seated at the head of the table, smil- 
ing on their children, and seeing them smile 
in return, without the intervention of one 
anxious thought, — one present harassing of 
petty difficulty, or heavy presage of future 
mischance, — one fear of the morrow, or ach- 
ing remembrance of the past. Their chil- 
dren formed indeed a groupe on which the 
eye of painter or of parent, the gaze of taste 
or of affection, might have hung with equal 
delight. Everhard their eldest son, now 
sixteen, possessed too much beauty for his 
sex, and his delicate and brilliant com- 
plexion, his slender and exquisitely mould- 
ed form, and the modulation of his tender 
and tremulous voice, inspired that mingled 
interest, with which we watch, in youth, 
over the strife of present debility with the 
promise of future strength, and infused in- 
to his parent's hearts that fond anxiety 
with which we mark the progress of a 



76 MELMOTH : 

mild but cloudy morning in spring, rejoic- 
ing in the mild and balmy glories of its 
dawn, but fearing lest clouds may over- 
shade them before noon. The daughters, 
Ines and Julia, had all the loveliness of 
their colder climate — the luxuriant ringlets 
of golden hair, the large bright blue eyes, 
the snow-like whiteness of their bosoms; 
and slender arms, and the rose-leaf tint 
and peachiness of their delicate cheeks, 
made them, as they attended their pa- 
rents with graceful and fond officious- 
ness, resemble two young Hebes mi- 
nistering cups, w^hich their touch alone 
"was enough to turn into nectar. 

" The spirits of these young persons had 
been early depressed by the difficulties in 
which their parents were involved ; and 
even in childhood they had acquired the 
timid tread, the whispered tone, the 
anxious and inquiring look, that the con- 
stant sense of domestic distress painfully 
teaches even to children, and which it is 
the most exquisite pain to a parent to wit- 



A TALE. 77 

ncss. But now there was nothing to re- 
strain their young hearts, — that stranger, 
a smiley fled back rejoicing to the lovely 
home of their lips, — and the timidity of 
their former habits only lent a grateful 
shade to the brilliant exuberance of youth- 
ful happiness. Just opposite this picture, 
whose hues were so bright, and whose 
shades were so tender, were seated the fi- 
gures of the aged grandfather and grandmo- 
ther. The contrast was very strong ; there 
was no connecting link, no graduated medi- 
um, — you passed at once from the first and 
fairest flowers of spring, to the withered 
and rootless barrenness of winter. 

" These very aged persons, however, 
had something in their looks to soothe the 
eye, and Teniers or Wouverman would 
perhaps have valued their figures and cos- 
tume far beyond those of their young and 
lovely grandchildren. They were stiffly 
and quaintly habited in their German' 
garb — the old man in his doublet and cap, 
and the old woman in her ruff, stomacher. 



78 MELMOTH : 

and head-gear resembling a skull-cap, with 
long depending pinners, through which a 
few -white, but very long hairs, appeared 
on her wrinkied cheeks ; but on the coun- 
tenances of both there was a gleam of joy, 
like the cold smile of a setting sun on a 
wintry landscape. They did not distinctly 
hear the kind importunities of their son 
and daughter, to partake more amply of 
the most plentiful meal they had ever wit- 
nessed in their frugal lives, — but they 
bowed and smiled with that thankfulness 
which is at once wounding and grateful 
to the hearts of affectionate children. 
They smiled also at the beauty of Ever- 
hard" and their elder grandchildren, — at 
the wild pranks of Maurice, who was as 
wild in the hour of trouble as in the hour 
of prosperity ; — and finally, they smiled at 
all that was said, though they did not hear 
half of it, and at all they saw, though they 
could enjoy very little — and that smile of 
age, that placid submission to the pleasures 
of the young, mingled with undoubted 



A TALE, 79 

anticipations of a more pure and perfect fe- 
licity, gave an almost heavenly expression 
to features, that would otherwise have 
borne only the withering look of debility 
and decay. 

" Some circumstances occurred during 
this family feast, which were sufficiently 
characteristic of the partakers. Walberg 
(himself a very temperate man) pressed 
his father repeatedly to take more wine 
than he was accustomed to,-7-the old man 
gently declined it. The son still pressed 
it heartfully, and the old man complied 
with a wish to gratify his son, not himself. 

" The younger children, too, caressed 
their grandmother with the boisterous 
fondness of children. Their mother re- 
proached them. — " Nay, let be," said the 
gentle old woman. " They trouble you, 
mother," said the wife of AValberg. — 
" They cannot trouble me long," said the 
grandmother, with an emphatic smile. 
" Father," said Walberg, is not Everhard 
grown very tall ?" — " The last time I saw 



80 MELMOTH : 

him," said the grandfather, " I stooped to 
kiss him ; now I think he must stoop to 
kiss me." And, at the word, Everhard 
darted like an arrow into the trembling 
arms that were opened to receive him, and 
his red and hairless lips w^ere pressed to the 
snowy beard of his grandfather. " Cling 
there, my child," said the exulting father. 
— " God grant your kiss may never be ap- 
plied to lips less pure." — " They never shall, 
my father !" said the susceptible boy, blush- 
ing at his own emotions — '' I never wish 
to press any lips but those that wdll bless 
me like those of my grandfather." — — 
" And do you wish," said the old man jo- 
cularly, " that the blessing should always 
issue from lips as rough and hoary as 
mine?" Everhard stood blushing behind 
the old man's chair at this question, and 
Walberg, who heard the clock strike the 
hour at which he had been alw^ays accus- 
tomed, in prosperity or adversity, to sum- 
mon his family to prayer, made a signal 
which his children well understood, and 



A TALE. 81 

which was communicated in whispers to 
their aged relatives. — *' Thank God," said 
the aged grandmother to the young whis- 
perer, and as she spoke, she sunk on her 
knees. Her grandchildren assisted her. 
" Thank God," echoed the old man, bend- 
ing his stiffened knees, and doffing his cap 
— ** Thank God for this ' shadow of a great 
rock in a weary land !' " — and he knelt, 
while Walberg, after reading a chapter or 
two from a German Bible which he held 
in his hands, pronounced an extempore 
prayer, imploring God to fill their hearts 
with gratitude for the temporal blessings 
they enjoyed, and to enable them " so to 
pass through things temporal, that they 
might not finally lose the things eternal.'' 
At the close of the prayer, the family rose 
and saluted each other with that affection 
which has not its root in earth, and whose 
blossoms, however diminutive and colour- 
less to the eye of man in this wretched 
soil, shall yet bear glorious fruit in the 
garden of God. It was a lovely sight to 

d2 



82 MELMOTH : 

behold the young people assisting their 
aged relatives to arise from their knees, — 
and it was a lovelier hearing, to listen to the 
happy good-nights exchanged among the 
parting family. The wife of Walberg was 
most assiduous in preparing the comforts 
of her husband's parents, and Walberg 
yielded to her with that proud gratitude, 
that feels more exaltation in a benefit con- 
ferred by those we love, than if we con- 
ferred it ourselves. He loved his parents, 
but he was proud of his wife loving them 
because they were his. To the repeated 
offers of his children to assist or attend 
their ancient relatives, he answered, " No, 
dear children, your mother will do better, 
— your mother always does best." As he 
spoke, his children, according to a custom 
now forgot, kneeled before him to ask 
his blessing. His hand, tremulous with af- 
fection, rested first on the curling locks of 
the darling Everhard, whose head towered 
proudly above those of his kneeling sisters, 
and of JNJaurice, who, with the irrepressible 



A TALE. 83 

and venial levity of joyous childhood, 
laughed as he knelt. " God bless you !" 
said Walberg — " God bless you all, — and 
may he make you as good as your mother, 
and as happy as — your father is this night f 
and as he spoke, the happy father turned 
aside and wept. 



CHAPTER XXV. 



-Quaeque ipsa miserrima vidi^, 



Et quorum pars magna fui. 

Virgil. 



X. HE wife of Walberg, who was na- 
turally of a cool sedate temper, and to 
whom misfortune had taught an anxious 
and jealous prevoyance, was not so intoxi- 
cated with the present prosperity of the 
family, as its young, or even its aged mem- 
bers. Her mind was full of thoughts 
which she would not communicate to her 



A TALE. 85 

husband, and sometimes did not wish to 
acknowledge to herself; but to the priest, 
who visited them frequently with renewed 
marks of Guzman's bounty, she spoke ex- 
plicitly. She said, that however grateful for 
her brother's kindness, for the enjoyment 
of present competence, and the hope of fu- 
ture wealth, she wished that her children 
might be permitted to acquire the means of 
independent subsistence for themselves, 
and that the money destined by Guzman's 
liberality for their ornamental education, 
might be applied to the purpose of ensur- 
ing them the power of supporting them- 
selves, and assisting their parents. She al- 
luded slightly to the possible future change 
in her brother's favourable feelings towards 
her, and dwelt much on the circumstance 
of her children being strangers in the 
country, wholly unacquainted with its lan- 
guage, and averse from its religion ; and 
she mildly but strongly stated the difficul- 
ties to which a heretic family of stran- 
gers might be exposed in a Catholic coun- 



86 MELMOTH : 

try, and implored the priest to employ his 
mediation and influence with her brother, 
that her children might be enabled, through 
his bounty, to acquire the means of inde- 
pendent subsistence, as if^ and she paus- 
ed. The good and friendly priest (for 
he was truly both) listened to her with at- 
tention ; and after satisfying his conscience, 
by adjuring her to renounce her heretical 
opinions, as the only means of obtaining a 
reconciliation with God and her brother, 
and receiving a calm, but firm negative, 
proceeded to give her his best lay advice, 
which was to comply with her brother's 
wishes in every thing, to educate her chil- 
dren in the manner which he prescribed, 
and to the full extent of the means which 
he so amply furnished. He added, eii con- 
fiance^ that Guzman, though, during his 
long life, he had never been suspected of 
any passion but that of accumulating 
money, was now possessed with a spirit 
much harder to expel, and was resolved 
that the heirs of his wealth should be, in 



A TALE. 87 

point of all that might embellish polished 
society, on a level with the descendants of 
the first nobility of Spain. Finally, he 
counselled submission to her brother's 
wishes in all things, — and the wife of 
Walberg complied with tears, which she 
tried to conceal from the priest, and had 
completely effaced the traces of before she 
again met her husband. 

" In the mean time, the plan of Guzman 
was rapidly realized. A handsome house 
was taken for Walberg, — his sons and 
daughters were splendidly arrayed, and 
sumptuously lodged ; and, though educa- 
tion was, and still is, on a very low level 
in Spain, they were taught all that was 
then supposed to qualify them as compa- 
nions for the descendants of Hidalgoes. 
Any attempt, or even allusion to their be- 
ing prepared for the ordinary occupations 
of life, was strictly forbidden by the orders 
of Guzman. The father triumphed in 
this, — the mother regretted it, but she 
kept her regret to herself, and consoled 



88 MELMOTH : 

herself with thinking, that the ornamental 
education her children were receiving 
might ultimately be turned to account ; for 
the wife of Walberg was a woman whom 
the experience of misfortune had taught 
to look to the future with an anxious eye, 
and that eye, with ominous accuracy, had 
seldom failed to detect a speck of evil in 
the brightest beam of sun-shine that had 
ever trembled on her chequered existence. 
" The injunctions of Guzman were obey- 
ed, — the family lived in luxury. The young 
people plunged into their new life of en- 
joyment with an avidity proportioned to 
their youthful sensibility of pleasure, and 
to a taste for refinement and elegant pur- 
suits, which their former obscurity had re- 
pressed, but never extinguished. The 
proud and happy father exulted in the 
personal beauty, and improving talents of 
his children. The anxious mother sighed 
sometimes, but took care the sigh should 
never reach her husband's ear. The aged 
grandfather and grandmother, whose in- 



A TALE. 89 

firmities had been much increased by their 
journey to Spain, and possibly still more 
by that strong emotion which is a habit to 
youth, but a convulsion to age, sat in 
their ample chairs comfortably idle, dozing 
away life in intervals of unuttered though 
conscious satisfaction, and calm but vene- 
rable apathy ; — they slept much, but when 
they awoke, they smiled at their grand- 
children, and at each other. 

" The wife of Walberg, during this in- 
terval, which seemed one of undisturbed 
felicity to all but her, sometimes suggest- 
ed a gentle caution, — a doubtful and 
anxious hint, — a possibility of future dis- 
appointment, but this was soon smiled a- 
way by the rosy, and laughing, and kiss- 
ful lips of her children, till the mother at 
last began to smile at her apprehensions 
herself At times, however, she led them 
anxiously in the direction of their uncle's 
house. She walked up and down the 
street before his door with her children, 
and sometimes lifted up her veil, as if to 



90 MELMOTH : 

try whether her eye could pierce through 
walls as hard as the miser's heart, or win- 
dows barred like his coffers, — then glancing 
on her children's costly dress, while her 
eye darted far into futurity, she sighed and 
returned slowly home. This state of sus- 
pence was soon to be terminated. 

" The priest, Guzman's confessor, visit- 
ed them often ; first in quality of almoner 
or agent of his bounty, which was amply 
and punctually bestowed through his 
hands ; and secondly, in quality of a pro- 
fessed chess-player, at which game he had 
met, even in Spain, no antagonist like 
Walberg. He also felt an interest in the 
family and their fortunes, which, though 
his orthodoxy disowned, his heart could 
not forbear to acknowledge, — so the good 
priest compromised matters by playing 
chess with the father, and praying for the 
conversion of his family on his return to 
Guzman's house. It was while engaged 
in the former exercise, that a message ar- 
rived to summon him on the instant home, 



A TALE. 91 

— the priest left his queen en prise, and 
hurried into the passage to speak with the 
messenger. The family of Walberg, with 
agitation unspeakable, half rose to follow 
him. They paused at the door, and then 
retreated with a mixed feeling of anxiety 
for- the intelligence, and shame at the 
attitude in which they might be discover- 
ed. As they retreated, however, they 
could not help hearing the words of the 
messenger, — " He is at his last gasp, — he 
has sent for you, — you must not lose a mo- 
ment." As the messenger spoke, the 
priest and he departed. 

" The family returned to their apart- 
ment, and for some hours sat in pro- 
found silence, interrupted only by the 
ticking of the clock, which was distinctly 
and solely heard, and which seemed too 
loud to their quickened ears, amid that 
deep stillness on which it broke incessant- 
ly,— or by the echoes of Walberg's hurried 
step, as he started from his chair and tra- 



92 MELMOTH : 

versed the apartment. At this sound 
they turned, as if expecting a messenger, 
then, glancing at the silent figure of Wal- 
berg, sunk on their seats again. The fa- 
mily sat up all that long night of unutter- 
ed, and indeed unutterable emotion. The 
lights burnt low, and were at length ex- 
tinguished, but no one noticed them ; — the 
pale light of the dawn broke feebly into 
the room, but no one observed it was 
morning. " God ! — how long he lingers !" 
exclaimed Walberg involuntarily ; and 
these words, though uttered under his 
breath, made all the listeners start, as at 
the first sounds of a human voice, which 
they had not heard for many hours. 

" At this moment a knock was heard 
at the door, — a step trod slowly along tne 
passage that led to the room, — the door 
opened, and the priest appeared. He ad- 
vanced into the room without speaking, or 
being spoken to. And the contrast of 
strong emotion and unbroken silence, — - 
this conflict of speech that strangled 



A TALE. 9S 

thought in the utterance, and of thought 
that in vain asked aid of speech, — the 
agony and the muteness, — formed a ter- 
rible momentary association. It was but 
momentary, — the priest, as he stood, 
uttered the words — " All is over !" Wal- 
berg clasped his hands over his fore- 
head, and in ecstatic agony exclaimed, — 
" Thank God !" and wildly catching at the 
object nearest him, as if imagining it one 
of his children, he clasped and hugged 
it to his breast. His wife wept for 
a moment at the thought of her brother's 
death, but roused herself for her children's 
sake to hear all that was to be told. The 
Priest could tell no more but that Guz- 
man was dead,— seals had been put on 
every chest, drawer, and coffer in the 
house, — not a cabinet had escaped the dili- 
gence of the persons employed, — and the 
will was to be read the following day. 

" For the following day the family re- 
mained in that intensity of expectation 
that precluded all thought. The servants 



94 MELMOTH : 

prepared the usual meal, but it remained 
untasted. The family pressed each other 
to partake of it ; but as the importunity 
was not enforced by the inviter setting 
any example of the lesson he tried to 
teach, the meal remained untasted. A- 
bout noon a grave person, in the habit of 
a notary, was announced, and summoned 
Walberg to be present at the opening of 
Guzman's will. As A^^alberg prepared to 
obey the summons, one of his children 
officiously offered him his hat, another his 
cloke, both of which he had forgot in tlie 
trepidation of his anxiety ; and these in- 
stances of reminiscence and attention in 
his children, contrasted with his own ab- 
straction, completely overcame him, and 
he sunk down on a seat to recover himself. 
" You had better not go, my love," said 
his wife mildly. " I believe I shall — I 
must take your advice," said Walberg, re- 
lapsing on the seat from which he had half 
risen. The notary, with a formal bow, 
was retiring. " I will go !" said Walberg, 



A TALE. 95 

swearing a German oath, whose guttural 
sound made the notary start, — " I ivill go !" 
and as he spoke he fell on the floor, ex- 
hausted by fatigue and want of refresh- 
ment, and emotion indescribable but to a 
father. The notary retired, and a few 
hours more were exhausted in torturing 
conjecture, expressed on the mother's part 
only by clasped hands and smothered 
sighs, — on the father's by profound silence, 
averted countenance, and hands that seem- 
ed to feel for those of his children, and 
then shrink from the touch, — and on the 
children's by rapidly varying auguries of 
hope and of disappointment. The aged 
pair sat motionless among their family ; — 
they knew not what was going on, but 
they knew if it was good they must par- 
take of it, — and in the perception or ex- 
pectation of the approach of evil, their fa- 
culties had latterly become very obtuse. 

" The day was far advanced, — it was 
noon. The servants, with whom the mu- 
nificence of the deceased had amply sup- 



96 -MELMOth: 

plied their establishment, announced that 
dinner was prepared; and Ines, who re- 
tained more presence of mind than the 
rest, gently suggested to her husband the 
necessity of not betraying their emotions 
to their servants. He obeyed her hint 
mechanically, and walked into the dining- 
hall, forgetting for the first time to offer 
his arm to his infirm father. His family 
followed, but, when seated at the table, they 
seemed not to know for what purpose they 
were collected there. Walberg, consumed 
by that thirst of anxiety which nothing 
seems sufficient to quench, called repeat- 
edly for wine ; and his wife, who found 
even the attempt to eat impossible in the 
presence of the gazing and unmoved at- 
tendants, dismissed them by a signal, but 
did not feel the desire of food restored 
by their absence. The old couple eat as 
usual, and sometimes looked up with an 
expression of vague and vacant wonder, 
and a kind of sluggish reluctance to admit 
the fear or belief of approaching calamity. 



A TALE. 97 

Towards the end of their cheerless meal, 
Walberg was called out ; he returned in a 
few minutes, and there was no appearance 
of change in his countenance. He seated 
himself, and only his wife perceived the 
traces of a wild smile stealing over the 
trembling lines of his face, as he filled a 
large glass of wine, and raised it to his 
lips, pronouncing — " A health to the heirs 
of Guzman." But instead of drinking the 
wine, he dashed the glass to the floor, 
and burying his head in the drapery of the 
table on which he flung himself, he ex- 
claimed, " Not a ducat, — not a ducat, — all 

left to the church ! — Not a ducat !" "^ 

* * v^ * 

" In the ev^ening the priest called, and 
found the family much more composed. 
The certainty of evil had given them a 
kind of courage. Suspence is the only 
evil against which it is impossible to setup 
a defence, — and, like young mariners in 
an untried sea, they almost felt ready to 
welcome the storm, as a relief from the 

VOL. IV. E 



MELMOTH : 

deadly and loathsome sickness of anxiety. 
The honest resentment, and encouraging 
manner of the priest, were a cordial to 
their ears and hearts. He declared his be- 
lief, that nothing but the foulest means 
that might be resorted to by interested and 
bigotted monks, could have extorted such 
a will from the dying man, — his readiness 
to attest, in every court in Spain, the in- 
tentions of the testator (till within a few 
hours of his death) to have bequeathed his 
whole fortune to his family,— -intentiorts 
which he had repeatedly expressed to him 
and others, and to whose effect he had 
seen a former will of no long date, — and, 
finally, gave his strenuous advice to Wal- 
berg to bring the matter to legal arbitra- 
tion, in aid of which he promised his per- 
sonal exertions, his influence with the 
ablest advocates in Seville, and every thing 
— ^but money. 

" The family that night went to bed 
with spirits exalted by hope, and slept in 
peace. One circumstance alone marked a 



A TALE. 99 

change in their feelings and habits. As 
they were retiring, the old man laid his 
tremulous hand on the shoulder of Wal- 
berg, and said mildly, " My son, shall we 
pray before we retire ?" — " Not to-night, 
father," said Walberg, who perhaps fear- 
ed the mention of their heretical worship 
might alienate the friendly priest, or who 
felt the agitation of his heart too great for 
the solemn exercise ; ** Not to-night, I am 
— too happy !" 

The priest was as good as his word, — 
the ablest advocates in Seville undertook 
the cause of Walberg. Proofs of undue 
influence, of imposition, and of terror be- 
ing exercised on the mind of the testator, 
were ingeniously made out by the dili- 
gence and spiritual authority of the priest, 
and skilfully arranged and ably pleaded by 
the advocates. Walberg's spirits rose with 
every hour. The family, at the time of 
Guzman's death, were in possession of a 
considerable sum of money, but this was 
soon expended, together with another sum 



100 MELMOTH : 

which the frugality of Ines had enabled 
her to save, and which she now cheerfully 
produced in aid of her husband's exigen- 
cies, and in confidence of eventual success. 
When all was gone, other resources still 
remained, — the spacious house was dis- 
posed of, the servants dismissed, the fur- 
niture sold (as usual) for about a fourth of 
its value, and, in their new and humble a- 
bode in the suburbs of Seville, Ines and 
her daughters contentedly resumed those 
domestic duties which they had been in 
the habit of performing in their quiet 
home in Germany. Amid these changes, 
the grandfather and grandmother expe- 
rienced none but mere change of place, of 
which they hardly appeared conscious. 
The assiduous attention of Ines to their 
comforts was increased, not diminished, by 
the necessity of being herself the sole 
ministrant to them ; and smiling she plead- 
ed want of appetite, or trifling indisposi- 
tiop, as an excuse for her own and her 
children's meal, while theirs was composed 



A TAI.E. 101 

of every thing that could tempt the taste- 
less palate of age, or that she remembered 
was acceptable to theirs. 

" The cause had now come to a bearing, 
and for the two first davs the advocates 
of Walberg carried all before them. On 
the third the ecclesiastical advocates made 
a firm and vigorous stand. Walberg re- 
turned much dispirited ; — his wife saw it, 
and therefore assumed no airs of cheerful- 
ness, which only increase the irritation of 
misfortune, but she was equable, and 
steadily and tranquilly occupied in domes- 
tic business the whole evening in his 
sight As they were separating for the 
night, by a singular contingency, the old 
man again reminded his son of the for- 
gotten hour of family prayer. " Not to- 
night, father," said Walberg impatiently ; 
"** not to-night ; I am — too unhappy !" — 
" Thus," said the old man, lifting up his 
ivithered hands, and speaking with an 
energy he had not showed for years, — 
'• thus, O my God ! prosperity and adver- 



102 MELMOTH : 

sity alike furnish us with excuses for ne- 
glecting thee !" As he tottered from the 
room,* Walberg declined his head on the 
bosom of his wife, who sat beside him, 
and shed a few bitter tears. And Ines 
whispered to herself, " The sacrifice of 
God is a troubled spirit, — a broken heart 

he will not despise." * • 

* # * * ' 

" The cause had been carried on with a 
spirit and expedition that had no prece- 
dent in the courts of Spain, and the fourth 
day was fixed on for a final hearing and 
termination of the cause. The day dawned, 
and at the dawn of day Walberg arose, and 
walked for some hours before the gates of 
the hall of justice ; and when they were 
opened, he entered, and sat down me- 
chanically on a seat in the vacant hall, with 
the same look of profound attention, and 
anxious interest, that he would have as- 
sumed ha(^the court been seated, and the 
cause about to be decided. After a few 
moment's pause, he sighed, started, and 



A TALE. 103 

appearing to awake from a dream, quitted 
his seat, and walked up and down the 
empty passages till the court was prepared 
to sit. 

" The court met early that day, and the 
cause was powerfully advocated. VVal- 
berg sat on one seat, without ever chang- 
ing his place, till all was over ; and it was 
then late in the evening, and he had taken 
no refreshment the entire day, and he had 
never changed his place, and he had never 
changed the close and corrupted atmo-^ 
sphere of the crowded court for a moment. 
Quid multis morer ? The chance of a he- 
retic stranger, against the interests of 
churchmen in Spain, may be calculated 
by the most shallow capacity. 

" The family had all that day sat in the 
innermost room of their humble dwelling. 
Everhard had wished to accompany his 
father to the court, — his mother withheld 
him. The sisters involuntarily^dropt their 
work from time to time, and their mother 
gently reminded them of the necessity of 



104 MELMOTH; 

renewing it. They did resume it, but 
their hands, at variance with their feelings, 
made such blunders, that their mother, 
^MK^loiv ytxccyuc-oi, removed their work, and 
suggested to them some active employ- 
ment in household affairs. While they 
were thus engaged, evening came on,— the 
family from time to time suspended their 
ordinary occupations, and crowded to the 
window to watch the return of their fa- 
ther. Their mother no longer interfered, 
— she sat in silence, and this silence form- 
ed a strong contrast to the restless impa- 
tience of her children. " That is my fa- 
ther," exclaimed the voices of the four at 
once, as a figure crossed the street. " That 
is not my father," they repeated, as the 
figure slowly retired. A knock was heard 
at the door, — Ines herself rushed forward 
to open it. A figure retreated, advanced 
again, and again retreated. Then it 
seemed to rush past her, and enter the 
house like a shadow. In terror she follow- 
ed it, and with terror unutterable saw 



A TALE* 105 

her husband kneeling among his children, 
who in vain attempted to raise him, while 
he continued to repeat, " No, let me kneel, 
— ^let me kneel, I have undone you all ! 
The cause is lost, and I have made beggars 
of you all !" — " Rise, — rise, dearest father," 
cried the children, gathering round him, 
" nothing is lost, if you are saved !" — 
" Kise, my love, from that horrible and 
unnatural humiliation," cried Ines, grasp- 
ing the arms of her husband ; " help me, 
my children, — father, — mother, will you 
not help me ?" — and as she spoke, the tot- 
tering, helpless, and almost lifeless figures 
of the aged grandfather and grandmother 
arose from their chairs, and staggering for- 
wards, added their feeble strength, — their 
vis impotentice, to sustain or succour the 
weight that dragged heavily on the arms 
of the children and their mother. By this 
sight, more than by any effort, Walberg 
was raised from the posture that agonized 
his family, and placed in a chair, around 
which hung the wife and children, while 

E 2 



106 MELMOTH: 

the aged father and mother, retreating tor- 
pidly to their seats, seemed to lose in a 
few moments the keen consciousness of 
evil that had inspired them for an instant 
with a force almost miraculous. Ines and 
her children hung round Walberg, and 
uttered all of consolation that helpless af- 
fection could suggest ; but perhaps there is 
not a more barbed arrow can be sent 
through the heart, than by the thought 
that the hands that clasp ours so fondly 
cannot earn for us or themselves the means 
of another meal, — that the lips that are 
pressed to ours so warmly, may the next 
ask us for bread, and — ask in vain ! 

" It was perhaps fortunate for this un- 
happy family, that the very extremity of 
their grief rendered its long indulgence im- 
possible, — the voice of necessity made itself 
be heard distinctly and loudly amid all the 
cry and clamour of that hour of agony. 
Something must be done for the morrow, 
— and it was to be done immediately. 
" What money have you ?" was the first 



A TALE. 107 

articulate sentence VValberg uttered to his 
wife ; and when she whispered the small sum 
that the expences of their lost cause had 
left them, he shivered with a brief empha- 
tic spasm of horror, — then bursting from 
their arms, and rising, he crossed the 
room, as if he wished to be alone for a 
moment. As he did so, he saw his young- 
est child playing with the long strings of 
his grandfather's band, — a mode of spor- 
tive teazing in which the urchin delighted, 
and which was at once chid and smiled at. 
Walberg struck the poor child vehement- 
ly, and then catching him in his arms, bid 
him — " Smile as long as he could !" * 

* *• * tJJ 

" They had means of subsistence at least 
for the following week ; and that was such a 
source of comfort to them, as it is to men 
who are quitting a wreck, and drifting on a 
bare raft with a slender provision towards 
some coast, which they hope to reach before 
it is exhausted. They sat up all that night 
together in earnest counsel, after Ines had 



108 MELMOTH : 

taken care to see the father and mother of 
her husband comfortably placed in their a- 
partment. Amid their long and melan- 
choly conference, hope sprung up insensi- 
bly in the hearts of the speakers, and a 
plan was gradually formed for obtaining 
the means of subsistence. Walberg was 
to offer his talents as a musical teacher, — 
Ines and her daughters were to undertake 
embroidery, — and Everhard, who possessed 
exquisite taste both in music and drawing, 
was to make an effort in both departments, 
and the friendly priest was to be applied 
to for his needful interest and recommen- 
dation for all. The morning broke on 
their long-protracted consultation, and 
found them unwearied in discussing its 
subject. " We shall not starve," said the 
children hopefully. — " I trust not," said 
Walberg sighingly. — His wife, who knew 
Spain, said not a word. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 



-This to me 



In dreadful secrecy they did impart. 
And I with them the third night kept the watch. 

Shakespeare. 



" As they spoke, a soft knock was heard, 
such as kindness gives at the door of mis- 
fortune, and Everhard started up to an- 
swer it. " Stay," said Walberg, absently, 
" Where are the servants ?" Then recol- 
lecting himself, he smiled agonizingly, and 
waved his hand to his son to go. It was 
the good priest. He entered, and sat 
down in silence, — no one spoke to him. 



110 MELMOTH: 

It might be truly said, as it is sublimely 
said in the original, " There was neither 
speech nor language, but voices were heard 
among them — " and felt too'' The worthy 
priest piqued himself on his orthodoxy of 
all matters of belief and form enjoined by 
the Catholic church ; and, moreover, had ac- 
quired a kind of monastic apathy, of sanc- 
tified stoicism, which priests sometimes 
imagine is the conquest of grace over the 
rebellion of nature, when it is merely the 
result of a profession that denies nature its 
objects and its ties. Yet so it was, that as 
he sat among this afflicted family, after 
complaining of the keenness of the morn- 
ing air, and wiping away in vain the mois- 
ture, which he said it had brought into his 
eyes, he at last yielded to his feelings, and 
" lifted up his voice and wept." But tears 
were not all he had to offer. On hearing 
the plans of Walberg and his family, he 
promised, with a faultering voice, his 
ready assistance in promoting them ; and, 
as he rose to depart, observing that he had 



A TALE. Ill 

been entrusted by the faithful with a small 
sum for the relief of the unfortunate, and 
knew not where it could be better bestow- 
ed, he dropped from the sleeve of his ha- 
bit a well filled purse on the floor, and 
hurried away. 

" The family retired to rest as the day ap- 
proached, but rose in a few hours afterwards 
without having slept ; and the remainder 
of that day, and the whole of the three fol- 
lowing, were devoted to applications at 
every door where encouragement might be 
expected, or employment obtained, the 
priest in person aiding every application. 
But there were many circumstances unfa- 
vourable to the ill-starred family of Wal- 
berg. They were strangers, and, with the 
exception of their mother, who acted as 
interpreter, ignorant of the language of 
the country. This was " a sore evil," ex- 
tending almost to the total preclusion of 
their exertions as teachers. They were 
also heretics, — and this alone was a suffi- 
cient bar to their success in Seville. In 



IW MELMOTH : 

some families the beauty of the daughters, 
in others that of the son, was gravely de- 
bated as an important objection. In others 
the recollection of their former splendour, 
suggested a mean and rancorous motive to 
jealous inferiority to insult them by a re- 
jection, for which no other cause could 
be assigned. Unwearied and undismayed, 
they renewed their applications every day, 
at every house where admission could be 
obtained, and at many where it was de- 
nied ; and each day they returned to exa- 
mine the diminished stock, to divide the 
scantier meal, calculate how far it was pos- 
sible to reduce the claims of nature to the 
level of their ebbing means, and smile 
when they talked of the morrow to each 
other, but weep when they thought of it 
alone. There is a withering monotony in 
the diary of misery, — " one day telleth an- 
other." But there came at length a day, 
when the last coin was expended, the 
last meal devoured, the last resource ex- 
hausted, the last hope annihilated, and the 



A TALE. 115 

friendly priest himself told them weeping, 
he had nothing to give them but his 
prayers. 

" That evening the family sat in pro- 
found and stupified silence together for 
some hours, till the aged mother of Wal- 
berg, who had not for some months utter- 
ed any thing but indistinct monosyllables, 
or appeared conscious of any thing that 
was going on, suddenly, with that omi- 
nous energy that announces its effort to 
be the last, — that bright flash of parting 
life that precedes its total extinction, ex- 
claimed aloud, apparently addressing her 
husband, " There is something wrong 
here, — why did they bring us from Ger- 
many ? They might have suffered us to 
die there, — they have brought us here to 
mock us, I think. Yesterday, — (her me- 
mory evidently confounding the dates of 
her son's prosperous and adverse fortune), 
yesterday they clothed me in silk, and I 
drank wine, and to-day they give me this 
sorry crust,'-(flinging away the piece of 



114 MELMOTH : 

bread which had been her share of the mi- 
serable meal), — there is something wrong 
here. I will go back to Germany, — I 
will !" and she rose from her seat in the 
sight of the astonished family, who, hor- 
ror-struck, as they would have been at the 
sudden resuscitation of a corse, ventured 
not to oppose her by word or movement, 
" I will go back to Germany," she repeat- 
ed ; and, rising, she actually took three or 
four firm and equal steps on the floor, 
while no one attempted to approach her. 
Then her force, both physical and mental, 
seemed to fail, — she tottered, — her voice 
sunk into hollow mutterings, as she re- 
peated, " I know the way, — I know the 

w^ay, — if it w^as not so dark I have not 

far to go, — I am very near — home /" As she 
spoke, she fell across the feet of Walberg. 
The family collected round her, and raised 
— a corse. " Thank God !" exclaimed her 
son, as he gazed on his mother's corse. — 
And this reversion of the strongest feeling 
of nature, — this wish for the death of 



A TALE. 115 

those for whom, in other circumstances, 
we would ourselves have died, makes 
those who have experienced it feel as if 
there was no evil in life but w^ant, and no 
object of rational pursuit but the means of 
avoiding it. Alas ! if it be so, for what 
purpose were hearts that beat, and minds 
that bum, bestowed on us? Is all the 
energy of intellect, and all the enthusiasm 
of feeling, to be expended in contrivances 
how to meet or shift off the petty but tor- 
turing pangs of hourly necessity ? Is the 
fire caught from heaven to be employed in 
lighting a faggot to keep the cold from the 
numbed and wasted fingers of poverty. 
Pardon this digression, Senhor," said the 
stranger, " but / had a painful feeling, 
that forced me to make it'' He then pro- 
ceeded. 

" The family collected around the dead 
body, — and it might have been a subject 
worthy the pencil of the first of painters, to 
witness its interment, as it took place the 
following night. As the deceased was a 



116 MELMOTH: 

heretic, the corse was not allowed to he 
laid in consecrated ground ; and the family, 
solicitous to avoid giving offence, or at- 
tracting notice on the subject of their re- 
ligion, were the only attendants on the 
funeral. In a small inclosure, at the rear 
of their wretched abode, her son dug his 
mother's grave, and Ines and her daugh- 
ters placed the body in it. Everhard was 
absent in search of employment, — as they 
hoped, — and a light was held by the 
youngest child, who smiled as he watched 
the scene, as if it had been a pageant got 
up for his amusement. That light, feeble 
as it was, showed the strong and varying 
expression of the countenances pn which 
it fell ; — in Walberg's there was a stern 
and fearful joy, that she whom they were 
laying to rest had been " taken from the 
evil to come," — in that of Ines there was 
grief, mingled with something of horror, 
at this mute and unhallowed ceremony. — 
Her daughters, pale with grief and fear, 
wept silently ; but their tears were check- 



A TALE. 117 

ed, and the whole course of their feelings 
changed, when the light fell on another 
figure who appeared suddenly standing a- 
mong them on the edge of the gi^ave,— it 
was that of Walberg's father. Impatient 
of being left alone, and wholly uncon- 
scious of the cause, he had groped and 
tottered his way till he reached the spot ; 
and now, as he saw his son heap up the 
earth over the grave, he exclaimed, with 
a brief and feeble effort of reminiscence, 
sinking on the ground, " Me, too, — lay 
me there, the same spot will serve for 
both !" His children raised and supported 
him into the house, where the sight of 
Everhard, with an unexpected supply of 
provisions, made them forget the horrors 
of the late scene, and postpone once more 
the fears of want till to-morrow. No in- 
quiry how this supply was obtained, could 
extort more from Everhard than that it 
was the gift of charity. He looked ex- 
hausted and dreadfully pale, — and, for- 
bearing to press him with further ques- 



118 MELMOTH : 

tions, they partook of this manna-meal, — 
this food that seemed to have dropped 

from heaven, and separated for the night. 

* * * * 

" Ines had, during this period of cala- 
mity, unremittingly enforced the applica- 
tion of her daughters to those accomplish- 
ments from w^hich she still derived the 
hopes of their subsistence. Whatever 
were the privations and disappointments 
of the day, their musical and other exer- 
cises were strictly attended to ; and hands 
enfeebled by want and grief, plied their 
task with as much assiduity as when oc- 
cupation was only a variation of luxury. 
This attention to the ornaments of life, 
when its actual necessaries are wanted, — 
this sound of music in a house where the 
murmurs of domestic anxiety are heard 
every moment, — this subservience of ta- 
lent to necessity, all its generous enthu- 
siasm lost, and only its possible utility re- 
membered or valued, — is perhaps the bit- 
terest strife that ever was fought between 



A TALE. 119 

the opposing claims of our artificial and our 
natural existence. But things had now 
occurred that shook not only the resolution 
of Lies, but even affected her feelings be- 
yond the power of repression. She had 
been accustomed to hear, with delight, the 
eager application of her daughters to their 
musical studies ; — now — when she heard 
them, the morning after the interment of 
their grandmother, renewing that appli- 
cation — she felt as if the sounds struck 
through her heart. She entered the room 
where they were, and they turned towards 
her with their usual smiling demand for 
her approbation. 

The mother, with the forced smile of a 
sickening heart, said she believed there 
was no occasion for their practising any 
further that day. The daughters, who un- 
derstood her too well, relinquished their 
instruments, and, accustomed to see every 
article of furniture converted into the 
means of casual subsistence, they thought 
no worse than that their ghitarras might 



120 melmoth: 

be disposed of this day, and the next they 
hoped they would have to teach on those 
of their pupils. They were mistaken. 
Other symptoms of failing resolution, — of 
utter and hopeless abandonment, appeared 
that day. Walberg had always felt and 
expressed the strongest feelings of tender 
respect towards his parents — his father par- 
ticularly, whose age far exceeded that of 
his mother. At the division of their meal 
that day, he shewed a kind of wolfish 
and greedy jealousy that made Ines trem- 
ble. He whispered to her — " How much 
my father eats — how heartily he feeds 
while we have scarce a morsel !" — " And 
let us want that morsel, before your father 
wants one !" said Ines in a whisper — " I 
have scarce tasted any thing myself." — 
" Father — father," cried Walberg, shout- 
ing in the ear of the doting old man, " you 
are eating heartily, while Ines and her chil- 
dren are starving !" And he snatched the 
food from his father's hand, who gazed at 
him vacantly, and resigned the contested 



A TALE. 121 

morsel without a struggle. A moment 
afterwards the old man rose from his seat, 
and with horrid unnatural force, tore the 
untasted meat from his grandchildren's 
lips, and swallowed it himself, while his 
rivelled and toothless mouth grinned at 
them in mockery at once infantine and 
malicious. 

" Squabbling about your supper ?" cried 
Everhard, bursting among them with a 
wild and feeble laugh, — " Why, here's 
enough for to-morrow — and to-morrow." 
And he flung indeed ample means for two 
day's subsistence on the table, but he look- 
ed paler and paler. The hungry family 
devoured the hoard, and forgot to ask the 
cause of his increasing paleness, and obvi- 
ously diminished strength. * * 
* * * * 

" They had long been without any do- 
mestics, and as Everhard disappeared mys- 
teriously every day, the daughters were 
sometimes employed on the humble er- 
rands of the family. The beauty of the el- 

VOL. IV. F 



122 MELMOTH : 

der daughter, Julia, was so conspicuous, 
that her mother had often undertaken the 
most menial errands herself, rather than 
send her daughter into the streets unpro- 
tected. The following evening, however, 
being intently employed in some domes- 
tic occupation, she allowed Julia to go 
out to purchase their food for to-morrow, 
and lent her veil for the purpose, directing 
her daughter to arrange it in the Spanish 
fashion, with which she w^as well acquaint- 
ed, so as to hide her face. 

" Julia, who went with trembling steps 
on her brief errand, had somehow derang- 
ed her veil, and a glimpse of her beauty 
was caught by a cavalier who was passing. 
The meanness of her dress and occupation 
suggested hopes to him which he ventured 
to express. Julia burst from him with the 
mingled terror and indignation of insulted 
purity, but her eyes rested with uncon- 
scious avidity on the handful of gold which 
glittered in his hand. — She thought of her 
famishing parents, — of her own declining 



A TALE. 123 

strength, and neglected useless talents. 
The gold still sparkled before her, — she felt 
— she knew not what, and to escape from 
some feelings is perhaps the best victory 
we can obtain over them. But when she 
arrived at home, she eagerly thrust the 
small purchase she had made into her mo- 
ther's hand, and, though hitherto gentle, 
submissive, and tractable, announced, in a 
tone of decision that seemed to her startled 
mother (whose thoughts were always limit- 
ed to the exigencies of the hour) like that 
of sudden insanity, that she would rather 
starve than ever again tread the streets of 
Seville alone. 

" As Ines retired to her bed, she thought 
she heard a feeble moan from the room 
where Everhard lay, and where, from 
their being compelled to sell the necessary 
furniture of the bed, he had entreated his 
parents to allow Maurice to sleep with him, 
alleging that the warmth of his body would 
be a substitute for artificial covering to his 
little brother. Twice those moans were 



122 MELMOTH : 

heard, but Ines did not dare to awake Wal- 
berg, who had sunk into that profound sleep 
which is as often the refuge of intolerable 
misery, as that of saturated enjoyment. 
A few moments after, when the moans 
had ceased, and she had half persuaded 
herself it was only the echo of that wave 
that seems for ever beating in the ears 
of the unfortunate, — the curtains of her 
bed were thrown open, and the figure 
of a child covered with blood, stained in 
breast, arms, and legs, appeared before 
her, and cried, — " It is Everhard's blood — 
he is bleeding to death, — I am covered 
with his blood ! — Mother — mother— rise 
and save Everhard's life !" The object, 
the voice, the words, seemed to Ines like 
the imagery of some terrible dream, such 
as had lately often visited her sleep, till 
the tones of Maurice, her youngest, and 
(in her heart) her favourite child, made her 
spring from the bed, and hurry after the 
little blood-spotted figure that paddled be- 
fore her on its naked feet, till she reached 



A TALE. 125 

the adjoining room where Everhard lay. 
Amid all her anguish and fear, she trod as 
lightly as Maurice, lest she should awake 
Walberg. 

" The moon-light fell strongly through 
the unshuttered windows on the wretched 
•loset that just contained the bed. Its 
furniture was sufficiently scanty, and in 
his spasms Everhard had thrown off the 
sheet. So he lay, as Ines approached 
his bed, in a kind of corse-like beauty, 
to which the light of the moon gave 
an effect that would have rendered the 
figure worthy the pencil of a Murillo, 
a Rosa, or any of those painters, who, 
inspired by the genius of suffering, de- 
light in representing the most exquisite 
of human forms in the extremitv of human 
agony. A St Bartholomew flayed, with 
his skin hanging about him in graceful 
drapery — a St Laurence, broiled on a gri- 
diron, and exhibiting his finely-formed ana- 
tomy on its bars, while naked slaves are 
blowing the coals beneath it, — even these 



126 MELMOTH : 

were inferior to the form half- veiled, — 
half-disclosed by the moon-light as it lay. 
The snow-white limbs of Everhard were 
extended as if for the inspection of a sculp- 
tor, and moveless, as if they were indeed 
what they resembled, in hue and symme- 
try, those of a marble statue. His arms 
were tossed above his head, and the blood 
was trickling fast from the opened veins 
of both, — his bright and curled hair was 
clotted with the red stream that flowed 
from his arms, — his lips were blue, and a 
faint and fainter moan issued from them 
as his mother hung over him. This sight 
banished in a moment all other fears and 
feelings, and Tnes shrieked aloud to her 
husband for assistance. Walberg, stagger- 
ing from his sleep, entered the room, — the 
object before him was enough. Ines had 
only strength left to point to it. The 
wretched father rushed out in quest of me- 
dical aid, which he was obliged to solicit 
gratuitously, and in bad Spanish, while 
his accents betrayed him at every door he 



A TALE. 127 

knocked at, — and closed them against him 
as a foreigner and a heretic. At length a 
barber-surgeon (for the professions were 
united in Seville) consented, with many a 
yawn, to attend him, and came duly armed 
with lint and styptics. The distance was 
short, and he was soon by the bed of the 
young sufferer. The parents observed, 
with consternation unspeakable, the lan- 
guid looks of recognition, the ghastly smile 
of consciousness, that Everhard viewed 
him with, as he approached the bed ; and 
when he had succeeded in stopping the hse- 
morrhage, and bound up the arms, a whis- 
per passed between him and the patient, 
and the latter raised his bloodless hand to 
his lips, and uttered, " Remember our bar- 
gain." As the man retired, Walberg 
followed, and demanded to know the 
meaning of the words he had heard. 
Walberg was a German, and choleric — 
the surgeon was a Spaniard, and cool. 
" I shall tell you to-morrow, Senhor," said 
he, putting up his instruments,—" in the 



128 MELMOTH : 

mean time be assured of my gratuitous 
attendance on your son, and of liis certain 
recovery. We deem you heretics in Se- 
ville, but that youth is enough to canon- 
ize the whole family, and cover a multi- 
tude of sins." And with these words he 
departed. The next day he attended 
Everhard, and so for several, till he was 
completely recovered, always refusing the 
slightest remuneration, till the father, 
whom misery had made suspicious of 
every thing and nothing, watched at the 
door, and heard the horrible secret. He 
did not disclose it to his wife, — but from 
that hour, it was observed that his gloom 
became more intense, and the communi- 
cations he used to hold with his family, 
on the subject of their distress, and the 
modes of evading it by hourly expedients, 
utterly and finally ceased. 

" Everhard, now recovered, but still 
pale as the widow of Seneca, was at last 
able to join the family consultation, and 
give advice, and suggest resources, with 



A TALE. 129 

a mental energy that his physical weak- 
ness could not overcome. The next day, 
when they were assembled to debate on 
the means of procuring subsistence for 
the following one, they for the first time 
missed their father. At every word that 
was uttered, they turned to ask for his 
sanction — but he was not there. At last 
he entered the room, but without taking 
a part in their consultation. He leaned 
gloomily against the wall, and while Ever- 
hard and Julia, at every sentence, turned 
their appealing looks towards him, he 
sullenly averted his head. Ines, appearing 
to pursue some work, while her trembling 
fingers could scarce direct the needle, made 
a sign to her children not to observe him. 
Their voices were instantly depressed, and 
their heads bent closely towards each other. 
Mendicity appeared the only resource of 
this unfortunate family, — and they agreed, 
that the evening was the best time for try- 
ing its effect. The unhappy father remain- 
ed rocking against the shattered wainscot 

F 2 



130 MELMOTH : 

till the arrival of evening. Ines repaired 
the clothes of the children, which were 
now so decayed, that every attempt at re- 
pair made a fresh rent, and the very thread 
she worked with seemed less attenuated 
than the worn-out materials it wrought 
on. 

" The grandfather, still seated in his 
ample chair by the care of Ines, (for his 
son had grown very indifferent about him), 
watched her moving fingers, and exclaim- 
ed, with the petulance of dotage, " Aye, 
— ^you are arraying them in embroidery, 
while I am in rags. — In rags !" he repeat- 
ed, holding out the slender garments which 
the beggared family could with difficulty 
spare him. Ines tried to pacify him, and 
showed her work, to prove that it was the 
remnants of her children's former dress she 
was repairing; but, with hon'or unutter- 
able, she perceived her husband incensed 
at these expressions of dotage, and vent- 
ing his frantic and fearful indignation in 
language that she tried to bury the sound 



A TALE. LSI 

of, by pressing closer to the old man, and 
attempting to fix his bewildered attention 
on herself and her work. This was easily 
accomplished, and all was well, till they 
were about to separate on their wretched 
precarious errands. Then a new and un- 
told feeling trembled at the heart of one 
of the young wanderers. Julia remem- 
bered the occurrence of a preceding even- 
ing, — she thought of the tempting gold, 
the flattering language, and the tender 
tone of the young cavalier. She saw her 
family perishing around her for want, — 
she felt it consuming her own vitals, — and 
as she cast her eye round the squalid room, 
the gold glittered brighter and brighter in 
her eye. A faint hope, aided perhaps by 
a still more faint suggestion of venial 
pride, swelled in her heart. " Perhaps he 
might love me," she whispered to herself, 
" and think me not unworthy of his hand.*' 
Then despair returned to the charge. " I 
must die of famine," she thought, " if I 
return unaided,— and why may I not by 



132 MELMOTH : 

my death benefit my family ! 1 will never 
survive shame, but they may, — for they 
will not know it 1"— She went out, and 
took a direction different from that of the 
family. 

" Night came on, — the wanderers return- 
ed slowly one by one, — Julia was the last. 
Her brothers and sister had each obtained 
a trifling alms, for they had learned Spa- 
nish enough to beg in, — and the old man's 
face w^ore a vacant smile, as he saw the 
store produced, which w^as, after all, scarce 
sufficient to afford a meal for the youngest. 
" And have you brought us nothing, Ju- 
lia r" said her parents. She stood apart, 
and in silence. Her father repeated the 
question in a raised and angry voice. She 
started at the sound, and, rushing for- 
ward, buried her head in her mother's 
bosom. " Nothing, — nothing," she cried, 
in a broken and suffocated voice ; " I tried, 
— my weak and wicked heart submitted to 
the thought for a moment, — but no, — no, 
not even to save you from perishing, could 



A TALE. 133 

I ! — I came home to perish first myself!*' 
Her shuddering parents comprehended her, 
— and amid their agony they blessed her 
and wept, — but not from grief. The meal 
was divided, of which Julia at first steadi- 
ly refused to partake, as she had not con- 
tributed to it, till her reluctance was over- 
come by the affectionate importunity of the 
rest, and she complied. 

" It was during this division of what all 
believed to be their last meal, that Walberg 
gave one of those proofs of sudden and 
fearful violence of temper, bordering on 
insanity, which he had betrayed latterly. 
He seemed to notice, with sullen displea- 
sure, that his wife had (as she always did) 
reserved the largest portion for his father. 
He eyed it askance at first, muttering an- 
grily to himself Then he spoke more a- 
loud, though not so as to be heard by the 
deaf old man, who was sluggishly de- 
vouring his sordid meal. Then the suf- 
ferings of his children seemed to inspire 
him with a kind of wild resentment, and 



134 MELMOTH : 

he started up, exclaiming, " iSly son sells 
his blood to a surgeon, to save us from 
perishing * ! My daughter trembles on the 
verge of prostitution, to procure us a 
meal !" Then fiercely addressing his father, 
" And what dost thou do, old dotard ? 
Rise up, — rise up, and beg for us thyself, 
or thou must starve !" — and, as he spoke, 
he raised his arm against the helpless old 
man. At this horrid sight, Ines shrieked 
aloud, and the children, rushing forward, 
interposed. The wretched father, incensed 
to madness, dealt blows among them, 
which were borne without a murmur; and 
then, the storm being exhausted, he sat 
down and wept. 

" At this moment, to the astonishment 
and terror of all except Walberg, the old 
man, who, since the night of his wife's 
interment, had never moved but from his 
chair to his bed, and that not without as- 

* Fact, — it occurred in a French family not many 
years ago. 



A TALE. 1S5 

sistance, rose suddenly from his seat, and, 
apparently in obedience to his son, walked 
with a firm and steady pace towards the 
door. When he had reached it, he paused, 
looked back on them with a fruitless ef- 
fort at recollection, and went out slowly ; 
— and such was the terror felt by all at 
this last ghastly look, which seemed like 
that of a corse moving on to the place of 
its interment, that no one attempted to 
oppose his passage, and several moments 
elapsed before Everhard had the recollec- 
tion to pursue him. 

" In the mean time, Ines had dismissed 
her children, and sitting as near as she 
dared to the Avretched father, attempted 
to address some soothing expressions to 
him. Her voice, which was exquisite- 
ly sweet and soft, seemed to produce a 
mechanical effect on him. He turned to- 
wards her at first, — then leaning his head 
on his arm, he shed a few silent tears, — 
then flinging it on his wife's bosom, he 
wept aloud. Ines seized this moment 



1 36 MELMOTH : 

to impress on his heart the horror she felt 
from the outrage he had committed, and 
adjured him to suppHcate the mercy of 
God for a crime, which, in her eyes, ap- 
peared scarce short of parricide. Walberg 
wildly asked what she alluded to; and 
when, shuddering, she uttered the words, 
— " Your father, — your poor old father !" 
— he smiled with an expression of myste- 
rious and supernatural confidence that 
froze her blood, and, approaching her ear, 
softly whispered, " I have no father ! He 
is dead, — long dead ! I buried him the 
night I dug my mother's grave ! Poor old 
man," he added with a sigh, '^ it was the 
better for him, — he would have lived only 
to weep, and perish perhaps with hunger. 
But I will tell you, Ines, — and let it be a 
secret, I wondered what made our provi- 
sions decrease so, till what was yesterday 
sufficient for four, is not to-day sufficient 
for one. I watched, and at last I dis- 
covered — it must be a secret — an old gob- 
lin, who daily visited this house. It came 



A TALE. 1S7 

in the likeness of an old man in rags, and 
with a long white beard, and it devoured 
every thing on the table, while the chil- 
dren stood hungry by ! But I struck at — 
I cursed it, — I chased it in the name of the 
All-powerful, and it is gone. Oh it was a 
fell devouring goblin ! — but it will haunt 
us no more, and we shall have enough. 
Enough," said the wretched man, invo- 
luntarily returning to his habitual associa- 
tions, — " enough for to-morrow !" 

" Ines, overcome with horror at this ob- 
vious proof of insanity, neither interrupt- 
ed or opposed him ; she attempted only to 
soothe him, internally praying against the 
too probable disturbance of her own intel- 
lects. Walberg saw her look of distrust, 
and, with the quick jealousy of partial in- 
sanity, said, " If you do not credit me in 
that, still less, I suppose, will you in the 
account of that fearful visitation with 
which 1 have latterly been familiar." — 
" Oh, my beloved !" said Ines, who recog- 
nized in these words the source of a fear 



138 MELMOTH: 

that had latterly, from some extraordinary 
circumstances in her husband's conduct, 
taken possession of her soul, and made the 
fear even of famine trifling in comparison, 
— " I dread lest I understand you too well. 
The anguish of want and of famine I 
could have borne, — aye, and seen you bear, 
but the horrid words you have lately ut- 
tered, the horrid thoughts that escape you 
in your sleep, — when I think on these, 

and guess at"^ " You need not guess," 

said Walberg, interrupting her, " I will 
tell you all." And, as he spoke, his coun- 
tenance changed from its expression of 
wildness to one of perfect sanity and calm 
confidence, — his features relaxed, his eye 
became steady, and his tone firm. — " Every 
night since our late distresses, I have wan- 
dered out in search of some relief, and 
supplicated every passing stranger; — lat- 
terly, I have met every night the enemy 
of man, who"— — " Oh cease, my love, 
to indulge these horrible thoughts, — they 
are the results of your disturbed unhappy 



A TALE. l39 

state of mind." — " Ines, listen to me. I 
see that figure as plainly as I see yours, — 
1 hear his voice as distinctly as you hear 
mine this moment. Want and misery are 
not naturally fertile in the production of 
imagination, — they grasp at realities too 
closely. No man, who wants a meal, con- 
ceives that a banquet is spread before him, 
and that the tempter invites him to sit 
down and eat at his ease. No, — no, Ines, 
the evil one, or some devoted agent of his 
in human form, besets me every night,— 
and how I shall longer resist the snare, I 
know not." — " And in what form does he 
appear ?" said Ines, hoping to turn the 
channel of his gloomy thoughts, while she 
appeared to follow their direction. " In 
that of a middle-aged man, of a serious 
and staid demeanour, and with nothing 
remarkable in his aspect except the light 
of two burning eyes, whose lustre is al- 
most intolerable. He fixes them on me 
sometimes, and I feel as if there was fas- 
cination in their glare. Every night he 



140 MEL MOTH : 

besets me, and few like me could have re- 
sisted his seductions. He has offered, and 
proved to me, that it is in his power to be- 
stow all that human cupidity could thirst 

for, on the condition that 1 cannot 

utter ! It is one so full of horror and im- 
piety, that, even to listen to it, is scarce 
less a crime than to comply with it !" 

" Ines, still incredulous, yet imagining 
that to soothe his delirium was perhaps the 
best way to overcome it, demanded what 
that condition was. Though they were 
alone, Walberg would communicate it 
only in a whisper ; and Ines, fortified as 
she was by reason hitherto undisturbed, 
and a cool and steady temper, could not 
but recollect some vague reports she had 
heard in her early youth, before she quit- 
ted Spain, of a being permitted to wander 
through it, with power to tempt men un- 
der the pressure of extreme calamity with 
similar offers, which had been invariably 
rejected, even in the last extremities of 
despair and dissolution. She was not su- 



A TALE. 141 

perstitious, — but, her memory now taking 
part with her husband's representation of 
what had befallen him, she shuddered at 
the possibility of his being exposed to si- 
milar temptation ; and she endeavoured to 
fortify his mind and conscience, by argu- 
ments equally appropriate whether he was 
the victim of a disturbed imagination, or 
the real object of this fearful persecution. 
She reminded him, that if, even in Spain, 
where the abominations of Antichrist pre- 
vailed, and the triumph of the mother of 
witchcrafts and spiritual seduction was 
complete, the fearful offer he alluded to 
had been made and rejected with such un- 
mitigated abhorrence, the renunciation of 
one w^ho had embraced the pure doctrines 
of the gospel should be expressed with a 
tenfold energy of feeling and holy defiance. 
" You," said the heroic woman, " you first 
taught me that the doctrines of salvation 
are to be found alone in the holy scrip- 
tures, — I believed you, and wedded you 
in that belief. We are united less in the 



142 melmoth: 

body than in the soul, for in the body 
neither of us may probably sojourn much 
longer. You pointed out to me, not the 
legends of fabulous saints, but the lives of 
the primitive apostles and martyrs of the 
true church. There I read no tales of 
" voluntary humility," of self-inflicted — 
fruitless sufferings, but I read that the 
people of God were " destitute, afflicted, 
tormented." And shall we dare to mur- 
mur at following the examples of those 
you have pointed out to me as ensamples 
of suffering ? They bore the spoiHng of 
their goods, — they wandered about in 
sheep skins and goat skins, — ^they resisted 
unto blood, striving against sin. — And 
shall we lament the lot that has fallen 
to us, when our hearts have so often 
burned within us, as we read the holy 
records together? Alas! what avails feel- 
ing till it is brought to the test of fact ? 
How we deceived ourselves, in believ- 
ing that we indeed participated in the 
feelings of those holy men, while we w^re 



A TALE. 143 

SO far removed from the ^ test by which 
they were proved ! We read of imprison- 
ments, of tortures, and of flames ! — We 
closed the book, and partook of a com- 
fortable meal, and retired to a peaceful 
bed, triumphing in the thought, while sa- 
turated with all the world's good, that 
if their trials had been ours, we could 
have sustained those trials as they did. 
Now, our hour has come, — it is an 
hour sharp and terrible !" — " It is !" mur- 
mured the shuddering husband. " But 
shall we therefore shrink ?" replied his 
wife. " Your ancestors, who were the 
first in Germany that embraced the re- 
formed religion, have bled and blazed for 
it, as you have often told me, — can there 
be a stronger attestation to it ?" — " I be- 
lieve there can," said Walberg, whose 
eyes rolled fearfully, — " that of starving 
for it! — Oh Ines," he exclaimed, as he 
grasped her hands convulsively, " I have 
felt,— 1 still feel, that a death at the stake 



144 MELMOTH : 

would be mercy compared to the lingering 
tortures of protracted famine,— to the death 
that we die daily — and yet do not die! What 
is this I hold ?" he exclaimed, grasping un- 
consciously the hand he held in his. " It 
is my hand, my love," answered the trem- 
bling wife. — " Yours ! — no—impossible ! — 
Your fingers were soft and cool, but these 
are dry, — is this a human hand ?" — " It 
,is mine," said the weeping wife. " Then 
you must have been famishing," said Wal- 
berg, awakening as if from a dream. " We 
have all been so latterly," answered Ines, 
satisfied to restore her husband's sanity, 
even at the expense of this horrible con- 
fession,—" We have all been so — but I 
have suffered the least. When a fa- 
mily is famishing, the children think of 
their meals — but the mother thinks only 
of her children. I have lived on as little 
as — I could, — I had indeed no appetite." 
— " Hush," said Walberg, interrupting 
her — " what sound was that ? — was it not 



A TALE. 145 

like a dying groan ?" — " No—it is the chil- 
dren who moan in their sleep." — " What 
do they moan for ?" " Hunger I believe,' 
said Tnes, involuntarily yielding to the 
dreadful conviction of habitual misery. — 
" And I sit and hear this," said Walberg, 
starting up, — " I sit to hear their young 
sleep broken by dreams of hunger, while 
for a word's speaking I could pile this floor 
with mountains of gold, and all for the risk 

of" " Of what ?" — said Ines, clinging 

to him,—" of what ?— Oh ! think of that ! 
— what shall a man give in exchange for 
his soul ? — Oh ! let us starve, die, rot be- 
fore your eyes, rather than you should seal 

your perdition by that horrible" 

*' Hear me, woman !" said Walberg, turn- 
ing on her eyes almost as fierce and lus- 
trous as those of Melmoth, and whose 
light, indeed, seemed borrowed from his ; 
" Hear me ! — My soul is lost ! They who 
die in the agonies of famine know no God, 
and want none — if I remain here to famish 
among my children, I shall as surely blas- 

VOL. IV. G 



146 MELMOTH : 

pheme the Author of my being, as I shall 
renounce him under the fearful conditions 
proposed to me ! — Listen to me, Ines, and 
tremble not. To see my children die of 
famine will be to me instant suicide and 
impenitent despair ! But if I close with 
this fearful offer, I may yet repent, — I may 
yet escape ! — There is hope on one side — 
on the other there is none — none— none ! 
Your hands cling round me, but their 
touch is cold ! — You are wasted to a sha- 
dow with want ! Shew me the means of 
procuring another meal, and I will spit at 
the tempter, and spurn him ! — But where 
is that to be found ? — Let me go, then, to 
meet him !— You will pray for me, Ines,— 
will you not ? — and the children ? — No, 
let them not pray for me ! — in my despair 
I forgot to pray myself, and their prayers 
would now be a reproach to me.— Ines ! — 
Ines ! — What ? am I talking to a corse ?" 
He was indeed, for the wretched wife had 
sunk at his feet senseless. " Thank God !" 
he again emphatically exclaimed, as he be- 



A TALE* 147 

held her lie to all appearance lifeless before 
him. " Thank God a word then has killed 
her, — it was a gentler death than famine ! 
It would have been kind to have strangled 
her with these hands ! Now for the chil- 
dren !" he exclaimed, while horrid thoughts 
chased each other over his reeling and un- 
seated mind, and he imagined he heard the 
roar of a sea in its full strength thundering 
in his ears, and saw ten thousand waves 
dashing at his feet, and every wave of 
blood. " Now for the children !"— and he 
felt about as if for some implement of de- 
struction. In doing so, his left hand cross- 
ed his right, and grasping it, he exclaimed 
as if he felt a sword in his hand, — " This 
will do— they will struggle—they will sup- 
pUcate, — but I will tell them their mother 
lies dead at my feet, and then what can 
they say ? Hold now," said the miserable 
man, sitting calmly down, " If they cry to 
me, what shall I answer ? Julia, and Ines 
her mother's namesake, — and poor little 
Maurice, who smiles even amid hunger. 



148 ^ELMOTH: 

and whose smiles are worse than curses ! — 
I will tell them their mother is dead !" he 
cried, staggering towards the door of his 
childrens' apartment — " Dead without a 
blow! — that shall be their answer and 
their doom." 

" As he spoke, he stumbled over the 
senseless body of his wife ; and the tone 
of his mind once more strung up to the 
highest pitch of conscious agony, he 
cried, " INlen ! — men ! — what are your pur- 
suits and your passions ? — your hopes and 
fears ? — your struggles and your triumphs ? 
— Look on me ! — learn from a human be- 
ing like yourselves, who preaches his last 
and fearful sermon over the corse of his 
Vv'ife, and approaching the bodies of his 
sleeping children, whom he soon hopes to 
see corses also— corses made so by his own 
hand ! — Let all the world listen to me I — 
let them resign factitious wants and wishes, 
and furnish those who hang on them for 
subsistence with the means of bare subsis- 
tence ! — There is no care, no thought be- 



A TALK. 149 

yond this ! Let our children call on me 
for instruction, for promotion, for distinc- 
tion, and call in vain — I hold myself inno- 
cent. They may find those for themselves, 
or want them if they list — but let them 
never in vain call on me for bread, as 
they have done, — as they do now ! I 
hear the moans of their hungry sleep ! — 
World — world, be wise, and let your chil- 
dren curse you to your face for any thing 
but want of bread ! Oh that is the bitter- 
est of curses, — and it is felt most when it 
is least uttered ! I have felt it often, but 1 
shall feel it no longer !" — And the wretch 
tottered towards the beds of his children. 

" Father! — father!" cried Julia, *^ are 
these your hands ? Oh let me live, and I 

will do any thing — any thing but" 

"Father! — dear father!" cried Ines, " spare 
us! — to-morrow may bring another meal!" 
Maurice, the young child, sprung from his 
bed, and cried, clinging round his father, 
" Oh, dear father, forgive me! — but 1 
dreamed a wolf was in the room, and was 



150 MELMOTH : 

tearing out our throats; and, father, I 
cried so long, that I thought you never 
would come. And now — Oh God! oh 
Gk)d !" — as he felt the hands of the frantic 
wretch grasping his throat, — " are you the 
wolf?** 

" Fortunately those hands were pov^r- 
less from the very convulsion of the agony 
that prompted their desperate effort. The 
daughters had swooned from horror, — and 
their swoon appeared like death. The 
child had the cunning to counterfeit death 
also, and lay extended and stopping his 
breath under the fierce but faultering gripe 
that seized his young throat — then relin- 
quished — then grasped it again — and then 
relaxed its hold as at the expiration of a 
spasm. 

" When all was over, as the wretched 
father thought, he retreated from the cham- 
ber. In doing so, he stumbled over the 

corse-like form of his wife. A groan 

announced that the sufferer was not dead. 
" What does this mean ?** said Walberg, 



A TALE. 151 

staggering in his delirium, — " does the 
corse reproach me for murder ? — or does 
one surviving breath curse me for the un- 
finished work ?" 

" As he spoke, he placed his foot on his 
wife's body. At this moment, a loud 
knock was heard at the door. " They are 
come !" said Walberg, whose frenzy hur- 
ried him rapidly through the scenes of an 
imaginary murder, and the consequence of 
a judicial process. " Well! — come in — 
knock again, or lift the latch — or enter as 
ye list — here I sit amid the bodies of my 
wife and children — I have murdered them 
— I confess it — ye come to drag me to tor- 
ture, I know — but never — never can your 
tortures inflict on me more than the agony 
of seeing them perish by hunger before 
my eyes. Come in— come in — the deed 
is done ! — The corse of my wife is at ray 
foot, and the blood of my children is on 
my hands — what have I further to fear ?" 
But while the wretched man spoke thus, 
he sunk sullenly on his chair, appearing 



152 ilELMOTH : 

to be employed in wiping from his fingers 
the traces of blood with which he ima- 
gined they were stained. At length the 
knocking at the door became louder, — the 
latch was lifted, — and three figures entered 
the apartment in which Walberg sat. 
They advanced slowly, — two from age and 
exhaustion, — and the third from strong 
emotion, Walberg heeded them not, — 
his eyes were fixed, — his hands locked in 
each other; — nor did he move a limb as 
they approached. 

" Do you not know us ?" said the fore- 
most, holding up a lanthern which he 
held in his hand. Its light fell on a 
groupe worthy the pencil of a Rembrandt 
The room lay in complete darkness, ex- 
cept where that strong and unbroken light 
fell. It glared on the rigid and moveless 
obduracy of Walberg's despair, who ap- 
peared stiffening into stone as he sat. It 
showed the figure of the friendly priest 
who had been Guzman's director, and 
whose features, pale and haggard with age 



A TALE. 153 

and austerities, seemed to struggle with 
the smile that trembled over their wrink- 
led lines. Behind him stood the aged fa- 
ther of Walberg, with an aspect of perfect 
apathy, except when, with a momentary 
effort at recollection, he shook his white 
head, seeming to ask himself why he was 
there — and wherefore he could not speak. 
Supporting him stood the young form of 
Everhard, over whose cheek and eye wan- 
dered a glow and a lustre too bright to 
last, and instantly succeeded by paleness 
and dejection. He trembled, advanced, — 
then shrinking back, clung to his infirm 
grandfather, as if needing the support he 
appeared to give. Walberg was the first 
to break the silence. " I know ye who 
ye are," he said hollowly — " ye are come 
to seize me — ye have heard my confession 
— why do you delay ? Drag me away — 
1 would rise and follow you if I could, but 
I feel as if I had grown to this seat — ^you 
must drag me from it yourselves. 

" As he spoke, his wife, who had re- 
G 2 



154 MELMOTH : 

mained stretched at his feet, rose slowly 
but firmly ; and, of all that she saw or 
beard, appearing to comprehend only the 
meaning of her husband's words, she clasp- 
ed her arms round him, as if to oppose 
his being torn from her, and gazed on the 
groupe with a look of impotent and ghast- 
ly defiance. ** Another witness," cried 
Walberg, " risen from the dead against 
me ? Nay, then, it is time to be gone,'*— 
and he attempted to rise. " Stay, father," 
said Everhard, rushing forward and de- 
taining him in his seat ; " stay, — there is 
good news, and this good priest has come 
to tell it, — listen to him, father, I cannot 
speak." — " You ! oh you ! Everhard," an- 
swered the father, with a look of mourn- 
ful reproach, " you a witness against me 
too, — I never raised my hand against you ! 
—Those whom I murdered are silent, and 
will you be my accuser ?" 

** They all now gathered round him, 
partly in terror and partly in consolation, 
—all anxious to disclose to him the tid- 



A TALE. 155 

ings with which their hearts were burden- 
ed, yet fearful lest the freight might be 
too much for the frail vessel that rocked 
and reeled before them, as if the next 
breeze would be like a tempest to it. At 
last it burst forth from the priest, who, by 
the necessities of his profession, was igno- 
rant of domestic feelings, and of the feli- 
cities and agonies which are inseparably 
twined with the fibres of conjugal and pa- 
rental hearts. He knew nothing of what 
Walberg might feel as a husband or father, 
— for he could never be either ; but he felt 
that good news must be good news, into 
whatever ears they were poured, or by 
whatever lips they might be uttered. 
" We have the will," he cried abruptly, 
" the true will of Guzman. The other 
was — asking pardon of God and the saints 
for saying so — no better than a forgery. 
The will is found, and you and your fa- 
mily are heirs to all his wealth. I was 
coming to acquaint you, late as it was. 



'^ 



156 MELMOTH : 

having with difficulty obtained the Supe- 
rior's permission to do so, and in my way 
I met this old man, whom your son was 
conducting, — how came he out so late?" 
At these words Walberg was observed to 
shudder with a brief but strong spasm. 
" The will is found !" repeated the priest, 
perceiving how little effect the words 
seemed to have on Walberg, — and he 
raised his voice to its utmost pitch. " The 
will of my uncle is found," repeated Ever- 
hard. " Found, — found, — found !" echoed 
the aged grandfather, not knowing what 
he said, but vaguely repeating the last 
words he heard, and then looking round 
as if asking for an explanation of them. 
" The will is found, love," cried Ines, who 
appeared restored to sudden and perfect 
consciousness by the sound ; " Do you not 
hear, love? We are wealthy, — we are 
happy ! Speak to us, love, and do not 
stare so vacantly, — speak to us !" A long 
pause followed. At length, — " Who are 



««r« »A.v^^ m-'^m-^ jk-^ 



A TALE. 157 

those ?** said Walberg in a hollow voice, 
pointing to the figures before him, whom 
he viewed with a fixed and ghastly look, 
as if he was gazing on a band of spectres. 
" Your son, love, — and your father, — and 
the good friendly priest. Why do you 
look so doubtfully on us ?" — " And what 
do they come for ?" said Walberg. Again 
and again the import of their communica- 
tion was told him, in tones that, trem- 
bling with varied emotion, scarce could 
express their meaning. At length he 
seemed faintly conscious of what was said, 
and, looking round on them, uttered a 
long and heavy sigh. They ceased to 
speak, and watched him in silence. — 
" Wealth ! — wealth l—it comes too late. 
Look there,— look there !" and he pointed 
to the room where his children lay. 

" Ines, with a dreadful presentiment at 
her heart, rushed into it, and beheld her 
daughters lying apparently lifeless. The 
shriek she uttered, as she fell on the bo- 
dies, brought the priest and her son to her 



158 MELMOTH : 

assistance, and Walberg and the old man 
were left together alone, viewing each 
other with looks of complete insensibility ; 
and this apathy of age, and stupefaction 
of despair, made a singular contrast with 
the fierce and wild agony of those who 
still retained their feelings. It was long 
before the daughters were recovered from 
their death-like swoon, and still longer be- 
fore their father could be persuaded that 
the arms that clasped him, and the tears 
that fell on his cold cheek, were those of 
his living children. 

" All that night his wife and family 
struggled with his despair. At last recol- 
lection seemed to burst on him at once. 
He shed some tears ; — then, with a mi- 
nuteness of reminiscence that was equally 
singular and affecting, he flung himself 
before the old man, who, speechless and 
exhausted, sat passively in his chair, and 
exclaiming, " Father, forgive me !" buried 
his head between his father's knees. * 

tJt * » * 



A TALE. 159 

" Happiness is a powerful restorative,— 
in a few days the spirits of all appeared to 
have subsided into a calm. They wept 
sometimes, but their tears were no longer 
painful ; — they resembled those showers in 
a fine spring morning, which announce the 
increasing warmth and beauty of the day. 
The infirmities of Walberg's father made 
the son resolve not to leave Spain till his 
dissolution, which took place in a few 
months. He died in peace, blessing and 
blessed. His son was his only spiritual at- 
tendant, and a brief and partial interval 
of recollection enabled him to understand 
and express his joy and confidence in the 
holy texts which were read to him from 
the scriptures. The wealth of the family 
had now given them importance ; and, by 
the interest of the friendly priest, the 
body was permitted to be interred in con- 
secrated ground. The family then set out 
for Germany, where they reside in prospe- 
rous felicity ; — but to this hour Walberg 
shudders with horror when he recals the 



160 MELMOTH : 

fearful temptations of the stranger, whom 
he met in his nightly wanderings in the 
hour of his adversity, and the horrors of 
this visitation appear to oppress his recol- 
lection more than even the images of his 
family perishing with want. 

" There are other narratives," continued 
the stranger, " relating to this mysterious 
being, which I am in possession of, and 
which I have collected with much diffi- 
culty ; for the unhappy, who are exposed to 
his temptations, consider their misfortunes 
as a crime, and conceal, with the most 
anxious secresy, every circumstance of this 
horrible visitation. Should we again meet, 
Senhor, I may communicate them to you, 
and you will find them no less extraordi- 
nary than that I have just related. But it 
is now late, and you need repose after the 
fatigue of your journey." — So saying, the 
stranger departed. 

" Don Francisco remained seated in his 
chair, musing on the singular tale he had 



A TALE. 161 

listened to, till the lateness of the hour, 
combining with his fatigue, and the pro- 
found attention he had paid to the narra- 
tive of the stranger, plunged him insen- 
sibly into a deep slumber. He was a- 
woke in a few minutes by a slight noise 
in the room, and looking up perceived 
seated opposite to him another person, 
whom he never recollected to have seen 
before, but who was indeed the same who 
had been refused admittance under the 
roof of that house the preceding day. He 
appeared seated perfectly at his ease, how- 
ever ; and to Don Francisco's look of sur- 
prise and inquiry, replied that he was a 
traveller, who had been by mistake shown 
into that apartment, — that finding its oc- 
cupant asleep and undisturbed by his en- 
trance, he had taken the liberty of re- 
maining there, but was willing to retire if 
his presence was considered intrusive. 

" As he spoke, Don Francisco had lei- 
sure to observe him. There was some- 
thing remarkable in his expression, though 



162 MELMOTH : 

the observer did not find it easy to define 
what it was ; and his manner, though not 
courtly or conciliating, had an ease which 
appeared more the result of independence 
of thought, than of the acquired habitudes 
of society. 

" Don Francisco welcomed him gravely 
and slowly, not without a sensation of awe 
for which he could scarcely account ; — and 
the stranger returned the salutation in a 
manner that was not likely to diminish 
that impression. A long silence followed. 
The stranger (who did not announce his 
name) was the first to break it, by apolo- 
gizing for having, while seated in an adja- 
cent apartment, involuntarily overheard 
an extraordinary tale or narrative related 
to Don Francisco, in which he confessed 
he took a profound interest, such as (he 
added, bowing with an air of grim and re- 
luctant civility) would, he trusted, palliate 
his impropriety in listening to a commu- 
nication not addressed to him. 

1' To all this Don Francisco could only 



A TALE. 163 

reply by bows equally rigid, (his body 
scarce forming an acute angle with his 
limbs as he sat), and by looks of uneasy 
and doubtful curiosity directed towards his 
strange visitor, who, however, kept his seat 
immoveably, and seemed, after all his apo- 
logies, resolved to sit out Don Francisco. 

'* Another long pause was broken by 
the visitor. " You were listening, I 
think," he said, " to a wild and terrible 
story of a being who was commissioned 
on an unutterable errand, — even to tempt 
spirits in woe, at their last mortal extremi- 
ty, to barter their hopes of future happi- 
ness for a short remission of their tempo- 
rary sufferings." — " I heard nothing of 
that," said Don Francisco, whose recollec- 
tion, none of the clearest naturally, was 
not much improved by the length of the 
narrative he had just listened to, and by 
the sleep into which he had fallen since he 
heard it. " Nothing?" said the visitor, 
with something of abruptness and asperity 
in his tone that made the hearer start— 



164 MELMOTH : 

" nothing ? — I thought there was mention 
too of that unhappy being to whom Wal- 
berg confessed his severest trials were 
owing, — in comparison with whose fearful 
visitations those of even famine were as 
dust in the balance." — " Yes, yes," answer- 
ed Don Francisco, startled into sudden 
recollection, " I remember there was a 
mention of the devil, — or his agent^^or 
something" " Senhor," said the stran- 

ger interrupting him, with an expression 
of wild and fierce derision, which was lost 
on Aliaga — " Senhor, I beg you will not 
confound personages who have the honour 
to be so nearly allied, and yet so perfectly 
distinct as the devil and his agent, or a- 
gents. You yourself, Senhor, who, of 
course, as an orthodox and inveterate Ca- 
tholic, must abhor the enemy of mankind, 
have often acted as his agent, and yet 
would be somewhat offended at being mis- 
taken for him." Don Francisco crossed 
himself repeatedly, and devoutly disavow- 
ed his ever having been an agent of the 



A TALE. 165 

enemy of man. " Will you dare to say 
so ?" said his singular visitor, not raising 
his voice as the insolence of the question 
seemed to require, but depressing it to the 
lowest whisper as he drew his seat nearer 
his astonished companion — " Will you dare 
to say so ? — Have you never erred ? — Have 
you never felt one impure sensation ? — 
Have you never indulged a transient feel- 
ing of hatred, or malice, or revenge? — Have 
you never forgot to do the good you ought 
to do,— or remembered to do the evil you 
ought not to have done? — Have you never 
in trade overreached a dealer, or banquetted 
on the spoils of your starving debtor?— Have 
you never, as you w^ent to your daily de- 
votions, cursed from your heart the wan- 
derings of your heretical brethren, — and 
while you dipped your fingers in the holy 
water, hoped that every drop that touched 
your pores, would be visited on them in 
drops of brimstone and sulphur ?— Have 
you never, as you beheld the famished, il- 
literate, degraded populace of your coun- 



166 MELMOTH : 

try, exulted in the wretched and tempora- 
ry superiority your wealth has given you, 
— and felt that the wheels of your carriage 
would not roll less smoothly if the way 
was paved with the heads of your country- 
men ? Orthodox Catholic — old Christian 
— as you boast yourself to be, — is not this 
true? — and dare you say you have not 
been an agent of Satan? I tell you, 
whenever you indulged one brutal pas- 
sion, one sordid desire, one impure imagi- 
nation — whenever you uttered one word 
that wrung the heart, or embittered the 
spirit of your fellow-creature — whenever 
you made that hour pass in pain to whose 
flight you might have lent wings of down 
— whenever you have seen the tear, which 
your hand might have wiped away, fall 
uncaught, or forced it from an eye which 
would have smiled on you in light had 
you permitted it — whenever you have 
done this, you have been ten times more 
an agent of the enemy of man than all 
the wretches whom terror, enfeebled 



A TALE. 167 

nerves, or visionary credulity, has forced 
into the confession of an incredible com- 
pact with the author of evil, and whose 
confession has consigned them to flames 
much more substantial than those the 
imagination of their persecutors pictured 
them doomed to for an eternity of suffer- 
ing ! Enemy of mankind !" the speaker 
continued, — " Alas ! how absurdly is that 
title bestowed on the great angelic chief, 
— the morning star fallen from its sphere I 
What enemy has man so deadly as him- 
self? If he would ask on whom he should 
bestow that title aright, let him smite his 
bosom, and his heart will answer, — Be- 
stow it here !'* 

" The emotion with which the stran- 
ger spoke, roused and affected even the 
sluggish and incrusted spirit of the listen- 
er. His conscience, like a state coach- 
horse, had hitherto only been brought on 
solemn and pompous occasions, and then 
paced heavily along a smooth and well- 
prepared course, under the gorgeous trap- 



168 , MELMOTH: 

pings of ceremony ; — now it resembled the 
same animal suddenly bestrid by a fierce 
and vigorous rider, and urged by lash, and 
spur along a new and rugged road. And 
slow and reluctant as he was to own it, he 
felt the power of the weight that pressed, 
and the bit that galled him. He answer- 
ed by a hasty and trembling renunciation 
of all engagements, direct or indirect, with 
the evil power; but he added, that he 
must acknowledge he had been too often 
the victim of his seductions, and trusted 
for the forgiveness of his wanderings to 
the power of the holy church, and the in- 
tercession of the saints. 

" The stranger (though he smiled some- 
what grimly at this declaration) seemed to 
accept the concession, and apologized, in 
his turn, for the warmth with which he 
had spoken ; and which he begged Don Fran- 
cisco would interpret as a mark of interest 
in his spiritual concerns. This explanation, 
though it seemed to commence favourably. 



A TALE. ] 69 

was not followed, however, by any at- 
tempt at renewed conversation. The par- 
ties appeared to stand aloof from each 
other, till the stranger again alluded to his 
having overheard the singular conversa- 
tion and subsequent narrative in Aliaga's 
apartment. " Senhor," he added, in a 
voice whose solemnity deeply impressed 
the hearer, wearied as he was, — " I am 
acquainted with circumstances relating to 
the extraordinary person who was the 
daily watcher of Walberg's miseries, and 
the nightly tempter of his thoughts, — 
known but to him and me. Indeed I 
may add, without the imputation of va- 
nity or presumption, that I am as well ac- 
quainted as himself with every event of 
his extraordinary existence ; and that your 
curiosity, if excited at all about him, could 
be gratified by none so amply and faith- 
fully as by myself" — '• I thank you, Sen- 
hor," answered Don Francisco, whose 
blood seemed congealing in his veins at 
the voice and expression of the stranger, 

VOL. IV. H 



IfO MELMOTH : 

he knew not why—" I thank you, but 
my curiosity has been completely satisfied 
by the narrative I have already listened 
to. The night is far spent, and I have to 
pursue my journey to-morrow; I will 
therefore defer hearing the particulars 
you offer to gratify me with till our next 
meeting,** 

" As he spoke, he rose from his seat, 
hoping that this action would intimate to 
the intruder, that his presence was no 
longer desirable. The latter continued, in 
spite of the intimation, fixed in his seat. 
At length, starting as if from a trance, he 
exclaimed, " When shall our next meet- 
ing be ?" 

" Don Francisco, who did not feel par- 
ticularly anxious to renew the intimacy, 
shghtly mentioned, that he was on his 
journey to the neighbourhood of Madrid, 
where his family, whom he had not seen 
for many years, resided — that the stages of 
his journey were uncertain, as he would 
be obliged to wait for communications 



A TALE. 171 

from a friend and future relative,— (he al- 
luded to Montilla his intended son-in-law, 
and as he spoke, the stranger gave a pecu- 
liar smile), — and also from certain mercantile 
correspondents, whose letters were of the 
utmost importance. Finally, he added, in 
a disturbed tone, (for the awe of the 
stranger's presence hung round him like a 
chilling atmosphere, and seemed to freeze 
even his words as they issued from his 
mouth), he could not — easily — tell when 
he might again have the honour of meet- 
ing the stranger. " You cannot," said the 
stranger, rising and drawing his mantle 
over one shoulder, while his reverted eyes 
glanced fearfully on the pale auditor — 
" You cannot, — but I can. Don Fran- 
cisco di Aliaga, we shall meet to-morrow 
night !" 

" As he spoke, he still continued to 
stand near the door, fixing on Aliaga eyes 
whose light seemed to burn more intense- 
ly amid the dimness of the wretched a- 
partment. Aliaga had risen also, and was 



172 MELMOTH : 

gazing on his strange visitor with dim and 
troubled vision, — when the latter, sudden- 
ly retreating from the door, approached 
him and said, in a stifled and mysterious 
whisper, " Would you wish to witness 
the fate of those whose curiosity or pre- 
sumption breaks on the secrets of that mys- 
terious being, and dares to touch the folds 
of the veil in which his destiny has been en- 
shrouded by eternity? If you do, look 
here!" And as he spoke, he pointed to a door 
which Don Francisco well remembered to 
be that which the person whom he had 
met at the inn the preceding evening, and 
who had related to him the tale of Guz- 
man's family, (or rather relatives), had re- 
tired by. Obeying mechanically the wav- 
ing of the arm, and the beckoning of the 
stranger's awful eye, rather than the im- 
pulse of his own will, Aliaga followed him. 
They entered the apartment ; it was nar- 
row, and dark, and empty. The stranger 
held a candle aloft, whose dim light fell on 
a wretched bed, where lav what had been 



A TALE. 173 

the form of a living man within a few 
hours. '' Look there !" said the stranger ; 
and Aliaga with horror beheld the figure 
of the being who had been conversing 
with him the preceding part of that very 
evening, — extended a corse ! 

" Advance — look — observe!" said the 
stranger, tearing off the sheet which had 
been the only covering of the sleeper 
who had now sunk into the long and 
last slumber — " There is no mark of vio- 
lence, no distortion of feature, or convul- 
sion of limb — no hand of man was on him. 
He sought the possession of a desperate 
secret — he obtained it, but he paid for it 
the dreadful price that can be paid but 
once by mortals. So perish those whose 
presumption exceeds their power !" 

" Aliaga, as he beheld the body, and 
heard the w^ords of the stranger, felt him- 
self disposed to summon the inmates of 
the house, and accuse the stranger of mur- 
der; but the natural cowardice of a mer- 
cantile spirit, mingled with other feelings 



174 melmoth: 

which he could not analyse, and dared not 
own, withheld him, — and he continued to 
gaze alternately on the corse and the corse- 
like stranger. The latter, after pointing 
emphatically to the body, as if intimating 
the danger of imprudent curiosity, or una- 
vailing disclosure, repeated the words, 
" We meet again to-morrow night !" and 
departed. 

" Aliaga, overcome by fatigue and emo- 
tion, sunk down by the corse, and remain- 
ed in that trance-like state till the servants 
of the inn entered the room. They were 
shocked to find a dead body in the bed, 
and scarce less shocked at the death-like 
state in which they found Aliaga. His 
known wealth and distinction procured 
for him those attentions which otherwise 
their terrors or their suspicions might have 
withheld. A sheet was cast over the 
body, and Aliaga was conveyed to another 
apartment, and attended sedulously by the 
domestics. 

" In the mean time, the Alcaide ar- 



A TALE. 175 

rived ; and having learned that the person 
who had died suddenly in the inn was one 
totally unknown, as being only a writer, 
and a man of no importance in public or 
private life, and that the person found 
near his bed in a passive stupor was a 
wealthy merchant, — snatched, with some 
trepidation, the pen from the ink-horn 
which hung at his button-hole, and sketch- 
ed the record of this sapient inquest : 

" That a guest had died in the house, 
none could deny ; but no one could sus- 
pect Don Francisco di Aliaga of murder." 
" As Don Francisco mounted his mule 
the following day, on the strength of this 
just verdibt, a person, who did not appa- 
rently belong to the house, was particular- 
ly solicitous in adjusting his stirrups, &zc.; 
and while the obsequious Alcaide bowed 
oft and profoundly to the wealthy mer- 
chant, (whose liberality he had amply ex- 
perienced for the favourable colour he had 
given to the strong circumstantial evidence 
against him), this person whispered, in a 



176 melmoth: 

voice that reached only the ears of Don 
Francisco, " We meet to-night 1" 

" Don Francisco checked his mule as 
he heard the words. He looked round 
him — the speaker was gone. Don Fran- 
cisco rode on with a feeling known to few, 
and which those who have felt are perhaps 
the least willing to communicate. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

XciXi/rtv 5i TO (piXAo-uf 

^xXiTTe^TiPOV Oi TCUVTUV 

xxoTvy)(fiiniv (piXavra. 

** JLloN Fkancisco rode on most of that 
day. The weather was mild, and his ser- 
vants holding occasionally large umbrellas 
over him as he rode, rendered travelling 
supportable. In consequence of his long 
absence from Spain, he was wholly unac- 
quainted with his route, and obliged to 
depend on a guide ; and the fidelity of a 
Spanish guide being as proverbial and 

H 2 



178 MELMOTH : 

trust- worthy as Punic faith, towards even- 
ing Don Francisco found himself just 
where the Princess Micomicona, in the ro- 
mance of his countryman, is said to have 
discovered Don Quixote, — " amid a laby- 
rinth of rocks." He immediately dis- 
patched his attendants in various direc- 
tions, to discover the track they were to 
pursue. The guide gallopped after as fast 
as his w^earied mule could go, and Don 
Francisco, looking round, after a long de- 
lay on the part of his attendants, found 
himself completely alone. Neither the 
weather nor the prospect was calculated to 
raise his spirits. The evening was very 
misty, unlike the brief and brilliant twi- 
light that precedes the nights of the fa- 
voured climates of the south. Heavy 
showers fell from time to time, — not inces- 
sant, but seeming like the discharge of 
passing clouds, that were instantly suc- 
ceeded by others. Those clouds gathered 
blacker and deeper every moment, and 
hung in fantastic wreaths over the stony 



A TAXE. 179 

mountains' that formed a gloomy perspec- 
tive to the eye of the traveller. As the 
mists wandered over them, they seemed 
to rise and fade, and shift their shapes and 
their stations like the hills of Ubeda *, as 
indistinct in form and as dim in hue, as 
the atmospheric illusions which in that 
dreary and deceptive light sometimes gave 
them the appearance of primeval moun- 
tains, and sometimes that of fleecv and 
baseless clouds. 

" Don Francisco at first dropt the reins 
on his mule's neck, and uttered sundry 
ejaculations to the Virgin. Finding this 
did no good, — that the hills still seemed 
to wander before his bewildered eyes, and 
the mule, on the other hand, remained 
immoveable, he bethought himself of call- 
ing on a variety of saints, whose names 
the echoes of the hills returned with the 
most perfect punctuality, but not one of 

* Vide Cervantes, apud Don Quixote de Collibus 
Ubeda?. 



180 MELMOTH : 

whom happened just then to be at leisure 
to attend to his petitions. Finding the 
case thus desperate, Don Francisco struck 
spurs into his mule, and gallopped up a 
rocky defile, where the hoofs of his beast 
struck fire at every step, and their echo 
from the rocks of granite made the rider 
tremble, les he was pursued by banditti at 
every step he took. The mule, so provoked, 
gallopped fiercely on, till the rider, weary as 
he was, and somewhat incommoded by its 
speed, drew up the reins more tightly, at 
hearing the steps of another rider close 
behind him. The mule paused instantly. 
Some say that animals have a kind of in- 
stinct in discovering and recognizing the 
approach of beings not of this world. 
However that may be, Don Francisco's 
mule stood as if its feet had been nailed 
to the road, till the approach of the tra- 
veller set it once more into a gallop, on 
which, as it appeared, the gallop of the 
pursuer, whose course seemed fleeter than 
that of an earthly rider, gained fast, and 



A TALE. 181 

in a few moments a singular figure rode 
close beside Don Francisco. 

*•' He was not in a riding dress, but 
muffled from head to foot in a long cloke, 
whose folds were so ample as almost to hide 
the flanks of his beast. As soon as he 
was abreast with Aliaga, he removed that 
part of the cloke which covered his head 
and shoulders, and, turning towards him, 
disclosed the unwelcome countenance of 
his mysterious visitor the preceding night. 
" We meet again, Senhor," said the stran- 
ger, with his peculiar smile, " and fortu- 
nately for you, I trust. Your guide has 
ridden off with the money you advanced 
him for his services, and your servants are 
ignorant of the roads, which, in this part 
of the country, are singularly perplexed. 
If you will accept of me as your guide, 
you will, 1 believe, have reason to con- 
gratulate yourself on our encounter." 

** Don Francisco, who felt that no choice 
was left, acquiesced in silence, and rode 
on, not without reluctance, by the side of 



182 MELMOTH : 

his strange companion. The silence was 
at length broken, by the stranger's point- 
ing out the village at which Aliaga pro- 
posed to pass the night, at no very great 
distance, and at the same time noticing 
the approaching of his servants, who were 
returning to their master, after having 
made a similar discovery. These circum- 
stances contributing to restore Aliaga's 
courage, he proceeded with some degree 
of confidence, and even began to listen 
with interest to the conversation of the 
stranger ; particularly as he observed, that 
though the village was near, the wind- 
ings of the road were likely to retard 
their arrival for some hours. The in- 
terest which had thus been excited, 
the stranger seemed resolved to improve 
to the uttermost. He rapidly unfolded 
the stores of his rich and copiously fur- 
nished mind ; and, by skilfully blending 
his displays of general knowledge with 
particular references to the oriental coun- 
tries where Aliaga had resided, their com- 



A TALE. IBS 

merce, their customs, and their manners, and 
with a perfect acquaintance with the most 
minute topics of mercantile discourse, — he 
so far conciliated his fellow-traveller, that 
the journey, begun in terror, ended in de- 
light, and Aliaga heard with a kind of 
pleasure, (not however unmixed with aw- 
ful reminiscences), the stranger announce 
his intention of passing the night at the 
same inn. 

" During the supper, the stranger re- 
doubled his efforts, and confirmed his suc- 
cess. He was indeed a man who could 
please when he pleased, and whom. His 
powerful intellects, extensive knowledge, 
and accurate memory, qualified him to 
render the hour of companionship delight- 
ful to all whom genius could interest, or 
information amuse. He possessed a fund 
of anecdotical history, and, from the fide- 
lity of his paintings, always appeared him- 
self to have been an agent in the scenes 
he described. This night, too, that the 
attractions of his conversation might want 



184 MELMOTH : 

no charm, and have no shade, he watch- 
fully forbore those bursts of passion, — those 
fierce explosions of misanthropy and male- 
diction, and that bitter and burning irony 
with which, at other times, he seemed to 
delight to interrupt himself and confound 
his hearer. 

" The evening thus passed pleasurably ; 
and it was not till supper was removed, 
and the lamp placed on the table beside 
which the stranger and he were seated a- 
lone, that the ghastly scene of the preced- 
ing night rose like a vision before the eyes 
of Aliaga. He thought he saw the corse 
lying in a corner of the room, and waving 
its dead hand, as if to beckon him away 
from the society of the stranger. The vi- 
sion passed away, — he looked up, — they 
were alone. It was with the utmost effort 
of his mixed politeness and fear, that he 
prepared himself to listen to the tale which 
the stranger liad frequently, amid their 
miscellaneous conversation, alluded to, and 
showed an evident anxiety to relate. 



A TALE. 185 

" These allusions were attended with 
unpleasant reminiscences to the hearer, — 
but he saw that it was to be, and armed 
himself as he might with courage to hear. 
" I would not intrude on you, Senhor,'* 
said the stranger, with an air of grave in- 
terest which Aliaga had never seen him 
assume before — " I would not intrude on 
you with a narrative in which you can feel 
but little interest, were I not conscious 
that its relation may operate as a warning 
the most awful, salutary, and efficacious 
to yourself." — " Me !" exclaimed Don 
Francisco, revolting with all the horror of 
an orthodox Catholic at the sound. — 
" Me !" he repeated, uttering a dozen eja- 
culations to the saints, and making the 
sign of the cross twice that number of 
times. — *' Me !" he continued, discharging 
a whole volley of fulmination against all 
those who, being entangled in the snares 
of Satan, sought to draw others into them, 
whether in the shape of heresy, witchcraft, 
or otherwise. It might be observed, how* 



186 MELMOTH : 

eV^r, that he laid most stress on heresy, 
the latter evil, from the rigour of their 
mythology, or other causes, which it were 
not unworthy philosophical curiosity to in- 
quire into, being almost unknown in 
Spain ; — and he uttered this protestation 
(which was doubtless very sincere) with 
such a hostile and denunciatory tone, that 
Satan, if he was present, (as the speak- 
er half imagined), would have been al- 
most justified in making reprisals. A- 
mid the assumed consequence which pas- 
sion, whether natural or artificial, always 
gives to a man of mediocrity, he felt 
himself withering in the wild laugh of 
the stranger. " You, — you !" he exclaim- 
ed, after a burst of sound that seem- 
ed rather like the convulsion of a de- 
moniac, than the mirth, however frantic, 
of a human being — " you ! — oh, there's 
metal more attractive ! Satan himself, how- 
ever depraved, has a better taste than fx> 
crunch such a withered scrap of ortho- 
doxy as you between his iron teeth. No ' 



A TALE. 187 

— the interest I alluded to as possible for 
you to feel, refers to another one, for whom 
you ought to feel if possible more than for 
yourself Now, worthy Aliaga, your per- 
sonal fears being removed, sit and listen 
to my tale. You are sufficiently acquaint- 
ed, through the medium of commercial 
feelings, and the general information which 
your habits have forced on you, with the 
history and manners of those heretics who 
inhabit the country called England." 

" Don Francisco, as a merchant, avouch- 
ed his knowledge of their being fair deal- 
ers, and wealthy liberal speculators in 
trade ; but (crossing himself frequently) 
he pronounced his utter detestation of 
them as enemies to the holy church, and 
implored the stranger to believe that he 
would rather renounce the most advanta- 
geous contract he had ever made with 
them in the mercantile line, than be sus- 
pected of " I suspect nothing," said 

the stranger, interrupting him, with that 
smile that spoke darker and bitterer things 



188 MELMOTH : 

than the fiercest frown that ever wrinkled 
the features of man. — " Interrupt me no 
more, — listen, as you value the safety of 
a being of more value than all your race 
beside. You are acquainted tolerably 
with the English history, and manners, 
and habits ; the latter events of their his- 
tory are indeed in the mouths of all Eu- 
rope." Aliaga was silent, and the stranger 
proceeded. 



C^e Hobtrs' Calt* 



" In a part of that heretic country lies 
a portion of land they call Shropshire, (" I 
have had dealings with Shewsburv mer- 
chants," said Aliaga to himself, '* they fur- 
nished goods, and paid bills with distin- 
guished punctuality,") — there stood Mor- 
timer Castle, the seat of a family who 



A TALE. 189 

boasted of their descent from the age of 
the Norman Conqueror, and had never 
mortgaged an acre, or cut down a tree, or 
lowered a banner on their towers at the 
approach of a foe, for five hundred years. 
Mortimer castle had held out durintj the 
w^ars of Stephen and Matilda, — it had 
even defied the powers that summoned it 
to capitulation alternately, (about once a 
week), during the struggle between the 
houses of York and Lancaster, — it had al- 
so disdained the summons of Richard and 
Richmond, as their successive blasts shook 
its battlements, while the armies of the 
respective leaders advanced to the field of 
Bosworth. The Mortimer family, in fact, 
by their power, their extensive influence, 
their immense wealth, and the indepen- 
dency of their spirit, had rendered them- 
selves formidable to every party, and supe- 
rior to all. 

'* At the time of the Reformation, Sir 
Roger Mortimer, the descendant of this 
powerful family, vigorously espoused the 



190 MELMOTH : 

cause of tlie Reformers ; and when the no- 
bility and gentry of the neighbourhood 
sent their usual dole, at Christmas, of beef 
and ale to their tenants, Sir Roger, with his 
chaplain attending him, went about from 
cottage to cottage, distributing Bibles in 
English, of the edition printed by Tyn- 
dal in Holland. But his loyalism prevail- 
ed so far, that he circulated along with 
them the uncouth print, cut out of his own 
copy, of the King (Henry VIH.) dispen- 
sing copies of the Bible from both hands, 
which the people, as represented in the 
engraving, caught at with theirs, and 
seemed to devour as the word of life, al- 
most before it could reach them. 

" In the short reign of Edward, the fa- 
mily was protected and cherished ; and the 
godly Sir Edmund, son and successor to 
Sir Roger, had the Bible laid open in his 
hall window, that while his domestics 
passed on their errands, as he expressed 
himself, — " he that runs may read." In 
that of Mary, they were oppressed, con- 



A TAI.E. 191 

fiscated, and menaced. Two of their ser- 
vants were burned at Shrewsbury ; and it 
was said that nothing but a large sum, 
advanced to defray the expences of the 
entertainments made at Court on the ar- 
rival of Philip of Spain, saved the godly 
Sir Edmund from the same fate. 

" Sir Edmund, to whatever cause he 
owed his safety, did not enjoy it long. 
He had seen his faithful and ancient ser- 
vants brought to the stake, for the opinions 
he had taught them, — he had attended 
them in person to the aw^ful spot, and seen 
the Bibles he had attempted to place in 
their hands flung into the flames, as they 
were kindled round them, — he had turned 
with tottering steps from the scene, but 
the crowd, in the triumph of their barba- 
rity, gathered round, and kept him close, 
so that he not only involuntarily witness- 
ed the whole spectacle, but felt the very 
beat of the flames that were consuming 
the bodies of the sufferers. Sir Edmund 
returned to Mortimer Castle, and died. 



192 melmoth: 

** His successor, during the reign of 
Elizabeth, stoutly defended the rights of 
the Reformers, and sometimes grumbled 
at those of prerogative. These grumblings 
were said to have cost him dear — the 
court of purveyors charged him £.3000, 
an enormous sum in those days, for an 
expected visit of the Queen and her court 
— a visit which was never paid. The 
money was, however, paid; and it was 
said that Sir Orlan de Mortimer raised 
part of the money by disposing of his fal- 
cons, the best in England, to the Earl of 
Leicester, the then favourite of the Queen. 
At all events, there was a tradition in the 
family, that when, on his last ride through 
his territorial demesne, Sir Orlando saw 
his favourite remaining bird fly from the 
falconer's hand, and break her jesses, he 
exclaimed, ** Let her fly ; she knows the 
way to my lord of Leicester's." 

" During the reign of James, the Mor- 
timer family took a more decided part. 
The, influence of the Puritans (whom 



A TALE. 193 

James hated with a hatred passing that of 
even a controversialist, and remembered 
with pardonable filial resentment, as the 
inveterate enemies of his ill-fated mother) 
was now increasing every hour. Sir Ar- 
thur Mortimer was standing by King 
James at the first representation of " Bar- 
tholomew Fair," written by Ben Jonson, 
when the prologue uttered these words * : 

" Your Majesty is welcome to a Fair ; 
Such place, such men, such language, and such ware, 
You must expect — with these the zealous noise 
Of your land's faction, scandalized at toys." 

" My lord," said the King, (for Sir Ar- 
thur was one of the lords of the privy 
council), " how deem you by that?" — 
" Please your Majesty," answ^ered Sir 
Arthur, " those Puritans, as I rode to 



* Vide Jonson's play, in which is introduced a 
Puritan preacher, a Banhury man, named Zeal-of- 
the-land Busy. 

VOL. IV. I 



J94 melmoth: 

London, cut off mine horse's tail, as they 
said the ribbons with which it was tied sa- 
voured too much of the pride of the beast 
on which the scarlet whore sits. Pray 
God their shears may never extend from 
the tails of horses to the heads of kings !** 
And as he spoke with affectionate and 
ominous solicitude, he happened to place 
his hand on the head of Prince Charles, 
(afterwards Charles I.), who was sitting 
next his brother Henry, Prince of Wales, 
and to whom Sir Arthur Mortimer had 
had the high honour to be sponsor, as 
proxy for a sovereign prince. 

" The awful and troubled times which 
Sir Arthur had predicted soon arrived, 
though he did not live to witness them. 
His son, Sir Roger Mortimer, a man lofty 
alike in pride and in principle, and immove- 
able in both, — an Arminian in creed, and 
an aristocrat in politics, — the zealous friend 
of the misguided Laud, and the bosom- 
companion of the vmfortunate Strafford, — 
was among the first to urge King Charles 



A TALE. 195 

to those high-handed and impolitic mea^ 
sures, the result of which was so fatal. 

" When the war broke out between the 
King and the Parliament, Sir Roger e- 
spoused the royal cause with heart and 
hand,— raised a large sum in vain, to pre- 
vent the sale of the crown-jewels in Hol- 
land,— and led five hundred of his tenants, 
armed at his own expence, to the battles of 
Edge-hill and Marston-moor. 

" His wife was dead, but his sister, Mrs 
Ann Mortimer, a woman of uncommon 
beauty, spirit, and dignity of character, 
and as firmly attached as her brother to 
the cause of the court, of which she had 
been once the most brilliant ornament, 
presided over his household, and by her 
talents, courage, and promptitude, had 
been of considerable service to the cause. 

" The time came, however, when valour 
and rank, and loyalty and beauty, found 
all their efforts ineffectual ; and of the five 
hundred brave men that Sir Roger had 
led into the field to his sovereign's aid, he 
brought back thirty maimed and mutilated 



]96 melmoth: 

veterans to Mortimer Castle, on the disas- 
trous day that King Charles was persuad* 
ed to put himself into the hands of the 
disaffected and mercenary Scots, who sold 
him for their arrears of pay due by the 
Parliament. 

" The reign of rebellion soon com- 
menced, — and Sir Roger, . as a distinguish- 
ed loyalist, felt the severest scourge of its 
power. Sequestrations and compositions, 
— fines for malignancy, and forced loans 
for the support of a cause he detested, — 
drained the well-filled coffers, and depress- 
ed the high spirit, of the aged loyalist. 
Domestic inquietude was added to his 
other calamities. He had three children. 
— His eldest son had fallen fighting in the 
King's cause at the battle of Newbury, 
leaving an infant daughter, then supposed 
the heiress of immense wealth. His se- 
cond son had embraced the Puritanic 
cause, and, lapsing from error to error, 
married the daughter of an Independent, 
whose creed he had adopted ; and, accord- 



A TALE. 197 

ing to the custom of those days, fought 
all day at the head of his regiment, and 
preached and prayed to them all night, in 
strict conformity with that verse in the 
psalms, which served him alternately for 
his text and his battle- word — " Let the 
praises of God be in their mouth, and a 
two-edged sword in their hands." This 
double exercise of the sword and the word, 
however, proved too much for the strength 
of the saint-militant; and after having, 
during Cromwell's Irish campaign, vigo- 
rously headed the attack on Cloghan Cas- 
tle * the ancient seat of the O'Moores, 



* I have been an inmate in this castle for many 
months — it is still inhabited by the venerable descen- 
dant of that ancient family. His son is now High- 
Sheriff of the King's county. Half the castle was 
battered down by Oliver Cromwell's forces, and re- 
built in the reign of Charles the Second. The re- 
mains of the caslle are a tower of about forty feet 
square, and five stories high, with a single spacious 
apartment on each floor, and a narrow staircase com- 
municating with eachj and reaching to the bartizan. 



198 MELMOTH ; 

princes of Leix, and being scalded 

through his buff-coat by a discharge of 
hot water from the bartizan, — and then 
imprudently given the word of exhorta- 
tion for an hour and forty minutes to his 
soldiers, on the bare heath that surround- 
ed the castle, and imder a drenching rain, 
— he died of a pleurisy in three days, and 
left, like his brother, an infant daughter 
who had remained in England, and had 
been educated by her mother. It was 
said in the family, that this man had writ- 
ten the first lines of Milton's poem " on 
the new forcers of conscience under the 
Long Parliament." It is certain, at least, 
that when the fanatics who surrounded his 
dying bed were lifting up their voices to 



A beautiful ash -plant, which I have often admired, 
is now displaying its foliage between the stones of 
the bartizaUj— and how it got or grew there, heaven 
only knows. There it is, however ; and it is better 
to see it there than to feel the dischar£:e of hot water 
or molten lead from the apertures. 



A TALE. 199 

sing a hymn, he thundered with his last 
breath, 

" Because ye have thrown off your prelate lord. 

And with stiff vows renounce his Liturgy, 

To seize the widowed w — e pluralitie. 

From them whose sin ye envied not, abhorr'd," &c. 

*' Sir Roger felt, though from different 
causes, pretty much the same degree of 
emotion on the deaths of his two sons. 
He was fortified against affliction at the 
death of the elder, from the consolation 
afforded him by the cause in which he 
had fallen ; and that in which the apostate, 
as his father always called him. had pe- 
rished, was an equal preventive against his 
feeling any deep or bitter grief on his dis- 
solution. 

" When his eldest son fell in the royal 
cause, and his friends gathered round him 
in officious condolence, the old loyalist re- 
plied, with a spirit worthy of the proudest 
days of classic heroism, " It is not for my 
dead son that I should weep, but for my 



200 MELMOTH: 

living one." His tears, however, were 
flowing at that time for another cause. 

" His only daughter, during his absence, 
in spite of the vigilance of Mrs Ann, had 
been seduced by some Puritan servants in 
a neighbouring family, to hear an Inde- 
pendent preacher of the name of Sandal, 
who v/as then a serjeant in Colonel Pride's 
regiment, and who was preaching in a 
barn in the neighbourhood, in the inter- 
vals of his military exercises. This man 
was a natural orator, and a vehement en- 
thusiast ; and, with the license of the day, 
that compromised between a pun and a 
text, and delighted in the union of both, 
this serjeant-preacher had baptized himself 
by the name of-—" Thou-art-not-worthy-to- 
unloose-the-latchets-of-his-shoes, — SandaL 

" This was the text on which he preach- 
ed, and his eloquence had such effect on 
the daughter of Sir Roger Mortimer, that, 
forgetting the dignity of her birth, and 
the loyalty of her family, she united her 
destiny with this low-born man ; and, be- 



A TAI.E. 201 

lieving herself to be suddenly inspired 
from this feUcitous conjunction, she ac- 
tually out-preached two female Quakers in 
a fortnight after their marriage, and wrote 
a letter (very ill-spelled) to her father, in 
which she announced her intention to 
" suffer affliction with the people of God," 
and denounced his eternal damnation, if 
he declined embracing the creed of her 
husband ; — which creed was changed the 
following week, on his hearing a sermon 
from the celebrated Hugh Peters, and a 
month after, on hearing an itinerant 
preacher of the Ranters or Antinomians, 
who was surrounded by a troop of licen- 
tious, half-naked, drunken disciples, whose 
vociferations of — " We are the naked 
truth," completely silenced a fifth-mo- 
narchy man, who was preaching from a 
tub on the other side of the road. To this 
preacher Sandal was introduced, and be- 
ing a man of violent passions, and unset- 
tled principles, he instantly embraced the 
opinions of the last speaker, (dragging his 

I 2 



202 MELMOTH : 

wife along with him into every gulph of 
polemical or political difficulty he plunged 
in), till he happened to hear another 
preacher of the Cameronians, whose con- 
stant topic, whether of triumph or of con- 
solation, was the unavailing efforts made 
in the preceding reign, to force the 
Episcopalian system down the throats 
of the Scots ; and, in default of a text, 
always repeated the words of Archy, 
jester to Charles the First, who, on the 
first intimation of the reluctance of the 
Scots to admit Episcopal jurisdiction, ex- 
claimed to Archbishop Laud, " My Lord, 
who is the fool now ?" — for which he had 
his coat stripped over his head, and was 
forbid the court. So Sandal vacillated be- 
tween creed and creed, between preacher 
and preacher, till he died, leaving his wi- 
dow with one son. Sir Roger announced 
to his widowed daughter, his determined 
purpose never to see her more, but he pro- 
mised his protection to her son, if entrust- 
ed to his care. The widow was too poor 



A TALE. SOS 

to decline compliance with the offer of her 
deserted father. 

" So in Mortimer Castle were, in their 
infancy, assembled the three grandchil- 
dren, born under such various auspices 
and destinies. JNIars^aret Mortimer the 
heiress, a beautiful, intelligent, spirited 
girl, heiress of all the pride, aristocratical 
principle, and possible wealth of the fa- 
mily ; Elinor JNIortimer, the daughter of 
the Apostate, received rather than admit- 
ted into the house, and educated in all the 
strictness of her Independent family ; and 
John Sandal, the son of the rejected 
daughter, whom Sir Roger admitted into 
the Castle only on the condition of his be- 
ing engaged in the service of the royal 
family, banished and persecuted as they 
were ; and he renewed his correspondence 
with some emigrant loyalists in Holland, 
for the establishment of his protege, w^hom 
he described, in language borrowed from 
the Puritan preachers, as " a brand snatch- 
ed from the burning." 



204 MELMOTH •• 

" While matters were thus at the Castle, 
intelligence arrived of Monk's unexpect- 
ed exertions in favour of the banished fa- 
mily. The result was as rapid as it was 
auspicious. The Restoration took place 
within a few days after, and the Morti- 
mer family were then esteemed of so 
much consequence, that an express, girth- 
ed from his waist to his shoulders, was 
dispatched from London to announce the 
intelHgence. He arrived when Sir Roger, 
whose chaplain he had been compelled by 
the ruling party to dismiss as a malig- 
nant, was reading prayers himself to his 
family. The return and restoration of 
Charles the Second was announced. The 
old loyalist rose from his knees, w^av- 
ed his cap, (which he had reverently 
taken from his white head), and, sud- 
denly changing his tone of supplication 
for one of triumph, exclaimed, " Lord, 
now lettest thou thy servant depart in 
peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes 
have seen thy salvation !" As he spoke, 



A TALE. 205 

the old man sunk on the cushion which 
Mrs Ann had placed beneath his knees. 
His grandchildren rose from their knees 
to assist him, — it was too late, — his spirit 
had parted in that last exclamation. 



CHAPTER XXVIIL 



-She sat, and thought 



Of what a sailor suffers. 

COWPER. 



" jL he intelligence that was the cause of 
old Sir Roger's death, who might be said 
to be conducted from this world to the 
next by a blessed euthanasia, (a kind of 
passing with a light and lofty step from a 
narrow entry to a spacious and glorious a- 
partment, without ever feeling he trod the 
dark and rugged threshold that lies be- 
tween), was the signal and pledge to this 



A TALE. 207 

ancient family of the restitution of their 
faded honours, and fast-decHning posses- 
sions. Grants, reversals of fines, resto- 
ration of land and chattels, and offers of 
pensions, and provisions, and remunera- 
tions, and all that royal gratitude, in the 
effervescence of its enthusiasm, could be- 
stow, came showering on the IMortimer 
family, as fast and faster than fines, con- 
fiscations, and sequestrations, had poured 
on them in the reign of the usurper. In 
fact, the language of King Charles to the 
Mortimers was like that of the Eastern 
monarchs to their favourites, — " Ask what 
thou wilt, and it shall be granted to thee, 
even to the half of my kingdom." The 
jNIortimers asked only for their own, — and 
being thus more reasonable, both in their 
expectations and demands, than most other 
applicants at that period, they succeeded 
in obtaining what they required. 

" Thus Mrs Margaret Mortimer (so un- 
married females were named at the date of 
the narrative) was again acknowledged as 



208 MELMOTH : 

the wealthy and noble heiress of the Castle. 
Numerous mvitations were sent to her to 
visit the court, which, though recom- 
mended by letters from divers of the 
court-ladies, who had been acquainted, 
traditionally at least, with her family, and 
enforced by a letter from Catherine of 
Braganza, written by her own hand, in 
which she acknowledged the obligations of 
the king to the house of Mortimer, were 
steadily rejected by the high-minded heir- 
ess of its honours and its spirit. — " From 
these towers," said she to Mrs Ann, " my 
grandfather led forth his vassals and te- 
nants in aid of his king, — to these towers 
he led what was left of them back, when 
the royal cause seemed lost for ever. Here 
he Hved and died for his sovereign, — and 
here will I live and die. And I feel that 
I shall do more effectual service to his Ma- 
jesty, by residing on my estates, and protect- 
ing my tenants, and repairing," — she added 
with a smile, — " even with my needle, the 



A TALE. 209 

rents made in the banners of our house by 
many a Puritan's bullet, than if I flaunt- 
ed it in Hyde- Park in my glass coach, or 
masqueraded it all night in that of * St 
James's, even though I were sure to en- 
counter the Duchess of Cleveland on one 
side, and Louise de Querouaille on the 
other, — fitter place for them than me." — 
And so saying, Mrs Margaret Mortimer 
resumed her tapestry w^ork. Mrs Ann 
looked at her with an eye that spoke vo- 
lumes, — and the tear that trembled in it 
made the lines more legible. 

" After the decided refusal of Mrs Mar- 
garet Mortimer to go to London, the fa- 
mily resumed their former ancestorial ha- 
bits of stately regularity, and decorous 
grandeur, such as became a magnificent 
and well-ordered household, of which a 



* See a comedy of Wycherly's^ entitled, "^ Love 
in a Wood, or St James's Park/' where the company 
are represented going there at night in masks, anti 
with torches. 



210 MELMOTH : 

noble maiden was the head and president. 
But this regularity was without rigour, 
and this monotony without apathy — the 
minds of these highly fated females were 
too familiar with trains of lofty thinking, 
and images of noble deeds, to sink into 
vacancy, or feel depression from solitude. 
I behold them," said the stranger, " as I 
once saw them, seated in a vast irregularly 
shaped apartment, wainscotted with oak 
richly and quaintly carved, and as black as 
ebony — Mrs Ann Mortimer, in a recess 
which terminated in an ancient case- 
ment window, the upper panes of which 
were gorgeously emblazoned with the arms 
of the JNIortimers, and some legendary at- 
chievements of the former heroes of the 
family. A book she valued much * lay 
on her knee, on which she fixed her eyes 
intently — the light that came through 
the casement chequering its dark lettered 
pages with hues of such glorious and fan- 

* Taylor's Book of Martyrs. 



A TALE. 211 

tastic colouring, that they resembled the 
leaves of some splendidly-illuminated mis- 
sal, with all its pomp of gold, and azure, 
and vermilion. 

*' At a little distance sat her two grand- 
nieces, employed in work, and relieving 
their attention to it by conversation, for 
which they had ample materials. They 
spoke of the poor whom they had visited 
and assisted, — of the rewards they had dis- 
tributed among the industrious and order- 
ly, — and of the books which they were 
studying; and of which the well-filled 
shelves of the library furnished them with 
copious and noble stores. 

" Sir Roger had been a man of letters 
as well as of arms. He had been often 
heard to say, that next to a well-stocked 
armoury in time of war, was a well-stocked 
library in time of peace ; and even in the 
midst of his latter grievances and priva- 
tions, he contrived every year to make an 
addition to his own. 

" His grand-daughters, well instructed by 



212 MELMOTH : 

him in the French and Latin languages, 
had read Mezeray, Thuanus, and Sully. 
In English, they had Froissart in the 
black-letter translation of Pynson, im- 
printed 1525. Their poetry, exclusive of 
the classics, consisted chiefly of Waller, 
Donne, and that constellation of writers 
that illuminated the drama in the latter 
end of the reign of Elizabeth, and the 
commencement of that of James, — Marlow, 
and Massinger, and Shirley, and Ford — 
cum multis aliis, Fairfax's translations 
had made them familiar with the conti- 
nental poets ; and Sir Roger had consent- 
ed to admit, among his modern collection, 
the Latin poems (the only ones then pub- 
lished) of Milton, for the sake of that in 
Quintum Novembris, — for Sir Roger, next 
to the fanatics, held the Catholics in utter 
abomination." 

" Then he will be damned to all eter- 
nity," said Aliaga, " and that's some satis- 
faction." 

" Thus their retirement was not in- 
elegant, nor unaccompanied with those 



A TALE. 213 

delights at once soothing and elating, 
which arise from a judicious mixture of 
useful occupation and literary tastes. 

" On all they read or conversed of, Mrs 
Ann Mortimer was a living comment. 
Her conversation, rich in anecdote, and 
accurate to minuteness, sometimes rising 
to the loftiest strains of eloquence, as she 
related " deeds of the days of old," and of- 
ten borrowing the sublimity of inspiration, 
as the reminiscences of religion softened 
and solemnized the spirit with which she 
spake, — like the influence of time on fine 
paintings, that consecrates the tints it mel- 
lows, and makes the colours it has half ob- 
scured more precious to the eye of feeling 
and of taste, than they were in the glow 
of their early beauty, — her conversation 
was to her grand-nieces at once histor}' 
and poetry. 

" The events of English history then 
not recorded, had a kind of traditional 
history more vivid, if not so faithful as the 
records of modern historians, in the me- 



214 MELMOTH : 

mories of those who had been agents and 
sufferers (the terms are probably synoni- 
mous) in those memorable periods. 

" There was an entertainment then, ba- 
nished by modern dissipation now, but al- 
luded to by the great poet of that nation, 
whom your orthodox and undeniable creed 
justly devotes to eternal damnation. 

*' In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire, 

****** 



-and tell the tales 



Of woful ages long ago betid ; 

And send the hearers weeping to their beds. 

****** 

We cited up a thousand heavy times." 



" When memory thus becomes the de- 
pository of grief, how faithfully is the 
charge kept ! — and how much superior are 
the touches of one who paints from the 
life, and the heart, and the senses, — to 
those of one who dips his pen in his ink- 
stand, and casts his eye on a heap of mus- 
ty parchments, to glean his facts or his 



A TALE. 215 

feelings from them ! JNIrs Ann Mortimer 
had much to tell, — and she told it well. 
If history was the subject, she could relate 
the events of the civil wars — events which 
resembled indeed those of all civil wars, 
but which derived a peculiar strength of 
character, and brilliancy of colouring, from 
the hand by which they were sketched. 
She told of the time when she rode be- 
hind her brother. Sir Roger, to meet the 
King at Shrewsbury ; and she almost 
echoed the shout uttered in the streets 
of that loyal city, when the University 
of Oxford sent in its plate to be coined 
for the exigences of the royal cause. She 
told also, with grave humour, the anec- 
dote of Queen Henrietta making her 
escape with some difficulty from a house 
on fire, — and, when her life was scarce se- 
cure from the flames that consumed it, 
rushing back among them — to save her 
lap-dog I 

" But of all her historical anecdotes, 
Mrs Ann valued most what she bad to 



216 MELMOTH : 

relate of her own family. On the virtue 
and valour of her brother Sir Roger, she 
dwelt with an unction whose balm impart- 
ed itself to her hearers; and even Elinor, in 
spite of the Puritanism of her early prin- 
ciples, wept as she listened. But when 
Mrs Ann told of the King taking shelter 
for one night in the Castle, under the pro- 
tection only of her mother and herself, to 
whom he intrusted his rank and his mis- 
fortunes, (arriving under a disguise), — 
(Sir Roger being absent fighting his bat- 
tles in Yorkshire) — when she added that 
her aged mother, Lady Mortimer, then 
seventy-four, after spreading her richest 
velvet mantle, lined with fur, as a quilt 
for the bed of her persecuted sovereign, 
tottered into the armoury, and, presenting 
the few servants that followed her with 
what arms could be found, adjured them 
by brand and blade, by lady's love, and 
their hopes of heaven, to defend her royal 
guest. AVhen she related that a band of 



A TALE. 217 

iiatics, after robbing a church of all its sil- 
ver-plate, and burning the adjacent vicar- 
age, drunk with their success, had invest- 
ed the Castle, and cried aloud for " the 
man'' to be brought unto them, that he 
might be hewed to pieces before the Lord 
in Gilgal — and Lady Mortimer had call- 
ed on a young French officer in Prince 
Rupert's corps, who, with his men, had 
been bil letted on the Castle for some days 
— and that this youth, but seventeen years 
of age, had met two desperate attacks of 
the assailants, and twice retired covered 
with his own blood and that of the assail- 
ants, whom he had in vain attempted to 
repel — and that Lady Mortimer, finding 
all was lost, had counselled the royal fugi- 
tive to make his escape, — and furnished 
him with the best horse left in Sir Roger's 
stables to effect his flight, while she re- 
turned to the great hall, whose windows 
were now shattered by the balls that hiss- 
ed and flew round her head, and whose 
doors were fast yielding to the crows and 

VOL. IV. K 



218 MELMOTH : 

other instruments which a Puritan smith, 
who was both chaplain and colonel of the 
band, had lent them, and instructed them 
in the use of— and how Lady Mortimer fell 
on her knees before the young Frenchman, 
and adjured him to make good the defence 
till Iving Charles was safe, and free, and far 
— and how the young Frenchman had 
done all that man could do ; — and finally, 
when the Castle, after an hour's obstinate 
resistance, yielded to the assault of the fa- 
natics, he had staggered, covered with 
blood, to the foot of the great chair 
which that ancient lady had immove- 
ably occupied, (paralyzed by terror and 
exhaustion), and dropping his sword, then 
for the first time, exclaimed, " J'ai fait 
mon devoir!" and expired at her feet — 
and how her mother sat in the same ri- 
gour of attitude, while the fanatics ravag- 
ed through the Castle, — drank half the 
wines in the cellar, — thrust their bayonets 
through the family-pictures, which they 
called the idols of the high-places,— fired 



A TALE. 219 

bullets through the wainscot, and convert- 
ed half the female servants after their own 
way, — and on finding their search after 
the King fruitless, in mere wantonness of 
mischief, were about to discharge a piece 
of ordnance in the hall that must have 
jshattered it in pieces, while Lady Morti- 
mer sat torpidly looking on, — till, perceiv- 
ing that the piece was accidentally point- 
ed towards the very door through which 
King Charles had passed from the hall, 
her recollection seemed suddenly to re- 
turn, and starting up and rushing before 
the mouth of the piece, exclaimed, " A^t 
there! — you shall not there T — and as 
she spoke, dropt dead in the hall. When 
Mrs Ann told these and other thrilling 
tales of the magnanimity, the loyalty, 
and the sufferings of her high ancestry, 
in a voice that alternately swelled with 
energy, and trembled with emotion, and 
as she told them, pointed to the spot 
where each had happened, — her young 
hearers felt a deep stirring of the heart, 



220 MELMOTH : 

— a proud yet mellowed elation that never 
yet was felt by the reader of a written his- 
tory, though its pages were as legitimate 
as any sanctioned by the royal licenser at 
Madrid. 

" Nor was Mrs Ann Mortimer less qua- 
lified to take an interesting share in their 
lighter studies. When Waller's poetry 
was its subject, she could tell of the charms 
of his Sacharissa, whom she knew well, — 
the Lady Dorothea Sidney, daughter of 
the Earl of Leicester, — and compare, with 
those of his Amoret, the Lady Sophia 
Murray. And in balancing the claims of 
these poetical heroines, she gave so accu- 
rate an account of their opposite styles of 
beauty, — entered so minutely into the de- 
tails of their dress and deportment, — and so 
affectingly hinted, with a mysterious sigh, 
that there was one then at court whom 
Lucius, Lord Falkland, the gallant, the 
learned, and the polished, had whispered 
was far superior to both, that her audi- 
tors more than suspected she had herself 



A TALE. i>2l 

been one of the most brilliant stars in that 
galaxy whose faded glories were still re- 
flected in her memory, — and that Mrs 
Ann, amid her piety and patriotism, still 
blended a fond reminiscence of the gallan- 
tries of that court where her youth had 
been spent, — and over which the beau- 
ty, the magnificent taste, and national 
gaiete of the ill-fated Henrietta, had 
once thrown a light as dazzling as it was 
transient. She was listened to by Mar- 
garet and Elinor with equal interest, but 
with far different feelings. Margaret, 
beautiful, vivacious, haughty, and gene- 
rous, and resembling her grandfather and 
his sister alike in character and person, 
could have listened for ever to narrations 
that, while they confirmed her principles, 
gave a kind of holiness to the governing 
feelings of her heart, and made her enthu- 
siasm a kind of virtue in her eyes. An 
aristocrat in politics, she could not con- 
ceive that public virtue could soar to a 
higher pitch than a devoted attachment to 



222 MELMOTH : 

the house of Stuart afforded for its flight ; 
and her religion had never given her any 

disturbance. Strictly attached to the 

Church of England, as her forefathers 
had been from its first establishment, she 
included in an adherence to this not only 
all the graces of religion, but all the vir- 
tues of morality; and she could hardly 
conceive how there could be majesty in 
the sovereign, or loyalty in the subject, or 
valour in man, or virtue in woman, unless 
they were comprised within the pale of 
the Church of England. These qualities, 
with their adjuncts, had been always re- 
presented to her as co-existent with an at- 
tachment to monarchy and Episcopacy^ 
and vested solely in those heroic charac- 
ters of her ancestry, whose lives, and even 
deaths, it was a proud delight to their 
young descendant to listen to, — while all 
the opposite qualities, — all that man can 
hate, or woman despise,— had been repre- 
sented to her as instinctively resident in 
the partizans of republicanism and the 



A TALE. 223 

Presbytery, Thus her feelings and her 
principles, — her reasoning powers and the 
habits of her life, all took one way ; and 
she was not only unable to make the least 
allowance for a divergence from this way, 
but utterly unable to conceive that another 
existed for those who believed in a God, 
or acknowledged human power at all. She 
was as much at a loss to conceive how any 
good could come out of that Nazareth of 
her abhorrence, as an ancient geographer 
would have been to have pointed out A- 
merica in a classical map. — Such was ]\Iar- 
garet. 

" Elinor, on the other hand, bred up a- 
mid a clamour of perpetual contention, — 
for the house of her mother's family, in 
which her first years had been passed, was, 
in the language of the profane of those 
times, a scruple-shop, where the godly of 
all denominations held their conferences 
of contradiction, — had her mind early a- 
wakened to differences of opinion, and op- 
position of principle. Accustomed to hear 



224 MELMOTH : 

these differences and oppositions often ex- 
pressed with the most unruly vehemence, 
she had never, like Margaret, indulged in 
a splendid aristocracy of imagination, that 
bore every thing before it, and made pro- 
sperity and adversity alike pay tribute to 
the pride of its triumph. Since her ad- 
mission into the house of her grandfather, 
the mind of Elinor had become still more 
humble and patient, — more subdued and 
self-denied. Compelled to hear the opi- 
nions she was attached to decried, and the 
characters she reverenced vilified, she sat 
in reflective silence ; and, balancing the 
opposite extremes which she was destined 
to witness, she came to the right conclu- 
sion, — that there must be good on both 
sides, however obscured or defaced by pas- 
sion and by interest, and that great and 
noble qualities must exist in either party, 
where so much intellectual power, and so 
much physical energy, had been displayed 
by both. ISor could she believe that these 
clear and mighty spirits would be for ever 



A TALE. 225 

opposed to each other in their future des- 
tinations, — she loved to view them as chil- 
dren who had " fallen out by the way," 
from mistaking the path that led to their 
father's house, but who would yet rejoice 
together in the light of his presence, and 
smile at the differences that divided them 
on their journey. 

" In spite of the influence of her early 
education, Elinor had learned to appre- 
ciate the advantages of her residence in 
her grandfather's castle. She was fond of 
literature and of poetry. She possessed 
imagination and enthusiasm, — and these 
qualities met with their loveliest indul- 
gence amid the picturesque and historical 
scenery that sui rounded the Castle, — the 
lofty tales told within its walls, and to 
which every stone in them seemed to cry 
out in attestation, — and the heroic and 
chivalrous characters of its inmates, with 
whom the portraits of their high descend- 
ed ancestry seemed starting from their 
gorgeous frames to converse, as the tale of 

K 2 



226 MELMOTH : 

their virtues and their valour was told in 
their presence. This was a different scene 
from that in which she had passed her 
childhood. The gloomy and narrow a- 
partments, divested of all ornament, and 
awaking no associations but those of an 
awful futurity — the uncouth habits, aus- 
tere visages, denunciatory language, and 
polemical fury of its inmates or guests, 
struck her with a feelino^ for which she re- 
proached herself, but did not suppress ; 
and though she continued a rigid Calvi- 
nist in her creed, and listened whenever 
she could to the preaching of the non-con- 
formist ministers, she had adopted in her 
pursuits the literary tastes, and in her 
manners the dignified courtesy, that be- 
came the descendant of the Mortimers. 

" Elinor's beauty, though of a style 
quite different from that of her cousin, 
was yet beauty of the first and finest 
character. Margaret's was luxuriant, 
lavish, and triumphant, — every move- 
ment displayed a conscious grace, — every 



A TALE. 227 

look demanded homage, and obtained 
it the moment it was demanded. Eli- 
nor's was pale, contemplative, and touch- 
ing ; — her hair was as black as jet, and the 
thousand small curls into which, accord- 
ing to the fashion of the day, it was 
woven, seemed as if every one of them 
had been twined by the hand of nature, — 
they hung so softly and shadowingly, that 
they appeared like a veil dropping over 
the features of a nun, till she shook them 
back, and there beamed among them an 
eye of dark and brilliant light, like a star 
amid the deepening shades of twilight. 
She wore the rich dress prescribed by the 
taste and habits of Mrs Ann, who had 
never, even in the hour of extreme ad- 
versity, relaxed in what may be called the 
rigour of her aristocratical costume, and 
would have thought it little less than a 
desecration of the solemnity, had she ap- 
peared at prayers, even though celebrated 
(as she loved to term it) in the Castle-hall, 
unless arrayed in satins and velvets, that. 



2!28 MELMOTH : 

like ancient suits of armour, could have 
stood alone and erect without the aid of 
human inhabitant. There was a soft and 
yielding tone in the gently modulated har- 
mony of EHnor's form and movements, — a 
gracious melancholy in her smile, — a tremu- 
lous sweetness in her voice, — an appeal in 
her look, which the heart that refused to 
answer could not have living pulse within 
its region. No head of Rembrandt's, amid 
its contrasted luxuries of light and shade, 
— no form of Guido's, hovering in exqui- 
site and speechful undulation between 
earth and heaven, could vie with the tint 
and character of Elinor's countenance and 
form. There w^as but one touch to be 
added to the picture of her beauty, and 
that touch was given by no physical grace, 
— no exterior charm. It was borrowed 
from a feehng as pure as it was intense, — 
as unconscious as it was profound. The 
secret fire that lit her eyes with that lam- 
bent glory, while it caused the paleness of 
her young cheek, — that preyed on her 



A TALE. 229 

heart, while it seemed to her imagination 
that she clasped a young cherub in her 
arms, like the unfortunate queen of Vir- 
gil, — that fire was a secret even to herself. 
— She knew she felt, but knew not what 
she felt. 

" When first admitted into the Castle, 
and treated with sufficient hauteur hy her 
grandfather and his sister, who could not 
forget the mean descent and fanatic prin- 
ciples of her father's family, she remem- 
bered, that, amid the appalling grandeur 
and austere reserve of her reception, her 
cousin, John Sandal, was the only one 
who spoke to her in accents of tenderness, 
or turned on her an eye that beamed con- 
solation. She remembered him as the 
beautiful and gentle boy who had lighten- 
ed all her tasks, and partaken in all her re- 
creations. 

** At an early age John Sandal, at his 
own request, had been sent to sea, and 
had never since visited the Castle. On 
the Restoration, the remembered services 



230 3IELMOTH : 

of the Mortimer family, and the high 
fame of the youth's courage and ability, 
had procured him a distinguished situation 
in the navy. John Sandal's consequence 
now rose in the eyes of the family, of 
whom he was at first an inmate on tole- 
ration only ; and even Mrs Ann Mortimer 
began to express some anxiety to hear tid- 
ings of her valiant cousin John. When 
she spoke thus, the light of Elinor's eye 
fell on her aunt with as rich a glow as 
ever summer sun on an evening land- 
scape ; but she felt, at the same moment, 
an oppression, — an indefinable suspension 
of thought, of speech, almost of breath, 
which was only relieved by the tears 
which, when retired from her aunt's pre- 
sence, she indulged in. Soon this feeling 
was exchanged for one of deeper and more 
agitating interest. The war with the 
Dutch broke out, and Captain John San- 
dal's name, in spite of his youth, appear- 
ed conspicuous among those of the officers 
appointed to that memorable service. 



A TALE. 231 

" Mrs Ann, long accustomed to hear 
the names of her family uttered always 
in the same breath with the stirring report 
of high heroic deeds, felt the elation of 
spirit she had experienced in by-gone days, 
combined with happier associations, and 
more prosperous auguries. Though far 
advanced in life, and much declined in 
strength, it was observed, that during the 
reports of the war, and while she listened 
to the accounts of her kinsman's valour 
and fast-advancing eminence, her step be- 
came firm and elastic, her lofty figure di- 
lated to its youthful height, and a colour 
at times visited her cheek, with as rich and 
brilliant a tinge as when the first sighs of 
love murmured over its young roses. The 
high minded Margaret, partaking that 
enthusiasm which merged all personal feel- 
ing in the glory of her family and of her 
country, heard of the perils to which her 
cousin (whom she hardly remembered) was 
exposed, only with a haughty confidence 
that he would meet them as she felt she 



23% MELMOTH : 

would have met them herself, had she 
been, like him, the last male descendant 
of the family of Mortimer. Elinor trem- 
bled and wept, — and when alone she pray- 
ed fervently. 

" It was observable, however, that the 
respectful interest with which she had hi- 
therto listened to the family legends so 
eloquently told by Mrs Ann, was now ex- 
changed for a restless and unappeaseable 
anxiety for tales of the naval heroes who 
had dignified the family history. Happily 
she found a willing narrator in Mrs Ann, 
who had little need to search her memory, 
and no occasion to consult her invention, 
for splendid stories of those whose home 
was the deep, and whose battle-field was 
the wild waste ocean. Amid the gallery 
richly hung with family portraits, she 
pointed out the likeness of many a bold 
adventurer, whom the report of the riches 
and felicities of the new discovered world 
had tempted on speculations sometimes 
wild and disastrous, sometimes prosperous 



A TALE. 233^-^ 

beyond the golden dreams of cupidity. 
" How precarious ! — how perilous P' mur- 
mured Elinor, shuddering. But when Mrs 
Ann told the tale of her uncle, the lite- 
rary speculator, the polished scholar, the 
brave and gentle of the family, who had 
accompanied Sir Walter Raleigh on his 
calamitous expedition, and years after died 
of grief for his calamitous death, Elinor, 
with a start of horror, caught her aunt's 
arm, emphatically extended towards the 
portrait, and implored her to desist. The 
decorum of the family was so great, that 
this liberty could not be taken without an 
apology for indisposition ; — it was duly 
though faintly made, and Elinor retired to 
her apartment. 

" From February 1665, — from the first 
intelligence of De Ruyter's enterprises, 
till the animating period when the Duke 
of York was appointed to the command 
of the Royal fleet, — all was eager and an- 
ticipative excitement, and eloquent expa- 
tiations on ancient achievements, and pre* 



234 MELMOTH : 

sageful hopes of new honours, on the part 
of the heiress of Mortimer and Mrs Ann, 
and profound and speechless emotion on 
that of Elinor. 

" The hour arrived, and an express was 
dispatched from London to Mortimer 
Castle with intelligence, in which King 
Charles, with that splendid courtesy which 
half redeemed his vices, announced him- 
self most deeply interested, inasmuch as 
it added to the honours of the loyal fami- 
ly, whose services he appreciated so high- 
ly. The victory was complete, — and Cap- 
tain John Sandal, in the phrase which 
the King's attachment to French manners 
and language was beginning to render po- 
pular, had " covered himself with glory." 
Amid the thickest of the fight, in an open 
boat, he had carried a message from Lord 
Sandwich to the Duke of York, under a 
shower of balls, and when old^ officers 
had stoutly declined the perilous errand ; 
and when, on his return, Opdam the 
Dutch Admiral's ship blew up, amid the 



jj^ 



A TALE. 235 

crater of the explosion John Sandal plung- 
ed into the sea, to save the half-drown- 
ing, half-burning wretches who clung 
to the fragments that scorched them, or 
sunk in the boiling waves ; and then, — dis- 
missed on another fearful errand, flung 
himself between the Duke of York and 
the ball that struck at one blow the Earl 
of Falmouth, Lord Muskeny, and Mr 
Boyle, and when they all fell at the same 
moment, wiped, with unfaultering hand, 
and on bended knee, their brains and gore, 
with which the Duke of York was cover- 
ed from head to foot. When this was 
read by Mrs Ann Mortimer, with many 
pauses, caused by sight dim with age, and 
diffused with tears, — and when at length, 
finishing the long and laborious read de- 
tail, Mrs Ann exclaimed — " He is a hero !" 
Elinor tremblingly whispered to herself — 
" He is a Christian." 

" The details of such an event forming 
a kind of era in a family so sequestered, 
imaginative, and heroic, as that of the 



236 MELMOTH : 

Mortimers, the contents of the letter sign- 
ed by the King's own hand were read over 
and over again. They formed the theme 
of converse at their meals, and the subject 
of their study and comment when alone. 
Margaret dwelt much on the gallantry of 
the action, and half-imagined she saw the 
tremendous explosion of Opdam's ship. 
Elinor repeated to herself, " And he 
plunged amid the burning wave to save 
the lives of the men he had conquered 1" 
And some months elapsed before the bril- 
liant vision of glory, and of grateful royal- 
ty, faded from their imagination ; and 
when it did, like that of Micyllus, it left 
honey on the eye-lids of the dreamer. 

" From the date of the arrival of this 
intelligence, a change had taken place in 
the habits and manners of Elinor, so strik- 
ing as to become the object of notice to all 
but herself Her health, her rest, and her 
imagination, became the prey of indefina- 
ble fantasies. The cherished images of 
the past, — the lovely visions of her golden 



A TALE. 237 

childhood, — seemed fearfully and insanely 
contrasted in her imagination with the 
ideas of slaughter and blood, — of decks 
strewed with corses, — and of a young and 
terrible conqueror bestriding them amid 
showers of ball and clouds of fire. Her 
very senses reeled between these opposite 
impressions. Her reason could not brook 
the sudden transition from the smiling and 
Cupid-like companion of her childhood, to 
the hero of the embattled deep, and of na- 
tions and navies on fire, — garments rolled 
in blood, — the thunder of the battle and 
the shouting. 

" She sat and tried, as well as her wan- 
dering fancy would allow her, to reconcile 
the images of that remembered eye, whose 
beam rested on her like the dark blue of 
a summer heaven swimming in dewy 
light, — with the flash that darted from the 
burning eye of the conqueror, whose light 
was as fatal where it fell as his sword. 
She saw him, as he had once sat beside 



238 MELMOTH : 

her, smiling like the first morning in 
spring, — and smiled in return. The slen- 
der form, the soft and springy movements, 
the kiss of childhood that felt like velvet, 
and scented like balm, — was suddenly ex- 
changed in her dream (for all her thoughts 
were dreams) for a fearful figure of one 
drenched in blood, and spattered with 
brains and gore. And Elinor, half-scream- 
ing, exclaimed, " Is this he whom 1 
loved?" Thus her mind, vacillating be- 
tween contrasts so strongly opposed, be- 
gan to feel its moorings give way. She 
drifted from rock to rock, and on every 
rock she struck a wreck. 

" Elinor relinquished her usual meet- 
ings with the family — she sat in her own 
apartment all the day, and most of the 
evening. It was a lonely turret project- 
ing so far from the walls of the Castle, 
that there were windows, or rather case- 
ments, on three sides. There Elinor sat 
to catch the blast, let it blow as it would, 



A TALE. 239 

and imagined she heard in its meanings 
the cries of drowning seamen. No music 
that her lute, or that which Margaret 
touched with a more powerful and bril- 
liant finger, could wean her from this me- 
lancholy indulgence. 

" Hush !" she would say to the females 
who attended her — " Hush ! let me lis- 
ten to the blast ! — It waves many a banner 
spread for victory, — it sighs over many a 
head that has been laid low !" 

" Her amazement that a being could 
be at once so gentle and so ferocious — her 
dread that the habits of his life must have 
converted the angel of her uilderness into 
a brave but brutal seaman, estranged from 
the feelings that had rendered the beauti- 
ful boy so indulgent to her errors, — so 
propitiator^' between her and her proud 
relatives, — so aidant in all her amuse- 
ments, — so necessary to her very existence. 
— The tones of this dreamy life harmonized, 
awfully for Elinor, with the sound of the 
blast as it shook the turrets of the Castle, 



240 MELMOTH : 

or swept the woods that groaned and bow- 
ed beneath its awful visitings. And this 
secluded life, intense feeling, and profound 
and heart-rooted secret of her silent pas- 
sion, held perhaps fearful and indescribable 
alliance with that aberration of mind, that 
prostration at once of the heart and the 
intellect, that have been found to bring 
forth, according as the agents were im- 
pelled, " the savour of life unto life, or of 
death unto death." She had all the in- 
tensity of passion, combined with all the 
devotedness of religion ; but she knew not 
which way to steer, or what gale to follow. 
She trembled and shrunk from her doubt- 
ful pilotage, and the rudder was left to the 
mercy of the winds and waves. Slender 
mercy do those experience who commit 
themselves to the tempests of the mental 
world — better if they had sunk at once 
amid the strife of the dark waters in their 
wild and wintry rage ; there they would 
soon have arrived at the haven where they 
would be secure. 



A TALE. 241 

Such was the state of Elinor, when the 
arrival of one who had been long a stran- 
ger in the vicinity of the Castle caused a 
strong sensation in its inhabitants. 

" The widow Sandal, the mother of the 
young seaman, who had hitherto lived in 
obscurity on the interest of the small for- 
tune bequeathed her by Sir Roger, (under 
the rigid injunction of never visiting the 
Castle), suddenly arrived in Shrewsbury, 
which was scarce a mile from it, and de- 
clared her intention of fixing her residence 
there. 

" The affection of her son had showered 
on her, with the profusion of a sailor, and 
the fondness of a child, all the rewards of 
his services — but their glory ; — and in com- 
parative affluence, and honoured and point- 
ed to as the mother of the young hero 
who stood high in royal favour, the widow 
of many sorrows took up her abode once 
more near the seat of her ancestors. 

" At this period, every step taken by the 
member of a family was a subject of anxious 

VOL. IV. L 



242 MELMOTH : 

and solemn consultation to those who con- 
sidered themselves its heads, and there was 
a kind of chapter held in Mortimer Castle 
on this singular movement of the widow 
Sandal . Elinor's heart beat hard during the 
debate — it subsided, however, at the deter- 
mination, that the severe sentence of Sir 
Koger was not to be extended beyond 
his death, and that a descendant of the 
house of Mortimer should never live 
neojlected while almost under the shadow 
of its walls. 

" The visit was accordingly solemnly 
paid, and gratefully received, — there was 
much stately courtesy on the part of Mrs 
Ann towards her niece, (whom she called 
cousin after the old English fashion), and 
a due degree of retrospective humility 
and decorous dejection on that of the wi- 
dow. They parted mutually softened to- 
wards, if not pleased with each other, and 
the intercourse thus opened w^as unremit- 
tingly sustained by Elinor, whose weekly 
visits of ceremony soon became the daily 



A TALE. 243 

visits of interest and of habit. The object 
of the thoughts of both was the theme 
of the tongue of but one ; and, as is not un- 
common, she who said nothing felt the 
most. The details of his exploits, the de- 
scription of his person, the fond enumera- 
tion of the promises of his childhood, and 
the graces and goodliness of his youth, 
were dangerous topics for the listener, to 
whom the bare mention of his name caused 
an intoxication of the heart, from which 
it scarce recovered for hours. 

" The frequency of these visits was not 
observed to be diminished by a faint ru- 
mour, which the widow seemed to believe, 
rather from hope than probability, that 
Captain Sandal was about to visit the 
neighbourhood of the Castle. It was one 
evening in autumn, that Elinor, who had 
been prevented during the day from visit- 
ing her aunt, set out attended only by her 
maid and her usher. There was a private 
path through the park, that opened by a 
small door on the verge of the suburbs 



244 MELMOTH : 

where the widow lived. Elinor, on her 
arrival, found her aunt from home, and 
was informed she had gone to pass the 
evening with a friend in Shrewsbury. 
Elinor hesitated for a moment, and then 
recollecting that this friend was a grave 
staid widow of one of Oliver's knights, 
w^ealthy, however, and well respected, and 
a common acquaintance, she resolved to 
follow her thither. As she entered the 
room, which was spacious, but dimly lit 
by an old-fashioned casement window, she 
was surprised to see it filled with an un- 
usual number of persons, some of whom 
were seated, but the greater number were 
collected in the ample recess of the win- 
dow, and among them Elinor saw a figure, 
remarkable rather for its height, than its 
attitude or pretension, — it was that of a 
tall slender boy, about eighteen, with a 
beautiful infant in his arms, whom he was 
caressing with a tenderness that seemed 
rather associated with the retrospective 
fondness of brotherhood, than the antici- 



A TALE. 245 

pated hope of paternity. The mother of 
the infant, proud of the notice bestowed on 
her child, made, however, the usual incre- 
dulous apology for its troubling him. 

" Troubling me !" said the boy, in tones 
that made Elinor think it was the first time 
she had heard music. " Oh, no — if you 
knew how fond I am of children, — how 
long it is since I had the delight of press- 
ing one to my breast — how long it may be 

again before" and averting his head, 

he bowed it over- the babe. The room was 
very dark, from the increasing shades of 
evening, deepened by the effect of the 
heavy w^ainscotting of its walls ; but at this 
moment, the last bright light of an au- 
tumnal evening, in all its rich and fading 
glory, burst on the casement, powering on 
every object a golden and purpureal light. 
That end of the apartment in which EH- 
nor sat remained in the deepest shade. 
She then distinctly beheld the figure which 
iier heart seemed to recognize before her 
senses. His luxuriant hair, of the richest 



246 MELMOTH : 

brown, (its feathery summits tinged by the 
light resembling the halo round some glo- 
rified head), hung, according to the fashion 
of the day, in clusters on his bosom, and 
half-concealed the face of the infant, as it 
lay like a nestling among them. 

" His dress was that of a naval officer, — 
it was splendidly adorned with lace, and 
the superb insignia of a foreign order, 
the guerdon of some daring deed ; and as 
the infant played with these, and then look- 
ed upward, as if to repose its dazzled sight 
on the smile of its young protector, Elinor 
thought she had never beheld association 
and contrast so touchingly united, — it was 
like a finely coloured painting, where the 
tints are so mellow^ed and mingled into 
each other, that the eve feels no transition 
in passing from one brilliant hue to ano- 
ther, with such exquisite imperceptibility 
are they graduated^ — it was like a fine 
piece of music, where the art of the modu- 
lator prevents your knowing that you pass 
from one key to another ; so softly are the 



A TALE. 247 

intermediate tones of harmony touched, 
that the ear knows not where it wanders, 
but wherever it wanders, feels its path 
is pleasant. The young loveliness of 
the infant, almost assimilated to the beauty 
of the youthful caresser, and yet contrasted 
with the high and heroic air of his figure, 
and the adornments of his dress, (splendid 
as they were), all emblematic of deeds of 
peril and of death, seemed to the imagina- 
tion of Elinor like the cherub-angel of 
peace reposing on the breast of valour, 
and whispering that his toils were done. 
She was awoke from her vision by the 
voice of the widow. — " Niece, this is your 
cousin John Sandal." Elinor started, and 
received the salute of her kinsman, thus 
abruptly introduced, with an emotion, 
which, if it deprived her of those courtly 
graces which ought to have embellished 
her reception of the distinguished stranger, 
gave her, at least, the more touching ones 
of diffidence. 

" The forms of the day admitted of, and 



24S MELMOTH : 

even sanctioned, a mode of salutation since 
exploded ; and as Elinor felt the pressure 
of a lip as vermeil as her own, she trem- 
bled to think that that lip had often given 
the war- word to beings athirst for human 
blood, and that the arm that enfolded her 
so tenderly had pointed the weapons 
of death with resistless and terrible aim 
against bosoms that beat with all the cords 
of human affection. She loved her young 
kinsman, but she trembled in the arms 
of the hero. 

" John Sandal sat down by her, and in 
a few moments the melody of his tones, 
the gentle facility of his manner, the eyes 
that smiled when the lips were closed, and 
the lips whose smile was more eloquent 
in silence than the language of the bright- 
est eyes, made her gradually feel at ease 
with herself — she attempted to converse, 
but paused to listen— she tried to look up, 
but felt like the worshippers of the sun, 
sickening under the blaze she gazed on, — 
and averted her eyes that she might see. 



A TALE. 249 

There was a mild, inoppressive, but most 
seductive light in the dark-blue eyes that 
fell so softly on hers, like moon-light float- 
ing over a fine landscape. And there 
was a young and eloquent tenderness in 
the tones of that voice, which she expected 
to have spoken in thunder, that disarmed 
and dulcified speech almost to luxury. Eli- 
nor sat, and imbibed poison at every inlet of 
the senses, ear, and eye, and touch, for her 
kinsman, with a venial, and to her imper- 
ceptible licence, had taken her hand as he 
spoke. And he spoke much, but not of war 
and blood, of the scenes where he had been 
so eminent, and of the events to which his 
simple allusion would have given interest 
and dignity,— but of his return to his family, 
of the dehght he felt at again beholding his 
mother, and of the hopes that he indulged 
of being not an unwelcome visitor at the 
Castle. He inquired after Margaret with 
affectionate earnestness, and after Mrs Ann 
with reverential regard ; and in mention^ 
ing the names of these relatives, he spoke 

L 2 



250 MELMOTH : 

like one whose heart was at home before 
his steps, and whose heart could make 
every spot where it rested a home to it- 
self and to others. Elinor could have 
listened for ever. The names of the rela- 
tives she loved and revered sounded in her 
ears like music, but the advancing night 
warned her of the necessity of returning to 
the Castle, where the hours were scrupu- 
lously observed ; and when John Sandal 
offered to attend her home, she had no 
longer a motive to delay her departure. 

" It had appeared dark in the room 
where they were sitting, but it was still 
rich and purple twilight in the sky, when 
they set out for the Castle. 

" Elinor took the path through the park, 
and, absorbed in new feelings, was for the 
first time insensible of its woodland beauty, 
at once gloomy and resplendent, mellow- 
ed by the tints of autumnal colouring, and 
glorious with the light of an autumnal eve- 
ning, — till she was roused to attention by 
the exclamations of her companion, who 



A TALE. 251 

appeared rapt into delight at what he be- 
held. This sensibility of nature, this fresh 
and unworn feeling, in one whom she had 
believed hardened by scenes of toil and 
terror against the perception of beauty, — 
whom her imagination had painted to her 
2ls fitter to cross the Alps, than to luxuriate 
in Campania^ — touched her deeply. She 
attempted to reply, but was unable, — she 
remembered how her quick susceptibility 
of nature had enabled her to sympathize 
with and improve on the admiration ex- 
pressed by others, and she wondered at her 
silence, for she knew not its cause. 

" As they approached the Castle, the 
scene became glorious beyond the imagi- 
nation of a painter, whose eye has dream- 
ed of sun-set in foreign climes. The vast 
edifice lay buried in shade, — all its varied 
and strongly charactered features of tower 
and pinnacle, bartizan and battlement, 
were melted into one dense and sombrous 
mass. The distant hills, with their coni- 
cal summits, were still clearly defined in 



252 MELMOTH : 

the dark-blue heaven, and their peaks stilJ 
retained a hue of purple so brilliant and 
lovely, that it seemed as if the light had 
loved to linger there, and, parting, had 
left that tint as the promise of a glorious 
morning. The woods that surrounded 
the Castle stood as dark, and apparently 
as solid as itself Sometimes a gleam like 
gold trembled over the tufted foliage of 
their summits, and at length, through a 
glade which opened among the dark and 
massive boles of the ancient trees, one 
last rich and gorgeous flood of light burst 
in, turned every blade of grass it touched 
into emerald for a moment, — paused on its 
lovely work — and parted. The effect was 
so instantaneous, brilliant, and evanishing, 
that Elinor had scarce time for a half ut- 
tered exclamation, as she extended her 
arm in the direction where the light had 
fallen so brightly and so briefly. She rais- 
ed her eyes to her companion, in that full 
consciousness of perfect sympathy that 
make words seem like counters, compared 



A TALE. 255 

to the sterling gold of a heart-minted look. 
Her companion had turned towards it 
too. He neither uttered exclamation, nor 
pointed with finger, — he smiled, and his 
countenance was as that of an angel. It 
seemed to reflect and answer the last 
bright farewell of day, as if friends had 
parted smiling at each other. It was not 
alone the lips that smiled, — the eyes, the 
cheeks, every feature had its share in that 
effulgent light that w^as diffused over his 
aspect, and all combined to make that 
harmony to the eye, which is often as de- 
liciously perceptible, as the combination of 
the most exquisite voices with the most 
perfect modulation, is to the ear. To the 
last hour of her mortal existence, that 
smile, and the scene w^here it was uttered^ 
were engraved on the heart of Elinor. It 
announced at once a spirit, that, like the 
ancient statue, answered every ray of light 
that fell on it with a voice of melody, and 
blended the triumph of the glories of na- 
ture with the profound and tender felici- 



254 MELMOTH : 

ties of the heart. They spoke no more 
during the remainder of their walk, but 
there was more eloquence in their silence 
than in many words. * * 

" It was almost night before they ar- 
rived at the Castle. Mrs Ann received 
her distinguished kinsman with stately 
cordiality, and affection mingled with 
pride. Margaret welcomed him rather as 
the hero than the relative ; and John, after 
the ceremonies of introduction, turned to 
repose himself on the smile of Elinor. 
They had arrived just at the time when 
the chaplain was about to read the even- 
ing prayers, — a form so strictly adhered to 
at the Castle, that not even the arrival 
of a stranger was permitted to interfere 
with its observance. Elinor watched this 
moment with peculiar solicitude; — her 
religious feelings were profound, and 
amid all the young hero's vivid display of 
the gentlest affections, and purest sensibili- 
ties by which our wretched existence can be 



A TALE. 255 

enhanced or beautified, she still dreaded 
that religion, the companion of deep 
thought and solemn habits, might wander 
far for an abode before it settled in the 
heart of a sailor. The last doubt passed 
from her mind, as she beheld the intense 
but silent devotion with which John min- 
gled in the family rite. There is some- 
thing very ennobling in the sight of male 
piety. To see that lofty form, that never 
bowed to man, bowed to the earth to 
God, — to behold the knee, whose joints 
would be as adamant under the influence 
of mortal force or threat, as flexible as 
those of infancy in the presence of the 
Almighty, — to see the locked and lift- 
ed hands, to hear the fervent aspiration, 
to feel the sound of the mortal weapon 
as it drags on the floor beside the kneeling 
warrior, — these are things that touch the 
senses and the heart at once, and suggest 
the awful and affecting image of all phy- 
sical energy prostrate before the power of 



256 MELMOTH : 

the Divinity. Elinor watched him even 
to the forgetfuhiess of her own devo- 
tions ; — and when his white hands, that 
seemed never formed to grasp a weapon of 
destruction, were clasped in devotion, and 
one of them sHghtly and occasionally rais- 
ed to part the redundant curls that shaded 
his face as he knelt, she thought that she 
beheld at once angelic strength and angelic 
purity. 

" When the service concluded, Mrs 
Ann, after repeating her solemn welcome 
to her nephew, could not help expressing 
her satisfaction at the devotion he had 
showed ; but she mingled with that ex- 
pression a kind of incredulity, that men ac- 
customed to toil and peril could ever have 
devotional feelings. John Sandal bowed 
to the congratulatory part of Mrs Ann's 
speech, and, resting one hand on his short 
sword, and with the other removing the 
thick ringlets of his luxuriant hair, he 
stood before them a hero in deed, and a 



A TALE. 257 

boy in form. A blush overspread his 
young features, as he said, in accents at 
once emphatic and tremulous, " Dear 
Aunt, why should you accuse those of 
neglecting the protection of the Almighty 
who need it most. They who " go down 
to the sea in ships, and occupy their busi- 
ness in the great waters," have the best 
right to feel, in their hour of peril, " it is 
but the wind and the storm fulfilling his 
word." A seaman without a belief and 
hope in God, is worse off than a seaman 
without chart or pilot." 

" As he spoke with that trembling elo- 
quence that makes conviction be felt al- 
most before it is heard, ]\lrs Ann held out 
to him her withered but still snow-white 
hand to kiss. INIargaret presented hers 
also, like a heroine to a feudal knight; 
and Elinor turned aside, and wept in de- 
licious agony. # * * 
* * * * * 

" When we set ourselves resolutely to 



258 MELMOTH : 

discover perfection in a character, we are 
always sure to find it. But Elinor 
needed little aid from the pencil of ima- 
gination to colour the object that had 
been stamped by an ineffaceable touch upon 
her heart. Her kinsman's character and 
temper developed themselves slowly, or 
rather were developed by external and ac- 
cidental causes ; for a diffidence almost fe- 
minine prevented his ever saying much, — 
and when he did, him^self was the last 
theme he touched on. He unfolded him- 
self like a blowing flower, — the soft and 
silken leaves expanded imperceptibly to 
the eye, and every day the tints were 
deepening, and the scent becoming richer, 
till Elinor was dazzled by their lustre, and 
inebriated with the fragrance. 

" This wish to discover excellencies in 
the object we love, and to identify esteem 
and passion by seeking the union of moral 
beauty and physical grace, is a proof that 
love is of a very ennobling character, — 



A TALE. 259 

that, however the stream may be troubled 
by many things, the source at least is 
pure, — and that the heart capable of feel- 
ing it intensely, proves it possesses an 
energy that may one day be rewarded by 
a brighter object, and a holier flame, than 
earth ever afforded, or nature ever could 
kindle. * * * * 

# # « i(& % 

" Since her son's arrival, the widow 
Sandal had betrayed a marked degree of 
anxiety, and a kind of restless precaution 
against some invisible evil. She was now 
frequently at the Castle. She could not 
be blind to the increasing attachment of 
John and Elinor, — and her only thought 
was how to prevent the possibility of 
their union, by which the interest of the 
former and her own importance would be 
materially affected. 

" She had obtained, by indirect means, 
a knowledge of the contents of Sir Roger's 
will ; and the whole force of a mind which 
possessed more of art than of power, and 



260 MELMOTH : 

of a temper which had more passion than 
energy, was strained to reahze the hopes 
it suggested. Sir Roger's will was sin- 
gular. Alienated as he was from his 
daughter Sandal, and his younger son the 
father of Elinor, by the connexions they 
had adopted, it seemed to be the strongest 
object of his wishes to unite their descend- 
ants, and invest the wealth and rank of 
the house of Mortimer in the last of its re- 
presentatives. He had therefore bequeath- 
ed his immense estates to his grand-daugh- 
ter Margaret, in the event of her marrying 
her kinsman John Sandal ; — in the case of 
his marrying Elinor, he was entitled to no 
more than her fortune of £.5000; — and 
the bequest of the greater part of the pro- 
perty to a distant relative who bore the 
name of IMortimer, was to be the conse- 
quence of the non-intermarriage of San- 
dal with either of his cousins. 

" Mrs Ann Mortimer, anticipating the 
effect that this opposition of interest to af~ 
fection might produce in the family, had 



A TALE. 261 

kept the contents of the will a secret, — but 
Mrs Sandal had discovered it by means of 
the domestics at the Castle, and her mind 
wrought intensely on the discovery. She 
was a woman too long familiar with want 
and privation to dread any evil but their 
continuance, and too ambitious of the re- 
membered distinctions of her early life, 
not to risk any thing that might enable 
her to recover them. She felt a personal 
feminine jealousy of the high-minded Mrs 
Ann, and the noble-hearted beautiful Mar- 
garet, which w^as unappeasable; and she 
hovered round the walls of the Castle like 
a departed spirit groaning for its re-admis- 
sion to the place from which it had been 
driven, and feeling and giving no peace 
till its restoration was accomplished. 

" When with these feelings was united 
the anxiety of maternal ambition for her 
son, who might be raised to a noble inhe- 
ritance, or sunk to comparative mediocri- 
ty by his choice, the result may be easily 
guessed ; and the widow Sandal, once de- 



262 MELMOTH : 

termined on the end, felt little scruple a- 
bout the means. Want and envy had 
given her an unslakeable appetite for the 
restored splendours of her former state; 
and false religion had taught her every 
shade and penumbra of hypocrisy, every 
meanness of artifice, every obliquity of in- 
sinuation. In her varied life she had 
known the good, and chosen the evil. 
The M^idow Sandal was now determined 
to interpose an insurmountable obstruc- 
tion to their union. * * * 
^ # ^ ^ * 

*' Mrs Ann still flattered herself that 
the secret of Sir Roger's will was suppress- 
ed. She saw the intense and disrupta- 
ble feeling that seemed to mark John and 
EUnor for each other ; and, with a feeling 
half-borrowed from magnanimity, half 
from romance, (for Mrs Ann had been 
fond of the high-toned romances of her 
day), she looked forward to the felicity 
of their union as being little disturbed by 
the loss of land and lordship, — of the im 



A TALE. 263 

meiise revenues, — and the far-descended 
titles of the Mortimer family. 

" Highly as she prized these distinc- 
tions, dear to every noble mind, she prized 
still more highly the union of devoted 
hearts and congenial spirits, who, tramp- 
ling on the golden apples that were flung 
in their path, pressed forward with unre- 
mitting ardour for the prize of felicity. 

'^ The wedding-day of John and Elinor 
was fixed, — the bridal clothes were made, — 
the noble and numerous friends summon- 
ed, — the Castle hall decorated, the bells of 
the parish church ringing out a loud and 
merry peal, and the blue-coated serving 
men adorned with favours, and employed 
in garnishing the wassail bowl, which was 
doomed by many a thristy eye to be often 
drained and often replenished. Mrs Ann 
herself took with her own hands, from an 
ample chest of ebony, a robe of velvet and 
satin, which she had worn at the court of 
James the First, on the marriage of the 
princess Elizabeth with the prince palatine, 



264 MEI.MOTH : 

of whom the former, to borrow the lan- 
guage of a contemporary writer, had 
" brided and bridled it so well, and indeed 
became herself so handsomely," that Mrs 
Ann, as she arrayed herself, thought she 
saw the splendid vision of the royal bridal 
float before her faded eyes in dim but gor- 
geous pageantry once more. The heiress, 
too, attired herself splendidly, but it was 
observed, that her beautiful cheek was 
paler than even that of the bride, and the 
smile which held a fixed unjoyous station 
on her features all that morning, seemed 
more like the effort of resolution than the 
expression of felicity. The widow Sandal 
had betrayed considerable agitation, and 
quitted the Castle at an early hour. The 
bridegroom had not yet appeared, and the 
company, after having in vain for some 
time awaited his arrival, set out for the 
church, where they supposed he was im- 
patiently expecting them. 

" The cavalcade was magnificent and 
numerous—the dignity and consequence of 



A TALE. ^5 

Uie Mortimer family had assembled all 
who had aspired to the distinction of their 
acquaintance, and such was then the feu- 
dal grandeur attendant on the nuptials of 
a high- descended family, that relatives, 
however remote in blood or in local dis- 
tance, collected for sixty miles in every 
direction around the Castle, and presented 
a " host of friends, gorgeously arrayed and 
attended on that eventful morning." 

" Most of the company, even including 
the females, were mounted on horseback, 
and this, by apparently increasing the num- 
ber of the procession, added to its tumultu- 
ous magnificence. There were some cum- 
brous vehicles, misnomed carriages, of a 
feshion indescribably inconvenient, but 
gorgeously gilded and painted, — and the 
Cupids on the pannels had been re-touch- 
ed for the occasion. The bride was lifted 
on her palfrey by two peers, — I\Iargaret 
rode beside her gallantly attended, — and 
Mrs Ann, who once more saw nobles con- 
tending for her withered hand, and adjust- 

VOL. IV. M 



2C)6 MELMOTH : 

ing her silken rein, felt the long-faded glo- 
ries of her family revive, and led the van 
of the pompous procession with as much 
dignity of demeanour, and as much glow 
of faded beauty, once eminent and resist- 
less, as if she still followed the gorgeous 
]iuptial progress of the princess palatine. 
They arrived at the church, — the bride, 
the relatives, the splendid company, the 
minister — all but the bridegroom, w^ere 
tbere. There was a long painful silence. 
Several gentlemen of the bridal party rode 
rapidly out in every direction in which it 
was thought probable to meet him, — the 
clergyman stood at the altar, till, weary of 
standing, he retired. The crowd from the 
neighbouring villages, combined with the 
numerous attendants, filled the church- 
yard. Their acclamations were incessant, 
— the heat and distraction became intoler- 
able, and Elinor begged for a few moments 
to be allowed to retire to the vestry. 

" There was a casement window which 
opened on the road, and Mrs Ann sup- 



A TALE. 267 

ported the feride as she tottered towards 
it, attempting to loose her wimple, and 
veil of costly lace. As Elinor approached 
the casement, the thundering hoofs of a 
horse at full speed shook the road. Elinor 
looked up mechanically, — the rider was 
John Sandal, — he cast a look of horror at 
the pale bride, and plunging his desperate 
spurs deeper, disappeared in a moment, * 

" A year after this event, two figures were 
seen to walk, or rather wander, almost 
every evening, in the neighbourhood of a 
small hamlet in a remote part of York- 
shire. The vicinage was picturesque and 
attractive, but these figures seemed to 
move amid the scenery like beings, who, 
if they still retained eyes for nature, had 
lost all heart for it. That wan and atte- 
nuated form, so young, yet so withered, 
whose dark eyes emit a fearful light amid 
features chill and white as those of a statue, 
and the young graces of whose form seem 
to have been nipt like those of a Hly that 



2\}S MELMOTH : 

bloomed tbo soon in spring, and was de- 
stroyed by the frost of the treacherous sea- 
son, whose whispers had first invited it to 
bud, — that is EHnor Mortimer, — and that 
figure that walks beside her, so stiff and 
rectangular, that it seems as its motion 
was regulated by mechanism, whose sharp 
eyes are directed so straight forward, that 
they see neither tree on the right hand, or 
glade on the left, or heaven above, or earth 
beneath, or any thing but a dim vision of 
mystic theology for ever before them, 
which is aptlv reflected in their cold con- 
templative light, that is the Puritan maid- 
en sister of her mother, w^ith whom Elinor 
had fixed her residence. Her dress is ar- 
ranged with as much precision as if a ma- 
thematician had calculated the angles of 
every fold, — every pin's point knows its 
place, and does its duty — the plaits of her 
round- eared cap do not permit one hair to 
appear 6n her narrow forehead, and her large 
hood, adjusted after the fashion in which it 
was worn by the godly sisters, who rode out 



A TALE. 269 

to meet Prynne on his return from the pil- 
lory, lends a deeper shade to her rigid fea- 
tures, — a wretched-looking lacquey is carry- 
ing a huge clasped bible after her, in the 
mode in which she remembered to have 
seen Lady Lambert and Lady Des- 
borough march to prayer, attended by their 
pages, while she proudly followed in their 
train, distinguished as the sister of that 
godly man and powerful preacher of the 
word. Sandal. From the day of her dis* 
appointed nuptials, Elinor, with that in- 
sulted feeling of maiden pride, which not 
even the anguish of her broken heart could 
suppress, had felt an unappeaseable anxiety 
to quit the scene of her disgrace and her 
misfortune. It was vainly opposed by her 
aunt and Margaret, who, horror-struck at 
the event of those disastrous nuptials, and 
wholly unconscious of the cause, had im- 
plored her, with all the energy of affection, 
to fix her residence at the Castle, within 
whose walls they pledged themselves he who 
had abandoned her should never be permit- 



270 melmoth: 

ted to place his foot. Elinor answered the 
impassioned importunities, only by eager 
and clinging pressures of her cold hands, 
and by tears which trembled on her eye- 
lids, without the power to fall. — " Nay, stay 
with us," said the kind and noble-hearted 
Margaret, " you shall not leave us I" And 
she pressed the hands of her kinswoman, 
with that cordial touch that gives a welcome 
as much to the heart as to the home of 
the inviter. — " Dearest cousin," said Eli- 
nor, answering, for the first time, this affec- 
tionate appeal with a faint and ghastly 
smile — " I have so many enemies within 
these walls, that I can no longer encounter 
them with safety to my life." — " Ene- 
mies !" repeated Margaret. — " Yes, dearest 
cousin — there is not a spot where he trod — 
not a prospect on which he has gazed — 
not an echo which has repeated the sound 
of his voice, — that does not send daggers 
through my heart, which those who wish 
me to live would not willingly see infixed 
any longer." To the emphatic agony with 



A TALE. 271 

which these words were uttered, Margaret 
had nothing to reply but with tears ; and 
EHnor set out on her journey to the rela- 
tive of her mother, a rigid Puritan, who 
resided in Yorkshire. 

" As the carriage was ordered for her 
departure, INIrs Ann, supported by her 
female attendants, stood on the draw- 
bridge to take leave of her niece, with so- 
lemn and affectionate courtesy. Margaret 
wept bitterly, and aloud, as she stood at a 
easement, and waved her hand to Elinor. 
Her aunt never shed a tear, till out of the 
presence of the domestics, — but when all 
was over, — " she entered into her chamber, 
and wept there." 

" When her carriage had driven some 
miles from the Castle, a servant on a fleet 
horse followed it at full speed with Eli- 
nor's lute, which had been forgotten, — it 
was offered to her, and after viewing it for 
some moments with a look in which me- 
mory struggled with grief, she ordered its 
strings to be broken on the spot, and pro- 
ceeded on her journey. 



,^272 MELMOTH : 

*' Tlie retreat to which Ehnor had retired, 
did not afford her the tranquillity she ex- 
pected. Thus, change of place always de- 
ceives us with the tantalizing hope of re- 
lief, as we toss on the feverish bed of life. 

" She went in a faint expectation of the 
revival of her religious feelings — she went 
to wed, amid the solitude and desert 
where she had first known him, the im- 
mortal bridegroom, who would never de- 
sert her as the mortal one had done, — but 
she did not find him there — the voice of 
God was no longer heard in the garden — 
either her religious sensibility had abated, 
or those from whom she first received the 
impression, had no longer power to renev/ 
it, or perhaps the heart which has ex- 
hausted itself on a mortal object, does not 
find its powers soon recruited to meet the 
image of celestial beneficence, and ex- 
change at once the visible for the invisible, 
— the felt and present, for the future and 
the unknown. 

" Ehnor returned to the residence of 
her mother's family in the hope of renew- 



A TALE. 273 

ing former images, but she found only 
the words that had conveyed those ideas, 
and she looked around in vain for the im- 
pressions they had once suggested. W^hen 
we thus come to feel that all has been il- 
lusion, even on the most solemn subjects, 
— that the future world seems to be desert- 
ing us along with the present, and that 
our own liearts, with all their treachery, 
have done us no more wrong than the 
false impressions which we have received 
from our religious instructors, we are like 
the deity in the painting of the great Ita- 
lian artist, extending one hand to the sun, 
and the other to the moon, but touching 
neither. Elinor had imagined or hoped, 
that the language of her aunt would have 
revived her habitual associations — she w^as 
disappointed. It is true no pains were 
spared — when Elinor wished to read, she 
was furnished amply with the "Westminster 
Confession, or Prynne's Histriomastrix ; or 
if she wished for lighter pages, for the 
Belles Lettres of Puritanism, there were 

M 2 



274 MELMOTH : 

John Bunyan's Holy War, or the life of 
Mr Bad man. If she closed the book in 
despair at the insensibility of her untouch- 
ed heart, she was invited to a godly con- 
ference, where the non-comformist minis- 
ters, who had been, in the language of 
the day, extinguished under the Bartholo- 
mew bushel *, met to give the precious 
word in season to the scattered fold of the 
Lord. Elinor knelt and wept too at these 
meetings ; but, while her form was prostrat- 
ed before the Deity, her tears fell for one 
whom she dared not name. When, in in- 
controulable agony, she sought, like Jo- 
seph, where she might weep unobserved 
and unrestrained, and rushed into the nar- 
row garden that skirted the cottage of her 
aunt, and wept there, she was followed by 
the quiet, sedate figure, moving at the 
rate of an inch in a minute, who offered 
her for her consolation, the newly publish- 



* Anachronism — n'importe. 



WrAhT../ 275 

ed and difficultly obtained work of Mar- 
shall on Sanctification. 4 

** Elinor, accustomed too much to that 
fatal excitement of the heart, \vhich ren- 
ders all other excitement as faint and fee- 
ble as the air of heaven to one who has 
been inhaling the potent inebriation of the 
strongest perfumes, wondered how this* 
being, so abstracted, cold, and unearthly, 
could tolerate her motionless existence. 
She rose at a fixed hour, — at a fixed hour 
she prayed, — at a fixed hour received the 
godly friends who visited her, and whose 
existence was as monotonous and apathetic 
as her own, — at a fixed hour she dined, — 
and at a fixed hour she prayed again, and 
then retired, — yet she prayed without unc- 
tion, and fed without appetite, and retired to 
rest without the least inclination to sleep. 
Her life was mere mechanism, but the 
machine was so well wound up, that it ap- 
peared to have some quiet consciousness 
and sullen satisfaction in its movements. 

" Elinor struggled in vain for the re- 



2Xp MELMOTH : 

newal of this life of cold mediocrity, — she 
thirsted for it as one who, in the deserts of 
Afric, expiring for want of water, would 
wish for the moment to be an inmate of 
Lapland, to drink of their eternal snows, 
— yet at that moment w^onders how its 
inhabitants can live among SNO^v. She 
saw a being far inferior to herself in men- 
tal power, — of feelings that hardly deserved 
tlie name — tranquil, and wondered that 
she herself was wTctched. — Alas ! she 
did not know, that the heartless and un- 
imaginative are those alone who entitle 
themselves to the comforts of life, and 
who can alone enjoy them. A cold and 
sluggish mediocrity in their occupations 
or their amusements, is all they require — 
pleasure has with them no meaning but 
the exemption from actual suffering, nor 
do they annex any idea to pain but the 
immediate infliction of corporeal suffering, 
or of external calamity — the source of 
pain or pleasure is never found in their 
hearts — while those who have profound 



A TAI.E. 277 

feelings scarce ever look elsewhere for 
either. So much the worse for them, — the 
being reduced to providing for the neces- 
sities of human life, and being satisfied 
when that provision is made, is perhaps 
the best condition of human life — beyond 
that, all is the dream of insanity, or the 
agony of disappointment. Far better the 
dull and dusky winter*s day, whose gloom, 
if it never abates, never increases, — (and 
to which we lift up an eye of listlessness, 
in which there is no apprehension of fu- 
ture and added terrors), — to the glorious 
fierceness of the summer's day, whose sun 
sets amid purple and gold, — while, panting 
under its parting beams, w^e see the clouds 
collecting in the darkening East, and view 
the armies of heaven on their march, 
whose thunders are to break our rest, and 
w^hose lightnings may crumble us to ashes. 

» 7P- -^ -S^ * 

" Elinor strove hard with her fate, — the 
strength of her intellect had been much 
developed since her residence at Mortimer 



278 MELMOTH : 

Castle, and there also the energies of her 
heart had been developed fatally. How 
dreadful is the conflict of superior intellect 
and a burning heart, with the perfect me- 
diocrity of the characters and circumstan- 
ces they are generally doomed to live with ! 
The battering-rams play against wool-bags, 
— the lightnings glance on ice, hiss, and 
are extinguished. The greater strength we 
exhibit, we feel we are more and more 
paralyzed by the weakness of our enemies, 
— our very energy becomes our bitterest 
enemy, as it fights in vain against the im- 
pregnable fortress of total vacuity ! It is 
in vain we assail a foe who neither 
knows our language or uses our weapons. 
Elinor gave it up, — yet still she struggled 
with her own feelings ; and perhaps the 
conflict which she now undertook was the 
hardest of all. She had received her first 
religious impressions under the roof of her 
Puritanic aunt, and, true or false, they had 
been so vivid, that she was anxious to re- 
vive them. When the heart is robbed of 



A TALE. 279 

its first-born, there is nothing it will not 
try to adopt. Elinor remembered a very 
affecting scene that had occurred in her 
childhood, beneath the roof where she now 
resided. 

" An old non-conformist minister, a very 
Saint John for sanctity of life, and simpli- 
city of manners, had been seized by a 
magistrate while giving the word of con« 
solation to a few of his flock who had met 
at the cottage of her aunt. 

'* The old man had supplicated for a 
moment's delay on the part of the civil 
power, and its officers, by an unusual effort 
of toleration or of humanity, complied. 
Turning to his congregation, who, amid 
the tumult of the arrest, had never risen 
from their knees, and only changed the 
voice of supplication from praying with 
their pastor, to praying for him, — he 
quoted to them that beautiful passage from 
the prophet Malachi, which appears to 
give such delightful encouragement to the 
spiritual intercourse of Christians, — ** Then 



280 MELMOTil : 

they that feared the Lord, spoke often to 
one another, and the Lord heard it," &c. 
As he spoke, the old man was dragged 
away by some rougher hands, and died 
soon after in confinement. 

" On the young imagination of Elinor, 
this scene was indelibly written. Amid 
the magnificence of Mortimer Castle, it 
had never been effaced or obscured, and 
now she tried to make herself in love with 
the sounds and the scene that had so deep- 
ly touched her infant heart. 

" Resolute in her purposes, she spared 
no pains to excite this reminiscence of re- 
ligion, — it was her last resource. Like the 
wife of Phineas, she struggled to bear an 
heir of the soul, even while she named 
him Ichahod, — and felt the glory was de- 
parted. She went to the narrow apart- 
ment, — she seated herself in the very chair 
that venerable man occupied when he was 
torn from it, and his departure appeared 
to her like that of an ascending prophet. 
She would then have caught the folds of 



A TALE. 281 

his mantle, and mounted with him, even 
though his flight had led to prison and to 
death. Slie tried, by repeating his last 
words, to produce the same effect they had 
once had on her heart, and wept in inde- 
scribable agony at feeling those words had 
no meaning now for her. When life and 
passion have thus rejected us, the backward 
steps we are compelled to tread towards 
the path we have w^andered from, are ten 
thousand times more torturing and arduous 
than those we have exhausted in their 
pursuit. Hope then supported our hands 
every step we took. Remorse and disap- 
pointment scourge us back, and every step 
is tinged w4th tears or with blood ; and 
well it is for the pilgrim if that blood is 
drained from his heart, for then — his pil- 
grimage will be sooner terminated. * 

** At times Elinor, who had forgotten 
neither the language or habits of her for- 
mer existence, would speak in a manner 
that gave her Puritanic relative hopes that, 



282 XIELMOTH : 

according to the language of the times, 
** the root of the matter was in her," — and 
when the old lady, in confidence of her re- 
turning orthodoxy, discussed long and 
learnedly on the election and perseverance 
of the saints, the listener would startle 
her by a burst of feeling, that seemed to 
her aunt more like the ravings of a de- 
moniac, than the language of a human 
being,^-especially one who had from her 
youth known the Scriptures. She would 
say, " Dearest aunt, I am not insensible of 
what you say ; from a child, (thanks to 
your care), I have known the holy scrip- 
tures. I have felt the power of religion* 
At a latter period I have experienced all 
the enjoyments of an intellectual exis- 
tence. Surrounded by splendour, 1 have 
conversed with enlarged minds, — 1 have 
seen all that life can shew me, — I have 
lived with the mean and the rich, — the 
spiritual in their poverty, and the world- 
ly-minded in their grandeur, — I have deep- 
ly drank of the cup which both modes of 



A TALE. 28^ 

existence held to my lip, — and at this 
moment I swear to you, — one moment of 
heart, — one dream such as once I dream- 
ed, (and thought I should never awake 
from), is worth all the existence that the 
earthly-minded lavish on this world, and 
those who mystify expend on the next !" — 
" Unfortunate wretch! and undone for ever- 
lasting !" cried the terrified Calvinist, lifting 
up her hands, — '* Cease, cease," said Elinor 
with that dignity which grief alone can 
give, — " If I have indeed devoted to an 
earthly love that w^hich is due to God 
alone, is not my punishment certain in a 
future state ? Has it not already commen- 
ced here ? May not then all reproaches be 
spared when Ave are sufifering more than 
human enmity can wish us, — when our 
very existence is a bitterer reproach to us 
than malignity can utter ?" — As she spoke, 
she added, wiping a cold tear from her 
wasted cheek, " My stroke is heavier than 
my groaning !" 

" At other times she appeared to listen 



!28i MELMOTH : 



to the language of the Puritan preachers 
{for all were preachers who frequented the 
house) with some appearance of attention, 
and then, rushing from them without any 
conviction but that of despair, exclaimed 
in her haste, ** All men are liars !" Thus 
it fares with those who wish to make an 
instant transition from one world to an- 
other, — it is impossible, — the cold wave in- 
terposes — for ever interposes, between the 
wilderness and the land of promise — and 
we may as soon expect to tread the 
threshold which parts life and death with- 
out pain, as to cross the interval which 
separates two modes of existence so distinct 
as those of passion and religion, without 
struggles of the soul inexpressible — with- 
out groanings which cannot be uttered. 

*' To these struggles there was soon to 
be an addition. Letters at this period cir- 
culated very slowly, and were written only 
on important occasions. Within a very 
short period, Elinor received two letters by 
express from Mortimer Castle, written by 



A TALE. 285 

her cousin Margaret. The first announced 
the arrival of John Sandal at the Castle, 
— the second, the death of Mrs Ann, — the 
postscriptums of both contained certain 
mysterious hints relative to the interrup- 
tion of the marriage, — intimations that the 
cause was known only to the writer, to 
Sandal and to his mother, — and entreaties 
that Elinor would return to the Castle, 
and partake of the sisterly love with which 
Margaret and John Sandal would be glad 
to receive her. The letters dropt from her 
hand as she received them,— of John San- 
dal she had never ceased to think, but she 
had never ceased to wish not to think, — and 
his name even now gave her a pang which 
she could neither utter or suppress, and 
which burst forth in an involuntary shriek, 
that seemed like the last string that breaks 
in the exquisite and too-highly strung in- 
strument of the human heart. 
V " Over the account of Mrs Ann's death, 
she lingered with that fearful feeling that 
a young adventurer experiences, who sees 



586 MEXMOTH : 

a noble vessel set out before him on a 
voyage of discovery, and wishes, while lin- 
gering in harbour himself, that he w^as 
already at the shore where it has arrived, 
and tasted of its repose, and participated 
in its treasures. 

" Mrs Ann's death had not been un- 
worthy of that life of magnanimity and 
high heroic feehng which had marked 
every hour of her mortal existence — she 
had espoused the cause of the rejected Eli- 
nor, and sworn in the chapel of Mortimer 
Castle, while Margaret knelt beside, never 
to admit within its walls the deserter of 
his betrothed bride. 

On a dim autumnal evening, when Mrs 
Ann, with fading sight but undiminished 
feeling, was poring over some of Lady 
Russel's letters in manuscript, and, to re- 
lieve her eyes, sometimes glanced on 
the manuscript of Nelson's Fasts and Fes- 
tivals of the Church of England, — it was 
announced to her that a Cavalier (the ser- 
vants well knew the charm of that name 
to the ear of the ancient loyalist) had 



A TALE. 287 

crossed the draw-bridge, entered the hall, 
and was advancing to the apartment where 
she sat. '' Let him be admitted," was her 
answer, and rising from her chair, which 
was so lofty and so spacious, that as she 
Hfted herself from it to greet the stranger 
with a courtly reception, her form appear- 
ed like a spectre rising from an ancient 
monument, — she stood facing the entrance 
— at that entrance appeared John Sandal. 
She bent forwards for a moment, but her 
eyes, bright and piercing, still recognized 
him in a moment. 

" Back ! — back !" — exclaimed the stately 
ancestress, waving him off with her wither- 
ed hand — " Back ! — profane not this floor 
with another step !" — " Hear me, nnadam, 
for one moment — suffer me to address you, 
even on my knees — I pay the homage to 
your rank and relationship — misunder- 
stand it not as an acknowledgement of 
guilt on my part !" 

" Mrs Ann's features at this action 
underwent a slight contraction — a short 



288 MELMOTH : 

spasmodic affection. " Rise, Sir — rise/' 
she said — *' and say what you have to say 
— but utter it, Sir, at the door whose 
threshold you are unworthy to tread." 

" John Sandal rose from his knees, and 
pointed instinctively as he rose to the 
}>ortrait of Sir Roger Mortimer, to whom 
he bore a striking resemblance. Mrs J\.nn 
acknowledged the appeal — she advanced a 
few steps on the oaken floor — she stood 
erect for a moment, and then, pointing 
with a dignity of action which no pencil 
could embody to the portrait, seemed to 
consider her attitude as a valid and eloquent 
answer — it said — he to whose resemblance 
you point, and claim protection from, never 
like you dishonoured these walls by an act 
of baseness — of heartless treachery ! Be- 
trayer ! — look to his portrait ! Her expres-. 
sion had in it something of the sublime — 
the next moment a strong spasm contract- 
ed her features — she attempted to speak, 
but her lips no longer obeyed her— she 
seemed to speak, but was not heard even 



A TALE. 289^ 

by herself. She stood for a moment before 
John Sandal in that rigid immoveable at- 
titude that says, " Advance not another 
step at your peril — insult not the portraits 
of your ancestors — insult not their living 
representative, by another step of intru- 
sion !" As she spoke thus, (for her atti- 
tude "Spoke), a stronger spasm contracted 
her features. She attempted to move — 
the same rigid constriction extended to 
her limbs ; and, waving her prohibitory 
arm still, as if in defiance at once of the 
approach of death and of her rejected 
kinsman, she dropt at his feet. * 

« ^ « 4i^ « 

" She did not long survive the inter- 
view, nor did she ever recover the use of 
speech. Her powerful intellect was, how- 
ever, unimpaired ; and to the last she ex- 
pressed herself most intelligibly by action, 
as determined not to hear a word explana- 
tory of Sandal's conduct. This explanation 
was therefore made to Margaret, who, 
though much shocked and agitated at the 

VOL. IV. N 



290 MELMOTH : 

first disclosure, seemed afterwards perfect* 
]y reconciled to it. * * ^ 

^ tJt w *Js ^ 

" Shortly after the receipt of these let- 
ters, Elinor took a sudden, but perhaps 
not singular resolution, — she determined to 
set out immediately for Mortimer Castle. 
It was not her weariness of the withering 
life, the uQtuT^g fiio? she lived at her Purita- 
nic aunt's — -it was not the wish to enjoy 
again the stately and splendid ceremonial 
of Mortimer Castle, contrasted with the 
frugal fare and monastic rigour of the cot- 
tage in Yorkshire — it was not even the 
wish for that change of place that always 
flatters us with change of circumstance, as 
if we did not carry our own hearts with us 
wherever we go, and might not therefore 
be sure that an innate and eroding ulcer 
must be our companion from the Pole to 
the Equator — it was not this, but a whis- 
per half unheard, yet believed, (just in 
proportion as it was inaudible and incre- 
dible), that murmured from the bottom of 
her credulous heart, ' Go — and perhaps' — 



A TALE. 291 

" Elinor set out on her journey, and 
after having performed it with fewer diffi- 
culties than can be imagined, considering 
the state of the roads, and the modes of 
travelling in the year 1667 or thereabouts, 
she arrived in the vicinity of Mortimer 
Castle. It was a scene of reminiscence to 
her, — her heart throbbed audibly as the 
carriage stopped at a Gothic gate, through 
which there was a walk between two rows 
of lofty elms. She alighted, and to the 
request of the servant who followed her, 
that he might be permitted to shew her 
the way through a path entangled by 
the intersecting roots of the trees, and 
dim with twilight, she answered only 
by her tears. She waved him off, and 
advanced on foot and alone. She re- 
membered, from the bottom of her soul, 
how she had once wandered amid that 
very grove with John Sandal — how his 
smile had shed a richer light on the 
landscape, than even the purple smile of 
the dying day-light. She thought of that 



292 MELMOTH : 

smile, and lingered to catch it amid the 
rich and burning hues flung by the fading 
light on the many-tinted boles of the an- 
cient trees. The trees were there — and 
the light was there — but his smile, that 
once eclipsed the sun-light, was there no 
longer ! 

" She advanced alone — the lofty avenue 
of trees still retained its magnificent depth 
of shade, and gorgeous colouring of trunk 
and leaf She sought among them for 
that which she had once felt — and God 
and nature alone are conscious of the ago- 
ny with which we demand from them the 
object which we are conscious was once 
consecrated to our hearts, and which we 
now require of both in vain ! God with- 
holds, — and Nature denies them ! 

" As Elinor with trembling steps ad- 
vanced towards the Castle, she saw the 
funeral scutcheon which Mrs Margaret, in 
honour of her grand-aunt, had caused to 
be affixed over the principal tower since 
her decease, with the same heraldric deco- 



A TALE. '293 

mm as if the last male of the Mortimer 
family were extinct. Elinor looked up, 
and many thoughts rushed on her heart. — 
" There is one departed," she thought, 
" whose mind was always fixed on glorious 
thoughts — the most exalted actions of hu- 
manity, or the sublime associations of eter- 
nity ! Her noble heart had room but for 
two illustrious guests — the love of God, 
and the love of her country. They tarried 
with her to the last, for they found the 
abode worthy of them ; and when they 
parted, the inmate found the mansion 
untenantable any longer — the soul fled 
with its glorious visitors to heaven ! My 
treacherous heart welcomed another in- 
mate, and how has he repaid its hospita- 
lity ? — By leaving the mansion in ruins !" 
As she spoke thus, she approached the en- 
trance of the Castle. 

" In the spacious hall she was receiv- 
ed by Margaret Mortimer with the em- 
brace of rooted affection, and by John 
Sandal, who advanced after the first en- 



294t MELMOTH : 

thusiasm of meeting was over, with that 
calm and brother-like good-will, from 
which there was — nothing to be hoped. 
There was the same heavenly smile, the 
same clasp of the hand, the same tender 
and almost feminine expression of anxiety 
for her safety— even Margaret herself, 
who must have felt, and who did feel 
the perils of the long journey, did not 
enter into them with that circumstan- 
tiality, or appear to sympathize with them 
so vividly, or, when the tale of toil and 
travel was told, appear to urge the neces- 
sity of speedy retirement, with such soli- 
citude as did John Sandal. Elinor, faint 
and gasping, grasped the hands of both, 
and by an involuntary motion locked both 
together. The widow Sandal was present 
— she shewed much agitation at the ap- 
pearance of Elinor ; but when she saw this 
extraordinary and spontaneous movement, 
it was observed she smiled. 

" Soon after, Elinor retired to the a- 
partment she had formerly occupied. By 



A TALE. 295 

the affectionate and delicate prevoyance of 
Margaret, the furniture had all been chang- 
ed — there was nothing to remind her of 
former days, except her heart. She sat for 
some time reflecting on her reception, and 
hope died within her heart as she thought 
of it. The strongest expression of aver- 
sion or disdain would not have been so 
withering. 

" It is certain that the fiercest passions 
may be exchanged for their widest ex- 
tremes in a time incredibly short, and by 
means the most incalculable. Within the 
narrow circle of a day, enemies may em- 
brace, and lovers may hate, — but, in the 
course of centuries, pure complacency and 
cordial good-will never can be exalted 
into passion. The wretched Elinor felt 
this, — and feeling it, knew that all was 
lost. 

" She had now, for many days, to un- 
dergo the torture of complacent and fra- 
ternal affection from the man she loved, — 
and perhaps a keener torture was never 



296 MELMOTH : 

endured. To feel hands that we long to 
press to our burning hearts, touch ours 
with cool and pulseless tranquillity — to 
see eyes in whose light we live, throw on 
us a cold but smiling beam, that gives 
light, but not fertility, to the parched and 
thirsting soil of the heart — to hear the or-^ 
dinary language of affectionate civiUty ad- 
dressed to us in tones of the most delicious 
suavity — to seek in these expressions an 

ulterior meaning, and to find it not 

This — this is an agony which only those 
who have felt can conceive ! 

" Elinor, with an effort that cost her 
heart many a pang, mingled in the habits 
of the house, which had been greatly 
changed since the death of Mrs Ann, The 
numerous suitors of the wealthy and no- 
ble heiress, now crowded to the Castle; 
and, according to the custom of the times, 
they were sumptuously entertained, and 
invited to prolong their stay by numerous 
banquets. 

" On these occasions, John Sandal was 



: A TALE. 397 

the first to pay distinguished attention to 
Elinor. They danced together; and though 
her Puritanic education had taught her an 
abhorrence of those " devil's measures," as 
her family was accustomed to term them, 
she tried to adapt herself to the gay steps 
of the Canaries *, and the stately move- 
ments of the Measures — (for the newer 
dances had not, even in report, reached 
Mortimer Castle) — and her slender and 
graceful form needed no other inspiration 
than the support of John Sandal's arms, 
(who was himself an exquisite dancer), to 
assume all the graces of that delightful 
exercise. Even the practised courtiers 



* In Cowley's " Cutter of Coleman Street," Mrs 
Tabitha, a rigid Puritan, tells her husband she had 
danced the Canaries in her youth. And in Rush- 
worth's Collections, if I remember right, Prynne 
vindicates himself from the charge of a general de- 
nunciation against dancing, and even speaks of the 
" Measures," a stately, solemn dance, with some ap- 
probation. 

N2 



298 MELMOTH : 

applauded her. But, when it was over, 
Elinor felt, that had John Sandal been 
dancing with a being the most indifferent 
to him on earth, his manner would have 
been exactly the same. No one could 
point with more smiling grace to her 
slight deviations from the figure, — no one 
could attend her to her seat with more 
tender and anxious politeness, and wave 
the vast fan of those days over her with 
more graceful and assiduous courtesy. 
But Elinor felt that these attentions, how- 
ever flattering, were offered not by a 
lover. * * * * 

***** 

" Sandal was absent on a visit to some 
neighbouring nobleman, and Margaret and 
Elinor were one evening completely alone. 
Each seemed equally anxious for an ex- 
planation, which neither appeared willing 
to begin. Elinor had lingered till twi- 
light at the casement, from which she 
had seen him ride, and lingered still 
when to see him was no longer possible. 



A TALE. 2Q9 

Her sight was strained to catch a ghmpse 
of him through the gathering clouds, as 
her imagination still . toiled to catch a 
gleam of that light of the heart, which 
now struggled dimly amid clouds of 
gloomy and unpierceable mystery. " Eli- 
nor," said ^Margaret emphatically, " look 
for him no longer, — he never can be 
yours !" 

" The sudden address, and the impe- 
rative tone of conviction, had upon Eli- 
nor the effect of being addressed by a 
supernatural monitor. She was unable 
even to ask how the terrible intelligence 
that burst on her so decisively, was ob- 
tained. 

" There is a state of mind in which we 
listen thus to a human voice as if it were 
an oracle, — and instead of asking an ex- 
planation of the destiny it announces, we 
wait submissively for what yet remains to 
be told. In this mood, Elinor slowly ad- 
vanced from the casement, and asked in a 
voice of fearful calmness, " Has he ex- 



3Q0 MELMOTH : 

plained himself perfectly to you ?" — ** Per- 
fectly." — " And there is nothing to ex- 
pect?" — " Nothing." — " And you have 
heard this from himself — his very self?" 
— " I have ; and, dear Elinor, let us never 
again speak on the subject." — " Never!" 
answered EHnor,— " Never !" 

" The veracity and dignity of Marga- 
ret's character, were inviolable securities 
for the truth of what she uttered; and 
perhaps that was the very reason why Eli- 
nor tried to shrink most from the convic- 
tion. In a morbid state of heart, we can- 
not bear truth — the falsehood that intoxi- 
cates us for a moment, is worth more than 
the truth that w^ould disenchant us for life. 
— / hate him because he tells me the truth, 
is the language natural to the human 
mind, from the slave of power to the slave 
of passion. * * * 

^ * # fk ^ 

" Other symptoms that could not escape 
the notice of the most shallow, struck her 
every hour. That devotion of the eye and 



A TALE. = jiJl 

heart, of the language and the look, 

that cannot be mistaken, — were all ob- 
viously directed to Margaret. Still Elinor 
lingered in the Castle, and said to herself, 
while every day she saw and felt what was 
passing, " Perhaps." That is the last word 
that quits the lips of those who love. 



* 



" She saw with all her eyes, — she felt to 
the bottom of her soul, — the obviously in- 
creasing attachment of John Sandal and 
!Margaret ; yet still she dreamed of in- 
terposing obstacles, — of an explanatmu 
When passion is deprived of its proper 
aliment, there is no telling the food on 
which it will prey, — the impossibilities to 
which, like a famished garrison, it will 
look for its wretched sustenance. 

" Elinor had ceased to demand the heart 
of the being she was devoted to. She now 
lived on his looks. She said to herself. 
Let him smile, though not on me, and I 
am happy still — wherever the sun-light 
falls, the earth must be blessed. Then she 



302 MELMOTH : 

sunk to lower claims. She said, Let me 
but be in his presence, and that is enough 
— let his smiles and his soul be devoted to 
another, one wandering ray may reach me, 
and that will be enough ! 

" Love is a very noble and exalting 
sentiment in its first germ and principle. 
We never loved without arraying the ob- 
ject in all the glories of moral as well as 
physical perfection, and deriving a kind of 
dignity to ourselves from our capacity of 
admiring a creature so excellent and dig- 
nified ; but this lavish and magnificent 
prodigality of the imagination often leaves 
the heart a bankrupt. Love in its iron 
age of disappointment, becomes very de- 
graded — it submits to be satisfied with 
merely exterior indulgences — a look, a 
touch of the hand, though occurring by 
accident— a kind word, though uttered al- 
most unconsciously, suffices for its humble 
existence. In its first state, it is like man 
before the fall, inhaling the odours of pa- 
radise, and enjoying the communion of 



A TALE. 303 

the Deity; in the latter, it is like the same 
beino: toiliiiop amid the briar and the this- 
tie, barely to maintain a squalid existence 
without enjoyment, utility, or loveliness. 

" About this time, her Puritan aunt 
made a strong effort to recover Elinor out of 
the snare of the enemy. She wrote a long 
letter (a great exertion for a woman far 
advanced in years, and never in the habits 
of epistolary composition) adjuring her 
apostate niece to return to the guide of 
her youth, and the covenant of her God, — 
to take shelter in the everlasting arms 
while they were still held out to her, — and 
to flee to the city of refuge while its gates 
were yet open to receive her. She urged 
on her the truth, power, and blessedness of 
the system of Calvin, which she termed 
the gospel. — She supported and defended 
it with all the metaphysical skill, and all 
the scriptural knowledge she possessed, — 
and the latter was not scanty. — And she 
affectingly reminded her, that the hand 



304 MELMOTH : 

that traced these lines, would be unable 
ever to repeat the admonition, and would 
probably be mouldering into dust while 
she was employed in their perusal. 

" Elinor wept while she read, but that 
was all. She wept from physical emotion, 
not from mental conviction ; nor is there 
such an induration of heart caused by any 
other power, as by that of the passion 
which seems to soften it most. She an- 
swered the letter, however, and the effort 
scarce cost her less than it did her decre- 
pid and dying relative. She acknowledged 
her dereliction of all religious feeling, and 
bewailed it — the more, she added with 
painful sincerity, because I feel my grief 
is not sincere, " Oh, my God !" she con- 
tinued, " you who have clothed my heart 
with such burning energies — you who 
have given to it a power of loving so in- 
tense, so devoted, so concentrated— you 
have not given it in vain ; — no, in some 
happier world, or perhaps even in this, 
when this " tyranny is overpast," you will 



A TALE. 305 

fill my heart with an image worthier than 
him whom I once believed your image on 
earth. The stars, though their light ap- 
pears so dim and distant to us, were not 
lit by the Almighty hand in vain. Their 
glorious light burns for remote and hap- 
pier worlds ; and the beam of religion that 
glows so feebly to eyes almost blind with 
earthly tears, may be rekindled when a 
broken heart has been my passport to a 
place of rest. * * • 

♦ * * * * 

" Do not think me, dear aunt, deserted 
by all hope of religion, even though I have 
lost the sense of it. Was it not said by 
unerring lips to a sinner, that her trans- 
gressions were forgiven because she loved 
much ? And does not this capacity of 
love prove that it will one day be more 

worthily filled, and more happily employed. 

****** 

" Miserable wretch that I am ! At this 
moment, a voice from the bottom of my 
heart asks me ** JV/iom hast thou loved so 



306 MELMOTH : 

much ? Was it man or God, that thou 
darest to compare thyself with her who 
knelt and wept — not before a mortal idol, 

but at the feet of an incarnate divinity ?" 

******* 

" It may yet befall, that the ark which 
has floated through the waste of waters 
may find its resting-place, and the trem- 
bling inmate debark on the shores of an 
unknown but purer w^orld." * * 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

There is an oak beside the froth-clad pool. 
Where in old time^ as I have often heard, 
A woman desperate, a wretch like me. 

Ended her woes ! — Her woes were not like mine ! 

* it * * * 

Ronan will know; 
When he beholds me floating on the stream. 
His heart will tell him why Rivine died ! 

Home's Fatal Discovery. 

X HE increasing decline of Elinor's health 
was marked by all the family ; the very 
servant who stood behind her chair looked 
sadder every day — even Margaret began 
to repent of the invitation she had given 
her to the Castle. 



308 MELMOTH : 

" Elinor felt this, and would have spar- 
ed her what pain she could ; but it was 
not possible for herself to be insensible of 
the fast-fading remains of her withering 
youth and blighted beauty. The place — 
the place itself, was the principal cause of 
that mortal disease that was consuming 
her ; yet from that place she felt she had 
less resolution to tear herself every day. 
So she lived, like those sufferers in 
eastern prisons, who are not allowed to 
taste food unless mixed with poison, and 
who must perish alike whether they eat or 
forbear. 

" Once, urged by intolerable pain of 
heart, (tortured by living in the placid 
light of John Sandal's sunny smile), she 
confessed this to Margaret. She said, 
" It is impossible for me to support this 
existence — impossible ! To tread the floor 
which those steps have trod — to listen 
for their approach, and when they come, 
feel they do not bear him we seek — to 
see every object around me reflect his 



A taIe. 309 

image, but never — never to see the rea- 
lity — to see the door open which once 
disclosed his figure, and when it opens, 
not to see him, and when he does appear, 
to see him not what he was — to feel 
he is the same and not the same, — the 
same to the eye, but not to the heart — to 
struggle thus between the dream of ima- 
gination and the cruel awaking of reality 
—Oh ! Margaret — that undeception plants 
a dagger in the heart, whose point no 
human hand can extract, and whose venom 
no human hand can heal !" Margaret 
wept as Elinor spoke thus, and slowly, 
very slowly, expressed her consent that 
Elinor should quit the Castle, if it was 
necessary for her peace. 

" It was the very evening after this 
conversation, that Elinor, whose habit 
was to wander among the woods that 
surrounded the Castle unattended, met 
with John Sandal. It was a glorious 
autumnal evening, just like that on which 
they had first met, — the associations of na- 



310 MELMOTH : 

ture were the same, those of the heart 
alone had suffered change. There is that 
light in an autumnal sky, — that shade in 
autumnal woods, — that dim and hallow- 
ed glory in the evening of the year, 
which is indefinably combined with re- 
collections. Sandal, as they met, had 
spoken to her in the same voice of melody, 
and with the same heart- thrilling tender- 
ness of manner, that had never ceased to 
visit her ear since their first meeting, like 
music in dreams. She imagined there 
was more than usual feeling in his man- 
ner ; and the spot where they were, and ^ 
which memory made populous and elo- 
quent with the imagery and speech of 
other days, flattered this illusion. A 
vague hope trembled at the bottom of 
her heart, — she thought of what she dared 
not to utter, and yet dared to believe. 
They walked on together, — together they 
watched the last light on the purple hills, 
the deep repose of the woods, whose sum- 
mits were still like " feathers of gold," — 



A TALE. 311 

together they once more tasted the confi- 
dence of nature, and, amid the most per- 
fect silence, there Vv^as a mutual and unut- 
terable eloquence in their hearts. The 
thoughts of other days rushed on Elinor, 
— she ventured to raise her eyes to that 
countenance which she once more saw " as 
it had been that of an angel." The glow 
and the smile, that made it appear like a 
reflexion of heaven, were there still, — but 
that glow was borrowed from the bright 
flush of the glorious west, and that smile 
was for nature, — not for her. She linger- 
ed till she felt it fade with the fading 
light, — and a last conviction striking her 
heart, she burst into an agony of tears. 
To his words of affectionate surprise, and 
gentle consolation, she answered only by 
fixing her appealing eyes on him, and a- 
gonizingly invoking his name. She had 
trusted to nature, and to this scene of 
their first meeting, to act as an interpreter 
between them,— and still even in despair 
she trusted to it. 



S12 MELMOTH : 

" Perhaps there is not a more agonizing 
moment than that in which we feel the 
aspect of nature give a perfect vitality to 
the associations of our hearts, while they 
lie buried in those in which we try in vain 
to 7^evive them, 

" She was soon undeceived. With that 
benignity which, while it speaks of conso- 
lation, forbids hope — with that smile which 
angels may be supposed to give on the 
last conflict of a sufferer who is casting off 
the garments of mortality in pain and hope 
— with such an expression he whom she 
loved regarded her. From another world 
he might have cast such a glance on her, — 

and it sealed her doom in this for ever. * 

* * * * ♦ * 

" As, unable to witness the agony of the 
wound he had inflicted but could not heal, 
be turned from her, the last light of day 
faded from the hills — the sun of both 
worlds set on her eye and soul — she sunk 
on the earth, and notes of faint music that 
seemed designed to echo the words—'* No 



A TALE. 313 

— no— no — never— never more !" trembled 
in her ears. They were as simple and 
monotonous as the words themselves, and 
were played accidentally by a peasant boy 
who was wandering in the woods. But 
to the unfortunate, every thing seems pro- 
phetic; and amid the shades of evening, 
and accompanied by the sound of his de- 
parting footsteps, the breaking heart of 
Elinor accepted the augury of these me- 
lancholy notes *. * * * 
# # *^ * * * 

" A few daj^s after this final meeting, 
Elinor wrote to her aunt in York to an- 

* As this whole scene is taken from fact^ I sub- 
join the notes whose modulation is so simple, and 
whose effect was so profour^. 

p-Hziirir9!=:I:=:i=H3-gi-;g-j;3 



VOL. IV. O 



314 MELMOTH : 

nounce, that if she still lived, and was not 
unwilling to admit her, she would reside 
with her for life ; and she could not help 
intimating, that her life would probably 
not outlast that of her hostess. She did 
not tell what the widow Sandal had whis- 
pered to her at her first arrival at the Cas- 
tle, and what she now ventured to repeat 
with a tone that struggled between the 
imperative and the persuasive, — the con- 
ciliating and the intimidative. Elinor 
yielded, — and the indelicacy of this repre- 
sentation, had only the effect to make her 
shrink from its repetition. 

" On her departure, JNIargaret wept, 
and Sandal shewed as much tender offi- 
ciousness about her journey, as if it were 
to terminate in then* renewed bridal. To 
escape from this, "Elinor hastened her pre- 
parations for departure. 

" When she arrived at a certain dis- 
tance from the Castle, she dismissed the 
family carriage, and said she would go on 
foot with her female servant to the farm- 



A TALE. 315 

house where horses were awaiting her. 
She went there, but remained concealed, 
for the report of the approaching bridal 

resounded in her ears. * * 

* * * * *t 

" The day arrived — Elinor rose very ear- 
ly — the bells rung out a merry peal — (as she 
had once heard them do on another occa- 
sion) — the troops of friends arrived in great- 
er numbers, and with equal gaiety as they 
had once assembled to escort her — she saw 
their equipages gleaming along — she heard 
the joyous shouts of half the county — she 
imagined to herself the timid smile of 
JMargaret, and the irradiated countenance 
of him who had been hei^ bridegroom. 

" Suddenly there was a pause. She felt 
that the ceremony was going on — was 
finished — that the irrevocable words were 
spoken — the indissoluble tie was knit ! 
Again the shout and wild joyance burst 
forth as the sumptuous cavalcade returned 
to the Castle. The glare of the equipages, 
— the splendid habits of the riders, — the 



316 MELMOTH : 

cheerful groupe of shouting tenantry,— 

she saw it all ! * * * * 

****** 

" When all was over, Elinor glanced 
accidentally at her dress — it was white like 
her bridal habit; — shuddering she exchang- 
ed it for a mourning habit, and set out, ai^ 
she hoped, on her last journey. 



CHAPTER XXX 



Fuimus, non sumus. 



A ▼ HEN Elinor arrived in Yorkshire, 
she found her aunt was dead. Elinor 
went to visit her grave. It was, in com- 
pliance with her last request, placed near 
the window of the independent meeting- 
house, and bore for inscription her favour- 
ite text, " Those whom he foreknew, he 
also predestinated," &c. &c. Elinor stood 
by the grave some time, but could not 
shed a tear. This contrast of a life so ri- 



318 MELMOTH: 

gid, and a death so hopeful, — this silence 
of humanity, and eloquence of the grave, 
— pierced through her heart, as it will 
through every heart that has indulged in 
the inebriation of human passion, and feels 
that the draught has been drawn from 
broken cisterns. 

" Her aunt's death made Elinor's life, 
if possible, more secluded, and her habits 
more monotonous than they would other- 
wise have been. She was very charitable 
to the cottagers in her neighbourhood; but 
except to visit their habitations, she never 
quitted her own. # * * 

■^ * * *• =* 

" Often she contemplated a small stream 
that flowed at the end of her garden. As 
she had lost all her sensibility of nature, 
another motive was assigned for this mute 
and dark contemplation ; and her ser- 
vant, much attached to her, watched her 
closely. ^ * * * 

" She was roused from this fearful state 



A TALE. 319 

of Stupefaction and despair, which those 
who have felt shudder at the attempt to 
describe, by a letter from Margaret. She 
had received several from her which lay 
unanswered, (no unusual thing in those 
days), but this she tore open, read with in- 
terest inconceivable, and prepared instant- 
ly to answer by action. 

" Margaret's high spirits seemed to have 
sunk in her hour of danger. She hinted 
that that hour was rapidly approaching, 
and that she earnestly implored the pre- 
sence of her affectionate kinsw^oman to 
soothe and sustain in the moment of her 
approaching peril. She added, that the 
manly and affectionate tenderness of John 
Sandal at this period, had touched her 
heart more deeply, if possible, than all the 
former testimonies of his affection — but 
that she could not bear his resignation of 
all his usual habits of rural amusement, and 
of the neighbouring society — that she in 
vain had chided him from her couch, where 
she lingered in pain and hope, and hoped 



320 MELMOTH : 

that Elinor's presence might induce him 
to yield to her request, as he must feel, on 
her arrival, the dearest companion of her 
youth was present— and that, at such a 
moment, a female companion was more 
suitable than even the gentlest and most 

affectionate of the other sex. * * 

***** 

" Elinor set out directly. The purity 
of her feelings had formed an impenetra- 
ble barrier between her heart and its ob- 
ject, — and she apprehended no more dan- 
ger from the presence of one who was 
wedded, and wedded to her relative, than 
from that of her own brother. 

" She arrived at the Castle — Margaret's 
hour of danger had begun — she had been 
very ill during the preceding period. The 
natural consequences of her situation had 
been aggravated by a feeling of dignified 
responsibility on the birth of an heir to 
the house of Mortim.er — and this feeling 
had not contributed to render that situa- 
tion more supportable. 



A TALE. 321 

" Elinor bent over the bed of pain — 
pressed her cold lips to the burning lips of 
the sufferer — and prayed for her. 

" The first medical assistance in the 
country (then very rarely employed on 
such occasions) had been obtained at a 
vast expence. The widow Sandal, de- 
clining all attendance on the sufferer, 
paced through the adjacent apartments in 
agony unutterable and unuttei^ed, 

" Two days and nights went on in hope 
and terror — the bell-ringers sat up in every 
church within ten miles round — the te- 
nantry crowded round the Castle with ho- 
nest heartfelt solicitude — the neighbour- 
ing nobility sent their messages of inqui- 
ry every hour. An accouchement in a 
noble family was then an event of impor- 
tance. 

" The hour came — twins were born dead 
— and the young mother was fated to fol- 
low them within a few hours ! While life 
yet remained, Margaret shewed the re- 
mains of the lofty spirit of the Mortimers. 

o 2 



322 MELMOTH : 

She sought with her cold hand that of her 
wretched husband and of the weeping Eli- 
nor. She joined them in an embrace 
which one of them at least understood, 
and prayed that their union might be 
eternal. She then begged to see the bo- 
dies of her infant sons — they were produ- 
ced ; and it was said that she uttered ex- 
pressions, intimating that, had they not 
been the heirs of the Mortimer family — 
had not expectation been wound so high, 
and supported by all the hopes that life 
and youth could flatter her with, — she and 
they might yet have existed. 

" As she spoke, her voice grew feebler, 
and her eyes dim — their last hght was 
turned on him she loved ; and when sight 
was gone, she still felt his arms enfold her. 
The next moment they enfolded— nothing ! 

" In the terrible spasms of masculine 
atrony — the more intensely felt as they 
are more rarely indulged — the young wi- 
dower dashed himself on the bed, which 
shook with his convulsive grief; and Eli- 



A TALE. 323 

nor, losing all sense but that of a calamity 
so sudden and so terrible, echoed his deep 
and suffocating sobs, as if she whom they 
deplored had not been the only obstacle to 
lier happiness. * * 

* * •e^ 7^ -* 

" Amid the voice of mourninc: that 
rung through the Castle from vault to 
tower in that day of trouble, none w^as 
loud like that of the widow Sandal— her 
wailings were shrieks, her grief was de- 
spair. Rushing through the rooms like 
one distracted, she tore her hair out by the 
roots, and imprecated the most fearful cur- 
ses on her head. At length she approach- 
ed the apartment where the corse lay. The 
servants, shocked at her distraction, would 
have withheld her from entering it, but 
could not. She burst into the room, cast 
one wild look on its inmates — the still 
corse and the dumb mourners — and then, 
flinging herself on her knees before her 
son, confessed the secret of her guilt, and 
developed to its foul base the foundation 



324 MELMOTH : 

of that pile of iniquity and sorrow which 
had now reached its summit. 
- " Her son listened to this horrible con- 
fession with fixed eye and features unmov- 
ed; and at its conclusion, when the wretch- 
ed penitent implored the assistance of her 
son to raise her from her knees, he repell- 
ed her outstretched hands, and with a 
weak wild laugh, sunk back on the bed. 
He never could be removed from it till 
the corse to which he clung was borne 
away, and then the mourners hardly knew 
which to deplore—- her who was deprived 
of the light of life, or him in whom the 
light of reason was extinguished for ever ! 

" The wretched, guilty mother, (but 
for her fate no one can be solicitous), a 
few months after, on her dying bed, de- 
clared the secret of her crime to a minister 
of an independent congregation, who was 
induced, by the report of her despair, to^ 
visit her. She confessed that, being insti- 
gated by avarice, and still more by the de- 



A TALE. 325 

sire of regaining lier lost consequence in the 
family, and knowing the wealth and dig- 
nity her son would acquire, and in which 
she must participate, by his marriage with 
Margaret, she had, after using all the 
means of persuasion and intreaty, been 
driven, in despair at her disappointment, 
to fabricate a tale as false as it was horri- 
ble, which she related to her deluded son 
on the evening before his intended nup- 
tials with EHnor. She had assured him 
he was not her son, but the offspring of 
the illicit commerce of her husband the 
preacher with the Puritan mother of Eli- 
nor, w4io had formerly been one of his 
congregation, and whose well-known and 
strongly-expressed admiration of his preach- 
ing had been once supposed extended to 
his person, — had caused her much jealous 
anxiety in the early years of their mar- 
riage, and was now made the basis of this 
horrible fiction. She added, that JVlarga- 
ret's obvious attachment to her cousin had, 
in some degree, palliated her guilt to her- 



326 MELMOTH : 

self; but that, when she saw him quit her 
house in despair on the morning of his in- 
tended marriage, and rush he knew not i 
whither, she was half tempted to recall 
him, and confess the truth. Her mind 
again became hardened, and she reflected 
that her secret was safe, as she had bound 
him by an oath, from respect to his fa- 
ther's memory, and compassion to the 
guilty mother of Elinor, never to disclose 
the truth to her daughter. 

" The event had succeeded to her guil- 
ty wishes Sandal beheld Elinor with the 

eyes of a brother, and the image of Mar- 
garet easily found a place in his unoccu- 
pied affections. But, as often befals to the 
dealers in falsehood and obliquity, the ap- 
parent accomplishment of her hopes prov- 
ed her ruin. In the event of the marriage 
of John and Margaret proving issueless, 
the estates and title went to the distant 
relative named in the will ; and her son, 
deprived of reason by the calamities in 
which her arts had involved him, was by 



A TALE. 327 

them also deprived of the wealth and rank 
to which they were meant to raise him, 
and reduced to the small pension obtained 
by his former services, — the poverty of the 
King, then himself a pensioner of Lewis 
XIV., forbidding the possibility of added 
rem.uneration. When the minister heard 
to the last the terrible confession of the 
dying penitent, in the awful language 
ascribed to Bishop Burnet when consulted 
by another criminal, — he bid her " almost 

despair," and departed. * * 

***** 

•* Elinor has retired, with the helpless 
object of her unfading love and unceasing 
care, to her cottage in Yorkshire. There, 
in the language of that divine and blind 
old man, the fame of whose poetry has not 
yet reached this country, it is 

" Her delight to see him sitting in the house/' 

and watch, like the father of the Jewish 
champion, the growth of that ** God-given 



328 MELMOTH ; 

strength," that intellectual power, which, 
unlike Samson's, will never return. 

** After an interval of two years, during 
which she had expended a large part of 
the capital of her fortune in obtaining the 
first medical advice for the patient, and 
" suffered many things of many physi- 
cians," she gave up all hope,— and, reflect- 
ing that the interest of her fortune thus 
diminished would be but sufficient to pro- 
cure the comforts of life for herself and him 
W'hom she has resolved never to forsake, 
she sat down in patient misery with her 
melancholy companion, and added one 
more to the many proofs of woman's 
heart, " unwearied in well-doing," with- 
out the intoxication of passion, the excite- 
ment of applause, or even the gratitude of 
the unconscious object. 

" Were this a life of calm privation, 
and pulseless apathy, her efforts would 
scarce have merit, and her sufferings hard- 
ly demand compassion ; but it is one of 
pain incessant and immitigable. The first- 



A TALE. 329 

born of her heart lies dead within it ; but 
that heart is still alive with all its keenest 
sensibilities, its most vivid hopes, and its 

most exquisite sense of grief. * ^ 

* * * * * 

" She sits beside him all day — she 
w^atches that eye whose light was life, and 
sees it fixed on her in glassy and unmean- 
ing complacency she dreams of that 

smile which burst on her soul like the 
morning sun over a landscape in spring, 
and sees that smile of vacancy which tries 
to convey satisfaction, but cannot give it 
the language of expression. Averting 
her head, she thinks of other days. A vi- 
sion passes before her. — Lovely and glo- 
rious things, the hues of whose colouring 
are not of this world, and whose web is too 
fine to be woven in the loom of life,— rise to 
her eye like the illusions of enchantment. 
A strain of rich remembered music floats 
in her hearing — she dreams of the hero, 
the lover, the beloved, — him in whom were 
united all that could dazzle the eye, ine- 



330 MELMOTH : 

briate the imagination, and melt the heart. 
She sees him as he first appeared to her, — 
and the mirage of the desert present not a 
vision more delicious and deceptive — she 
bends to drink of that false fountain, and 
the stream disappears — she starts from her 
reverie, and hears the weak laugh of the 
sufferer, as he moves a little water in a 
shell, and imagines he sees the ocean in a 
storm ! * * * * 

***** 

" She has one consolation. When a 
short interval of recollection returns, — 
when his speech becomes articulate, — he 
utters her name, not that of Margaret, 
and a beam of early hope dances on her 
heart as she hears it, but fades away as fast 
as the rare and wandering ray of intellect 

from the lost mind of the sufferer ! * 

* % * * * 

" Unceasingly attentive to his health 
and his comforts, she walked out with 
him every evening, but led him through 
the most sequestered paths, to avoid those 



A TALE. 331 

whose mockfiil persecution, or whose va- 
cant pity, might be equally torturing to 
her feelings, or harassing to her still gentle 
and smiling companion. 

"It was at this period," said the stran- 
ger to Aliaga, " I first became acquainted 
with I mean — at this time a stran- 
ger, who had taken up his abode near the 
hamlet where Elinor resided, was seen to 
watch the two figures as they passed slow- 
ly on their retired walk. Evening after 
evening he watched them. He knew the 
history of these two unhappy beings, and 
prepared himself to take advantage of it. 
It was impossible, considering their seclud- 
ed mode of existence, to obtain an intro- 
duction. He tried to recommend himself 
by his occasional attentions to the invalid 
— he sometimes picked up the flowers that 
an unconscious hand flung into the stream, 
and listened, with a gracious smile, to the 
indistinct sounds in which the sufferer, 
who still retained all the graciousness 



332 MELMOTH : 

of his perished mind, attempted to thank 
him. 

" Elinor felt grateful for these occasion- 
al attentions; but she was somewhat alarm- 
ed at the assiduity with which the stran- 
ger attended their melancholy walk every 
evening, — and, whether encouraged, ne- 
glected, or even repelled, still found the 
means of insinuating himself into compa- 
nionship. Even the mournful dignity of 
Elinor's demeanour, — her deep dejection, ^ 
— her bows or brief replies, — were una- 
vailing against the gentle but indefatiga- 
ble importunity of the intruder. 

" By degrees he ventured to speak to 
her of her misfortunes, — and that topic is 
a sure key to the confidence of the unhap- 
py. Elinor began to listen to him ; — and, 
though somewhat amazed at the know- 
ledge he displayed of every circumstance 
of her life, she could not but feel soothed 
by the tone of sympathy in which he 
spoke, and excited by the mysterious hints 
of hope which he sometimes suffered to 



A TALE. 333 

escape him as if involuntarily. It was ob- 
served soon by the inmates of the hamlet, 
whom idleness and the want of any object 
of excitement had made curious, that Eli- 
nor and the stranger were inseparable in 

their evening walks. * * 

***** 

" It was about a fortnight after this ob- 
servation was first made, that Elinor, un- 
attended, drenched with rain, and her head 
uncovered, loudly and eagerly demanded 
admittance, at a late hour, at the house of 
a neighbouring clergyman. She was ad- 
mitted, — and the surprise of her reverend 
host at this visit, equally xmseasonable and 
unexpected, was exchanged for a deeper 
feeling of wonder and terror as she related 
the cause of it. He at first imagined 
(knowing her unhappy situation) that the 
constant presence of an insane person 
might have a contagious effect on the in- 
tellects of one so perseveringly exposed to 
that presence. 

•• As Elinor, however, proceeded to dis- 



334 MELMOTH : 

close the awful proposal, and the scarcely 
less awful name of the unholy intruder, 
the clergyman betrayed considerable emo- 
tion ; and, after a long pause, desired per- 
mission to accompany her on their next 
meeting. This was to be the following 
evening, for the stranger was unremitting 
in his attendance on her lonely walks. 

" It is necessary to mention, that this 
clergyman had been for some years abroad 
— that events had occurred to him in fo- 
reign countries, of which strange reports 
were spread, but on the subject of wiiich 
he had been always profoundly silent— and 
that having but lately fixed his residence 
in the neighbourhood, he "was equally a 
stranger to Elinor, and to the circumstan- 
ces of her past life, and of her present situ- 
ation. * * * :. 
* * * * 

" It was now autumn, — the evenings 
were growing short, — and the brief twi- 
light was rapidly succeeded by night. On 
the dubious verge of both, the clergyman 



A TALE. 335 

quitted his house, and went in the direc- 
tion where Elinor told him she was accus- 
toaied to meet the stranger. 

" They were there before him ; and in 
the shuddering and averted form of Eli- 
nor, and the stern but calm importunity 
of her companion, he read the terrible se- 
cret of their conference. Suddenly he ad- 
vanced and stood before the stranger. 
They immediately recognised each other 
An expression that was never before be- 
held there — ^an expression of fear — wan- 
dered over the features of the stranger ! 
He paused for a moment, and then depart- 
ed without uttering a word nor was 

Elinor ever again molested by his presence. 



" It was some days before the clergy- 
man recovered from the shock of this sin- 
gular encounter sufficiently to see Elinor, 
and explain to her the cause of his deep 
and painful agitation. 

"' He sent to announce to her when he 
was able to receive her, and appointed the 



336 MELMOTH : 

night for the time of meeting, for he 
knew that during the day she never for- 
sook the helpless object of her unalienated 
heart. The night arrived — imagine them 
seated in the antique study of the clergy- 
man, whose shelves were filled with the 
ponderous volumes of ancient learning — 
the embers of a peat fire shed a dim and 
fitful light through the room, and the 
single candle that burned on a distant 
oaken stand, seemed to shed its light on 
that alone — not a ray fell on the figures of 
Elinor and her companion, as they sat in 
their massive chairs of carved-like figures 
in the richly-wrought nitches of some Ca- 
tholic place of worship " 

" That is a most profane and abomina- 
ble comparison," said Aliaga, starting from 
the doze in which he had frequently in- 
dulged during this long narrative. 

" But hear the result," said the perti- 
nacious narrator. " The clergyman con- 
fessed to Elinor that he had been acquaint- 
ed with an Irishman of the name of Mel- 



A TAI.E. 337 

moth, whose various erudition, profound 
intellect, and intense appetency for infor- 
mation, had interested him so deeply as to 
lead to a perfect intimacy between them. 
At the breaking out of the troubles in 
England, the clergyman had been com- 
pelled, with his father's family, to seek re- 
fuge in Hcdland. There again he met 
JNIelmoth, who proposed to him a journey 
to Poland — the offer was accepted, and to 
Poland they went. The clergyman here 
told many extraordinary tales of Dr Dee, 
and of Albert Alasco, the Polish adven- 
turer, who were their companions both 
in England and Poland — and he added, 
that he felt his companion Melmoth was 
iiTevocably attached to the study of that 
art which is held in just abomination by 
all *' who name the name of Christ." The 
power of the intellectual vessel was too 
great for the narrow seas where it was 
coasting — it longed to set out on a voyage 
of discovery — in other words, Melmoth at- 
tached himself to those impostors, or worse, 
who promised him the knowledge and the 

VOL. IV. P 



358 MELMOTH : 

power of the future world — on conditions 
that are unutterable." A strange expression 
crossed his face as he spoke. He recover- 
ed himself, and added, " From that hour 
our intercourse ceased. I conceived of 
him as of one given up to diabolical de- 
lusions — to the power of the enemy. 

1 had not seen Melmoth for some years. 
I was preparing to quit Gennany, when, 
on the eve of my departure, I received 
a message from a person who announced 
himself as my friend, and who, believing 
himself dying, wished for the attendance 
of a Protestant minister. We were then 
in the territories of a Catholic electoral 
bishop. I lost no time in attending the 
sick person. As I entered his room, con- 
ducted by a servant, who immediately 
closed the door and retired, I was asto- 
nished to see the room filled with an as- 
trological apparatus, books and implements 
of a science I did not understand ; in a 
corner there was a bed, near which there 
w^as neither priest or physician, relative or 
friend — on it lay extended the form of 



A TALEM .T39 

Melmoth. I approached, and attempted 
to address to him some words of consola- 
tion. He waved his hand to me to be 
silent — and I was so. The recollection 
of his former habits and pursuits, and the 
view of his present situation, had an effect 
that appalled more than it amazed me. 
" Come near," said Melmoth, speaking 
very faintly — '' nearer. I am dying — hov.- 
my life has been passed you know but 
too well. Mine was the great angelic sin 
— pride and intellectual glorying ! It was 
the first mortal sin — a boundless aspiration 
after forbidden knowledge ! I am now 
dying. I ask for no forms of religion — 
I wish not to hear words that have to me 
no meaning, or that 1 wish had none ! 
Spare your look of horror. I sent for 
you to exact your solemn promise that 
you will conceal from every human being 
the fact of my death — let no man know 
that I died, or when, or where." 

" He spoke with a distinctness of tone, 
and energy of manner, that convinced 
me he could not be in the state he de- 



oiO melmoth: 

scribed himself to be, and 1 said, " But I 
cannot believe you are dying — your in- 
tellects are clear, your voice is strong, 
your language is coherent, and but for 
the paleness of your face, and your lying 
extended on that bed, 1 could not even 
imagine you were ill." He answered, 
" Have you patience and courage to abide 
by the proof that what I say is true ?" 
1 replied, that I doubtless had patience, 
and for the courage, I looked to that Be- 
inc£ for whose name I had too much reve- 
rence to utter in his hearing. He ac- 
knowledged my forbearance by a ghastly 
smile which I understood too well, and 
pointed to a clock that stood at the foot 
of his bed. ** Observe," said he, *' the hour- 
hand is on eleven, and I am now sane, 
clear of speech, and apparently healthful — 
tarry but an hour, and you yourself will 
behold me dead !" 

'' I remained by liis bed-side — the eyes of 
both were fixed intently on the slow mo- 
tion of the clock. From time to time he 
spoke, but his strength now appeared ob- 



A TALE. 3-il 

viously declining. He repeatedly urged 
on me the necessity of profound secresy, 
its importance to myself, and yet lie hint- 
ed at the possibility of our future meet- 
ing. I asked why he thought proper to 
confide to me a secret whose divulgenient 
was so perilous, and which might have 
been so easily concealed ? Unknowing whe- 
ther he existed, or where, I must have 
been equally ignorant of the mode and 
place of his death. To this he returned 
no answer. As the hand of the clock ap- 
proached the hour of twelve, his counte- 
nance changed — his eyes became dim — 
his speech inarticulate — his jaw dropped — 
his respiration ceased. I applied a glass 
to his lips — but there was not a breath to 
stain it. I felt his wrist — but there w as no 
pulse. I placed my hand on his heart — 
there was not the slightest vibration. In 
a few minutes the body was perfectly 
cold. I did not quit the room till nearly 
an hour after — the body gave no signs of 
returning animation, 

*' Unhappy circumstances detained me 



342 MELMOTH : 

long abroad. I was in various parts of the 
Continent, and every where I was haunt- 
ed with the report of Melmoth being still 
alive. To these reports I gave no credit, 
and returned to England in the full con- 
viction of his being dead. Yet it tvas 
Melmoth xicho walked and spoke with you 
the last night of our meeting. My eyes 
never more faithfully attested the presence 
of living being. It was Melmoth himself, 
such as I beheld him many years ago. 
when my hairs were dark and my steps 
were firm. I am changed, but he is the 
same — time seems to have forborne to 
touch him from terror. By what means or 
power he is thus enabled to continue his 
posthumous and preternatural existence, 
it is impossible to conceive, unless the 
fearful report that every where followed 
his steps on the Continent, be indeed true." 
" Elinor, impelled by terror and wild 
curiosity, inquired into that report which 
dreadful experience had anticipated the 
meaning of " Seek no farther," said the 
minister, *' you know already more than 



A TALE. 343 

should ever have reached the human ear, 
or entered into the conception of the human 
mind. Enough that you have been ena- 
bled by Divine Power to repel the as- 
saults of the evil one — the trial was terrible, 
but the result w^ill be glorious. Should 
the foe persevere in his attempts, remem- 
ber that he has been already repelled amid 
the horrors of the dungeon and of the 
scaffold, the screams of Bedlam and the 
flames of the Inquisition — he is yet to be 
subdued by a foe that he deemed of all 
others the least invincible — the withered 
energies of a broken heart. He has tra- 
versed the earth in search of victims, 
" Seeking whom he might devour," — and 
has found no prey, even where he might 
seek for it with all the cupidity of infernal 
expectation. Let it be your glory and 
crown of rejoicing, that even the feeblest 
of his adversaries has repulsed him with 
a power that will always annihilate his." 



344 MELMOTH : 

*• Who is that faded form that supports 
with difficulty an emaciated invalid, and 
seems at every step to need the support 
she gives ? — It is still Elinor tending John. 
Their path is the same, but the season is 
changed — and that change seems to her to 
have passed alike on the mental and phy- 
sical world. It is a dreary evening in 
Autumn — the stream flows dark and tur- 
bid beside their path — the blast is groan- 
ing among the trees, and the dry dis- 
coloured leaves are sounding under their 
feet — their walk is uncheered by human 
converse, for one of them no longer thinks, 
and seldom speaks ! 

" Suddenly he gives a sign that he 
wishes to be seated — it is complied with, 
and she sits beside him on the felled 
trunk of a tree. He declines his head 
on her bosom, and she feels with de- 
li shted amazement, a few tears stream- 
ing on it for the first time for years 
— a soft but conscious pressure of her 
hand, seems to her like the signal of re- 
viving intelligence — with breathless hope 



i A TALE. 345 

she watches him as he slowly raises his 
head, and fixes his eyes — God of all con- 
solation, there is intelligence in his glance ! 
He thanks her with an unutterable look 
thr all her care, her long and painful la- 
bour of love ! His lips are open, but long 
unaccustomed to utter human sounds, the 
effort is made with difficulty — again that 
effort is repeated and tails — his strength is 
exhausted — his eyes close — his last gentle 
sigh is breathed on the bosom of faith and 
love — and Elinor soon after said to those 
who surrounded her bed, that she died 
happy, since he knew her once more ! She 
gave one parting awful sign to the minis- 
ter, which was understood and answered ! 






CHAPTER XXXI. 

Cum mihi non tantum furesque feraeque suetse^ 
Hunc vexare locum, curae sunt atque labori ; 
Quantum carminibus quae versant atque venenis, 
Humanos animos. 

Horace. 

" At is inconceivable to me," said Don 
Aliaga to himself, as he pursued his jour- 
ney the next day — " it is inconceivable to 
me how this person forces himself on my 
company, harasses me with tales that have 
no more application to me than the legend 
of the Cid, and may be as apocryphal as 
the ballad of Roncesvalles — and now he 
has ridden by my side all day^ and, as if 



A TALE. 347 

to make amends for his former uninvited 
and unwelcome communicativeness, he 
has never once opened his lips." 

" Senhor," said the stranger, then speak- 
ing for the first time, as if he read Aliaga's 
thoughts — " I acknowledge myself in er- 
ror for relating to you a narrative in which 
you must have felt there v/as Httle to in- 
terest you. Permit me to atone for it, by 
recounting to you a very brief one, in 
which I flatter myself you will be dispos- 
ed to feel a very peculiar interest."' — " You 
assure me it will be brief," said Aliaga. 
" Not only so, but the last I shall obtrude 
on your patience," replied the stranger. 
" On that condition," said Aliaga, *•' in 
Gkxls name, brother, proceed. And look 
you handle the matter discreetly, as you 
have said." 

" There was," said the stranger, ** a cer- 
tain Spanish merchant, who set out pro- 
sperously in business ; but, after a few 
years, finding his affairs assume an unfa- 
vourable aspect, and being tempted by an 
offer of partnership with a relative who 



348 .MELMOTH : 

was settled in the East Indies, had em- 
bai*ked for those countries with his wife 
and son, leaving behind him an infant 
daughter in Spain." — " That was exactly 
my case," said AUaga, wholly unsuspicious 
of the tendency of this tale. 

*' Tvvo years of successful occupation 
restored him to opulence, and to the hope 
of vast and future accumulation. Thus 
encouraged, our Spanish merchant enter- 
tained ideas of settling in the East Indies, 
and sent over for his young daughter with 
her nurse, who embarked for the East In- 
dies with the first opportunity, which was 
then verv rare." — " This reminds me ex- 
actly of what occurred to myself," said 
Aliaga, whose faculties were somewhat 
obtuse. 

" The nurse and infant were supposed 
to have perished in a storm which wreck- 
ed the vessel on an isle near the mouth 
of a river, and in which the crew and; 
passengers perished. It was said that the 
nurse and child alone escaped; that by 
some extraordinary chance they arrived 



A TALE. 349 

at this isle, where the nurse died from 
fatigue and want of nourishment, and 
the child survived, and grew up a wild 
and beautiful daughter of nature, feeding 
on fruits, — and sleeping amid roses, — and 
drinking the pure element, — and inhaling 
the harmonies of heaven, — and repeating 
to herself the few Christian words her 
nurse had taught her, in answer to the 
melody of the birds that sung to her, and 
of the stream whose waves murmured in 
accordance to the pure and holy music of 
her unearthly heart." — " I never heard a 
word of this before," muttered Aliaga to 
himself The stranger went on. 

" It was said that some vessel in distress 
arrived at the isle, — that the captain had 
rescued this lovely lonely being from the 
brutality of the sailors, — and, discovering 
from some remains of the Spanish tongue 
which she still spoke, and which he sup- 
posed must have been cultivated during 
the visits of some other wanderer to the 
isle, he undertook, like a man of honour, 
to conduct her to her parents, whose names 



350 MELMOTH : 

she could tell, though not their residence, 
so acute and tenacious is the naemoiy of 
infancy. He fulfilled his promise, and the 
pure and innocent being was restored to 
her family, who were then residing in the 
city of Benares." Aliaga, at these words, 
stared with a look of intelligence some- 
what ghastly. He could not interrupt the 
stranger — he drew in his breath, and closed 
his teeth. 

" 1 have since heard," said the stranger, 
" that the family has returned to Spain, — 
that the beautiful inhabitant of the foreign 
isle is become the idol of your cavaliers of 
Madrid, — your loungers of the Prado, — 
your saa^aviensesy — your — by what other 
name of contempt shall I call them ? But 
listen to me, — there is an eye fixed on her, 
and its fascination is more deadly than 
that fabled of the snake ! — There is an arm 
extended to seize her, in whose grasp hu- 
manity withers ! — That arm even now re- 
laxes for a moment, — its fibres thrill with 
pity and horror, — it releases the victim for 
a moment, — it even beckons her father to 



A TALE. 351 

her aid ! — Don Francisco, do you under- 
stand me now ? — Has this tale interest or 
application for you ?" 

" He paused, but Aliaga, chilled witli 
horror, was unable to answer him but by 
a feeble exclamation. *' If it has," resum- 
ed the stranger, " lose not a moment to 
save your daughter !" and, clapping spurs 
to his mule, he disappeared through a 
narroiv passage among the rocks, apparent- 
ly never intended to be trod by earthly 
traveller. Aliaga was not a man suscep- 
tible of strong impressions from nature ; 
but, if he had been, the scene amid which 
this mysterious warning was uttered would 
have powerfully ministered to its effect. 
The time was evening, — a grey and misty 
twilight hung over every object ; — the 
way lay through a rocky road, that wound 
among mountains, or rather stony hills, 
bleak and bare as those which the weary 
traveller through the * western isle sees 
rising amid the moors, to which they form 

* Ireland, — ^tbrsan. 



352 MELMOTH : 

a contrast without giving a relief. Heavy- 
rains had made deep gullies amid the hills, 
and here and there a mountain-stream 
brawled amid its stony channel, like a proud 
and noisy upstart, while the vast chasms 
that had been the beds of torrents which 
once swept through them in thunder, now 
:?tood gaping and ghastly like the deserted 
abodes of ruined nobility. Not a sound 
broke on the stillness, except the monoto- 
nous echo of the hoofs of the mules an- 
swered from the hollows of the hill, and 
the screams of the birds, which, after a few 
short circles in the damp and cloudy air, 

fled back to their retreats amid the cliffs. 

^ * ^ « * 

y^ V y/f ^ 

" It is almost incredible, that after this 
warning, enforced as it was by the perfect 
acquaintance which the stranger displayed 
of Aliaga's former life and family-circum- 
stances, it should not have had the effect of 
making him hurry homewards immediate- 
ly, particularly as it seems he thought it 
of sufficient importance to make it the 



A TALE. 353 

subject of correspondence with his wife. 
So it was however. 

" At the moment of the stranger's de- 
parture, it was his resolution not to lose 
a moment in hastening homewards ; but 
at the next stage he arrived at, there were 
letters of business awaiting him. A mer- 
cantile correspondent gave him the infor- 
mation of the probable failure of a house 
in a distant part of Spain, where his speedy 
presence might be of vital consequence. 
There were also letters from IMontilla, his 
intended son-in-law, informing him that 
the state of his father's health was so pre- 
carious, it was impossible to leave him till 
his fate was decided. As the decisions of 
fate involved equally the wealth of the 
son, and the life of the father, Aliaga could 
not help thinking there was as much pru- 
dence as affection in this resolution. 
..n** After reading these letters, Aiiaga's 
mind began to flow in its usual channel. 
There is no breaking through the invete- 
rate habitudes of a thorough-paced mer- 
cantile mind, " though one rose from tlie 



354 MELMOTH : 

dead." Besides, by this time the myste- 
rious image of the stranger's presence and 
communications were fading fast from a 
mind not at all habituated to visionary 
impressions. He shook off the terrors of 
this visitation by the aid of time, and gave 
his courage the credit due to that aid. 
Thus we all deal with the illusions of the 
imagination, — with this difference only, 
that the impassioned recal them with the 
tear of regret, and the unimaginative with 
the blush of shame. Aliaga set out for 
the distant part of Spain where his pre- 
sence was to save this tottering house in 
which he had an extensive concern, and 
wrote to Donna Clara, that it might be 
some months before he returned to the 
neighbourhood of Madrid. 



^•^ 



CHAPTER XXXIL 



Husband, husband, I've the ring 

Thou gavest to-day to me ; 
And thou to me art ever wed. 

As I am wed to thee i 

Little's Poems. 



" JL HE remainder of that dreadful night 
when Isidora disappeared, had been passed 
almost in despair by Donna Clara, who, 
amid all her rigour and chilling mediocri- 
ty, had still the feelings of a mother — and 
by Fra Jose, who, with all his selfish lux- 
ury and love of domination, had a heart 
where distress never knocked for admit- 
tance, that she did not find pity ready to 
open the door. 



356 MELMOTH : 

" The distress of Donna Clara was ag- 
gravated by her fear of her husband, of 
whom she stood in great awe, and who, 
she dreaded, might reproach her with un- 
pardonable negligence of her maternal au- 
thority. 

** In this night of distress, she was often 
tempted to call on her son for advice and 
assistance ; but the recollection of his vio- 
lent passions deterred her, and she sat 
in passive despair till day. Then, with 
an unaccountable impulse, she rose from 
her seat, and hurried to her daughter's a- 
partment, as if she imagined that the events 
of the preceding night were only a fearful 
and false illusion that would be dispersed 
by the approach of day. 

" It seemed, indeed, as if they were, for 
on the bed lay Isidora in a profound sleep, 
with the same pure and placid smile as 
when she was lulled into slumber by the 
melodies of nature, and the sound was pro- 
longed in her dream by the whispered 
songs of the spirits of the Indian Ocean. 



A TALEil^ 337 

Donna Clara uttered a shriek of surprise, 
that had the singular effect of rousing Fra 
Jose from a deep sleep into which he had 
fallen at the approach of day. Starting at 
the sound, the good-natured, pampered 
priest, tottered into the room, and saw, 
with incredulity that slowly yielded to 
frequent application to his obstinate and 
adhesive eye-lids, the form of Isidora ex- 
tended in profound slumber. 

** Oh what an exquisite enjoyment !" 
said the yawning priest, as he looked on 
the sleeping beauty without another emo- 
tion than that of the delight of an uninter- 
rupted repose. — " Pray, don't disturb her," 
he said, yawning himself out of the room 
' — " after such a night as we all have had, 
sleep must be a very refreshing and lauda- 
ble exercise ; and so I commend you to 
the protection of the holy saints !" — " Oh 
reverend Father ! — Oh holy Father !" cried 
Donna C!ara clinging to him, " desert me 
not in this extremity — this has been the 
work of magic — of infernal spirits. See 
how profoundly she sleeps, though we are 



358 MELMOTH : 

speaking, and it is now day-light." — 
" Daughter, you are much mistaken," an- 
swered the drowsy priest ; " people can sleep 
soundly even in the day-time ; and for proof 
send me, as I am now retiring to rest, a 
bottle of FoncaiTal or Valdepenas — not 
that I value the richest vintage of Spain 
from the Chacoli of Biscay to the Mataro 
of Catalonia, * but I would never have 
it said that I slept in the day-time, but 

for sufficient reason." " Holy Father 1" 

answered Donna Clara, " do you not think 
my daughter's disappearance and intense 
slumber are the result of preternatural 
causes?""" Daughter," answered the priest, 
contracting his brows, " let me have some 
wine to slake the intolerable thirst caused 
by my anxiety for the welfare of your 
family, and let me meditate some hours 
afterwards on the measures best to be 
adopted, and then — when I awake, I will 
give you my opinion." ^' Holy Fa- 
ther, you shall judge for me in every 



* Vide Dillon's travels through Spam. 



A TALE.^ 359 

thing/' — " It were not amiss, daughter,'" 
said the priest retiring, " if a few slices 
of ham, or some poignant sausages, accom- 
panied the wine — it might, as it were, abate 
the deleterious effects of that abominable 
liquor, which 1 never drink but on emer- 
gencies like these." — " Holy Father, they 
shall be ordered," said the anxious mother 
— " but do you not think my daugh- 
ter's sleep is supernatural ?" — " Follow 
me to mine apartment, daughter," an- 
swered the priest, exchanging his cowl for 
a night-cap, which one of the numerous 
household obsequiously presented him, 
" and you will soon see that sleep is a 
natural effect of a natural cause. Your 
daughter has doubtless passed a very fa- 
tiguing night, and so have you, and so 
have I, though perhaps from very different 
causes ; but all those causes dispose us to 
a profound repose. — 1 have no doubt of 
mine — fetch up the wine and sausages — 
I am very weary — Oh I am weak and worn 
with fasts and watching, and the labours 
of exhortation. My tongue cleaves to the 



360 MELMOTH : 

roof of my mouth, and my jaws cling to- 
gether, — perhaps a draught or two might 
dissolve their parching adhesion. But I do 

so hate wine why the devil don't yotV' 

fetch up the bottle ?" 

" The attendant domestic, terrified by 
the tone of wrath in which the last words 
were uttered, hurried on with submissive 
expedition, and Fra Jose sat dow^i at 
length in his apartment to ruminate on 
the calamities and perplexities of the fa- 
mily, till he was actually overcome by the 
subject, and exclaimed in a tone of despair, 
" Both bottles empty ! Then it is useless 

to meditate further on this subject." ^' 

* * * * 

" He was roused at an earlier hour than 
he wished, by a message from Donna 
Clara, who, in the distress of a weak mind, 
accustomed always to factitious and exter- 
nal support, now felt as if every step she 
took without it, must lead to actual and 
instant perdition. Her fear of her husband^ 
next to her superstitious fears, held the 
strongest power over her mind, and that 



A TALE. 361 

morning she called Fra Jose to an early 
consultation of terror and inquietude. — 
Her great object was to conceal, if possi- 
ble, the absence of her daughter on that 
eventful night ; and finding that none of 
the domestics appeared conscious of it, and 
that amid the numerous household, only 
one aged servant was absent, of whose 
absence no one took notice amid the super- 
fluous multitude of a Spanish establish- 
ment, her courage began to revive. It was 
raised still higher by a letter from Aliaga, 
announcing the necessity of his visiting a 
distant part of Spain, and of the marriage 
of his daughter with Montilla being de- 
ferred for some months this sounded 

like reprieve in the ears of Donna Clara — 
$he consulted with the priest, who answ^er- 
ed in words of comfort, that if Donna 
Isidora's short absence were known, it was 
but a slight evil, and if it were not known, 
it was none at all, — and he recommended 
to her, to ensure the secresy of the 
servants by means that he swore by his 
habit were infallible, as he had known them 

VOL. IV. Q 



,.§§2 MELMOTH : 

operate effectively among the servants of a 
far more powerful and extensive establish- 
ment. — " Reverend Father," said Donna 
Clara," I know of no establishment among 
the grandees of Spain more splendid than 
ours." — " But I do, daughter," said the 
priest, " and the head of that establishment 
is — the Pope ; — but go now, and awake 
your daughter, who deserves to sleep till 
dooms-day, as she seems totally to have 
forgotten the hour of breakfast. It is not 
for myself I speak, daughter, but I cannot 
bear to see the regularity of a magnificent 
household thus interrupted ; for myself, 
a basin of chocolate, and a cluster of 
grapes, will be sufficient; and to allay 
the crudity of the grapes, a glass of 
JMalaga. — Your glasses, by the bye, are the 
shallowest I ever drank out of — could you 
not find some means to get from Ildefon- 
so * glasses of the right make, with short 
shanks and ample bodies ? Yours resemble 
those of Quichotte, all limbs and no trunk. 
*j 

* The celebrated manufactory for glass in Spain. 



'HliTALK. 36.3 

I like one that resembles his squire, a spa- 
cious body and a shank that may be mea- 
sured by my little finger." — " I will send 
to St Ildefonso this day," answered Donna 
Clara. — " Go and awake your daughter 
first," said the priest. 

" As he spoke, Isidora entered the 
room — the mother and the priest both 
stood amazed. Her countenance was as 
serene, her step as equal, and her mein as 
composed, as if she were totally uncon- 
scious of the terror and distress her disap- 
pearance the preceding night had caused. 
?^o the first short silence of amazement, 
'^succeeded a storm of interrogations from 
XDonna Clara and Fra Jose in concert — 
^'why — where — wherefore — and what, and 
with whom and how — that was all they 
could, articulate. They might as well 
have spared themselves the trouble, for 
neither that day nor many following, could 
the remonstrances, intreaties, or menaces 
of her mother, aided by the spiritual au- 
thority and more powerful anxiety of the 
priest, extort fi'om her a word of explana- 



364 MELMOTH : 

tion on the cause of her absence that awful 
night. When closely and sternly pressed, 
Isidora's mind seemed to assume some* 
thing of the wild but potent spirit of in- 
dependence, which her early habits and 
feelino^s mio^ht have communicated to her. 
She had been her own teacher and mis- 
tress for seventeen years, and though natu- 
rally gentle and tractable, when imperious 
mediocrity attempted to tyrannize over 
her, she felt a sense of disdain which she 
expressed only by profound silence. 

" Fra Jose, incensed at her obstinacy, and 
trembling for the loss of his power over 
the family, threatened to exclude her from 
confession, unless she disclosed to him the 
secret of that night — " Then I will confess 
to God!" said Isidora. Her mother's impor- 
tunity she found it more difficult to resist, 
for her feminine heart loved all that was 
feminine even in its most unattractive 
shape, and the persecution from that quar- 
ter was alike monotonous and unremit- 
ting. 

" There was a weak but harassing 



A TALE. t 265 

tenacity al)dut Donna Clara, that is the 
general adjunct to the female character 
when it combines intellectual mediocrity 
with rigid principle. When she laid siege 
to a secret, the garrison might as well capi- 
tulate at once What she wanted in vi- 
gour and ability, she supplied by a minute 
and gnawing assiduity. She never ventur- 
ed to carry the fort by storm, but her ob- 
stinacy blockaded it till it was forced to 
surrender. But here even her importunity 
failed. — Isidora remained respectfully, but 
resolutely silent ; finding matters thus des^ 
perate, Donna Clara, who had a fine talent 
for keeping as well as discovering a secret, 
agreed with Fra Jose not to utter a syl- 
lable of the business to her father and bro- 
ther. — " We will show, " said Donna 
Clara, with a sagacious and self-approving 
nod, " that we can keep a secret as well as 
she." — " Right, daughter, '' said Fra Jose, 
" imitate her in the only point in which 
you can flatter yourself with the hope of 
resemblance. * # * 



S66 MELMOTH : 

iv» rpi^g secret was, however, soon disclos« 
ed. Some months had elapsed, and the 
visits of her husband began to give an ha- 
bitual calm and confidence to the mind of 
Isidora. He imperceptibly was exchanging 
his ferocious misanthropy for a kind of pen- 
sive gloom.— It was like the dark, cold, but 
unterrificand comparatively soothing night, 
that succeeds to a day of storm and earth- 
quake. The sufferers remember the ter- 
rors of the day, and the still darkness of 
the night feels to them like a shelter. 
Isidora gazed on her espoused with de- 
light, when she saw no longer his withering 
frown, or more withering smile; and 
she felt the hope that the calm purity 
of female hearts always suggests, that its 
influence will one day float over the form- 
less and the void, like the spirit that moved 
upon the face of the waters ; and that the 
unbelieving husband may yet be saved 
by the believing wife. ^^^'( ^^ ^^ 
yc « These thoughts were her comfort, and 
itVas well she had thoughts to comfort 
'tier, for facts are miserable allies when ima- 



A TALE^ d&7 

gination fights its battle with despair. On 
one of those nights that she expected Mel- 
moth, he found her employed in her 
usual hymn to the Virgin, which she ac- 
companied on her lute. " Is it not rather 
late to sing your vesper hymn to the 
Virgin after midnight r" said Melmoth 
with a ghastly smile. " Her ear is open 
at all simes, I have been told," answered 
Isidora. — " If it is, then, love," said INlel- 
moth, vaulting as usual through the case- 
ment, " add a stanza to your hymn in fa- 
vour of me." — " Alas !" said Isidora, drop- 
ping her lute, " you do not believe, love, 
in ^vhat the Holy Church requires." — 
" Yes, I do believe, when I listen to you." 
— " And only then ?" — " Sing again your 
hymn to the Virgin." 

" Isidora complied, and watched the effect 
on the listener. He seemed affected — he 
motioned to her to repeat it. " My love," 
said Isidora, " is not this more like the re- 
petition of a theatrical song called for by 
an audience, than a hymn which he who 
listens to loves his wife better for, because 



368 MELMOTH : 

she loves her God. — '^Li is a snrewa ques- 
tion," said Melmoth, " but why am I in 
your imagination excluded from the love 
of God ?" — " Do you ever visit the church," 
answered the anxious Isidora. A pro- 
found silence. — " Do you ever receive the 
Holy Sacrament ?" — Melmoth did not 
utter a word. — " Have you ever, at my 
earnest solicitation, enabled me to an- 
nounce to my anxious family the tie that 
united us?"— No answer.—" And now— that 
—perhaps — I dare not utter what I feel ! 
Oh ! how shall I appear before eyes that 
watch me even now so closely ? — what shall 
I say ? — a wife without a husband — a mo- 
ther without a father for her child, or one 
whom a fearful oath has bound her never 
to declare ! Oh ! Melmoth, pity me,— 
deliver me from this life of constraint, false- 
hood, and dissimulation. Claim me as 
your wedded wife in the face of my fa- 
mily, and in the face of ruin your wedded 
wife will follow — will cling to — will perish 
with you !" Her arms clung round him, 
her cold but heart-wrung tears fell fast 



A TALE.^ 369 

on his cheek, and the imploring arms of 
woman supplicating for deliverance in her 
hour of shame and terror, seldom are twin- 
ed round us in vain. Melmoth felt the ap- 
peal — it was but for a moment. He caught 
the white arms extended towards him — 
he fixed an eager and fearful look of in- 
quiry on his victim-consort, as he asked — 
" And is it so ?" The pale and shuddering 
wife shrunk from his arms at the ques- 
tion — her silence answered him. The ago- 
nies of nature throbbed audibly in his 
heart. He said to himself— it is mine— the 
fruit of affection — the first-born of the 
heart and of nature — mine— mine, — and 
whatever becomes of me, there shall yet 
be a human being on earth who traces me 
in its external form, and who will be 
taught to pray for its father, even when its 
prayer falls parched and hissing on the 
fires that burn for ever, like a wandering 
drop of dew on the burning sands of the 
desert! ♦ « * * 

***** 

q2 



370 MELMOTH : 

.". From the period of this communiea- 
ticm, Melmoth's tenderness for his wife 
yisibly increased. 

." Heaven only knows the source of that 
wild fondness with which he contemplated 
her, and in which was still mingled some- 
thing of ferocity. His warm look seemed 
like the glow of a sultry summer day, 
whose heat announces a storm, and com- 
pels ^ us by its burning oppression, to look 
to the storm almost for relief. 

" It is not impossible that he looked to 
some future object of his fearful experi- 
xnent — and a being so perfectly in his power 
as his o\yn child, might have appeared to 
him fatally fitted for his purpose — the 
quantum of misery, too, necessary to 
qualify the probationer, it was always in 
his own power to inflict. Whatever was 
his motive, he assumed as much tender- 
ness as it was possible for him to assume, 
and spoke of the approaching event with 
the anxious interest of a human father. 
' " Soothed by his altered manner, Isidora 
J^re with silent sufferance th^j;|^ii^den,f>f 



A TALE. 371 

Het'^Mtuation, with all its painful accompa- 
niments of indisposition and dejection, ag- 
gravated by hourly fear and mysterious 
secresy. She hoped he would at length re- 
ward her by an open and honourable decla- 
ration, but this hope was expressed only in 
her patient smiles. The hour approached 
fast, and fearful and indefinite apprehen- 
sions began to overshadow her mind, rela- 
tive to the fate of the infant about to be 
born under circumstances so mysterious. 

" At his next nightly visit, Melmoth 
found her in tears. 

' " Alas !" said she in answer to his abrupt 
inquiry, and brief attempt at consolation, 
" How many causes have I for tears — and 
how few have 1 shed? If you would 
have them wiped away, be assured it is 
only your hand can do it. I feel," she 
added, " that this event will be fatal to 
itlje— I know I shall not live to see my 
child — I demand from you the only pro- 
mise that can support me even under this 
conviction" — Melmoth interrupted her by 
the assurance, that these apprehensions 



S72 MELMOTH : 

%fe?^' the inseparable concomitants of her 
situation, and that many mothers, surround- 
ed by a numerous offspring, smiled as they 
recollected their fears that the birth of each 
would be fatal to them. 
'""Isidora shook her head. "The pre- 
sages," said she, " that visit me, are such 
as never visited mortality in vain. I have 
always believed, that as we approach the 
invisible world, its voice becomes more 
audible to us, and grief and pain are very 
eloquent interpreters between us and eter- 
nity — quite distinct from all corporeal suf- 
fering, even from all mental terror, is that 
deep and unutterable impression which is 
alike incommunicable and ineffaceable — it 
is as if heaven spoke to us alone, and told 
us to keep its secret, or divulge it on the 
condition of never being believed. Oh ! 
Melmoth, do not give that fearful smile 
when I speak of heaven — soon I may be 
your only intercessor there." " ]\ly dear 
saint," said Melmoth, laughing and kneel- 
ing to her in mockery, " let me make early 
interest for your mediation — how many 



ha tale. 87^ 

ducats will it cost me to get you canoniz- 
ed ? — you will furnish me, 1 hope, with an 
authentic account of legitimate miracles — 
one is ashamed of the nonsense that is 
sent monthly to the Vatican." " Let 
your conve?^sien be the fii^st miracle on the 
list,'' said Isidora, w^ith an energy that made 
Melmoth tremble — it was dark — but she 
felt that he trembled — she pursued her 
imagined triumph — " Melmoth," she ex- 
claimed, " I have a right to demand one 
promise from you — for you I have sacri- 
ficed every thing — never was woman more 
devoted — never did Avoman give proofs of 
devotion like mine. I might have been 
the noble, honoured wife of one who would 
have laid his wealth and titles at my feet. 
In this my hour of danger and suffering, 
the first famihes in Spain would have been 
waiting round my door. Alone, unaided, 
unsustained, unconsoled, I must undergo 
the terrible struggle of nature — terrible to 
those whose beds are smoothed by the 
hands of affection, whose agonies are 
soothed by the presence of a mother — who 
hears the first feeble cry of her infant 



S74 MELMOTH : 

echoed by the joy of exulting noble rela- 
tives. Oh Melmoth ! what must be mine ! 
I must suffer in secresy and in silence ! I 
must see my babe torn from me before I 
have even kissed it, — and the chrism-mantle 
will be one of that mysterious darkness 
which yovir fingers have woven ! Yet grant 
me one thing — one thing !" continued the 
suppliant, growing earnest in her prayer 
even to agony ; *^ swear to me that my 
child shall be baptised according to the 
forms of the Catholic church, — that it shall 
be a Christian as far as those forms can 
make it, — and I shall feel that, if all my 
fearful presages are fulfilled, I shall leave 
behind me one who will pray for his father, 
and whose prayer may be accepted. Pro- 
mise me,— swear to me," she added, in in- 
tenser agony, " that my child shall be a 
Christian ! Alas ! if my voice be not wor- 
thy to be heard in heaven, that of a che- 
rub may ! Christ himself suffered children 
to come unto him while on earth, and will 
he repel them in heaven ? — Oh ! no, — no ! 
he will not repel yours f^^^^-^^^ -*^'^ < 



A TALBn/: 3T5 

** Melmoth listened to her with feelings 
that it is better to suppress than explain 
or expatiate on. Thus solemnly adjured, 
however, he promised that the child 
should be baptised ; and added, with an 
expression which Isidora's delight at this 
concession did not give her time to under- 
stand, that it should be a Christian as far 
as the rites and ceremonies of the Catholic 
church could make it one. While he add- 
ed many a bitter hint of the inefficacy of 
any external rites — and the impotentiality 
of any hierarchy — and of the deadly and 
desperate impositions of priests under 
every dispensation — and exposed them 
with a spirit at once ludicrous and Satanic, 
— a spirit that mingled ridicule with hor- 
ror, and seemed like a Harlequin in the 
infernal regions, flirting with the furies, 
Isidora still repeated her solemn request 
that her child, if it survived her, should 
be baptised. To this he assented ; and 
added, with a sarcastic and appalling levi- 
ty, — " And a Mahometan, if you should 
change your mind,— or any other mytho- 



376 MELMOTH : 

logy you please to adopt ; — only send me 
word, — priests are easily obtained, and ce- 
remonies cheaply purchased ! Only let me 
know your future intentions, — when you 
know them yourself." — '•' I shall not be 
here to tell you," said Isidora, replying with 
profound conviction to this withering levi- 
ty, like a cold winter day to the glow of a 
capricious summer one, that blends the 
sunshine and the lightning ; — " Melmoth, 
I shall not be here then !" And this e- 
nergy of despair in a creature so young, 
so inexperienced, except in the vicissitudes^ 
of the heart, formed a strong contrast to 
the stony apathy of one who had traversed 
life from Dan to Beersheba, and found all 
barren, or — made it so. 

" At this moment, while Isidora wept 
the cold tears of despair, without daring 
to ask the hand of him she loved to dry 
them, the bells of a neighbouring convent, 
where they were performing a mass for 
the soul of a departed brother, suddenly 
rung out. Isidora seized that moment, 
when the very air was eloquent with the 



A TALE. 377 

voice of religion, to impress its power on 
that mysterious being whose presence in- 
spired her equally with terror and -vvith 
love. " Listen, — listen !" she cried. The 
sounds came slowly and stilly on, as if it 
was an involuntary expression of that pro- 
found sentiment that night always inspires, 
— the reverberating watch-word from sen- 
tinel to sentinel, when wakeful and re- 
flecting minds have become the " watchers 
of the night*." The effect of these 
sounds was increased, by their catching 
from time to time the deep and thrilling 
chorus of the voices, — these voices more 
than harmonized, they were coincident 
with the toll of the bell, and seemed like 
them set in involuntary motion, — music 
played by invisible hands. 

" Listen," repeated Isidora, " is there 
no truth in the voice that speaks to you in 
tones like these ? Alas ! if there be no 



, * He called unto me out of Seir, Watchman, what 
of the night ? — Watchman, what of the night ? i 
Isaiah. 



378 MELMOTH : 

truth in religion, there is none on earth ! 
Passion itself evanishes into an illusion, 
unless it is hallowed by the consciousness 
of a God and of futurity. That sterility 
of the heart that forbids the growth of 
divine feeling, must be hostile also to every 
tender and generous sentiment. He who 
is without a God must he without a heart I 
Oh, my love, will you not, as you bend 
over my grave, wish my last slumbers to 
have been soothed by sounds like these, — 
wish that they may whisper peace to your 
own ? Promise me, at least, that you will 
lead your child to my tomb-stone, — that 
you will suffer it to read the inscription 
that tells I died in the faith of Christ, and 
the hope of immortality. Its tears will be 
powerful pleaders to you not to deny it 
the consolation that faith has given me 
in hours of suffering, and the hopes with 
which it will illuminate my parting hour. 
Oh promise me this at least, that you will 
suffer your child to visit my grave — that 
is all. Do not interrupt or distract the 
impression by sophistry or levity, or by 



A TALE. 379 

that wild and withering eloquence that 
flashes from your lips, not to enlighten but 
to blast. You will not weep, but you will 
be silent, — leave Heaven and nature free 
to their work. The voice of God will 
speak to its heart, and my spirit, as it wit- 
nesses the conflict, will tremble though in 
paradise, — and, even in heaven, will feel 
an added joy, when it beholds the victory 
won. Promise me, then, — swear to me !" 
she added, with agonizing energy of tone 
and gesture. " Your child shall be a 
Christian !" said Melmoth. 









CHAPTER XXXII. 



-Oh, spare me, Grirabald ! 



I will tempt hermits for thee in their cells. 
And virgins in their dreams. 

Dryden's King Arthur. 



JLt is a singular, but well-attested fact, 
that women who are compelled to undergo 
all the inconveniences and uneasiness of 
clandestine pregnancy, often fare better 
than those whose situation is watched over 
by tender and anxious relatives ; and that 
concealed or illegitimate births are actually 
attended with less danger and suffering 
than those which have all the aid that skill 
and affection can give. So it appeared 



A TALE. 381 

likely to fare with Isidora. The retirement 
in which her family lived — the temper of 
Donna Clara, as slow to suspect from want 
of penetration, as she was eager in pursu- 
ing an object once discovered, from the 
natural cupidity of a vacant mind — these 
circumstances, combined with the dress of 
the day, the enormous and enveloping 
far din gale, gave safety to her secret, at 
least till the arrival of its crisis. As this 
crisis approached, one may easily imagine 
the secret and trembling preparation — the 
important nurse, proud of the trust re- 
posed in her — the confidential maid — the 
faithful and discreet medical attendant — 
to obtain all these Melmoth supplied her 
amply with money — a circumstance that 
would have surprised Isidora, as his ap- 
pearance was always remarkably plain and 
private, if, at this moment of anxiety, any 
thought but that of the hour could have 

found room in her mind. * * 

***** 

" On the evening supposed to be that pre- 
ceding the dreaded event, Melmoth had 



382 MELMOTH : 

thrown an unusual degree of tenderness 
into his manner — he gazed on her fre- 
quently with anxious and silent fondness 
— he seemed to have something to com- 
municate which he had not courage to dis- 
close. Isidora, well versed in the language 
of the countenance, which is often, more 
than that of words, the language of the 
heart, intreated him to tell her what he 
looked, " Your father is returning," said 
Melmoth reluctantly. " lie wdll certainly 
be here in a few days, perhaps in a few 
hours." Isidora heard him in silent horror. 
" My father!" she cried — " I have never 
seen my father. — Oh, how shall I meet him 
now ! And is my mother ignorant of this ? 
— would she not have apprized me?" — "She 
is ignorant at present ; but she will not long 
be so." — " And from whence could you 
have obtained intelligence that she is ig- 
norant of?" Melmoth paused some time, 
— ^his features assumed a more contracted 
and gloomy character than they had done ^ 
laterally— he answered with slow and 
stem reluctance — " Never again ask me 



A TALE. 383 

that question— the inteUigence that I can 
give you must be of more importance to 
you than the means by which 1 obtain it 
— enough for you that it is true/' — " Par- 
don me, love," said Isidora; " it is pro- 
bable that 1 may never again offend you — 
will you not, then, forgive my last ofifence?" 

" Mel moth seemed too intently occupied 
with his own thoughts to answer even her 
tears. He added, after a short and sullen 
pause, " Your betrothed bridegroom is 
coming with your father — Montilla's father 
is dead — the arrangements are all conclud- 
ed for your nuptials — your bridegroom is 
coming to wed the wife of another — wdth 
him comes your fiery, foolish brother, who 
has set out to meet his father and his fu- 
ture relative. There will be a feast pre- 
pared in the house on the occasion of your 
future nuptials — you may hear of a strange 
guest appearing at your festival — I will be 
there !" 

" Isidora stood stupified with horror. 
»^li. Festival !" she repeated — " a bridal fes- 



384 MELMOTH : 

tival ! — and I already wedded to you, and 

about to become a mother !" 

* *■ * * * 

" At this moment the trampling of 
many horsemen was heard as they ap- 
proached the villa — the tumult of the do- 
mestics hurr}ang to admit and receive 
them, resounded through the apartments 
— and Melmoth, wdth a gesture that seem- 
ed to Isidora rather like a menace than a 
farewell, instantly disappeared ; and within 
an hour, Isidora knelt to the father she had 
never till then beheld — suffered herself to 
be saluted by Montilla — and accepted the 
embrace of her brother, who, in the petu- 
lance of his spirit, half rejected the chill 
and altered form that advanced to greet 
him. 

# ^ # ^ i^ 

" Every thing at the family meeting 
w^as conducted in true Spanish formality. 
Aliaga kissed the cold hand of his withered 
wife — the numerous domestics exhibited a 
grave joy at the return of their master — 
Fra Jose assumed increased importance, 



A TALE. 385 

and called for dinner in a louder tone. 
Montilla, the lover, a cold and quiet cha- 
racter, took things as they occurred, 
f *• Every thing lay hubhed under a brief 
and treacherous calm. Isidora, who trenn- 
bled at the approaching danger, felt he»* 
terrors on a sudden suspended. It was not 
so very near as she apprehended — and she 
bore with tolerable patience the daily naen- 
tion of her approaching nuptials, while she 
was momently harassed by her confiden- 
tial servants with hints of the impossibility 
of the event of whicli they were in expec- 
tation, being much longer C^layed. Isi- 
dora heard, felt, endured all with courage 
— the grave congratulation of her father 
and mother — the self-complacent attentions 
of Montilla, sure of the bride and of her 
dower — the sullen compliance of the bro- 
ther, who, unable to refuse his consent, 
was for ever hinting that Ids sister miglit 
have formed a higher connection. All 
these passed over her mind like a dream 
— the reality of her existence seemed inter- 
nal, and she said to herself, — '* Were I at 

VOL. IV. K 



386 MELMOTH : 

the altar, were my hand locked in that of 
Montilla, Melmoth would rend me from 
him." A wild but deeply-fixed conviction 
— a wandering image of preternatural 
power, overshadowed her mind while she 
thought of Melmoth; — and this image, 
which had caused her so much terror ^nd 
inquietude in her early hours of love, now 
formed her only resource against the ht>ur 
of inconceivable suffering ; as those unfor- 
tunate females in the Eastern Tales, whose 
beauty has attracted the fearful passion of 
some evil genie, are supposed to depend, 
at their nuptial ^hour, on the presence of 
the seducing spirit, to tear from the arms 
of the agonised parent, and the distracted 
bridegroom, the victim whom he has re- 
served for himself, and whose wild devo- 
tion to him gives a dignity to the union 

so unhallowed and unnatural * * 

***** 



* Vide the beautiful tale of Auheta the Princes^' 
of Egypt, and Maugraby the Sorcerer, in the Ara^^' 
bian Tales. 



<iTALEi^^ 387 



" Aliaga*s heart expanded amid the ap- 
proaching completion of the felicitous 
plans he had formed, and with his heart, 
his purse, which was its depositary, open- 
ed also, and he resolved to give a splendid 
fete in honour of his daughter's nuptials. 
Isidora remembered Melmoth's prediction 
of a fatal festival ; and his words, " I will 
be there," gave her for a time a kind of 
trembling confidence. But as the prepa- 
rations were carried on under her very e3^e, 
— as she was hourly consulted about the 
disposal of the ornaments, and the decora- 
tions of the apartments, — her resolution 
failed, and while she uttered a few incohe- 
rent words, her eye was glazed with hor- 
ror. 

" The entertainment was to be a mask- 
ed ball ; and Isidora, who imagined that 
this might suggest to Melmoth some au- 
spicious expedient for her escape, watched 
in vain for some hint of hope, — some allu- 
sion to the probability of this event facili- 
tating her extrication from those snares of 



388 MELMOTH : 

death that seemed compassing her about. 
He never uttered a word, and her depen- 
dence on him was at one moment confirm- 
ed, at another shaken to its foundation, by 
this terrible silence. In one of these latter 
moments, the anguish of which was in- 
creased beyond expression by a conviction 
that her hour of danger was not far dis- 
tant, she exclaimed to Melmoth— " Take 
me — take me from this place ! My exis- 
tence is nothing — it is a vapour that soon 
must be exhaled — but my reason is threat- 
ened every moment ! I cannot sustain the 
horrors to which I am exposed! All this day 
I have been dragged through roomsdecorat- 
ed for my impossible nuptials !— Oh, Mel- 
moth, if you no longer love me, at least com- 
miserate me ! Save me from a situation of 
horror unspeakable !— have mercy on your 
child, if not on me ! I have hung on your 
lookSj—I have watched for a word of hope 
— you have not uttered a sound — you 
'^have not cast a glance of hope on tne ! 
I am wild ! — I am reckless of all but the 



A TALE. S89 

imminent and present horrors of to- 
morrow — you have talked of your power 
to approach, to enter these walls without 
suspicion or discovery — you boasted of 
that cloud of mystery in which you 
could envelope yourself. Oh ! in this last 
moment of my extremity, wrap me in its 
tremendous folds, and let me escape in 
them, though they prove my shroud ! — 
Think of the terrible night of our mar- 
riage ! I followed you then in fear and 
confidence — your touch dissolved every 
earthly barrier — your steps trod an un- 
known path, yet I followed you !— -Oh ! 
If you really possess that mysterious and 
inscrutable power, which I dare not either 
question or believe, exert it for me in this 
terrible emergency— aid my escape — and 
though I feel I shall never live to thank 
you, the silent suppliant will remind you 
by its smiles of the tears that I now shed ; 
and if they are shed in vain, its smile will 
have a bitter eloquence as it plays with the 
flowers on its mother's grave !" 



390 MELMOTH : 

" Melmoth, as she spoke, was profound- 
ly silent, and deeply attentive. He said 
at last, " Do you then resign yourself to 
me ?"— " Alas ! have I not ?"— «* A question 
is not an answer. Will you, renouncing 
all other engagements, all other hopes, 
depend on me solely for your extrication 
from this fearful emergency ?" — " I will — 
I^ do !" — " Will you promise, that if I 
render you the service you require, if I 
employ the power you say I have allude 
ed to, you will be mine ?" — *' Yours !-^ 
Alas ! am I not yours already ?" — " You 
embrace my protection^ then ? You volun- 
tarily seek the shelter of that power 
which 1 can promise ? Yo\i yourself will 
me to employ that power in effecting your 
escape ? — Speak — do I interpret your senti-q 
ments aright ? — I am unable to exer- 
cise those powers you invest me with, un-cr 
less you yourself require me to do so. I 
have waited — I have watched for the de^ 
raand — it has been made — would that it 
never had !" An expression of the fierc- 



A TALE. 391 

est agony corrugated his stern features as 
he spoke. — " But it may yet be with- 
drawn — reflect!" — " And you will not 
then save me from shame and danger ? Is. 
this the proof of your love — is this the* 
boast of your power ?" said Isidora, half^ 
frantic at this delay. " If I adjure you to/ 
pause — if I myself hesitat and tremble— 1 
it is to give time for the salutary whisper^ 
of your better angel." — " Oh ! save me^' 
and you shall be my angel !" said Isidora, 
falling at his feet Melmoth shook 
through his whole frame as he heard these 
words. He raised and soothed her, how-^ 
ever, with promises of safety, though in a 
voice that seemed to announce despair — 
and then turning from her, burst into a 
passionate soliloquy. — '* Immortal Hea- 
ven ! what is man ? — A being wilh the ig- 
norance, but not the instinct, of the 
feeblest animals ! — They are like birds — 
when thy hand, O Thou whom I dare not 
call Father, is on them, they scream and 
quiver, though the gentle pressure is in-' 



392 MELMOl-H 



.r^« ^ 



tenaea only to" convey the wanderef tack 
to his cage — while, to shun the light fear 
that scares their senses, they rush into the 
snare that is spread in their sight, and 
where their captivity is hopeless !" As he 
spoke, hastily traversing the room, his 
foot struck against a chair on which a gor- 
geous dress was spread. " What is this ?" 
he exclaimed — " What ideot trumpery, 
w'hat May-queen foolery is this ?" — " It is 
the habit I am to wear at the feast to- 
night," said Isidora — " My attendants are 
coming — I hear them at the door — oh, 
with what a throbbing heart I shall 
put on this glittering mockery \- — But 
you will not desert me then ?" she add- 
ed, with wild and breathless anxiety. 
" Fear not,'' said JNlelmoth, solemnly — 
"You have demanded my aid, and it 
shall be accorded. May your heart trem- 
ble no more when you throw off that 
habit, than now when you are about to 
put it on !" 

" The hour approached, and the guests 



A TALE. 393 



t 



were arriving. Isidora, arrayed in a splen- 
did and fanciful garb, and lejoicing in the 
shelter which her mask afforded to the ex- 
pression of her pale features, mingled 
among the groupe. She walked one mea- 
sure with Montilla, and then declined 
dancing on the pretence of assisting her 
mother in receiving and entertaining her 
guests. ^ 

" After a sumptuous banquet, dancing 
was renewed in the spacious hall, and Isi- 
dora followed the company thither with a 
beating heart. Twelve was the hour at 
which Melmoth had promised to meet her, 
and by the clock, which was placed over 
the door of the hall, she saw it wanted but 
a quarter to twelve. The hand moved on 
— it arrived at the hour — the clock struck ! 
Isidora, whose eyes had been rivetted on 
its movements, now withdrew them in 
despair. At that moment she felt her 
arm gently touched, and one of the 
maskers, bending towards her, whispered, 
" I am here !" and he added the sign 

R 2 



S^i MELMOTH : 

which Mehnoth and she had agreed on 
as the signal of their meeting. Isido- 
re, unable to reply, could only return 
the sign. " JVlake haste," he added — " All 
is arranged for your flight — there is not a 
moment to be lost— I will leave you now, 
but meet me in a few moments in the 
western portico — the lamps are extinguish- 
ed there, and the servants have neglected 
to relicjht them — be silent and be swift 1" 
He disappeared as he spoke, and Isidora, 
after a few moments, followed him. 
Though the portico was dark, a faint gleam 
from the splendidly illuminated rooms dis^i 
closed to her the figure of Melmoth. He 
drew her arm under his in silence, and 
proceeded to hurry her from the spot. 
" Stop, villain, stop !" exclaimed the voice 
of her brother, who, followed by Montilla, 
sprung from the balcony—" Where do you 
drag my sister ? — and you, degraded wretch, 
where are you about to fly, and with 
whom ?" Melmoth attempted to pass him, 
supporting Isidora with one arm, while 



A TALE. 895 

the other was extended to repel his ap- 
proach ; but Fenian, drawing his sword, 
placed himself directly in their way, at the 
same time calling on Montilla to raise the 
household, and tear Isidora from his arms. 
"Off, fool— off!" exclaimed Melmoth— 
** Rush not on destruction ! — 1 seek not 
your life — one victim of your house is er 
nough — let us pass ere you perish !"— r; 
*' Boaster, prove your words !" said Fer- 
nan, making a desperate thrust at him, 
which Melmoth coolly put by with his 
hand. " Draw, coward !" cried Fernan, 
rendered furious by this action—" My 
next will be more successful !" Melmpth 
slowly drew his sword. " Boy !" said he 
in an awful voice — " If I turn this point a- 
gainst you, your life is not worth a mo- 
nient's purchase — be wdse and let us pass." 
Fernan made no answer but by a fierce 
attack, wdiich was instantly met by his 
antagonist. 

" The shrieks of Isidora had now reach- 
ed the ears of the revellers, who rushed in 



396 MELMOTH : 

crowds to the garden — the servants follow- 
ed them with flambeaux snatched from 
the walls adorned for this ill-omened fes- 
tival, and the scene of the combat was in 
a moment as light as day, and surrounded 
by a hundred spectators. 

^^ Part them— part them — save them 1" 
shrieked Isidora, writhing at the feet of 
her father and mother, who, with the rest, 
were gazing in stupid horror at the scene 
— *' Save my brother — save my husband !" 
The whole dreadful truth rushed on Don- 
na Clara's mind at these words, and cast- 
ing a conscious look at the terrified priest, 
she fell to the ground. The combat was 
short as it was unequal, — in two moments 
JNIelmoth passed his sword twice through 
the body of Fernan, who sunk beside Isi- 
dora, and expired ! There was a univer- 
sal pause of horror for some moments — 
at length a cry of — " Seize the murderer !" 
burst from every lip, and the crowd began 
to close around Melmoth. He attempted 
no defence. He retreated a few paces, 
Riobi^i io ^a no iim ^n^ 



• ^A TALE. S97 

and sheathing his sword, waved them back 
only with his arm ; and this movement, 
that seemed to announce an internal 
power above all physical force, had the ef- 
fect of nailing every spectator to the spot 
where he stood. 

" The light of the torches, which the 
trembling servants held up to gaze on him, 
fell full on his countenance, and the voices 
of a few shuddering speakers exclaimed, 
" Mel MOTH THE WANDERER 1" — " I am — 
I am I" said that unfortunate being — '' and 
who now will oppose my passing — who 

will become my companion ? — I seek not 

to injure now — but I will not be detained. 

Would that breathless fool had yielded to 

my bidding, not to my sword — there was 

but one human chord that vibrated in 

my heart— it is broken to-night, and for 

ever ! I will never tempt woman more ! 

Why should the whirlwind, that can 

shake mountains, and overwhelm cities 

bwith its breath, descend to scatter the 

leaves of the rose-bud?" As he spoke, 

his eyes fell on the form of Isidora, 



99)ftt MELMOTH : 

which lay at his feet extended beside that 
of Fernan. He bent over it for a moment 
T-a pulsation like returning life agita- 
ted her frame. He bent nearer — he whis- 
pered, unheard by the rest, — " Isidora, 
will you fly with me — this is the moment 
^^every arm is paralyzed — every mind is 
frozen to its centre ! — Isidora, rise and fly 
with rae — this is your hour of safety !" 
Isidora, who recognized the voice but not 
the speaker, raised herself for a moment — 
looked on Melmoth— cast a glance on the 
bleeding bosom of Fernan, and fell on it 
dyed in that blood. Melmoth started up 
— there was a slight movement of hostility 
among some of the guests— he turned one 
brief and withering glance on them— they 
stood every man his hand on his sword, 
without the power to draw them, and the 
very domestics held up the torches in their 
trembling hands, as if with involuntary 
awe they were lighting him out. So he 
passed on unmolested amid the groupe, 
till fee reached the spot where Aliaga, stu- 



A TALE. 399 

pified with horror, stood beside the bodies 
of his son and daughter. " Wretched old 
man !" he exclaimed, looking on him a3 
the unhappy father strained his glazing 
and dilated eyes to see who spoke to him, 
and at length wdth difficulty recognized 
the form of t/ie stranger^ — the companion 
of his fearful journey some months past— ^ 
** Wretched old man — you were warned — 
but you neglected the warning — I adjured 
you to save your daughter — / best knew 
her danger — you saved your gold — now 
estimate the value of the dross you grasped, 
and the precious ore you dropt ! / stood 
between myself and her — I warned — I 
menaced — it was not for me to intreat. 
Wretched old man — see the result!" — and 
he turned slowly to depart. An involun- 
tary sound of execration and horror, half 
a howl and half a hiss, pursued his parting 
steps, and the priest, with a dignity that 
more became his profession than his cha- 
racter, exclaimed aloud, ** Depart accurs- 
ed, and trouble us not— go, cursing and 



490 . MELMOTH : 

to curse." — " I go conquering and to 
conquer," answered Melmoth with wild 
and fierce triumph — " wretches ! your 
vices, your passions, and your weaknesses, 
make you my victims. Upbraid your- 
selves, and not me. Heroes in your 
guilt, but cowards in your despair, you 
would kneel at my feet for the terri- 
ble immunity with which I pass through 
you at this moment. — I go accursed of 
every human heart, yet untouched by one 
human hand !" — As he retired slowly, the 
murmur of suppressed but instinctive and 
irrepressible horror and hatred burst from 
the groupe. He past on scowling at them 
like a lion on a pack of bayed hounds, 
and departed unmolested — ^unassayed — no 
weapon was drawn— no arm was lifted — 
the mark was on his brow, — and those who 
could read it knew that all human power 
was alike forceless and needless, — and those 
who could not succumbed in passive hor- 
ror. Every sword was in its sheath as 
Melmoth quitted the garden. " Leave 



A TALE. 



idi' 



him to God !" — was the universal exclama- 
tion. " You could not leave him in worse^ 
hands," exclaimed Fra Jose—" He wiir" 
certainly be damned — and — that is some 
comfort to this afflicted family." * 



J 

d 



t(W^ 



ma 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 



Nunc animura pietas, et materna nomina frangunt. 



" Xn less than half an hour, the superb 
apartments, the illuminated gardens of 
Aliaga, did not echo a footstep ; all 
were gone, except a few who lingered, 
some from curiosity, some from humanity, 
to witness or condole with the sufferings 
of the wretched parents. The sumptuous- 
ly decorated garden now presented a sight ^ 
honid from the contrasted figures and 



A TALE. 403 

scenery. The domestics stood like statues, 
holding the torches still in their hands — 
Isidora lay beside the bloody corse of 
her brother, till an attempt was made 
to remove it, and then she clung to it 
with a strength that required strength 
to tear her from it — Aliaga, who had; 
not uttered a word, and scarcely drawn) 
a breath, sunk on his knees to curse hi& 
half-lifeless daughter — Donna Clara, who. 
still retained a woman's heart, lost all 
fear of her husband in this dreadful e- 
mergency, and, kneeling beside him, held 
his uplifted hands, and struggled hard 
for the suspension of the malediction—. 
Fra Jose, the only one of the groupe 
who appeared to possess any power of re- 
collection or of mental sanity, addressed 
repeatedly to Isidora the question, " Are 
you married, — and married to that fearful 
being r" — " I am married !" answered the 
victim, rising from beside the corse of her 
brother. " I am married !" she added, 
glancing a look at her splendid habit, and ri 



404 MELMOTH : 

ai'splaying'it with a frantic laugti. A loud 
knocking at the garden gate was heard at 
this moment. " I am married !" shrieked 
Jsidora, *' and here comes the witness of 
my nuptials !" 

** As she spoke, some peasants from the 
iFeighbourhood, assisted by the domestics 
of Don Aliaga, brought in a corse, so al- 
tered from the fearful change that passes 
on the mortal frame, that the nearest rela- 
tive could not have known it. Isidora re- 
cognized it in a moment for the body of 
the old domestic who had disappeared so 
mysteriously on the night of her frightful 
nuptials. The body had been discovered 
but that evening by the peasants ; it was 
lacerated as by a fall from rocks, and so 
disfigured and decayed as to retain no re- 
semblance to humanity. It was recogniz- 
able only by the livery of Aliaga, which, 
though much defaced, was still distin- 
guishable by some peculiarities in the 
dress, that announced that those defaced 
garments covered the mortal remains of 



A TALE. 4-05 

the old domestic. " There !" cried Isido- 
ra with delirious energy — " There is the 
witness of my fatal marriage !" 

*' Fra Jose hung over the illegible frag- 
ments of that w^hereon nature had once 
written — * This is a human being,' and, 
turning his eyes on Isidora, with involun- 
tary horror he exclaimed, " Your witness 
is dumb 1" As the wretched Isidora was 
dragged away by those who surrounded 
her, she felt the first throes of maternal 
suffering, and exclaimed, " Oh ! there 
.will be a living witness — if you permit it 
to live !" Her words were soon realized ; 
she was conveyed to her apartment, and 
in a few hours after, scarcely assisted and 
wholly unpitied by her attendants, gave 
birth to a daughter. 

" This event excited a sentiment in the 
family at once ludicrous and horrible. A- 
liaga, who had remained in a state of stu- 
pefaction since his son's death, uttered but 
one exclamation — " Let the wife of the 
•^^rcerer, and their accursed offspring, be 



406 MELMOTH : 

delivered into the hands of the merciful 
and holy tribunal, the Inquisition." He 
afterwards muttered something about his 
property being confiscated, but to this no- 
body paid attention. Donna Clara was 
almost distracted between compassion for 
her wretched daughter, and being grand- 
mother to an infant demon, for such she 
deemed the child of " Melmoth the Wan- 
derer" must be— and Fra Jose, while he 
baptized the infant with trembling hands, 
almost expected a fearful sponsor to appear 
and blast the rite with his horrible nega- 
tive to the appeal made in the name of all 
that is holy among Christians. The baptis^ 
mal ceremony wasperformed, however, witbj 
an omission which the good-natured priest, 
overlooked — there was no sponsor— the. 
lowest domestic in the house declined with^ 
horror the proposal of being sponsor foE^ 
the child of that terrible union. The 
wretched mother heard them from her bed 
of pain, and loved her infant better for ifc|i 
utter destitution. * * 7 



A TALE. 407 

*« A few hours put an end to the 
consternation of the family, on the 
score of religion at least. The officers of 
the Inquisition arrived, armed with all 
the powers of their tribunal, and strong- 
ly excited by the report, that the Wan- 
derer of whom they had been long in 
search, had lately perpetrated an act that 
brought him within the sphere of their 
jurisdiction, by involving the life of 
the only being his solitary existence held 
alliance with. " We hold him by the 
cords of a man," said the chief inquisitor, 
speaking more from what he read than 
what he felt — " if he burst these cords he 
is more than man. He has a wife and 
child, and if there be human elements in 
him, if there be any thing mortal cling- 
ing to his heart, we shall wind round 
the roots of it, and extract it." * 

" It was not till after some weeks, that 
Isidora recovered her perfect recollection. 
When she did, she was in a prison, a pallet "* 



408 MELMOTH : 

of straw was her bed, a crucifix and a 
death's head the only furniture of her cell ; 
the light struggled through a narrow grate, 
and struggled in vain, to cast one gleam 
on the squalid apartment that it visited 
and shrunk from. Isidora looked round 
her — she had light enough to see her child 
— she clasped it to her bosom, from which 
it had unconsciously drawn its feverish 
nourishment, and wept in extasy. " It is 
my own," she sobbed, " and only mine ! 
It has no father — he is at the ends of the 
earth— he has left me alone— but I am not 
alone while you are left to me !" 

" She was left in solitary confinement 
for many days, undisturbed and unvisited. 
The persons in whose hands she was had 
strong reasons for this mode of treatment. 
They were desirous that she should reco- 
ver perfect sanity of intellect previous 
to her examination, and they also wished 
to give her time to form that profound at- 
tachment to the innocent companion of her 
solitude, that might be a powerful engine 



A TALE. 409 

in their hands in discovering those circum- 
stances relative to Melmoth that had hi- 
therto baffled all the power and penetra- 
tion of the Inquisition itself. All reports 
agreed that the Wanderer had never be- 
fore been known to make a woman the 
object of his temptation, or to entrust her 
with the terrible secret of his destiny * ; and 
the Inquisitors were heard to say to each 
other, " Now that we have got the Deli- 
lah in our hands, we shall soon have the 
Sampson." 

** It was on the night previous to her 
examination, (of which she was unap- 
prized), that Isidora saw the door of her 
cell opened, and a figure appear at it, 
whom, amid the dreary obscurity that sur- 
rounded her, she recognized in a moment, 
— it was Fra Jose. After a long pause of 
mutual horror, she knelt in silence to re- 
ceive his benediction, which he gave with 

• From this it should seem that they were unac- 
quainted with the story of Elinor Mortimer. 
VOL. JV. S 



410 MELMOTH : 

feeling solemnity; and then the good 
monk, whose propensities, though some- 
what " earthly and sensual," were never 
" devilish," after vainly drawing his cowl 
over his face to stifle his sobs, lifted up his 
voice and " wept bitterly." 

" Isidora was silent, but her silence was 
not that of sullen apathy, or of conscience- 
seared impenitence. At length Fra Jose 
seated himself on the foot of the pallet, at 
some distance from the prisoner, who waa 
also sitting, and bending her cheek, dowii 
which a cold tear slowly flowed, over her 
infant. " Daughter," said the monk, col- 
lecting himself, " it is to the indulgence 
of the holy office I owe this permission to 
visit you." — " I thank them," said Isidora, 
and her tears flowed fast and relievinglyw 
** I am permitted also to tell you that your 
examination will take place to-morrow,^— 
to adjure you to prepare for it, — and, if 

there be any thing which" " My 

examination !" repeated Isidora with sur- 
i prise, but evidently without terror, "on 

3il eaw ft ^nfim yiod b gew »rf— <o2fe tzshq 



^^ TALE. 411 

^•Miii subjecPhm t then to be examfil^ff?^ 
— " On that of your inconceivable union 
with a being devoted and accursed.** 
His voice was choaked with horror, and 
he added, " Daughter, are you then in- 
deed the wife of — of — that being, whose 
name makes the flesh creep, and the hair 
stand on end ?" — " I am." — " Who were 
the witnesses of your marriage, and what 
hand dared to bind yours with that unholy 
and unnatural bond ?" — " There were no 
witnesses — we were wedded in darkness. 
T saw no form, but I thought I heard 
words uttered — I know I felt a hand place 
mine in Melmoth's — its touch was as cold 
as that of the dead." — "Oh complicated 
and mysterious horror !" said the priest, 
turning pale, and crossing himself with 
marks of unfeigned terror ; he bowed his 
head on his arm for some time, and re- 
mained silent from unutterable emotion. 
••Father," said Isidora at length, "you 
knew the hermit who lived amid the ruins 
of the monastery near our house, — he was a 
priest also, — he was a holy man, it was he 



412 MELMOTH; 

who united us !" Her voice trembled / ' " ■ 
" Wretched victim !" groaned the priest, 
without raising his head, " you know not 
what you utter — that holy man is known 
to have died the very night preceding that 
of your dreadful union." 

" Another pause of mute horror follow- 
ed, which the priest at length broke. — 
*• Unhappy daughter," said he in a com- 
posed and solemn voice, " I am indulged 
with permission to give you the benefit 
of the sacrament of confession, previous 
to your examination. I adjure you to un- 
burden your soul to me, — will you ?"— 
" I will, my father." — " Will you answer 
me, as you would answer at the tribunal 
of God ?" — " Yes, — as I would answer at 
the tribunal of God." As she spake, she 
prostrated herself before the priest in the 

attitude of confession. * * 

* * * » • 

" And you have now disclosed the 
whole burden of your spirit ?" — " I have, 
my father." The priest sat thoughtfully 
for a considerable time. He then put to 



A TALE. 413 

her several singular questions relative to 
Melmoth, which she was wholly unable to 
answer. They seemed chiefly the result 
of those impressions of supernatural power 
and terror, which were every where asso- 
ciated with his image. " My father," 
said Isidora, when he had ceased, in a 
faultering voice, " My father, may I in- 
quire about my unhappy parents ?" The 
priest shook his head, and remained silent. 
At length, affected by the agony with 
which she urged her inquiry, he reluc- 
tantly said she might guess the effect 
which the death of their son, and the ira- 
prisonment of their daughter in the In- 
quisition, must have on parents, who were 
no less eminent for their zeal for the Ca- 
tholic faith, than for their parental affec- 
tion. " Are they alive ?" said Isidora. — - 
" Spare yourself the pain of further in- 
quiries, daughter," said the priest, " and 
be assured, that if the answer was such as 
could give you comfort, it w^ould not be 
withheld." 

" At this moment a bell was heard to 



414 MELMOTH: 

sound in a distant part of the structure. 
** That bell," said the priest, ** announces 
that the hour of your examination ap- 
proaches — farewell, and may the saints be 
with you." — " Stay, father, — stay one mo- 
ment, — but one moment !' cried Isidora, 
rushing franticly between him and the 
door. Fra Jose paused. Isidora sunk 
before him, and, hiding her face with her 
hands, exclaimed in a voice choaked with 
agony, " Father, do you think — that I 
am — ^lost for ever ?" — " Daughter," said the 
priest in heavy accents, and in a troubled 
and doubting spirit, " Daughter, — I have 
given you what comfort I could — press 
for no more, lest what I have given (with 
many struggles of conscience) may be 
withdrawn. Perhaps you are in a state 
on which I can form no judgment, and 
pronounce no sentence. May God be 
merciful to you, and may the holy tribu- 
nal judge you in its mercy also." — " Yet 
stay, father — stay one moment — only one 
moment — only one question more." As 
she spoke, she caught her pale and inno- 



A TALE. 415 

cent companion from the pallet where it 
slept, and held it up to the priest. " Fa- 
ther, tell me, can this be the child of a 
demon ? — can it be, this creature that 
smiles on me — that smiles on you, while 
you are mustering curses against it ? — 
Oh, holy drops have sprinkled it from 
your own hand 1 — Father, you have spoke 
holy words over it. Father, let them 
tear me with their pincers, let them roast 
me on their flames, but will not my 
child escape — my innocent child, that 
smiles on you ? — Holy father, dear father, 
look back on my child." And she crawled 
after him on her knees, holding up the 
miserable infant in her arms, whose weak 
cry and wasted frame, pleaded against the 
dungeon-life to which its infancy had been 
doomed. 

Fra Jose melted at the appeal, and he 
was about to bestow many a kiss and many 
a prayer on the wretched babe, when the 
bell again was sounded, and hasting away, 
he had but time to exclaim, *' My daugh- 
ter, may God protect you I" — " God pro- 



416 MELMOTH: 

tect me," said Isidora, clasping her infant 
to her bosom. The bell sounded again, 
and Isidora knew that the hour of her 
trial approached. 



^..uiomi:^^ --..i,' .v.; ■.K.J-. 



^u 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 



Fear not now the fever's fire. 

Fear not now the death-bed groan ; 
Pangs that torture, pains that tire 



Bed-nd asre with feeble moan. 



Mason. 



JL HE first examination of Isidora was 
conducted with the circumspective forma- 
lity that has always been known to mark 
the proceedings of that tribunal. The se- 
cond and the third were alike strict, pe- 
netrating and inoperative, and the holy 
office began to feel its highest functionaries 
were no match for the extraordinary priso- 

8 2 



418 MELMOTH ; 

ner who stood before them, who, combin- 
ing the extremes of simplicity and magna- 
nimity, uttered every thing that might 
criminate herself, but evaded with skill 
that baffled all the arts of inquisitorial ex- 
amination, every question that referred to 
Melmoth. 

r« " In the course of the first examination, 
they hinted at the torture. Isidora, with 
something of the free and nature- taught 
dignity of her early existence, smiled as 
they spoke of it. An official whispered 
one of the inquisitors, as he observed the 
peculiar expression of her countenance, 
and the torture was mentioned no more. ^ 
" A second — a third examination fol- 
lowed at long intervals — but it was 
observed, that every time the mode of 
examination was less severe, and the treat- 
ment of the prisoner more and more 
indulgent — her youth, her beauty, her 
profound simplicity of character and 
language,, developed strongly on this 
(singular emergency, and the affecting 
jcircum stance of her always appearing with 



A TALE. 419 

her child in her arms, whose feeble cries 
she tried to hush, while she bent forward 
to hear and answer the questions addressed 
to her— all these seemed to have wrought 
powerfully on the minds of men not ac- 
customed to yield to external impressions. 
There was also a docility, a submission, 
about this beautiful and unfortunate being 
—a contrite and bending spirit — a sense 
of wTetchedness for the misfortunes of her 
family — a consciousness of her own, that 
touched the hearts even of inquisitors. 

" After repeated examinations, when 
nothing could be extorted from the prisoner, 
a skilful and profound artist in the school of 
mental anatomy, whispered to the inqui- 
sitor something about the infant whom 
she held in her arms. " She has defied the 
rack," was the answer. " Try her on that 
7'ack,'' was rejoined, and the hint was 
taken. 

" After the usual formalities were gone 
tlirough, Isidora's sentence was read to 
her. She was condemned, as a suspected 
heretic, to perpetual confinement in the 



420 MELMOTH : 

prison of the Inquisition — her child was 
to be taken from her, and brought up in 
a convent, in order to 
.-^•^ Here the reading of the sentence was 
interrupted by the prisoner, who, uttering 
one dreadful shriek of maternal agony, 
louder than any other mode of torture had 
ever before extorted, fell prostrate on the 
floor: When she was restored to sensa- 
tion, no authority or terror of the place or 
the judges, could prevent her pouring 
forth those wild and piercing supplications, 
which, from the energy with which they 
are uttered, appear to the speaker himself 
like commands, — that the latter part of 
her sentence might be remitted — the for- 
mer appeared to make not the least im- 
pression on her — eternal solitude, passed 
in eternal darkness, seemed to give her 
neither fear or pain, but she wept, and 
pleaded, and raved, that she might not 
be separated from her infant. 

" The judges listened with fortified 
hearts, and in unbroken silence. When 
she found all was over, she rose from her 



A TALE. 421 

posture of humiliation and agony — and 
there was something even of dignity about 
her as she demanded, in a calm and alter- 
ed voice, that her child might not be re- 
moved from her till the following day. She 
had also self-possession enough to enforce 
her petition by the remark, that its life 
might be the sacrifice if it was too sudden- 
ly deprived of the nourishment it was ac- 
customed to receive from her. To this re- 
quest the judges acceded, and she was re- 
manded to her cell. * * 

♦ * » * * % 

" The time elapsed. The person who 
brought her food departed without utter- 
ing a w^ord ; nor did she utter a word to 
him. It was about midnight that the 
door of her cell was unlocked, and two 
persons in official habits appeared at it. 
They seemed to pause, like the heralds at 
the tent of Achilles, and then, like them, 
forced themselves to enter. These men 
had haggard and livid faces — their atti- 
tudes were perfectly stony and automaton- 
like — their movements appeared the result 



^2 MELMOTH : 

of mere mechanism — yet these men were 
touched. The miserable light within hard- 
ly shewed the pallet on which the priso- 
ner was seated; but a strong red light 
from the torch the attendant held, flar- 
ed broadly on the arch of the door un^ 
der which the figures appeared. They 
approached with a motion that seemed si- 
multaneous and involuntary — and uttered 
together, in accents that seemed to issue 
from one mouth, " Deliver your child 
to us." In a voice as hoarse, dry, and 
natureless, the prisoner answered, " Take 
it !'* 

" The men looked about the cell — it 
seemed as if they knew not where to find 
tJie offspring of humanity amid the cells 
of the Inqu sition. The prisoner was si- 
lent and motionless during their search. 
It was not long — the narrow apartment, 
the scanty furniture, afforded little room 
for the investigation. When it was con- 
cluded, however, the prisoner, bursting 
into a wild laugh, exclaimed, " Where 
would you search for a child but in its 



A TALE. 423 

mother's bosom ? Here — here it is — take 
it — take it !" And she put it into their 
hands. " Oh what fools ye were to seek 
my child any where but on its mother's 
bosom ! It is your's now !" slie shrieked 
in a voice that froze the officials. — " Take 
it — take it from me !" 

" The agents of the holy office advan- 
ced ; and the technicality of their move- 
ments was somewhat suspended when Isi- 
dora placed in their hands the corse of her 
infant daughter. Around the throat of 
tlie miserable infant, born amid agony, 
and nursed in a dungeon, there was a black 
mark, which the officials made their use of 
in representing this extraordinary circum- 
stance to the holy office. By some it was 
deemed as the sign impressed by the evil 
one at its birth — by others as the fearful 
effect of maternal despair. 
a "It was determined that the prisoner 
should appear before them within four- 
and-twenty hours, and account for the 
death of her child. ♦ ♦ * 

«i • * • * ♦ 



424 MELMOTH : 

" Within less than half that number of 
hours, a mightier arm than that of the In- 
quisition was dealing with the prisoner — 
an arm that seemed to menace, but was 
indeed stretched out to save, and before 
whose touch the barriers of the dreaded 
Inquisition itself were as frail as the for- 
tress of the spider Vv^ho hung her web on 
its walls. Isidora was dying of a disease 
not the less mortal because it makes no 
appearance in an obituary — she was dying 
of that internal and incurable wound — a 
broken heart. 

" When the inquisitors were at last 
coTivinced that there was nothing more to 
be obtained by torture, bodily or mental 
torture, they suffered her to die unmolest- 
ed, and granted her last request, that Fra 

Jose might be permitted to visit her. * 
* ♦ * * * 

« It was midnight, but its approach was 
unknown in that place, where day and 
night are the same. A dim lamp was sub- 
stituted for that weak and struggling beam 
that counterfeited day-light. The peni- 



A TALE. 425 

tent was stretched on lier bed of rest — 
the humane priest sat beside her ; and if 
his presence gave no dignity to the scene, 
it at least softened it by the touches of hu- 
manity. * ♦ * 

" My father," said the dying Isidora, 
" you pronounced me forgiven." — " Yes, 
my daughter," said the priest, " you have 
assured me you are innocent of the death 
of your infant." — '' You never could have 
believed me guilty," said Isidora, raising 
herself on her pallet at the appeal — " the 
consciousness of its existence alone would 
have kept me alive, even in my prison-y^ 
Oh, my father, how was it possible it 
could live, buried with me in this dread- 
ful place almost as soon as it respir- 
ed? Even the morbid nourishment it re- 
ceived from me was dried up when my 
sentence was read. It moaned all night 
— towards morning its moans grew faint- 
er, and I was glad — at last they ceased, 
and I was very — happy !" But, as she talk- 
ed of this fearful happiness, she wept. 



426 MELMOTH : 

" My daughter, is your heart disengag- 
ed from that awful and disastrous tie that 
bound it to misfortune here, and to per- 
dition hereafter?" It was long before she 
could answer ; at length she said in a 
broken voice, " My father, I have not now 
strength to search or to struggle with my 
heart. Death must very soon break every 
tie that w^as twined with it, and it is use- 
less to anticipate my liberation ; the effort 
would be agony — fruitless agony, for, 
while I live, I must love my destroyer! 
Alas ! in being the enemy of mankind, 
was not his hostility to me inevitable 
and fatal? In rejecting his last terrible 
temptation — in resigning him to his des- 
tiny, and preferring submission to my own, 
I feel my triumph complete, and my sal- 
vation assured." — " Daughter, I do not 
comprehend you." — " Melmoth," said Isi- 
dora, with a strong effort, " Melmoth was 
here last night — within the walls of the 
Inquisition — within this very cell 1" The 
priest crossed himself with marks of the 
profoundest horror, and, as the wind 



A TALE. 427 

swept hollowly through the long passage, 
almost expected the shaken door would 
burst open, and disclose the figure of the 
Wanderer. * * * 

* * * ^ 

" My father, I have had many dreams," 
answered the penitent, shaking her head 
at a suggestion of the priest's, " many — 
many wanderings, but this was no dream. 
I have dreauied of the garden-land where 
I beheld him first— I have dreamed of the 
nights when he stood at my casement, and 
trembled in sleep at the sound of my mo- 
ther's step— and I have had holy and 
hopeful visions, in which celestial forms 
appeared to me, and promised me his con- 
version ^but this was no dream — I saw 
him last night. Father, he was here the 
whole night — he promised — he assured 
me— he adjured me to accept of libera- 
tion and safety, of life and of felicity. 
He told me, nor could I doubt him, that, 
by whatever means he effected his en- 
trance, he could also effect my escape. 
He offered to live with me in that In- 



428 MELMOTH : 

dian isle — that paradise of ocean, far from 
human resort or human persecution. He 
offered to love me alone, and for ever — 
and then I listened to him. Oh, my fa- 
ther, I am very young, and life and love 
sounded sweetly in my ears, when I look- 
ed at my dungeon, and thought of dying 
on this floor of stone! But — when he 
whispered the terrible condition on which 
the fulfilment of his promise depended — 

when he told me that" 

=«•-** Her voice failed with her failing 
strength, and she could utter no more. 
" Daughter, said the priest, bending over 
her bed, " daughter, 1 adjure you, by the 
image represented on this cross I hold to your 
dying lips — by your hopes of that salva- 
tion which depends on the truth you utter 
to me, your priest and your friend — the 
conditions proposed by your tempter?! 
** Promise me absolution for repeating the 
words, for I should wish that my last 
breath might not be exhaled in uttering — 
what I must." — " Te absolvo,'" &c. said 
the priest, and bent his ear to catch the 



A TALE. 429 

sounds. The moment they were uttered, 
he started as from the sting of a serpent, 
and, seating himself at the extremity of 
the cell, rocked in dumb horror. " My 
father, you promised nie absolution," said 
the penitent. " Jam tihi dedi, mori- 
hunda,'' answered the priest, in the con- 
fusion of thoughts using the language ap- 
propriated to the service of religion. 
" Moribunda indeed !" said the sufferer, 
falling back on her pallet, " Father, let me 
feel a human hand in mine as I part !"— 
" Call upon God, daughter !" said the 
priest, applying the crucifix to her cold 
lips. " I loved his religion," said the pe- 
nitent^ kissing it devoutly, " I loved it be- 
fore I knew it, and God must have been 
my teacher, for I had no other ! Oh !" she 
exclaimed, with that deep conviction that 
must thrill every dying heart, and whose 
echo (would God) might pierce every liv- 
ing one — '* Oh that I had loved none but 
God — how profound would have been my 
peace — how glorious my departure — now 
-^his image pursues me even to the brink 



430 MELMOTH : 

of the grave, into which I plunge to e- 
scape it !" 

" My daughter," said the priest, while 
the tears rolled fast down his cheeks — 
" my daughter, you are passing to bliss — 
the conflict was fierce and short, but the 
victory is sure — harps are tuned to a new 
song, even a song of welcome, and wreaths 
of palm are weaving for you in paradise !" 

" Paradise!" uttered Isidora, with her 
last breath — '* Will he be there /" 



iT 



■■J 



•> si9ri ACiA^vro JjcL 

iy adi— jfTBibnl 

.Ynhssb ?irf lo aRdi sasf on 

sd }!brf 






CHAPTER XXXV. 

Loud tolled the bell, the priests prayed well, 
The tapers they all burned bright. 

The monk her son, and her daughter the nun, 
They told their beads all night ! 

• « ♦ • • 

The second nigh t . 



The monk and the nun they told their beads 

As fast as they could tell. 
And aye the louder grew the noise, 

The faster went the bell I 

• » • • 9 

The third night came 

• • ■ • • 

The monk and the nun foi^t their beads, 

They fell to the ground dismayed. 
There was not a single saint in heaven 

Whom they did not call to their aid ( 

SouTHnr. 

JML0N9ADA here concluded the tale of the 
Indian,— the victim of Melmoth's passion, 
no less than of his destiny, both alike un- 
hallowed and unutterable. And he an- 



432 MELMOTH : 

nounced his intention of disclosing to him 
the fates of the other victims, whose skele- 
tons were preserved in the vault of the 
Jew Adonijah in Madrid. He added, that 
the circumstances relating to them, were 
of a character still darker and more awful 
than those he had recited, as they were 
the result of impressions made on mascu- 
line minds, without any excitement but 
that of looking into futurity. He men- 
tioned, too, that the circumstances of 
his residence in the house of the Jew, 
his escape from it, and the reasons of 
his subsequent arrival in Ireland, were 
scarcely less extraordinary than any thing 
he had hitherto related. Young Mel- 
moth, (whose name perhaps the reader has 
forgot), did " seriously incline" to the pur- 
pose of having his dangerous curiosity 

further gratified, nor was he perhaps al- 
together without the wild hope of seeing the 
original of that portrait he had destroyed, 
burst from the walls and take up ihe fear- 
ful tale himself. 

The narrative of the Spaniard had oc« 



A TALE. 433 

Copied many days ; at their termination, 
young iNIelmoth signified to his guest that 
he was prepared to hear the sequel. 

A night was fixed for the continuation 
of the recital. Young Melmoth and his 
guest met in the usual apartment — it was 
a dreary, stormy night — the rain that had 
fallen all day, seemed now to have yielded 
to the wind, that came in strong and sud- 
den bursts, suddenly hushed, as if collect- 
ing strength for the tempest of the night. 
Mon9ada and Melmoth drew their chairs 
closer to the fire, looking at each other with 
the aspect of men who wish to inspire each 
other with courage to listen, and to tell, 
and are the more eager to inspire it, be- 
cause neither feels it himself 

At length Mon9ada collected his voice 
and resolution to proceed, but as he went 
on, he perceived he could not fix his 
hearer's attention, and he paused. 

" I thought," said Melmoth, answering 
his silence, " I thought I heard a noise — 
as of a person walking in the passage." 
** Hush ! and listen," said Mon9ada, " I 

VOL. IV. T 



434 MELMOTH : 

would not wish to be overheard." They 
paused and held their breath — the sound 
was renewed — it was evidently that of steps 
approaching the door, and then retiring 
from it. " We are watched," said Mel- 
moth, half-rising from his chair, but at 
that moment the door opened, and a 
figure appeared at it, which Mon^ada re- 
cognized for the subject of his narrative, 
and his mysterious visitor in the prison of 
the Inquisition, and Melmoth for the ori- 
ginal of the picture, and the being whose 
unaccountable appearance had filled him 
with consternation, as he sat beside his 
dying uncle's bed. 

The figure stood at the door for some 
time, and then advancing slowly till it 
gained the centre of the room, it remained 
there fixed for some time, but without 
looking at them. It then approached the 
table where they sat, in a slow but dis- 
tinctly heard step, and stood before them 
as a living being. The profound horror 
that was equally felt by both, was diffe- 
rently expressed by each. Mon9ada cross- 



A TALE. 435 

ed himself repeatedly, and attempted to 
utter many prayers. Melmoth, nailed to 
his chair, fixed his sightless eyes on the 
form that stood before him — it was in- 
deed Melmoth the Wanderer — the same 
as he was in the past century — the same 
as he may be in centuries to come, 
should the fearful terms of his exist- 
ence be renewed. His " natural force 
was not abated," but '* his eye was dim," 
— that appalling and supernatural lustre of 
the visual organ, that beacon lit by an in- 
fernal fire, to tempt or to warn the adven- 
turers of despair from that coast on which 
many struck, and some sunk — that porten- 
tous light was no longer visible — the form 
and figure were those of a living man, of 
the age indicated in the portrait which the 
young Melmoth had destroyed, but the 

eyes were as the eyes of the dead. * 

***** 

As the Wanderer advanced still nearer 
till his figure touched the table, Mon^ada 
and Melmoth started up in irrepressible 
horror, and stood in attitudes of defence,'^ 



456 MELMOTH : 

though conscious at the moment that all 
defence was hopeless against a being that 
withered and mocked at human power. 
The Wanderer waved his arm with an 
action that spoke defiance without hostiHty 
— and the strange and solemn accents of 
the only human voice that had respired 
mortal air beyond the period of mortal life, 
and never spoken but to the ear of guilt 
or suffering, and never uttered to that ear 
aught but despair, rolled slowly on their 
hearing like a peal of distant thunder. 

" Mortals — you are here to talk of my 
destiny, and of the events which it has 
involved. That destiny is accomplished, I 
believe, and with it terminate those events 
that have stimulated your wild and wretched 
curiosity. I am here to tell you of both !— 
I — I — of whom you speak, am here! — Who 
can tell so well of Melmoth the Wanderer 
as himself, now that he is about to resign 
that existence which has been the object of 
terror and wonder to the world? — Mel- 
moth, you ,behold your ancestor — the be- 
ing on whose portrait is inscribed the date 



A TALE. 437 

of a century and a half, is before you. — 
Mon^ada, you see an acquaintance of a 
later date." — (A grim smile of recognition 
wandered over his features as he spoke). — 
" Fear nothing," he added, observing the 
agony and terror of his involuntary hear- 
ers — " What have you to fear ?" he con- 
tinued, while a flash of derisive malignity 
once more lit up the sockets of his dead 
eyes — " You, Senhor, are armed with 
your beads — and you, Melmoth, are forti- 
fied by that vain and desperate inquisitive- 
iiess, which might, at a former period, 
have made you my victim," — (and his fea^; 
tures underwent a short but horrible con- 
vulsion) — " but now makes you only my 
mockery. 
«. * * * * * 

Gif Have you aught to quench my thirst ?" 
he added, seating liimself. The senses of 
Mon^ada and his companion reeled in de- 
lirious terror, and the former, in a kind of 
wild confidence, filled a glass .of water, and 
offered it to the Wanderer with a hand as 
steady, but somewhat colder, as he would 



438 MELMOTH : 

have presented it to one who sat beside 
him in human companionship. The Wan- 
derer raised it to his Hps, and tasted a few- 
drops, then replacing it on the table, said 
with a laugh, wild indeed, but no longer 
ferocious — " Have you seen," said he to 
Mon^ada and Melmoth,whogazed with dim 
and troubled sight on this vision, and wist 
not what to think — " Have you seen the 
fate of Don Juan, not as he is pantomimed 
on your paltry stage, but as he is repre- 
sented in the real horrors of his destiny 
by the Spanish writer * ? There the spectre 
returns the hospitality of his inviter, and 
summons him in turn to a feast. — The 
banquet-hall is a church — he arrives — it is 
illuminated with a mysterious light — invi- 
sible hands hold lamps fed by no earthly 
substance, to light the apostate to his 
doom ! — He enters the church, and is greet- 
ed by a numerous company — the spirits of 
those whom he has wronged and murder- 

* Vide the original play, of which there is a cu- 
rious and very obsolete translation. 



A TALE. 439 

ed, uprisen from their charnel, and swath- 
ed in shrouds, stand there to , welcome 
him ! — As he passes among them, they 
call on him in hollow sounds to pledge 
them in goblets of blood which they pre- 
sent to him — and beneath the altar, by 
which stands the spirit of him whom the 
parricide has niurdered, the gulph of per- 
dition is yawning to receive him ! 

Through such a band I must soon prepare 
to pass ! — Isidora ! thy form will be the 
last I must encounter — and — the most ter- 
rible 1 Now for the last drop I must taste 
of earth's produce — the last that shall wet 
my mortal lips !" He slowly finished the 
draught of water. jVeither of his compa- 
nions had the power to speak. He sat 
down in a posture of heavy musing, and 
neither ventured to interrupt him. 

They kept silence till the morning was 
daw^ning, and a faint light streamed through 
the closed shutters. Then the Wanderer 
raised his heavy eyes, and fixed them on 
Mel moth. " Your ancestor has come 
home," he said ; " his w^anderings are over ! 



Tit 
440 MELMOTH : 

—What has been told or believed of me 
is now of light avail to me. The secret of 
my destiny rests with myself If all that 
fear has invented, and credulity believed 
of me be true, to what does it amount ? 
That if my crimes have exceeded those of 
mortality, so will my punishment. I have 
been on earth a terror, but not an evil to 
its inhabitants. None can participate in 
my destiny but with his own consent — 
none have consented — none can be involv- 
ed in its tremendous penalties, but by par- 
ticipation. I alone must sustain the pe- 
nalty. If I have put forth my hand, and 
eaten of the fruit of the interdicted tree, 
am I not driven from the presence of 
God and the region of paradise, and sent 
to wander amid worlds of barrenness and 
curse for ever and ever ? 

" It has been reported of me, that I 
obtained from the enemy of souls a range 
of existence beyond the period allotted to 
mortality — a power to pass over space 
wdthout disturbance or delay, and visit re- 
mote regions with the swiftness of thought 



A TALE. 4)11 

—to encounter tempests without the hope of 
their blasting me, and penetrate into dun- 
geons, whose bolts were as flax and tow at 
my touch. It has been said that this 
power was accorded to me, that I might 
be enabled to tempt wretches in their fear- 
ful hour of extremity, with the promise 
of deliverance and immunity, on condition 
of their exchanging situations with me. 
If this be true, it bears attestation to a 
truth uttered by the lips of one I may not 
name, and echoed by every human heart 
in the habitable world. 

" No one has ever exchanged destinies 
with Meimoth the Wanderer. I have tra- 
versed the world in the search, and no one, 
to gain that world, would lose his own 
soul! — Not Stanton in his cell — nor you, 
Mon9ada, in the prison of the Inquisition 
— ^nor Walberg, who saw his children pe- 
rishing with want — nor — another" — 

He paused, and though on the verge of 
his dark and doubtful voyage, he seemed 
to cast one look of bitter and retrospective 

T 2 



442 MELMOTH : 

anguish on the receding shore of life, and 
see, through the mists of memory, one 
form that stood there to bid him farewell. 
He rose — " Let me, if possible, obtain an 
hour's repose. Aye, repose — sleep !" he re- 
peated, answering the silent astonishment 
of his hearers' looks, " my existence is still 
human !" — and a ghastly and derisive smile 
wandered over his features for the last 
time, as he spoke. How often had that 
smile frozen the blood of his victims ! 
Melmoth and Mon^ada quitted the apart- 
ment ; and the Wanderer, sinking back in 
his chair, slept profoundly. He slept, but 
what were the visions of his last earthly 
slumber ? 



He dreamed that he stood on the sum- 
piit of a precipice, whose downward height 



A TALE. 443 

no eye could have measured, but for the 
tearful waves of a fiery ocean that lash- 
ed, and blazed, and roared at its bottom, 
sending its burning spray far up, so as to 
drench the dreamer ^vith its sulphurous 
rain. The whole glowing ocean below was 
alive — every billow bore an agonizing soul, 
that rose like a wreck or a putrid corse on 
the waves of earth's oceans — uttered a 
shriek as it burst against that adamantine 
precipice — sunk — and rose again to repeat 
the tremendous experiment ! Every bil- 
low of fire was thus instinct with immor- 
tal and agonizing existence,-^each was 
freighted with a soul, that rose on the 
burning wave in torturing hope, burst on 
the rock in despair, added its eternal shriek 
to the roar of that fiery ocean, and sunk 
to rise again — in vain, and — for ever ! 

Suddenly the Wanderer felt himself 
flung half-way down the precipice. He 
stood, in his dream, tottering on a crag mid- 
way down the precipice — he looked up- 
ward, but the upper air (for there w^as no 
heaven) showed only blackness unshadowed 



444 MELMOTH : 

and impenetrable — but, blacker than that 
blackness, he could distinguish a gigantic 
outstretched arm, that held him as in sport 
on the ridge of that infernal precipice, 
while another, that seemed in its motions 
to hold fearful and invisible conjunction 
with the arm that grasped him, as if both 
belonged to some being too vast and hor- 
rible even for the imagery of a dream to 
shape, pointed upwards to a dial-plate fixed 
on the top of that precipice, and which 
the flashes of that ocean of fire made fear- 
fully conspicuous. He saw the mysterious 
single hand revolve — he saw it reach the 
appointed period of 150 years — (for in this 
mystic plate centuries were marked, not 
hours)~he shrieked in his dream, and, 
with that strong impulse often felt in 
sleep, burst from the arm that held him, 
to arrest the motion of the hand. 

In the effort he fell, and falling grasped 
at aught that might save him. His fall 
seemed perpendicular — there was nought 
to save him — the rock was as smooth as 
ice — the ocean of fire broke at its foot ! 



A TALE. 44j5 

Suddenly a groupe of figures appeared, 
ascending as he fell. He grasped at them 
successively; — first Stanton — then Wal- 
berg — Elinor Mortimer — Isidora— M on9a- 
da — all passed him, — to each he seemed in 
his slumber to cling in order to break 
his fall — all ascended the precipice. He 
caught at each in his downward flight, 
but all forsook him and ascended. 

His last despairing reverted glance was 
fixed on the clock of eternity — the up- 
raised black arm seemed to push forward 
the hand — it arrived at its period — he fell 
— he sunk — he blazed — he shrieked ! The 
burning waves boomed over his sinking 
head, and the clock of eternity rung out its 
awful chime—" Room for the soul of the 
Wanderer 1" — and the waves of the bum- 
ing ocean answered, as they lashed the a- 
damantine rock — ** There is room for 
more !"— The Wanderer awoke. 






CHAPTER XXXVI. 



And in he came with eyes of flame. 
The fiend to fetch the dead. 

Southey's Old Woman of Berkeley. 

IVlIelmoth and Mon9ada did not dare to 
approach the door till about noon. They 
then knocked gently at the door, and find- 
ing the summons unanswered, they enter- 
ed slowly and irresolutely. The apart- 
ment was in the same state in which they 
had left it the preceding night, or rather 
morning; it was dusky and silent, the shut- 
ters had not been opened, and the^Wan- 
derer still seemed sleeping in his chair. 



A TALE. 447 

At the sound of their approach he half- 
started up, and demanded what was the 
hour. They told him. " My hour is 
come," said the Wanderer, ^' it is an hour 
you must neither partake or witness— the 
clock of eternity is about to strike, but its 
knell must be unheard by mortal ears r* 
As he spoke they approached nearer, and 
saw with horror the change the last few 
hours had wrought on him. The fearful 
lustre of his eyes had been deadened be- 
fore their late interview, but now the lines 
of extreme age were visible in every fea- 
ture. His hairs were as white as snow, 
his mouth had fallen in, the muscles of his 
face were relaxed and withered — he was 
the very image of hoary decrepid debility. 
He started himself at the impression which 
his appearance visibly made on the in- 
truders. " You see what I feel," he ex- 
claimed, " the hour then is come. I am 
summoned, and I must obey the sum- 
mons — my master 'has other work for me!' 
When a meteor blazes in your atmos-'' 
phere — when a comet pursues its burning 



448 MELMOTH : 

path towards the sun — look up, and per- 
haps you may think of the sphit con- 
demned to guide the blazing and erratic 

orb." 

The spirits, that had risen to a kind of 

wild elation, as suddenly subsided, and 
he added, " Leave me, I must be alone 
for the few last hours of my mortal exist- 
ence — if indeed they are to be the last." 
He spoke this with an inward shuddering, 
that was felt by his hearers. " In this a- 
partment," he continued, " I first drew 
breath, in this I must perhaps resign it, — 

would — would I had never been born ! * 

***** 

" Men — retire — leave me alone. What- 
ever noises you hear in the course of the 
awful night that is approaching, come not 
near this apartment, at peril of your lives. 
Remember," raising his voice, which still 
retained all its powers, '* remember your 
lives will be the forfeit of your desperate 
curiosity. For the same stake I risked 
more than life — and lost it ! — Be warned 
— retire !" 



A TALE. 449 

They retired, and passed the remainder 
of that day without even thinking of food, 
from that intense and burning anxiety 
that seemed to prey on their very yitals. 
At night they retired, and though each 
lay down, it was without a thought of re- 
pose. Kepose indeed \vould have been 
impossible. The sounds that soon after 
midnight began to issue from the apart- 
ment of the Wanderer, were at first of a 
description not to alarm, but they were 
soon exchanged for others of such inde- 
scribable horror, that Melmoth, though he 
had taken the precaution of dismissing the 
servants to sleep in the adjacent offices, 
began to fear that those sounds might 
reach them, and, restless himself from in- 
supportable inquietude, rose and walked 
up and dov\m the passage that led to that 
room of horror. As he was thus occupied, 
he thought he saw a figure at the lower 
end of the passage. So disturbed was his 
vision, that he did not at first recognize 
Mon9ada. Neither asked the other the 



450 MELMOTH : 

reason of his being there — they walked 
up and down together silently. 

In a short time the sounds became so 
terrible, that scarcely had the awful warn- 
ing of the Wanderer power to withhold 
them from attempting to burst into the 
room. These noises were of the most 
mixed and indescribable kind. They could 
not distinguish whether they were the 
shrieks of supplication, or the yell of blas- 
phemy — they hoped inwardly they might 
be the former. 

Towards morning the sounds sudden- 
ly ceased — they were stilled as in a mo- 
ment. The silence that succeeded seemed 
to them for a few moments more terrible 
than all that preceded. After consulting 
each other by a glance, they hastened to- 
gether to the apartment. They entered — 
it was empty — not a vestige of its last in- 
habitant was to be traced within. 

After looking around in fruitless a- 
mazement, they perceived a small door op- 
posite to that by v/hicli they had entered. 



A TALE. 451 

It communicated with a back staircase, and 
was open. As they approached it, they 
discovered the traces of footsteps that 
appeared to be those of a person who 
had been walking in damp sand or clay. 
These traces were exceedingly plain — 
they followed them to a door that open- 
ed on the garden — that door was open 
also. They traced the foot-marks dis- 
tinctly through the narrow gravel walk, 
which was terminated by a broken fence, 
and opened on a heathy field which spread 
half-way up a rock whose summit over- 
looked the sea. The weather had been 
rainy, and they could trace the steps dis- 
tinctly through that heathy field. They 
ascended the rock to^^ether. 

Early as it was, the cottagers, who 
were poor fishermen residing on the shore, 
were all up, and assuring Melmoth and 
his companion that they had been disturb- 
ed and terrified the preceding night by 
sounds which they could not describe. It 
was singular that these men, accustomed 



452 MELMOTH : 

by nature and habit alike to exaggeration 
and superstition, used not the language of 
either on this occasion. 

There is an overwhelming mass of 
conviction that falls on the mind, that 
annihilates idiom and peculiarities, and 
crushes out truth from the heart. Mel- 
moth waved back all who offered to ac- 
company him to the precipice which 
over- hung the sea. Mon9ada alone fol- 
lowed him. 

Through the furze that clothed this 
rock, almost to its summit, there w^as a 
kind of tract as if a person had drag- 
ged, or been dragged, his way through 
it — a down-trodden track, over which 
no footsteps but those of one impelled by 
force had ever passed. Melmoth and 
Mon^ada gained at last the summit of the 
rock. The ocean was beneath — the wide, 
waste, engulphing ocean ! On a crag be- 
neath them, something hung as floating 
to the blast. Melmoth clambered down 
and caught it. It was the handkerchief 



A TALE. 453 

which the Wanderer had worn about his 
neck the preceding night — that was the 
last trace of the Wanderer ! 

Melmoth and Mon9ada exchanged 
looks of silent and unutterable horror, and 
returned slowly home. 



FINIS. 



JOHJT PiLLANS, Printer, Edinburgh. 



V 



J 



-^ 



