M E L M O T H 



THE 



WANDERER 



T A L E. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF " BERTRAM/' &c. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



VOL. I. 



EDINBURGH: 

PRINTED FOK AHCHIBALD CONSTABLE AND COMPANY. 

AND HURST, ROBINSON, AND CO. CHEAPSIDE, 
LONDON. 



1820. 



£13 s 



TO THE 



MOST NOBLE 

in 



v THE 



3 MARCHIONESS OF ABERCORN, 



■^ 

^ 



Cftfe &omaure 



Is, by her Ladyship's permission, 



Respectfully inscribed by 

THE AUTHOR. 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2010 with funding from 

University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 



http://www.archive.org/details/melmothwanderert01matu 



PKEFACE. 



X he hint of this Romance (or Tale) was 
taken from a passage in one of my Ser- 
mons, which (as it is to be presumed very 
few have read) I shall here take the liberty 
to quote. The passage is this. 

u At this moment is there one of us 
" present, however we may have departed 
" from the Lord, disobeyed his will, and 
" disregarded his word — is there one of 
" us who would, at this moment, accept 



X PREFACE. 

" all that man could bestow, or earth af- 
" ford, to resign the hope of his salvation ? 
" — No, there is not one — not such a fool 
" on earth, were the enemy of mankind 
" to traverse it with the offer !" 

This passage suggested the idea of 
" Melmoth the Wanderer." The Reader 
will find that idea developed in the follow- 
ing pages, with what power or success he 
is to decide. 

The " Spaniard's Tale" has been censur- 
ed by a friend to whom I read it, as con- 
taining too much attempt at the revivifi- 
cation of the horrors of Radcliffe-Romance, 
of the persecutions of convents, and the 
terrors of the Inquisition. 

I defended myself, by trying to point 
out to my friend, that I had made the 
misery of conventual life depend less on 
the startling adventures one meets with in 



PREFACE. XI 

romances, than on that irritating series of 
petty torments which constitutes the mi- 
sery of life in general, and which, amid 
the tideless stagnation of monastic exist- 
ence, solitude gives its inmates leisure to 
invent, and power combined with malig- 
nity, the full disposition to practise. I 
trust this defence will operate more on the 
conviction of the Reader, than it did on 
that of my friend. 

For the rest of the Romance, there are 
some parts of it which I have borrowed 
from real life. 

The story of John Sandal and Elinor 
Mortimer is founded in fact. 

The original from which the Wife of 
Walberg is imperfectly sketched is a living 
woman, and long may she live, 

I cannot again appear before the public 
in so unseemly a character as that of a 
writer of romances, without regretting the 



Xii PREFACE. 

necessity that compels me to it. Did my 
profession furnish me with the means of 
subsistence, I should hold myself culpable 
indeed in having recourse to any other, 
but — am I allowed the choice ? 



Dublin, 1 



Slst August 1820. 



MELMOTXL 



CHAPTER I. 



Alive again ? Then show me where he is ; 
I'll give a thousand pounds to look upon him. 

Shakespeare. 



_Ln the autumn of 1816, John Melmoth, 
a student in Trinity College, Dublin, quit- 
ted it to attend a dying uncle on whom his 
hopes for independence chiefly rested. John 
was the orphan son of a younger brother, 
whose small property scarce could pay 
John's college expences ; but the uncle was 
rich, unmarried, and old ; and John, 
from his infancy, had been brought up 

VOL. I. A 



2 MELMOTH : 

to look on him with that mingled sen- 
sation of awe, and of the wish, with- 
out the means to conciliate, (that sen- 
sation at once attractive and repulsive), 
with which we regard a being who (as 
nurse, domestic, and parent have tutored 
us to believe) holds the very threads of 
our existence in his hands, and may pro- 
long or snap them when he pleases. 

On receiving this summons, John set 
immediately out to attend his uncle. 

The beauty of the country through 
which he travelled (it was the county 
Wicklow) could not prevent his mind 
from dwelling on many painful thoughts, 
some borrowed from the past, and more 
from the future. His uncle's caprice and 
moroseness, — the strange reports concern- 
ing the cause of the secluded life he had led 
for many years, — his own dependent state, 
— fell like blows fast and heavy on his 
mind. He roused himself to repel them, 
— sat up in the mail, in which he was a 
solitary passenger, — looked out on the pro- 



A TALE. 3 

spect, — consulted his watch ; — then he 
thought they receded for a moment, — but 
there was nothing to fill their place, and 
he was forced to invite them back for 
company. When the mind is thus active 
in calling over invaders, no wonder the 
conquest is soon completed. As the car- 
riage drew near the Lodge, (the name of 
old Melmoth's seat), John's heart grew 
heavier every moment. 

The recollection of this awful uncle 
from infancy, — when he was never per- 
mitted to approach him without innumer- 
able lectures, — not to be troublesome, — not 
to go too near his uncle, — not to ask him 
any questions, — on no account to disturb 
the inviolable arrangement of his snuff- 
box, hand-bell, and spectacles, nor to suf- 
fer the glittering of the gold-headed cane 
to tempt him to the mortal sin of handling 
it, — and, finally, to pilot himself aright 
through his perilous course in and out of 
the apartment without striking against the 
piles of books, globes, old newspapers, wig- 



4 MELMOTH : 

blocks, tobacco-pipes, and snuff-cannisters, 
not to mention certain hidden rocks of rat- 
traps and mouldy books beneath the chairs, 
— together with the final reverential bow 
at the door, which was to be closed with 
cautious gentleness, and the stairs to be 
descended as if he were " shod with felt." 
— This recollection was carried on to his 
school-boy years, when at Christmas and 
Easter, the ragged poney, the jest of the 
school, was dispatched to bring the reluc- 
tant visitor to the Lodge, — where his pas- 
time was to sit vis-a-vis to his uncle, with- 
out speaking or moving, till the pair re- 
sembled Don Raymond and the ghost of 
Beatrice in the Monk, — then watching 
him as he picked the bones of lean mutton 
out of his mess of weak broth, the latter 
of which he handed to his nephew with a 
needless caution not to " take more than 
" he liked," — then hurried to bed by day- 
light, even in winter, to save the expence 
of an inch of candle, where he lay awake 
and restless from hunger, till his uncle's 



A TALE. 5 

retiring at eight o'clock gave signal to the 
governante of the meagre household to 
steal up to him with some fragments of 
her own scanty meal, administering be- 
tween every mouthful a whispered cau- 
tion not to tell his uncle. Then his col- 
lege life, passed in an attic in the second 
square, uncheered by an invitation to the 
country ; the gloomy summer wasted in 
walking up and down the deserted streets 
as his uncle would not defray the expences 
of his journey ; — the only intimation of 
his existence, received in quarterly epistles, 
containing, with the scanty but punctual 
remittance, complaints of the expences of 
his education, cautions against extrava 
gance, and lamentations for the failure of 
tenants and the fall of the value of lands. 
All these recollections came over him, and 
alono* with them the remembrance of that 
last scene, where his dependence on his 
uncle w 7 as impressed on him by the dying 
lips of his father. 

" John, 1 must leave you, my poor boy ; 



6 MELMOTH : 

it has pleased God to take your father from 
you before he could do for you what 
would have made this hour less painful to 
him. You must look up, John, to your 
uncle for every thing. He has oddities 
and infirmities, but you must learn to bear 
with them, and with many other things 
too, as you will learn too soon. And now, 
my poor boy, may He who is the father of 
the fatherless look on your desolate state, 
and give you favour in the eyes of your 
uncle." As this scene rose to John's 
memory, his eyes filled fast with tears, 
which he hastened to wipe away as the 
carriage stopt to let him out at his uncle's 
gate. 

He alighted, and with a change of linen 
in a handkerchief, (his only travelling 
equipment), he approached his uncle's gate. 
The lodge was in ruins, and a barefooted 
boy from an adjacent cabin ran to lift on 
its single hinge what had once been a gate* 
but was now a few planks so villainously 
put together, that they clattered like a sign 



A TALE. 7 

in a high wind. The stubborn post of 
the gate, yielding at last to the united 
strength of John and his barefooted assis- 
tant, grated heavily through the mud and 
gravel stones, in which it left a deep and 
sloughy furrow, and the entrance lay open. 
John, after searching his pocket in vain for 
a trifle to reward his assistant, pursued his 
way, while the lad, on his return, cleared 
the road at a hop step and jump, plunging 
through the mud with all the dabbling and 
amphibious delight of a duck, and scarce 
less proud of his agility than of his " sarv- 
" ing a gentleman." As John slowly 
trod the miry road which had once been 
the approach, he could discover, by the dim 
light of an autumnal evening, signs of 
increasing desolation since he had last vi- 
sited the spot, — signs that penury had been 
aggravated and sharpened into downright 
misery. There was not a fence or a hedge 
round the domain : an uncemented wall of 
loose stones, whose numerous gaps were 
filled with furze or thorns* supplied their 



8 MELMOTH : 

place. There was not a tree or shrub on 
the lawn ; the lawn itself was turned into 
pasture-ground, and a few sheep were pick- 
ing their scanty food amid the pebble- 
stones, thistles, and hard mould, through 
which a few blades of grass made their rare 
and squalid appearance. 

The house itself stood strongly defined 
even amid the darkness of the evening sky ; 
for there were neither wings, or offices, or 
shrubbery, or tree, to shade or support it, 
and soften its strong harsh outline. John, 
after a melancholy gaze at the grass-grown 
steps and boarded windows, " addressed 
" himself " to knock at the door ; but 
knocker there was none: loose stones, 
however, there were in plenty ; and John 
was making vigorous application to the 
door with one of them, till the furious 
barking of a mastiff, who threatened at 
every bound to break his chain, and whose 
yell and growl, accompanied by " eyes 
" that glow and fangs that grin," savoured 
as much of hunger as of rage, made the 



A TALE. 9 

assailant raise the siege on the door, and 
betake himself to a well-known passage 
that led to the kitchen. A light glimmer- 
ed in the window as he approached : he 
raised the latch with a doubtful hand ; but, 
when he saw the party within, he advanced 
with the step of a man no longer doubtful 
of his welcome. 

Round a turf-fire, whose well-replenish- 
ed fuel gave testimony to the " master's" 
indisposition, who would probably as soon 
have been placed on the fire himself as seen 
the whole kish emptied on it once, were 
seated the old housekeeper, two or three 
followers, (i. e. people who ate, drank, and 
lounged about in any kitchen that was 
open in the neighbourhood, on an occasion 
of grief or joy, all for his honor's sake, and 
for the great rispict they bore the family), 
andan old woman, whom John immediately 
recognized as the doctress of the neigh- 
bourhood, — a withered Sybil, who prolong- 
ed her squalid existence by practising on 
the fears, the ignorance, and the sufferings 

a 2 



10 MELMOTH : 

of beings as miserable as herself. Among 
the better sort, to whom she sometimes 
had access by the influence of servants, she 
tried the effects of some simples, her skill 
in which was sometimes productive of suc- 
cess. Among the lower orders she talked 
much of the effects of the " evil eye," a- 
gainst which she boasted a counter-spell, 
of unfailing efficacy ; and while she spoke, 
she shook her grizzled locks with such 
witch-like eagerness, that she never failed 
to communicate to her half- terrified, half- 
believing audience, some portion of that 
enthusiasm which, amid all her conscious- 
ness of imposture, she herself probably 
felt a large share of ; still, when the 
case at last became desperate, when 
credulity itself lost all patience, and 
hope and life were departing together, 
she urged the miserable patient to con- 
fess " there was something about his 
"heart;" and when this confession was 
extorted from the weariness of pain and 
the ignorance of poverty, she nodded and 



A TALE. 11 

muttered so mysteriously, as to convey to 
the bystanders, that she had had difficulties 
to contend with which were invincible by 
human power. When there was no pre- 
text, from indisposition, for her visiting 
either " his honor's" kitchen, or the cottar's 
hut, — when the stubborn and persevering 
convalescence of the whole country threat- 
ened her with starvation, — she still had a 
resource : — if there were no lives to be 
shortened, there were fortunes to be told ; 
— she worked " by spells, and by such 
daubry as is beyond our element." No one 
twined so well as she the mystic yarn to be 
dropt into the lime-kiln pit, on the edge of 
which stood the shivering inquirer into fu- 
turity, doubtful whether the answer to her 
question of " who holds ?" was to be ut- 
tered by the voice of demon or lover. 

No one knew so well as she to find 
where the four streams met, in which, on 
the same portentous season, the chemise 
was to be immersed, and then displayed 
before the fire, (in the name of one whom 
we dare not mention to " ears polite"), to be 



12 MELMOTH : 

turned by the figure of the destined hus- 
band before morning. No one but herself 
(she said) knew the hand in which the 
comb was to be held, while the other was 
employed in conveying the apple to the 
mouth, — while, during the joint operation, 
the shadow of the phantom- spouse was to 
pass across the mirror before which it was 
performed. No one was more skilful or 
active in removing every iron implement 
from the kitchen where these ceremonies 
were usually performed by the credulous 
and terrified dupes of her wizardry, lest, in- 
stead of the form of a comely youth exhi- 
biting a ring on his white finger, an head- 
less figure should stalk to the rack, 
(A?iglice, dresser), take down a long spit, 
or, in default of that, snatch a poker from 
the fire-side, and mercilessly take measure 
with its iron length of the sleeper for a 
coffin. No one, in short, knew better how 
to torment or terrify her victims into a be- 
lief of that power which may and has re- 
duced the strongest minds to the level of 
the weakest; and under the influence of 



A TALE. 13 

which the cultivated sceptic, Lord Lyttle- 
ton, yelled and gnashed and writhed in his 
last hours, like the poor girl who, in the be- 
lief of the horrible visitation of the vampire, 
shrieked aloud, that her grandfather was 
sucking her vital blood while she slept, 
and expired under the influence of imagi- 
nary horror. Such was the being to whom 
old Melmoth had committed his life, half 
from credulity, and (Hibernice speaking) 
more than half from avarice. Among this 
groupe John advanced, — recognising some, 
— disliking more,— distrusting all. The 
old housekeeper received him with cordia- 
lity ;-~he was always her " whiteheaded 
boy," she said, — (imprimis, his hair w r as as 
black as jet), and she tried to lift her 
withered hand to his head with an action 
between a benediction and a caress, till the 
difficulty of the attempt forced on her the 
conviction that that head was fourteen 
inches higher than her reach since she 
had last patted it. The men, with the 
national deference of the Irish to a person 



14f MELMOTH : 

of superior rank, all rose at his approach, 
(their stools chattering on the broken flags) 
and wished his honor " a thousand years 
and long life to the back of that ; and would 
not his honor take something to keep the 
grief out of his heart ;" and so saying, five 
or six red and bony hands tendered him 
glasses of whiskey all at once. All this 
time the Sybil sat silent in the ample chim- 
ney-corner, sending redoubled whiffs out of 
her pipe. John gently declined the offer of 
spirits, received the attentions of the old 
housekeeper cordially, looked askance at 
the withered crone who occupied the 
chimney corner, and then glanced at the 
table, which displayed other cheer than he 
had been accustomed to see in his " honor's 
time." There w r as a wooden dish of pota- 
toes, which old Melmoth would have con- 
sidered enough for a week's subsistence. 
There was the salted salmon, (a luxury un- 
known even in London Vide Miss Edge- 
worth's Tales, " The Absentee)." 

There .was the slink-veal, flanked with 



A TALE. 15 

tripe ; and, finally, there were lobsters and 
fried turbot enough to justify what the au- 
thor of the tale asserts, " suo periculo," 
that when his great grandfather, the Dean 
of Killala, hired servants at the deanery, 
they stipulated that they should not be 
required to eat turbot or lobster more 
than twice a-week. There were also bot- 
tles of Wicklow ale, long and surrep- 
titiously borrowed from his " honor's" cel- 
lar, and which now made their first ap- 
pearance on the kitchen hearth, and mani- 
fested their impatience of further con- 
straint, by hissing, spitting, and bouncing 
in the face of the fire that provoked its ani- 
mosity. But the whiskey (genuine illegiti- 
mate potsheen, smelling strongly of weed 
and smoke, and breathing defiance to ex- 
cisemen) appeared, the " veritable Amphi- 
tryon" of the feast ; every one praised, and 
drank as deeply as he praised. 

John, as he looked round the circle, and 
thought of his dying uncle, was forcibly re- 
minded of the scene at Don Quixote's de- 



16 7\IELM0TH : 

parture, where, in spite of the grief caused 
by the dissolution of the worthy knight, 
we are informed that " nevertheless the 
niece eat her victuals, the housekeeper 
drank to the repose of his soul, and even 
Sancho cherished his little carcase." After 
returning, " as he might," the courtesies 
of the party, John asked how his uncle 
was. " As bad as he can be ;" — " Much 
better, and many thanks to your honor,'' 
was uttered in such rapid and discordant 
unison by the party, that John turned 
from one to the other, not knowing which 
or what to believe. " They say his honor 
has had a fright," said a fellow, upwards 
of six feet high, approaching by way of 
whispering, and then bellowing the sound 
six inches above John's head. " But then his 
honor has had a cool since," said a man who 
was quietly swallowing the spirits that 
John had refused. At these words the 
Sybil who sat in the chimney corner slow- 
ly drew her pipe from her mouth, and turn- 
ed towards the party : The oracular move- 



A TALE. 17 

ments of a Pythoness on her tripod never 
excited more awe, or impressed for the mo- 
ment a deeper silence. " It's not here" 
said she, pressing her withered ringer on 
her wrinkled forehead, " nor here, — nor 
here ;" and she extended her hand to the 
foreheads of those who were near her, who 
all bowed as if they were receiving a bene- 
diction, but had immediate recourse to the 
spirits afterwards, as if to ensure its effects. 
— " It's all here — it's all about the heart ;" 
and as she spoke she spread and pressed her 
fingers on her hollow bosom with a force 
of action that thrilled her hearers. — " It's all 
here" she added, repeating the action, 
(probably excited by the effect she had pro- 
duced), and then sunk on her seat, resumed 
her pipe, and spoke no more. At this mo- 
ment of involuntary awe on the part of 
John, and of terrified silence on that of the 
rest, an unusual sound was heard in the 
house, and the whole company started as 
if a musket had been discharged among 
them : — it was the unwonted sound of old 



18 MELMOTH : 

Melmoth's bell. His domestics were so 
few, and so constantly near him, that the 
sound of his bell startled them as much as 
if he had been ringing the knell for his own 
interment. " He used always to rap doxv?i 
for me," said the old housekeeper, hurry- 
ing out of the kitchen ; " he said pulling 
the bells wore out the ropes." 

The sound of the bell produced its full 
effect. The housekeeper rushed into the 
room, followed by a number of women, 
(the Irish prasflcas), all ready to prescribe 
for the dying or weep for the dead, — all 
clapping their hard hands, or wiping their 
dry eyes. These hags all surrounded the 
bed ; and to witness their loud, wild, and 
desperate grief, their cries of " Oh ! he's 
going, his honor's going, his honor's going," 
one would have imagined their lives were 
bound up in his, like those of the wives in 
the story of Sinbad the Sailor, who were to 
be interred alive with their deceased hus- 
bands. 

Four of them wrung their hands and 



A TALE. 19 

howled round the bed, while one, with all 
the adroitness of a Mrs Quickly, felt his 
honor's feet, and " upward and upward," 
and " all was cold as any stone." 

Old Mel moth withdrew his feet from 
the grasp of the hag, — counted with his 
keen eye (keen amid the approaching dim- 
ness of death) the number assembled round 
his bed, — raised himself on his sharp elbow, 
and pushing away the housekeeper, (who 
attempted to settle his nightcap, that had 
been shoved on one side in the struggle, 
and gave his haggard, dying face, a kind 
of grotesque fierceness), bellowed out in 
tones that made the company start, — 
" What the devil brought ye all here ?" 
The question scattered the whole party 
for a moment ; but rallying instantly, they 
communed among themselves in whispers, 
and frequently using the sign of the cross, 
muttered " The devil, — Christ save us, the 
devil in his mouth the first word he spoke." 
" Aye," roared the invalid, " and the devil 
in my eye the first sight I see," " Where* 



20 MELMOTH : 

— where ?" cried the terrified housekeeper, 
clinging close to the invalid in her terror, 
and half- hiding herself in the blanket, 
which she snatched without mercy from 
his struggling and exposed limbs. " There, 
there," he repeated, (during the battle of 
the blanket), pointing to the huddled and 
terrified women, who stood aghast at 
hearing themselves arointed as the very- 
demons they came to banish. " Oh ! Lord 
keep your honor's head," said the house- 
keeper in a more soothing tone, when her 
fright was over ; " and sure your honor 
knows them all, is'n't her name, — and her 
name, — and her name," — and she pointed 
respectively to each of them, adding their 
names, which we shall spare the English 
reader the torture of reciting, (as a proof 
of our lenity, adding the last only, Cotch- 

leen O'Mulligan), " Ye lie, ye b h," 

growled old Melmoth; " their name is 
Legion, for they are many, — turn them 
all out of the room, — turn them all out of 
doors, — if they howl at my death, they 



# 



A TALE. 21 

shall howl in earnest,— not for my death, 
for they would see me dead and damned 
too with dry eyes, but for want of the 
whiskey that they would have stolen if 
they could have got at it," (and here old 
Melmoth grasped a key which lay under 
his pillow, and shook it in vain triumph at 
the old housekeeper, who had long pos- 
sessed the means of getting at the spirits 
unknown to his " honor"), " and for want 
of the victuals you have pampered them 
with/' " Pampered, oh Ch — st !" ejacu- 
lated the housekeeper. " Aye, and what 
are there so many candles for, all fours, 
and the same below I warrant. Ah ! you 
— you — worthless, wasteful old devil." 
" Indeed, your honor, they are all sixes?' 
" Sixes, — and what the devil are you burn- 
ing sixes for, d'ye think it's the wake al- 
ready ? Ha ?" " Oh ! not yet, your ho- 
nor, not yet," chorussed the beldams ; " but 
in God's good time, your honor knows," 
in a tone that spoke ill suppressed impa- 
tience for the event. " Oh ! that your ho- 



22 MELMOTH : 

nor would think of making your soul." 
" That's the first sensible word you have 
said," said the dying man, " fetch me the 
prayer-book, — you'll find it there under 
that old boot-jack, — blow off the cobwebs ; 
— it has not been opened this many a year." 
It was handed to him by the old gover- 
nante, on whom he turned a reproaching 
eye. " What made you burn sixes in the 
kitchen, you extravagant jade ? How 
many years have you lived in this house ?" 
" I don't know, your honor." " Did you 
ever see any extravagance or waste in it 
" Oh never, never, your honor." " Was 
any thing but a farthing candle ever 
Jburned in the kitchen ?" " Never, never, 
your honor." " Were not you kept as 
tight as hand and head and heart could 
keep you, were you not ? answer me that.'" 
" Oh yes, sure, your honor ; every sowl 
about us knows that, — every one does your 
honor justice, that you kept the closest house 
and closest hand in the country, — your ho- 
nor was always a good warrant for it." "And 



A TALE 23 

how dare you unlock my hold before death 
has unlocked it," said the dying miser, shak- 
ing his meagre hand at her. " I smelt meat 
in the house, — I heard voices in the house, 
— I heard the key turn in the door over 
and over. Oh that I was up," he added, 
rolling in impatient agony in his bed, 
" Oh that I was up, to see the waste and 
ruin that is going on. But it would kill 
me," he continued, sinking back on the 
bolster, for he never allowed himself a pil- 
low ; " it would kill me, — the very thought 
of it is killing me now." The women, 
discomfited and defeated, after sundry 
winks and whispers, were huddling out of 
the room, till recalled by the sharp eager 
tones of old Melmoth. — " Where are ye 
trooping to now ? back to the kitchen to 
gormandize and guzzle ? Won't one of 
ye stay and listen while there's a prayer 
read for me ? Ye may want it one day for 
yourselves, ye hags." Awed by this ex- 
postulation and menace, the train silently 
returned, and placed themselves round the 



24 MELMOTH : 

bed, while the housekeeper, though a Ca- 
tholic, asked if his honor would not have 
a clergyman to give him the rights, (rites) 
of his church. The eyes of the dying 
man sparkled with vexation at the propo- 
sal. " What for,— just to have him ex- 
pect a scarf and hat-band at the funeral. 

Read the prayers yourself, you old ; 

that will save something." The house- 
keeper made the attempt, but soon de- 
clined it, alleging, as her reason, that her 
eyes had been watery ever since his honor 
took ill. " That's because you had always 
a drop in them," said the invalid, with a 
spiteful sneer, which the contraction of 
approaching death stiffened into a hideous 
grin. — " Here, — is not there one of you 
that's gnashing and howling there, that 
can get up a prayer to keep me from it ?" 
So adjured, one of the women offered her 
services ; and of her it might truly be said, 
as of the " most desartless man of the 
watch" in Dogberry's time, that " her 
reading and writing came by nature f for 



A TALE. 25 

she never had been at school, and had ne- 
ver before seen or opened a Protestant 
prayer book in her life ; nevertheless, on 
she went, and with more emphasis than 
good discretion, read nearly through the 
service for the " churching of women ;" 
which in our prayer-books following that 
of the burial of the dead, she perhaps 
imagined was someway .connected with 
the state of the invalid. 

She read with great solemnity, — it was a 
pity that two interruptions occurred during 
the performance, one from old Melmoth, 
who, shortly after the commencement of 
the prayers, turned towards the old house- 
keeper, and said, in a tone scandalously 
audible, " Go down and draw the niggers 
of the kitchen fire closer, and lock the 
door, and let me hear it locked. I can't 
mind any thing till that's done." The 
other was from John Melmoth gliding in- 
to the room, hearing the inappropriate 
words uttered by the ignorant woman, 
taking quietly as he knelt beside her the 

VOL. I. b 



26 MELMOTH : 

prayer-book from her hands, and reading 
in a suppressed voice part of that solemn 
service which, by the forms of the Church 
of England, is intended for the consolation 
of the departing. 

" That is John's voice," said the dying 
man ; and the little kindness he had ever 
shewed this unfortunate lad rushed on his 
hard heart at this moment, and touched it. 
He saw himself, too, surrounded by heart- 
less and rapacious menials ; and slight as 
must have been his dependence on a rela- 
tive whom he had always treated as a 
stranger, he felt at this hour he was no 
stranger, and grasped at his support like 
a straw amid his wreck. " John, my good 
boy, you are there. — I kept you far from 
me when living, and now you are nearest 
me when dying. — John, read on" John, 
affected deeply by the situation in which 
he beheld this poor man, amid all his 
wealth, as well as by the solemn request to 
impart consolation to his dying moments, 
read on ; — but in a short time his voice 



A TALE. 27 

became indistinct, from the horror with 
which he listened to the increasing hiccup 
of the patient, which, however, he strug- 
gled with from time to time, to ask the 
housekeeper if the Triggers were closed. 
John, who was a lad of feeling, rose from 
his knees in some degree of agitation. 
" What, are you leaving me like the 
rest ?" said old Melmoth, trying to raise 
himself in the bed. " No, Sir," said John ; 
" but," observing the altered looks of the 
dying man, " I think you want some re- 
freshment, some support, Sir." " Aye, 
I do, I do, but whom can I trust to get it 
for me. They, (and his haggard eye wan- 
dered round the groupe), they would poi- 
son me." " Trust me, Sir," said John ; "I 
will go to the apothecary's, or whoever 
you may employ." The old man grasped 
his hand, drew him close to his bed, cast a 
threatening yet fearful eye round the par- 
ty, and then whispered in a voice of ago- 
nized constraint, " I want a glass of wine. 







28 MELMOTH : 

it would keep me alive for some hours', 
but there is not one I can trust to get it 
for me, — they'd steal a bottle, and ruin 
me" John was greatly shocked. " Sir, 
for God's sake, let me get a glass of wine 
for you." " Do you know where ?" said 
the old man, with an expression in his 
face John could not understand. " No, 
Sir; you know I have been rather a 
stranger here, Sir." " Take this key," said 
old Melmoth, after a violent spasm ; " take 
this key, there is wine in that closet, — Ma- 
deira. I always told them there was no- 
thing there, but they did not believe me, 
or I should not have been robbed as I have 
been. At one time I said it was whiskey, 
and then I fared worse than ever, for they 
drank twice as much of it." 

John took the key from his uncle's 
hand ; the dying man pressed it as he did 
so, and John, interpreting this as a mark 
of kindness, returned the pressure. He 
was undeceived by the whisper that fol- 
lowed, — " John, my lad, don't drink any 



A TALE. 29 

of that wine while you are there." " Good 
God !" said John, indignantly throwing 
the key on the bed ; then, recollecting that 
the miserable being before him was no 
object of resentment, he gave the promise 
required, and entered the closet, which no 
foot but that of old Melmoth had entered 
for nearly sixty years. He had some diffi- 
culty in finding out the wine, and indeed 
staid long enough to justify his uncle's 
suspicions, — but his mind was agitated, 
and his hand unsteady. He could not but 
remark his uncle's extraordinary look, that 
had the ghastliness of fear superadded to 
that of death, as he gave him permission 
to enter his closet. He could not but see 
the looks of horror which the women ex- 
changed as he approached it. And, final- 
ly, when he was in it, his memory was 
malicious enough to suggest some faint 
traces of a story, too horrible for imagina- 
tion, connected with it. He remembered 
in one moment most distinctly, that no 



30 MELMOTH: 

one but his uncle had ever been known to 
enter it for many years. 

Before he quitted it, he held up the 
dim light, and looked around him with a 
mixture of terror and curiosity. There 
was a great deal of decayed and useless 
lumber, such as might be supposed to be 
heaped up to rot in a miser's closet ; but 
John's eyes were in a moment, and as if 
by magic, rivetted on a portrait that hung 
on the wall, and appeared, even to his un- 
taught eye, far superior to the tribe of 
family pictures that are left to moulder on 
the walls of a family mansion. It repre- 
sented a man of middle age. There was 
nothing remarkable in the costume, or in 
the countenance, but the eyes, John felt, 
were such as one feels they wish they had 
never seen, and feels they can never forget. 
Had he been acquainted with the poetry 
of Southey, he might have often exclaim- 
ed in his after-life, 

" Only the eyes had life, 

They gleamed with demon light."— Thalaba. 



A TALE. 31 

From an impulse equally resistless 
and painful, he approached the portrait, 
held the candle towards it, and could 
distinguish the words on the border of 
the painting, — Jno. Melmoth, anno 1646. 
John was neither timid by nature, or 
nervous by constitution, or superstitious 
from habit, yet he continued to gaze in 
stupid horror on this singular picture, till, 
aroused by his uncle's cough, he hurried 
into his room. The old man swallowed 
the wine. He appeared a little revived ; 
it was long since he had tasted such a cor- 
dial, — his heart appeared to expand to a 
momentary confidence. " John, what did 
you see in that room ?" " Nothing, Sir." 
" That's a lie ; every one wants to cheat ot- 
to rob me." " Sir, I don't want to do 
either." " Well, what did you see that 
you — you took notice of?" " Only a 
picture, Sir." " A picture, Sir! — the 
original is still alive." John, though 
under the impression of his recent feel- 
ings, could not but look incredulous 



32 MELMOTH : 

" John/' whispered his uncle ; — " John, 
they say I am dying of this and that ; and 
one says it is for want of nourishment, 
and one says it is for want of medicine, — 
but, John," and his face looked hideously 
ghastly, " I am dying of a fright. That 
man," and he extended his meagre arm 
toward the closet, as if he was pointing to 
a living being ; " that man, 1 have good 
reason to know, is alive still." " How is 
that possible, Sir ?" said John involuntari- 
ly, " the date on the picture is 1646." 
" You have seen it, — you have noticed it," 
said his uncle. " Well," — he rocked and 
nodded on his bolster for a moment, then, 
grasping John's hand with an unutterable 
look, he exclaimed, " You will see him 
again, he is alive." Then, sinking back 
on his bolster, he fell into a kind of sleep 
or stupor, his eyes still open, and fixed on 
John. 

The house was now perfectly silent, and 
John had time and space for reflection. 
More thoughts came crowding on him 



A TALE. S3 

than he wished to welcome, but they 
would not be repulsed. He thought of 
his uncle's habits and character, turned the 
matter over and over again in his mind, 
and he said to himself, " The last man on 
earth to be superstitious. He never 
thought of any thing but the price of 
stocks, and the rate of exchange, and my 
college expences, that hung heavier at his 
heart than all ; and such a man to die of 
a fright, — a ridiculous fright, that a man 
living 150 years ago is alive still, and yet — 
he is dying." John paused, for facts will 
confute the most stubborn logician. " With 
all his hardness of mind, and of heart, he 
is dying of a fright. I heard it in the 
kitchen, I have heard it from himself, — he 
could not be deceived. If I had ever 
heard he was nervous, or fanciful, or super- 
stitious, but a character so contrary to all 
these impressions ; — a man that, as poor 
Butler says, in his Remains of the Anti- 
quarian, would have " sold Christ over a- 
gain for the numerical piece of silver which 

B 2 



34 MELMOTH : 

Judas got for him," — such a man to die 
of fear! Yet he is dying," said John, 
glancing his fearful eye on the contracted 
nostril, the glazed eye, the dropping jaw, 
the whole horrible apparatus of the fades 
Hippocratica displayed, and soon to cease 
its display. 

Old Melmoth at this moment seemed to 
be in a deep stupor ; his eyes lost that 
little expression they had before, and his 
hands, that had convulsively been catch- 
ing at the blankets, let go their short and 
quivering grasp, and lay extended on the 
bed like the claws of some bird that had 
died of hunger, — so meagre, so yellow, so 
spread. John, unaccustomed to the sight 
of death, believed this to be only a sign 
that he was going to sleep; and, urged 
by an impulse for which he did not at- 
tempt to account to himself, caught up the 
miserable light, and once more ventured 
into the forbidden room, — the blue chamber 
of the dwelling. The motion roused the 
dying man ; — he sat bolt upright in his bed 



A TALE. 35 

This John could not see, for he was now 
in the closet ; but he heard the groan, or 
rather the choaked and guggling rattle of 
the throat, that announces the horrible 
conflict between muscular and mental con- 
vulsion. He started, turned away; but, 
as he turned away, he thought he saw the 
eyes of the portrait, on which his own 
was fixed, move, and hurried back to his 
uncle's bedside. 

Old Melmoth died in the course of that 
night, and died as he had lived, in a kind 
of avaricious delirium. John could not 
have imagined a scene so horrible as his last 
hours presented. He cursed and blasphem- 
ed about three half-pence, missing, as he 
said, some weeks before, in an account of 
change with his groom, about hay to a starv- 
ed horse that he kept. Then he grasped 
John's hand, and asked him to give him the 
sacrament. " If I send to the clergyman, 
he will charge me something for it, which 
I cannot pay, — I cannot. They say I am 
rich, — look at this blanket ; — but I would 



36 MELMOTH : 

not mind that, if I could save my soul/' 
And, raving, he added, " Indeed, Doctor, 
1 am a very poor man. I never troubled 
a clergyman before, and all I want is, that 
you will grant me two trifling requests, 
very little matters in your way, — save my 
soul, and (whispering) make interest to 
get me a parish coffin, — I have not enough 
left to bury me. I always told every one 
I was poor, but the more I told them so, 
the less they believed me." 

John, greatly shocked, retired from the 
bed-side, and sat down in a distant corner 
of the room. The women were again in 
the room, which was very dark. Mel- 
moth was silent from exhaustion, and 
there was a death-like pause for some time. 
At this moment John saw the door open, 
and a figure appear at it, who looked 
round the room, and then quietly and de- 
liberately retired, but not before John had 
discovered in his face the living original 
of the portrait. His first impulse was to 
utter an exclamation of terror, but his 



A TALE. 37 

breath felt stopped. He was then rising 
to pursue the figure, but a moment's re- 
flection checked him. What could be 
more absurd, than to be alarmed or amazed 
at a resemblance between a living man 
and the portrait of a dead one ! The like- 
ness was doubtless strong enough to strike 
him even in that darkened room, but it 
was doubtless only a likeness ; and though 
it might be imposing enough to terrify an 
old man of gloomy and retired habits, and 
with a broken constitution, John resolved 
it should not produce the same effect on 
him. 

But while he was applauding himself 
for this resolution, the door opened, and 
the figure appeared at it, beckoning and 
nodding to him, with a familiarity some- 
what terrifying. John now started up, 
determined to pursue it ; but the pursuit 
was stopped by the weak but shrill cries 
of his uncle, who was struggling at once 
with the agonies of death and his house- 
keeper. The poor woman, anxious for 



38 MELMOTK : 

her master's reputation and her own, was 
trying to put on him a clean shirt and 
nightcap, and Melmoth, who had just 
sensation enough to perceive they were 
taking something from him, continued ex- 
claiming feebly, " They are robbing me, 
— robbing me in my last moments, — rob- 
bing a dying man. John, won't you as- 
sist me, — I shall die a beggar ; they are 
taking my last shirt, — I shall die a beg- 
gar. 5 '— —And the miser died. 



A TALE. 39 



CHAPTER II. 



You that wander, scream, and groan^ 
Round the mansions once your own. 

Rowe. 



A few days after the funeral, the will 
was opened before proper witnesses, and 
John was found to be left sole heir to his 
uncle's property, which, though originally 
moderate, had, by his grasping habits, 
and parsimonious life, become very con- 
siderable. 

As the attorney who read the will con- 
cluded, he added, " There are some words 



40 MELMOTH : 



here, at the corner of the parchment, 
which do not appear to be part of the will, 
as they are neither in the form of a codicil, 
nor is the signature of the testator affixed 
to them ; but, to the best of my belief, 
they are in the hand- writing of the de- 
ceased." As he spoke he shewed the lines 
to Melmoth, who immediately recognized 
his uncle's hand, (that perpendicular and 
penurious hand, that seems determined to 
make the most of the very paper, thriftily 
abridging every word, and leaving scarce 
an atom of margin), and read, not with- 
out some emotion, the following words: 
" I enjoin my nephew and heir, John 
Melmoth, to remove, destroy, or cause to 
be destroyed, the portrait inscribed J. 
Melmoth, 1646, hanging in my closet. I 
also enjoin him to search for a manuscript, 
which I think he will find in the third and 
lowest left-hand drawer of the mahogany 
chest standing under that portrait, — it is 
among some papers of no value, such as 
manuscript sermons, and pamphlets on the 



A TALE. 41 

improvement of Ireland, and such stuff; 
he will distinguish it by its being tied 
round with a black tape, and the paper 
being very mouldy and discoloured. He 
may read it if he will ; — I think he had 
better not. At all events, I adjure him, 
if there be any power in the adjuration of 
a dying man, to burn it." 

After reading this singular memoran- 
dum, the business of the meeting was again 
resumed ; and as old Melmoth's will was 
very clear and legally worded, all was soon 
settled, the party dispersed, and John 
Melmoth was left alone. 

We should have mentioned, that his 
guardians appointed by the will (for he 
was not yet of age) advised him to return 
to College, and complete his education as 
soon as proper ; but John urged the expe- 
diency of paying the respect due to his 
uncle's memory, by remaining a decent 
time in the house after his decease. This 
was not his real motive. Curiosity, or 
something that perhaps deserves a better 



42 MELMOTH : 

name, the wild and awful pursuit of an 
indefinite object, had taken strong hold of 
his mind. His guardians (who were men 
of respectability and property in the neigh- 
bourhood, and in whose eyes John's con- 
sequence had risen rapidly since the read- 
ing of the will), pressed him to accept of 
a temporary residence in their respective 
houses, till his return to Dublin. This 
was declined gratefully, but steadily. They 
called for their horses, shook hands with 
the heir, and rode off — Melmoth was left 
alone. 

The remainder of the day was passed 
in gloomy and anxious deliberation, — in 
traversing his late uncle's room, — approach- 
ing the door of the closet, and then re- 
treating from it, — in watching the clouds, 
and listening to the wind, as if the gloom 
of the one, or the murmurs of the other, 
relieved instead of increasing the weight 
that pressed on his mind. Finally, towards 
evening, he summoned the old woman, 
from whom he expected something like an 



A TALE. 43 

explanation of the extraordinary circum- 
stances he had witnessed since his arrival 
at his uncle's. The old woman, proud of 
the summons, readily attended, but she 
had very little to tell, — her communication 
was nearly in the following words : (We 
spare the reader her endless circumlocu- 
tions, her Irishcisms, and the frequent 
interruptions arising from her applica- 
tions to her snuff-box, and to the glass 
of whiskey punch with which Mel moth 
took care to have her supplied). The 
old woman deposed, " That his honor 
(as she always called the deceased) was 
always intent upon the little room inside 
his bed-chamber, and reading there, within 
the last two years ; — that people, knowing 
his honor had money, and thinking it 
must be there, had broke into that room, 
(in other words, there was a robbery at- 
tempted there), but finding nothing but 
some papers, they had retired ; — that he 
was so frightened, he had bricked up the 
window ; but she thought there was more 



44 MELMOTH : 

in it than that, for when his honor missed 
but a half- penny, he would make the 
house ring about it, but that, when the 
closet was bricked up, he never said a 
w T ord ; —that afterwards his honor used to 
lock himself up in his own room, and 
though he was never fond of reading, was 
always found, when his dinner was brought 
him, hanging over a paper, which he hid 
the moment anv one came into the room, 

ml * 

and once there was a great bustle about a 
picture that he tried to conceal ; — that 
knowing there was an odd story in the 
family, she did her best to come at it, and 
even went to Biddy Brannigan's, (the me- 
dical Sybil before mentioned), to find out 
the rights of it ; -but Biddy only shook 
her head, filled her pipe, uttered some 
words she did not understand, and smoked 
on ; — that it was but two evenings before 
his honor was struck, (i. e. took ill), she 
was standing at the door of the court, 
(which had once been surrounded by sta- 
bles, pigeon-house, and all the usual et- 



A TALE. 45 

ceteras of a gentleman's residence, but 
now presented only a ruinous range of 
dismantled out-offices, thatched with this- 
tles, and tenanted by pigs), when his honor 
called to her to lock the door, (his honor 
was always keen about locking the doors 
early) ; she was hastening to do so, when 
he snatched the key from her, swearing at 
her, (for he was always very keen about 
locking the doors, though the locks were 
so bad, and the keys so rusty, that it was 
always like the cry of the dead in the 
house when the keys were turned) ; — that 
she stood aside for a minute, seeing he was 
angry, and gave him the key, when she 
heard him utter a scream, and saw him 
fall across the door- way ; — that she hurried 
to raise him, hoping it was a fit ; — that 
she found him stiff and stretched out, and 
called for help to lift him up ; — that then 
people came from the kitchen to assist ; — 
that she was so bewildered and terrified, 
she hardly knew what was done or said ; 
but with all her terror remembered, 



46 MELMOTH I 

that as they raised him up, the first sign 
of life he gave was lifting up his arm, and 
pointing it towards the court, and at that 
moment she saw the figure of a tall man 
cross the court, and go out of the court, 
she knew not where or how, for the outer 
gate was locked, and had not been opened 
for years, and they were all gathered round 
his honor at the other door ; — she saw the 
figure, — she saw the shadow on the wall, 
— she saw him walk slowly through the 
court, and in her terror cried, " Stop him," 
but nobody minded her, all being busy 
about her master ; and when he was 
brought to his room, nobody thought but 
of getting him to himself again. And 
further she could not tell. His honor 
(young Mel moth) knew as much as she, — 
he had witnessed his last illness, had heard 
his last words, he saw him die, — how could 
she know more than his honor." 

" True," said Melmoth, " I certainly 
saw him die ; but — you say there was an 
odd story in the family? do you know any 



A TALE. 47 

thing about it ?" " Not a word, it was long 
before my time, as old as I am." " Cer- 
tainty it must have been so ; but, was my 
uncle ever superstitious, fanciful ?" — and 
Mel moth was compelled to use many sy- 
nonymous expressions, before he could 
make himself understood. When he did, 
the answer was plain and decisive, " No, 
never, never. When his honor sat in the 
kitchen in winter, to save a fire in his own 
room, he could never bear the talk of the 
old women that came in to light their 
pipes betimes, (from time to time). He 
used to shew such impatience of their 
superstitious nonsense, that they were fain 
to smoke them in silence, without the 
consolatory accompaniment of one whisper 
about a child that the evil eye had looked 
on, or another, that though apparently a 
mewling, peevish, crippled brat all day, 
went regularly out at night to dance with 
the good people on the top of a neighbour- 
ing mountain, summoned thereto by the 
sound of a bag-pipe, which was unfailing- 



48 MELMOTH : 

ly heard at the cabin door every night." 
Mel moth's thoughts began to take some- 
what of a darker hue at this account. If 
his uncle was not superstitious, might he 
not have been guilty, and might not his 
strange and sudden death, and even the 
terrible visitation that preceded it, have 
been owing to some wrong that his rapa- 
city had done the widow and the father- 
less. He questioned the old woman in- 
directly and cautiously on the subject, — 
her answer completely justified the de- 
ceased. " He was a man," she said, * of 
a hard hand, and a hard heart, but he was 
as jealous of another's right as of his own. 
He would have starved all the world, but 
he would not have wronged it of a far- 
thing." 

Melmoth's last resource was to send for 
Biddy Brannigan, who was still in the 
house, and from whom he at least hoped 
to hear the odd story that the old woman 
confessed was in the family. She came, 
and, on her introduction to Melmoth, it 



A TALE. 4§ 

was curious to observe the mingled look 
of servility and command, the result of 
the habits of her life, which was alternate- 
ly one of abject mendicity, and of arro- 
gant but clever imposture. When she 
first appeared, she stood at the door, awed 
and curtseying in the presence, and mut- 
tering sounds which, possibly intended for 
blessings, had, from the harsh tone and 
witch-like look of the speaker, every ap- 
pearance of malediction ; but when inter- 
rogated on the subject of the story, she 
rose at once into consequence, — her figure 
seemed frightfully dilated, like that of 
Virgil's Alecto, who exchanges in a mo- 
ment the appearance of a feeble old woman 
for that of a menacing fury. She walked 
deliberately across the room, seated, or ra- 
ther squatted herself on the hearth-stone 
like a hare in her form, spread her bony 
and withered hands towards the blaze, and 
rocked for a considerable time in silence 
before she commenced her tale. When 
she had finished it, Melmoth remained in 
vol. i. c 



50 MELMOTH : 

astonishment at the state of mind to which 
the late singular circumstances had reduc- 
ed him, — at finding himself listening with 
varying and increasing emotions of inter- 
est, curiosity, and terror, to a tale so wild, 
so improbable, nay, so actually incredible, 
that he at least blushed for the folly he 
could not conquer. The result of these 
impressions was, a resolution to visit the 
closet, and examine the manuscript that 
very night. 

This resolution he found it impossible 
to execute immediately, for, on inquiring 
for lights, the gouvernante confessed the 
very last had been burnt at his honor's 
wake ; and a bare -footed boy was charged 
to run for life and death to the neighbour- 
ing village for candles ; and if you could 
horry a couple of candlesticks, added the 
housekeeper, f Are there no candlesticks 
in the house ?" said Melmoth. " There 
are, honey, plinty, but it's no time to be 
opening the old chest, for the plated ones, 
in regard of their being at the bottom of 



A TALE, 51 

it, and the brass ones that's in it (in the 
house), one of them has no socket, and the 
other has no bottom." " And how did 
you make shift yourself," said Melmoth. 
" 1 stuck it in a potatoe," quoth the house- 
keeper. So the gossoon ran for life and 
death, and Melmoth, towards the close of 
the evening, was left alone to meditate. 

It was an evening apt for meditation, 
and Melmoth had his fill of it before the 
messenger returned. The weather was 
cold and gloomy ; heavy clouds betokened 
a long and dreary continuance of autumnal 
rains ; cloud after cloud came sweeping on 
like the dark banners of an approaching 
host, whose march is for desolation. As 
Melmoth leaned against the window, w r hose 
dismantled frame, and pieced and shatter- 
ed panes, shook with every gust of wind, 
his eye encountered nothing but that most 
cheerless of all prospects, a miser's garden, 
— walls broken down, grass-grown walks 
whose grass w r as not even green, dwarfish, 
doddered, leafless trees, and a luxuriant 



LIBRARY 

UKSVERSfTY Of ttXIWO» 



52 MELMOTH : 

crop of nettles and weeds rearing their 
unlovely heads where there had once been 
flowers, all waving and bending in capri- 
cious and unsightly forms, as the wind 
sighed over them. It was the verdure of 
the church yard, the garden of death. He 
turned for relief to the room, but no relief 
was there, — the wainscotting dark with 
dirt, and in many places cracked and 
starting from the walls, — the rusty grate, 
so long unconscious of a fire, that nothing 
but a sullen smoke could be coaxed to 
issue from between its dingy bars, — the 
crazy chairs, their torn bottoms of rush 
drooping inwards, and the great leathern 
seat displaying the stuffing round the 
worn edges, while the nails, though they 
kept their places, had failed to keep the 
covering they once fastened, — the chimney- 
piece, which, tarnished more by time than 
by smoke, displayed for its garniture half 
a pair of snuffers, a tattered almanack of 
1750, a time-keeper dumb for want of re- 
pair, and a rusty fowling-piece without a 



A TALE. 5o 

lock. — No wonder the spectacle of desola- 
tion drove Melmoth back to his own 
thoughts, restless and uncomfortable as 
they were. He recapitulated the Sybil's 
story word by word, with the air of a man 
who is cross-examining an evidence, and 
trying to make him contradict himself. 

" The first of the Melmoths, she says, who 
settled in Ireland, was an officer in Crom- 
well's army, who obtained a grant of lands, 
the confiscated property of an Irish family 
attached to the royal cause. The elder bro- 
ther of this man was one who had travelled 
abroad, and resided so long on the Conti- 
nent, that his family had lost all recollec- 
tion of him. Their memory was not sti- 
mulated bv their affection, for there were 
strange reports concerning the traveller. 
He was said to be (like the " damned ma- 
gician, great Glendower,") " a gentleman 
profited in strange concealments." 

It must be remembered, that at this 
period, and even to a later, the belief in 
astrology and witchcraft was very general 



34 MELMOTH : 

Even so late as the reign of Charles II. 
Dryden calculated the nativity of his son 
Charles, the ridiculous books of Glanville 
were in general circulation, and Delrio 
and Wierus were so popular, that even a 
dramatic writer (Shadwell) quoted copious- 
ly from them, in the notes subjoined to 
his curious comedy of the Lancashire 
witches. It was said, that during the 
life-time of Melmoth, the traveller paid 
him a visit; and though he must have 
then been considerably advanced in life, 
to the astonishment of his family, he did 
not betray the slightest trace of being a 
year older than when they last beheld him. 
His visit was short, he said nothing of the 
past or the future, nor did his family ques- 
tion him. It was said that they did not 
feel themselves perfectly at ease in his pre- 
sence. On his departure he left them his 
picture, (the same which Melmoth saw in 
the closet, bearing date 1646), and they 
saw him no more. Some years after, a 
person arrived from England, directed to 



A TALE. 55 

Melmoth's house, in pursuit of the travel- 
ler, and exhibiting the most marvellous 
and unappeasable solicitude to obtain some 
intelligence of him. The family could 
give him none, and after some days of 
restless inquiry and agitation, he departed, 
leaving behind him, either through negli- 
gence or intention, a manuscript, contain- 
ing an extraordinary account of the cir- 
cumstances under which he had met John 
Melmoth the Traveller (as he was called). 

The manusqrifjjt and portrait were both 
preserved, and of the original a report 
spread that he was still alive, and had been 
frequently seen in Ireland even to the pre- 
sent century, — but that he wasnever known 
to appear but on the approaching death of 
one of the family, nor even then, unless 
when the evil passions or habits of the in- 
dividual had cast a shade of gloomy and 
fearful interest over their dying hour. 

It was therefore judged no favourable 
augury for the spiritual destination of the 
last Melmoth, that this extraordinary per- 



56 MELMOTH : 

son had visited, or been imagined to visits 
the house previous to his decease." 

Such was the account given by Biddy 
Brannigan, to which she added her own 
solemnly- attested belief, that John Mel- 
moth the Traveller was still without a hair 
on his head changed, or a muscle in his 
frame contracted ; — that she had seen those 
that had seen him, and would confirm 
their evidence by oath if necessary ; — that 
he was never heard to speak, seen to par- 
take of food, or known to enter any dwell- 
ing but that of his family ; — and, finally, 
that she herself believed that his late ap- 
pearance boded no good either to the living 
or the dead. 

John was still musing on these things 
when the lights were procured, and, dis- 
regarding the pallid countenances and mo- 
nitory whispers of the attendants, he reso- 
lutely entered the closet, shut the door, 
and proceeded to search for the manuscript. 
It was soon found, for the directions of 
old Melmoth were forcibly written, and 



A TALE. 57 

strongly remembered. The manuscript, 
old, tattered, and discoloured, was taken 
from the very drawer in which it was 
mentioned to be laid. Melmoth's hands 
felt as cold as those of his dead uncle, 
when he drew the blotted pages from their 
nook. He sat down to read, — there was 
a dead silence through the house. Mel- 
moth looked wistfully at the candles, snuff- 
ed them, and still thought they looked 
dim, (perchance he thought they burned 
blue, but such thought he kept to himself.) 
Certain it is, he often changed his posture, 
and would have changed his chair, had 
there been more than one in the apartment. 
He sunk for a few moments into a tit of 
gloomy abstraction, till the sound of the 
clock striking twelve made him start, — it 
was the only sound he had heard for some 
hours, and the sounds produced by inani- 
mate things, while all living beings around 
are as dead, have at such an hour an effect 
indescribably awful. John looked at his 
manuscript with some reluctance, opened 

c 2 



58 MELMOTH : 

it, paused over the first lines, and as the 
wind sighed round the desolate apartment, 
and the rain pattered with a mournful 
sound against the dismantled window, 
wished what did he wish for? — he 
wished the sound of the wind less dismal, 
and the dash of the rain less monotonous. 
He may be forgiven, it was past mid- 
night, and there was not a human being 
awake but himself within ten miles when 
he began to read. 






CHAPTER III. 



Apparebat eidolon senex. 

Pliny. 



A he manuscript was discoloured, oblite- 
rated, and mutilated beyond any that had 
ever before exercised the patience of a 
reader. Michaelis himself, scrutinizing 
into the pretended autograph of St Mark 
at Venice, never had a harder time of it.-— 
Melmoth could make out only a sentence 
here and there. The writer, it appeared, 
was an Englishman of the name of Stan- 
ton, who had travelled abroad shortly after 



60 MELMOTH : 

the Restoration. Travelling was not then 
attended with the facilities which modern 
improvement has introduced, and scholars 
and literati, the intelligent, the idle, and 
the curious, wandered over the Continent 
for years, like Tom Cory at, though they 
had the modesty, on their return, to en- 
title the result of their multiplied observa- 
tions and labours only " crudities." 

Stanton, about the year 1676, was in 
Spain ; he was, like most of the travellers 
of that age, a man of literature, intelli- 
gence, and curiosity, but ignorant of the 
language of the country, and fighting his 
way at times from convent to convent, in 
quest of what was called " Hospitality," 
that is, obtaining board and lodging on 
the condition of holding a debate in Latin, 
on some point theological or metaphysical, 
with any monk who would become the 
champion of the strife. Now, as the theo- 
logy was Catholic, and the metaphysics 
Aristotelian, Stanton sometimes wished 
himself at the miserable Posada from 



A TALE. 61 

whose filth and famine he had been fight- 
ing his escape ; but though his reverend 
antagonists always denounced his creed, 
and comforted themselves, even in defeat, 
with the assurance that he must be damn- 
ed, on the double score of his being a he- 
retic and an Englishman, they were ob- 
liged to confess that his Latin was good, 
and his logic unanswerable ; and he was 
allowed, in most cases, to sup and sleep 
in peace. This was not doomed to be his 
fate on the night of the 17th August 
1677, when he found himself in the plains 
of "V alencia, deserted by a cowardly guide, 
who had been terrified by the sight of a 
cross erected as a memorial of a murder, 
had slipped off his mule unperceived, 
crossing himself every step he took on his 
retreat from the heretic, and left Stanton 
amid the terrors of an approaching storm, 
and the dangers of an unknown country. 
The sublime and yet softened beauty of 
the scenery around, had filled the soul of 
Stanton with delight, and he enjoyed that 



62 MELMOTH : 

delight as Englishmen generally do, si- 
lently. 

The magnificent remains of two dynas- 
ties that had passed away, the ruins of 
Roman palaces, and of Moorish fortresses, 
were around and above him; — the dark 
and heavy thunder- clouds that advanced 
slowly, seemed like the shrouds of these 
spectres of departed greatness ; they ap- 
proached, but did not yet overwhelm or 
conceal them, as if nature herself was for 
once awed by the power of man ; and far 
below, the lovely valley of Valencia blush- 
ed and burned in all the glory of sunset, 
like a bride receiving the last glowing kiss 
of the bridegroom before the approach of 
night. Stanton gazed around. The dif- 
ference between the architecture of the 
Roman and Moorish ruins struck him. 
Among the former are the remains of a 
theatre, and something like a public place ; 
the latter present only the remains of for- 
tresses, embattled, castellated, and fortified 
from top to bottom, — not a loop-hole for 



A TALE. 63 

pleasure to get in by, — the loop-holes were 
only for arrows ; all denoted military power 
and despotic subjugation a toutrance. 
The contrast might have pleased a philo- 
sopher, and he might have indulged in 
the reflection, that though the ancient 
Greeks and Romans were savages, (as Dr 
Johnson says all people who want a press 
must be, and he says truly), yet they were 
wonderful savages for their time, for they 
alone have left traces of their taste for 
pleasure in the countries they conquered, 
in their superb theatres, temples, (which 
were also dedicated to pleasure one way or 
another), and baths, while other conquer- 
ing bands of savages never left any thing 
behind them but traces of their rage for 
power. So thought Stanton, as he still 
saw strongly defined, though darkened by 
the darkening clouds, the huge skeleton 
of a Roman amphitheatre, its arched and 
gigantic colonnades now admitting a gleam 
of light, and now commingling with the 
purple thunder-cloud ; and now the solid 



64 MELMOTH : 

and heavy mass of a Moorish fortress, no 
light playing between its impermeable 
walls, — the image of power, dark, isolated, 
impenetrable. Stanton forgot his coward- 
ly guide, his loneliness, his danger amid 
an approaching storm and an inhospitable 
country, where his name and country 
would shut every door against him, and 
every peal of thunder would be supposed 
justified by the daring intrusion of a here- 
tic in the dwelling of an old Christian, as 
the Spanish Catholics absurdly term them- 
selves, to mark the distinction between 
them and the baptised Moors. — All this 
was forgot in contemplating the glorious 
and awful scenery before him, — -light 
struggling with darkness, — and darkness 
menacing a light still more terrible, and 
announcing its menace in the blue and 
livid mass of cloud that hovered like a de- 
stroying angel in the air, its arrows aimed, 
but their direction awfully indefinite. But 
he ceased to forget these local and petty 
dangers, as the sublimity of romance 



A TALE. 65. 

would term them, when he saw the first 
flash of the lightning, broad and red as 
the banners of an insulting army whose 
motto is Vce victis, shatter to atoms the 
remains of a Roman tower ; — the rifted 
stones rolled down the hill, and fell at the 
feet of Stanton. He stood appalled, and, 
awaiting his summons from the Power in 
whose eye pyramids, palaces, and the 
worms whose toil has formed them, and 
the worms who toil out their existence 
under their shadow or their pressure, are 
perhaps all alike contemptible, he stood 
collected, and for a moment felt that de- 
fiance of danger which danger itself ex- 
cites, and we love to encounter it as a 
physical enemy, to bid it " do its worst," 
and feel that its worst will perhaps be ulti- 
mately its best for us. He stood and saw 
another flash dart its bright, brief, and 
malignant glance over the ruins of ancient 
power, and the luxuriance of recent ferti- 
lity. Singular contrast ! The relics of art 
for ever decaying, — the productions of na~ 



66 MELMOTH : 

ture for ever renewed. — (Alas ! for what pur- 
pose are they renewed, better than to mock 
at the perishable monuments which men try 
in vain to rival them by). The pyramids 
themselves must perish, but the grass that 
grows between their disjointed stones will 
be renewed from year to year. Stanton 
was thinking thus, when all power of 
thought was suspended, by seeing two 
persons bearing between them the body of 
a young, and apparently very lovely girl, 
who had been struck dead by the light- 
ning. Stanton approached, and heard the 
voices of the bearers repeating, " There is 
none who will mourn for her !" " There 
is none who will mourn for her !" said 
other voices, as two more bore in their 
arms the blasted and blackened figure of 
what had once been a man, comely and 
graceful ; — " there is not one to mourn for 
her now !" They were lovers, and he had 
been consumed by the flash that had de- 
stroyed her, while in the act of endeavour- 
ing to defend her. As they were about 



A TALE. 67 

to remove the bodies, a person approached 
with a calmness of step and demeanour, 
as if he were alone unconscious of danger, 
and incapable of fear; and after looking 
on them for some time, burst into a laugh 
so loud, wild, and protracted, that the 
peasants, starting with as much horror at 
the sound as at that of the storm, hurried 
away, bearing the corse with them. Even 
Stanton's fears were subdued by his asto- 
nishment, and, turning to the stranger, 
who remained standing on the same spot, 
he asked the reason of such an outrage on 
humanity. The stranger, slowly turning 
round, and disclosing a countenance which 

(Here the manuscript was illegible 

for a few lines), said in English (A 

long hiatus followed here, and the next 
passage that was legible, though it proved 
to be a continuation of the narrative, was 

but a fragment). * * 

* # & *• 

The terrors of the night rendered Stan- 
ton a sturdy and unappeasable applicant ; 
and the shrill voice of the old woman, re- 



68 MELMOTH : 

peating, " no heretic — no English — Mo- 
ther of God protect us — avaunt Satan !" — 
combined with the clatter of the wooden 
casement (peculiar to the houses in Valen- 
tia) which she opened to discharge her 
volley of anathematization, and shut again 
as the lightning glanced through the aper- 
ture, were unable to repel his importunate 
request for admittance, in a night whose 
terrors ought to soften all the miserable 
petty local passions into one awful feeling 
of fear for the Power who caused it, and 
compassion for those who were exposed to 
it. — But Stanton felt there was something 
more than national bigotry in the excla- 
mations of the old woman ; there was a 
peculiar and personal horror of the En- 
glish. — And he was right ; but this did 

not diminish the eagerness of his 

■&- «■ * , * 

The house was handsome and spacious, 
but the melancholy appearance of deser- 
tion * * * 



A TALE. 69 

— The benches were by the wall, but there 
were none to sit there ; the tables were 
spread in what had been the hall, but it 
seemed as if none had gathered round 
them for many years ; — the clock struck 
audibly, there was no voice of mirth or of 
occupation to drown its sound ; time told 
his awful lesson to silence alone; — the 
hearths were black with fuel long since 
consumed ; — the family portraits looked as 
if they were the only tenants of the man- 
sion ; they seemed to say, from their moul- 
dering frames, " there are none to gaze on 
us ;" and the echo of the steps of Stanton 
and his feeble guide, was the only sound 
audible between the peals of thunder that 

rolled still awfully, but more distantly, 

every peal like the exhausted murmurs of 
a spent heart. As they passed on, a shriek 
was heard. Stanton paused, and fearful 
images of the dangers to which travellers 
on the Continent are exposed in deserted 
and remote habitations, came into his 
mind. " Don't heed it," said the old wo- 



70 MELMOTH : 

man, fighting him on with a miserable 
lamp ; — " it is only he * * * 

The old woman having now satisfied her- 
self, by ocular demonstration, that her 
English guest, even if he was the devil, 
had neither horn, hoof, or tail, that he 
could bear the sign of the cross without 
changing his form, and that, when he 
spoke, not a puff of sulphur came out of 
his mouth, began to take courage, and at 
length commenced her story, which, 

weary and comfortless as Stanton was, * 

* * & * 

" Every obstacle was now removed ; 
parents and relations at last gave up all op- 
position, and the young pair were united. 
Never was there a lovelier, — they seemed 
like angels who had only anticipated by a 
few years their celestial and eternal union. 
The marriage was solemnized with much 
pomp, and a few days after there was a 
feast in that very wainscotted chamber 
which you paused to remark was so gloomy. 
It was that night hung with rich tapestry, 



A TALE. 71 

representing the exploits of the Cid, par- 
ticularly that of his burning a few Moors 
who refused to renounce their accursed 
religion. They were represented beauti- 
fully tortured, writhing and howling, and 
H Mahomet ! Mahomet !" issuing out of 
their mouths, as they called on him in 
their burning agonies ; — you could almost 
hear them scream. At the upper end of 
the room, under a splendid estrade, over 
which was an image of the blessed Virgin, 
sat Donna Isabella de Cardoza, mother to 
the bride, and near her Donna Ines, the 
bride, on rich almohadas ; the bridegroom 
sat opposite to her ; and though they 
never spoke to each other, their eyes, 
slowly raised, but suddenly withdrawn, 
(those eyes that blushed), told to each 
other the delicious secret of their happi- 
ness. Don Pedro de Cardoza had assem- 
bled a large party in honour of his daugh- 
ter's nuptials ; among them was an En- 
glishman of the name of Melmoth, a tra- 
veller ; no one knew who had brought him 



72 MELMOTH : 

there. He sat silent like the rest, while 
the iced waters and the sugared wafers 
were presented to the company. The 
night was intensely hot, and the moon 
flowed like a sun over the ruins of Sa- 
guntum ; the embroidered blinds flapped 
heavily, as if the wind made an effort to 
raise them in vain, and then desisted. 

(Another defect in the manuscript oc- 
curred here, but it was soon supplied). 

" The company were dispersed through 
various alleys of the garden; the bridegroom 
and bride wandered through one where 
the delicious perfume of the orange trees 
mingled itself with that of the myrtles in 
blow. On their return to the hall, both 
of them asked, Had the company heard 
the exquisite sounds that floated through 
the garden just before they quitted it? 
No one had heard them. They expressed 
their surprise. The Englishman had never 
quitted the hall; it was said he smiled 
with a most particular and extraordinary 



A TALE. 73 

expression as the remark was made. His 
silence had been noticed before, but it was 
ascribed to his ignorance of the Spanish 
language, an ignorance that Spaniards are 
not anxious either to expose or remove by 
speaking to a stranger. The subject of 
the music was* not again reverted to till 
the guests were seated at supper, when 
Donna Ines and her young husband, ex- 
changing a smile of delighted surprise, ex- 
claimed they heard the same delicious 
sounds floating round them. The guests 
listened, but no one else could hear it ; — 
every one felt there was something extra- 
ordinary in this. Hush ! was uttered by 
every voice almost at the same moment. 
A dead silence followed, — you would think, 
from their intent looks, that they listened 
with their very eyes. This deep silence, 
contrasted with the splendour of the feast, 
and the light effused from torches held by 
the domestics, produced a singular effect, 
— it seemed for some moments like an as- 
vol. i. © 



74 MELMOTH : 

sembly of the dead. The silence was in- 
terrupted, though the cause of wonder 
had not ceased, by the entrance of Father 
Olavida, the Confessor of Donna Isabella, 
who had been called away previous to the 
feast, to administer extreme unction to a 
dying man in the neighbourhood. He 
was a priest of uncommon sanctity, be- 
loved in the family, and respected in the 
neighbourhood, where he had displayed 
uncommon taste and talents for exorcism ; 
— in fact, this was the good Father's forte, 
and he piqued himself on it accordingly. 
The devil never fell into worse hands than 
Father Olavida's, for when he was so con- 
tumacious as to resist Latin, and even the 
first verses of the Gospel of St John in 
Greek, which the good Father never had 
recourse to but in cases of extreme stub- 
bornness and difficulty, — (here Stanton re- 
collected the English story of the Boy of 
Bilson, and blushed even in Spain for his 
country men ),-*-then he always applied to 



A TALE. 75 

the Inquisition ; and if the devils were 
ever so obstinate before, they were always 
seen to fly out of the possessed, just as, in 
the midst of their cries, (no doubt of blas- 
phemy), they were tied to the stake. Some 
held out even till the flames surrounded 
them ; but even the most stubborn must 
have been dislodged when the operation 
was over, for the devil himself could no 
longer tenant a crisp and glutinous lump 
of cinders. Thus Father Olavida's fame 
spread far and wide, and the Cardoza 
family had made uncommon interest to 
procure him for a Confessor, and happily 
succeeded. The ceremony he had just 
been performing, had cast a shade over 
the good Father's countenance, but it dis- 
persed as he mingled among the guests, 
and was introduced to them. Room was 
soon made for him, and he happened ac- 
cidentally to be seated opposite the En- 
glishman. As the wine was presented to 
him, Father Olavida, (who, as I observed, 



76 ivAlmoth : 

was a man of singular sanctity), prepared 
to utter a short internal prayer. He hesi- 
tated, — trembled, — desisted ; and, putting 
down the wine, wiped the drops from his 
forehead with the sleeve of his habit. 
Donna Isabella gave a sign to a domestic, 
and other wine of a higher quality was 
offered to him. His lips moved, as if in 
the effort to pronounce a benediction on it 
and the company, but the effort again 
failed ; and the change in his countenance 
was so extraordinary, that it was perceived 
by all the guests. He felt the sensation 
that his extraordinary appearance excited, 
and attempted to remove it by again en- 
deavouring to lift the cup to his lips. So 
strong was the anxiety with which the 
company watched him, that the only sound 
heard in that spacious and crowded hall, 
was the rustling of his habit, as he at- 
tempted to lift the cup to his lips once 
more — in vain. The guests sat in asto- 
nished silence. Father Olavida alone re- 



A TALE. 77 

mainecl standing ; but at that moment the 
Englishman rose, and appeared determin- 
ed to fix Olavida's regards by a gaze like 
that of fascination. Olavida rocked, reel- 
ed, grasped the arm of a page, and at last, 
closing his eyes for a moment, as if to 
escape the horrible fascination of that un- 
earthly glare, (the Englishman's eyes were 
observed by all the guests, from the mo- 
ment of his entrance, to effuse a most 
fearful and preternatural lustre), exclaim- 
ed, " Who is among us ? — Who ? — I can- 
not utter a blessing while he is here. I 
cannot feel one. Where he treads, the 
earth is parched ! — Where he breathes, the 
air is fire ! — Where he feeds, the food is 
poison ! — Where he turns, his glance is 
lightning! — Who is among us f — Who?" 
repeated the priest in the agony of adju- 
ration, while his cowl fallen back, his few 
thin hairs around the scalp instinct and 
alive with terrible emotion, his outspread 
arms protruded from the sleeves of his 



78 MELMOTH : 

habit, and extended towards the awful 
stranger, suggested the idea of an inspired 
being in the dreadful rapture of prophetic 
denunciation. He stood — still stood, and 
the Englishman stood calmly opposite to 
him. There was an agitated irregularity 
in the attitudes of those around them, 
which contrasted strongly the fixed and 
stern postures of those two, who remained 
gazing silently at each other. " Who 
knows him ?" exclaimed Olavida, starting 
apparently from a trance ; " who knows 
him ? who brought him here ?" 

The guests severally disclaimed all 
knowledge of the Englishman, and each 
asked the other in whispers, " who had 
brought him there?" Father Olavida 
then pointed his arm to each of the com- 
pany, and asked each individually, " Do 
you know him ?" " No ! no ! no I" 
was uttered with vehement emphasis by 
every individual. " But I know him," 
said Olavida, u by these cold drops !" and 



A TALE. 79 

he wiped them off; — " by these convulsed 
joints !" and he attempted to sign the 
cross, but could not. He raised his voice, 
and evidently speaking with increased dif- 
ficulty, — " By this bread and wine, which 
the faithful receive as the body and blood 
of Christ, but which his presence converts 
into matter as viperous as the suicide foam 
of the dying Judas, — by all these — J know 
him, and command him to be gone ! — He 

is — he is " and he bent forwards as he 

spoke, and gazed on the Englishman with 
an expression which the mixture of rage, 
hatred, and fear, rendered terrible. All 
the guests rose at these words, — the whole 
company now presented two singular 
groupes, that of the amazed guests all 
collected together, and repeating, " Who, 
what is he ?" and that of the Englishman, 
who stood unmoved, and Olavida, who 
dropped dead in the attitude of pointing 
to him. ****** 



SO MELMOTH : 

The body was removed into another 
room, and the departure of the English- 
man was not noticed till the company re- 
turned to the hall. They sat late toge- 
ther, conversing on this extraordinary cir- 
cumstance, and finally agreed to remain in 
the house, lest the evil spirit (for they be- 
lieved the Englishman no better) should 
take certain liberties with the corse by no 
means agreeable to a Catholic, particularly 
as he had manifestly died without the be- 
nefit of the last sacraments. Just as this 
laudable resolution was formed, they were 
roused by cries of horror and agony from 
the bridal-chamber, where the young pair 
had retired. 

They hurried to the door, but the father 
was first. They burst it open, and found 
the bride a corse in the arms of her hus- 
band. 

* * * * 

He never recovered his reason ; the family 
deserted the mansion rendered terrible by 



A TALE. 81 

so many misfortunes. One apartment is 
still tenanted by the unhappy maniac ; his 
were the cries you heard as you traversed 
the deserted rooms. He is for the most 
part silent during the day, but at mid- 
night he always exclaims, in a voice fright- 
fully piercing, and hardly human, " They 
are coming ! they are coming !" and re- 
lapses into profound silence. 

The funeral of Father Olavida was at- 
tended by an extraordinary circumstance. 
He was interred in a neighbouring con- 
vent; and the reputation of his sanctity, 
joined to the interest caused by his extra- 
ordinary death, collected vast numbers at 
the ceremony. His funeral sermon was 
preached by a monk of distinguished elo- 
quence, appointed for the purpose. To 
render the effect of his discourse more 
powerful, the corse, extended on a bier, 
with its face uncovered, was placed in the 
aisle. The monk took his text from one 
of the prophets, — {.'■ Death is gone up into 

d 2 



82 MELMOTH : 

our palaces." He expatiated on mortali- 
ty, whose approach, whether abrupt or 
lingering, is alike awful to man. — He 
spoke of the vicissitudes of empires with 
much eloquence and learning, but his au- 
dience were not observed to be much af- 
fected. — He cited various passages from the 
lives of the saints, descriptive of the glo- 
ries of martyrdom, and the heroism of 
those who had bled and blazed for Christ 
and his blessed mother, but they appeared 
still waiting for something to touch them 
more deeply. When he inveighed against 
the tyrants under whose bloody persecu- 
tions those holy men suffered, his hearers 
were roused for a moment, for it is always 
easier to excite a passion than a moral feel- 
ing. But when he spoke of the dead, and 
pointed with emphatic gesture to the corse, 
as it lay before them cold and motionless, 
every eye was fixed, and every ear be- 
came attentive. Even the lovers, who, 
under pretence of dipping their fingers 



A TALE. 83 

into the holy water, were contriving to 
exchange amorous billets, forbore for one 
moment this interesting intercourse, to 
listen to the preacher. He dwelt with 
much energy on the virtues of the deceas- 
ed, whom he declared to be a particular 
favourite of the Virgin ; and enumerating 
the various losses that would be caused by 
his departure to the community to which 
he belonged, to society, and to religion at 
large ; he at last worked up himself to a 
vehement expostulation with the Deity on 
the occasion. " Why hast thou," he ex- 
claimed, " why hast thou, Oh God ! thus 
dealt with us ? Why hast thou snatched 
from our sight this glorious saint, whose 
merits, if properly applied, doubtless would 
have been sufficient to atone for the apos- 
tacy of St Peter, the opposition of St 
Paul, (previous to his conversion), and 
even the treachery of Judas himself? 
Why hast thou, Oh God ! snatched him 
from us ?" — and a deep and hollow voice 



84 MELMOTH : 

from among the congregation answersed, 
— " Because he deserved his fate." The 
murmurs of approbation with which the 
congregation honoured this apostrophe, 
half-drowned this extraordinary interrup- 
tion ; and though there was some little 
commotion in the immediate vicinity of 
the speaker, the rest of the audience con- 
tinued to listen intently. " What," pro- 
ceeded the preacher, pointing to the corse, 
" what hath laid thee there, servant of 
God ?" — " Pride, ignorance, and fear," an- 
swered the same voice, in accents still more 
thrilling. The disturbance now became 
universal. The preacher paused, and a 
circle opening, disclosed the figure of a 
monk belonging to the convent, who stood 

among them. * * * 

* * * * 

After all the usual modes of admoni- 
tion, exhortation, and discipline had been 
employed, and the bishop of the diocese, 
who, under the report of these extraordi- 



A TALE. 85 

nary circumstances, had visited the con- 
vent in person to obtain some explanation 
from the contumacious monk in vain, it 
was agreed, in a chapter extraordinary, 
to surrender him to the power of the 
Inquisition. He testified great horror 
when this determination was made known 
to him, — and offered to tell over and 
over again all that he could relate of the 
cause of Father Olavida's death. His hu- 
miliation, and repeated offers of confes- 
sion, came too late. He was conveyed to 
the Inquisition. The proceedings of that 
tribunal are rarely disclosed, but there is a 
secret report (I cannot answer for its truth) 
of what he said and suffered there. On 
his first examination, he said he would re- 
late all he could. He was told that was 

not enough, he must relate all he knew, * 

***■*• #**# 

** Why did you testify such horror at the 
funeral of Father Olavida ?" — " Every one 
testified horror and grief at the death of 



86 MELMOTH : 

that venerable ecclesiastic, who died in the 
odour of sanctity. Had I done otherwise, 
it might have been reckoned a proof of 
my guilt." " Why did you interrupt the 
preacher with such extraordinary exclama- 
tions ?" — To this no answer. " Why do 
you refuse to explain the meaning of 
those exclamations?" — No answer. " Why 
do you persist in this obstinate and 
dangerous silence? Look, I beseech you, 
brother, at the cross that is suspended a- 
gainst this wall," and the Inquisitor point- 
ed to the large black crucifix at the back 
of the chair where he sat ; " one drop of 
the blood shed there can purify you from 
all the sin you have ever committed ; but 
all that blood, combined with the inter- 
cession of the Queen of Heaven, and the 
merits of all its* martyrs, nay, even the 
absolution of the Pope, cannot deliver 
yon from the curse of dying in unrepent- 
ed sin." — " What sin, then, have I com- 
mitted ?" " The greatest of all possible 



A TALE. 87 

sins ; you refuse answering the questions 
put to you at the tribunal of the most 
holy and merciful Inquisition ; — you will 
not tell us what you know concerning the 
death of Father Olavida."— " I have told 
you that I believe he perished in conse- 
quence of his ignorance and presumption." 
" What proof can you produce of that ?" 
— " He sought the knowledge of a secret 
withheld from man." " What was that ?" 
— " The secret of discovering the presence 
or agency of the evil power." " Do you 
possess that secret?" — After much agitation 
on the part of the prisoner, he said distinctly, 
but very faintly, " My master forbids me 
to disclose it." " If your master were Je- 
sus Christ, he would not forbid you to 
obey the commands, or answer the ques- 
tions of the Inquisition."—" I am not 
sure of that." There was a general out- 
cry of horror at these words. The exami- 
nation then went on. " If you believed 
Olavida to be guilty of any pursuits* ov 



88 MELMOTII : 

studies condemned by our mother the 
church, why did you not denounce him 
to the Inquisition ?" — "Because I believed 
him not likely to be injured by such pur- 
suits ; his mind was too weak, — he died in 
the struggle," said the prisoner with great 
emphasis. " You believe, then, it requires 
strength of mind to keep those abominable 
secrets, when examined as to their nature 
and tendency ?" — " No, I rather imagine 
strength of body." " We shall try that 
presently," said an Inquisitor, giving a 
signal for the torture. * * * 

The -prisoner underwent the first and se- 
cond applications with unshrinking cou- 
rage, but on the infliction of the water- 
torture, which is indeed insupportable to 
humanity, either to suffer or relate, he ex- 
claimed in the gasping interval, he would 
disclose every thing. He was released, 
refreshed, restored, and the following day 
uttered the following remarkable confession 



A TALE. 89 

* # # # * 

* # * # # * 

The old Spanish woman further confess- 
ed to Stanton, that * * * 
****** and that 
the Englishman certainly had been seen 
in the neighbourhood since ;- — seen, as she 
had heard, that very night. " Great 
G — d !" exolaimed Stanton, as he recol- 
lected the stranger whose demoniac laugh 
had so appalled him, while gazing on the 
lifeless bodies of the lovers, whom the 
lightning had struck and blasted. 



As the manuscript, after a few blotted 
and illegible pages, became more distinct, 
Melmoth read on, perplexed and unsatis- 
fied, not knowing what connexion this 
Spanish story could have with his ances- 
tor, whom, however, he recognised under 
the title of the Englishman ; and wonder* 
ing how Stanton could have thought it 



90 MELMOTH : 

worth his while to follow him to Ireland, 
write a long manuscript about an event 
that occurred in Spain, and leave it in the 
hands of his family, to " verify untrue 
things," in the language of Dogberry, — 
his wonder was diminished, though his 
curiosity was still more inflamed, by the 
perusal of the next lines, which he made 
out with some difficulty. It seems Stan- 
ton was now in England. * * * 
***•* **** 

About the year 1677, Stanton was in 
London, his mind still full of his myste- 
rious countryman. This constant subject 
of his contemplations had produced a visi- 
ble change in his exterior, — his walk was 
what Sallust tells us of Catiline's, — his 
were, too, the " fcedi ocali" He said to 
himself every moment, " If I could but 
trace that being, I will not call him man," 
— and the next moment he said, " and 
what if I could ?" In this state of mind, 
it is singular enough that he mixed con- 
stantly in public amusements, but it is 



A TALE. 91 

true. When one fierce passion is devour- 
ing the soul, we feel more than ever the 
necessity of external excitement ; and our 
dependence on the world for temporary 
relief increases in direct proportion to our 
contempt of the world and all its works. 
He went frequently to the theatres, then 
fashionable, when 

" The fair sat panting at a courtier's play, 
And not a mask went unimproved away.** 

The London theatres then presented 
a spectacle which ought for ever to put 
to silence the foolish outcry against pro- 
gressive deterioration of morals, — foolish 
even from the pen of Juvenal, and still 
more so from the lips of a modern Puri- 
tan. Vice is always nearly on an ave- 
rage : The only difference in life worth 
tracing, is that of manners, and there we 
have manifestly the advantage of our an- 
cestors. Hypocrisy is said to be the ho- 
mage that vice pays to virtue, — decorum is 
the outward expression of that homage* 



92 MELMOTII : 

and if this be so, we must acknowledge 
that vice has latterly grown very humble 
indeed. There was, however, something 
splendid, ostentatious, and obtrusive, in 
the vices of Charles the Second's reign. — 
A view of the theatres alone proved it, 
when Stanton was in the habit of visiting 
them. At the doors stood on one side the 
footmen of a fashionable nobleman, (with 
arms concealed under their liveries), sur- 
rounding the sedan of a popular actress \ 
whom they were to carry off vi et armis, 
as she entered it at the end of the play. 
At the other side waited the glass coach 
of a woman of fashion, who waited to 
take Kynaston (the Adonis of the day), in 
his female dress, to the park after the 



* Mrs Marshall, the original Roxana in Lee's Alex- 
ander, and the only virtuous woman then on the stage. 
She was carried off in the manner described, by Lord 
Orrery, who, finding all his solicitations repelled, had 
recourse to a sham marriage performed by a servant 
in the habit of a clergyman. 



A TALE. 93 

play was over, and exhibit him in all the 
luxurious splendour of effeminate beauty, 
(heightened by theatrical dress), for which 
he was so distinguished. 

Plays being then performed at four 
o'clock, allowed ample time for the even- 
ing drive, and the midnight assignation, 
when the parties met by torch-light, mask- 
ed, in St James's park, and verified the title 
of Wycherly's play, " Love in a Wood." 
The boxes, as Stanton looked round him, 
were filled with females, whose naked 
shoulders and bosoms, well testified in the 
paintings of Lely, and the pages of Gram- 
mont, might save modern puritanism many 
a vituperative groan and affected reminis- 
cence. They had all taken the precaution 
to send some male relative, on the first 
night of a new play, to report whether it was 
fit for persons of " honour and reputation" 
to appear at ; but in spite of this precaution, 
at certain passages (which occurred about 
every second sentence) they were compelled 
to spread out their fans, or play with the 



94 MELMOTH : 

still cherished love-lock, which Prynne him- 
self had not been able to write down . 

The men in the boxes were composed of 
two distinct classes, the " men of wit and 
pleasure about town," distinguished by 
their Flanders lace cravats, soiled with 
snuff, their diamond rings, the pretended 
gift of a royal mistress, (nHmporte whether 
the Duchess of Portsmouth or Nell 
G wynne) ; their uncombed wigs, whose 
curls descended to their waists, and the 
loud and careless tone in which they abus- 
ed Dryden, Lee, and Otway, and quoted 
Sedley and Rochester ; — the other class 
were the lovers, the gentle " squires of 
dames," equally conspicuous for their white 
fringed gloves, their obsequious bows, and 
their commencing every sentence address- 
ed to a lady, with the profane exclamation 
of # " Oh Jesu !" or the softer, but equally 

* Vide Pope, (copying from Doune). 

" Peace, fools, or Gonson will for Papists seize you, 
If once he catch you at your Jesu, Jesu." 



A TALE. 95 

unmeaning one of " I beseech you, Ma- 
dam," or, " Madam, I burn *." One circum- 
stance sufficiently extraordinary marked 
the manners of the day ; females had not 
then found their proper level in life ; they 
were alternately adored as goddesses, and 
assailed as prostitutes ; and the man who, 
this moment, addressed his mistress in lan- 
guage borrowed from Orondates worship- 
ping Cassandra, in the next accosted her 
with ribaldry that might put to the blush 
the piazzas of Coven t Garden f . 

The pit presented a more various spectacle. 
There were the critics armed cap-a-pee from 
Aristotle and Bossu ; these men dined at 
twelve, dictated at a coffee-house till four, 

* Vide the Old Bachelor, whose Araminta, wearied 
by the repetition of these phrases, forbids her lover 
to address her in any sentence commencing with 
them. 

+ Vide any old play you may have the patience to 
peruse ; or, instar omnium, read the courtly loves of 
Rodolphil and Melantha, Palamede and Doratice, in 
Dryden's Marriage a la Mode. 



90 MELMOTH : 

then called to the boy to brush their shoes, 
and strode to the theatre, where, till the 
curtain rose, they sat hushed in grim re- 
pose, and expecting their evening prey. 
There were the templars, spruce, pert, and 
loquacious ; and here and there a sober 
citizen, doffing his steeple-crowned hat, 
and hiding his little band under the folds 
of his huge puritanic cloke, while his eyes, 
declined with an expression half leering, 
half ejaculatory, towards a masked female, 
muffled in a hood and scarf, testified what 
had seduced him into these " tents of Ke- 
dar." There were females, too, but all in 
vizard masks, which, though worn as well 
as aunt Dinah's in Tristram Shandy, served 
to conceal them from the " young bub- 
bles" they were in quest of, and from all but 
the orange- women, who hailed them loud- 
ly as they passed the doors # . In the gal- 
leries were the happy souls who waited for 

* Vide Southern's Oroonoko, — I mean the comic 
part. 



A TALE. 97 

the fulfilment of Dryden's promise in one 
of his prologues * ; no matter to them whe- 
ther it were the ghost of Almanzor's mo- 
ther in her dripping shroud, or that of 
Lai us, who, according to the stage direc- 
tions, rises in his chariot, armed with the 
ghosts of his three murdered attendants 
behind him ; — a joke that did not escape 
l'Abbe le Blanc f, in his recipe for writing 
an English tragedy. Some, indeed, from 
time to time called out for the " burning 
of the Pope ;" but though 

(< Space was obedient to the boundless piece, 
Which oped in Mexico and closed in Greece," 

it was not always possible to indulge them 
in this laudable amusement, as the scene 
of the popular plays was generally laid in 
Africa or Spain ; Sir Robert Howard, El- 
kanah Settle, and John Dryden, all agree- 
ing in their choice of Spanish and Moorish 



* ce A charm, a song, a murder, and a ghost." 

Prologue to (Ediptis, 
t Vide Le Blanc's Letters. 
VOL. I. E 



9S MELMOTH : 

subjects for their principal plays. Among 
this joyous groupe were seated several 
women of fashion masked, enjoying in 
secrecy the licentiousness which they dar- 
ed not openly patronise, and verifying 
Gay's characteristic description, though 
it was written many years later, 

<e Mobbed in the gallery Laura sits secure, 
And laughs at jests that turn the box demure." 

Stanton gazed on all this with the look of 
one who " could not be moved to smile at 
any thing." He turned to the stage, the 
play was Alexander, then acted as written 
by Lee, and the principal character was 
performed by Hart, whose god- like ardour 
in making love, is said almost to have 
compelled the audience to believe that they 
beheld the " son of Ammon." 

There were absurdities enough to offend 
a classical, or even a rational spectator. 
There were Grecian heroes with roses in 
their shoes, feathers in their hats, and wigs 
down to their waists ; and Persian prin- 



A TALE. 99 

cesses in stiff stays and powdered hair. 
But the illusion of the scene was well 
sustained, for the heroines were rivals in 
real as well as theatrical life. It was that 
memorable night, when, according to the 
history of the veteran Betterton *, Mrs 
Barry, who personated Roxana, had a 
green-room squabble with Mrs Bowtell, 
the representative of Statira, about a veil, 
which the partiality of the property-man 
adjudged to the latter. Roxana suppress- 
ed her rage till the fifth act, when, stabbing 
Statira, she aimed the blow with such 
force as to pierce through her stays, and 
inflict a severe though not dangerous 
wound. Mrs Bowtell fainted, the per- 
formance was suspended, and, in the com- 
motion which this incident caused in the 
house, many of the audience rose, and 
Stanton among them. It was at this mo- 
ment that, in a seat opposite to him, he 
discovered the object of his search for four 

* Vide Betterton's History of the Stage. 



100 MELMOTH : 

years, — the Englishman whom he had met 
in the plains of Valentia, and whom he be- 
lieved the same with the subject of the ex- 
traordinary narrative he had heard there. 

He was standing up. There was no- 
thing particular or remarkable in his ap- 
pearance, but the expression of his eyes 
could never be mistaken or forgotten. 
The heart of Stanton palpitated with vio- 
lence, — a mist 'overspread his eyes, — a 
nameless and deadly sickness, accompa- 
nied with a creeping sensation in every 
pore, from which cold drops were gush- 
ing, announced the * * 

******* 

Before he had well recovered, a strain of 
music, soft, solemn, and delicious, breath- 
ed round him, audibly ascending from the 
ground, and increasing in sweetness and 
power till it seemed to fill the whole build- 
ing. Under the sudden impulse of amaze- 
ment and pleasure, he inquired of some 
around him from whence those exquisite 
sounds arose. But, by the manner in 



A TALE. 101 

which he was answered, it was plain that 
those he addressed considered him insane ; 
and, indeed, the remarkable change in his 
expression might well justify the suspi- 
cion. He then remembered that night in 
Spain, when the same sweet and myste- 
rious sounds were heard only by the young 
bridegroom and bride, of whom the latter 
perished on that very night. "And am I 
then to be the next victim ?" thought 
Stanton ; " and are those celestial sounds, 
that seem to prepare us for heaven, only 
intended to announce the presence of an 
incarnate ..fiend, who mocks the devoted 
with ' airs from heaven,' while he prepares 
to surround them with e blasts from hell' ?" 
It is very singular that at this moment, 
when his imagination had reached its 
highest pitch of elevation, — when the ob- 
ject he had pursued so long and fruitlessly, 
had in one moment become as it were 
tangible to the grasp both of mind and 
body, — when this spirit, with whom he had 
wrestled in darkness, was at last about to 



102 MELMOTH : 

declare its name, that Stanton began to 
feel a kind of disappointment at the futi- 
lity of his pursuits, like Bruce at disco- 
vering the source of the Nile, or Gibbon 
on concluding his History. The feeling 
which he had dwelt on so long, that he 
had actually converted it into a duty, was 
after all mere curiosity ; but what pas- 
sion is more insatiable, or more capable 
of giving a kind of romantic grandeur to 
all its wanderings and eccentricities ? Cu- 
riosity is in one respect like love, it al- 
ways compromises between the object and 
the feeling ; and provided the latter pos- 
sesses sufficient energy, no matter how 
contemptible the former may be. A child 
might have smiled at the agitation of 
Stanton, caused as it was by the acciden- 
tal appearance of a stranger ; but no man, 
in the full energy of his passions, was 
there, but must have trembled at the hor- 
rible agony of emotion with which he felt 
approaching, with sudden and irresistible 
velocity, the crisis of his destiny. 



A TALE. 103 

V 

When the play was over, he stood 
for some moments in the deserted streets. 
It was a beautiful moonlight night, and he 
saw near him a figure, whose shadow, pro- 
jected half across the street, (there were 
no flagged ways then, chains and posts 
were the only defence of the foot-passen- 
ger), appeared to him of gigantic magni- 
tude. He had been so long accustomed 
to contend with these phantoms of the 
imagination, that he took a kind of stub- 
born delight in subduing them. He walk- 
ed up to the object, and observing the 
shadow only was magnified, and the figure 
was the ordinary height of man, he ap- 
proached it, and discovered the very ob- 
ject of his search, — the man whom he had 
seen for a moment in Valentia, and, after 
a search of four years, recognised at the 
theatre. ***** 
# # # % *- # 

" You were in quest of me ?" — " I 
was." " Have you any thing to inquire 
of me ?"— « Much," " Speak, then."— 



104 MELMOTH : 

u This is no place." " No place ! poor 
wretch, I am independent of time and 
place. Speak, if you have any thing to 
ask or to learn ?" — " I have many things 
to ask, but nothing to learn, I hope, from 
you." " You deceive yourself, but you 
will be undeceived when next we meet." 
— " And when shall that be ?" said Stan- 
ton, grasping his arm ; " name your hour 
and your place." " The hour shall be 
mid-day," answered the stranger, with a 
horrid and unintelligible smile ; " and the 
place shall be the bare walls of a mad- 
house, where you shall rise rattling in 
your chains, and rustling from your straw, 
to greet me, — yet still you shall have the 
curse of sanity, and of memory. My 
voice shall ring in your ears till then, and 
the glance of these eyes shall be reflected 
from every object, animate or inanimate, 
till you behold them again." — " Is it under 
circumstances so horrible we are to meet 
again ?" said Stanton, shrinking under the 



A TALI?. 105 

full-lighted blaze of those demon eyes. 
" I never," said the stranger, in an em- 
phatic tone,—" I never desert my friends 
in misfortune. When they are plunged 
in the lowest abyss of human calamity, 

they are sure to be visited by me." * 

# # # % 

The narrative, when Melmoth was a- 
gain able to trace its continuation, describ- 
ed Stanton, some years after, plunged in a 
state the most deplorable. 

tie had been always reckoned of a sin- 
gular turn of mind, and the belief of this, 
aggravated by his constant talk of Mel- 
moth, his wild pursuit of him, his strange 
behaviour at the theatre, and his dwelling 
on the various particulars of their extra- 
ordinary meetings, with all the intensity 
of the deepest conviction, (while he never 
could impress them on any one's convic- 
tion but his own), suggested to some pru- 
dent people the idea that he was deranged. 
Their malignity probably took part with 

e 2 



106 MELMOTH 5 

their prudence. The selfish Frenchman * 
says, we feel a pleasure even in the mis- 
fortunes of our friends, — a plus forte in 
those of our enemies ; and as every one is 
an enemy to a man of genius of course, 
the report of Stanton's malady was propa- 
gated with infernal and successful indus- 
try. Stanton's next relative, a needy un- 
principled man, watched the report in its 
circulation, and saw the snares closing 
round his victim. He waited on him one 
morning, accompanied by a person of a 
grave, though somewhat repulsive appear- 
ance. Stanton was as usual abstracted 
and restless, and, after a few moments 
conversation, he proposed a drive a few 
miles out of London, which he said would 
revive and refresh him. Stanton objected, 
on account of the difficulty of getting a 
hackney coach, (for it is singular that at 
this period the number of private equi- 
pages, though infinitely fewer than they 

* Rochefoucault. 



A TALE. 10 



w 



are now, exceeded the number of hired 
ones), and proposed going by water. This, 
however, did not suit the kinsman's views ; 
and, after pretending to send for a car- 
riage, (which was in waiting at the end of 
the street), Stanton and his companions 
entered it, and drove about two miles out 
of London. 

The carriage then stopped. " Come, 
Cousin," said the younger Stanton, — 
il come and view a purchase I have made." 
Stanton absently alighted, and followed 
him across a small paved court ; the other 
person followed. " In troth, Cousin," said 
Stanton, " your choice appears not to have 
been discreetly made ; your house has 
something of a gloomy aspect." — " Hold 
you content, Cousin," replied the other ; 
u I shall take order that you like it better, 
when you have been some time a dweller 
therein." Some attendants of a mean ap- 
pearance, and with most suspicious visages, 
awaited them on their entrance, and they 
ascended a narrow staircase, which led to 



108 MELMOTH : 

a room meanly furnished. " Wait here," 
said the kinsman, to the man who accom- 
panied them, " till I go for company to 
divertise my cousin in his loneliness." They 
were left alone. Stanton took no notice 
of his companion, but as usual seized the 
first book near him, and began to read. It 
was a volume in manuscript, — they were 
then much more common than now. 

The first lines struck him as indicating 
insanity in the writer. It was a wild pro- 
posal (written apparently after the great 
fire of London) to rebuild it with stone, 
and attempting to prove, on a calculation 
wild, false, and yet sometimes plausible, 
that this could be done out of the colossal 
fragments of Stonehenge, which the writer 
proposed to remove for that purpose. 
Subjoined were several grotesque drawings 
of engines designed to remove those mas- 
sive blocks, and in a corner of the page 
was a note, — " I would have drawn these 
more accurately, but was not allowed a 
knife to mend my pen." 



A TALE. 109 

The next was entitled, " A modest pro- 
posal for the spreading of Christianity in 
foreign pans, whereby it is hoped its en- 
tertainment will become general all over 
the world." — This modest proposal was, to 
convert the Turkish ambassadors, (who 
had been in London a few years before), 
by offering them their choice of being 
strangled on the spot, or becoming Chris- 
tians. Of course the writer reckoned on 
their embracing the easier alternative, but 
even this was to be clogged with a heavy 
condition, — namely, that they must be 
bound before a magistrate to convert 
twenty mussulmans a day, on their return 
to Turkey. The rest of the pamphlet 
was reasoned very much in the conclusive 
style of Captain Bobadil, — these twenty 
will convert twenty more a piece, and 
these two hundred converts, converting 
their due number in the same time, all 
Turkey would be converted before the 
Grand Signior knew where he was. Then 
comes the coup d'eclat, — one fine morn- 



110 MELMOTH : 

ing, every minaret in Constantinople was 
to ring out with bells, instead of the cry 
of the Muezzins ; and the Imaum, coming 
out to see what was the matter, was to be 
encountered by the Archbishop of Can- 
terbury, in pontificalibus, performing Ca- 
thedral service in the church of St Sophia, 
which was to finish the business. Here 
an objection appeared to arise, which the 
ingenuity of the writer had anticipated. — 
" It may be redargued," saith he, w by 
those who have more spleen than brain, 
that forasmuch as the Archbishop preach- 
eth in English, he will not thereby much 
edify the Turkish folk, who do altogether 
hold in a vain gabble of their own." But 
this (to use his own language) he " evites," 
by judiciously observing, that where ser- 
vice was performed in an unknown 
tongue, the devotion of the people was 
always observed to be much increased 
thereby; as, for instance, in the church 
of Rome, — that St Augustine, with his 
monks, advanced to meet King Ethelbert 



A TALE. Ill 

singing litanies, (in a language his majes- 
ty could not posssibly have understood), 
and converted him and his whole court on 

the spot ; — that the sybilline books 

# # # # * * * 

Cum multis aliis. 

Between the pages were cut most ex- 
quisitely in paper the liknesses of some of 
these Turkish ambassadors; the hair of 
the beards, in particular, was feathered 
with a delicacy of touch that seemed the 
work of fairy fingers, — but the pages 
ended with a complaint of the operator, 
that his scissars had been taken from him. 
However, he consoled himself and the 
reader with the assurance, that he would 
that night catch a moon-beam as it enter- 
ed through the grating, and, when he had 
whetted it on the iron knobs of his door, 
would do wonders with it. In the next 
page was found a melancholy proof of 
powerful but prostrated intellect. It con- 
tained some insane lines, ascribed to Lee 
the dramatic poet, commencing, 



11£ melmoth: 

" O that my lungs could bleat like buttered pease/' &e. 

There is no proof whatever that these 
miserable lines were really written by Lee, 
except that the measure is the fashionable 
quatrain of the period. It is singular that 
Stanton read on without suspicion of his 
own danger, quite absorbed in the album 
of a mad-house, without ever reflecting on 
the place where he was, and which such 
compositions too manifestly designated. 

It was after a long interval that he look- 
ed round, and perceived that his compa- 
nion was gone. Bells were unusual then. 
He proceeded to the door, — it was fasten- 
ed. He called aloud, — his voice was echo- 
ed in a moment by many others, but in 
tones so wild and discordant, that he de- 
sisted in involuntary terror. As the day 
advanced, and no one approached, he tried 
the window, and then perceived for the 
first time it was grated. It looked out on 
the narrow flagged yard, in which no hu- 
man being was; and if there had, from 



A TALE. 113 

such a being no human feeling could have 
been extracted. 

Sickening with unspeakable horror, he 
sunk rather than sat down beside the mi- 
serable window, and " wished for day." 
# # # # 

At midnight he started from a doze, half 
a swoon, half a sleep, which probably tlje 
hardness of his seat, and of the deal table 
on which he leaned, had not contributed 
to prolong. 

He was in complete darkness ; the hor- 
ror of his situation struck him at once 3 
and for a moment he was indeed almost 
qualified for an inmate of that dreadful 
mansion. He felt his way to the door, 
shook it with desperate strength, and ut- 
tered the most frightful cries, mixed with 
expostulations and commands. His cries 
were in a moment echoed by a hundred 
voices. In maniacs there is a peculiar 
malignity, accompanied by an extraordi- 
nary acuteness of some of the senses, par- 
ticularly in distinguishing the voice of a 



114 MELMOTH : 

stranger. The cries that he heard on every 
side seemed like a wild and infernal veil of 
joy, that their mansion of misery had ob- 
tained another tenant. 

He paused, exhausted, — a quick and 
thundering step was heard in the passage. 
The door was opened, and a man of savage 
appearance stood at the entrance, — two 
more were seen indistinctly in the passage. 
— " Release me, villain !" " Stop, my fine 
fellow, what's all this noise for ?" " Where 
am I?" " Where you ought to be." 
" Will you dare to detain me ?" " Yes, 
and a little more than thafcf' answered the 
ruffian, applying a loaded horse-whip to 
his back and shoulders, till the patient 
soon fell to the ground convulsed with 
rage and pain. " Nov/ you see you are 
where you ought to be," repeated the ruf- 
fian, brandishing the horse-whip over him, 
" and now take the advice of a friend, 
and make no more noise. The lads are 
ready for you with the darbies, and they'll 
clink them on in the crack of this whip, 



A TALE. 115 

unless you prefer another touch of it first." 
They then were advancing into the room 
as he spoke, with fetters in their hands, 
(strait waistcoats being then little known 
or used), and shewed, by their frightful 
countenances and gestures, no unwilling- 
ness to apply them. Their harsh rattle on 
the stone pavement made Stanton's blood 
run cold; the effect, however, was use- 
ful. He had the presence of mind to 
acknowledge his (supposed) miserable con- 
dition, to supplicate the forbearance of the 
ruthless keeper, and promise complete sub- 
mission to his orders. This pacified the 
ruffian, and he retired. 

Stanton collected all his resolution to 
encounter the horrible night ; he saw ail 
that was before him, and summoned him- 
self to meet it. After much agitated de- 
liberation, he conceived it best to continue 
the same appearance of submission and 
tranquillity, hoping that thus he might in 
time either propitiate the wretches in 
whose hands he was, or, by his appare 



116 MELMOTH: 

inoffensiveness, procure such opportuni- 
ties of indulgence, as might perhaps ulti- 
mately facilitate his escape. He therefore 
determined to conduct himself with the 
utmost tranquillity, and never to let his 
voice be heard in the house ; and he laid 
down several other resolutions with a de- 
gree of prudence which he already shud- 
dered to think might be the cunning of 
incipient madness, or the beginning result 
of the horrid habits of the place. 

These resolutions were put to desperate 
trial that very night. Just next to Stan- 
ton's apartment were lodged two most un- 
congenial neighbours. One of them was 
a puritanical weaver, who had been driven 
mad by a single sermon from the celebrat- 
ed Hugh Peters, and was sent to the 
mad-house as full of election and reproba- 
tion as he could hold, — and fuller. He 
regularly repeated over the five points 
while day-light lasted, and imagined him- 
self preaching in a conventicle with dis- 
tinguished success; towards twilight his 



A TALE. 117 

visions were more gloomy, and at mid- 
night his blasphemies became horrible. In 
the opposite cell was lodged a loyalist 
tailor, who had been ruined by giving 
credit to the cavaliers and their ladies, — 
(for at this time, and much later, down to 
the reign of Anne, tailors were employed 
by females even to make and Jit on their 
stays\ — who had run mad with drink and 
loyalty on the burning of the Rump, and 
ever since had made the cells of the mad- 
house echo with fragments of the ill-fated 
Colonel Lovelace's songs, scraps from 
Cowley's " Cutter of Coleman street," and 
some curious specimens from Mrs Aphra 
Bella's plays, where the cavaliers are deno- 
minated the heroicks, and Lady Lambert 
and Lady Desborough represented as go- 
ing to meeting, their large Bibles carried 
before them by their pages, and falling in 
love with two banished cavaliers by the 
way. — " Tabitha, Tabitha/' cried a voice 
half in exultation and half in derision ; 
" thou shalt go with thy hair curled, and 



118 melmoth: 

tfey breasts naked ;" — and then added in 
an affected voice, — " I could dance the 
Canaries once, spouse." This never failed 
to rouse the feelings, or rather operate on 
the instincts of the puritanic weaver, who 
immediately answered, " Colonel Harrison 
shall come out of the west, riding on a 
sky-coloured mule, which signifies instruc- 
tion *." " Ye lie, ye round-head son of a 
b h," roared the cavalier tailor, " Co- 
lonel Harrison will be damned before he 
ever mounts a sky-coloured mule ;" and 
he concluded this pithy sentence with 
fragments of anti-Oliverian songs. 

iC And may I live to see 
Old Noll upon a tree, 
And many such as he ; 
Confound him, confound him, 
Diseases all around him." 

" Ye are honest gentlemen, I can play 
many tunes," squeaked a poor mad loyalist 

* Vide Cutter of Coleman street. 



A TALE. 119 

fiddler, who had been accustomed to play 
in the taverns to the cavalier party, and 
just remembered the words of a similar 
minstrel playing for Colonel Blunt in the 
committee. " Then play me the air to 
" Rebellion is breaking up house," ex- 
claimed the tailor, dancing wildly about 
his cell (as far as his chains allowed him) 
to an imaginary measure. The weaver 
could contain no longer. t( How long, 
Lord, how long," he exclaimed, " shall 
thine enemies insult thy sanctuary, in 
which I have been placed an anointed 
teacher ? even here, where I am placed to 
preach to the souls in prison ? — Open the 
flood-gates of thy power, and though thy 
waves and storms go over me, let me tes- 
tify in the midst of them, even as he who 
spreadeth forth his hands to swim may 
raise one of them to warn his companion 
that he is about to sink. — Sister Ruth, 
why dost thou uncover thy bosom to dis- 
cover my frailty ? — Lord, let thine arm of 
power be with us as it was w r hen thou 



120 MELMOTH J 

brakest the shield, the sword, and the 
battle, — when thy foot was dipped in the 
blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of 
thy dogs was red through the same. — Dip 
all thy garments in blood, and let me 
weave thee fresh when thou art stained. — 
When shall thy saints tread the wine- 
press of thy wrath ? Blood ! blood ! the 
saints call for it, earth gapes to swallow it, 
hell thirsts for it ! — Sister Ruth, I pray 
thee, conceal thy bosom, and be not as 
the vain women of this generation. — Oh 
for a day like that, a day of the Lord of 
hosts, when the towers fell ! — Spare me in 
the battle, for I am not a mighty man of 
war ; leave me in the rear of the host, to 
curse, with the curse of Meroz, those who 
come not to the help of the Lord against 
the mighty, — even to curse this malignant 
tailor, — yea, curse him bitterly. — Lord, I 
am in the tents of Kedar, my feet stumble 
on the dark mountains, — I fall, — I fall !" — 
And the poor wretch, exhausted by his 
delirious agonies, fell, and grovelled for 



A TALE. 121 

some time in his straw. " Oh ! I have had 
a grievous fall, — Sister Ruth, — Oh Sister 
Ruth ! — Rejoice not against me, Oh mine 
enemy ! though I fall, I shall rise again." 
Whatever satisfaction Sister Ruth might 
have derived from this assurance, if she 
could have heard it, was enjoyed tenfold 
by the weaver, whose amorous reminiscen- 
ces were in a moment exchanged for war- 
like ones, borrowed from a wretched and 
disarranged mass of intellectual rubbish. 
" The Lord is a man of war," he shouted. 
— " Look to Marston Moor ! — Look to the 
city, the proud city, full of pride and sin ! 
— Look to the waves of the Severn, as 
red with blood as the waves of the Red 
Sea! — There were the hoofs broken by 
means of the prancings, the prancings of 
the mighty ones. — Then, Lord, was thy 
triumph, and the triumph of thy saints, 
to bind their kings in chains, and their 
nobles in links of iron." The malignant 
tailor burst out in his turn : " Thank the 

VOL. I. F 



122 MELMOTH : 

false Scots, and their solemn league and 
covenant, and Carisbrook Castle, for that, 
ye crop-eared Puritan," he yelled. " If it 
had not been for them, I would have 
taken measure of the king for a velvet 
cloak as high as the Tower of London, 
and one flirt of its folds would have knock- 
ed the " copper nose" into the Thames, 
and sent it a-drift to Hell." " Ye lie, in 
your teeth," echoed the weaver; " and I will 
prove it unarmed, with my shuttle against 
your needle, and smite you to the earth 
thereafter, as David smote Goliah. It was 
the man's (such was the indecent language 
in which Charles the First was spoken of 
by the Puritans) — it was the man's carnal, 
self-seeking, world-loving, prelatical hier- 
archy, that drove the godly to seek the 
sweet word in season from their own 
pastors, who righteously abominated the 
Popish garniture of lawn-sleeves, lewd 
organs, and steeple houses. Sister Ruth, 
tempt me not with that calf's head, it is 



A TALE. 123 

all streaming with blood ; — drop it, I be- 
seech thee, sister, it is unmeet in a wo- 
man's hand, though the brethren drink of 
it. — Woe be unto thee, gain say er, dost 
thou not see how flames envelope the ac- 
cursed city under his Arminian and Po- 
pish* son ? — London is on fire ! — on fire !" 
he yelled ; " and the brands are lit by 
the half-papist, whole-arminian, all-damn- 
ed people thereof. — Fire ! — fire !" The voice 
in which he shrieked out the last words 
was powerfully horrible, but it was like 
the moan of an infant, compared to the 
voice which took up and re-echoed the 
cry, in a tone that made the building 
shake. It was the voice of a maniac, who 
had lost her husband, children, subsistence, 
and finally her reason, in the dreadful fire 
of London. The cry of fire never failed 
to operate with terrible punctuality on her 
associations. She had been in a disturbed 
sleep, and now started from it as suddenly 
as on that dreadful night. It was Satur- 



124 MELMOTH: 

day night, too, and she was always ob- 
served to be particularly violent on that 
night, — it w r as the terrible weekly festival 
of insanity with her. She was awake, and 
busy in a moment escaping from the 
flames ; and she dramatized the whole 
scene with such hideous fidelity, that 
Stanton's resolution was far more in dan- 
ger from her than from the battle between 
his neighbours Testimony and Hothead. 
She began exclaiming she was suffocated 
by the smoke ; then she sprung from her 
bed, calling for a light, and appeared to 
be struck by the sudden glare that burst 
through her casement. — " The last day," she 
shrieked, " The last day ! The very heavens 
are on fire !" — " That will not come till 
the Man of Sin be first destroyed," cried 
the weaver; " thou ravest of light and 
fire, and yet thou art in utter darkness. — 
I pity thee, poor mad soul, I pity thee !" 
The maniac never heeded him ; she ap- 
peared to be scrambling up a stair-case to 



A TALE. 125 

her children's room. She exclaimed she 
was scorched, singed, suffocated ; her cou- 
rage appeared to fail, and she retreated. 
" But my children are there !" she cried 
in a voice of unspeakable agony, as she 
seemed to make another effort ; " here I 
am — here I am come to save you. — Oh 
God ! They are all blazing ! — Take this 
arm — no, not that, it is scorched and dis- 
abled — well, any arm — take hold of my 
clothes — no, they are blazing too !— Well, 
take me all on fire as I am ! — And their 
hair, how it hisses ! — Water, one drop of 
water for my youngest — he is but an in- 
fant — for my youngest, and let me burn !" 
She paused in horrid silence, to watch the 
fall of a blazing rafter that was about to 
shatter the stair-case on which she stood. 
— " The roof has fallen on my head !" she 
exclaimed. " The earth is weak, and all 
the inhabitants thereof," chaunted the 
weaver ; li I bear up the pillars of it." 
The maniac marked the destruction of 



126 MELMOTH : 

the spot where she thought she stood by 
one desperate bound, accompanied by a 
wild shriek, and then calmly gazed on her 
infants as they rolled over the scorching 
fragments, and sunk into the abyss of fire 
below. " *There they go, — one — two — 
three — all !" and her voice sunk into low 
ttiutterings, and her convulsions into faint, 
cold shudderings, like the sobbings of a 
spent storm, as she imagined herself to 
t( stand in safety and despair," amid the 
thousand houseless wretches assembled in 
the suburbs of London on the dread- 
ful nights after the fire, without food, 
roof, or raiment, all gazing on the burn- 
ing ruins of their dwellings and their 
property. She seemed to listen to their 
complaints, and even repeated some of 
them very afFectingly, but invariably an- 
swered them with the same words, " But 
I have lost all my children — allr It was 
remarkable, that when this sufferer began 
to rave, all the others became silent. The 



A TALE. 127 

cry of nature hushed every other cry, — 
she was the only patient in the house who 
was not mad from politics, religion, ebriety, 
or some perverted passion ; and terrifying 
as the out-break of her frenzy always was, 
Stanton used to await it as a kind of relief 
from the dissonant, melancholy, and ludi- 
crous ravings of the others. 

But the utmost efforts of his resolution 
began to sink under the continued horrors 
of the place. The impression on his senses- 
began to defy the power of reason to resist 
them. He could not shut out these fright- 
ful cries nightly repeated, nor the frightful 
sound of the whip employed to still them. 
Hope began to fail him, as he observed, 
that the submissive tranquillity (which he 
had imagined, by obtaining increased in- 
dulgence, might contribute to his escape, 
or perhaps convince the keeper of his 
sanity) was interpreted by the callous ruf- 
fian, who was acquainted only with the 
varieties of madness, as a more refined 



128 MELMOTH : 

species of that cunning which he was well 
accustomed to watch and baffle. 

On his first discovery of his situation, 
he had determined to take the utmost care 
of his health and intellect that the place 
allowed, as the sole basis of his hope of 
deliverance. But as that hope declined, 
he neglected the means of realizing it. 
He had at first risen early, walked inces- 
santly about his cell, and availed himself 
of every opportunity of being in the open 
air. He took the strictest care of his per- 
son in point of cleanliness, and with or 
without appetite, regularly forced down 
his miserable meals ; and all these efforts 
were even pleasant, as long as hope 
prompted them. But now he began to 
relax them all. He passed half the day 
in his wretched bed, in which he frequent- 
ly took his meals, declined shaving or 
changing his linen, and, when the sun 
shone into his cell, turned from it on his 
straw with a sigh of heart-broken despon- 



A TALE. 129 

dency. Formerly, when the air breath d 
through his grating, he used to ,ay, 
" Blessed air of heaven, I shall breathe 
you once more in freedom ! — Reserve all 
your freshness for that delicious evening 
when I shall inhale you, and be as free as 
you myself." Now when he felt it, he 
sighed and said nothing. The twitter of 
the sparrows, the pattering of rain, or the 
moan of the wind, sounds that he used to 
sit up in his bed to catch with delight, as 
reminding him of nature, were now un- 
heeded. 

He began at times to listen with sullen 
and horrible pleasure to the cries of his 
miserable companions. He became squa- 
lid, listless, torpid, and disgusting in his 
appearance. # # * 

* * # # 

It was one of those dismal nights, that, 
as he tossed on his loathsome bed, — more 
loathsome from the impossibility to quit it 
without feeling more " unrest, 1 ' — he per- 
ceived the miserable light that burned in 

f 2 



130 MELMOTH : 

the hearth was obscured by the interven- 
tion of some dark object. He turned 
feebly towards the light, without cu- 
riosity, without excitement, but with a 
wish to diversify the monotony of his mi- 
sery, by observing the slightest change 
made even accidentally in the dusky at- 
mosphere of his cell. Between him and 
the light stood the figure of Melmoth, 
just as he had seen him from the first ; the 
figure was the same ; the expression of the 
face was the same, — cold, stony, and rigid ; 
the eyes, with their infernal and dazzling 
lustre, were still the same. 

Stanton's ruling passion rushed on his 
soul ; he felt this apparition like a sum- 
mons to a high and fearful encounter. He 
heard his heart beat audibly, and could 
have exclaimed with Lee's unfortunate he- 
roine, — " It pants as cowards do before 
a battle ; Oh the great march has sound- 
ed !" 

Melmoth approached him with that 
frightful calmness that mocks the terror 



A TALE. 131 

it excites. " My prophecy has been ful- 
filled ;— you rise to meet me rattling from 
your chains, and rustling from your straw 
— am I not a true prophet ?" Stanton 
was silent. " Is not your situation very 
miserable?" — Still Stanton was silent; for 
he was beginning to believe this an il- 
lusion of madness. He thought to him- 
self, " How could he have gained en- 
trance here?"- — " Would you not wish 
to be delivered from it ?" Stanton toss- 
ed on his straw, and its rustling seem- 
ed to answer the question. " I have the 
power to deliver you from it." Melmoth 
spoke very slowly and very softly, and the 
melodious smoothness of his voice made a 
frightful contrast to the stony rigour of his 
features, and the fiend-like brilliancy of his 
eyes. " Who are you, and whence come 
you ?" said Stanton, in a tone that was 
meant to be interrogatory and imperative, 
but which, from his habits of squalid de- 
bility, was at once feeble and querulous. 
His intellects had become affected by the 
gloom of his miserable habitation, as the 



132 MELMOTH : 

wretched inmate of a similar mansion, 
when produced before a medical examiner, 
was reported to be a complete Albinos. — 
" His skin was bleached, his eyes turned 
white ; he could not bear the light ; and, 
when exposed to it, he turned away with 
a mixture of weakness and restlessness, 
more like the writhings of a sick infant 
than the struggles of a man." 

Such was Stanton's situation ; he was 
enfeebled now, and the power of the ene- 
my seemed without a possibility of oppo- 
sition from either his intellectual or corpo- 
real powers. * * 

***** 

Of all their horrible dialogue, only these 
words were legible in the manuscript, 
" You know me now." — " 1 always knew 
you." — u That is false ; you imagined you 
did, and that has been the cause of all the 

wild * 

* * * * * 

of the * * # 

* * of your finally being lodged 
in this mansion of misery, where only I 



A TALE. 133 

would seek, where only I can succour you." 

" You, demon !" " Demon ! Harsh 

words ! — Was it a demon or a human 
being placed you here? — Listen to me, 
Stanton ; nay, wrap not yourself in that 
miserable blanket, — that cannot shut out 
my words. Believe me, were you folded 
in thunder-clouds, you must hear one I 
Stanton, think of your misery. These 
bare walls — what do they present to the 
intellect or to the senses ?— White- wash, 
diversified with the scrawls of charcoal or 
red chalk, that your happy predecessors 
have left for you to trace over. You have 
a taste for drawing, — I trust it will im- 
prove. And here's a grating, through 
which the sun squints on you like a step- 
dame, and the breeze blows, as if it meant 
to tantalize yon with a sigh from that 
sweet mouth, whose kiss you must never 
enjoy. And where's your library, — intel- 
lectual man, — travelled man ?" he repeated 
in a tone of bitter derision ; " where be 
your companions, your peaked men of 



134 MELMOTH : 

countries, as your favourite Shakespeare 
has it? You must be content with the 
spider and the rat, to crawl and scratch 
round your flock-bed ! I have known pri- 
soners in the Bastile to feed them for com- 
panions, — why don't you begin your task? 
1 have known a spider to descend at the 
tap of a finger, and a rat to come forth 
when the daily meal was brought, to share 
it with his fellow-prisoner ! — How delight- 
ful to have vermin for your guests ! Aye, 
and when the feast fails them, they make 
a meal of their entertainer ! — You shudder 
— Are you, then, the first prisoner who 
has been devoured alive by the vermin 
that infested his cell? — Delightful ban- 
quet, not " where you eat, but where 
you are eaten !" Your guests, however, 
will give you one token of repentance 
while they feed ; there will be gnash- 
ing of teeth, and you shall hear it, and 

feel it too perchance ! And then for 

meals — Oh you are daintily off! — The 
soup that the cat has lapp«d ; and (as her 



A TALE. 135 

progeny has probably contributed to the 

hell-broth) why not ? Then your 

hours of solitude, deliciously diversified 
by the yell of famine, the howl of mad- 
ness, the crash of whips, and the broken- 
hearted sob of those who, like you, are 
supposed, or driven mad by the crimes of 
others ! — Stanton, do you imagine your 
reason can possibly hold out amid such 
scenes? — Supposing your reason was un- 
impaired, your health not destroyed, — 
suppose all this, which is, after all, more 
than fair supposition can grant, guess the 
effect of the continuance of these scenes 
on your senses alone. A time will come, 
and soon, when, from mere habit, you will 
echo the scream of every delirious wretch 
that harbours near you ; then you will 
pause, clasp your hands on your throbbing 
head, and listen with horrible anxiety 
whether the scream proceeded from you or 
them. The time will come, when, from 
the want of occupation, the listless and 
horrible vacancy of your hours, you will 



136 MELMOTH : 

feel as anxious to hear those shrieks, as 
you were at first terrified to hear them, — ■ 
when you will watch for the ravings of your 
next neighbour, as you would for a scene 
on the stage. All humanity will be extin- 
guished in you. The ravings of these 
wretches will become at once your sport 
and your torture. You will watch for the 
sounds, to mock them with the grimaces 
and bellowings of a fiend. The mind has 
a power of accommodating itself to its si- 
tuation, that you will experience in its 
most frightful and deplorable efficacy. 
Then comes the dreadful doubt of one's 
own sanity, the terrible announcer that 
that doubt will soon become fear, and that 
fear certainty. Perhaps (still more dread- 
ful) the fear will at last become a hope, — 
shut out from society, watched by a brutal 
keeper, writhing with all the impotent 
agony of an incarcerated mind, without 
communication and without sympathy, un- 
able to exchange ideas but with those 
whose ideas are only the hideous spectres 



A TALE. 137 

of departed intellect, or even to hear the 
welcome sound of the human voice, except 
to mistake it for the howl of a fiend, and 
stop the ear desecrated by its intrusion, — 
then at last your fear will become a more 
fearful hope ; you will wish to become one 
of them, to escape the agony of conscious- 
ness. As those who have long leaned over 
a precipice, have at last felt a desire to 
plunge below, to relieve the intolerable 
temptation of their giddiness *, you will 
hear them laugh amid their wildest pa- 
roxysms ; you will say, ' Doubtless those 
wretches have some consolation, but I have 
none ; my sanity is my greatest curse in 
this abode of horrors. They greedily de- 
vour their miserable meals, while I loathe 
mine. They sleep sometimes soundly, 
while my sleep is — worse than their wak- 

* A fact, related to me by a person who was near 
committing suicide in a similar situation, to escape 
what he called " the excruciating torture of giddi* 
ness.'- 



138 MELMOTH: 

ing. They are revived every morning by 
some delicious illusion of cunning mad- 
ness, soothing them with the hope of escap- 
ing, baffling or tormenting their keeper ; 
my sanity precludes all such hope. / 
know I never can escape^ and the preser- 
vation of my faculties is only an aggrava- 
tion of my sufferings. I have all their 
miseries, — I have none of their consola- 
tions. They laugh,—! hear them ; would 
I could laugh like them.' You will try, 
and the very effort will be an invocation 

mr 

to the demon of insanity to come and take 
full possession of you from that moment 
for ever. 

(There were other details, both of the 
menaces and temptations employed by 
Melmoth, which are too horrible for in- 
sertion. One of them may serve for an 
instance). 

" You think that the intellectual power 
is something distinct from the vitality of 
the soul, or, in other words, that if even 
your reason should be destroyed, (which it 



A TALE. 139 

nearly is), your soul might yet enjoy 
beatitude in the full exercise of its enlarged 
and exalted faculties, and all the clouds 
which obscured them be dispelled by the 
Sun of Righteousness, in whose beams 
you hope to bask for ever and ever. Now, 
without going into any metaphysical sub- 
tleties about the distinction between mind 
and soul, experience must teach you, that 
there can be no crime into which madmen 
would not, and do not precipitate them- 
selves ; mischief is their occupation, ma- 
lice their habit, murder their sport, and 
blasphemy their delight. Whether a soul 
in this state can be in a hopeful one, it is 
for you to judge; but it seems to me, that 
with the loss of reason, (and reason cannot 
long be retained in this place), you lose 
also the hope of immortality. — Listen," 
said the tempter, pausing, rt listen to the 
wretch who is raving near you, and whose 
blasphemies might make a demon start. 
— He was once an eminent puritanical 
preacher. Half the day he imagines him- 



140 MELMOTH : 

self in a pulpit, denouncing damnation 
against Papists, Arminians, and even Sub- 
lapsarians, (he being a Supra-lapsarian 
himself). He foams, he writhes, he gnash- 
es his teeth ; you would imagine him in 
the hell he was painting, and that the fire 
and brimstone he is so lavish of, were ac- 
tually exhaling from his jaws. At night 
his creed retaliates on Mm; he believes 
himself one of the reprobates he has been 
all clay denouncing, and curses God for 
the very decree he has all day been glori- 
fying Him for. 

He, whom he has for twelve hours been 
vociferating " is the loveliest among ten 
thousand," becomes the object of demoniac 
hostility and execration. He grapples 
with the iron posts of his bed, and says he 
is rooting out the cross from the very 
foundations of Calvary ; and it is remark- 
able, that in proportion as his morning 
exercises are intense, vivid, and eloquent, 
his nightly blasphemies are outrageous and 
horrible. — Hark ! Now he believes himself 



A TALE. 141 

a demon ; listen to his diabolical eloquence 
of horror !" 

Stanton listened, and shuddered * 

* * * * * 

* Escape — escape for your life," cried the 
tempter ; " break forth into life, liberty, 
and sanity. Your social happiness, your 
intellectual powers, your immortal inte- 
rests, perhaps, depend on the choice of 
this moment. — There is the door, and the 
key is my hand. Choose — choose !" — " And 
how comes the key in your hand ? and 
what is the condition of my liberation ?" 

said Stanton. * 

* * * * 

The explanation occupied several pages, 
which, to the torture of young Melmoth, 
were wholly illegible. It seemed, how- 
ever, to have been rejected by Stanton 
with the utmost rage and horror, for Mel- 
moth at last made out, — " Begone, mon- 
ster, demon ! begone to your native 

place. Even this mansion of horror 
trembles to contain you ; its walls sweat, 



142 MELMOTH : 

and its floors quiver, while you tread 

them." * * 

* * * * 

The conclusion of this extraordinary 
manuscript was in such a state, that, in 
fifteen mouldy and crumbling pages, Mel- 
moth could hardly make out that number 
of lines. No antiquarian, unfolding with 
trembling hand the calcined leaves of an 
Herculaneum manuscript, and hoping to 
discover some lost lines of the JEneis in 
Virgil's own autograph, or at least some 
unutterable abomination of Petronius or 
Martial, happily elucidatory of the mys- 
teries of the Spintrise, or the orgies of the 
Phallic worshippers, ever pored with more 
luckless diligence, or shook a head of more 
hopeless despondency over his task. He 
could but just make out what tended ra- 
ther to excite than assuage that feverish 
thirst of curiosity which was consuming 
his inmost soul. The manuscript told no 
more of Melmoth, but mentioned that 
Stanton was finally liberated from his 



A TALE. 148 

confinement, — that his pursuit of Mel- 
moth was incessant and indefatigable, — 
that he himself allowed it to be a species 
of insanity, — that while he acknowledged 
it to be the master-passion, he also felt it 
the master- torment of his life. He again 
visited the Continent, returned to Eng- 
land, — pursued, inquired, traced, bribed, 
but in vain. The being whom he had 
met thrice, under circumstances so extra- 
ordinary, he was fated never to encounter 
again in his life-time. At length, dis- 
covering that he had been born in Ireland, 
he resolved to go there, — went, and found 
his pursuit again fruitless, and his inquiries 
unanswered. The family knew nothing 
of him, or at least what they knew or ima- 
gined, they prudently refused to disclose 
to a stranger, and Stanton departed unsa- 
tisfied. It is remarkable, that he too, as 
appeared from many half-obliterated pages 
of the manuscript, never disclosed to mor- 
tal the particulars of their conversation in 
the mad-house ; and the slightest allusion 



144 MELMOTH : 

to it threw him into fits of rage and gloom 
equally singular and alarming. He left 
the manuscript, however, in the hands of 
the family, possibly deeming, from their 
incuriosity, their apparent indifference to 
their relative, or their obvious inacquaint- 
ance with reading of any kind, manuscript 
or books, his deposit would be safe. He 
seems, in fact, to have acted like men, 
who, in distress at sea, intrust their letters 
and dispatches to a bottle sealed, and com- 
mit it to the waves. The last lines of the 
manuscript that were legible, were suffi- 
ciently extraordinary. 

* * ^ * 

" I have sought him every where. — The 
desire of meeting him once more, is be- 
come as a burning fire within me, — it is 
the necessary condition of my existence. 
I have vainly sought him at last in Ireland, 
of which I find he is a native. — Perhaps 

our final meeting will be in * 

* * * * 

Such was the conclusion of the manu- 



A TALE. 145 

script which Melmoth found in his uncle's 
closet. When he had finished it, he sunk 
down on the table near which he had been 
reading it, his face hid in his folded arms, 
his senses reeling, his mind in a mingled 
state of stupor and excitement. After a 
few moments, he raised himself with an 
involuntary start, and saw the picture 
gazing at him from its canvas. He was 
within ten inches of it as he sat, and the 
proximity appeared increased by the strong 
light that was accidentally thrown on it, 
and its being the only representation of a 
human figure in the room. Melmoth felt 
for a moment as if he were about to re- 
ceive an explanation from its lips. 

He gazed on it in return, — all was 
silent in the house, — they were alone toge- 
ther. The illusion subsided at length ; 
and as the mind rapidly passes to opposite 
extremes, he remembered the injunction 
of his uncle to destroy the portrait. He 
seized it ; — his hand shook at first, but 
the mouldering canvas appeared to as- 

VOL. I. G 



146 MELMOTH : 

sist him in the effort. He tore it from 
the frame with a cry half terrific, half 
triumphant ; — it fell at his feet, and he 
shuddered as it fell. He expected to hear 
some fearful sounds, some unimaginable 
breathings of prophetic horror, follow this 
act of sacrilege, for such he felt it, to tear 
the portrait of his ancestor from his native 
walls. He paused and listened : — " There 
was no voice, nor any that answered ;" — 
but as the wrinkled and torn canvas fell 
to the floor, its undulations gave the por- 
trait the appearance of smiling. Melmoth 
felt horror indescribable at this transient 
and imaginary resuscitation of the figure. 
He caught it up, rushed into the next room, 
tore, cut, and hacked it in every direction, 
and eagerly watched the fragments that 
burned like tinder in the turf-fire which 
had been lit in his room. As Melmoth saw 
the last blaze, he threw himself into bed, 
in hope of a deep and intense sleep. He 
had done what was required of him, and 
felt exhausted both in mind and body; 



A TALE. 147 

but his slumber was not so sound as he 
had hoped for. The sullen light of the 
turf-fire, burning but never blazing, dis- 
turbed him every moment. He turned 
and turned, but still there was the same 
red light glaring on, but not illuminating, 
the dusky furniture of the apartment. 
The wind was high that night, and as the 
creaking door swung on its hinges, every 
noise seemed like the sound of a hand 
struggling with the lock, or of a foot 
pausing on the threshold. But (for Mel- 
moth never could decide) was it in a 
dream or not, that he saw the figure of 
his ancestor appear at the door ? — hesitat- 
ingly as he saw him at first on the night 
of his uncle's death, — saw him enter the 
room, approach his bed, and heard him 
whisper, " You have burned me, then ; 
but those are flames I can survive. — I am 
alive, — I am beside you." Melmoth start- 
ed, sprung from his bed, — it was broad 
day-light. He looked round, — there was 
no human being in the room but himself 



148 MELMOTH : 

He felt a slight pain in the wrist of his 
right arm. He looked at it, it was black 
and blue, as from the recent gripe of a 
strong hand. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Haste with your weapons, cut the shrouds and stay, 
And hew at once the miz en-mast away. 

Falconer. 



jL he following evening Mel moth retired 
early. The restlessness of the preceding 
night inclined him to repose, and the 
gloom of the day left him nothing to wish 
for but its speedy conclusion. It was now 
the latter end of Autumn ; heavy clouds 
had all day been passing laggingly and 
gloomily along the atmosphere, as the 
hours of such a day pass over the human 



150 MELMOTH : 

mind and life. Not a drop of rain fell ; 
the clouds went portentously off, like 
ships of war after reconnoitering a strong 
fort, to return with added strength and 
fury. The threat was soon fulfilled ; the 
evening came on, prematurely darkened 
by clouds that seemed surcharged with a 
deluge. Loud and sudden squalls of wind 
shook the house from time to time, and 
then as suddenly ceased. Towards night 
the storm came on in all its strength ; 
Melmoth's bed was shaken so as to render 
it impossible to sleep. He " liked the 
rocking of the battlements," but by no 
means liked the expected fall of the chim- 
neys, the crashing in of the roof, and the 
splinters of the broken windows that were 
already scattered about his room. He rose 
and went down to the kitchen, where he 
knew a fire was burning, and there the 
terrified servants were all assembled, all 
agreeing, as the blast came roaring down 
the chimney, they never had witnessed 
such a storm, and between the gusts, 



A TALE. 151 

breathing shuddering prayers for those 
who were " out at sea that night." The 
vicinity of Melmoth's house to what sea- 
men call an iron-bound coast, gave a dread- 
ful sincerity to their prayers and their 
fears. 

In a short time, however, Melmoth per- 
ceived that their minds were occupied 
with terrors beside those of the storm. 
The recent death of his uncle, and the 
supposed visit of that extraordinary being 
in whose existence they all firmly believed, 
were connected in their minds inseparably 
with the causes or consequences of this 
tempest, and they whispered their fearful 
suggestions to each other, till the sound 
reached Melmoth's ears at every step that 
he measured across the broken floor of the 
kitchen. Terror is very fond of associa- 
tions ; we love to connect the agitation of 
the elements with the agitated life of man ; 
and never did a blast roar, or a gleam 
of lightning flash, that was not con- 
nected in the imagination of some one, 



152 MELMOTH : 

•with a calamity that was to oe dreaded, 
deprecated, or endured, — with the fate of 
the living, or the destination of the dead. 
The tremendous storm that shook all 
England on the night of Cromwell's death, 
gave the hint to his puritanic chaplains to 
declare, that the Lord had caught him up 
in the whirlwind and chariot of fire, even 
thereafter, as he caught the prophet Eli- 
jah ; while all the cavalier party, putting 
their own construction on the matter, pro- 
claimed their confidence, that the Prince 
of the power of the air was vindicating 
his right, and carrying off the body of his 
victim (whose soul had long been his pur- 
chase) in a tempest, whose wild howl and 
triumphant ravage might have been va- 
riously, and with equal justice, interpret- 
ed by each party as giving testimony to 
their mutual denunciations. Just such 
a party (mutatis mutandis) were collected 
round the bickering fire and rocking chim- 
ney in Melmoth's kitchen. " He is going 
in that blast," said one of the hags, taking 



A TALE. 153 

the pipe from her mouth, and trying vain- 
ly to rekindle it among the embers that 
the storm scattered about like dust ; " he 
is going in that blast." — " He'll come a- 
gain," cried another Sybil, " he'll come 
again, — he's not at rest ! — He roams and 
wails about till something is told that he 
never could tell in his life-time. — G-d save 
us !" she added, howling up the chimney, 
as if addressing the troubled spirit ; " tell 
us what you want, and stop the blast, will 
ye ?" — The wind came like thunder down 
the chimney ; the hag shuddered and re- 
treated. "If it's this you want — and this 
— and this," cried a young female whom 
Melmoth had not noticed before, " take 
them ;" and she eagerly tore the papers 
out of her hair, and flung them into the 
fire. Then Melmoth recollected a ridicu- 
lous story told him the day before of this 
girl, who had had the " bad luck," as she 
called it, to curl her hair with some of 
the old and useless law-papers of the 
family, and who now imagined that they 

G 2 



154 MELMOTH : 

" who kept this dreadful pudder o'er her 
head," were particularly provoked by her 
still retaining about her whatever belong- 
ed to the deceased ; and as she flung the 
fragments of paper into the fire, she cried 

aloud, " There stop for the holy J s' 

sake, and let us have no more about it ! — 
You have what you wanted, and will you 
have done?" The laugh that Melmoth 
could hardly resist, was checked by a sound 
which he heard distinctly amid the storm. 
" Hush — silence ! that was a signal gun ! 
— there is a vessel in distress." They all 
paused and listened. We have already 
mentioned the closeness of Melmoth's a- 
bode to the sea-shore. This had well ac- 
customed its inmates to all the terrors of 
shipwrecked vessels and drowning passen- 
gers. To their honour be it spoken, they 
never heard those sounds but as a claim, a 
piteous, irresistible claim on their huma- 
nity. They knew nothing of the barba- 
rous practice on the English coast, of fas- 
tening a lanthorn to the limbs of a span- 



A TALE. 155 

selled horse, whose plungings were to mis- 
direct the wrecked and sinking wretches, 
in the vain hope that the light they saw 
was a beacon, and thus to double the hor- 
rors of death by the baffled expectation of 
relief. 

The party in the kitchen all watched 
Melmoth's countenance intently, as if its 
expression could have told them " the se- 
crets of the hoary deep." The storm 
ceased for a moment, and there was a deep 
and dreary silence of fearful expectation. 
The sound was heard again, — it could not 
be mistaken. " It is a gun," cried Mel- 
moth ; " there is a vessel in distress !" and 
he hurried out of the kitchen, calling on 
the men to follow him. 

The men partook eagerly of the excite- 
ment of enterprise and danger. A storm 
without doors is, after all, better than a 
storm within ; without we have something 
to struggle with, within we have only to 
suffer ; and the severest storm, by exciting 
the energy of its victim, gives at once a 



156 ~ MELMOTH : 

stimulus to action, and a solace to pride, 
which those must want who sit shudder- 
ing between rocking walls, and almost 
driven to wish they had only to suffer, 
not to fear. 

While the men were in search of a 
hundred coats, boots, and hats of their 
old master, to be sought for in every part 
of the house, — while one was dragging a 
great coat from the window, before which 
it had long hung as a blind, in total default 
of glass or shutters, — another was snatch- 
ing a wig from the jack, where it had been 
suspended for a duster, — and a third was 
battling with a cat and her brood of kit- 
tens for a pair of old boots which she had 
been pleased to make the seat of her ac- 
couchement, — Melmoth had gone up to the 
highest room in the house. The window 
was driven in ; — had there been light, this 
window commanded a view of the sea and 
the coast. He leaned far out of it, and 
listened with fearful and breathless anxiety. 
The night was dark, but far off, his sight, 



A TALE. 157 

sharpened by intense solicitude, descried a 
light at sea. The gust drove him from the 
window for a moment ; at returning the 
next, he saw a faint flash, and then the re- 
port of a gun followed. 

There needed no more ; and in a few 
moments after, Melmoth was on the shore. 
Their way was short, and they walked 
with their utmost speed ; but the violence 
of the storm made their progress very 
slow, and their anxiety made it seem still 
slower. From time to time they said to 
each other, in choaked and breathless ac- 
cents, " Call up the people in those cab- 
bins — there is a light in that house — they 
are all up — no wonder — who could sleep 
in such a night — hold the lanthorn low — 
it is impossible to keep footing on the 
strand." " Another gun !" they exclaimed, 
as the flash faintly broke through the dark- 
ness, and the heavy sound rolled round the 
shore, as if fired over the grave of the suf- 
ferers. " Here's the rock, hold fast, and 
cling together." They scaled it. " Great 



158 MELMOTH : 

God !" cried Melmoth, who was among 
the first, " what a night ! and what a 
spectacle! — Hold up your lanthorns — do 
you hear cries ? — shout to them — tell 
them there is help and hope near them. 
— Stay," he added, " let me scramble up 
that crag — they will hear my voice from 
that." He dashed desperately through 
the water, while the foam of the break- 
ers from a distant rock almost choak- 
ed him, gained the point, and, elated by 
his success, shouted aloud with his utmost 
strength. But his voice, baffled and 
drowned by the tempest, was lost even to 
his own hearing. Its sound was faint and 
querulous, more like the wail of grief, than 
the encouraging cry of hope. At this mo- 
ment, the racking clouds flying rapidly a- 
cross the sky, like the scattered fugitives 
of a routed army, the moon burst forth 
with the sudden and appalling efful- 
gence of lightning. Melmoth caught a 
full view of the vessel, and of her dan- 
ger. She lay beating against a rock, 



A TALE. 159 

over which the breakers clashed their foam 
to the height of thirty feet. She was half 
in the water, a mere hulk, her rigging 
torn to shreds, her main mast cut away, 
and every sea she shipped, Melmoth 
could hear distinctly the dying cries of 
those who were swept away, or perhaps of 
those whose mind and body, alike ex- 
hausted, relaxed their benumbed hold of 
hope and life together, — knew that the next 
shriek that was uttered must be their own 
and their last. There is something so very 
horrible in the sight of human beings pe- 
rishing so near us, that we feel one firm 
step rightly planted, one arm steadily held 
out, might save at least one, — yet feel we 
know not where to fix that step, and 
cannot stretch that arm, that Mel moth's 
senses reeled under the shock, and for 
a moment he echoed the storm with 
yells of actual insanity. By this time 
the country, having been alarmed by the 
news of a vessel going to pieces on the 
shore, had poured down in multitudes; 



160 MELMOTH : 

and those who, from experience or confi- 
dence, or even ignorance, repeated inces- 
santly, " it is impossible to save her, — 
every soul on board must perish," involun- 
tarily quickened their steps as they uttered 
the words, as if they were anxious to be- 
hold the fulfilment of their own prediction, 
while they appeared hurrying to avert it. 

Of one man, in particular, it was ob- 
served, that during their hurried rush to 
the shore, he was, with what breath his 
haste allowed him, assuring the rest every 
moment, " she would be down before they 
could get there," and heard the ejaculations 
of " Christ save us ! don't say that," " No, 
please God, we'll do some good," with a 
laugh almost of triumph. When they ar- 
rived, this man scaled a rock at the risk of 
his life, caught a view of the vessel, point- 
ed out her desperate situation to those be- 
low, and shouted, " Didn't I tell you so? 
wasn't I right?" And as the storm in- 
creased, his voice was still heard, " wasn't 
I right ?" And when the cries of the pe- 



A TALE. 161 

rishing crew were distinctly wafted to 
their ears, he was still heard in the interval 
repeating, " But wasn't I right ?" Singu- 
lar sentiment of pride, that can erect its 
trophies amid the grave. 'Tis in this 
spirit we give advice to those who suffer 
from life, as well as from the elements; 
and when the heart of the victim breaks, 
console ourselves by exclaiming, " Didn't 
I foretell it all? did I not tell you how it 
would be ?" It is remarkable that this 
man lost his life that very night in the 
most deperate and fruitless attempt to save 
the life of one of the crew who was swim- 
ming within six yards of him. The whole 
shore was now crowded with helpless ga- 
zers, every crag and cliff was manned ; it 
seemed like a battle fought at once by sea 
and land, between hope and despair. No 
effectual assistance could be rendered, — 
not a boat could live in that gale, — yet 
still, and to the last, cheers were heard 
from rock to rock, — terrible cheers, that 
announced safety was near and — impossi- 



162 TVIELMOTH : 

sible ; — Ian thorns held aloft in all directions, 
that displayed to the sufferers the shore all 
peopled with life, and the roaring and im- 
passable waves between ; — ropes flung out, 
with loud cries of help and encouragement, 
and caught at by some chilled, nerveless, 
and despairing hand, that only grasped the 
wave, — relaxed its hold, — was tossed once 
over the sinking head,— and then seen no 
more. It was at this moment that Mel- 
moth, starting from his trance of terror, 
and looking round him, saw all, to the 
number of hundreds, anxious, restless, and 
occupied ; and, though obviously in vain, 
the sight cheered his heart. " How much 
good there is in man," he cried, " when it 
is called forth by the sufferings of his fel- 
lows !" He had no leisure or inclination, 
then, to analyse the compound he called 
good, and resolve it into its component 
parts of curiosity, strong excitement, the 
pride of physical strength, or the compara- 
tive consciousness of safety. He had, in- 
deed, no leisure, for just then he descried, 



A TALE. 163 

standing a few yards above him on the 
rock, a figure that shewed neither sympa- 
thy or terror, — uttered no sound,— offered 
no help. Melmoth could hardly keep his 
footing on the slippery and rocking crag 
on which he stood ; the figure, who stood 
still higher, appeared alike unmoved by the 
storm, as by the spectacle. Melmoth's 
surtout, in spite of his efforts to wrap it 
round him, was fluttering in rags, — not a 
thread of the stranger's garments seemed 
ruffled by the blast. But this did not 
strike him so much as his obvious insensi- 
bility to the distress and terror around 
him, and he exclaimed aloud, " Good 
God ! is it possible that any thing bearing 
the human form should stand there with- 
out making an effort, without expressing 
a feeling, for those perishing wretches !" 
A pause ensued, or the blast carried away 
the sound ; but a few moments after, Mel- 
moth distinctly heard the words, " Let 
them perish." He looked up, the figure 
still stood unmoved, the arms folded across 



164 MELMOTH : 

the breast, the foot advanced, and fixed as 
in defiance of the white and climbing spray 
of the wave, and the stern profile caught 
in the glimpses of the stormy and doubtful 
moon-light, seeming to watch the scene 
with an expression formidable, revolting, 
and unnatural. At this moment, at re- 
mendous wave breaking over the deck of 
the hulk, extorted a cry of horror from the 
spectators ; they felt as if they were echo- 
ing that of the victims whose corses were 
in a few moments to be dashed against 
their feet, mangled and lifeless. 

When the cry had ceased, Melmoth 
heard a laugh that chilled his blood. It 
was from the figure that stood above him. 
Like lightning then glanced on his me- 
mory the recollection of that night in 
Spain, when Stanton first encountered that 
extraordinary being, whose charmed life, 
" defying space and time," held such fatal 
influence over his, and when he first re- 
cognised his supposed demoniac character 
by the laugh with which he hailed the 



A TALE. 165 

spectacle of the blasted lovers. The echo 
of that laugh rung in Melmoth's ears ; he 
believed it was indeed that mysterious 
being who was standing so near him. His 
mind, by its late intense and bewildering 
pursuits, at once heated and darkened, 
like the atmosphere under an incumbent 
thunder- cloud, had now no power of in- 
quiry, of conjecture, or of calculation. He 
instantly began to climb the rock, — the 
figure was but a few feet above him, — the 
object of his daily and nightly dreams 
was at last within the reach of his mind 
and his arm, — was almost tangible. Fang 
and Snare * themselves, in all the en- 
thusiasm of professional zeal, never ut- 
tered, " If I but once get him with- 
in my vice," with more eagerness than 
did Melmoth, as he scrambled up his 
steep and perilous path, to the ledge of 
the rock where the figure stood so calm 
and dark. Panting from the fury of the 

* See Henry IV. Second Part. 



166 MELMOTH : 

storm, the vehemence of his own exer- 
tions, and the difficulty of the task, he 
was now almost foot to foot, and face to 
face, with the object of his pursuit, when, 
grasping at the loosened fragment of a 
stone whose fall could not have hurt a 
child, though on its tottering insecurity 
hung the life-grasp of a man, his hold fail- 
ed — he fell backwards, — the roaring deep 
was beneath, seeming to toss its ten 
thousand arms to receive and devour 
him. He did not feel the instantaneous 
giddiness of his fall, but as he sunk he 
felt the splash, he heard the roar. He 
was engulphed, then for a moment 
thrown to the surface. He struggled with 
nothing to grasp at. He sunk with a 
vague thought, that if he could reach the 
bottom, if he could arrive at any thing 
solid, he was safe. Ten thousand trum- 
pets then seemed to ring in his ears ; lights 
flashed from his eyes. " He seemed to go 
through fire and water," and remembered 
no more till several days afterwards, when 



A TALE. 167 

he found himself in bed, the old gouver- 
nante beside him, and uttered faintly, 
" What a horrid dream !" then sinking 
back as he felt his exhaustion, " and how 
weak it has left me !" 



Ai- 



CHAPTER V. 



" I have heard/' said the Squire, " that from hell 
there is no retention." 

Cervantes. 



X 1 oil some hours after this exclamation, 
Melmoth lay silent, his memory returning, 
— his senses gradually defecated, — the in- 
tellectual lord slowly returning to his ab- 
dicated throne. — 

" I remember all now," he cried, start- 
ing up in his bed with a sudden vehe- 
mence, that terrified his old nurse with 
the apprehension of returning insanity; 



A TALE. 169 

but when she approached the bed, candle 
in hand, cautiously veiling her eyes with 
the other, while she threw the full glare 
of the light on the face of the patient, she 
saw in a moment the light of sanity in his 
eyes, and the strength of health in his 
movements. To his eager inquiries of 
how he had been saved, how the storm 
had terminated, and w r hether any but him- 
self had survived the wreck, she could not 
deny herself the gratification of answer- 
ing, though conscious of his weakness, 
and solemnly charged neither to let him 
speak or hear, as she valued the recovery 
of his reason. She had faithfully observed 
the charge for several days, — a dreadful 
trial! — and now she felt like Fatima in 
Cymon, who, when threatened by the 
magician with the loss of speech, exclaims, 
" Barbarian, will not my death then satis- 
fy you ?" 

She began her narrative, the effect of 
which was, to lull Melmoth into a pro- 
found repose before half of it was con- 

VOL. I, H 



170 melmoth: 

eluded ; he felt the full benefit of the in- 
valids mentioned in Spenser, who used to 
hire Irish story-tellers, and found those in- 
defatigable persons still pursuing the tale 
when they awoke. At first Melmoth lis- 
tened with eager attention ; soon he was 
in the situation of him described by Miss 
Baillie, 

ce Who, half asleep, but faintly hears/ 
The gossip's tale hum in his ears," 

Soon after his lengthened respiration gave 
token that she was only " vexing the dull 
ear of a drowsy man ;" while, as she closed 
the curtain, and shaded the light, the 
images of her story were faintly painted 
on his dream, that still seemed half a 
waking one. 

In the morning Melmoth sat up, gazed 
round, remembered every thing in a mo- 
ment, though nothing distinctly, but felt 
the most intense anxiety to see the stran- 
ger saved from the shipwreck, who, he 



A TALE. 171 

remembered the gouvernante had told him, 
(while her words seemed to falter on the 
threshold of his closing senses), was still 
alive, and an inmate in his house, but 
weak and ill from the bruises he had re- 
ceived, and the exhaustion and terror he 
had undergone. The opinions of the 
household on the subject of this stranger 
were various. The knowledge of his be- 
ing a Catholic had conciliated their hearts, 
for the first act of his recovered reason 
was to request that a Catholic priest might 
be sent for, and the first use of his speech 
was to express his satisfaction that he was 
in a country where he might enjoy the 
benefits of the rites of his own church. 
So far all was well ; but there was a mys- 
terious haughtiness and reserve about him, 
that somewhat repelled the officious curio- 
sity of his attendants. He spoke often to 
himself in a language they did not under- 
stand ; they hoped relief from the priest 
on this point, but the priest, after listen- 
ing long at the invalid's door, pronounced 



172 JVIELMOTH I 

the language in which he was soliloquizing 
not to be Latin, and, after a conversation 
of some hours with him, refused to tell 
what language the stranger spoke to him- 
self in, and forbid all inquiry on the sub- 
ject. This was bad enough ; but, still 
worse, the stranger spoke English with 
ease and fluency, and therefore could have 
no right, as all the household argued, to 
torment them with those unknown sounds, 
that, sonorous and powerful as they were, 
seemed to their ears like an evocation of 
some invisible being. 

" He asks for what he wants in Eng- 
lish," said the harassed housekeeper, " and 
he can call for candle in English, and he 
can say he'll go to bed in English ; and 
why the devil can't he do every thing in 
English ? — He can say his prayers too in 
English to that picture he's always pulling 
out of his breast and talking to, though 
it's no saint, I am sure, he prays to, (from 
the glimpse I got of it), but more like the 
devil, — Christ save us !" AH these strange 



A TALE. 173 

rumours, and ten thousand more, were 
poured into Melmoth's ears, fast and faster 
than he could receive them. " Is Father 
Fay in the house," said he at last, under- 
standing that the priest visited the stranger 
every day ; " if he be, let me see him." 
Father Fay attended him as soon as he 
quitted the stranger's apartment. 

He was a grave and decent priest, well 
^ spoken of by those that were without" 
the pale of his own communion ; and as 
he entered the room, Mel moth smiled at 
the idle tattle of his domestics. " I thank 
you for your attention to this unfortunate 
gentleman, who, I understand, is in my 
house." — " It was my duty." — " I am 
told he sometimes speaks in a foreign 
tongue." The priest assented. " Do you 
know what countryman he is ?" " He is a 
Spaniard," said the priest. This plain, 
direct answer, had the proper effect on 
Melmoth, of convincing him of its vera- 
city, and of there being no mystery in the 



174 MELMOTH : 

business, but what the folly of his servants 
had made. 

The priest proceeded to tell him the 
particulars of the loss of the vessel. She 
was an English trader bound for Wex- 
ford or Waterford, with many passengers 
on board; she had been driven up the 
Wicklow coast by stress of weather, had 
struck on the night of the 19th October, 
during the intense darkness that accompa- 
nied the storm, on a hidden reef of rocks, 
and gone to pieces. Crew, passengers, all 
had perished, except this Spaniard. It 
was singular, too, that this man had saved 
the life of Melmoth. While swimming 
for his own, he had seen him fall from the 
rock he was climbing, and, though his 
strength was almost exhausted, had col- 
lected its last remains to preserve the life 
of a being who, as he conceived, had been 
betrayed into danger by his humanity. 
His efforts were successful, though Mel- 
moth was unconscious of them ; and in 
the morning they were found on the 



A TALE. 175 

strand, locked in each other's hold, but 
stiff and senseless. They shewed some 
signs of life when an attempt was made to 
remove them, and the stranger was con- 
veyed to Melmoth's house. " You owe 
your life to him," said the priest, when he 
had ended. " I shall go and thank him 
for it this moment," said Melmoth ; but as 
he was assisted to rise, the old woman 
whispered to him with visible terror, " Ja- 
sus* sake, dear, don't tell him ye're a 
Melmoth, for the dear life ! He has been 
as mad as any thing out of Bedlam, since 
some jist mintioned the name before him 
the ither night." A sickening recollection 
of some parts of the manuscript came 
over Melmoth at these words, but he 
struggled with himself, and proceeded to 
the apartment of the stranger. 

The Spaniard was a man about thirty, 
of a noble form and prepossessing manners. 
To the gravity of his nation was super- 
added a deeper tint of peculiar melancholy. 
He spoke English fluently ; and when 



176 MELMOTH : 

questioned on it by Melmoth, he remark- 
ed with a sigh, that he had learnt it in a 
painful school. Melmoth then changed 
the subject, to thank him with earnest 
gratitude for the preservation of his life. 
" Senhor," said the Spaniard, " spare me ; 
if your life was no dearer to you than 
mine, it would not be worth thanks." 
" Yet you made the most strenuous exer- 
tions to save it," said Melmoth. " That 
was instinct," said the Spaniard. " But 
you also struggled to save mine," said 
Melmoth. " That was instinct too at the 
moment," said the Spaniard ; then resum- 
ing his stately politeness, " or I should say? 
the influence of my better genius. I am 
wholly a stranger in this country, and 
must have fared miserably but for the 
shelter of your roof." 

Melmoth observed that he spoke with 
evident pain, and he confessed a few mo- 
ments afterwards, that though he had 
escaped without any serious injury, he had 
been so bruised and lacerated, that he still 



A TALE. 17 



in- 



breathed with difficulty, and hardly pos- 
sessed the use of his limbs. As he con- 
cluded the account of his sufferings during 
the storm, the wreck, and the subsequent 
struggle for life, he; exclaimed in Spanish, 
" God ! why did the Jonah survive, and 
the mariners perish ?" Melmoth, imagining 
he was engaged in some devotional ejacu- 
lation, was going to retire, when the Spa- 
niard detained him. " Senhor, I under- 
stand your name is " He paused, 

shuddered, and with an effort that seemed 
like convulsion, disgorged the name of 
Melmoth. " My name is Melmoth." 
" Had you an ancestor, a very remote 
one, who was — at a period perhaps beyond 
family-tradition— ——It is useless to in- 
quire," said the Spaniard, covering his face 
with both his hands, and groaning aloud. 
Melmoth listened in mingled excitement 
and terror. u Perhaps, if you would pro- 
ceed, I could answer you — go on, Senhor," 
" Had you," said the Spaniard, forcing 
himself to speak, abruptly and rapidly, 

H % 



178 MELMOTH : 

" had you, then, a relative who was, about 
one hundred and forty years ago, said to 
be in Spain." " I believe — yes, I fear — I 
had." " It is enough, Senhor — leave me 
— to-morrow perhaps — leave me now." 
* It is impossible to leave you now," said 
Melmoth, catching him in his arms before 
he sunk on the floor. He was not sense- 
less, for his eyes were rolling with terrible 
expression, and he attempted to articulate. 
They were alone. Melmoth, unable to 
quit him, called aloud for water; and 
while attempting to open his vest, and 
give him air, his hand encountered a mi- 
niature portrait close to the heart of the 
stranger. As he touched it, his touch 
operated on the patient with all the force 
of the most powerful restorative. He 
grasped it with his own cold hand with a 
force like that of death, and muttered in 
a hollow but thrilling voice, " What have 
you done?" He felt eagerly the ribbon 
by which it was suspended, and, satisfied 
that his terrible treasure was safe, turned 



A TALE. 179 

his eyes with a fearful calmness of expres- 
sion on Melmoth, " You know all, then ?" 
— " I know nothing," said Melmoth faul- 
tering. The Spaniard rose from the 
ground, to which he had almost fallen, 
disengaged himself from the arms that 
supported him, and eagerly, but stagger- 
ingly, hurrying towards the candles, (it- 
was night), held up the portrait full before 
Melmoth's eve. It was a miniature like- 
ness of that extraordinary being. It was 
painted in a coarse and unartist-like style, 
but so faithfully, that the pencil appear- 
ed rather held by the mind than by the 
fingers. 

" Was he — was the original of this — 
your ancestor ? — Are you his descendant ? 
— Are you the depository of that terrible 

secret which " He again fell to the 

ground convulsed, and Melmoth, for whose 
debilitated state this scene was too much, 
was removed to his own apartment. 

It was several days before he again saw 



180 MELMOTH : 

his visitor ; his manner was then calm and 
collected, till he appeared to recoHect the 
necessity of making an apology for his 
agitation at their last meeting. He began 
— hesitated — stopped ; tried in vain to ar- 
range his ideas, or rather his language; 
but the effort so obviously renewed his 
agitation, that Melmoth felt an exertion 
on his part necessary to avert its conse- 
quences, and began most in auspiciously to 
inquire into the motive of his voyage to 
Ireland. After a long pause, the Spa- 
niard said, u , That motive, Senhor, a few 
days past I believed it was not in mortal 
power to compel me to disclose. I deem- 
ed it incommunicable as it was incredible. 
I conceived myself to be alone on the 
earth, without sympathy and beyond re- 
lief. It is singular that accident should 
have placed me within the reach of the 
only being from whom I could expect 
either, and perhaps a developement of 
those circumstances which have placed me 
in a situation so extraordinary." This ex- 



A TALE. 181 

ordium, delivered with a composed but 
thrilling gravity, had an effect on Mel- 
moth. He sat down and prepared to 
listen, and the Spaniard began to speak ; 
but after some hesitation, he snatched the 
picture from his neck, and trampling on it 
with true continental action, exclaimed, 
" Devil ! devil ! thou choakest me I" and 
crushing the portrait, glass and all, under 
his feet, exclaimed, " Now I am easier." 

The room in which they sat was a low, 
mean, wretchedly furnished apartment ; 
the evening was tempestuous, and as the 
windows and doors rattled in the blast, 
Melmoth felt as if he listened to some 
herald of " fate and fear." A deep and 
sickening agitation shook his frame ; and 
in the long pause that preceded the narra- 
tive of the Spaniard, the beating of his 
heart was audible to him. He rose, and 
attempted to arrest the narration by a mo- 
tion of his hand ; but the Spaniard mis- 
took this for the anxiety of his impatience, 
and commenced his narrative, which, in. 



182 MELMOTH : 

mercy to the reader, we shall give without 
the endless interruptions; and queries, and 
anticipations of curiosity, and starts of 
terror, with which it was broken by Mel- 
moth. 



©ate xrf tf)t J^pantartr* 

" I am, Senhor, as you know, a native 
of Spain, but you are yet to learn I am a 
descendant of one of its noblest houses, — 
a house of which she might have been 
proud in her proudest day,— the house of 
Moneada. Of this I was not myself con- 
scious during the first years of my life; 
but during those years, I remember expe- 
riencing the singular contrast of being 
treated with the utmost tenderness, and 
kept in the most sordid privacy. I lived 
in a wretched house in the suburbs of Ma- 
drid with an old woman, whose affection 



A TALE. 18S 

for me appeared prompted as much by in- 
terest as inclination. I was visited every 
week by a young cavalier and a beautiful 
female ; they caressed me, called me their 
beloved child, and I, attached by the grace 
with which my young father's capa was 
folded, and my mother's veil adjusted, and 
by a certain air of indescribable superiority 
over those by whom I was surrounded, 
eagerly returned their caresses, and peti- 
tioned them to take me home with them ; 
at these words they always wept, gave a 
valuable present to the woman I lived 
with, whose attention was always redou- 
bled by this expected stimulant, and de- 
parted. 

" I observed their visits were always short, 
and paid late in the evening ; thus a sha- 
dow of mystery enveloped my infant days, 
and perhaps gave its lasting and inefface- 
able tinge to the pursuits, the character, 
and the feelings of my present existence. 
A sudden change took place ; — one day 
I was visited, splendidly dressed, and 



1 84 MELMOTH : 

carried in a superb vehicle, whose mo- 
tion made me giddy with novelty and sur- 
prise, to a palace whose front appeared to 
me to reach the heavens. I was hurried 
through several apartments, whose splen- 
dour made my eyes ache, amid an army of 
bowmg domestics, to a cabinet where sat an 
old nobleman, whom, from the tranquil ma- 
jesty of his posture, and the silent magni- 
ficence that surrounded him, I felt disposed 
to fall down and worship as we do those 
saints, whom, after traversing the aisles of 
an immense church, we find niched in some 
remote and solitary shrine. My lather and 
mother were there, and both seemed awed 
by the presence of that aged vision, pale 
and august ; their awe increased mine, and 
as they led me to his feet, I felt as if about 
to be sacrificed. He embraced me, how- 
ever, with some reluctance and more aus- 
terity ; and when this ceremony was per- 
formed, during which I trembled, I was 
removed by a domestic, and conducted to 
an apartment where I was treated like the 
son of a grandee ; in the evening I was 



A TALE. 185 

visited by my father and mother; they shed 
tears over me as they embraced me, but I 
thought I co. 'Id perceive they mingled 
the tears of grief with those of fondness. 
Every thing around appeared so strange, 
that perhaps I felt something appropriate in 
this change. I was so much altered myself, 
that I expected an alteration in others, and 
the reverse would have struck me as a phe- 
nomenon. 

" Change followed change with such ra- 
pidity, that it produced on me an effect like 
that of intoxication. I was now twelve 
years old, and the contracted habits of my 
earily life had had their usual effect, of ex- 
alting my imagination, w r hile they impaired 
every other faculty. I expected an adven- 
ture whenever the door opened, and that 
was but seldom, to announce the hours of 
devotion, food, and exercise. On the third 
day after I Was received, into the palace of 
Moneada, the door was opened at an un- 
usual hour, (a circumstance that made me 
tremble with anticipation), and my father 



186 MELMOTH: 

and mother, attended by a number of do- 
mestics, entered, accompanied by a youth 
whose superior height and already distin- 
guished figure, made him appear my se- 
nior, though he was in fact a year younger. 
" Alonzo," said my father to me, " em- 
brace your brother." I advanced with all 
the eagerness of youthful affection, that 
feels delight from new claims on its store, 
and half wishes those new claims were end- 
less ; but the slow step of my brother, the 
measured air with which he extended his 
arms, and declined his head on my left 
shoulder for a moment, and then raising it, 
viewed me with eyes in whose piercing and 
haughty lustre there was not one beam of 
fraternity, repelled and disconcerted me. 
We had obeyed our father, however, 
and embraced. " Let me see you hand in 
hand together," said my father, as if he 
would have enjoyed the sight. I held out 
my hand to my brother, and we stood thus 
linked for a few moments, my father and 
mother remaining at some distance to gaze 



A TALE. 187 

on us ; during these few moments, I had 
leisure to glance from my parents to my 
brother, and judge of the comparative ef- 
fect our appearance thus contrasted might 
produce on them. The contrast was by 
no means favourable to me. I was tall, 
but my brother was much taller ; he had an 
air of confidence, of conquest I might say ; 
the brilliancy of his complexion could be 
equalled only by that of his dark eyes, 
which turned from me to our parents, and 
seemed to say, " Chuse between us, and re- 
ject me if you dare." 

" My father and mother advanced and. 
embraced us both. I clung round their* 
necks ; my brother submitted to their ca- 
resses with a kind of proud impatience, that 
seemed to demand a more marked recog- 
nition. 

" 1 saw no more of them, — that evening 
the whole household, which perhaps contain 
two hundred domestics, were in despair. 
The Duke de Moncada, that awful vision 
of anticipated mortality whom I had seen 



188 MELMOTH : 

but- once, was dead. The tapestry was torn 
from the walk ; every room was filled with 
ecclesiastics; Iwas neg'ected by my atten- 
dants, and wandered through the spacious 
rooms, till I by chance lifted up a curtain of 
black velvet, and saw a sight which, young 
as I was, paralyzed me. My father and 
mother, dressed in black, sat beside a figure 
which I believed to be my grandfather 
asleep, but his sleep was very profound ; 
my brother was there too, in a mourning 
dress, but its strange and grotesque dis-. 
figurement could not conceal the impa- 
tience with which he wore it, and the flash- 
ing eagerness of his expression, and the 
haughty brilliancy of his eye, shewed a kind 
of impatience of the part he was compelled- 
to act. — I rushed forward ; — I was withheld 
by the domestics ; — I asked, " Why am I 
not permitted to be here, where my 
younger brother is ?" An ecclesiastic drew 
me from the apartment. I struggled with 
him, and demanded, with an arrogance 
which suited my pretensions better than. 



A TALE. 1 89 

my prospects, " Who I was ?" " The 
grandson of the late Duke of Moncada," 
was the answer. •• And why am 1 thus 
treated ?" To this no answer. I was con- 
veyed to my apartment, and closely watch- 
ed during the interment of the Duke of 
Moncada. I was not permitted to at- 
tend his funeral. I saw the splendid 
and melancholy cavalcade depart from 
the palace. I ran from window to win- 
dow to witness the funeral pomp, but 
was not allowed to accompany it. Two 
days after I was told a carriage waited for 
me at the gate. I entered it, and was con- 
veyed to a convent of Ex- Jesuits, (as they 
were well known to be, though no one in 
Madrid dared to say so), where an agree- 
ment had been made for my board and 
education, and where I became an inmate 
that very day. I applied myself to my 
studies, my teachers were pleased, my pa- 
rents visited me frequently, and gave the 
usual marks of affection, and all was well ; 
till one day as they were retiring, I heard 



190 MELMOTH : 

an old domestic in their suite remark, how 
singular it was, that the eldest son of the 
(now) Duke de Moneada should be edu- 
cated in a convent, and brought up to a 
monastic life, while the younger, living in 
a superb palace, was surrounded by teachers 
suited to his rank. The word i( monastic 
life" thrilled in my ears ; it furnished me 
with an interpretation not only of the in- 
dulgence 1 had experienced in the convent, 
(an indulgence quite inconsistent with the 
usual severity of their discipline), but of 
the peculiar language in which I had been 
always addressed by the Superior, the bre- 
thren, and the boarders. The former, whom 
I saw once a week, bestowed the most flat- 
tering praises on the progress I had made 
in my studies, (praises that covered me with 
blushes, for I well knew it was very mode- 
rate compared with that of the other board- 
ers), and then gave me his benediction, 
but never without adding, " My God ! 
thou wilt not suffer this lamb to wander 
from thy fold." 



A TALE. 191 

The brethren always assumed before me 
an air of tranquillity, that eulogized their 
situation more powerfully than the most 
exaggerated eloquence. The petty squab- 
bles and intrigues of the convent, the bit- 
ter and incessant conflict of habits, tem- 
pers, and interests, the efforts of incar- 
cerated minds for objects of excitement, 
the struggles to diversify endless mono- 
tony, and elevate hopeless mediocrity ; — all 
that makes monastic life like the wrong 
side of tapestry, where we see only un- 
couth threads, and the harsh outlines, with- 
out the glow of the colours, the richness of 
the tissue, or the splendour of the embroid- 
ery, that renders the external surface so 
rich and dazzling ; all this was carefully 
concealed. I heard something of it, how- 
ever, and, young as I was, could not help 
wondering how men who carried the worst 
passions of life into their retreat, could 
imagine that retreat was a refuge from the 
erosions of their evil tempers, the moni- 
tions of conscience, and the accusations of 



1 98 MELMOTH : 

God. The same dissimulation was prac- 
tised by the boarders ; the whole house was 
in masquerade from the moment I entered 
it. If I joined the latter at the time of re- 
creation, they went through the few a- 
musements allowed them with a kind of 
languid impatience, as if it was an inter- 
ruption of better pursuits to which they 
were devoted. One of them, coming up 
to me, would say, " What a pity that 
these exercises are necessary for the sup- 
port of our frail nature ! what a pity we 
cannot devote its whole powers to the ser- 
vice of God !" Another would say, " I 
never am so happy as in the choir ! What 
a delightful eulogy was that pronounced 
by the Superior on the departed FreJose! 
How thrilling was that requiem ! I ima- 
gined the heavens opened, and angels 
descending to receive his soul, as I listened 
to it !" 

" All this, and much more, I had been 
accustomed to hear every day. I now be- 
gan to understand it. 1 suppose they 



A TALE. 193 

thought they had a very weak person to 
deal with ; but the bare- faced coarseness of 
their manoeuvres only quickened my pe- 
netration, which began to be fearfully 
awake. I said to them, " Are you, then, 
intended for the monastic life?" " We 
hope so." " Yet I have heard you, Oliva, 
once (it was when you did not think I 
overheard you) I heard you complain of 
the length and tediousness of the homilies 
delivered on the eves*of the saints." — " I 
was then under the influence of the evil 
spirit doubtless," said Oliva, who was a 
boy not older than myself; " Satan is 
sometimes permitted to buffet those whose 
vocation is but commencing, and whom 
he is therefore more afraid to lose." " And 
I have heard- you, Balcastro, say you had 
not taste for music ; and to me, I confess, 
that of the choir appears least likely to 
inspire a taste for it." " God has touched 
my heart since," replied the young hypo- 
crite, crossing himself; " and -you know, 
friend of my soul, there is a promise, that 
vol. I. I 



194 MELMOTH : 

the ears of the deaf shall be opened. 5 ' 
" Where are those words?" " In the 
Bible." " The Bible ?— But we are not 
permitted to read it." " True, dear Mon- 
$ada, but we have the word of our Supe- 
rior and the brethren for it, and that is 
enough." " Certainly ; our spiritual guides 
must take on themselves the whole respon- 
sibility of that state, whose enjoyments 
and punishments they reserve in their own 
hands ; but, Balcastro, are you willing to 
take this life on their word, as well as the 
next, and resign it before you have tried 
it ?" " My dear friend, you onjy speak 
to tempt me." " I do not speak to tempt" 
said I, and was turning indignantly away, 
when the bell ringing, produced its usual 
effect on us all. My companions assumed 
a more sanctified air, and I struggled for a 
more composed one. 

As we went to the church, they con- 
versed in whispers, but those whispers 
were intended to reach my ear. I could 
hear them say, " It is in vain that he 



A TALE. 195 

struggles with grace; there never was a 
more decided vocation ; God never ob- 
tained a more glorious victory. Already 
he has the look of a child of heaven ; — the 
monastic gait, — the downcast look; — the 
motion of his arms naturally imitates the 
sign of the cross, and the very folds of his 
mantle arrange themselves, by a divine 
instinct, into those of a Monk's habit." 
And all this while my gait was disturbed, 
my countenance flushed, and often lifted 
to heaven, and my arms employed in 
hastily adjusting my cloak, that had fallen 
off my shoulder from my agitation, and 
whose disordered folds resembled any thing 
but those of a Monk's habit. From that 
evening I began to perceive my dan- 
ger, and to meditate how to avert it. I 
had no inclination for the monastic life ; 
but after vespers, and the evening exer- 
cise in my own cell, I began to doubt 
if this very repugnance was not itself a 
sin. Silence and night deepened the im- 
pression, and I lay awake for many hours> 



196 MELMOTH : 

supplicating God to enlighten me, to eii* 
able me not to oppose his will, but clearly 
to reveal that will to me ; and if he was 
not pleased to call me to a monastic life, 
to support my resolution in undergoing 
every thing that might be inflicted on me, 
sooner than profane that state by extorted 
vows and an alienated mind. That my 
prayers might be more effectual, I offered 
them up first in the name of the Virgin, 
then in that of the Patron-saint of the 
family, and then of the Saint on whose 
eve I was born. I lay in great agitation 
till morning, and went to matins with- 
out having closed my eyes, I had, how- 
ever, I felt, acquired resolution, — at least 
I thought so. Alas ! I knew not what 
I had to encounter. I was like a man 
going to sea with a day's provision, and 
imagining he is victualled for a voyage 
to the poles. I went through my exercises 
(as they were called) with uncommon assi- 
duity that day ; already I felt the necessity 



A TALE. 197 

of imposition, — fatal lesson of monastic in- 
stitutions. We dined at noon ; and soon 
after my father's carriage arrived, and I 
was permitted to go for an hour on the 
banks of the Manzanares. To my surprise 
my father was in the carriage, and though 
he welcomed me with a kind of embar- 
rassment, 1 was delighted to meet him. 
He was a layman at least, — he might have 
a heart. 

I was disappointed at the measured 
phrase he addressed me in, and this froze 
me at once into a rigid determination, to 
be as much on my guard with him, as I 
must be within the walls of the convent. 
The conversation began, " You like your 
convent, my son ?" " Very much," (there 
was not a word of truth in my answer, but 
the fear of circumvention always teaches 
falsehood, and we have only to thank our 
instructors). " The Superior is very fond 
of you." " He seems so." " The brethren 
are attentive to your studies, and capable 
of directing them, and appreciating your 



198 MELMOTH : 

progress." " They seem so." " And the 
boarders — they are sons of the first families 
in Spain, they appear all satisfied with 
their situation, and eager to embrace its 
advantages." " They seem so." My dear 
«on, why have you thrice answered me in 
the same monotonous, unmeaning phrase ?" 
" Because I thought it all seeming." "How, 
then, would you say that the devotion of 
those holy men, and the profound atten- 
tion of their pupils, whose studies are alike 
beneficial to man, and redounding to the 
glory of the church to which they are de- 
dicated — " " My dearest father, — I say 
nothing of them, — but / dare to speak of 
myself, — I can never be a monk, — if that 
is your object — spurn me, — order your 
lacqueys to drag me from this carriage, — 
leave me a beggar in the streets to cry 
* "fire and water," — but do not make me 
a monk." My father appeared stunned 

* ** Fire for the cigars, and iced- water for drink." 
s^A cry often heard in Madrid, 



A TALE. 199 

by this apostrophe. He did not utter a 
word. He had not expected such a pre- 
mature developement of the secret which 
he imagined he had to disclose, not to hear 
disclosed. At this moment the carnage 
turned into the Prado; a thousand magnifi- 
cent equipages, with plumed horses, superb 
caparisons, and beautiful women bowing 
to the cavaliers, who stood for a moment 
on the foot-board, and then bowed .their 
adieus to the " ladies of their love," passed 
before our eyes. I saw my father, at this 
moment, arrange his superb mantle, and the 
silk net in which his long black hair was 
bound, and give the signal to his lacqueys 
to stop, that he might mingle among the 
crowd. I caught this moment, — 1 grasped 
his mantle. — " Father, you find this world 
delightful then, — would you ask me to 
resign it, — me, — who am your child." — 
" But you are too young for it, my son." 
" Oh, then, my father, 1 am surely much 
too young for another world, to which you 
would force me." " Force you, my child. 



200 aVIELMOTH : 

mv first-born !" And these words he ut- 
tered with such tenderness, that I invo- 
luntarily kissed his hands, while his lips 
eagerly pressed my forehead. It was at 
this moment that 1 studied, with all the 
eagerness of hope, my father's physiognomy, 
or what artists would call his physique. 

" He had been my parent before he was 
sixteen ; his features were beautiful, his 
figure the most graceful and lover-like I 
ever beheld, and his early marriage had 
preserved him from all the evils of youth- 
ful excess, and spared the glow of feature, 
and elasticity of muscle, and grace of ju- 
venility, so often withered by vice, almost 
before they have bloomed. He was now 
but twenty- eight, and looked ten years 
younger. He was evidently conscious of 
this, and as much alive to the enjoyments 
of youth, as if he were still in its spring. 
He was at the same moment rushing into 
all the luxuries of youthful enjoyment and 
voluptuous splendour, and dooming one, 
who was at least young enough to be his 



A TALE. 201 

son, to the frozen and hopeless monotony 
of a cloister. I laid hold of this with the 
grasp of a drowning man. But a drown- 
ing man never grasped a straw so weak as 
he who depends on the worldly feeling of 
another for the support of his own. 

" Pleasure is very selfish ; and when sel- 
fishness pleads to selfishness for relief, it is 
like a bankrupt asking his fellow-prisoner 
to go bail for him. This was my convic- 
tion at the moment, yet still I reflected, 
(for suffering supplies the place of experi- 
ence in youth, and they are most expert 
casuists who have graduated only in the 
school of misfortune), I reflected, that a 
taste for pleasure, while it renders a man 
selfish in one sense, renders him generous 
in another. The real voluptuary, though 
he would not part with his slightest in- 
dulgence to save the world from destruc- 
tion, would yet wish all the world to be 
enjoying itself, (provided it was not at his 
expence), because his own would be in- 
creased by it. To this I clung, and in = 

I 2 



202 MELMOTH : 

treated my father to indulge me with ano- 
ther view of the brilliant scene before us. 
He complied, and his feelings, softened by 
this compliance, and exhilarated by the 
spectacle, (which interested him more than 
me, who observed it only for its effect on 
him), became more favourable than ever. 
I availed myself of this, and, while return- 
ing to the convent, threw the whole power 
of my nature and intellect into one (almost) 
shrieking appeal to his heart. I compared 
myself to the unhappy Esau, deprived of 
his birthright by a younger brother, and 1 
exclaimed in his language, " Hast thou no 
blessing for me ! Bless me, even me also, 
Oh my father !" My father was affected ; 
he promised my intreaty every considera- 
tion ; but he hinted some difficulty to be 
encountered on my mother's part, much 
on that of her Director, who (I afterwards 
found) governed the whole family, and 
still more remotely hinted at something 
insurmountable and inexplicable. He suf- 
fered me, however, to kiss his hand at 



A TALE. 203 

parting, and vainly struggled with his 
emotions when he felt it damp with my 
tears. 

" It was not till two days after, that I 
was summoned to attend my mother's Di- 
rector, who was waiting for me in the 
parlour. I deemed this delay the result 
of a long family debate, or (as it seemed to 
me) conspiracy ; and I tried to prepare 
myself for the multifarious warfare in 
which I had now to engage with parents, 
directors, superiors, and monks, and board- 
ers, all sworn to win the day, and not 
caring whether they carried their point by 
storm, sap, mine, or blockade. I began to 
measure the power of the assailants, and to 
try to furnish myself with weapons suited 
to their various modes of attack. My fa- 
ther was gentle, flexible, and vacillating. 
I had softened him in my favour, and I 
felt that was all that could be done with 
him. But the Director was to be encoun- 
tered with different arms. As I went 
down to the parlour, I composed my looks, 



204 MELMOTH : 

my gait, I modulated my voice, I adjust- 
ed my dress. 1 was on my guard, body, 
mind, mien, clothes, every thing. He was 
a grave, but mild-looking ecclesiastic ; one 
must have had the treachery of Judas to 
suspect him of treachery. I felt disarmed, 
I even experienced some compunction. 
" Perhaps," said I, " I have all this while 
armed myself against a message of recon- 
ciliation." The Director began with some 
trifling inquiries about my health, and my 
progress in study, but he asked them in 
a tone of interest. I said to myself, it 
would not be decorous for him to enter on 
the subject of his visit too soon ; — I answer- 
ed him calmly, but my heart palpitated 
with violence. A silence ensued, and then 
suddenly turning towards me, he said, 
" My dear child, I understand your objec- 
tions to a monastic life are insurmountable. 
I do not wonder at it ; its habits must ap- 
pear very unconciliating to youth, and, in 
fact, I know not to what period of life ab- 
stinence, privation, and solitude, are parti- 



A TALE. 205 

cularly agreeable ; it was the wish of your 
parents doubtless ; but" — This address, so 
full of candour, almost overpowered me ; 
caution and every thing else forsook me as 
I exclaimed, " But what then, my father?" 
" But, I was going to observe, how rarely 
our own views coincide with those which 
others entertain for us, and how difficult 
it is to decide which are the least erroneous." 
" Was that all ?" said I, shrinking with 
disappointment. " That was all ; for in- 
stance, some people, (of whom I once hap- 
pened to be one), might be fanciful enough 
to imagine, that the superior experience 
and proved affection of parents should 
qualify them to decide on this point bet- 
ter than their children ; nay, I have heard 
some carry their absurdity so far, as to talk 
of the rights of nature, the obligations of 
duty, and the useful coercion of restraint ; 
but since I had the pleasure of becoming 
acquainted with your resolution, I am be- 
ginning to be of opinion, that a youth, not 
thirteen years of age, may be an incom- 



206 MELMOTH : 

parable judge in the last resort, particular- 
ly when the question bears a trifling relation 
to his eternal as well as temporal interest ; 
in such a case, he has doubtless the double 
advantage of dictating both to his spiri- 
tual and natural parents." " My father, I 
beg you to speak without irony or ridi- 
cule ; you may be very clever, but I mere- 
ly wish you to be intelligible and serious." 
" Do you wish me, then, to speak serious- 
ly ?" and he appeared to collect himself as 
he asked this question. " Certainly." " Se- 
riously, then, my dear child, do you not 
believe that your parents love you ? Have 
you not received from your infancy every 
mark of affection from them ? Have you 
not been pressed to their bosoms from 
your very cradle?" At these words I 
struggled vainly with my feelings, and 
wept, while I answered, " Yes." " I am 
sorry, my dear child, to see you thus over- 
powered ; my object was to appeal to your 
reason, (for you have no common share of 
reasoning power), — and to your reason I 



A TALE. 207 

appeal ;— can you suppose that parents, who 
have treated you with such tenderness, 
who love you as they do their own souls, 
could act (as your conduct charges them) 
with causeless and capricious cruelty to- 
wards you ? Must you not be aware there 
is a reason, and that it must be a profound 
one ? Would it not be more worthy of 
your duty, as well as your superior sense, 
to inquire into, than contend with it ?" " Is 
it founded upon any thing in my con- 
duct, then? — I am willing to do every 
thing, — to sacrifice every thing." — " I un- 
derstand, — you are willing to do every 
thing but what is required of you, — and to 
sacrifice every thing but your own inclina- 
tion." " But you have hinted at a reason." 
The Director was silent. " You urged 
me to inquire into it." The Director was 
silent still. " My father, I adjure you, by 
the habit you wear, un muffle this terrible 
phantom to me ; there is nothing 1 cannot 
encounter"--" Except the commands of your 
parents. But am I at liberty to discover 



208 MELMOTH : 

this secret to you ?" said the Director, in a 
tone of interna] debate. " Can I imagine 
that you, who have in the very outset out- 
raged parental authority, will revere pa- 
rental feelings ?" " My father, I do not 
understand you." " My dear child, I am 
compelled to act with a caution and re- 
serve unsuited to my character, which is 
naturally as open as yours. I dread the 
disclosure of a secret ; it is repugnant to 
my habits of profound confidence ; and I 
dread disclosing any thing to a character 
impetuous like yours. I feel myself re- 
duced to a most painful situation." " My 
father, act and speak with candour, my si- 
tuation requires it, and your own profes- 
sion demands it from you. My father, re- 
member the inscription over the confes- 
sional which thrilled my very blood to 
read, " God hears thee." Remember 
God hears you always, and will you not 
deal sincerely with one whom God has 
placed at your mercy?" I spoke with 
much agitation, and the Director appeared 



A TALE. 209 

affected for a moment ; that is, he passed 
his hand over his eyes, which were as dry- 
as — his heart. He paused for several mi- 
nutes, and then said, " My dear child, dare 
I trust you ? I confess I came prepared 
to treat you like a boy, but I feel I am 
disposed to consider you as a man. You 
have the intelligence, the penetration, the 
decision of a man. Have you the feelings 
of one ?" " Try me, my father." I did 
not perceive that his irony, his secret, and 
his parade of feeling, were all alike thea- 
trical, and substitutionary for real inte- 
rest and sincerity. " If I should be in- 
clined to trust you, my dear child," — 
" I shall be grateful." " And secret." 
" And secret, my father." " Then imagine 
yourself" — •* Oh ! my father, let me not 
have to imagine any thing — tell me the 
truth." " Foolish boy, — am I then so bad 
a painter, that I must write the name under 
the figure." " I understand you, my fa- 
ther, and shall not interrupt you again." 
" Then imagine to yourself the honour of 



£10 MELMOTH : 

one of the first houses in Spain ; the peace 
of a whole family, — the feelings of a father, 
-—the honour of a mother, — the interests of 
religion, — the eternal salvation of an indi- 
vidual, all suspended in one scale. What 
do you think could outweigh them?" 
w Nothing," I replied ardently. " Yet, in 
the opposite scale you throw nothing, — the 
caprice of a boy not thirteen years old ; — 
this is all you have to oppose to the claims 
of nature, of society, and of God." " My 
father, I am penetrated with horror at what 
you have said, — does all this depend on 
me ?" " It does, — it does all depend on 
you." " But how, then, — I am bewilder- 
ed, — I am willing to make a sacrifice, — tell 
me what I am to do." " Embrace, my 
dear child, the monastic life ; this will ac- 
complish the views of all who love you, 
ensure your own salvation, and fulfil the 
will of God, who is calling you at this 
moment by the voices of your affectionate 
parents, and the supplications of the mi- 
nister of heaven, who is now kneeling be- 



A TALE. 211 

fore you." And he sunk on his knees 
before me. 

" This prostration, so unexpected, so re- 
volting, and so like the monastic habit of 
artificial humiliation, completely annihi- 
lated the effect of his language. I retreat* 
ed from his arms, which were extended 
towards me. " My father, / cannot, — I 
will never become a monk " " Wretch ! 
and you refuse, then, to lis .1 to the call 
of ycur conscience, the adjuration of your 
parents, and the voice of God ?" The fury 
with which he uttered these words, — the 
change from a ministering angel to an in- 
furiated and menacing demon, had an 
effect just contrary to what he expected. 
I said calmly, " My conscience does not 
reproach me, — I have never disobeyed 
its calls. My parents have adjured me 
only through your mouth ; and I hope, 
for their sakes, the organ has not been in- 
spired by them. And the voice of God, 
echoed from my own heart, bids me not 
to obey you, by adulterating his service 



212 MELMOTH : 

with prostituted vows." As I spoke thug, 
the Director changed the whole character 
of his figure, his attitude, and his lan- 
guage ; — from the extreme of supplication 
or of terror, he passed in a moment, with 
the facility of an actor, to a rigid and 
breathless sternness. His figure rose from 
the ground before me like that of the Pro- 
phet Samuel before the astonished eyes of 
Saul. He dropt the dramatist, and was 
the monk in a moment. " And you will 
not take the vows ?" " 1 will not, my 
father." " And you will brave the resent- 
ment of your parents, and the denuncia- 
tions of the church." " I have done no- 
thing to deserve either." " But you will 
encounter both, to cherish your horrid re- 
solution of being the enemy of God." 
" I am not the enemy of God for speak- 
ing the truth." " Liar and hypocrite, you 
blaspheme !" " Stop, my father, these are 
words unbecoming your profession, and 
unsuited to this place." " I acknowledge 
the justice of the rebuke, and submit to 



A TALE. 213 

it, though uttered by the mouth of a 
child." — And he dropped his hypocritical 
eyes, folded his hands on his breast, and 
murmured, " Fiat voluntas tua. My dear 
child, my zeal for the service of God, and 
the honour of your family, to which I am 
attached equally by principle and affection, 
have carried me too far, — 1 confess it ; but 
have I to ask pardon of you also, my 
child, for a redundance of that affection 
and zeal for your house, which its descen- 
dant has proved himself destitute of?" 
The mingled humiliation and irony of this 
address had no effect on me. He saw it had 
not; for after slowly raising his eyes to 
watch that effect, he saw me standing in 
silence, not trusting my voice with a word, 
lest I should utter something rash and dis- 
respectful, — not daring to lift up my eyes, 
lest their expression should speak without 
making language necessary. 

" I believe the Director felt his situation 
rather critical ; his interest in the family 
depended on it, and he attempted to coveF 



£14 MELMOTH : 

his retreat with all the expertness and fer- 
tility of manoeuvre which belong to an 
ecclesiastical tactician. " My dear child, 
we have been both wrong, I from zeal, 
and you from — no matter what ; our busi- 
ness is to exchange forgiveness with each 
other, and to implore it of God, whom we 
have both offended. My dear child, let 
us prostrate ourselves before him, and even 
while our hearts are glowing with human 
passion, God may seize that moment to 
impress the seal of his grace on both, and 
fix it there for ever. Often the earthquake 
and the whirlwind are succeeded by the 
still, small voice, and God is there. — Let 
us pray. 5 ' I fell on my knees, resolved to 
pray in my heart ; but in a short time, the 
fervour of his language, the eloquence and 
energy of his prayers, dragged me along 
with him, and I felt myself compelled to 
pray against every dictate of my own 
heart. He had reserved this display for 
the last, and he had judged well. I never 
heard any ^thing so like inspiration ; as I 



A TALE. 215 

listened, and involuntarily, to effusions 
that seemed to issue from no mortal lips, 
I began to doubt my own motives, and 
search my heart. I had disdained his 
taunts, I had defied and conquered his 
passion, but as he prayed, I wept. This 
going over the same ground with the 
heart, is one of the most painful and hu- 
miliating of all exercises ; the virtue of 
yesterday becomes the vice of to-day ; we 
ask with the desponding and restless scep- 
ticism of Pilate, " What is truth ?" but 
the oracle that was so eloquent one mo- 
ment, is dumb the next, or if it answers, 
it is with that ambiguity that makes us 
dread we have to consult again — again 
— and for ever — -in vain. 

I was now in a state quite fit for the Di- 
rector's purpose ; but he was fatigued with 
the part he had played with so little suc- 
cess, and took his leave, imploring me to 
continue my importunities to Heaven to 
direct and enlighten me, while he himself 
would supplicate all the saints in heaven 



216 MELMOTH : 

to touch the hearts of my parents, and re* 
veal to them some means of saving me 
from the crime and perjury of a forced 
vocation, without involving themselves in 
a crime, if possible, of blacker dye and 
greater magnitude. Saying so he left me, 
to urge my parents, with all his influence, 
to pursue the most rigorous measures to 
enforce my adoption of the conventual 
life. His motives for doing so were suffi- 
ciently strong when he visited me, but their 
strength was increased tenfold before his 
departure. He had reckoned confidently 
on the power of his remonstrances ; he 
had been repulsed ; the disgrace of such a 
defeat rankled in the core of his heart. 
He had been only a partizan in the cause, 
but he was now a party. What was a 
matter of conscience before, was now a 
matter of honour with him ; and I rather 
believe that the Director laid a greater 
stress on the latter, or made a great havock 
of confusion between both in his mind. 
Be that as it may, I passed a few days 



A TALE. 217 

after his visit in a state of indescribable 
excitement. 1 had something to hope, 
and that is often better than something to 
enjoy. The cup of hope always excites 
thirst, that of fruition disappoints or 
quenches it. I took long walks in the 
garden alone. I framed imaginary con- 
versations to myself. The boarders ob- 
served me, and said to each other, accord- 
ing to their instructions, " He is meditat- 
ing on his vocation, he is supplicating for 
illuminating grace, let us not disturb him." 
I did not undeceive them ; but I reflected 
with increasing horror on a system that 
forced hypocrisy to a precocity unparallel- 
ed, and made the last vice of life the ear- 
liest of conventual youth. But I soon for- 
got reflection, to plunge into reverie. I 
imagined myself at the palace of my fa- 
ther ; I saw him, my mother, and the Di- 
rector, engaged in debate. I spoke for 
each, and felt for all. I supplied the pas- 
sionate eloquence of the Director, his 
strong representations of my aversion to 

VOL,. I. K 



218 3V1ELM0TH : 

the habit, his declaration that further im- 
portunity on their part would be as impious 
as it was fruitless. I saw all the impres- 
sion I once flattered myself I had made 
on my father revived. I saw my mother 
yield. I heard the murmur of doubtful 
acquiescence, — the decision, the congratu- 
lations. I saw the carriage approaching, 
— I heard the convent doors fly open. Lk 
berty, — liberty, — I was in their arms ; no, 
I was at their feet. Let those who smile 
at me, ask themselves whether they have 
been indebted most to imagination or reali- 
ty for all they have enjoyed in life, if in- 
deed they have ever enjoyed any thing. 
In these internal dramas, however, I al- 
ways felt that the persons did not speak 
with the interest I wished; and the speeches 
1 put into their mouths would have been 
spoken with ten thousand times more 
animation by myself. Still I felt the 
most exquisite enjoyment in these reve- 
ries, and perhaps it was not diminished by 



A TALE. 21$ 

the thought how I was deceiving my com- 
panions the whole time. But dissimula- 
tion always teaches dissimulation ; and the 
only question is, whether we shall be the 
masters of the art or its victims ? a ques- 
tion soon decided by our self-love. 

" It was on the sixth day that I heard, 
with a beating heart, a carriage stop. I 
could have sworn to the sound of its 
wheels. I was in the hall before I was 
summoned. 1 felt I could not be in the 
wrong, nor was I. I drove to my father's 
palace in a delirium, — a vision of repulse 
and of reconciliation, of gratitude and of 
-despair. I was ushered into a room, where 
were assembled my father, my mother, and 
the Director, all seated, and silent as sta- 
tues. I approached, I kissed their hands, 
and then stood at a small distance breath- 
less. My father was the first to break si- 
lence, but he spoke very much with the 
air of a man who was repeating a part 
dictated to him ; and the tone of his voice 
contradicted every word he prepared to 



220 MELMOTH : 

utter. " My son, I have sent for you, no 
longer to contend with your weak and 
wicked obstinacy, but to announce to you 
my own resolution. The will of Heaven 
and of your parents has devoted you to 
its service, and your resistance can only 
make us miserable, without in the least 
frustrating that resolution." At these 
words, gasping for breath, my lips invo- 
luntarily unclosed ; my father imagined 
this was an attempt to reply, though in 
fact I was not capable of uttering a syl- 
lable, and hastened to prevent it. " My 
son, all opposition is unavailing, all dis- 
cussion fruitless. Your destiny is decided, 
and though your struggles may render it 
wretched, they cannot reverse it. Be re- 
conciled, my child, to the will of Heaven 
and your parents, which you may insult, 
but cannot violate. This reverend person 
can better explain to you the necessity of 
your obedience than 1 can." And my fa- 
ther, evidently weary of a task which he 
had reluctantly undertaken, was rising to 



A TALE. 221 

go away, when the Director detained him. 
" Stay, Senhor, and assure your son be- 
fore you depart, that, since I last saw him, 
I have fulfilled my promise, and urged 
every topic on your mind, and that of the 
duchess, that I thought might operate for 
his best interests" I was aware of the 
hypocritical ambiguity of this expression ; 
and, collecting my breath, I said, " Ilever 
rend father, as a son I seek not to employ 
an intercessor with my own parents. I 
stand before them, and if I have not an 
intercessor in their hearts, your mediation 
must be ineffectual altogether. I implored 
you merely to state to them my invincible 
reluctance." They all interrupted me with 
exclamations, as they repeated my last 
words, — " Reluctance ! invincible ! Is it 
for this you have been admitted to our 
presence ? Is it for this we have borne so 
long with your contumacy, only to hear it 
repeated^with aggravations?" "Yes, my 
father, — yes, for this or nothing. If I am 
not permitted to speak, why am I suffered 



£22 MELMOTH : 

in your presence ?" " Because we hoped 
to witness your submission." " Allow me 
to give the proofs of it on my knees f — 
and I fell on my knees, hoping that my 
posture might soften the effect of the 
words 1 could not help uttering. I kissed 
my fathers hand, — he did not withdraw 
it, and I felt it tremble. I kissed the 
skirt of my mother's robe, — she attempted 
to withdraw it with one hand, but with 
the other she hid her face, and I thought 
I saw tears bursting through her fingers. 
I knelt to the Director too, and besought 
his benediction, and struggled, though 
with revolting lips, to kiss his hand ; but 
he snatched his habit from my hand, ele- 
vated his eyes, spread out his fingers, and 
assumed the attitude of a man who recoils 
in horror from a being who merits the ex- 
treme of malediction and reprobation. 
Then I felt my only chance was with my 
parents. I turned to them, but they 
shrunk from me, and appeared willing to 
devolve the remainder of the task on the 



A TALE. 223 

Director. He approached me. " My 
child, you have pronounced your reluc- 
tance to the life of God invincible, but 
may there not be things more invincible 
even to your resolution? The curses of 
that God, confirmed by those of your pa- 
rents, and deepened by all the fulmina- 
tions of the church, whose embraces you 
have rejected, and whose holiness you 
have desecrated by that rejection." " Fa- 
ther, these are terrible words, but I have 
no time now but for meanings." " Besot- 
ted wretch, I do not understand you, — 
you do not understand yourself." " Oh ! 
I do, — I do !" I exclaimed. And turning 
to my father, still on my knees, I cried, 
" My dear father, is life, — human life, all 
shut up from me ?" " It is," said the Di- 
rector, answering for my father. " Have 
I no resource ?" " None." " No profes- 
sion ?" " Profession ! degenerate wretch !" 
" Let me embrace the meanest, but 
do not make me a monk." " Profligate 
as weak," " Oh ! mv father," still call 



224f MELMOTH : 

ing on my father, " let not this man an- 
swer for yon. Give me a sword, — send 
me into the armies of Spain to seek death, 
— death is all I ask, in preference to that 
life you doom me to." " It is impossible," 
said my father, gloomily returning from 
the window against which he had been 
leaning ; " the honour of an illustrious fa- 
mily, — the dignity of a Spanish grandee — " 
" Oh ! my father, of how little value will 
that be, when I am consuming in my early 
grave, and you die broken-hearted on it, 
over the flow T er your own voice has doom- 
ed to wither there." My father trembled. 
" Senhor, I entreat, — I command you to 
retire ; this scene will unfit you for the de- 
votional duties you must perform this 
evening." " And you leave me then ?" I 
cried as they departed. M Yes,— yes," — re- 
peated the Director ; " leave you burden- 
ed with the curse of your father." " Oh 
no !" exclaimed my father ; but the Direc- 
tor had hold of his hand, and pressed it 
strongly. " Of your mother," he repeat- 



A TALE. 225 

ed. I heard my mother weep aloud, and 
felt it like a repeal of that curse; but she 
dared not speak, and I could not. The 
Director had now two victims in his hands, 
and the third at his feet. He could not 
avoid showing his triumph. He paused, 
collected the full power of his sonorous 
voice, and thundered forth, " And of God !" 
And as he rushed from the room, accom- 
panied by my father and mother, whose 
hands he grasped, I felt as if struck by a 
thunderbolt. The rushing of their robes, 
as he dragged them out, seemed like the 
whirlwind that attends the presence of tha 
destroying angel. I cried out, in my hope- 
less agony of destitution, " Oh ! that my 
brother were here to intercede for me," — 
and, as i uttered these words, I fell. My 
head struck against a marble table, and I 
sunk on the floor covered with blood. 

" The domestics (of whom, according 
to the custom of the Spanish nobility, 
there were about two hundred in the 
palace) found me in this situation. They 

K 2 



226 MELMOTH : 

uttered outcries, — assistance was procur- 
ed, — it was believed that I had attempt- 
ed to kill myself; but the surgeon who 
attended me happened to be a man both 
of science and humanity, and having 
cut away the long hair clotted with blood, 
and surveyed the wound, he pronounced 
it trifling. My mother was of his opinion, 
for within three days I was summoned to 
her apartment. I obeyed the summons. 
A black bandage, severe head-ache, and an 
unnatural paleness, were the only testi- 
monies of my accident, as it was called ; 
and the Director had suggested to her that 
this was the time to fix the impression. 
How well religious persons understand the 
secret of making every event of the pre- 
sent world operate on the future, while 
they pretend to make the future predomi- 
nate over the present. Were I to outlive 
the age of man, I should never forget my 
interview with my mother. She was alone 
when I entered, and seated with her back 
to me. I knelt and kissed her hand. Mv 



A TALE. 227 

paleness and my submission seemed to af- 
fect her, — but she struggled with her emo- 
tions, overcame them, and said in a cold 
dictated tone, " To what purpose are those 
marks of exterior reverence, when your 
heart disowns them ?" " Madam, I am not 
conscious of that." " Not conscious ! How 
then are you here ? How is it that you 
have not, long before this, spared your fa- 
ther the shame of supplicating his own 
child, — the shame, still more humiliating, 
of supplicating him in vain ; spared the 
Father Director the scandal of seeing the 
authority of the church violated in the 
person of its minister, and the remon- 
strances of duty as ineffectual as the calls 
of nature ? And me, — oh ! why have you 
not spared me this hour of agony and 
shame ?" and she burst into a flood of tears, 
that drowned my soul as she shed them. 
" Madam, what have I done that deserves 
the reproach of your tears ? My disincli- 
nation to a monastic life is no crime?' 3 
c; In you it is a crime." " But how then, ? 



£28 MELMOTH : 

dear mother, were a similar choice offered 
to my brother, would his rejection of it 
be deemed a crime ?" I said this almost in- 
voluntarily, and merely by way of com- 
parison. I had no ulterior meaning, nor 
the least idea that one could be developed 
by my mother, except a reference to an 
unjustifiable partiality. I was undeceived, 
when she added, in a voice that chilled my 
blood, " There is a great difference be- 
tween you." " Yes, Madam, he is your fa- 
vourite." <fc No, I take Heaven to witness, 
i — no;" and she, who had appeared so severe, 
so decisive, and so impenetrable before, ut- 
tered these words with a sincerity that pene- 
trated to the bottom of my heart ; — she ap- 
peared to be appealing to Heaven against 
the prejudices of her child. I was affect- 
ed — I said, " But, Madam, this difference 
of circumstances is inexplicable." " And 
would you have it explained by me?" " By 
any one, Madam." " By me /" she re- 
peated, not hearing me ; then kissing a 
crucifix than hung on her bosom, " My 



A TALE. 229 

God ! the chastisement is just, and I sub- 
mit to it, though inflicted by my own 
child. You are illegitimate," she added, 
turning suddenly towards me ; " you are 
illegitimate, — your brother is not ; and 
your intrusion into your father's house is 
not only its disgrace, but a perpetual mo- 
nitor of that crime which it aggravates 
without absolving." I stood speechless. 
" Oh ! my child," she continued, " have 
mercy on your mother. Has not this con- 
fession, extorted from her by her own son, 
been sufficient to expiate her offence?" 
7 Go on, Madam, I can bear any thing 
now." " You must bear it, for you have 
forced me to this disclosure. I am of rank 
far inferior to your father, — you were our 
first child. He loved me, and forgiving 
my weakness as a proof of my devotion 
to him, we were married, and your bro- 
ther is our lawful child. Your father, 
anxious for my reputation, since I was 
united to him, agreed with me, as our 
marriage was private, and its date uncer- 



830 MELMOTH : 

tain, that you should be announced as our 
legitimate offspring. For years your 
grandfather, incensed at our marriage, re- 
fused to see us, and we lived in retirement, 
—would that I had died there. A few 
days before his death he relented, and sent 
for us ; it was no time to acknowledge the 
imposition practised on him, and you were 
introduced as the child of his son, and the 
heir of his honours. But from that hour I 
have never known a moment's peace. The 
lie I had dared to utter before God and the 
world, and to a dying parent, — the injustice 
done to your brother , — the violation of na- 
tural duties and of legal claims, — the con- 
vulsions of my conscience, that heavily up- 
braided me, not only with vice and perjury, 
but with sacrilege." " Sacrilege !" " Yes ; 
every hour you delay the assumption of 
the habit is a robbery of God. Before you 
were born, I devoted you to him, as the 
only expiation of my crime. While 1 yet 
T)ore you in my bosom without life, I dared 
to implore his forgiveness only on the con- 



A TALE. 231 

dition of your future intercession for me as 
a minister of religion. I relied on your 
prayers before you could speak. I proposed 
to intrust my penitence to one, who, in 
becoming the child of God, had atoned for 
my offence in making him the child of sin, 
In imagination I knelt already at your 
confessional, — heard you, by the authority 
of the church, and the commission of 
Heaven, pronounce me forgiven. I saw 
you stand beside my dying bed, — I felt 
you press the cross to my cold lips, and 
point to that heaven where I hoped my 
vow had already secured a seat for you. 
Before your birth I had laboured to lift 
you to heaven, and my recompence is, 
that your obstinacy threatens to drag us 
both into the gulph of perdition. Oh ! my 
child, if our prayers and intercessions are 
available to the delivery of the souls of our 
departed relatives from punishment, hear 
the adjuration of a living parent, who im- 
plores you not to seal her everlasting con- 
demnation !" I was unable to answer, my 



£32 MELMOTH : 

mother saw it, and redoubled her efforts. 
" My son, if I thought that my kneel- 
ing at your feet would soften your obdu- 
racy, I would prostrate myself before them 
this moment." " Oh ! madam, the sight 
of such unnatural humiliation ought to 
kill me." "And yet you will not yield — 
the agony of this confession, the interests 
of my salvation and your own, nay, the 
preservation of my life, are of no weight 
with you." She perceived that these 
words made me tremble, and repeated, 
" Yes, my life ; beyond the day that your 
inflexibility exposes me to infamy, I will 
not live. If you have resolution, I have 
resolution too; nor do 1 dread the result, 
for God will charge on your soul, not on 
mine, the crime an unnatural child has 
forced me to — and yet you will npt yield. — 
Well, then, the prostration of my body is 
nothing to that prostration of soul you 
have already driven me to. 1 kneel to my 
own child for life and for salvation," and 
she knelt to me. I attempted to raise her; 



A TALE. 283 

she repelled me, and exclaimed, in a voice 
hoarse with despair, " And you will not 
yield ?" " I do not say so." " And what, 
then, do you say? — raise me not, approach 
me not, till you answer me." " That I 
will think." " Think! you must decide." 
" I do, then, I do." " But how ?" " To 
be whatever you would have me." As I 
uttered these w r ords, my mother fell in a 
swoon at my feet. As I attempted to lift 
her up, scarce knowing if it was not a corse 
I held in my arms, I felt I never could 
have forgiven myself if she had been re- 
duced to that situation by my refusing 

to comply with her last request. * 

* * * *■- 

I was overpowered with congratula- 
tions, blessings, and embraces. I received 
them with trembling hands, cold lips, a 
rocking brain, and a heart that felt turn- 
ed to stone. Every thing passed before 
me as in a dream. I saw the pageant 
move on, without a thought of who was 
to be the victim, I returned to the con- 



2$4 MELMOTH : 

vent — 1 felt my destiny was fixed — 1 had 
no wish to avert or arrest it — I was like 
one who sees an enormous engine (whose 
operation is to crush him to atoms) put 
in motion, and, stupified with horror, 
gazes on it with a calmness that might 
be mistaken for that of one who was 
eoolly analysing the complication of its 
machinery, and calculating the resist- 
less crush of its blow. I have read of a 
wretched Jew *, who, by the command of 
a Moorish emperor, was exposed in an 
area to the rage of a lion who had been 
purposely kept fasting for eight and forty 
hours. The horrible roar of the famished 
and infuriated animal made even the exe- 
cutioners tremble as they fastened the rope 
round the body of the screaming victim. 
Amid hopeless struggles, supplications for 
mercy, and shrieks of despair, he was 
bound, raised, and lowered into the area. 
At the moment he touched the ground, 
he fell prostrate, stupefied, annihilated, 

* Vide Buffa — Anachronism prepense, 



A TALE. 235 

He uttered no cry — he did not draw a 
breath — he did not make an effort — he 
fell contracting his whole body into a ball, 
and lay as senseless as a lump of earth. — 
So it fared with me ; my cries and strug- 
gles were over, — 1 had been flung into the 
area, and I lay there. I repeated to my- 
self, " I am to be a monk," and there the 
debate ended. If they commended me for 
the performance of my exercises, or re- 
proved me for my deficiency, I showed 
neither joy nor sorrow, — I said only, " I 
am to be a monk." If they urged me to 
take exercise in the garden of the convent, 
or reproved me for my excess in walk- 
ing beyond the allotted hours, I still an- 
swered, " I am to be a monk." I was 
showed much indulgence in these wander- 
ings. A son — the eldest son of the Duke 
de Moneada, taking the vows, was a glo- 
rious triumph for the ex- Jesuits, and they 
did not fail to make the most of it. They 
asked what books I would like to read,-— 
I answered, " What they pleased," They 



236 MELMOTH : 

saw I was fond of flowers, and vases of 
porcelain, filled with the most exquisite 
produce of their garden, (renewed every 
day), embellished my apartment. I was 
fond of music, — that they perceived from 
my involuntary joining in the choir. My 
voice was good, and my profound me- 
lancholy gave an expression to my tones, 
which these men, always on the watch to 
grasp at any thing that may aggrandize 
them, or delude their victims, assured me 
were like the tones of inspiration. 

" Amid these displays of indulgence, 
I exhibited an ingratitude totally fo- 
reign from my character. I never read 
the books they furnished me with, — I 
neglected the flowers with which they 
filled my room,— and the superb organ 
they introduced into my apartment, I 
never touched, except to elicit some 
deep and melancholy chords from its 
keys. To those who urged me to employ 
my talents for painting and music, I still 
answered with the same apathetic mono- 
tony, " I am to be a monk." " But, my 



A TALE. 237 

brother, the love of flowers, of music, 
of all that can be consecrated to God, 
is also worthy of the attention of man 
— you abuse the indulgence of the Su- 
perior." " Perhaps so." " You must, 
in gratitude to God, thank him for these 
lovely works of his creation ;" — the room 
was at this time filled with carnations and 
roses ; — " you must also be grateful to him 
for the powers with which he has distin- 
guished you in hymning his praises — your 
voice is the richest and most powerful 
in the church." " 1 don't doubt it." " My 
brother, you answer at random." " Just 
as I feel— but don't heed that." " Will you 
take a turn in the garden ?" " If you 
please." 6t Or will you seek a moment's 
consolation from the Superior?" " If you 
please." " But why do you speak with 
such apathy ? are the odour of the flowers, 
and the consolations of your Superior, to be 
appreciated in the same breath ?" " I be- 
lieve so." f* Why ?" " Because I am to 
be a monk." " Nay, brother, will you 



23S MELMOTH : 

never utter any thing but that phrase, 
which carries no meaning with it but that 
of stupefaction or delirium ?" " Imagine 
me, then, stupefied, delirious — what you 
please — you know I must be a monk." 
At these words, which I suppose I uttered 
in a tone unlike that of the usual chaunt 
of monastic conversation, another inter- 
posed, and asked what I was uttering in 
so loud a key ? " I am only saying," I re- 
plied, " that I must be a monk." " Thank 
God it is no worse," replied the querist, 
" your contumacy must long ago have 
wearied the Superior and the brethren — 
thank God it's no worse." At these words 
1 felt my passions resuscitated, — I exclaim- 
ed, " Worse ! what have I to dread ? — am 
I not to be a monk ?" From that evening, 
(I forget when it occurred), my liberty was 
abridged ; I was no longer suffered to walk, 
to converse with the boarders or novices, — 
a separate table was spread for me in the 
refectory, — the seats near mine were left 
vacant at service, — yet still my cell was 



A TALE. 239 

embellished with flowers and engravings, 
and exquisitely-wrought toys were left on 
my table. I did not perceive they were 
treating me as a lunatic, yet certainly 
my foolishly reiterated expressions might 
have justified them in doing so, — they had 
their own plans in concert with the Direc- 
tor, — my silence went for proof. The Di- 
rector came often to visit me, and the hy- 
pocritical wretches would accompany him 
to my cell. I was generally (for want of 
other occupation) attending to my flowers, 
or gazing at the engravings, — and they 
would say, " You see he is as happy as he 
wishes to be — he wants for nothing — he is 
quite occupied in watching those roses.** 
" No, I am not occupied," I returned, " it 
is occupation I want." Then they shrug- 
ged their shoulders, exchanged mysterious 
looks with the Director, and I was glad 
when they were gone, without reflecting 
on the mischief their absence threatened 
me with. At this moment, consultation af- 
ter consultation was held at the palace de 



240 MELMOTH : 

Moncada, whether I could be induced t# 
shew sufficient intellect to enable me to 
pronounce the vows. It seems the reve- 
rend fathers were as anxious as their old 
enemies the Moors, to convert an idiot in- 
to a saint. There was now a party com- 
bined against me, that it would have re- 
quired more than the might of man to resist. 
All was uproar from the palace de Mon- 
cada to the convent, and back again. I 
was mad, contumacious, heretical, idiotical, 
—any thing — every thing- — that could ap- 
pease the jealous agony of my parents, the 
cupidity of the monks, or the ambition of 
the ex-Jesuits, who laughed at the terror 
of all the rest, and watched intently over 
their own interests. Whether I was mad 
or not, they cared very little ; to enroll a 
son of the first house of Spain among their 
converts, or to imprison him as a madman, 
or to exorcise him as a demoniac, was all 
the same to them. There was a coup de 
theatre to be exhibited, and provided they 
played first parts, they cared little about 



A TALE. 241 

the catastrophe. Luckily, during all this 
uproar of imposture, fear, falsehood, and 
misrepresentation, the Superior remained 
steady. He let the tumult go on, to ag- 
grandize his importance ; but he was re- 
solved all the time that I should have sa- 
nity enough to enable me to take the vows. 
I knew nothing of all this, but was asto- 
nished at being summoned to the parlour 
on the last eve of my noviciate. I had 
performed my religious exercises with re- 
gularity, had received no rebukes from 
the master of the novices, and was totally 
unprepared for the scene that awaited me, 
In the parlour were assembled my father, 
mother, the Director, and some other per- 
sons whom I did not recognize. I ad- 
vanced with a calm look, and equal step. 
I believe I was as much in possession of 
my reason as any one present. The Su- 
perior, taking my arm, led me round the 

room, saying, " You see " I inter* 

rupted him — " Sir, what is this intend- 
VOL. i. L 



242 MELMOTH f 

ed for?" He answered only by putting 
his finger on his lips, and then desired me 
to exhibit my drawings. I brought 
them, and offered them on one knee, first 
to my mother, and then to my father. 
They were sketches of monasteries and 
prisons. My mother averted her eyes 
—and my father said, pushing them a- 
way, " I have no taste in those things." 
" But you are fond of music doubtless," 
said the Superior; " you must hear his 
performance." There was a small organ 
in the room adjacent to the parlour ; my 
mother was not admitted there, but my 
father followed to listen. Involuntarily I 
selected an air from the " Sacrifice of 
Jephtha." My father was affected, and bid 
me cease. The Superior imagined this 
was not only a tribute to my talent, but 
an acknowledgement of the power of his 
party, and he applauded without measure 
or judgement. Till that moment, I had 
never conceived I could be the object of a 



A TALE. 243 

party in the convent. The Superior was 
determined to make me a Jesuit, and 
therefore was pledged for my sanity. The 
monks wished for an exorcism, an auto 
defe, or some such bagatelle, to diversify 
the dreariness of monasticism, and there- 
fore were anxious I should be, or appear, 
deranged or possessed. Their pious wishes, 
however, failed. I had appeared when sum- 
moned, behaved with scrupulous correct- 
ness, and the next day was appointed for 
my taking the vows. 

" That next day— Oh ! that I could de- 
scribe it ! — but it is impossible — the pro- 
found stupefaction in which I was plung- 
ed prevented my noticing things which 
would have inspired the most uninterested 
spectator. I was so absorbed, that though 
I remember facts, I cannot paint the slight- 
est trace of the feelings which they excited. 
During the night I slept profoundly, till I 
was awoke by a knock at my door. — " My 
dear child, how are you employed ?" I knew 



£44 MELMOTH : 

the voice of the Superior, and I replied, 
" My father, I was sleeping." " And I 
was macerating myself at the foot of the 
altar for you, my child, — the scourge is 
red with my blood." I returned no an- 
swer, for I felt the maceration was better 
merited by the betrayer than the betrayed. 
Yet I was mistaken ; for in fact, the Su- 
perior felt some compunction, and had un- 
dergone this penance on account of my re- 
pugnance and alienation of mind, more 
than for his own offences. But Oh ! how 
false is a treaty made with God, which we 
ratify with our own blood, when he has 
declared there is but one sacrifice he will 
accept, even that of the Lamb slain from 
the foundation of the world ! Twice in 
the night, I was thus disturbed, and twice 
answered in the same language. The Su- 
perior, I make no doubt, was sincere. He 
thought he was doing all for God, and his 
bleeding shoulders testified his zeal. But 
I was in such a state of mental ossification. 



A TAIJE. 245 

that I neither felt, heard, or understood ; 
and when he knocked a second and third 
time at the door of my cell to announce 
the severity of his macerations, and the ef- 
ficacy of his intercessions with God, I an- 
swered, " Are not criminals allowed to 
sleep the night before their execution?" 
At hearing these words, which must have 
made him shudder, the Superior fell 
prostrate before the door of my cell, 
and I turned to sleep again. But 1 could 
hear the voices of the monks as they 
raised the Superior, and bore him to his 
cell. They said, " He is incorrigible — you 
humiliate yourself in vain — when he is 
ours, you shall see him a different being — 
he shall then prostrate himself before you." 
I heard this, and slept on. The morning 
came — I knew what it would bring — I 
dramatized the whole scene in my own 
mind, I imagined I witnessed the tears 
of my parents, the sympathy of the con- 
gregation. I thought I saw the hands 



246 MKLMOTH : 

of the priests tremble as they tossed the 
incense, and even the acolytes shiver as 
they held their robes. Suddenly my mind 
changed: I felt — what was it I felt? — a 
union of malignity, despair, and power, 
the most formidable. Lightning seemed 
flashing from my eyes as I reflected, — I 
might make the sacrificers and the sacri- 
ficed change places in one moment, — I 
might blast my mother as she stood, by a 
word, — I might break my father's heart, 
by a single sentence, — I might scatter 
more desolation around me, than it was 
apparently possible for human vice, human 
power, or human malignity, more potent 
th'in both, to cause to its most abject vic- 
tim. — Yes ! — on that morning I felt within 
myself the struggles of nature, feeling, 
compunction, pride, malevolence, and de- 
spair. — The former I had brought with me, 
the latter had been all acquired in the con- 
vent. I said to those who attended me 
that morning, " You are arraying me for 



A TALK. 247 

a victim, but I can turn the executioners 
into the victims if I please" — and I laugh- 
ed. The laugh terrified those who were 
about me — they retreated — they repre- 
sented my state to the Superior. He came 
to my apartment. The whole convent was 
by this time alarmed — their credit was at 
stake — the preparations had all been made 
— the whole world was determined I was 
to be a monk, mad or not. 

* The Superior was terrified, I saw, as 
he entered my apartment. " My son, 
what means all this ?" " Nothing, my fa- 
ther — nothing but a sudden thought that 
has struck me." " We will discuss it an- 
other time, my son ; at present — " u At 
present" I repeated with a laugh that 
must have lacerated the Superior's ears — 
M At present I have but one alternative to 
propose — let my father or my brother take 
my place — that is all. I will never be a 
monk." The Superior, at these words, ran 
ill despair round the cell. 1 followed him, 
exclaiming, in a voice that must have filled 



248 MELMOTH ! 

him with horror, " I exclaim against the 
vows — let those who forced me to it, take 
the guilt on themselves — let my father, in 
his own person, expiate his guilt in bringing 
me into the world — let my brother sacrifice 
his pride — why must I be the only victim 
of the crime of the one, and the passions 
of the other ?" " My son, all this was ar- 
ranged before." " Yes, I know that — I 
know that by a decree of the Almighty I 
was doomed to be cursed even in my mo- 
ther's womb, but I will never subscribe that 
decree with my own hand." " My son, 
what can I say to you — you have passed 
your noviciate." " Yes, in a state of stu- 
pefaction." " All Madrid is assembled to 
hear you take your vows." " Then all 
Madrid shall hear me renounce them, and 
disavow them." " This is the very day 
fixed on. The ministers of God are pre- 
pared to yield you to his arms. Heaven 
and earth, — all that is valuable in time, or 
precious in eternity, are summoned, are 
waiting for the irrevocable words that seaL 



A TALE. 249 

your salvation, and ensure that of those 
you love. What demon has taken pos- 
session of you, my child, and seized the 
moment you • were coming to Christ, to 
cast you down, and tear you ? How shall 
I — how shall the fraternity, and all the 
souls who are to escape from punishment 
by the merit of your prayers, answer to 
God for your horrible apostacy ?" " Let 
them answer for themselves — let every one 
of us answer for ourselves — that is the dic- 
tate of reason." " Of reason, my deluded 
child, — when had reason any thing to do 
with religion ?" I had sat down, folded 
my arms on my breast, and forbore to an- 
swer a word. The Superior stood with 
his arms crossed, his head declined, his 
whole figure in an air of profound and 
mortified contemplation. Any one else 
would have imagined him seeking God in 
the abvsses of meditation, but I felt he was 
only seeking him where he is never to be 
found, — in the abyss of that heart which is 
" deceitful and desperately wicked." He 

L 2 



250 MELMOTH : 

approached— I exclaimed, " Come not near 
me! — you will renew again the story of 
my submission— I tell you it was artificial;— 
of my regularity in devotional exercises- 
it was all mechanism or imposture ;— of my 
conformity to discipline — it was all prac- 
tised with the hope of escaping from it ul- 
timately. Now, I feel my conscience dis- 
charged and my heart lightened. Do you 
hear, do you understand me ? These are 
the first words of truth I ever uttered since I 
entered these walls — the only ones that will, 
perhaps, ever be uttered within them — aye, 
treasure them up, knit your brows, and 
cross yourself, and elevate your eyes as 
you will. Go on with your religious 
drama. What is there you see before you 
so horrible, that you recoil, that you cross 
yourself, that you lift your eyes and hands 
to heaven ? — a creature whom despair has 
driven to utter desperate truth! Truth 
may be horrible to the inmates of a con- 
vent, whose whole life is artificial and 
perverted, — whose very hearts are sophis- 



A TALE. 251 

ticated beyond the hand even of Heaven 
(which they alienate by their hypocrisy) 
to touch. But I feel I am at this moment 
an object of less horror in the sight of 
the Deity, than if I were standing at his 
altar, to (as you would urge me) insult him 
with vows, which my heart was bursting 
from my bosom to contradict, at the mo- 
ment I uttered them." 

i( At these words, which I must have 
uttered with the most indecent and insult- 
ing violence, I almost expected the Supe- 
rior would have struck me to the earth, — 
would have summoned the lay-brothers to 
bear me to confinement, — would have shut 
me up in the dungeon of the convent, for 
I knew there was such a place. Perhaps 
I wished for all this. Driven to extremity 
myself, I felt a kind of pride in driving 
others to it in return. Any thing of vio- 
lent excitement, of rapid and giddy vicis- 
situde, or even of intense suffering, I was 
prepared for, and equal to, at that mo- 
ment. But these paroxysms soon exhaust 
themselves and us by their violence. 



£5£ MELMOTH : 

Astonished by the Superior's silence, I 
raised my eyes to him. I said, in a tone 
of moderation that seemed unnatural to 
my own ears, " Well, let me hear my 
sentence." He was silent still. He had 
watched the crisis, and now skilfully seiz- 
ed the turn of the mental disease, to ex- 
hibit his applications. He was standing 
before me meek and motionless, his arms 
crossed, his eyes depressed, not the slight- 
est indication of resentment to be traced 
in his whole figure. The folds of his ha- 
bit, refusing to announce his internal agi- 
tation, seemed as they were cut out of • 
stone. His silence imperceptibly soft- 
ened me, — I blamed myself for my -vio- 
lence. Thus men of the world command 
us by their passions, and men of the other 
world by the apparent suppression of them. 
At last he said, " My son, you have re- 
volted from God, resisted his Holy Spirit, 
profaned his sanctuary, and insulted his 
minister, — in his name and my own 1 for- 
give you all. Judge of the various cha- 



A TALE. 25$ 

racters of our systems, by their different 
results on us two. You revile, defame, 
and accuse, — I bless and forgive ; which of 
us is then under the influence of the gos- 
pel of Christ, and within the pale of the 
church's benediction ? But leaving this 
question, which you are not at present in 
a frame to decide, I shall urge but one to- 
pic more ; if that fails, I shall no longer 
oppose your wishes, or urge you to prosti- 
tute a sacrifice which man would despise, 
and God must disdain. I add, I will even 
do my utmost to facilitate your wishes, 
which are now in fact my own." At these 
words, so full of truth and benignity, I 
was rushing to prostrate myself at his feet, 
but fear and experience checked me, and 
I only bowed. " Promise me merely that 
you will wait with patience till this last 
topic is urged ; whether it succeeds or not 
I have now little interest, and less care." I 
promised, — he went out. A few moments 
after he returned. His air was a little 
more disturbed, but still struggling for a 



254 MELMOTH : 

calmness of expression. There was agita- 
tion about him, but I knew not whether 
it was felt on his own account or mine. 
He held the door half open, and his first 
sentence astonished me. — " My son, you 
are well acquainted with the classical his- 
tories." " But what is that to the purpose, 
my father ?" " You remember a remark- 
able story of the Roman general, who 
spurned from the steps of his tribune, 
people, senators, and priests, — trampled 
on all law, — outraged all religion, — but 
was at last moved by nature, for, when 
his mother prostrated herself before him, 
and exclaimed, ' My son, before you tread 
the streets of Rome, you must first tread 
on the body of her who bore you !' he re- 
lented." " I remember all, but to what 
does this tend ?" " To this" and he threw 
open the door ; " now, prove yourself, if 
vou can, more obdurate than a heathen." 
As the door opened, across the threshold 
lay my mother, prostrate on her face. 
She said in a stifled voice, " Advance, — 



A TALE, 255 

break your vows, — but you must rush to 
perjury over the body of your mother." 
I attempted to raise her, but she clung to 
the ground, repeating the same words ; 
and her magnificent dress, that overspread 
the floor of stone with gems and velvet, 
frightfully contrasted her posture of hu- 
miliation, and the despair that burned in 
her eyes, as she raised them to me for a 
moment. Convulsed with agony and hor- 
ror, 1 reeled into the arms of the Superior, 
who seized that moment to bear me to the 
church. My mother followed, — the cere- 
mony proceeded. I vowed chastity, po- 
verty, and obedience, and in a few mo- 
ments my destiny was decided. * 

" Day followed day for many a month, 
of which I have no recollections, nor wish 
to have any. I must have experienced 
many emotions, but they all subsided like 
the waves of the sea under the darkness of 
a midnight sky, — their fluctuation conti- 
nues, but there is no light to mark their 



256 MELMOTH : 

motion, or trace when they rise and fall. 
A deep stupor pervaded my senses and 
soul ; and perhaps, in this state, I was best 
fitted for the monotonous existence to 
which I was doomed. It is certain that I 
performed all the conventual functions 
with a regularity that left nothing to be 
blamed, and an apathy that left nothing 
for praise. My life was a sea without a 
tide. The bell did not toll for service with 
more mechanical punctuality than I obey- 
ed the summons. No automaton, con- 
structed on the most exquisite principles 
of mechanism, and obeying those princi- 
ples with a punctuality almost miraculous, 
could leave the artist less room for com- 
plaint or disappointment, than I did the 
Superior and community. I was always 
first in my place in the choir. I received 
no visits in the parlour, — when I was per- 
mitted to go, I declined the permission. 
If penance was enjoined, I submitted ; if 
relaxation was permitted, I never partook 
of it. I never asked a dispensation from 



A TALE. 257 

morning prayers, or from vigils. I was 
silent in the refectory, — in the garden I 
walked alone. 1 neither thought, nor felt, 
nor lived, — if life depends on consciousness, 
and the motions of the will. I slept 
through my existence like the Simorgh in 
the Eastern fable, but this sleep was not 
to last long. My abstraction and calmness 
would not do for the Jesuits. My stupor, 
my noiseless tread, my fixed eyes, my 
ghastly silence, might indeed have im- 
pressed a superstitious community with 
the idea that it was no human creature 
who stalked through their cloisters, and 
haunted their choir. But they had quite 
different ideas. They considered all this 
as a tacit reproach to the struggles, the 
squabbles, the intrigues, and the circum- 
ventions, in which they were immersed, 
body and soul, from morn till night. Per- 
haps they thought I was lying in reserve, 
only to watch them. Perhaps there might 
have been a dearth of some matter of curio- 
sity or complaint in the convent just then, 



258 MELMOTH : 

— a very little serves for either. However it 
was, they began to revive the old story of 
my being deranged, and resolved to make 
the most of it. They whispered in the refec- 
tory, consulted in the garden, — shook their 
heads, pointed at me in the cloister, and fi- 
nally, I faithfully believe, worked themselves 
into the conviction that what they wished 
or imagined was actually true. Then they 
all felt their consciences interested in the 
investigation ; and a select party, headed 
by an old monk of influence and reputa- 
tion, waited on the Superior. They stat- 
ed to him my abstraction, my mechanical 
movements, my automaton figure, my 
meanless words, my stupifled devotion, 
my total alienation from the spirit of the 
monastic life, while my scrupulous, wood- 
en, jointless exactness in its forms w r as 
only a mockery. The Superior heard 
them with great indifference. He had 
held secret intelligence with my family, 
had communicated with the Director, and 
pledged himself that I should be a monk, 



A TALE. 259 

He had succeeded by dint of exertions, 
(the result of which has been seen), and 
now cared very little whether I was mad 
or not. With a grave air he forbid their 
further interference in the matter, and re- 
served its future cognizance to himself. 
They retired defeated, but not disappoint- 
ed, and they all pledged themselves to 
each other to watch me ; that is, to harass, 
persecute, and torment me into being the 
very character with which their malice, 
their curiosity, or their mere industry of 
idleness and wantonness of unoccupied in- 
vention, had invested me already. From 
that hour the whole convent was m & tu- 
mult of conspiracy and combination. 
Doors were clapped to wherever I was 
heard to approach ; and three or four 
would stand whispering near where I 
walked, and clear their throats, and ex- 
change signs, and pass audibly to the most 
trifling topics in my hearing, as if to inti- 
mate, while they affected to conceal it, 
that their last topic had been me. I laugh- 



2160 MEI410TH : 

ed at this internally. I said to myself, 
" Poor perverted beings, with what affec- 
tation of dramatic bustle and contrivance 
you labour to diversify the misery of your 
hopeless vacancy ; — you struggle, — I sub- 
mit." Soon the toils they were preparing 
began to tighten round me. They would 
throw themselves in my way with an assi- 
duity 1 could not avoid, and an appear- 
ance of kindness I did not willingly repel. 
They would say, in the blandest tones, 
" My dear brother, you are melancholy,-^- 
you are devoured with chagrin, — would 
to God our fraternal efforts could banish 
your regrets. But from what arises that 
melancholy that appears to consume you ?" 
At these words I could not help fixing on 
them eyes full of reproaches, and I believe 
of tears, — but I did not utter a word. 
The state in which they saw me, was a 
sufficient cause for the melancholy with 

which I was reproached. 

# # #• * 

" This attack having failed, another me« 



A TALE. £61 

thod was tried. They attempted to make 
me a party in the parties of the convent. 
They told me a thousand things of unjust 
partialities, — of unjust punishments, daily 
to be witnessed in the convent. They talked 
of a sickly brother being compelled to at- 
tend matins, while the physician pronounced 
his attendance on them must be his death, 
— and he died, — while a young favourite, 
in the bloom of health, had a dispensation 
from matins whenever he pleased to lie till 
nihe in the morning ; — of complaints that 
the confessional was not attended to as it 
ought, — and this might have made some 
impression on me, till another complainant 
added, and the turning-box is not at- 
tended to as it ought to be. This union of 
dissonant sounds, — this startling transition 
from a complaint of neglecting the myste- 
ries of the soul in its profoundest commu- 
nion with God, to the lowest details of the 
abuses of conventual discipline, revolted 
me at once. I had with difficulty conceal- 
ed my disgust till tfe«n, and it was now so 



262 MELMOTH : 

obvious, that the party gave up their at- 
tempt for the moment, and beckoned to 
an experienced monk to join me in my 
solitary walk, as I broke from them. He 
approached, " My brother, you are alone." 
M I wish to be so." " But why ?" " I am 
not obliged to announce my reasons." 
" True, but you may confide them to me." 
" I have nothing to confide." " I know 
that, — I would not for the world intrude 
on your confidence; reserve that for friends 
more honoured." It struck me as rather 
odd, that he should, in the same breath, 
ask for my confidence, — declare that he 
was conscious I had nothing to intrust to 
him, — and, lastly, request a reserve of my 
confidence for some more favoured friend. 
I was silent, however, till he said, " But, 
my brother, you are devoured with ennui." 
I was silent still. " Would to God I could 
find the means to dissipate it." I said, 
looking on him calmly, " Are those means 
to be found within the walls of a convent ?" 



A TALE. 26B 

*f Yes, my dear brother, — yes, certainly, — 
the debate in which the convent is now 
engaged about the proper hour for matins, 
which the Superior wants to have restored 
to the original hour." " What is the dif- 
ference ?" " Full jive minutes" " I con- 
fess the importance of the question." " Oh ! 
if you once begin to feel it, there wiH be 
no end of your happiness in a convent. 
There is something every moment to in- 
quire, to be anxious about, and to con- 
tend for. Interest yourself, my dear bro- 
ther, in these questions, and you will not 
have a moment's ennui to complain of." 
At these words I fixed my eyes on him. 
I said calmly, but I believe emphatically, 
" I have, then, only to excite in my own 
mind, spleen, malignity, curiosity, every 
passion that your retreat should have afford- 
ed me protection against, to render that re- 
treat supportable. Pardon me, if I cannot, 
like you, beg of God permission to take 
his enemy into compact against the corrup- 
tion which I promote, while I presume to 



264 MELMOTH : 

pray against it." He was silent, lifted up 
his hands, and crossed himself; and I said 
to myself, " God forgive your hypocrisy," 
as he went into another walk, and repeat- 
ed to his companions, " He is mad, irre- 
coverably mad." " But how, then ?" said 
several voices. There was a stifled whis- 
per. I saw several heads bent together. I 
did not know what they were meditating, 
nor did I care. I was walking alone, — it 
was a delicious moon-light evening. I saw 
the moon-beams through the trees, but the 
trees all looked to me like walls. Their 
trunks were as adamant, and the interlaced 
branches seemed to twine themselves into 
folds that said, " Beyond us there is no 
passing." I sat down by the side of a foun- 
tain, — there was a tall poplar over it, — I 
remember their situation well. An elderly 
priest (who, I did not see, was detached 
by the party) sat down beside me. He 
began some common-place observations on 
the transiency of human existence. I 
shook my head, and he understood, by a 



A TALE. 265 

kind of tact not uncommon among Jesuits, 
that it would not do. He shifted the sub- 
ject, remarked on the beauty of the fo- 
liage, and the limpid purity of the foun- 
tain. I assented. He added, " Oh that 
life were pure as that stream !" I sighed, 
" Oh that life were verdant and fertile to 
me as that tree !" " But, my son, may not 
fountains be dried up, and trees be wither- 
ed ?" u . Yes, my father, — yes, — the foun- 
tain of my life has been dried up, and the 
green branch of my life has been blasted 
for ever." As I uttered these words, I 
could not suppress some tears. The father 
seized on what he called the moment when 
God was breathing on my soul. Our con- 
versation was very long, and I listened to 
him with a kind of reluctant and stubborn 
attention, because I had involuntarily been 
compelled to observe, that he was the only 
person in the whole community who had 
never harassed me by the slightest impor- 
tunity either before my profession or after ; 
and when the worst things were said of me, 

VOL. I. M 



%66 MELMOTH i 

never seemed to attend; and when the 
worst things were predicted of me, shook 
his head and said nothing. His charac- 
ter was unimpeached, and his religious 
performances as exemplary and punc- 
tual as my own. With all this I felt no 
confidence in him, or in any human be- 
ing ; but I listened to him with patience, 
and my patience must have had no trivial 
trial, for, at the end of an hour, (I did 
not perceive that our conference w T as per- 
mitted quite beyond the usual hour of 
retirement), he continued repeating, " My 
dear son, you will become reconciled to 
the conventual life." " My father, never, 
never, — unless this fountain is dried up, 
and this tree withered, by to-morrow." 
" My son, God has often performed great- 
er miracles for the salvation of a soul." 

" We parted, and I retired to my cell. 
1 know not how he arid the others were 
employed, but, before matins, there was 
such a tumult in the convent, that one 
would have thought Madrid was on fire. 
Boarders, novices, and monks, ran about 



A TALE. 267 

from cell to cell, up and down the stair- 
ease, through all the corridors, unrestrain- 
ed and unquestioned, — all order was at an 
end. No bell was rung, no commands for 
restoring tranquillity issued ; the voice of 
authority seemed to have made peace for 
ever with the shouts of uproar. From my 
window I saw them running through the 
garden in every direction, embracing each 
other, ejaculating, praying, and counting 
their beads with hands tremulous, and eyes 
uplifted in extacy. The hilarity of a con- 
vent has something in it uncouth, unna- 
tural, and even alarming. I suspected 
some mischief immediately, but I said to 
myself, " The worst is over, they cannot 
make me more than a monk." — I was not 
long left in doubt. Many steps approach- 
ed my cell, numerous voices were repeat- 
ing, " Hasten, dear brother, hasten to the 
garden." I was left no choice ; they sur- 
rounded and almost bore me to the garden. 
" The whole community were assem- 
bled there, the Superior among them not 
attempting to suppress the confusion, but 



268 MELMOTH : 

rather encouraging it. There was a sufFu* 
sion of joy in every countenance, and a 
kind of artificial light in every eye, but 
the whole performance struck me as hol- 
low and hypocritical. I was led, or rather 
hurried to the spot where I had sat and 
conversed so long the preceding evening. 
The fountain was dried up 9 and the tree 
was withered. I stood speechless with as- 
tonishment, while every voice around me 
repeated, " A miracle ! a miracle ! — God 
himself has sealed your vocation with his 
own hand." The Superior made a signal 
to them to stop. He said to me in a calm 
voice, " My son, you are required only to 
believe the evidence of your own eyes. 
Will you make infidels of your very 
senses, sooner than believe God ? Prostrate 
yourself, I adjure you, before him this mo- 
ment, and, by a public and solemn act of 
faith, recognise that mercy that has not 
scrupled a miracle to invite you to salva- 
tion." 1 was amazed more than touched 
by what I saw and heard, but I threw my- 
self on my knees before them all, as I was 



A TALE. 269 

directed. I clasped my bands, and said 
aloud, " My God, if you have indeed 
vouchsafed this miracle on my account, 
you will also doubtless enrich and illumi- 
nate me with grace to apprehend and ap - 
preciate it. My mind is dark, but you 
can illuminate it. My heart is hard, but 
it is not beyond the power of omnipotence 
to touch and subdue it. An impression 
made on it this moment, a whisper sent to 
its recesses, is not less worthy of your 
mercy than an impression on inanimate 
matter, which only confounds my senses." 
The Superior interrupted me. He said, 
" Hold, those are not the words you 
should use. Your very faith is incredu- 
lous, and your prayer an ironical insult on 
the mercy it pretends to supplicate." " My 
father, put what words you please in my 
mouth, and I will repeat them, — if I am 
not convinced, I am at least subdued." 
" You must ask pardon of the community 
for the offence your tacit repugnance to 
the life of God has caused them." I did 



270 MELMOTR : 

so. " You must express your gratitude to 
the community for the joy they have tes- 
tified at this miraculous evidence of the 
truth of your vocation." I did so. " You 
must also express your gratitude to God, 
for a visible interposition of supernatural 
power, not more to the vindication of his 
grace, than to the eternal honour of this 
house, which he has been pleased to irra- 
diate and dignify by a miracle? I hesi- 
tated a little. I said, u My father, may I 
be permitted to utter this prayer internal- 
ly?" The Superior hesitated too; he 
thought it might not be well to push mat- 
ters too far, and he said at length, " As you 
please." I was still kneeling on the 
ground, close to the tree and the fountain. 
I now prostrated myself, with my face to 
the earth, and prayed internally and in- 
tensely, while they all stood around me ; 
but the language of my prayer was very 
different from what they flattered them- 
selves 1 was uttering. On rising from my 
knees, I was embraced by half the com- 



A TALE. 271 

munity. Some of them actually shed 
tears, the source of whose fountain was 
surely not in their hearts. Hypocritical joy 
insults only its dupe, but hypocritical grief 
degrades the professor. That whole day 
was passed in a kind of revelry. Exercises 
were abridged, — the refections embellished 
with confectionary, — every one had per- 
mission to 20 from cell to cell, without an 
order from the Superior. Presents of cho- 
colate, snuff, iced water, liqueurs, and (what 
was more acceptable and necessary than 
any of them) napkins and towels of the 
finest and whitest damask, circulated a- 
mcng all the members. The Superior was 
shut up half the day with two discreet 
brethren, as they are called, (that is, men 
who are elected to take part with the Su- 
perior, on supposition of their utter, su- 
perannuated incapacity, as Pope Sixtus 
was elected for his (supposed) imbecillity), 
preparing an authenticated account of the 
miracle, to be dispatched to the principal 
convents in Spain. There was no need to 



272 MELMOTH : 

distribute the intelligence through Madrid, 
— they were in possession of it an hour after 
it happened, — the malicious say an hour 
before. 

" I must confess the agitating exhilara- 
tion of this day, so unlike what I had 
ever witnessed before in a convent, pro- 
duced an effect on me I cannot describe. 
I was caressed, — made the hero of the fete, 
—(a conventual fete has always something 
odd and unnatural in it), — almost deified. 
I gave myself up to the intoxication of 
the day, — I did verily believe myself the 
favourite of the Deity for some hours. I 
said to myself a thousand flattering things. 
If this deception was criminal, I expiated 
my crime very soon. The next day every 
thine: was restored to its usual order, and 
I found that the community could pass 
from the extreme of disorder in a moment 
to the rigidity of their usual habits. 

" My conviction of this was certainly 
not diminished within the few following 
days. The oscillations of a convent vi- 



A TALE. 273 



brate within a very short interval. One 
day all is relaxation, another all is inexor- 
able discipline. Some following days I re- 
ceived a striking proof of that foundation 
on which, in despite of a miracle, my re- 
pugnance to a monastic life rested. Some 
one, it was said, had committed a slight 
breach of monastic duty. The slight 
breach was fortunately committed by a 
distant relation of the Archbishop of To- 
ledo, and consisted merely in his en- 
tering the church intoxicated, (a rare 
vice in Spaniards), attempting to drag 
the matin preacher from the pulpit, and 
failing in that, getting astride as well as 
he could on the altar, dashing down the 
tapers, overturning the vases and the pix, 
and trying to scratch out, as with the ta- 
lons of a demon, the painting that hung 
over the table, uttering all the while the 
most horrible blasphemies, and even soli- 
citing the portrait of the Virgin in lan- 
guage not to be repeated. A consultation 
was held. The community, as may be 

m % 



274 MELMOTH : 

guessed, was in an uproar while it lasted. 
Every one but myself was anxious and 
agitated. There was much talk of the in- 
quisition, — the scandal was so atrocious, 
— the outrage so unpardonable, — and a- 
tonement so impracticable. Three days 
afterwards the archbishop's mandate came 
to stop all proceedings; and the fol- 
lowing day the youth who had com- 
mitted this sacrilegious outrage appear- 
ed in the hall of the Jesuits, where the 
Superior and a few monks were assem- 
bled, read a short exercise which one of 
them had written for him on the pithy 
word " Ebrietas," and departed to take 
possession of a large benefice in the dio- 
cese of the archbishop his relative. The 
very next day after this scandalous scene 
of compromise, imposture, and profana- 
tion, a monk was detected in the act of 
going, after the permitted hour, to an ad- 
jacent cell to return a book he had bor- 
rowed. As a punishment for this offence, 
he was compelled to sit for three days at 



A TALE. 275 

refection, while we were dining, barefoot- 
ed and his tunic reversed, on the stone 
floor of the hall. He was compelled to 
accuse himself aloud of every crime, and 
of many not at all fit to be mentioned to 
our ears, and exclaim at every interval, 
" My God, my punishment is just." On 
the second day, it was found that a mat 
had been placed under him by some mer- 
ciful hand. There was an immediate com- 
motion in the hall. The poor wretch was 
labouring under a complaint that made it 
worse than death to him to be compelled 
to sit or rather lie on a stone floor ; some 
merciful being had surreptitiously convey- 
ed to him this mat. An investigation was 
immediately commenced. A youth whom 
I had not noticed before, started from the 
table, and kneeling to the Superior, con- 
fessed his guilt. The Superior assumed 
a stern look, retired with some old monks 
to consult on this new crime of humanity, 
and in a few moments the bell was rung, 
to give every one notice to retire to their 



276 MELMOTH : 

cells. We all retired trembling, and while 
we prostrated ourselves respectively before 
the crucifix in our cells, wondered who 
would be the next victim, or what might 
be his punishment. I saw that youth but 
once again. He was the son of a wealthy 
and powerful family, but even his wealth 
was no balance against his contumacy, 
in the opinion of the convent, that is, of 
four monks of rigid principles, whom the 
Superior consulted that very evening. 
The Jesuits are fond of courting power, 
but they are still fonder of keeping it, if 
they can, to themselves. The result of 
their debate was, that the offender should 
undergo a severe humiliation and penance 
in their presence. His sentence was an- 
nounced to him, and he submitted to it. 
He repeated every word of contrition they 
dictated to him. He then bared his shoul- 
ders, and applied the scourge till the blood 
flowed, repeating between every stroke, 
" My God, I ask pardon of thee for hav- 
ing given the slightest comfort or relief to 



A TALE. 277 

Fra Paolo, during his merited penance." 
He performed all this, cherishing in the 
bottom of his soul an intention still to 
comfort and relieve Fra Paolo, whenever 
he could find opportunity. He then 
thought all was over. He was desired 
to retire to his cell. He did so, but 
the monks were not satisfied with this 
examination. They had long suspected 
Fra Paolo of irregularity, and imagin- 
ed they might extort the confession 
of it from this youth, whose humanity 
increased their suspicion. The virtues of 
nature are always deemed vices in a con- 
vent. Accordingly, he had hardly been in 
bed when they surrounded him. They told 
him they came by command of the Superior 
to enjoin him a further penance, unless he 
disclosed the secret of the interest he felt 
for Fra Paolo. It was in vain he exclaimed, 
" I have no interest but that of humanity 
and compassion." Those were words they 
did not understand. It was in vain he 



278 MELMOTH : 

urged, " I will inflict whatever penance 
the Superior is pleased to order, but my 
shoulders are bleeding still," — and he shew- 
ed them. The executioners were pitiless. 
They compelled him to quit his bed, and 
applied the scourge with such outrageous 
severity, that at last, mad with shame, 
rage, and pain, he burst from them, and 
ran through the corridor calling for assist- 
ance or for mercy. The monks were in 
their cells, none dared to stir, — they shud- 
dered, and turned on their straw pallets. It 
was the vigil of Saint John the Lesser, and 
I had been commanded what is called in 
convents an hour of recollection, which 
was to be passed in the church. I had 
obeyed the order, and remained with my 
face and body prostrate on the marble 
steps of the altar, till 1 was almost uncon- 
scious, when I heard the clock strike 
twelve. I reflected the hour had elapsed 
without a single recollection on my part. 
" And thus it is to be always," I exclaim- 
ed, rising from my knees ; u they deprive 



A TALE. 279 

of the power of thinking, and then they 
bid me recollect." As I returned through 
the corridor, I heard frightful cries— I 
shuddered. Suddenly a phantom ap- 
proached me — I dropt on my knees — I 
cried, " Satana vade retro — apage Sa- 
tana." A naked human being, covered with 
blood, and uttering screams of rage and 
torture, flashed by me ; four monks pur- 
sued him — they had lights. I had shut 
the door at the end of the gallery — I felt 
they must return and pass me — I was still 
on my knees, and trembling from head to 
foot. The victim reached the door, found 
it shut, and rallied. I turned, and saw a 
groupe worthy of Murillo. A more per- 
fect human form never existed than that 
of this unfortunate youth. He stood in 
an attitude of despair — he was streaming 
with b ood. The monks, with their lights, 
their scourges, and their dark habits, seem- 
ed like a groupe of demons who had made 
prey of a wandering angel, — the groupe 
resembled the infernal furies pursuing 



£80 MELMOTH ! 

a mad Orestes. And, indeed, no ancient 
sculptor ever designed a figure more 
exquisite and perfect than that they had 
so barbarously mangled. Debilitated as 
my mind was by the long slumber of all 
its powers, this spectacle of horror and 
cruelty woke them in a moment. I rush- 
ed forward in his defence — I struggled 
with the monks — I uttered some expres- 
sions which, though I hardly was con- 
scious of, they remembered and exagge- 
rated with all the accuracy of malice. 

" I have no recollection of what followed; 
but the issue of the business was, that I 
was confined to my cell for the following 
week, for my daring interference in the 
discipline of the convent. And the addi- 
tional penance of the unfortunate novice, 
for resisting that discipline, was inflicted 
with such severity, that he became delirious 
with shame and agony. He refused food, 
he got no rest, and died the eighth night 
after the scene I had witnessed. He was 



A TALE. 281 



of a temper unusually mild and amiable — 
he had a taste for literature, and even the 
disguise of a convent could not conceal the 
distinguished graces of his person and man- 
ners. Had he lived in the world, how 
these qualities would have embellished it ! 
Perhaps the world would have abused 
and perverted them — true ; but would 
the abuses of the world ever have brought 
them to so frightful and disastrous a con- 
clusion ? — would he have been first lashed 
into madness, and then lashed out of exist- 
ence ? He was interred in the church of 
the convent, and the Superior himself pro- 
nounced his eulogium — the Superior! by 
whose order, or else permission, or at least 
connivance, he had been driven mad, in 
order to obtain a trivial and imaginary se- 
cret. 

" During this exhibition, my disgust 
arose to a degree incalculable. 1 had loath- 
ed the conventual life — I now despised it ; 
and every judge of human nature knows, 
that it is harder to eradicate the latter sen- 



282 MELMOTH : 

timent than the former. I was not long 
without an occasion for the renewed exer- 
cise of both feelings. The weather was 
intensely hot that year — an epidemic com- 
plaint broke out in the convent — every day 
two or three were ordered to the infirma- 
ry, and those who had merited slight pe- 
nances were allowed, by way of commuta- 
tion, to attend the sick. I was most 
anxious to be of the number — I was even 
resolved, by some slight deviation, to 
tempt this punishment, which would have 
been to me the highest gratification. Dare 
I confess my motive to you, Sir ? 1 was 
anxious to see those men, if possible, divest- 
ed of the conventual disguise, and forced 
to sincerity by the pangs of disease, and 
the approach of death. I triumphed al- 
ready in the idea of their dying confession, 
of hearing them acknowledge the seduc- 
tions employed to ensnare me, deplore the 
miseries in which they had involved me, 
and implore, with convulsed lips, my par- 
don in — no — not in vain. 



A TALE. 283 

" This wish, though vindictive, was not 
without its palliations ; but 1 was soon sav- 
ed the trouble of realizing it at my own 
expence. That very evening the Superior 
sent for me, and desired me to attend in 
the infirmary, allowing me, at the same 
time, remission from vespers. The first 
bed I approached, I found Fra Paolo ex- 
tended on. He had never recovered the 
effects of the complaint he laboured undei? 
at the time of his penance ; and the death 
of the young novice so (fruitlessly incurred) 
had been mortal to him. 

* I offered him medicines— I attempted 
to adjust him in his bed. He had been 
greatly neglected. He repelled both offers, 
and, feebly waving his hand, said, " Let 
me, at least, die in peace." A few mo- 
ments after, he unclosed his eyes, and re- 
cognized me. A gleam of pleasure trem- 
bled over his countenance, for he remem- 
bered the interest 1 had shewn for his un- 
fortunate friend. He said, in a voice 
hardly intelligible, " It is you, then?'* 



284 MELMOTH : 

" Yes, my brother, it is I — can I do any 
thing for you ?" After a long pause, he 
added, " Yes, you can." " Tell me then." 
He lowered his voice, which was before al- 
most inaudible, and whispered, " Let none 
of them come near me in my dying mo- 
ments — it will not give you much trouble 
— those moments are approaching." I 
pressed his hand in token of acquiescence. 
But I felt there was something at once ter- 
rifying and improper in this request from 
a dying man. I said to him, " My dear 
brother, you are then dying ? — would you 
not wish an interest in the prayers of the 
community? — would you not wish the be- 
nefit of the last sacraments ?" He shook 
his head, and I fear that I understood him 
too well. I ceased any further importuni- 
ty; and a few moments he uttered, in 
tones I could hardly distinguish, " Let 
them, let me die. — They have left me no 
power to form another wish." His eyes 
closed, — I sat beside his bed, holding his 
hand in mine. At first, I could feel he at- 



A TALE. 285 

tempted to press it — the attempt failed, 
his hold relaxed. Fra Paolo was no more. 

" I continued to sit holding the dead hand 
in mine, till a groan from an adjacent bed 
roused me. It was occupied by the old 
monk with whom I had held a long con- 
versation the night before the miracle, in 
which I still believed most firmly. 

" I have observed, that this man was of a 
temper and manners remarkably mild and 
attractive. Perhaps this is always con- 
nected with great weakness of intellect, 
and coldness of character in men. (It may 
be different in women — but my own ex- 
perience has never failed in the discovery, 
that where there was a kind of feminine 
softness and pliability in the male charac- 
ter, there was also treachery, dissimulation, 
and heartlessness.) At least, if there be 
such an union, a conventual life is sure 
to give it every advantage in its range 
of internal debility, and external seduc- 
tiveness. — That pretence of a wish to as- 
sist, without the power, or even the wish, 



286 MELMOTH : 

that is so flattering both to the weak minds 
that exercise it, and the weaker on whom 
it is exercised. This man had been al- 
ways judged very weak, and yet very fas- 
cinating. He had been always employed 
to ensnare the young novices. He was 
now dying — overcome by his situation, I 
forgot every thing but its tremendous 
claims, and offered him every assistance in 
my power. " I want nothing but to die," 
was his answer. His countenance was 
perfectly calm, but its calmness was ra- 
ther that of apathy than of resignation. 
" You are, then, perfectly sure of your ap- 
proach to blessedness ?" " I know no- 
thing about it." " How, my brother, are 
those words for a dying man to utter?" 
" Yes, if he speaks the truth." " But a 
monk? — a catholic?" " Those are but 
names — I feel that truth, at least, now." 
" You amaze me !" " I care not — I am 
on the verge of a precipice — I must plunge 
from it — and whether the by-standers utter 
outcries or not, is a matter of little conse- 



A TALE. 287 

quence to me." " And yet, you expressed 
a willingness to die?" " Willingness! 
Oh impatience ! — I am a clock that has 
struck the same minutes and hours for 
sixty years. Is it not time for the ma- 
chine to long for its winding up ? The 
monotony of my existence would make a 
transition, even to pain, desirable. I am 
weary, and would change — that is all* 
" But to me, and to all the community, 
you seemed to be resigned to the monas- 
tic life." " I seemed a lie — I lived a lie — 
I was a lie— I ask pardon of my last mo- 
ments for speaking the truth — I presume 
they neither can refuse me, or discredit my 
words— I hated the monastic life. Inflict 
pain on man, and his energies are roused — 
condemn him to insanity, and he slumbers 
like animals that have been found inclosed 
in wood and stone, torpid and content; 
but condemn him at once to pain and in- 
anity, as they do in convents, and you 
unite the sufferings of hell and of annihila- 
tion. For sixty years I have cursed my 



288 MELMOTH : 

existence. I never woke to hope, for I 
had nothing to do or to expect. I never 
lay down with consolation, for I had, at 
the close of every day, only to number so 
many deliberate mockeries of God, as ex- 
ercises of devotion. The moment life is 
put beyond the reach of your will, and 
placed under the influence of mechanical 
operations, it becomes, to thinking beings, 
a torment insupportable. 

" I never ate with appetite, because I 
knew, that with or without it, I must go 
to the refectory when the bell rung. I 
never lay down to rest in peace, because I 
knew the bell was to summon me in de- 
fiance of nature, whether it was disposed 
to prolong or shorten my repose. I never 
prayed, for my prayers were dictated to 
me. I never hoped, for my hopes were 
founded not on the truth of God, but on 
the promises and threatenings of man. My 
salvation hovered on the breath of a being 
as weak as myself, whose weakness I was 
nevertheless obliged to flatter, and struggle 



A TALE. 289 

to obtain a gleam of the grace of God, 
through the dark distorted medium of the 
vices of man. It never reached me—Y 
die without light, hope, faith, or consola- 
tion." — He uttered these words with a 
calmness that was more terrific than the 
wildest convulsions of despair. I gasped 
for breath — " But, my brother, you were 
always punctual in your religious exer- 
cises." " That was mechanism — will 
you not believe a dying man ?" " But 
you urged me, in a long conversation, to 
embrace the monastic life ; and your im- 
portunity must have been sincere, for it 
was after my profession." " It is natural 
for the miserable to wish for companions 
in their misery. This is very selfish, very 
misanthropic, you will say, but it is also 
very natural. You have yourself seen the 
cages suspended in the cells — are not the 
tame birds always employed to allure the 
wild ones? We were caged birds, can 
you blame us for the deception ?" In these 
w r ords I could not help recognizing that 

VOL. I. N 



290 MELMOTH : 

simplicity of profound corruption % — that 
frightful paralysis of the soul, which leaves 
it incapable of receiving any impression 
or making one, — that says to the accuser, 
Approach, remonstrate, upbraid— I defy 
you. My conscience is dead, and can nei- 
ther hear, utter, or echo a reproach. I was 
amazed — 1 struggled against my own con- 
viction. I said, " But your regularity in 
religious exercises — " " Did you never 
hear a bell toll ?" " But your voice was 
always the loudest and most distinct in the 
choir." " Did you never hear an organ 

played?" * * * 

* # ^ # 

I shuddered, yet I still went on with my 
queries — I thought I could not know too 
much. I said, " But, my brother, the re- 
ligious exercises in which you were con* 
stantly engaged, must have imperceptibly 
instilled something of their spirit into you ? 
— is it not so? You must have passed 

* Vide Madame Genlis's "Julien Delmour." 



A TALE. 291 

from the forms of religion into its spirit 
ultimately? — is it not so, my brother? 
Speak on the faith of a dying man. May 
I have such a hope ! I would undergo any 
thing — any thing, to obtain it." * There 
is no such hope," said the dying man, " de- 
ceive not yourself with it. The repetition 
of religious duties, without the feeling or 
spirit of religion, produces an incurable 
callosity of heart. There are not more ir- 
religious people to be found on earth than 
those who are occupied always in its ex- 
ternals. I verily believe half our lay-bro- 
thers to be Atheists. 1 have heard and 
read something of those whom we call he- 
retics. They have people to open their 
pews, (shocking profanation you will call 
it, to sell seats in the house of God, and 
you are right), they have people to ring 
bells when their dead are to be interred ; 
and these wretches have no other indica- 
tion of religion to give, but watching du- 
ring the whole time of service, (in which 
their duties forbid them to partake), for 



292 MELMOTH : 

the fees which they extort, and dropping 
upon their knees, ejaculating the names of 
Christ and God, amid the rattling of the 
pew-doors, which always operates on their 
associations, and makes them bound from 
their knees to gape for a hundredth part 
of the silver for which Judas sold his Sa- 
viour and himself. Then their bell-ringers 
—one would imagine death might human* 
ize them. Oh ! no such thing — they extort 
money in proportion to the depth of the 
grave. And the bell-ringer, the sexton, 
and the survivors, fight sometimes a ma- 
nual battleover the senseless remains, whose 
torpidity is the most potent and silent re- 
proach to this unnatural conflict." I knew 
nothing of this, but I grasped at his former 
words, " You die, then, without hope or 
confidence?" He was silent. " Yet you 
urged me by eloquence almost divine, by 
a miracle verified before my own eyes." 
He laughed. There is something very 
horrible in the laugh of a dying man : 
Hovering on the verge of both worlds, he 



A TALE. 293 

seems to give the lie to both, and proclaim 
the enjoyments of one, and the hopes of 
another, alike an imposture. " I perform- 
ed that miracle myself," he said with all 
the calmness, and, alas ! something of the 
triumph of a deliberate impostor. " I 
knew the reservoir by which the fountain 
was supplied — by consent of the Superior 
it was drawn off in the course of the night. 
We worked hard at it, and laughed at your 
credulity every pump we drew." " But 
the tree — " " I was in possession of some 
chemical secrets — I have not time to disclose 
them now — I scattered a certain fluid over 
the leaves of the poplar that night, and 
they appeared withered by the morning — 
go look at them a fortnight hence, and 
you will see them as green as ever." " And 
these are your dying words ?" " They are." 
" And why did you deceive me thus ?" 
He struggled a short time at this question, 
and then rising almost upright in his bed, 
exclaimed, " Because I was a monk, and 
wished for victims of my imposture to gra- 



294 MELMOTH : 

tify my pride ! and companions of my mi- 
sery, to soothe its malignity!" He was 
convulsed as he spoke, the natural mild- 
ness and calmness of his physiognomy 
were changed for something that I cannot 
describe — something at once derisive, tri- 
umphant, and diabolical. I forgave him 
every thing in that horrible moment. I 
snatched a crucifix that lay by his bed — I 
offered it to his lips. He pushed it away. 
u If I wanted to have this farce acted, I 
should choose another actor. You know 
I might have the Superior and half the 
convent at my bed-side this moment if I 
pleased, with their tapers, their holy water, 
and their preparations for extreme unction, 
and all the masquerade of death, by which 
they try to dupe even the dying, and in- 
sult God even on the threshold of his own 
eternal mansion. I suffered you to sit be- 
side me, because I thought, from your re- 
pugnance to the monastic life, you might 
be a willing hearer of its deceptions, and 
its despair." 



A TALE. 295 

* Deplorable as had been the image of 
that life to me before, this representation 
exceeded my imagination. I had viewed 
it as excluding all the enjoyments of life, 
and thought the prospect blasting; but 
now the other world was weighed in the 
balance, and found wanting. The genius 
of monasticism seemed to wield a two- 
edged sword, and to lift it between and 
against time and eternity. The blade bore 
a two-fold inscription— on the side next 
the world was written the word " suffer," 
— on that opposed to eternity, M despair." 
In the utter hopelessness of my soul, I still 
continued to question him for hope — him ! 
while he was bereaving me of its very sha- 
dow, by every word he uttered. " But, 
must all be plunged in this abyss of dark- 
ness ? Is there no light, no hope, no re- 
fuge, for the sufferer ? May not some of 
us become reconciled to our situation — first 
patient of it, then attached to it ? Finally, 
may we not (if our repugnance be invinci- 
ble) make a merit of it with God, and offer 



296 iMELMOTH: 

to him the sacrifice of our earthly hopes 
and wishes, in the confidence of an ample 
and glorious equivalent ? Even if we are 
unable to offer this sacrifice with the unc- 
tion which would ensure its acceptance, 
still may we not hope it will not be wholly 
neglected? — that we may become tran- 
quil, if not happy — resigned, if not con- 
tent. Speak, tell me if this may be?" 
" And you wish to extort deception from 
the lips of death—but you will fail. 
Hear your doom — Those who are pos- 
sessed of what may be called the reli- 
gious character, that is, those who are 
visionary, weak, morose, and ascetic, may 
elevate themselves to a species of in- 
toxication in the moments of devotion. 
They may, while clasping the images, 
work themselves into the delusion, that 
the dead stone thrills to their touch ; that 
the figures move, assent to their petitions, 
and turn their lifeless eyes on them with 
an expression of benignity. They may, 
while kissing the crucifix, believe that they 



A TALE. 297 

hear celestial voices pronouncing their par- 
don ; that the Saviour of the world extends 
his arms to them, to invite them to beati- 
tude ; that all heaven is expanded to their 
view, and the harmonies of paradise are 
enriched to glorify their apotheosis. But 
this is a mere inebriation that the most ig- 
norant physician could produce in his pa- 
tients by certain medicines. The secret 
of this ecstatic swoon might be traced to 
an apothecary's shop, or purchased at a 
cheaper rate. The inhabitants of the north 
of Europe procure this state of exaltation 
by the use of liquid fire — the Turks by 
opium — the Dervises by dancing — and 
Christian monks by spiritual pride ope- 
rating on the exhaustion of a macerated 
frame. It is all intoxication, with this 
difference only, that the intoxication of 
men of this world produces always self- 
complacency — that of men of the other 
world, a complacency whose supposed 
source is derived from God. The intoxi- 
cation is, therefore, more profound, more 

N 2 



298 MELMOTH : 

delusive, and more dangerous. But na- 
ture, violated by these excesses, exacts a 
most usurious interest for this illicit indul- 
gence. She makes them pay for moments 
of rapture with hours of despair. Their 
precipitation from extasy to horror is al- 
most instantaneous. In the course of a 
few moments, they pass from being the fa- 
vourites of Heaven to becoming its out- 
casts. They doubt the truth of their 
raptures, — the truth of their vocation. 
They doubt every thing — the sincerity 
of their prayers, even the efficacy of the 
Saviour's atonement, and the interces- 
sion of the blessed Virgin. They plunge 
from paradise to hell. They howl, they 
scream, they blaspheme. From the bot- 
tom of the infernal gulph in which they 
imagine themselves plunged, they bellow 
imprecations against their Creator — they 
denounce themselves as damned from all 
eternity for their sins, while their only sin 
is their inability to support preternatural 
excitement. The paroxysm ceases they 



A TALE. 299 

become the elect of God again in their own 
imaginations. And to those who interro- 
gate them with regard to their late despair, 
they answer, That Satan was permitted to 
buffet them — that they were under the 
hidings of God's face, &e. All saints, from 
Mahomet down to Francis Xavier, were 
only a compound of insanity, pride, and 
self-imposition ; — the latter would have 
been of less consequence, but that men 
always revenge their imposition on them- 
selves, by imposing to the utmost on 
others." 

" There is no more horrible state of 
mind than that in which we are forced by 
conviction to listen on, wishing every 
word to be false, and knowing every word 
to be true. Such was mine, but I tried 
to palliate it by saying, " It was never my 
ambition to be a saint ; but is the lot of all, 
then, so deplorable ?" The monk, who 
appeared to rejoice in this opportunity to 
discharge the concentrated malignity of 
sixty years of suffering and hypocrisy, 



300 MELMOTH : 

collected his dying voice to answer. He 
seemed as if he never could inflict enough, 
for what had been inflicted on himself. 
" Those who possess strong sensibility, 
without the religious character, are of all 
others the most unhappy, but their mise- 
ries are soonest terminated. They are 
harassed by trivial constraints, stupified 
by monotonous devotion, exasperated by 
dull insolence and bloated superiority. 
They struggle, they resist. Penance and 
punishment are applied. Their own vio- 
lence justifies increased violence of treat- 
ment ; and, at all events, it would be ap- 
plied without this justification, for there is 
nothing that delights the pride of power, 
more than a victorious strife with the pride 
of intellect. The remainder is easily to 
be conceived by you, who have witnessed 
it. You saw \he unfortunate youth who 
interfered about Paolo. He was lashed 
to madness. Tortured first to phrenzy, 
then to stupefaction, — he died ! I was the 
secret, unsuspected adviser of the whole 



A TALE. 301 

proceeding." " Monster !" I exclaimed, 
for truth had made us equal now, and even 
precluded the language that humanity 
would dictate when uttered to a dying 
man. — " But why ?" — said he, with that 
calmness which had once attracted, and 
now revolted me, but which had at all 
times undisputed possession of his phy- 
siognomy ; — " his sufferings were shorter, 
do you blame me for diminishing their du- 
ration ?" — There was something cold, iro- 
nical, and jeering, even in the suavity of 
this man, that gave a certain force to his 
simplest observations. It seemed as if he 
had reserved the truth all his life, to utter 
it at his dying hour. " Such is the fate of 
those who possess strong sensibility ; those 
who have less languish away in an imper- 
ceptible decline. They spend their time 
in watching a few flowers, in tending 
birds. They are punctual in their reli- 
gious exercises, they receive neither blame 
or praise, — they melt away in torpor and 
ennui. They wish for death, as the prepa- 



302 MELMOTH : 

ration it might put the convent to might 
produce a short excitement, but they are 
disappointed, for their state forbids excite- 
ment, and they die as they have lived, — 
unexcited, unawakened. The tapers are 
lit, they do not see them, — the unction is 
applied, they do not feel it, — prayers are 
uttered, they cannot partake in them ; — in 
fact, the whole drama is acted, but the 
principal performer is absent, — is gone. 
Others indulge themselves in perpetual re- 
verie. They walk alone in the cloister, — 
in the garden. They feed themselves with 
the poison of delicious, innutritive illu- 
sion. They dream that an earthquake 
will shake the walls to atoms, that a vol- 
cano will burst forth in the centre of the 
garden. They imagine a revolution of 
government, — an attack of banditti, — any 
thing, however improbable. Then they 
take refuge in the possibility of a fire, (if 
a fire bursts out in a convent, the doors 
are thrown open, and " Sauve qui peut," 
is the word). At this thought they con- 



A TALE. 303 

ceive the most ardent hope, — they could 
rush out, — they could precipitate them- 
selves into the streets, into the coun- 
try, — in fact, they would fly any where 
to escape. Then these hopes fail,— -they 
begin to get nervous, morbid, restless. 
If they have interest, they are indulg- 
ed with remission from their duties, and 
they remain in their cells, relaxed, — tor- 
pid, — idiotical ; if they have not interest, 
they are forced to the punctual perfor- 
mance of their duties, and then idiotism 
comes on much sooner, as diseased horses, 
employed in a mill, become blind sooner 
than those who are suffered to wear out 
existence in ordinary labour. Some of 
them take refuge in religion, as they call 
it. They call for relief on the Superior, 
but what can the Superior do? He is but 
human too, and perhaps feels the despair 
that is devouring the wretches who sup- 
plicate him to deliver them from it. Then 
they prostrate themselves before the images 
of the saints, — they invoke, they some- 



304 MELMOTH : 

times revile them. They call for their in- 
tercession, deplore its inefficacy, and fly to 
some other, whose merits they imagine 
are higher in the sight of God. They 
supplicate for an interest in the interces- 
sion of Christ and the Virgin, as their last 
resort. That resort fails them too, — the 
Virgin herself is inexorable, though they 
wear out her pedestal with their knees, 
and her feet with their kisses. Then they 
go about the galleries at night, they rouse 
the sleepers, they knock at every door, — 
they cry, " Brother Saint Jerome, pray for 
me, — Brother Saint Augustine, pray for 
me." Then the placard is seen fastened to 
the rails of the altar, " Dear brothers, pray 
for the wandering soul of a monk." The 
next day the placard bears this inscription, 
" The prayers of the community are im- 
plored for a monk who is in despair." 
Then they find human intercession as un- 
availing as divine, to procure them a re- 
mission of the sufferings which, while 
their profession continues to inflict on 



A TALE. 305 

them, no power can reverse or mitigate. 
They crawl to their cells, — in a few days 
the toll of the bell is heard, and the 
brethren exclaim, " He died in the odour of 
sanctity," and hasten to spread their snares 
for another victim." " And is this, then, 
monastic life ?" " It is, — there are but two 
exceptions, that of those who can every day 
renew, by the aid of imagination, the hope 
of escape, and who cherish that hope even 
on their dying bed ; and those who, like 
me, diminish their misery by dividing it, 
and, like the spider, feel relieved of the 
poison that swells, and would burst them, 
by instilling a drop of it into every insect 
that toils, agonizes, and perishes in their 
net, — like you'' At these last words, a 
glare of malignity flashed on the features 
of the dying wretch, that appalled me. I 
retreated from his bed for a moment. I 
returned, I looked at him, — his eyes were 
closed, — his hands extended. I touched 
him, — raised him, — he was dead, — those 
were his last words, The expression of 



306 MELMOTH : 

his features was the physiognomy of his 
soul, — they were calm and pale, but still a 
cold expression of derision lingered about 
the curve of his lips. 

" I rushed from the infirmary. I was 
at that time indulged, like all the other 
visitants of the sick, to go to the garden 
beyond the allotted hours, perhaps to di- 
minish the chance of infection. I was but 
too ready to avail myself of this permis- 
sion. The garden, with its calm moon- 
light beauty, its innocence of heaven, its 
theology of the stars, was at once a re- 
proach and a consolation to me. I tried 
to reflect, to feel, — both efforts failed ; and 
perhaps it is in this silence of the soul, this 
suspension of all the clamorous voices of the 
passions, that we are most ready to hear 
the voice of God. My imagination sudden- 
ly represented to me the august and ample 
vault above me as a church, — the images of 
the saints grew dim in my eyes as I gazed 
on the stars, and even the altar, over which 
the crucifixion of the Saviour of the world 



A TALE. 307 

was represented, turned pale to the eye 
of the soul, as I gazed on the moon 
" walking in her brightness." I fell on 
my knees. I knew not to whom I was 
about to pray, but I never felt so dispos- 
ed to pray. I felt my habit touched at 
this moment. I at first trembled, from 
the idea of being detected in a forbidden 
act. I started up. A dark figure stood 
beside me, who said in indistinct and 
faultering tones, " Read this," and he 
thrust a paper into my hand ; w I have 
worn it sewed into my habit for four days. 
I have watched you night and day. 1 had 
no opportunity but this, — you were in 
your cell, in the choir, or in the infirmary. 
Tear it in pieces, throw the fragments in- 
to the fountain, or swallow them, the 
moment you have read it. — Adieu. I 
have risked every thing for you," and he 
glided away. I recognized his figure as 
he departed ; it was the porter of the con- 
vent. I well understood the risk he must 
have run in delivering this paper, for it 



308 MELMOTH : 

was the regulation of the convent, that all 
letters, whether addressed to or written by 
boarders, novices, or monks, were first to 
be read by the Superior, and I never knew 
an instance of its infringement. The 
moon gave me sufficient light. 1 began 
to read, while a vague hope, that had 
neither object or basis, trembled at the 
bottom of my heart. The paper contain- 
ed these words : 

" My dearest brother, (my God ! how I 
started !) 1 see you revolt at the first lines 
which I address to you, — I implore you, 
for both our sakes, to read them with calm- 
ness and attention. We have been both 
the victims of parental and priestly impo- 
sition; the former we must forgive, for 
our parents are the victims of it too. The 
Director has their consciences in his hand, 
and their destiny and ours at his feet. 
Oh, my brother, what a tale have I to 
disclose to you ! I was brought up, by the 
Director's orders, whose influence over the 
domestics is as unbounded as it is over 



A TALE. 309 

their unhappy master, in complete hostili- 
ty against you, as one who was depriving 
me of my natural rights, and degrading 
the family by your illegitimate intrusion. 
May not this palliate, in some degree, my 
unnatural repulsiveness when we first met ? 
I was taught from my cradle to hate and 
fear you, — to hate you as an enemy, and 
fear you as an impostor. This was the 
Director's plan. He thought the hold he 
had over my father and mother too slight 
to gratify his ambition of domes tie power, 
or realize his hopes of professional distinc- 
tion. The basis of all ecclesiastical power 
rests upon fear. A crime must be dis- 
covered or invented. The vague reports 
circulated in the family, my mother's con- 
stant dejection, my father's occasional agi- 
tation, offered him a clue, which he fol- 
lowed with incessant industry through all 
its windings of doubt, mystery, and dis- 
appointment, till, in a moment of peni- 
tence, my mother, terrified by his constant 
denunciations if she concealed any secret 



310 MELMOTH i 

of her heart or life from him, disclosed the 
truth. 

" We were both infants then. He a- 
dopted immediately the plan he has sinee 
realized at the expence of all but himself. 
I am convinced he had not, from the first 
hour of his machinations, the least malig- 
nity against you. The aggrandizement of 
his interest, which ecclesiastics always in- 
dividualize with that of the church, was 
his only object. To dictate, to tyrannize, 
to manage a whole family, and that of 
rank, by his knowledge of the frailty of 
one of its members, was all he looked to. 
Those who by their vows are excluded 
from the interest which natural affections 
give us in life, must seek for it in the arti- 
ficial ones of pride and domination, and 
the Director found it there. All thence- 
forth was conducted and inspired by him. 
It was he who caused us to be kept asun- 
der from our infancy, fearful that nature 
might frustrate his plans, — it was he who 
reared me in sentiments of implacable ani- 



A TALE. 311 

mosity against you. When my mother 
fluctuated, he reminded her of her vow, 
with which she had rashly intrusted him. 
When my father murmured, the shame of 
my mother's frailty, the bitter feuds of 
domestic discussion, the tremendous sounds 
of imposture, perjury, sacrilege, and the 
resentment of the church, were thundered 
in his ears. You may conceive there is 
nothing this - man would shrink at, when, 
almost in my childhood, he disclosed to 
me my mother's frailty, to insure my 
early and zealous participation in his 
views. Heaven blast the wretch who 
could thus contaminate the ears, and 
wither the heart of a child, with the tale 
of a parent's shame, to secure a partizan 
for the church ! This was not all. From 
the first hour I was able to hear and com- 
prehend him, he poisoned my heart by 
every channel he could approach. He 
exaggerated my mother's partiality for 
you, which he assured me often con- 
tended vainly with her conscience. He 



312 MELMOTH : 

represented my father as weak and dissi- 
pated, but affectionate ; and, with the na- 
tural pride of a boy-father, immoveably 
attached to his eldest offspring. He said, 
" My son, prepare yourself to struggle 
with a host of prejudices, — the interests 
of God, as well as of society, demand it. 
Assume a high tone with your parents , — 
you are in possession of the secret that 
corrodes their consciences, make your own 
use of it." Judge the effect of these words 
on a temper naturally violent, — words, too, 
uttered by one whom I was taught to re- 
gard as the agent of the Divinity. 

" All this time, as I have since been in- 
formed, he was debating in his own mind 
whether he would not adopt your part in- 
stead of mine, or at least vacillate be- 
tween both, so as to augment his influence 
over our parents, by the additional fea- 
ture of suspicion. Whatever influenced 
his determination, the effect of his lessons 
on me may be easily calculated. I became 
restless, jealous, and vindictive; — insolent 



A TALE. 313 

to my parents, and suspicious of all around 
me. Before I was eleven years of age I 
reviled my father for his partiality to you, 
— 1 insulted my mother with her crime, — 
I tyrannized over the domestics, — I was 
the dread and the torment of the whole 
household ; and the wretch who had made 
me thus a premature demon, had out- 
raged nature, and compelled me to trample 
on every tie he should have taught me to 
hallow and cherish, consoled himself with 
the thought that he was obeying the calls 
of his function, and strengthening the 
hands of the church. 

" Scire volunt secreta domus et inde timeri." 

" On the day preceding our first meet- 
ing, (which had not been intended before), 
the Director went to my father ; he said, 
" Senhor, I think it best the brothers 
should meet. Perhaps God may touch 
their hearts, and by his merciful influence 
over them, enable you to reverse the de- 

vol. i. o 



314 MELMOTH : 

cree that threatens one of them with se- 
clusion, and both with a cruel and final 
separation." My father assented with 
tears of delight. Those tears did not melt 
the heart of the Director ; he hastened to 
my apartment, and said, " My child, sum- 
mon all your resolution, your artful, cruel, 
partial parents, are preparing a scene for 
you, — they are determined on introducing 
you to your spurious brother." " I will 
spurn him before their faces, if they dare 
to do so," said I, with the pride of prema- 
ture tyranny. " No, my child, that will 
not do, you must appear to comply with 
their wishes, but you must not be their 
victim, — promise me that, my dear child, 
— promise me resolution and dissimula- 
tion." " I promise you resolution, keep 
the dissimulation for yourself." " Well, I 
will do so, since your interests require it." 
He hurried back to my father. " Senhor, 
1 have employed all the eloquence of hea- 
ven and nature with your younger son. 
He is softened, — he melts already, — he 



A TALE. 315 

longs to precipitate himself into the frater- 
nal embrace, and hear your benediction 
poured over the united hearts and bodies 
of your two children, — they are both your 
children. You must banish all prejudices, 

and " " I have no prejudices !" said 

my poor father ; " let me but see my chil- 
dren embrace, and if Heaven summoned 
me at that moment, I should obey it 
by dying of joy." — The Director reproved 
him for the expressions which gushed from 
his heart, and, wholly unmoved by them, 
hurried back to me, full of his commission. 
" My child, I have warned you of the 
conspiracy formed against you by your 
own family. You will receive a proof of 
it to-morrow, — your brother is to be intro- 
duced, — you will be required to embrace 
him, — your consent is reckoned on, but at 
the moment you do so, your father is re- 
solved to interpret this as the signal, on 
your part, of the resignation of all your 
natural rights. Comply with your hypo- 
critical parents, embrace this brother, but 



316 MELMOTH : 

give an air of repugnance to the action 
that will justify your conscience, while it 
deceives those who would deceive you. 
Watch the signal- word, my dear child ; 
embrace him as you would a serpent, — his 
art is not less, and his poison as deadly. 
Remember that your resolution will de- 
cide the event of this meeting. Assume 
the appearance of affection, but remember 
you hold your deadliest enemy in your 
arms." At these words, unnatural as I 
was, I shuddered. I said, " My brother !" 
" Never mind," said the Director, " he is 
the enemy of God, — an illegitimate im- 
postor. Now, my child, are you prepar- 
ed ?" and I answered, " I am prepared." 
That night, however, I was very restless. 
I required the Director to be summoned. 
I said in my pride, " But how is this poor 
wretch (meaning you) to be disposed of?" 
" Let him embrace the monastic life," said 
the Director. At these words I felt an 
interest on your account I had never re- 
cognized before. I said decidedly, for he 



A TALE. 317 

had taught me to assume a tone of deci- 
sion, " He shall never be a monk." The 
Director appeared staggered, yet he trem- 
bled before the spirit he had himself rais- 
ed. " Let him go into the army," I said ; 
" let him inlist as a common soldier, I can 
supply him with the means of promotion ; 
— let him engage in the meanest profes- 
sion, I shall not blush to acknowledge 
him, but, father, he shall never be a 
monk." " But, my dear child, on what 
foundation does this extraordinary objec- 
tion rest ? It is the only means to restore 
peace to the family, and procure it for the 
unfortunate being for whom you are so 
much interested." " My father, have 
done with this language. Promise me, 
as the condition of my obedience to your 
wishes to-morrow, that my brother shall 
never be compelled to be a monk." " Com- 
pelled, my dear child ! there can be no 
compulsion in a holy vocation." " I am 
not certain of that ; but I demand from 
you the promise I have mentioned." The 



318 MELMOTH : 

Director hesitated, at last he said, " I pro- 
mise." And he hastened to tell my father 
there was no longer any opposition to our 
meeting, and that I was delighted with 
the determination which had been an- 
nounced to me of my brother eagerly em- 
bracing the monastic life. Thus was our 
first meeting arranged. When, at the 
command of my father, our arms were en- 
twined, I swear to you, my brother, I felt 
them thrill with affection. But the in- 
stinct of nature was soon superseded by 
the force of habit, and I recoiled, collect- 
ed all the forces of nature and passion in 
the terrible expression that I dared to di- 
rect towards our parents, while the Direc- 
tor stood behind them smiling, and en- 
couraging me by gestures. I thought I 
had acted my part with applause, at least 
I gave myself enough, and retired from 
the scene with as proud a step as if I had 
trampled on a prostrate world, — I had only 
trampled on nature and my own heart. 
.A few days after I was sent to a convent. 



A TALE. 319 

The Director was alarmed at the dogma- 
tizing tone he himself had taught me to 
assume, and he urged the necessity of my 
education being attended to. My parents 
complied with every thing he required. 
I, for a wonder, consented ; but, as the 
carriage conveyed me to the convent, I 
repeated to the Director, " Remember, 
mv brother is not to be a monk." 

" (After these lines several were unintel- 
ligible to me, apparently from the agitation 
under which they were written ; — the pre- 
cipitancy and fiery ardor of my brother's 
character communicated itself to his writ- 
ings. After many a defaced page I could 
trace the following words.) * * 

" It was singular enough that you, who 
were the object of my inveterate hatred 
before my residence in the convent, be- 
came the object of my interest from that 
moment. I had adopted your cause from 
pride, I now upheld it from experience. 
Compassion, instinct, whatever it was, be- 



320 MELMOTH : 

gan to assume the character of a duty. 
When I saw the indignity with which the 
lower classes were treated, I said to my- 
self, " No, he shall never suffer that, — he 
is my brother." When 1 succeeded in my 
exercises, and was applauded, I said, " This 
is applause in which he never can share." 
When I was punished, and that was much 
more frequently, I said, " He shall never 
feel this mortification." My imagination 
expanded. I believed myself your future 
patron, I conceived myself redeeming the 
injustice of nature, aiding and aggrandiz- 
ing you, forcing you to confess that you 
owed more to me than to your parents, 
and throwing myself, with a disarmed and 
naked heart, on your gratitude alone for 
affection. I heard you call me brother, — 
I bid you stop, and call me benefactor. 
My nature, proud, generous, and fiery, 
had not yet quite emancipated itself from 
the influence of the Director, but every 
effort it made pointed, by an indescribable 
impulse, towards you. Perhaps the secret 



A TALE. 321 

of this is to be found in the elements of 
my character, which always struggled a- 
gainst dictation, and loved to teach itself 
all it wished to know, and inspire itself 
with the object of its own attachments. 
It is certain that I wished for your friend- 
ship, at the moment I was instructed to 
hate you. Your mild eyes and affec- 
tionate looks haunted me perpetually in 
the convent. To the professions of friend- 
ship repeatedly made me by the boarders, 
I answered, " I want a brother." My con- 
duct was eccentric and violent,— -no won- 
der, for my conscience had begun to ope- 
rate against my habits. Sometimes I 
would apply with an eagerness that made 
them tremble for my health ; at others, no 
punishment, however severe, could make 
me submit to the ordinary discipline of the 
house. The community grew weary of 
rny obstinacy, violence, and irregularities. 
They wrote to the Director to have me 
removed, but before this could be accom- 
plished I was seized with a fever. They 

o 2 



322 MELMOTH : 

paid me unremitting attention, but there 
was something on my mind no cares of 
theirs could remove. When they brought 
me medicine with the most scrupulous 
punctuality, I said, " Let my brother 
fetch it, and if it be poison I will drink it 
from his hand ; I have injured him much." 
When the bell tolled for matins and ves- 
pers, I said, " Are they going to make 
my brother a monk ? The Director pro- 
mised me differently, but you are all de- 
ceivers." At length they muffled the 
bell. I heard its stifled sound, and I 
exclaimed, " You are tolling for his fune- 
ral, but I, — I am his murderer!" The 
community became terrified at these ex- 
clamations so often repeated, and with the 
meaning of which they could not accuse 
themselves. I was removed in a state of 
delirium to my father's palace in Madrid. 
A figure like yours sat beside me in the 
carriage, alighted when we stopped, accom- 
panied me where I remained, assisted me 
when I was placed again in the carriage. 



A TALE. 323 

So vivid was the impression, that I was 
accustomed to say to the attendants, " Stop, 
my brother is assisting me." When they 
asked me in the morning how I had rest- 
ed ? I answered, " Very well, — Alonzo has 
been all night at my bed-side." I in- 
vited this visionary companion to con- 
tinue his attentions ; and when the pil- 
lows were arranged to my satisfaction, 
I would say, " How kind my brother is, 
— how useful, — but why will he not 
speak V At one stage I absolutely re- 
fused nourishment, because the phantom 
appeared to decline it. I said, " Do not 
urge me, my brother, you see, will not ac- 
cept of it. Oh, I entreat his pardon, it is 
a day of abstinence, — that is his reason, 
you see how he points to his habit, — that 
is enough." It is very singular that the 
food at this house happened to be poison- 
ed, and that two of my attendants died 
of partaking of it before they could reach 
Madrid. I mention these circumstances, 
merely to prove the rivetted hold you had 



324) MELMOTH : 

taken both of my imagination and my af- 
fections. On the recovery of my intel- 
lect, my first inquiry was for you. This 
had been foreseen, and my father and mo- 
ther, shunning the discussion, and even 
trembling for the event, as they knew the 
violence of my temper, intrusted the whole 
business to the Director. He undertook 
it, — how he executed it is yet to be seen. 
On our first meeting he approached me 
with congratulations on my convalescence, 
with regrets for the constraints I must 
have suffered in the convent, with assur- 
ances that my parents would make my 
home a paradise. When he had gone on 
for some time, I said, " What have you 
done with my brother?" «' He is in the 
bosom of God," said the Director, crossing 
himself. I understood him in a moment, 
— I rushed past him before he had finished. 
" Where are you going, my son ?" " To 
my parents." " Your parents, — it is im- 
possible that you can see them now." 
" But it is certain that I will see them. 



A TALE. 325 

Dictate to me no longer, — degrade your- 
self not by this prostituted humiliation," 
for he was putting himself in a posture of 
in treaty, — " I will see my parents. Pro- 
cure for me an introduction to them this 
moment, or tremble for the continuance 
of your influence in the family." At these 
words he trembled. He did not indeed 
dread my influence, but he dreaded my 
passions. His own lessons were bitterly 
retaliated on him that moment. He had 
made me fierce and impetuous, because 
that suited his purpose, but he had neither 
calculated on, or prepared himself for, this 
extraordinary direction which my feelings 
had taken, so opposite to that which he had 
laboured to give them. He thought, in 
exciting my passions, he could ascertain 
their direction. Woe be to those, who, 
in teaching the elephant to direct his 
trunk against their foes, forget that by a 
sudden convolution of that trunk, he may 
rend the driver from his back, and trample 
him under his feet into the mire. Such 



326 MELMOTH: 

was the Director's situation and mine, I 
insisted on going instantly to my father's 
presence. He interposed, he supplicated ; 
at last, as a hopeless resource, he reminded 
me of his continual indulgence, his flat- 
tery of my passions. My answer was 
brief, but Oh that it might sink into the 
souls of such tutors and such priests ! 
" And that has made me what I am. 
Lead the way to my father's apartment, or 
I will spurn you before me to the door of 
it." At this threat, which he saw I was 
able to execute, (for you know my frame 
is athletic, and my stature twice that of 
his), he trembled ; and I confess this indi- 
cation of both physical and mental debili- 
ty completed my contempt for him. He 
crawled before me to the apartment where 
my father and mother were seated, in a 
balcony that overlooked the garden. They 
had imagined all was settled, and were asto- 
nished to see me rush in, followed by the 
Director, with an aspect that left them 
no reason to hope for an auspicious result 



A TALE. 327 

of our conference. The Director gave 
them a sign which I did not observe, and 
which they had not time to profit by, — 
and as I stood before them livid from my 
fever, on fire with passion, and trembling 
with inarticulate expressions, they shudder- 
ed. Some looks of reproach were levelled 
by them at the Director, which he returned, 
as usual, by signs. I did not understand 
tke7n, but I made them understand me in 
a moment. I said to my father, " Senhor, 
is it true you have made my brother a 
monk ?" My father hesitated ; at last he 
said, " I thought the Director had been 
commissioned to speak to you on that sub- 
ject." " Father, what has a Director to 
do in the concerns of a parent and child ? 
That man never can be a parent, — never 
can have a child, how then can he be a 
judge in a case like this ?" " You forget 
yourself, — you forget the respect due to a 
minister of the church." " My father, I 
am but just raised from a death-bed, my 
mother and you trembled for my life, — 



528 MELMOTH : 

that life still depends on your words. I 
promised submission to this wretch, on a 
condition which he has violated, which — " 
" Command yourself, Sir," said my father, 
in a tone of authority which ill suited the 
trembling lips it issued from, " or quit the 
apartment." " Senhor," interposed the 
Director, in a softened tone, " let not me 
be the cause of dissension in a family 
whose happiness and honour have been al- 
ways my object, next to the interests of 
the church. Let him go on, the remem- 
brance of my crucified Master will sustain 
me under his insults," and he crossed him- 
self. u Wretch !" I cried, grasping his 
habit, " you are a hypocrite, a deceiver !" 
and 1 know not of what violence I might 
have been guilty, but my father interpos- 
ed. My mother shrieked with terror, 
and a scene of confusion followed, in 
which I recollect nothing but the hypo- 
critical exclamations of the Director, ap- 
pearing to struggle between my father 
and me, while he mediated with God for 



A TALE. 329 

both. He repeated incessantly, " Senhor, 
do not interpose, every indignity I suffer 
I make a sacrifice to Heaven ; it will qua- 
lify me to be an intercessor for my tra- 
ducer with God;" and, crossing himself, 
he called on the most sacred names, and 
exclaimed, " Let insults, calumnies, and 
blows, be added to that preponderance of 
merit which is already weighed in the 
scales of heaven against my offences," and 
he dared to mix the claims of the inter- 
cession of the saints, the purity of the im- 
maculate Virgin, and even the blood and 
agony of Jesus Christ, with the vile sub- 
missions of his own hypocrisy. The room 
was by this time filled with attendants. 
My mother was conveyed away, still 
shrieking with terror. My father, who 
loved her, was driven by this spectacle, 
and by my outrageous conduct, to a pitch 
of fury, — he drew his sword. I burst in- 
to a laugh, that froze his blood as he ap- 
proached me. I expanded my arms, and 
presented my breast, exclaiming, " Strike ! 



330 MELMOTH : 

— this is the consummation of monastic 
power, — it begun by violating nature, and 
ends in filicide. Strike ! give a glorious 
triumph to the influence of the church, 
and add to the merits of the holy Direc- 
tor. You have sacrificed your Esau, your 
first-born, already, let Jacob be your next 
victim." My father retreated from me, 
and* revolted by the disfigurement which 
the violence of my agitation had caused, 
almost to convulsion, he exclaimed, " De- 
mon !" and stood at a distance viewing, 
and shuddering at me. " And who has 
made me so ? He who fostered my evil 
passions for his own purposes ; and, be- 
cause one generous impulse breaks out on 
the side of nature, would represent or 
drive me mad, to effectuate his purposes. 
My father, I see the whole power and sys- 
tem of nature reversed, by the arts of a 
corrupt ecclesiastic. By his means my 
brother has been imprisoned for life ; — by 
his means our birth has been made a curse 
to my mother and to you. What have 



A TALE. 331 

we had in the family since his influence 
was fatally established in it, but dissension 
and misery ? Your sword was pointed a- 
gainst my heart this moment ; was it na- 
ture or a monk that armed a parent against 
his child, whose crime was — interceding for 
his brother? Dismiss this man, whose 
presence eclipses our hearts, and let us 
confer together for a moment as father and 
son, and if I do not humiliate myself be- 
fore you, spurn me for ever. My father, 
for God's sake examine the difference be- 
tween this man and me, as we stand be- 
fore you. We are together at the bar of 
your heart, judge between us. A dry and 
featureless image of selfish power, conse- 
crated by the name of the church, oocu^ 
pies his whole soul, — I plead to you by 
the interests of nature, that must be sin- 
cere, because they are contrary to my own. 
He only wishes to wither your soul, — I 
seek to touch it. Is his heart in what he 
says ? does he shed a tear ? does he em- 
ploy one impassioned expression ? he calls 



332 MELMOTH : 

on God, — while I call only on you. The 
very violence which you justly condemn, 
is not only my vindication but my eulogy. 
They who prefer their cause to themselves, 
need no proof of their advocacy being sin- 
cere." " You aggravate your crime, by 
laying it on another; you have always 
been violent, obstinate, and rebellious." 
" But who has made me so? Ask himself, 
— ask this shameful scene, in which his du- 
plicity has driven me to act such a part." 
"If you wish to show submission, give 
me the first proof of it, by promising never 
to torture me by renewing the mention of 
this subject. Your brother's fate is decid- 
ed, — promise not to utter his name again, 
and " " Never, — never," I exclaim- 
ed, " never will 1 violate my conscience 
by such a vow ; and his who could pro- 
pose it must be seared beyond the power 
of Heaven to touch it." Yet, in utter- 
ing these words, I knelt to my father, 
but he turned from me. I turned in 
despair to the Director. I said, " If 



A TALE. 338 

you are the minister of Heaven, prove 
the truth of your commission, — make 
peace in a distracted family, reconcile my 
father to both his children. You can ef- 
fect this by a word, you know you can, 
yet you will not utter it. My unfortunate 
brother was not so inflexible to your ap- 
peals, and yet were they inspired by a 
feeling as justifiable as mine." I had of- 
fended the Director beyond all forgive- 
ness. I knew this, and spoke indeed ra- 
ther to expose than to persuade him: I 
did not expect an answer from him, and I 
was not disappointed, — he did not utter a 
word. 1 knelt in the middle of the floor 
between them. I cried, " Deserted by my 
father and by you, I yet appeal to Heaven. 
I call on it to witness my vow never to a- 
bandon my persecuted brother, whom I 
have been made a tool to betray. I know 
you have power, — 1 defy it. I know every 
art of circumvention, of imposture, of ma- 
lignant industry, — every resource of earth 
and hell, will be set at work against me. 



334 MELMOTH : 

I take Heaven to witness against you, and 
demand only its aid to insure my victory." 
My father had lost all patience ; he desired 
the attendants to raise and remove me by 
force. This mention of force, so repug- 
nant to my habits of imperious indulgence, 
operated fatally on intellects scarcely re- 
covering from delirium, and too strongly 
tried in the late struggle. I relapsed into 
partial insanity. I said wildly, " My fa- 
ther, you know not how mild, generous, 
and forgiving is the being you thus perse- 
cute, — I owe my life to him. Ask your 
domestics if he did not attend me, step by 
step, during my journey f If he did not 
administer my food, my medicines, and 
smoothe the pillows on which I was sup- 
ported?" " You rave," cried my father, as 
he heard this wild speech, but he cast a 
look of fearful inquiry on the attendants. 
The trembling servants swore, one and all, 
as well they might, that not a human be- 
ing but themselves had been suffered to 
approach me since I quitted the convent, 



A TALE. 325 

till my arrival at Madrid. The small re- 
mains of reason forsook me completely at 
this delaration, which was however true 
every word of it. I gave the lie to the 
last speaker with the utmost fury, — I 
struck those who were next me. My fa- 
ther, astonished at my violence, suddenly 
exclaimed, " He is mad." The Director, 
who had till then been silent, instantly 
caught the word, and repeated, u He is 
mad." The servants, half in terror, half 
in conviction, re-echoed the cry. 

" I was seized, dragged away ; and this 
violence, which always excited correspond- 
ing violence in me, realized all my father 
feared, and the Director wished for. I 
behaved just as a boy, scarce out of a fever, 
and still totally delirious, might be sup- 
posed to behave. In my apartment I tore 
down the hangings, and there was not a 
porcelain vase in the room that I did not 
dash at their heads. When they seized 
me, I bit their hands ; when at length 
they were compelled to bind me, I gnaw r - 



336 MELMOTH : 

ed the strings, and finally snapt them by a 
violent effort. In fact, I completely 
realized all the hopes of the Director. I 
was confined to my apartment for several 
days. During this time, I recovered the 
only powers that usually revive in a state 
of isolation, — those of inflexible resolution 
and profound dissimulation. I had soon 
exercise enough for both of them. On 
the twelfth day of my confinement, a ser- 
vant appeared at the door of my apart- 
ment, and, bowing profoundly, announced, 
that if my health was recovered, my fa- 
ther wished to see me. I bowed in com- 
plete imitation of his mechanical move- 
ments, and followed him with the steps of 
a statue. I found my father, armed with 
the Director at his side. He advanced, 
and addressed me with an abruptness 
which proved that he forced himself to 
speak. He hurried over a few expressions 
of pleasure at my recovery, and then said, 
" Have you reflected on the subject of our 
last conversation ?" "I have reflected on 



A TALE. 337 

i/."— " / had time to do so" — " And you 
have employed that time well ?" — " I hope 
so." — " Then the result will be favourable 
to the hopes of your family, and the in- 
terests of the church." The last words 
chilled me a little, but I answered as I 
ought. In a few moments after the Di- 
rector joined me, He spoke amicably, 
and turned the conversation on neutral 
topics. I answered him, — what an effort 
did it cost me ! — yet I answered him in all 
the bitterness of extorted politeness. All 
went on well, however. The family ap- 
peared gratified by my renovation. My 
father, harassed out, was content to pro- 
cure peace on any terms. My mother, 
still weaker, from the struggles between 
her conscience and the suggestions of 
the Director, wept, and said she was hap- 
py. A month has now elapsed in pro- 
found but treacherous peace on all sides. 

They think me subdued, but # 

* * * * 

" In fact, the efforts of the Director's 

VOL. I. P 



338 MELMOTH : 

power in the family would alone be suffi- 
cient to precipitate my determinations. He 
has placed you in a convent, but that is 
not enough for the persevering prosely- 
tism of the church. The palace of the 
Duke de Mo^ada is, under his influence, 
turned into a convent itself. My mother 
is almost a nun, her whole life is exhaust- 
ed in imploring forgiveness for a crime for 
which the Director, to secure his own in- 
fluence, orders her a new penance every 
hour. My father rushes from libertinism 
to austerity, — he vacillates between this 
world and the next ; — in the bitterness of 
exasperated feeling, sometimes reproaches 
my mother, and then joins her in the se- 
verest penance. Must there not be some- 
thing very wrong in the religion which 
thus substitutes external severities for in- 
ternal amendment ? I feel I am of an in- 
quiring spirit, and if I could obtain a 
book they call the Bible, (which, though 
they say it contains the words of Jesus 
Christ, they never permit us to see) 1 think 



A TALE. 339 

but no matter. The very domestics 

have assumed the in ordine ad spiritualia 
character already. They converse in whis- 
pers — they cross themselves when the clock 
strikes — they dare to talk, even in my hear- 
ing, of the glory which will redound to 
God and the church, by the sacrifice my 
father may yet be induced to make of his 
family to its interests. 

* * * * . 

" My fever has abated — I have not lost 
a moment in consulting your interests — I 
have heard that there is a possibility of 
your reclaiming your vows — that is, as I 
have been told, of declaring they were ex- 
torted under impressions of fraud and ter- 
ror. Observe me, Alonzo, I would rather 
see you rot in a convent, than behold you 
stand forth as a living witness of our mo- 
ther's shame. But I am instructed that 
this reclamation of your vows may be car- 
ried on in a civil court : If this be practi- 
cable, you may yet be free, and I shall be 
happy. Do not hesitate for resources, I 



340 MELMOTH : 

am able to supply them. If you do not 
fail in resolution, I have no doubt of our 
ultimate success. — Ours I term it, for I 
shall not know a moment's peace till you 
are emancipated. With the half of my 
yearly allowance I have bribed one of the 
domestics, who is brother to the porter of 
the convent, to convey these lines to you. 
Answer me by the same channel, it is secret 
and secure. You must, I understand, fur- 
nish a memorial, to be put into the hands 
of an advocate. It must be strongly word- 
ed, — but remember, not a word of our un- 
fortunate mother ; — I blush to say this to 
her son. Procure paper by some means. 
If you find any difficulty, I will furnish 
you ; but, to avoid suspicion, and too fre- 
quent recurrences to the porter, try to do 
it yourself. Your conventual duties will 
furnish you with a pretext of writing out 
your confession, — I will undertake for its 
safe delivery. I commend you to the 
holy keeping of God, —not the God of 
monks and directors, but the God of na- 



A TALE. 341 

ture and mercy. 1 am your affectionate 

brother, 

Juan di M0N9ADA." 

" Such were the contents of the papers 
which I received in fragments, and from 
time to time, by the hands of the porter. 
I swallowed the first the moment I had 
read it, and the rest I found means to de- 
stroy unperceived as I received them, — my 
attendance on the infirmary entitling me 
to great indulgences." 

At this part of the narrative, the Spa- 
niard became so much agitated, though 
apparently more from emotion than fatigue, 
that Melmoth intreated him to suspend it 
for some days, and the exhausted narrator 
willingly complied. 



END OF FIRST VOLUME. 
