GVKl^AiiTOB 



TOL,lfi 




% ,„/(■< lj "' n 



'■",/',:>/. x /4> fof^ 



lo^ i) ra\ 



PUBUS ffl !■'. h i;V M E ' u V coi.i;" i: 



i8 m 



GLENARVON. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. III. 



Les passions sont les vents qui enflent les voiles du vais- 
seau: elles le submergent quelquefois, mais sans elles il ne 
pourroit voguer. Tout est dangereux ici-bas, et tout est 
necessaire. 



Ei)Ut> GFtitttom 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR HENRY COLBURN, CONDUIT STREET. 
1816. 



London : Printed by Schulze and Dean, 
No. 13, Poland Street 



8fc* 









Q> 



GLENARVOtf, 



CHAPTER I. 



Love, though, when guilty, the parent of 
every crime, springs forth in the noblest 
hearts, and dwells ever with the gene- 
rous and the high-minded. The flame 
that is kindled by Heaven burns 
brightly and steadily to the last ; its ob- 
ject great and superior, sustained by 
principle, and incapable of change; but, 
when unsupported by these pure feel- 
ings, it rages and consumes us, burns up 
and destroys every noble hope, perverts 
the mind, and fills with craft and false- 
hood every avenue to the heart. Then 
that which was a paradise becomes a hell, 
and the victim of its power a maniac and 
a fiendi They know not the force of 

VOL. III. 3 



2 GLENARVON. 

passion, who have not felt it— they know 
not the agony of guilt, who have not 
plunged into its burning gulf, and trem- 
bled there. O ! when the rigorous and 
the just turn with abhorrence from the 
fearful sight— when, like the pharisee, 
in the pride of their unpolluted hearts, 
they bless their God that they are not 
as this sinner, let them beware; for the 
hour of trial may come to all; and that 
alone is the test of superior strength. 
When man, reposing upon himself, dis- 
dains the humility of acknowledging his 
offences and his weakness before his 
Creator, on the sudden that angry God 
sees fit to punish him in his wrath, and 
he who has appeared invulnerable till 
that hour, falls prostrate at once before 
the blow ; perhaps then, for the first 
time, he relents ; and, whilst he sinks 
himself, feels for the sinner whom, in the 
pride and presumption of his happier 
day, he had mocked at and despised. 
There is no trial which humafl* frailty 



GLEliARVON. 3 

cannot resist—there is no passion im- 
planted in the heart's core, which reason 
cannot subdue, if we call upon our God 
to assist us ; but, when unsupported by 
his strength, every temptation that assails 
us may overcome us, and the remem- 
brance of our own weakness should teach 
us to be humble in ourselves. 

Fallen, miserable Calanlha! where 
now are the promises of thy youth— -the 
bright prospects of thy happiness ? Where 
is that unclouded brow— that joyous 
look of innocence which once bespoke a 
heart at ease ? Is it the same, who, with 
an air of fixed and sullen despondency, 
flying from a father's house, from a hus- 
band's protection, for one moment re- 
solved to seek the lover whom she ado- 
red, and follow him, regardless of every 
other tie ? Yet even in that hour of 
passion and of guilt, the remembrance 
of her husband, of her sacred promise to 
her aunt, and of that gentle, supplicating 
look *with which it was received, re- 
b e z 



4» CLENARVON. 

curred. A moment's reflection <. anged 
the rash resolve ; and hastening forward, 
she knew not whither— she cared not to 
what fate, she found herself, after a long 
and weary walk, at the vicar's house, near 
Kelladon— a safe asylum and retreat. 

The boat which had conveyed her 
from the shore, returned ; and a few 
hours after brought Glenarvon to the 
other side of the rocks, known in the 
country by the name of the Wizard's 
Glen, and ofttimes the scene of tumult 
and rebellious meeting. Caiantha little 
expected to see him. He met her to- 
wards evening, as weary and trembling 
she stood, uncertain whither to fly, or 
how to act. The moment of meeting 
was terrible to both ; but that which 
followed was more agonizing still. A 
servant of her father's had discovered 
her after a long search. He informed 
her of her aunt's illness and terror; he 
humbly, but firmly, urged her instantly 
to return. 



GLENARVON. O 

Calantha had resolved never to do so; 
but, lost as she was, the voice of her 
aunt still had power to reach her heart— 
" Is she very ill? tf Very dangerously 
ill," said the man ; and without a mo- 
ment's delay, she immediately consented 
to return. She resolved to part from him 
she adored ; and Glenarvon generously 
agreed to restore her to her aunt, whose 
sufferings had affected his heart— whose 
prayers had moved him, as he said, to 
the greatest sacrifice he ever was called 
upon to make. Yet still he upbraided 
her for her flight, and affirmed, that had 
she but confided herself to him, she had 
long before this been far away from scenes 
so terrible to witness, and been spared a 
state of suspense so barbarous to endure. 
Whilst he spoke, he gazed upon her with 
much sadness, 

" I will leave you," he said ; " but the 

time may come when you will repent, 

and call in vain for me. They may tear 

my heart from out my breast— they niay 

b 3 



6 GLENARVON. 

tear thee from me, if it is their mad desire. 
I shall, or die, or recover, or forget thee. 
But oh ! miserable victim ! what shall be- 
come of thee? Do they hope their mo- 
rality will unteach the lessons I have 
given, or pluck my image from that 
heart? Thou art mine ; wedded to me; 
sold to me; and no after-time can undo 
for thee what I have done. Go ; for I 
can relinquish thee. But have they 
taught thee what it is to part from him 
you love ? never again to hear his voice- 
never again to meet those eyes, whose 
every turn and glance you have learned 
to read and understand ?" 

Calantha could not answer. ff You 
will write kindly and constantly to me," 
at length she said. " May God destroy 
me in his vengeance," cried Glenar- 
von, eagerly, "if, though absent, I 
do not daily, nay, hourly, think of thee, 
write to thee, live for thee ! Fear 
not, thou loved one ! There was a time 
when inconstancy had been a venial error 



GLENARVON. 7 

—when insecure of thy affections, and 
yet innocent, to fly thee had been a 
duty ; to save thee had been an angel's 
act of mercy and of virtue ; but now. 
when thou art mine, when, sacrificing 
the feelings of thy heart for others, thou 
dosl leave me, can you believe that I 
would add to your grief, and increase my 
own ? Can you believe him you love 
so base as this ? Oh ! yes, Calantha, I 
have acted the part of such a villain to 
your lost friend, that even you mistrust 
me." She reassured him. tfc I have gi- 
ven my very soul to you, Glenarvon ! 
I believe in you as I once did in Hea- 
ven. I had rather doubt myself and 
every thing than you]'/ 

She now expressed an anxiety to re- 
turn and see her aunt. "Yet, Calantha, 
it may perhaps be said that you have 
fled to me. The stain then is indelible. 
Think of it, my beloved; and think, if I 
myself conduct you back, how the male- 
volent, who are ever taunting you, will 
B4 



8 GLEN A R VON. 

say that I wished not to retain you. 
They know me not ; they guess not 
what I feel; and the world, ever apt to 
judge by circumstances imperfectly re- 
lated, will imagine" "At such a 

moment," said Calantha, impatiently, 
*' it isof little importance what is thought. 
When the heart suffers keenly, all the 
sayings of others are of little weight. Let 
them think the worst, and utter what 
they think. When we fall, as I have 
done, we are far beyond their power ; 
the venomed shaft of malice cannot 
wound ; for the blow under which we 
sink is alone heeded. I feel now but 
this — that I am going to part from you." 
Glenarvon looked at her, and the tears 
filled his eyes. " Thy love," he said, 
" was the last light of Heaven that 
beamed upon my weary pilgrimage ; thy 
presence recalled me from error; thy soft 
voice stilled every furious passion. It is 
all past now ; I care not what becomes 
of me/' As he spoke, they approached 



GLENARVON. 9 

the boat, and entering it, sailed with a 
gentle breeze across the bay. Not a 
wave rippled— not a cloud obscured the 
brightness of the setting sun. " How 
tranquil and lovely is the evening !" 
said Glenarvon, as the bark floated upon 
the smooth surface. " It is very calm 
now," she replied, as she observed the 
serenity of his countenance. " But, ah ! 
who knows how soon the dreadful storms 
may arise, and hurry us to destruction. 3> 

The boat touched the shore, where a 
crowd of spectators were assembled— - 
some watching from the top of the cliff, 
and others idly gazing upon the sea. 
The figure of Elinor distinctly appeared 
amongst the former, as bending forward, 
she eagerly watched for Glenarvon. Her 
hat and plume distinguished her from 
the crowd ; and the harp, her constant 
companion, sounded at intervals on the 
breeze in long and melancholy cadences. 
Her dark wild eye fixed itself upon him 
as he approached. "It is my false lover/ 5 
B 5 



10 GLENARVON. 

she said, and shrieked. " Hasten, dear- 
est Calantha," he cried, "from this spot, 
where we are so much observed. That 
wretched girl may, perhaps, follow us. 
Hasten; for see with what rapidity she 
advances." " Let her come," replied 
Calantha. " I am too miserable myself 
to turn from those who are unhappy.'* 
Elinor approached ; she gazed on them 
as they passed ; she strained her eyes to 
catch one last glimpse of Glenarvon as 
he turned the path. 

Many of his friends, retainers, and 
followers were near. He bowed to all 
with gracious courtesy; but upon Elinor 
he never cast his eyes. " He's gone l w 
she cried, shouting loudly, and address- 
ing herself to her lawless associates in the 
language they admired. " He is gone, 
and peace be with him; for he is the 
leader of the brave !" Calantha and 
Glenarvon now passed on in silence to 
the castle; but Elinor, returning to he* 
harp, struck the chords with enthusiasm, 



GLENARVON. 11 

whilst the caverns of the mountains re^ 
echoed to the strain. The crowd who 
had followed loudly applauded, joining 
in the chorus to the well-known sound of 

u Erin m'avourneen — Erin go brah." 



12 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER II. 



The moment of enthusiasm was past ; 
the setting sun warned every straggler 
and passenger to return. Some had a 
far distant home to seek ; others had left 
their wives or their children. Elinor 
turned from the golden light which illu- 
minated the west, and gazed in agony 
upon the gloomy battlements of St, 
Alvin Priory, yet resplendent with the 
last parting ray. Of all who followed 
her, few only now remained to watch 
her steps. She bade them meet her at 
the cavern at the accustomed hour ; she 
was weary, and feigned that till then 
she would sleep. This she did to disem- 
barrass herself of them. 

Upon raising herself after a little time, 
they were gone. It was dark— it was 



GLENARVON. 12 

lonely. She sat and mused upon the 
cliff, till the pale moon broke through 
the clouds, and tipped every wave with 
its soft and silvery light. — "The moon 
shines bright and fair,'' she said: "the 
shadows pass over it. Will my lover 
come again to me ? It is thy voice, Glen- 
arvon, which sings sweetly and mourn- 
fully in the soft breeze of night. 

My heart's fit to break, yet no tear fills my eye, 
As I gaze, on the moon, and the clouds that flit by. 
The moon shines so fair, it reminds me of thee; 
But the clouds that Qbscure it, are emblems of me. 

They vviil pass like the dream of our pleasures and 

youth ; 
They will pass like the promise of honor and truth; 
And bright thou shalt shine, when these shadows 

are gone, 
All radiant — serene — unobscur'd ; but alone. 

" And did he pass me so coldly by ? 
And did he not once look on me V 3 she 
said. "But I will not weep: he shall 
not break my spirit and heart. Let him 



14 GLENARVON. 

do so to the tame doves for whom he has 
forsaken me. Let such as Alice and 
Calantha die for his love* I will not/' — 
She took her harp: her voice was tired 
and feeble. She faintly murmured the 
feelings of her troubled soul. It sounded 
like the wind, as it whispered through 
the trees, or the mournful echo of some 
far distant flute. 

SONG. 

And can'st thou bid my heart forget, 
What once itlov'd so well; 
That look — that smile, when first we met; 
That last — that sad farewell? 

Ah! no : by ev'ry pang I've prov'd, 
By every fond regret, 
I feel, though I no moreamlov'd, 
I never— can forget. 

I wishM to see that face again, 
Although 'twere chang'd to me : 
I thought it not such madd'ning pain 
As ne'er to look on thee. 



CLENARVON. 15 

But, oh! 'twas torture to my breast, 
To meet thine alter'd eye, 
To see thee smile on all the rest, 
Yet coldly pass me by. 

Even now, when ev'ry hope is o'er 
To which I 



u Are these poetical effusions ended ?" 
said a soft voice from behind. — She start- 
ed ; and turning round, beheld the figure 
of a man envelloped in a dark military 
cloak, waiting for her upon the cliff. — 
M What a night it is ! not a wave on the 
calm sea : not a cloud in the Heavens. 
See how the mountain is tinged with the 
bright moonshine. Are you not chill'd — 
Are you not weary ; wandering thus 
alone ?" " I am prepared to follow you," 
said Elinor, " though not as a mistress, 
yet as a slave." "I do not love you, *' 
said the man, approaching her. " Oh, even 
if you were to hang about and kneel 
to me as once, I cannot love you ! Yet 
it was pleasant to be so loved; was it 



16 LENA R VON. 

not?" " I think not of it now," said 
Elinor, while a proud blush burned on her 
cheek. " This is no time for retrospec- 
tion. '* {f Let us hasten forwards, by the 
light of the moon : I perceive that we 
are late.— Have you forgiven me?" 
" There are injuries, Glenarvon, too 
great to be forgiven : speak not of the 
past: let us journey on." 

The lashing of the waves against the 
rocks, alone disturbed the silence of the 
scene. They walked in haste by each 
others side, till they passed Craig Allen 
Point, and turned into the mouth of a 
deep cavern. Whispers were then heard 
from every side— the confusion of strange 
voices, the jargon of a foreign dialect, 
the yells and cries of the mutineers and 
discontented. u Strike a light,*' said 
Elinor's companion, in a commanding 
tone, as he advanced to the mouth of 
the rock.— In a moment, a thousand 
torches blazed around, whilst shouts of 
joy proclaimed a welcome to the visitor, 



CLENARVON. 17 

who was accosted with every mark of the 
most obsequious devotion. 

" How many have taken the oath to- 
night ?" said a stout, ill-looking man, ad- 
vancing to the front line. " Sure, Citizen 
Connor, fifty as brave boys aseversuck'd 
whiskey from the mother country," 
answered O'Kelly from within. The 
ferocious band of rebels were now or- 
dered forward, and stood before their 
leader; some much intoxicated, and all 
exhibiting strange marks of lawless and 
riotous insubordination. " We'll pay no 
tythes to the parsons/* said one. "We'll 
go to mass, that we will, our own way." 
" We'll be entirely free." " There shall 
be no laws amongst us." " We'll re- 
form every thing, won't we ?" " And 
turn all intruders out with the tyrants." 
" Here's to the Emerald Isle ! Old Ire- 
land for ever ! Erin forever!" " Come, 
my brave boys," shouted forth one Ci- 
tizen Cobb, " this night get yourselves 
pikes— make yourselves arms ; beg, buy s 



18 GLENARVON. 

or steal, and bring them here privately 
at the next meeting. We'll send your 
names into the directory. Fear nothing ; 
we will protect you ; we'll consider your 
grievances ; only go home peaceably, 
some one way, and some another — by 
two's, by three's. Let us be orderly as 
the king's men are. We are free men ; 
and indeed free men can make as good 
soldiers/' 

" I would fain speak a few words, 
citizen, before we part to-night. The 
hour is not yet ripe ; but you have been 
all much wronged. My heart bleeds for 
your wrongs. Every tear that falls from 
an Irishman is like a drop of the heart's 
best blood ; is't not so, gentlemen r* Ye 
have been much aggrieved ; but there is 
one whom ye have for your leader, who 
feels for your misfortunes ; who will not 
live among you to see you wronged ; and 
who, though having nothing left for him- 
self, is willing to divide his property 
amongst you all to the last shilling. See 



6LENARV0N. 19 

there, indeed, he stands amongst us. 
Say, shall he speak to you ?" " Long 
life to him — let him speak to us." " Hear 
him." " Let there be silence as pro- 
found as death." " Sure and indeed 
we'll follow him to the grave/' " Och, 
he's a proper man!" A thousand voices 
having thus commanded silence : 

u Irishmen," said Glenarvon, throw- 
ing his dark mantle off, and standing 
amidst the grotesque and ferocious rab- 
ble, like some Being from a higher world 
— " Irishmen, our country shall soon be 
ee free : — you are about to be avenged. 
" That vile government, which has so 
" long, and so cruelly oppressed you, 
<e shall soon be no more ! The national 
" flag — the sacred green, shall fly over 
ft the ruins of despotism; and that fair 
" capital, which has too long witnessed 
(< the debauchery, the plots, the crimes 
" of your tyrants, shall soon be the ci- 
(( tadel of triumphant patriotism and vir- 
" tue. Even if we fail, let us die de* 



20 GLENARVOtf. 

tc fending the rights of man — the inde* 

*' pendence of Ireland. Let us remem- 

" ber that as mortals we are liable to the 

" contingencies of failure; but that an 

" unalterable manliness of mind, under 

" all circumstances, is erect and unsub- 

" dued. If you are not superior to your 

" antagonist in experience and skill, be 

sc so in intrepidity. Art, unsupported 

•* by skill, can perform no service. 

" Against their superior practice, array 

" your superior daring ; for on the cow- 

" ard, who forgets his duty in the hour 

" of danger, instant punishment shall 

"fall; but the brave, who risk their 

" lives for the general cause, shall receive 

€t immediate distinction and reward. — 

" Arise then, united sons of Ireland — 

ec arise like a great and powerful people, 

" determined to live free or die." 

Shouts of applause for a moment in- 
terrupted Glenarvon. Then, as if in- 
spired with renewed enthusiasm, he pro- 
ceeded : " Citizens, or rather shall I not 



GLENAUVON. H\ 

if say, my friends; for such you have 
" proved yourselves to me, my own and 
" dear countrymen ; for though an exile, 
Cf whom misfortune from infancy has pur- 
<e sued, I was born amongst you, and 
" first opened my delighted eyes amidst 
*-* these rocks and mountains, where it is 
" my hope and ambition yet to dwell. 
et The hour of independence approaches. 
(C Let us snap the fetters by which ly- 
ec rants have encompassed us around : let 
" us arouse ail the energies of our souls; 
ee call forth all the merit and abilities, 
* e which a vicious government has Jong 
u consigned to obscurity; and under the 
s< conduct of great and chosen leaders, 
" march with a steady step to victory/' 

Here Glenarvon was again interrupted 
by the loud and repeated bursts of ap- 
plause. Elinor then springing forward, 
in a voice that pierced through the hearts 
of each, and was echoed back from cave 
to cave — " Heard ye the words of your 
leader ?" she cried: " and is there one 
amongst you base enough to desert 



22 GLENARVON. 

him ?V " None, none/' " Then arm 
yourselves, my countrymen ; arm your- 
selves by every means in your power, 
and rush like lions on your foes. Let 
every heart unite, as if struck at once 
by the same manly impulse ; and Ireland 
shall itself arise to defend its indepen- 
dence ; for in the cause of liberty, inac- 
tion is cowardice ; and may every coward 
forfeit the property he has not the cou- 
rage to protect ! Heed not the glare of 
hired soldiery, or aristocratic yeomanry; 
they cannot stand the vigorous shock of 
freedom. Their trappings and their arms 
will soon be your's. Attack the tyrants 
in every direction, by day and by night. 
—To war— to war ! Vengeance on the 
detested government of England ! What 
faith shall you keep with them ? What 
faith have they ever kept with you ? 
Ireland can exist independent. O I let 
not the chain of slavery encompass us 
around.— Health to the Emerald isle! 
Glenarvon and Ireland for ever ! 



GLENARVON. 23 



CHAPTER III. 



The cry of enthusiasm has ceased. Eli- 
nor and her companion have quitted the 
cavern. Before she parted for the night, 
she asked him respecting one he loved. 
" Where is Calantha?" she said. " In 
yon dreary prison," he replied, pointing 
to Castle Delaval: — "like a rose torn from 
the parent stem, left to perish in all its 
sweetness -gathered by the hand of the 
spoiler, and then abandoned. I have 
left her/' " You look miserable, my 
Lord." " My countenance is truer to 
my feelings than I could havesupposed." 
" Alice dead— Calantha discarded! I 
heard the tale, but it left no credit with 
me. — Can there be hearts so weak as 
thus to die for love? *Tis but a month 
ago, I think, you said you never would 



t4f GLENARVON. 

leave her; that this was different from all 
other attachments; that you would bear 
her hence." " I have changed my in- 
tention: is that sufficient?" " Will she 
die, think you ?" " Your uncle will, if 
you continue thus, 3 ' replied Glenarvon. 
" I am sick at heart, Elinor, when 1 look 
on you." " Old men, my Lord, will 
seek the grave; and death can strike 
} r oung hearts, when vain men think it their 
doing. I must leave you." " Where- 
fore in such haste ? M " A younger and 
truer lover awaits my coming: I am his, 
to folfow and obey him." " Oh, Elinor, 
I tremble at the sight of so much cold 
depravity — so young and so abandoned. 
How changed from the hour in which I 
first met you at Glenaa ! Can it be pos- 
sible?" " Aye, my good Lord; so apt 
a scholar, for so great a master." 

Glenarvon attempted to seize her hand. 
"Do you dare to detain me? Touch 

me not. I fear you/' " Elinor, to what 

perdition are you hastening? I adjure 



GLENARVON. 25 

you by your former love, by Clare of 
Costoly, the boy for whom you affect 
such fondness, who still remains the 
favorite of my heart, return to your un- 
cle. I will myself conduct you." "Leave 
your hold, Glenarvon : force me not to 
shriek for succour. — Now that you have 
left me, I will speak calmly. Are you 
prepared to hear me ?" cf Speak." " Do 
you see those turrets which stand alone, 
as if defying future storms? Do you 
behold that bleak and barren mountain, 
my own native mountain, which gave 
me the high thoughts and feelings I pos- 
sess; which rears its head, hiding it only 
in the clouds ? Look above : see the 
pale moon, that moon which has often 
witnessed our mutual vows, which has 
shone upon our parting tears, and which 
still appears to light us on our guilty 
way : by these, by thyself, thy glorious 
self, 1 swear I never will return to 
virtue : 

VOL. III. C 



26 GLENARVON. 

<c For the heart that has once been estrang'd, 
iC With some newer affection "may burn, 
" It may change, as it ever has chang'd, 
<c But, oh ! it can never return. " 

" By these eyes, which you have term- 
ed bright and dear ; by these dark shining 
locks, which your hands have oft en- 
twined ; by these lips, which, prest by 
your's, have felt the rapturous fire and 
tenderness of love — virtue and I are for- 
sworn : and in me, whatever I may ap- 
pear, henceforward know that I am your 
enemy. Yes, Glenarvon, I am another's 
now." " You can never love another 
as you have loved me: you will find no 
other like me." " He is as fair and 
dear, therefore detain me not. 1 would 
rather toil for bread, or beg from stran- 
gers, than ever more owe to you one sin- 
gle, one solitary favour. Farewell — How 
I have adored, you know: how I have 
been requited, think — when sorrows as 
acute as those you have inflicted visit 



GLENAKVON. 27 

you. Alice, it is said, blest you with 
her dying breath. Calantha is of the 
same soft mould ; but there are deeds of 
horror, and hearts of fire : — the tygress 
has been known to devour her young; 
and lions, having tasted blood, have fed 
upon the bowels of their masters. " 

St. Clare, as she spoke, stood upon 
the edge of the high cliff to which they 
had ascended. The moon shone brightly 
on her light figure, which seemed to 
spring from the earth, as if impelled for- 
ward by the strength of passion. The 
belt of gold which surrounded her slen- 
der waist burst, as if unable longer to 
contain the proud swelling of her heart; 
she threw the mantle from her shoulders ; 
and raising the hat aud plume from her 
head, waved it high in the air: then 
darting forward, she fled hastily from the 
grasp of Glenarvon, who watched her 
lessening form till it appeared like a 
single speck in the distance, scarce vi- 
sible to the eye. 

c 2 



'2S GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Before Glenarvon had met Elinor upon 
the cliff, he had conducted Lady. Avon- 
dale to her father's house. The first per- 
son who came forward to meet them was 
Sir Richard. " My dear child," he said, 
18 what could have induced you to take 
in such a serious manner w T hat was meant 
in jest? There is your aunt dying in 
one room ; and every one in fits or mad 
in different parts of the house. The 
whole thing will be known all over the 
country ; and the worst of it is, when 
people talk, they never know what they 
say, and add, and add, till it makes a 
terrible story. But come in, do ; for if 
the world speak ill of you, I will protect 
you : and as to my Lord Glenarvon 



GLENARVOX. 29 

there, why it seems after all he is a 
very good sort of fellow ; and had no 
mind to have you ; which is what I 
hinted at before you set out, and might 
have saved you a long walk, if you would 
only have listened to reason. But come 
in, do; for all the people are staring at 
you, as if they had never seen a woman 
before. Not but what I must say, such 
a comical one, so hot and hasty, I never 
happened to meet with ; which is my 
fault, and not your's. Therefore, come 
in ; for I hate people to do any thing 
that excites observation. There now ' r 
did not I tell you so? Here are all your 
relations perfectly crazy : and we shall 
have a scene in the great hall, if you 
don^t make haste and get up stairs before 
they meet you." " Where is she ? 
where is she?" said Mrs. Seymour; and 
she wept at beholding her. But Ca- 
lantha could not weep : her heart seemed 
like ice within her: she could neither 
weep nor speak. ,l My child, my Ca- 
c 3 



30 GLENARVON. 

lantha," said Mrs. Seymour, " welcome 
back/' Then turning to Glenarvon, 
whose tears flowed fast, V receive my 
prayers, my thanks for this," she ex- 
claimed. " Heaven bless you for restoring 
any child to me." 

" Take her/' said Lord Glenarvon, 
placing Calantha in Mrs. Seymour's 
arms; " and be assured, I give to you 
what is dearer to me, far dearer than 
existence. I do for your sake what I 
would not for any other: I give up that 
which I sought, and won, and would 
have died to retain — that which would 
have made life dear, and which, being 
taken from me, leaves me again to a dull 
blank, and dreary void. Oh ! feel for 
what I have resisted; and forgive the 
past." " I cannot utter my thanks," 
said Mrs. Seymour. " Generous Glen- 
arvon ! God reward you for it, and bless 
you." She gave him her hand. 

Glenarvon received the applauses of 
all ; and he parted with an agitation so 



GLRNARVON. 31 

violent, and apparently so unfeigned, that 
even the duke, following, said, " We 
shall see you, perhaps, to-morrow : we 
shall ever, I am sure, see you with de- 
light." Calantha alone shared not in 
these transports; for her agony was be- 
yond endurance. Oh, that she too could 
have thought Glenarvon sincere and ge- 
nerous; that she too, in parting from 
him, could have said, a moment of pas- 
sion and my own errors have misled 
him ! — but he has a noble nature. Had 
he taken her by the hand, and said — 
Calantha, we both of us have erred ; but 
it is time to pause and repent : stay 
with a husband who adores you: live to 
atone for the crime you have committed : 
— she had done so. But he reproached 
her for her weakness ; scorned her for 
the contrition he said she only affected 
to feel; and exultingly enquired of her 
whether, in the presence of her husband, 
she should ever regret the lover she had 
lost. 

c 4 



32 GLENARVON. 

When we love, if that which we love 
is noble and superior, we contract a re- 
semblance to the object of our passion ; 
but if that to which we have bound our- 
selves is base, the contagion spreads 
swiftly, and the very soul becomes black 
with crime. Woe be to those who have 
ever loved Glenarvon ! Lady Avondale's 
heart was hardened; her mind utterly 
perverted; and that face of beauty, that 
voice of softness, all, alas! that yet 
could influence her. She was, indeed, 
insensible to every other consideration. 
When, therefore, he spoke of leaving her 
—of restoring her to her husband, she 
heard him not with belief; but she stood 
suspended, as if waiting for the explana- 
tion such expressions needed.— It came 
at length. " Have I acted it to the life ?" 
he whispered, ere he quitted her. " It is 
but to keep them quiet. Calm yourself. 
I will see you again to-morrow." 

That night Calantha slept not ; but 
she watched for the approaching morrow. 



GLENARVOSf. 35 

It came :— Glenarvon came, as he had 
promised : he asked permission to see 
her one moment alone : he was not de- 
nied. He entered, and chided her for 
her tears; then pressing her hand, he 
inquired if she really thought that he 
would leave her: " What now— now 
that every secret of my soul is your's ? 
Look at me, thou dear one : look again 
upon your master, and never acknow- 
ledge another/* " God bless and protect 
you," she answered. u Thanks, sweet, 
for your prayer. What fire burns in your 
eye ? What ecstasy is it thus to call you 
mine? Oh, tear from your mind every 
remaining scruple! — shrink not. The 
fatal plunge into guilt is taken: what 
matter how deep the fall. You weep, 
love ; and for what ? Once you were 
pure and spotless ; and then, indeed, was 
the time for tears; but not now; oh, 
not now ! 

" They talk to us of parting :— -we will 
not part. Though contempt may brand 
G 5 



34 GLENARVON. 

my name, I will return and tear thee 
from them when the time is fit ; and you 
shall drink deep of the draught of joy* 
though death and ignominy may be 
mingled with it. Let them see you 
again — let the ties strengthen that I have 
broken. That which has strayed from 
the flock will become even dearer than 
before; and when most dear, most 
prized : a second time I will return, and 
a second time break through every tie, 
every resolve. Dost shudder, sweet one } 
To whom are you united ? Remember 
the oaths — the ring; and however es- 
tranged—whatever you may hear, re- 
member that you belong to me, to me 
alone. And even,'* continued he, smiling 
with malicious triumph, " even though 
the gallant soldier, the once-loved Avon- 
dale return, can he find again the heart 
he has lost ? 'Tis but a shadow he can 
attempt to bind. The heart, the soul, 
are mine. O ! Calantha, you know not 
what you feel, nor half what you would 



GLENARVOX. 35 

fee], were I in reality to leave you. 
There's a fire burns in thee, fierce as in 
myself; you are bound to me now; I 
will return and claim you/' 

As he spoke, he placed around her 
neck a chain of gold, with a locket of 
diamonds, containing his hair, saying as 
he fastened it — " Remember the ring ; 
this, too, is a marriage bond between 
us, friend of my best affections ; never 
will I abandon or forget thee ; — never, 
by Heaven ! shalt thou regret thy attach- 
ment or my own." 

" Glenarvon," said Calantha, and she 
was much agitated, " I have no will but 
your's; but I am not so lost as to wish, 
or to expect you to remain faithful to 
one, you must no longer see ; only, when 
you marry— — " " May the wrath of Hea- 
ven blast me," he interrupted, '•" if ever 
I call any woman mine but you, my 
adored, my sweetest friend. I will be 
faithful ; but you— you must return to 
Avondale : and shall he teach you to 



36 GLENAITVON. 

forget me ? No, Calantha, never shall 
you forget the lessons I have given ; my 
triumph is secure. Think of me when 
I am away ; dream of me in the night, 
as that dear cheek slumbers upon its 
pillow. Our's has been but a short-tried 
friendship, but the pupils of Glenarvon 
never can forget their master. Better 
they had lived for years in folly and vice 
than one hour in the presence of such as 
I am. Do you repent, love ? It is im- 
possible. Look back to the time that is 
gone; count over the hours of solitude 
and social life ; bear in your memory 
every picture of fancied bliss, and tell me 
truly if they can be compared to the 
transport, the ecstasy of being loved. 

"Oh! there is Heaven in the language 
of adoration ; and one hour thus snatched 
from eternity is cheaply purchased by an 
age of woe. My love, my soul, look not 
thus. Now is the season of youth. 
While fresh and balmy as the rose of 
summer, dead to remorse, and burning 



GLEN A R VON. 37 

with hidden fires, dash all fear and all 
repentance from you ; leave repinings to 
the weak and the old, and taste the con- 
solation love alone can offer. What can 
heal its injuries ? What remove its re- 
grets ? What shew you its vanity and 
illusion but itself? This hour we enjoy 
its transports, and to-morrow, sweet, we 
must live upon its remembrance. 

" Farewell, beloved. Never let, or father 
or husband teach thee to forget me. Dis- 
semble well, however; for they say the 
conquering hero returns — Avondale. 
Oh ! if thou shouldst— but it is impossi- 
ble—I feel that you dare not. We must 
appear to give way : we have been too 
unguarded : we have betrayed ourselves: 
but, my life, my love is your's. Be true 
to me. You need not have one doubt of 
me: I never, never will forsake you. 
Heed not what I say to others ; I do it 
but to keep all tranquil, and to quiet 
suspicion. Trust all to one who has ne- 
ver deceived thee. I might have as- 



38 GLENARVON. 

sumed a character to you more worthy, 
more captivating. But have you not read 
the black secrets of my heart— aye, read, 
and shuddered, and yet forgiven me ?" 



GLENARVON. 39 



CHAPTER V. 



The repetition of a lover's promises is 
perhaps as irksome to those who may 
coldly peruse them, as the remembrance 
is delightful to those who have known 
the happiness of receiving them. It may 
indeed be held immoral to exhibit, in 
glowing language, scenes which ought 
never to have been at all ; but when 
every day, and every hour of the day— 
at all times, and in all places, and in all 
countries alike, man is gaining possession 
of his victim by similar arts, to paint 
the portrait to the life, to display his 
base intentions, and their mournful con- 
sequences, is to hold out a warning and 
admonition to innocence and virtue ; 
this cannot be wrong. All deceive them- 
selves. At this very instant of time, what 



40 GLENARVOtt. 

thousands of beguiled and credulous be- 
ings are saying to themselves in the pride 
of their hearts, " I am not like Ca- 
lantha," or, " thanks be to Heaven, the 
idol of my fancy is not a Glenarvon.* 5 
They deem themselves virtuous, because 
they are yet only upon the verge of ruin ; 
they think themselves secure, because 
they know not yet the heart of him who 
would mislead them. But the hour of 
trial is at hand ; and the smile of scorn 
may soon give place to the bitter tear of 
repentance. 

" Many can deceive," said Glenarvon,. 
mournfully gazing on Calantha whilst she 
wept ; u but is your lover like the com- 
mon herd ? Oh ! we have loved, my gen- 
tle mistress, better than they know how : 
we have dared the utmost : your mind 
and mine must not even be compared 
with their's. Let the vulgar dissemble 
and fear— let them talk idly in the un- 
meaning jargon they admire: they never 
felt what we have felt ; they never dared 



GLENARVON. 41 

what we have done : to win, and to be- 
tray, is with them an air— a fancy : and 
fit is the delight for the beings who can 
enjoy it. Such as these, a smile or a 
frown may gain or lose in a moment. But 
tell me, Calantha, have we felt nothing 
more? I who could command you, am 
your slave : every tear you shed is an- 
swered not by my eyes alone, but in my 
heart of hearts ; and is there that on earth 
I would not, will not sacrifice for you ? 

" I know they will wound you, and 
frown on you because of me ; but if once 
I shew myself again, the rabble must 
shrink at last ; they dare not stand before 
Glenarvon. Heaven, or hell, I care not 
which, have cast a ray so bright around 
my brow, that not all the perfidy of a 
heart as lost as mine, of a heart loaded, 
as you know too well, with crimes man 
shudders even to imagine— not all the 
envy and malice of those whom my 
contempt has stung, can lower me to their 
level. And you, Calantha, do you think 



42 OLENARVON. 

you will ever learn to hate me, even were 
I to leave, and to betray you ? Poor 
blighted flower, which I have cherished 
in my bosom, when scorned and trampled 
on, because you have followed him whom 
all hadgladlysought, if I had sobut willed 
it! Were I to subject you to the racking 
trial of frantic jealousy, and should you 
ever be driven by fury and vengeance to 
betray me, you would but harm yourself. 
To thy last wretched houp, thou wouldst 
pine in unavailing recollection and re- 
gret; as Clytie, though bound and fettered 
to the earth, still fixes her uplifted eyes 
upon her own sun, who passes over, re- 
gardless in his course, nor deigns to cast 
a look below/' 

It was at a late hour that night, when 
after again receiving the thanks of a 
whole family— when after hearing himself 
called the preserver of the wretch who 
scarcely dared to encounter his eyes, 
Lord Glenarvon took a last and faltering 
leave of Calantha. Twice he returned 



GLENARYON. 43 

and paused : he knew mot bow to say 
farewell: it seemed as if his lips trem- 
bled beneath the meaning of that fearful 
word — as if he durst not utter a knell 
to so much love — a death to every long- 
cherished hope. At length, in a slow 
and solemn voice, " Farewell, Calantha," 
he said. " God forgive us both, and bless 
you." Lady Avondale for one instant 
ventured to look upon him: it was but 
to impress upon her memory every fea- 
ture, every lineament, and trace of that 
image, which had reigned so powerfully 
over her heart. Had thousands been 
present, she had seen but that one : — 
had every danger menaced him, he had 
not moved. Thus in the agony of re- 
gret they parted ; but that regret was 
shared ; and as he glanced his eye for 
the last time on her, he pointed to the 
chain which he wore with her resem- 
blance near his heart; and he bade her 
take comfort in the thought that absence 
could never tear that image from him. 



44 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER VI. 



And now the glowing picture of guilt is at 
an end, the sword of justice hangs over the 
head of a devoted criminal ; and the tor- 
tures of remorse are alone left me to de- 
scribe. But no : remorse came not yet; 
absence but drew Calantha nearer to the 
object of her attachment. They never love 
so well who have never been estranged. 
Who is there that in absence clings not 
with increasing fondness to the object of 
its idolatry, watches not every post, and 
trembling with alarm, anxiety, and sus- 
pense, reads not again and again every line 
that the hand of love has traced ? Is there 
a fault that is not pardoned in absence ? 
Is there a doubt that is not harboured 
and believed, however agonizing ? Yet, 
though believed, is it not at once for- 



GLENARVON. 45 

given ? Every feeling but one is extinct 
in absence; every idea but one image is 
banished as profane. Lady Avondale 
had sacrificed herself and Glenarvon, as 
she then thought, for others ; but she 
could not bring herself to endure the pang 
she had voluntarily inflicted. 

She lived therefore but upon the let- 
ters she daily received from him ; for 
those letters were filled with lamenta- 
tions for her loss, and with the hope of 
a speedy return. She felt no horror 
at her conduct. She-deceived herself: 
conscience itself had ceased to reprove a 
heart so absorbed, so lost in the laby- 
rinth of guilt. Lord Avondale wrote to 
her but seldom : she heard however with 
uneasiness that his present situation was 
one that exposed him to much danger; 
and after a skirmish with the rebels, 
when she was informed that he was safe, 
she knelt down and said, " Thank God 
for it !*' as if he had still been dear. 
His letters, however, were repulsive and 



46 GLEN A R YON. 

cold. Glenarvon's, on the other hand, 
breathed the life and soul of love. 

In one of these letters, Glenarvon in- 
formed her, that he was going to Eng- 
land, to meet at Mortanville Priory se- 
veral of his friends. Lady Mandeville, 
Lady Augusta Selwyn, and Lady Tre- 
lawney, were to be of the party. " I care 
not," he said, " who may be there; this 
I know too well, that my Calantha will 
not." He spoke of lady Mowbrey and 
Lady Elizabeth with praise. " Oh ! if 
your Avondale be like his sister, whom 1 
have met with since we parted, what 
indeed have you not sacrificed for me ?" 
He confided to her, that Lady Mande- 
ville had ^entreated him to visit her in 
London: t( But what delight can 1 find 
in her society ?" he said; " it will only 
remind me of one I have lost." 

His letter, after his arrival in England, 
ended thus: " I will bear this separation 
as long as I can, my Calantha; but my 
health is consumed by my regret; and, 



GLENARVON. 47 

whatever you may do, I live alone — en- 
tirely alone. We may be alone in the 
midst of crowds; and if indifference, nay, 
almost dislike to others, is a proof of at- 
tachment to you, you will be secure and 
satisfied. I had a stormy passage from 
Ireland. Is it ominous of future trouble ? 
Vain is this separation. 

" I will bear with it for a short period: 
but in the spring, when the soft winds 
prepare to waft us, fly to me ; and we 
will traverse the dark blue seas, secure, 
through a thousand storms, in each 
others devotion. Were you ever at sea ? 
How does the roar of the mighty winds, 
and the rushing of waters, accord with 
you— the whistling of the breeze, the 
sparkling of the waves by night, and the 
rippling of the foam against the sides of 
that single plank which divides you from 
eternity? Fear you, Calantha ? Oh, not 
if your lover were by your side, your 
head reclining on his bosom, your heart 
freed from every other tie, and linked 



48 GLENARVON. 

alone by the dearest and the tenderest to 
his fate! Can you fancy yourself there, 
about the middle watch? How many 
knots does she make ? How often have 
they heaved the log? Does she sail with 
the speed of thought, when that thought 
is dictated by love? Perhaps it is a 
calm. Heed it not : towards morn it 
will freshen: a breeze will spring up; 
and by to-morrow even, we shall be at 
anchor. Wilt thou sail? 'They that 
go down into the great deep; they see 
the wonders of the Lord.' That thou 
may'st see as few as possible of his ter- 
rific wonders, is, my beloved, the prayer 
of him who Yiveth alone for thee ! 

"The prettiest and most perilous na- 
vigation for large ships is the Archi- 
pelago. There we will go; and there 
thou shalt see the brightest of moons, 
shining over the headlands of green Asia, 
or the Isles, upon the bluest of all waves — 
the most beautiful, but the most trea- 
cherous. Ob, Calantha ! what ecstasy 



GLENAKVON. 49 

were it to sail together, or to travel in 
those pleasant lands I have often de- 
scribed to you— *freed from the gloom and 
the forebodings this heavy noisome at- 
mosphere engengers! — Dearest! I write 
folly and nonsenses-do I not? But even 
this, is it not a proof of love?'* 

After his arrival at Mortanville Priory, 
Glenarvon wrote to Calantha a minute 
account of every one there. He seemed 
to detail to her his inmost thoughts. He 
thus expressed himself concerning Miss 
Monmouth :— " Do you remember bow 
often we have talked together of fyliss 
Monmouth ? You will hear, perhaps, 
that I have seen much of her of late. 
Remember she is thy relative; but oh ! 
how unlike my own, my beloved Ca- 
lantha ! Yet she pleases me well enough* 
They will, perhaps, tell you that I have 
shewn her some little attention. Pos- 
sibly this is true ; but, Heaven be my wit- 
ness, I never for one moment even have 
thought seriously about her. 5> Lady 

VOL. III. D 



50 CLENARVON. 

Trelawney, in writing to her sister, 
thought rather differently. It was thus 
that she expressed herself upon that sub- 
ject. " However strange you may think 
it/' she said in her letter to Sophia, 
" Lord Glenarvon has made a proposal 
of marriage to Miss Monmouth. I do 
not believe what you tell me of his con- 
tinuing to write to Calantha. If he does, 
it is only by way of keeping her quiet ; 
for I assure you he is most serious in his 
intentions. Miss Monmouth admires, 
indeed I think loves him ; yet she has 
not accepted his offer. Want of know- 
ledge of his character, and some fear of 
his principles, have made her for the 
present decline it. But their newly made 
friendship is to continue ; and any one 
may see how it will end. In the mean 
time, Lord Glenarvon has already con- 
soled himself for her refusal-— but I will 
explain all this when we meet. 

" Remember and say nothing of this to 
Calantha, unless she hears of it from 



GLENARVON. 6% 

others ; and advise her not to write so 
often. It is most absurd, believe me. 
Nothing, I think, can be more wanting 
in dignity than a woman's continuing to 
persecute a man who is evidently tired 
of her. He ever avoids all conversation 
on this topic; but with me, in private, 
I have heard a great deal, which makes 
me think extremely well of him. You 
know how violent Calantha is in all 
things:— -it seems in the present in- 
stance, that her love is of so mad and 
absurd a nature, that it is all he can do 
to prevent her coming after him. Such 
things, too, as she has told him ! A wo- 
man must have a depraved mind, even to 
name such subjects. 

" Now, I know you will disbelieve all 
this ; but at once to silence you, I have 
seen some passages of her letters ; and 
more forward and guilty professions none 
ever assuredly ventured to make. Her 
gifts too ! — he is quite loaded with them ; 
and while, as he laughingly observed, 
D 2 

UNIVERSITY OF 
BUNOiS LIBRARY 



52 GLENARVON. 

one little remembrance from a friend is 
dear, to be almost bought thus is un- 
becoming, both in him to receive, and 
herself to offer. As to Lord Glenarvon, 
I like him more than ever. He has, in- 
deed, the errors of youth; but his mind 
is superior, and his heart full of sensi- 
bility and feeling." 



GLENARVON. 53 



CHAPTER VII. 



If Glenarvon's letters had given joy to 
Calantha, in more prosperous and happier 
days, when surrounded by friends, what 
must they have appeared to her now, 
when bereft of all ? They were as the 
light of Heaven to one immersed in 
darkness ; they were as health to the 
wretch who has pined in sickness: they 
were as riches to the poor, and joy to 
the suffering heart. What then must 
have been her feelings when they sud- 
denly and entirely ceased ! At first, she 
thought the wind was contrary, and the 
mails irregular. Of one thing she felt 
secure— Glenarvon could not mean to 
deceive her. His last letter, too, was 
kinder than any other ; and the words with 
which he concluded it, were such as to 
d 3 



64t GLENARVON, 

inspire her with confidence. " If, by 
any chance, however improbable," he 
said, " my letters fail to reach you, 
impute the delay to any cause whatever: 
but do me enough justice not for one 
moment to doubt of me. I will comply 
with every request of your's; and from 
you I require in return nothing but ret 
membrance— the remembrance of one 
who has forgotton himself, the world* 
fame, hope, ambition—all here, and all 
hereafter, but you." 

Every one perhaps has felt the tor- 
tures of suspense : every one knows its 
lengthened pangs : it is unnecessary 
here to paint them. Weeks now passed, 
instead of days, and still not one line, 
one word from Glenarvon. Then it was 
that Lady Avondale thus addressed 
him : 

" It is in vain, my dearest friend, that 
I attempt to deceive myself. It is now 
two weeks since I have watched, with 
incessant anxiety, for one of those dear, 



GLENARVON. 65 

those kind letters, which had power to 
still the voice of conscience, and to make 
one, even as unworthy as I am, compa- 
ratively blest. You accused me of cold- 
ness ; yet I have written since, I fear, 
with only too much warmth. Alas! 
I have forgotten all the modesty and dig- 
nity due to my sex and situation, to im- 
plore for one line, one little line, which 
might inform me you were well, and not 
offended. Lord Avondale's return, I 
told you, had been delayed. His ab- 
sence, his indifference, are now my only- 
comfort in life. Were it otherwise, how 
could I support the unmeasured guilt I 
have heaped upon my soul ? The friends 
of my youth are estranged by my re- 
peated errors and long neglect. I am as 
lonely, as miserable in your absence as 
you can wish. 

<: Glenarvon, I do not reproach you : 

I never will. But your sudden, your 

unexpected silence, has given me more 

anguish than 1 can express. I will not 

D 4 



36 €LENARVON. 

doubt you: I will follow your last in- 
junctions, and believe every thing; sooner 
than that you will thus abandon me. If 
that time is indeed arrived— -and I know 
how frail a possession guilty love must 
ever be— how much it is weakened by 
security-- how much it is cooled by ab- 
sence : do not give yourself the pain of 
deceiving me: there is no use in deceit. 
Say with kindness that another has 
gained your affections; but let them 
never incline you to treat me with cru- 
elty. Oh, fear not, Glenarvon, that I 
shall intrude, or reproach you. I shall 
bear every affliction, if you but soften 
the pang to me by one soothing word. 

" Now, possibly, when you receive 
this, you will laugh at me for my fears: 
you will say 1 but echo back those which 
you indulged. But so sudden is the 
silence, so long the period of torturing 
suspense, that I must tremble till 1 re- 
ceive one line from your dearest hand — 
one line to say that you are not offended 



GLENARVON. 67 

with me. Remember that you are all 
on earth to me ; and if I lose that for 
which I have paid so terrible a price, 
what then will be my fate ! 

" I dread that you should have in- 
volved yourself seriously. Alas! I dread 
for you a thousand things I dare not 
say. My friend, we have been very 
wicked. It is myself alone I blame. 
On me, on me be the crime; but if my 
life could save you, how gladly would I 
give it up! Oh, cannot we yet repent! 
Act well, Glenarvon : be not in love 
with crime: indeed, indeed, I tremble 
for you. It is not inconstancy that I 
fear. Whatever your errors may be, 
whatever fate be mine, my heart cannot 
be severed from you. I shall, as yoti 
have often said, never cease to love; 
but, were I to see your ruin, ah, believe 
me, it would grieve me more than my 
own. I am nothing, a mere cypher: 
you might be all that is great and supe- 
rior. Act rightly, then, my friend ; and 
D 5 



£8 GLENARVON. 

hear this counsel, though it comes from 
one as fallen as I am* Think not that 
I wish to repine, or that I lament the 
past. You have rendered me happy : 
it is not you that I accuse. Bui, now 
that you are gone, I look with horror 
upon my situation ; and my crimes by 
night and by day appear unvarnished be- 
fore me. 

11 I am frightened, Glenarvon : we haver 
dared too much. I have followed you 
into a dark abyss ; and now that you, my 
guide, my protector, have left my side, 
my former weakness returns, and all, 
that one smile of your's could make me 
forget, oppresses and confounds me. 
The eye of Heaven has marked me, and 
I sink at once. You will abandon me: 
that thougbt comprises all things in it. 
Therein lies the punishment of my crime; 
The portrait which you have left with idq 
has a stern look. Some ha\ e said that the 
likeness of a friend is preferable to him~ 
self, for that it ever smiles upon us ; but 



GLENARVON. 39 

with me it is the reverse. I never saw 
Glenarvon's eyes gaze coldly on me till 
now. Farewell. 

" Ever with respect and love, 
" Your grateful, but unhappy friend, 

" Calantha." 

Lady Avondale was more calm when 
she had thus written. The next morning 
a letter was placed in her hand. Her 
heart beat high. It was from Mortan- 
ville Priory : — but it was from Lady Tre- 
lawney, in answer to one she had sent 
her, and not from Glenarvon. 

" Dearest cousin," said Lady Trelaw- 
ney, " I have not had time to write to you 
one word before. Of all the places I ever 
was at, this is the most perfectly de- 
lightful. Had I a spice in me of ro- 
mance, I would attempt to describe it ; 
but, in truth, I cannot. Tell Sophia we 
expect her for certain next week ; and, 
if you wish to be diverted from all black 



60 GLENARVON. 

thoughts, join our party. I received your 
gloomy letter after dinner ! I was sitting 

on a couch by , shall I tell you by 

whom ? — by Lord Glenarvon himself. 
At the moment in which it was deli- 
vered, for the post comes in here at nine 
in the evening, he smiled a little as he 
recognized the hand ; and, when I told 
him you were ill, that smile became an 
incredulous laugh ; for he knows well 
enough people are never so ill as they 
say. Witness himself: he is wonderfully 
recovered : indeed, he is grown perfectly 
delightful. I thought him uncommonly 
stupid all this summer, which I attribute 
now to you ; for you encouraged him in 
his whims and woes. Here, at least, he 
is all life and good humour. Lady Au- 
gusta says he is not the same man ; but 
sentiment, she affirms, undermines any 
constitution ; and you are rather too 
much in that style. 

* After all, my dear cousin, it is silly 
to make yourself unhappy about any 



GLENARVOX. 6l 

man. I dare say you thought Lord Glen- 
arvon very amiable: so do I :— and you 
fancied he was in love with you, as they 
call it: and I could fancy the same: and 
there is one here, I am sure, may fancy 
it as well as any of us : but it is so absurd 
to take these things seriously. It is 
his manner; and he owns himself that a 
grande passion bores him to death; and 
that if you will but leave him alone, he 
finds a little absence has entirely restored 
his senses. 

" By the bye, did you give him.... but 
that is a secret. Only I much suspect 
that he has made over all that you have 
given him to another. Do the same by 
him, therefore ; and have enough pride 
to shew him that you are not so weak and 
so much in his power as he imagines. I 
shall be quite provoked if you write any 
more to him. He shews all your letters : 
I tell you this as a friend : only, now, 
pray do not get me into a scrape, or re- 
peat it. 



99 GLENARVON. 

" Do tell me when Lord Avondale 
returns. They say there has been a real 
rising in the north : but Trelawney thinks 
people make a great deal of nothing at 
all: he says, for his part, he believes it 
is all talk and nonsense. We are going 
to London, where I hope you will meet 
us. Good bye to you, dear coz. Write 
merrily, and as you used. My motto, 
you know, is, laugh whilst you can, 
and be grave when you must. I have 
written a long letter to my mother and 
Sophia; but do not ask to see it. In- 
deed, I would tell you all, if I were not 
afraid you'd be so foolish as to vex your- 
self about what cannot be helped/' 

And Lady Avondale did vex herself; 
and this letter from Frances made her 
mad. The punishment of crime was 
then at hand : — Glenarvon had betrayed, 
had abandoned her. Yet was it possible, 
or was it not the malice of Frances who 
wished to vex her? Calantha could not 
believe him false. He had not been to 



GLENARVON. 63 

her as a common lover : — he was true : 
she felt assured he was: yet her agitation 
was very great. Perhaps he had been 
misled, and he feared to tell her. Gould 
she be offended, because he had been 
weak ? Oh, no ! he knew she could not : 
he would never betray her secrets ; he 
would never abandon her, because a 
newer favourite employed his momen- 
tary thoughts. She felt secure he would 
not, and she was calm. 

She walked to Belfont. She met 
with many of her former friends; 
but they received her coldly. Lady 
St. Clare drew up her head, and dropt 
her an austere courtesy. Several ladies- 
of equally unblemished reputation, were 
the first to shrink from a " fallen 
sinner." She returned to the castle; 
but every eye that met her's appeared to 
view her with new marks of disapproba- 
tion. Guilt, when bereft of support, is 
ever reprobated; but see it decked in 
splendour and success, and where are 



64 GLENARVON. 

they who shrink from its approach? 
Calantha's name was the theme of just 
censure, but in Glenarvon's presence, 
who had discovered that she was thus 
worthless and degraded? And did they 
think she did not see their meanness. 
The proud heart is the first to sink before 
contempt — it feels the wound more keen- 
ly than any other can. 

O, there is nothing in language that 
can express the deep humiliation of being 
received with coldness, when kindness 
is expected— of seeing the look, but half 
concealed, of strong disapprobation from 
such* as we have cause to feel beneath 
us, not alone in vigour of mind and spi- 
rit, but even in virtue and truth. The 
weak, the base, the hypocrite, are the 
first to turn with indignation from their 
fellow mortals in disgrace ; and, whilst 
the really chaste and pure suspect with 
caution, and censure with mildness, 
these traffickers in petty sins, who plume 
themselves upon their immaculate con- 



GLENARVON. 65 

duct, sound the alarum bell at the ap- 
proach of guih, and clamour their ana- 
themas upon their unwary and cowering 
prey. 

For once they fell with justice; and 
in this instance their conduct was re- 
ceived without resentment. There was 
a darker shade on the brow, an assumed 
distance of manner, a certain studied 
civility, which seemed to say, that, by 
favour, Lady Avondale was excused 
much ; that the laws of society would 
still admit her; that her youth, her rank 
and high connexions, were considerations 
which averted from her that stigmatising 
brand, her inexcusable hehaviour other- 
wise had drawn down : but still the 
mark was set upon her, and she felt its 
bitterness the more, because she knew 
how much it had been deserved. 

Yet of what avail were the reproving 
looks of friends, the bitter taunts of com- 
panions, whom long habit had rendered 
familiar, il*e ill-timed menaces and rough 



6*6 GLEN A R VON. 

reproaches of some, and the innuendoes 
and scornful jests of others? They only 
tended to harden a mind rendered fierce 
by strong passion, and strengthen the 
natural violence of a character which had 
set all opposition at defiance, and staked 
every thing upon one throw — which had 
been unused to refuse itself the smallest 
gratification, and knew not how to en- 
dure the first trial to which it ever had 
been exposed. Kindness had been the 
only remaining hope ; and kindness, such 
as the human heart can scarce believe 
in, was shewn in vain. Yet the words 
which are so spoken seldom fail to 
sooth. Even when on the verge of 
ruin, the devoted wretch will turn and 
listen to the accents which pity and be- 
nevolence vouchsafe to utter; and though 
they may come too late, her last looks 
and words may bless the hand that was 
thus stretched out to save her. 

It was with such looks of grateful 
affection that Lady Avondale turned to 



CLENARVON. 67 

Mrs. Seymour, when she marked the 
haughty frowns of Lady Margaret, and 
the cold repulsive glance with which many 
others received her. Yet still she lived 
upon the morrow ; and, with an an- 
guish that destroyed her, watched, vainly 
watched, for every returning post. Daily 
she walked to that accustomed spot- 
that dear, that well-known spot, where 
often and often she had seen and heard 
the man who then would have given his 
very existence to please her ; and the re- 
membrance of his love, of his promises, 
in some measure re-assured her. 

One evening, as she wandered there, 
she met St. Clara, who passed her in 
haste, whilst a smile of exulting triumph 
lighted her countenance. Lady Avon- 
dale sighed, and seated herself upon the 
fragment of a rock; but took no other 
notice of her. There was a blaze of glorious 
light diffused over the calm scene, and 
the gloomy battlements of Belfont Priory 



68 CLENARVON. 

yet shone with the departing ray. When 
Calantha arose to depart, she turned from 
the golden light which illuminated the 
west, and gazed in agony upon the spot 
where it was her custom to meet her 
lover. The vessels passed to and fro upon 
the dark blue sea; the sailors cheerfully 
followed their nightly work ; and the 
peasants, returning from the mountains 
with their flocks, sung cheerfully as they 
approached their homes. Calantha had 
no home to return to: no approving 
eye to bid her welcome : her heart was 
desolate. She met with an aged man, 
whose white locks flowed, and whose air 
was that of deep distress. He looked 
upon her. He asked charity of her as he 
passed : he said that he was friendless, 
and alone in the world. His name she 
asked: he replied, " Camioli." " If 
gold can give you peace, take this," she 
said. He blessed her: he called her all 
goodness — all loveliness ; and he prayed 



GLENARVON. 6<> 

for her to his Creator. " Oh, Father of 
mercy," said Calantha, " hear the prayer 
of the petitioner : grant me the blessing 
he has asked for me. I never more can 
pray. He little knows the pang he gave, 
He calls me good : alas ! that name and 
Calantha's are parted for ever. 

Poor wretch! who hast nothing to hope for in 

life, 
But the mercy of hearts long success has made 

hard. 
No parent hast thou, no fond children, no wife, 
Thine age from distress and misfortune to guard. 

Yet the trifle I gave, little worth thy possessing, 
Has call'd forth in thee, what I cannot repay : 
Thou hast ask'd of thy God for his favour and 

blessing ; 
Thou hast pray'd for the sinner, who never must 

pray. 

Old man, if those locks, which are silver'd by time, 
Have ne'er been dishonor'd by guilt or excess ; 
If when tempted to wrong, thou hast fled from the 

crime ; 
By passion unmov'd, unappali'd by distress : 



70 GLENARVON. 

If through life thou hast follow'd the course that 

is fair, 
And much hast perform'd, though of little possessed; 
Then the God of thy fathers shall favour the prayer, 
And a blessing be sent to a heart now unblest 



GLENARTON. 71 



CHAPTER VI I L 



Lady Atondale wrote again and 
again to Glenarvon. All that a woman 
would repress, all that she once feared 
to utter, she now ventured lo write. 
" Glenarvon," she said, H if I have dis- 
pleased you, let me at least be told my 
fault by you : you who have had power 
to lead me to wrong, need not doubt 
your influence if you would now but 
advise me to return to my duty. Say it 
but gently — speak but kindly to me, and 
I will obey every wish of your's. But 
perhaps that dreaded moment is arrived, 
and you are no longer constant and true. 
Ah ! fear not one reproach from me. I 
told you how it must end; and I will 
never think the worse of you for being 
as all men are. But do not add cruelty 



72 GLENARVON. 

to inconstancy. Let me hear from your 
own lips that you are changed. I but 
repeat your words, when once my letters 
failed to reach you — suspense, you then 
said, was torture: and will you now 
expose me to those sufferings which 
you even knew not how to endure ? Let 
no one persuade you to treat her with 
cruelty, who, whatever your conduct 
may be, will never cease to honour and 
to love you. 

" Forgive, if too presumptuous, I have 
written with flippant gaiety, or thought- 
less folly. Say I have been to blame ; but 
do not you, Glenarvon, do not you be my 
accuser. You are surrounded by those 
who possess beauty and talents, far, far 
above any which I can boast; but all I 
had it in my power to give, 1 offered 
you; and, however little worth, no one 
can bear to have that all rejected with 
contempt and ingratitude. And are they 
endeavouring to blacken me in your 
opinion ? and do they call this acting 



«LENARVON. 73 

honourably and fairly? Lady Trelawney 
perhaps — ah ! no, I will not believe it. 
Besides, had they the inclination, have 
they the power to engage you to re- 
nounce me thus ? 

" Glenarvon, my misery is at the 
utmost. If you could but know what I 
suffer at this moment, you would pity me. 
O leave me not thus: I cannot bear it. 
Expose me not to every eye : drive me 
not to desperation. This suspense is 
agonizing : this sudden, this protracted 
silence is too hard to bear. Every one 
does, everyone must, despise me: the 
good opinion of the wise and just, I have 
lost for ever ; but do not you abandon 
me, or if you must, oh let it be from 
your own mouth at least that I read my 
doom. Say that you love another— say 
it, if indeed it is already so; and I will 
learn to bear it. Write it but kindly. 
Tell me I shall still be your friend. I 
will not upbraid you : no grief of mind 
shall make me forget your former kind- 

VOL. III. B 



74 GLENARVON. 

ness. Oh no, I will never learn to hate 
or reproach you, however you may think 
fit to trample upon me. I will bless 
your name with my last breath — call 
upon you even from the grave, where you 
have sent me — only turn one look, one 
last dear look to me. i> 

Such was her letter. At another time 
she thus again addressed him: 

" Glenarvon, my only hope in life,drive 
me not at once to desperation. Alas! 
why do I write thus? You are ill perhaps: 
or my friends surroundingyou, have urged 
you to this. In such case, remember my 
situation. Say but kindly that my letters 
are no longer a solace to you, and I will 
of myself cease to write; but do not 
hurl me at once from adoration to con- 
tempt and hate. Do not throw me off, 
and doom me to sudden, to certain per- 
dition. Glenarvon, have mercy. Let 
compassion, if love has ceased, impel you 
to show me some humanity. I know it 
is degrading thus to write. I ought to 



GLENAHVON. 75 

be s'rlent, and to feel that if you have the 
heart to treat me with harshness, it is 
lowering myself still further thus to sue. 
But oh ! my God, it is no longer time to 
think ofdignity---to speak of what is ri^ht. 
I have fallen to the lowest depth. You, 
you are the first to teach me ho»v low, 
how miserably I am fallen. I forsook 
every thing for you. I would have fol- 
lowed you; and you know it. But for 
your's and other's sake, I would have 
sacrificed all— all to you. Alas ! I have 
already done so. 

" If you should likewise turn against 
me — if you, for whom so much is lost* 
should be the first to despise me, how 
can I bear up under it. Dread the v'10* 
lence of my feelings-— the agonizing pang, 
the despair of a heart so lost, and so be- 
trayed. Oh, write but one line to me. 
Say that another has engaged you to fo*- 

sake me — that you will love r* ^ tes _ m 
J -*jenomore; 

but that as a friend j-fi wi „ st|)| feel 
some affection, so^ e interest for me. 



76 GLENARVON. 

I am ill, Glenarvon. God knows I do 
not affect it, to touch you. Sirch guilt 
as mine, and so much bitter misery I— - 
how can I bear up under it? Oh pity 
the dread, the suspense I endure. You 
know not what a woman feels when re- 
morse, despair, and the sudden loss of 
him she lores, assail her at once. 

" I have seen, I have heard of cruelty, 
and falsehood : but you, Glenarvon— oh 
you who are so young, so beautiful, can 
you be inhuman ? It breaks my heart to 
think so. Why have you not the looks, 
as well as the heart of a villain ? Oh 
why take such pains, such care, to lull 
tne into security, to dispel every natural 
fear and suspicion, a heart that loves 
must harbour, only to plunge me deeper 
in agony— to destroy me with more re- 
fined and barbarous cruelty ? Jest not 
with my sufferings. God knows they , 
are acute and real. I feel even for my- 
lelf when I consider what I am going to 
endure. Oh spare one victim at least. 



GLENARVON. 77 

Generously save me: I ask you not to 
love me. Only break to me yourself 
this sudden change~-tell me my fate, 
from that dear mouth which has so often 
sworn never, never to abandon me." 



•^ at- 



78 OLEtfARVON 



CHAPTER IX, 



Days again passed in fruitless expecta- 
tion ; nights, in unceasing wakefulness 
and grief. At len°th one morning, a let- 
ter was put into Lady Avondale's hands. 
It was from Glenarvon. It is impossible 
to describe the joy, the transport of that 
moment; nor how, pressing it to her lips, 
she returned thanks to Heaven for receiv- 
ing, what it was a crime against her Crea- 
tor thus to value. She glanced her eye 
over the superscription ; but she durst 
not open it. She dreaded lest some 
cause should be assigned for so long a 
silence, which might appear less kind 
than what she could easily endure. The 
seal was not his seal ; and the black wax, 
so constantly his custom to use, was ex- 
changed for red. The motto upon the 



GLENARVON. 79 

seal (for lovers attend to all) was not that 
which at all times he made use of when 
addressing Calantha. It was a seal she 
knew too well. A strange foreboding 
that he was changed, filled her mind. 
She was prepared for the worst, as she 
apprehended. At last she broke the 
seal; but she was not prepared for the 
following words written by his own hand, 
and thus addressed to her. Oh! had he 
the heart to write them ? 

Mortanville Priory, Noreraber the 9tfh 
Lady Avondale, v 
I am no longer your lover ; and since 
you oblige me to confess it, by this truly 
irnfeminine persecution,— learn, that I am 
attached to another ; whose name it would 
of course be dishonourable to mention, 
I shall ever remember with gratitude the 
many instances I have received of the 
predilection you have shewn in my fa- 
vour. I shall ever continue your friend, 
if your ladyship will permit me so to 

E 4 



80 GLENARVON, 

style itself ; and, as a first proof of my 
regard, I offer you this advice, correct 
your vanity, which is ridiculous; exert 
your absurd caprices upon others ; and 
leave me in peace. 

Your most obedient servant, 

Glenarvoh. 

This letter was sealed and directed by 
Lady Mandeville; but the hand that 
wrote it was Lord Glenarvon's ; and 
therefore it had its full effect. Yes ; it 
went as it was intended, to the very 
heart ; and the wound thus given, was as 
deep as the most cruel enemy could 
have desired. The grief of a mother for 
the loss of her child has been described, 
though the hand of the painter fails ever 
in expressing the agonies of that mo- 
ment. The sorrows of a mistress when 
losing the lover she adores, have been the 
theme of every age. Poetry and paint- 
ing, have exhausted the expression of 
her despair, and painted to the life, that 



GLENARVON. 81 

which themselves could conceive— could 
feel and understand. Every one can 
sympathise with their sufferings; and that 
which others commiserate, is felt with 
less agony by ourselves. But who can 
sympathize with guilt, or who lament 
the just reward of crime? 

There is a pang, beyond all others— 
a grief, which happily for human nature 
few have been called upon to encounter. 
It is when an erring but not hardened 
heart, worked up to excess of pas- 
sion, idolized and flattered into security, 
madly betraying every sacred trust, re- 
ceives all unlooked for, from the hand it 
adores, the dreadful punishment which 
its crime deserves. And, if there can 
be a degree still greater of agony, shew 
to the wretch who sinks beneath the 
unexpected blow—shew her, in the per- 
son of her only remaining friend and 
protector, the husband she has betrayed— - 
the lover of her youth ! Oh shew him 
unsuspicious, faithful, kind ; and do not 
5 5 



S2 GLENARVON. 

judge her, if at such moment, the dream 
dispelled, frantic violence impelling her 
to acts of desperation and madness, lead 
her rash hand to attempt her miserable 
life. Where but in death can such out- 
cast seek refuge from shame, remorse, 
and all the bitterness of despair? Where 

but in death? it is no coward's 

act. The strength of momentary passion 
may nerve the arm for so rash a deed ; 
but faint hearts will sicken at the 
thought. 

Calantha durst not— no, she durst not 
strike the blow. She seized the sharp 
edged knife, and tried its force. It was 
not pain she feared. Pain, even to 
extremity, she already felt. But one single 
blow— one instant, and all to be at an 
end. A trembling horror seized upon 
her limbs : the life-blood chilled around 
her heart. She feared to die. Pain, 
even to agony, were better than thus ta 
brave Omnipotence— to rush forward un- 
called into that state of which no certain 



GLENARVON. 83 

end is known : to snatch destiny into our 
own power, and draw upon ourselves, 
in one instant of time, terrors and punish- 
ments above the boundless apprehension 
even of an evil imagination to conceive. 

Calantha's eye, convulsed and fixed, 
perceived not the objects which sur- 
rounded her. Her thoughts, quick as 
the delirious dream of fever, varied with 
new and dreadful pictures of calamity. 
It was the last struggle of nature. — -The 
spirit within her trembled at approaching 
dissolution. — The shock was too great 
for mortal reason to resist. Glenarvon— - 
Glenarvon ! that form— that look alone 
appeared to awaken her recollection, but 
all else was confusion and pain. 

It was a scene of horror. May it for 
ever be blotted from the remembrance of 
the human heart ! It claims no sympa- 
thy : it was the dreadful exhibition of a 
mind which passion had misled, and 
reason had ceased to guide. (Jalantha 
bowed not before that Being who had 
E 6 



84 GLENARVOX. 

seen fit to punish her in his wrath. She 
sought nor vengeance, nor future hope. 
All was lost for her; and with Glenarvon, 
every desire in life, every aspiring energy 
vanished. Overpowered, annihilated* 
she called for mercy and release. She 
felt that mortal passion domineered over 
reason ; and, after one desperate struggle 
for mastery, had conquered and destroyed 
her. 

Her father watched over and spoke to 
her. Mrs. Seymour endeavoured to 
awaken her to some sense of her situa- 
tion :— she spoke to her of her hus- 
band. Calantha 1 when reason had 
Ceased to guide thee, she called to sooth, 
to warn thee, but thou couldst not hear. 
That voice of conscience, that voice of 
truth, which in life's happier day thou 
had'st rejected, now spoke in vain ; and 
thy rash steps hurried on to seek the ter* 
mination of thy mad career. 



GLENARVON. $5 



CHAPTER X, 



When the very soul is as it were anni- 
hilated by some sudden and unexpected 
evil, the outward frame is calm— no ap- 
pearance of emotion, of tears, of repining, 
gives notice of the approaching calamity. 
Calantha, motionless, re-perused Glenar- 
von's letter, and spoke with gentleness 
to those who addressed her. Oh ! did 
the aunt that loved her, as she read that 
barbarous letter, exhibit equal marks of 
fortitude? No: in tears, in reproaches, 
she vented her indignation : but still 
Calantha moved not. 

There is a disease which it is terrible 
to name. Ah, see you not its symptoms 
in the wild eye of your child. Dread, 
dread the violence of her uncurbed pas» 



86 GLENARVON. 

«ions, of an imagination disordered and 
overpowered. Madness to frenzy has 
fallen upon her. What tumult, what 
horror, reign in that mind: how piercing 
were the shrieks she uttered : how hol- 
low the cry that echoed Glenarvon's 
name ! Lady Margaret held her to her 
bosom, and folded her arms around her. 
No stern looks upbraided her for her 
crimes: all was kindness unutterable- 
goodness that stabbed to the heart. 
And did she turn from such indul- 
gence — did her perverted passions still 
conquer every better feeling, as even 
on a bed of death her last hope was 
love-— her last words Glenarvon ! 

Sophia approached Calantha with 
words of kindness and religion : but the 
words of religion offered no balm to a 
mind estranged and utterly perverted. 
Her cheeks were pale, and her hollow 
eyes, glazed aud fixed, turned from the 
voice of comfort. Miss Seymour placed 
her children near her; but with tears of 



GLENARVON. 87 

remorse she heard them speak, and 
shrunk from their caresses. And still it 
was upon Glenarvon that she called. 
Yet when certain death was expected, 
or far worse, entire loss of reason, she 
by slow degrees recovered. 

There is a recovery from disease which 
is worse than death ; and it was her des- 
tiny to prove it. She loved her own 
sorrow too well: she cherished every 
sad remembrance : she became morose, 
absorbed, and irritated to frenzy, if in- 
truded upon. All virtue is blighted in 
such a bosom— all principle gone. It 
feeds upon its own calamity. Hope no- 
thing from the miserable : " a broken 
" heart is a sepulchre in which the ruin 
" of every thing that is noble and fair is 
" enshrined/' 

That which causes the tragic end of a 
woman's life, is often but a moment of 
amusement and folly in the history of a 
man. Women, like toys, are sought 
after and trifled with, and then thrown 



88 GLENARVON. 

by with every varying caprice. Another, 
and another still succeed ; but to each 
thus cast away, the pang has been be- 
yond thought, the stain indelible, and 
the wound mortal. Glenarvon had offer- 
ed his heart to another. He had given 
the love-gifts— the chains and the rings 
which he had received from Calantha, 
to his new favourite. Her letters he had 
shewn ; her secrets he had betrayed : to 
an enemy's bosom he had betrayed the 
struggles of a guilty heart, tortured with 
remorse, and yet at that time at least 
but too true, and faithful to him. 
They were the letters written in con- 
fidence which he shewed ! They were 
the secret thoughts of a soul he had torn 
from virtue and duty to follow him, 
which he betrayed ! 

And to whom did he thus expose her 
errors ?— to the near relations of her hus- 
band, to the friends, and companions of her 
youth; and instead of throwing a veil upon 
the weakness he himself had caused, when 



CLENARVON. 89 

doubt, remorse, and terror had driven 
her to acts of desperation ; instead of 
dropping one tear of pity over a bleeding, 
breaking heart, he committed those tes- 
timonies of her guilt, and his own trea- 
chery, into the hands of incensed and 
injured friends. They were human : 
they saw but what he would have them 
see ; they knew but what he wished 
them to know : they censured her al- 
ready, and rather believed his plausible 
and gentle words, than the frantic rhap- 
sodies of guilt and passion. They read 
the passages but half communicated ; 
they heard the insidious remarks ; they 
saw the letters in which themselves were 
misrepresented and unkindly named ; nor 
knew the arts which had been made use 
of to alienate Calantha. They espoused 
the cause of Glenarvon, and turned with 
anger and contempt against one whom 
they now justly despised. Even Sophia, 
whom the terror of despair had one mo- 
ment softened — even Sophia had not 



VO GLENARVON. 

long been in the society of Glenarvon 
after her arrival in England, when she 
also changed; so powerful were the ar- 
guments which he used to persuade her; 
or so easily tranquillized is resentment 
when we ourselves are not sufferers from 
the injury. 



&LENARV0N. 9i 



CHAPTER XI, 



On quitting Castle Delaval, Lord Glen- 
arvon went as he had promised, to 
Mr. Monmouth'ss eat in Wales, by name 
Mortanville Priory. There, in a large 
and brilliant society, he soon forgot 
Calantha. Lady Augusta rallied him 
for his caprice ; Lady Mandeville sought 
to obtain his confidence. Tears and re- 
proaches are ever irksome ; and the 
confidence that had once been placed in 
a former mistress, now suddenly with- 
drawn, was wholly given to her. A 
petitioner is at all times intrusive; and 
sorrow at a distance but serves to 
encrease the coldness and inconstancy it 
upbraids. The contrast is great between 
smiling and triumphant beauty, and 
remorse, misery, and disgrace. And, if 



92 GLENARVOtf. 

every reason here enumerated were 
insufficient to account for si lover'* 
inconstancy, it is enough in one word to 
say, that Lady Avondale was a 9ent; 
for Lord Glenarvon was of a disposition 
to attend so wholly to those in whose 
presence he took delight, that he failed 
to remember those to whom he had once 
been attached ; so that like the wheels of 
a watch, the chain of his affections 
might be said to unwind from the absent, 
in proportion as they twined themselves 
around the favourite of the moment ; and 
being extreme in all things, he could 
not sufficiently devote himself to the one, 
without taking from the other all that he 
had given. 

It were vain to detail the petty in- 
stances of barbarity he employed. The 
web was fine enough, and wove with a 
skilful hand. He even consulted with 
Lad)' Mandeville in what manner to 
make his inhuman triumph more poig- 
nant — more galling; and when he heard 



GLENARVON. $3 

that Calantba was irritated even unto 
madness, and grieved almost unto death, 
he only mocked at her folly, and despised 
her still remaining attachment to himself. 
" Indeed she is ill/' said Sophia, in an- 
swer to his insulting enquiry, soon after 
her arrival at Mortanville Priory. " She 
is even dangerously ill." " And pray 
may I ask of what malady ?" he replied, 
with a smile of scorn. " Of one, Lord 
Glenarvon," she answered with equal 
irony, " which will never endanger your 
health — of a broken heart." He laugh- 
ed. " Of deep remorse/' she continued. 
" And no regret V said he, looking 
archly at her. " Do not jest," she re- 
torted : " the misery which an unhal- 
lowed attachment must in itself inflict, 
is sufficient, I should think, without 
adding derision to every other feeling." 
" Does Miss Seymour speak from expe- 
rience or conjecture ?" 

Before Miss Seymour could answer, 
Lady Mandeville, who was present, 



94 GLENARVON. 

whispered something to Glenarvon ; and 
he laughed. Sophia asked eagerly what 
she was saying. " It is a secret," said 
Glenarvon, significantly. " How happy 
must Lady Mandeville be at this mo- 
ment!" said Lady Augusta, " for every 
one knows that the greatest enjoyment 
the human mind can feel, is when we 
are in the act of betraying a 6ecret con- 
fided to us by a friend, or informing an 
enemy of something upon which the life 
and safetyof another depends." "Come," 
said Lady Mandeville, " you are very 
severe; but I was only urging Lord 
Glenarvon to listen to Miss Seymour's 
admonitions in a less public circle. 
Miss Monmouth may be displeased if 
she hears of all this whispering." So 
saying, she took Glenarvon's arm, and 
they walked out of the room together. 

" After all, he is a glorious creature," 
said Lady Trelawney. " I wish I had a 
glorious creature to walk with me this 
morning," said Lady Augusta with a 



GLENARVON. 95 

sneer : " but how can I hope for support, 
when Calantha, who had once thousands 
to defend her, and whom I left the gayest 
where all were gay, is now dying alone, 
upbraided, despised, and deserted. Where 
are her friends?" " She fell by her 
own fault entirely/' said Lord Tre- 
Jawney. " Her life has been one course 
of absurdity. A crime here and there 
is nothing, I well know," said Lady 
Augusta ; " but imprudence and folly, 
who can pardon ?*' " She has a kind 
heart/' said Frances. '* Kind enough 
to some," said her lord ; " but talk not 
of her, for I feel indignant at her very 
name." " There is nothing excites our 
indignation so strongly,'* said Lady 
Augusta, " as misfortune. Whilst our 
friends are healthy, rich, happy, and, 
above all, well dressed and gaily attend- 
ed, they are delightful, adorable. After 
all, your sensible judicious people on 
the long run are the best : they keep a 
good eye to their own interest; and 



96 GLENARVON. 

these flighty ones are sure to get into 
scrapes. When they do, we flatterers 
have an' awkward part to play : we 
must either turn short about, as is the 
case now, or stand up in a bad cause, 
for which none of us have heart or 
spirit/' '•' There is no excuse lor Ca- 
lantha," said Miss Seymour. " God 
forbid I should look for one," said Lady 
Augusta. " J am like a deer, and ever 
fly with the herd: there is no excuse, 
Miss Seymour, ever, for those who are 
wounded and bleeding and trodden 
upon. I could tell you — but here 
come these glorious creatures ! Are you 
aware, that when Lady Avondale sent 
a few days since for her lovers portrait, 
and a lock of his hair, one of these 
glorious creatures, Lady Mandeville, 
yesterday in an envelope enclosed a 
braid of her own. C'est piquant cela : 
j' admire!*' " How illnatured the world 
is !" said Miss Monmouth, who had 
heard the a ter part of this discourse 



OLENARVON. 97 

" Not illnatured or wicked, my dear," 
said Lady Augusta ; " only weak, cow- 
ardly, and inordinately stupid/' " With 
what self-satisfaction every one tri- 
umphs at the fall of those whose ta- 
lents or situation raise them a little 
into observation !" said Miss Monmouth. 
u Common sense is so pleased/' said 
Lady Augusta, " when it sees of how 
little use any other sense is in this life, 
that one must forgive its triumph ; and 
its old saws and wholesome truisms come 
out with such an increase of length and 
weight, when the enemy to its peace has 
tumbled down before it, that it were 
vain to attempt a defence of the culprit 
condemned. L know the world too well 
to break through any of the lesser rules 
and customs imposed, but you, my dear, 
know nothing yet ; therefore 1 cannot 
talk to you." 

Miss Monmouth was the only child 
of the Honourable Mr. Monmouth, a near 
relation of Lady Mowbrey's. Her youth, 

VOL. III. F 



9S GLENARVON. 

her innocence, a certain charm of man- 
ner and of person, rare and pleasing, had 
already apparently made some impres- 
sion upon Glenarvon. He had secretly 
paid her every most marked attention. 
He had even made her repeatedly the 
most honourable offers. At first, trem- 
bling and suspicious, she repulsed the 
man of whom rumour had spoken much, 
which her firm principles and noble ge- 
nerous heart disapproved ; but soon at- 
tracted and subdued by the same all 
splendid talents, she heard him with 
more favourable inclinations. She was, 
herself, rich in the possession of every 
virtue and grace: but, alas! too soon 
she was over-reached by the same fasci- 
nation and disguise which had imposed 
upon every other. 

Amongst the many suitors who at this 
time appeared to claim Miss Monmouth's 
hand, Buchanan was the most distin- 
guished. Lady Margaret eagerly desired 
this marriage. She put every engine to 



CLEXARVOK* 99 

work in a moment to defeat Glenarvon's 
views, and secure the prize for her son. 
She even left Ireland upon hearing of his 
increasing influence, and joined for a 
few weeks the party at Mortanville Pri- 
ory. The parents of Miss Monmouth 
were as eager for Buchanan, as the young 
lady herself was averse. Glenarvon saw 
with bitterness the success his rival had 
obtained, and hated the friends and parents 
of Miss Monmouth for their mistrust of 
him. By day, by night, he assailed an 
innocent heart, not with gross flattery, 
not with vain professions. He had a 
mask for every distinct character he wish- 
ed to play ; and in each character he 
acted to the very life. 

In this instance he threw himself upon 
the generous mercy of one who already 
was but too well inclined to favour him. 
He candidly acknowledged his errors ; 
but he cast a veil over their magnitude ; 
and confessed only what he wished should 
be known. Miss Monmouth, he said* 

F 2 



100 GLENARVON. 

should reform him ; her gentle voice 
should recall his heart from perversion ; 
her virtues should win upon a mind, 
which, the errors of youth, the world 
and opportunity had misled. 

Miss Monmouth was the idol of her 
family. She was pure herself, and there- 
fore unsuspicious. Talents and judg- 
ment had been given her with no sparing 
hand ; but to these, she added the warm- 
est, the most generous heart, the strong- 
est feelings, and a high and noble cha- 
racter. To save, to reclaim one, whose 
genius she admired, whose beauty at- 
tracted, was a task too delightful to be 
rejected. Thousands daily sacrifice their 
hearts to mercenary and ambitious views; 
thousands coldly, without one feeling of 
enthusiasm or love, sell themselves for a 
splendid name ; and can there be a mind 
so cold, so corrupted, as to censure the 
girl, who, having rejected a Buchanan, 
gave her hand and heart, and all that she 
possessed, to save, to bless, and to re- 
claim a Glenarvon. 



6LENARVOK. 101 



CHAPTER XII. 



Haptily for Miss Monmouth, at the 
very moment her consent was given, 
Lady Margaret placed a letter in Glen- 
arvon's hands, which threw him into 
the deepest agitation, and obliged him 
instantly, and for a short time, to hasten 
to England. He went thither in company 
with Lady Margaret; and strange as it 
may appear, the love, the idolatry, he 
had professed for so many, seemed now 
with greater vehemence than for others 
transferred to herself. Whether from ar- 
tifice or caprice, it is unnecessary to say, 
but Lady Margaret at least made shew 
of a return. She never lost sight of him 
for one moment. She read with him ; 
she talked with him; she chided him 
F 3 



102 GLENARVON. 

with all the wit and grace of which she 
was mistress; and he, as if maddening 
in her presence, gazed on her with wild 
delight; and seemed inclined to abandon 
every thing for her sake. 

Lady Margaret applied to her nume- 
rous friends for the ship which had long 
been promised to Lord Glenarvon, as a 
reward for his former services. She wrote 
to Sir George Buchanan in favour of his 
appointment; she spoke with eloquence 
of his misfortunes ; and whether from 
her representations, or some other cause, 
his titles and estates were at length re- 
stored to him. Thanking her for the zeal 
she had shewn, he proposed to return 
with her immediately to Italy. 

She now hesitated. Her brother had 
written to her: these were the words 
of his letter: " Buchanan is desirous 
that his marriage should be celebrated in 
this place. Miss Monmouth, I fear, has 
been compelled to accept his hand ; and 



GLENARVON. 103 

I should pity her, if such force did not 
save her from a far worse fate. I mean a 
marriage with Glenarvon:" 

Glenarvon was by Lady Margaret's side 
when this letter was received. He held 
one of Lady Margaret's white hands in 
his: he was looking upon the rings she 
wore, and laughingly asking her if they 
were the gifts of Dartford. " Look at me, 
my beautiful mistress," he said, with the 
triumph of one secure. She carelessly 
placed the letter before his eyes. " Cor- 
rect your vanity," she said, whilst he 
was perusing it, alluding to the words 
he had written to Calantha ; " exert your 
caprices upon others more willing to bear 
them ; and leave me in peace." 

Stung to the soul, Glenarvon started; 
and gazed on her with malignant rage: 
then grinding his teeth with all the hor- 
ror of supprest rage, " I am not a fly to 
be trodden upon, but a viper that siiali 
sting thee to the heart. Farewell for 
ever/' he cried, rushing from her. Then 
f 4 



104 SLEKARVOK. 

returning one moment with calmness, 
and smiling on her, " you have not 
grieved me," he said gently : " I am not 
angry, my fair mistress. We shall meet 
again: fear not we shall meet again." 
" Now I am lost,*' said Lady Margaret, 
when he was gone. u I know by that 
smile that my fate is sealed/' 

There is nothing so uncongenial to 
the sorrowing heart as gaiety and mirth ; 
yet Calantha was at this time condemned 
to witness it. No sickness, no sufferings 
of its owners, prevented extraordinary 
festivities at the castle. Upon the even- 
ing of the celebration of Buchanan's mar- 
riage, there were revels and merry-making 
as in happier times; and the peasantry 
and tenants, forgetful of their cabals and 
wrongs, all appeared to partake in the 
general festivity. The ribband of green 
was concealed beneath large bouquets of 
flowers; and healths and toasts went 
round with tumults of applause, regard- 
less of the secret sorrows either of those 



GLEXARVON. 105 

who pledged them, or of their superiors. 
The lawn was covered with dancers. It 
was a cheerful scene ; and even Calantha 
smiled, as she leant upon her father's 
arm, and gazed upon the joyful coun- 
tenances which surrounded her; but it 
was the smile of one whose heart was 
breaking; and every tenant as he passed 
by and greeted her looked upon the fa- 
ther and the child, and sighed at the 
change which had taken place in the ap- 
pearance of both. 

Suddenly, amidst the dancers, with a 
light foot, as if springing from the earth, 
there appeared, lovely in beauty and in 
youth, the fairest flower of Belfont. It 
was Miss St. Clare. No longer envel- 
loped in her dark flowing mantle, she 
danced amidst the village maidens, the 
gayest there. She danced with all the 
skill of art, and all the grace of nature. 
Her dress was simple and light as the 
web of the gossamer : her ringlets, shining 
in the bright sun-beams, sported with the 

F 6 



106 GLENARVON. 

wind: red was her cheek as the first 
blush of love, or the rose of summer, 
when it opens to the sun. 

Upon the lake the boats, adorned with 
many coloured ribbands, sailed with the 
breeze. Bands of music played beneath 
the tents which were erected for refresh- 
ments. The evening was bright and 
cloudless. Elinor was the first and latest 
in the dance — the life and spirit of the 
joyous scene. Some shrunk back it 
is true at first, when they beheld her; 
but when they saw her smile, and that 
look of winning candour, which even 
innocence at times forgets to wear, that 
playful, youthful manner, re-assured them. 
u Can it be possible ! M said Calantha, 
when the music ceased, and the villagers 
dispersed — " can you indeed affect this 
gaiety, or do you feel it, St. Clare ?" 
" I feel it," cried the girl, laughing 
archly. " The shafts of love shall never 
pierce me ; and sorrows, though they fall 
thicker than the rain of Heaven, shall 



GLENARVON. 107 

never break my heart. " Oh ! teach 
me to endure afflictions thus. Is it re- 
ligion that supports you ?" " Religion l" 
St. Clare sighed. 

" Yon bright heaven/' she said, up- 
lifting her eyes, " is not for me. The 
time has been, when, like you, I could 
have wept, and bowed beneath the 
chastening rod of adversity ; but it is 
past. Turn you, and repent, lady ; for 
you are but young in sin, and the heart 
alone has wandered. Turn to that God 
of mercy, and he will yet receive and 
reclaim you." A tear started into her 
eyes, as she spoke. " I must journey 
on ; for the time allowed me is short. 
Death walks among us even now. Look 
at yon lordly mansion — your father's 
house. Is it well defended from within? 
Are there bold hearts ready to stand 
forth in the time of need ? Where is the 
heir of Delaval : — look to him: — even 
now they tear him from you. The fiends, 
the fiends are abroad :— »Iook to your 



103 GLENARVON. 

husband, lady — the gallant Earl of Avon- 
dale: red is the uniform he wears; black 
is the charger upon which he rides; but 
the blood of his heart shall flow. It is a 
bloody war we are going to: this is the 
year of horror!!! Better it were never to 
have been born, than to have lived in an 
age like this." 

" Unhappy maniac !" said a voice from 
behind. It was the voice of the Bard 
Camioli: " unhappy St. Clare!" he said. 
She turned; but he was gone. Every 
one now surrounded Miss St. Clare, re- 
questing her to sing. " Oh, I cannot 
sing," she replied, with tears, appealing 
to Calantha; then added lower — " my 
soul is in torture. That was a father^ 
voice, risen from the grave to chide me." 

Calantha took her hand with tender- 
ness ; but Miss St. Clare shrunk from her. 
M Fly me," she said, " for that which thou 
thinkest sweet has lost its savour. " Oh 
listen not to the voice of the charmer, 
charm she never so sweetly." Yet ere 



GLENARVON. 10£ 

we part, my young and dear protectress, 
take with you my heart's warm thanks 
and blessings ; for thou hast been kind to 
the friendless — thou hast been merciful 
to the heart that was injured, and in 
pain. I would not wish to harm thee. 
May the journey of thy life be in the sun- 
shine and smiles of fortune. May soft 
breezes waft thy gilded bark upon a 
smooth sea, to a guileless, peaceful shore ! 
May thy footsteps tread upon the green 
grass, and the violet and the rose spring 
up under thy feet I" Calantha's pale 
cheeks and falling tears were her only 
answer to this prayer, 



110 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XIII, 



Camioli had been some time concealed 
in Ireland. He now entered his brother 
Sir Everard's door. Upon that night he 
was seized with illness, before he had 
time to explain his intentions. He had 
placed a bag of gold in the hands of his 
brother; and now, in the paroxysm of his 
fever, he called upon his daughter; he 
urged those who attended on him to send 
for her, that he might once again behold 
her. " I am come to die in the land of 
my fathers/' he said. tf I have wandered 
on these shores to find if all I heard were 
true. Alas! it is true; and I wish once 
more to see my unhappy child— before I 
die." 

They wrote to Elinor; they told her 
of her father's words. They said : <f Oh, 
Elinor, return ; ungrateful child— haste 



GLENARVON. Ill 

thee to return. Thy father is taken 
dangerously ill. I think some of the 
wretches around us have administered 
poison to him. I know not where to 
find thee. He has called thrice for thee ; 
and now he raves. Oh hasten ; for in 
the frantic agony of his soul, he has 
cursed thee; and if thou dost not obey 
the summons, with the last breath of de- 
parting life,, he will bequeath thee his ma- 
lediction. O, Elinor, once the pride and 
joy of thy father's heart, whom myself 
dedicated as a spotless offering before 
the throne of Heaven, as being too fair, 
too good for such a lowly one as me— - 
return ere it be too late, and kneel by 
the bed of thy dying father. This is thy 
house. It is a parent calls, however un- 
worthy ; still it is one who loves thee ; 
and should pride incline thee not to hear 
him, O how thou wilt regret it when too 
late — Ever, my child, thy affectionate, 
but most unhappy uncle, 

Everard St. Clare,' 5 



112 GLENARVON. 

She received not the summons— -she 
was far distant when the letter was sent 
for her to the mountains. She received 
it not till noon; and the bard's last hour 
was at hand. 

Miss Lauriana St. Clare then addressed 
her-—" If any feeling of mercy yet 
warms your stubborn heart, come home 
to us and see your father, ere he breathe 
his last. 'Tis a fearful sight to see him:, 
he raves for you, and calls you his darling, 
and his favourite— -his lost lamb, who has- 
strayed from the flock, but vvert dearer 
than all the rest. Miss Elinor, I have 
little hopes of stirring your compassion; 
for in the days of babyhood you were ever, 
hard and unyielding, taking your own 
way, and disdaining the counsel of such 
as were older and wiser than you. Go 
to, child; you have played the wanton 
with your fortune, and the hour of shame 



is come." 



Miss St. Clare heard not the summons 
— upon her horse she rode swiftly over 



GLENARVON. 113 

the moors— it came too late—Camioli 
bad sickened in the morning, and ere 
night, he had died. 

They wrote again : " Your father's spirit 
has forsaken him : there is no recall from 
the grave. With his last words he be- 
queathed his curse to the favourite of 
his heart; and death has set its seal 
upon the legacy. The malediction of a 
father rest upon an ungrateful child !" 

Elinor stood upon the cliff near Craig 
Allen Bay, when her father's corpse was 
carried to the grave. She heard the knell 
and the melancholy dirge : she saw the 
procession as it passed : she stopped its 
progress, and was told that her father in 
his last hour had left her his malediction. 
Manv were near her, and flattered her at 
the time ; but she heard them not. 

Elinor stood on the barren cliff, to feel, 
as she said, the morning dew and fresh 
mountain air on her parched forehead. 
" My brain beats as if to madden me :-- - 
the fires of hell consume me; — it is a 



114 glenArvon. 

father's curse/' she cried ; and her voice, 
in one loud and dreadful shriek, rent the 
air. <f Oh it is a father's curse!" then 
pausing with a fixed and hurried eye : 
" Bear it, winds of heaven, and dews of 
earth," she cried : " bear it to false 
Glenarvon : — hear it, fallen angel, in the 
dull night, when the hollow wind shakes 
your battlements and your towers, and 
shrieks as it passes by, till it affrights 
your slumbers:— hear it in the morn, 
when the sun breaks through the clouds, 
and gilds with its beams of gold the 
eastern heavens :— - hear it when the 
warbling skylark, soaring to the skies, 
thrills with its pipe, and every note of 
joy sound in thy ear as the cry of woe. 
The old man is dead, and gone; he will 
be laid low in the sepulchre : his bones 
shall be whiter than his grey hairs. He 
left his malediction upon his child. 
May it rest with thee, false Glenarvon I 
Angel of beauty, light, and delight of the 
soul, thou paradise of joys unutterable 



GLENARVON. 115 

front which my heart is banished, thou 
God whom I have worshipped with 
sacrilegious incense, hear it and tremble. 
Amidst revels and feastings, in the hour 
of love, when passion beats in every pulse, 
when flatterers kneel, and tell thee thou 
art great, when a servile world bowing 
before thee weaves the laurel wreath of 
glory around thy brows, when old men for- 
get their age and dignity to worship thee, 
and kings and princes tremble before the 
scourge of thy wit — think on the cry of 
the afflicted — the last piercing cry of 
agonizing and desperate despair. Hear 
it, as it shrieks in the voice of the tem- 
pest, or bellows from the vast fathomless 
ocean ; and when they tell thee thou art 
great, when they tell thee thou art good, 
remember thy falsehood, thy treachery. 
Oh remember it and shudder, and say to 
thyself thou art worthless, and laugh at 
the flatterers that would deny it/* 



116 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Nothing is more mistaken than to sup- 
pose that unkindness and severity are the 
means of reclaiming an offender. There 
is no moment in which we are more in- 
sensible to our own errors than when we 
smart under apparent injustice. Cnlan- 
tha saw Glenarvon triumphant, and her- 
self deserted, The world, it is true, still 
befriended her; but her nearest relations 
and friends supported him. Taunted 
with her errors, betrayed, scorned, and 
trampled upon, the high spirit of her 
character arose in proportion as every- 
hope was cut off. She became violent, 
overbearing, untractable even to her at- 
tendants, demanding a more than ordi- 
nary degree of respect, from the suspicion 
thstt it might no longer be paid. Every 



«LENARVON. 117 

error of her life was now canvassed, and 
brought forth against her. Follies and 
absurdities long forgotten, were produced 
to view, to aggravate her present dis- 
grace; and the severity which an offend- 
ed world forbore to shew, Sophia, Fran- 
ces, the Princess of Madagascar, Ladv 
Maiideville, and Lord Glenarvon, were 
eager to evince. 

But, even at this hour, Calantha had 
reason to acknowledge the kindness and 
generosity of some ; and the poor remem- 
bered her in their prayers. Those whom 
she had once protected, flew forward to 
support her; and even strangers addressed 
her with looks, if not words, of consola- 
tion. It was not the gay, the professing, 
the vain, that shewed compassion in a 
moment of need— it was not the impru- 
dent and vicious whom Calantha had 
stood firm by and defended : these were 
the first to desert her. But it was the 
good, the pious, the benevolent, who 
came to her, and even courted an ac- 



11$ GLENARVON. 

quaintance they once had shunned; for 
their hope was now to reclaim. 

Humbled, not yet sufficiently, but 
miserable, her fair name blasted, the jest 
of fools, the theme of triumphant malice, 
Calantha still gave vent to every furious 
passion, and openly rebelled against those 
who had abandoned her. She refused to 
see any one, to hear any admonitions, 
and, sickening at every contradiction 
to her authority, insisted upon doing 
things the most illjudged and unreason- 
able, to shew her power, or her indigna- 
tion. Struck with horror at her conduct, 
every one now wrote to inform Lord 
Avondale of the absolute necessity of his 
parting from her. Hints were not only 
given, but facts were held up to view, 
and a life of folly and error was painted 
with every aggravation. Calantha knew 
not at this time the eager zeal that some 
had shewn to hurl just vengeance upon 
a self-devoted victim. She was informed 
therefore of Lord Avondale's expected 



GLENARVON. 119 

return, and prepared to receive him with 
hardened and desperate indifference. 

She feared not pain, nor death: the 
harshest words occasioned her no humilia- 
tion : the scorn, the abhorrence of com- 
panions and friends, excited no other sen- 
timent in her mind than disgust. Me- 
naced by every one, she still forbore to 
yield, and boldly imploring, if she were 
guilty, to be tried by the laws of her 
country — laws, which, if she had trans- 
gressed, she revered, and would sub- 
mit to, she defied the insolence, and ma- 
lice of private interference. 

From this state, Calantha was at length 
aroused by the return of Lord Avondale. 
It has been said, that the severest pang 
to one not wholly hardened, i9 the unsus- 
picious confidence of the friend whom 
we have betrayed, the look of radiant 
health and joy which we never more 
must share, that eye of unclouded virtue, 
that smile of a heart at rest, and, worse 
than all perhaps, the soft confiding words 



120 GLENARVOH. 

and fond caresses offered after long ab- 
sence. Cruel is such suffering. Such 
pang Calantha had already once endured, 
when last she had parted from her lord ; 
and for such meeting she was again pre- 
pared. She had been ill, and no one had 
read the secret of her soul. She had been 
lonely, and no one had comforted her in 
her hours of solitude: she had once loved 
Lord Avondale, but absence and neglect 
had entirely changed her. She prepared 
therefore for the interview with cold indif- 
ference, and her pride disdained to crave 
his forgiveness, or to acknowledge itself 
undeserving in his presence. " He is no 
longer my husband/' she repeated daily 
to herself. " My heart and his are at 
variance — severed by in J nation, though 
unhappily for both united by circum- 
stances. Let him send me from him : 
I am desperate and care not." 

None sufficiently consider, when 
they describe the hateful picture of 
crime, how every step taken in its 



GLENA&V0N. 151 

mazy road, perverts, and petrifies the feel- 
ing. Calantha, in long retrospect over 
her former life, thought only of the neg- 
lect and severity of hirn she had abaru 
doned. She dwelt with pleasure upon 
the remembrance of every momentary 
act of violence, and thought of his gaiety 
and merriment, as of a sure testimony 
that he was not injured by her ill con- 
duct. " He left me first," she said. 
" He loves me not; he is happy; I 
.alone suffer." And the consolation she 
derived from such reflections steeled her 
against every kindlier sentiment. 

Lord A von dale returned. There was 
no look of joy in his countenance — no 
radiant heartfelt smile which bounding 
spirits and youthful ardour once had 
raised. His hollow eye betokened deep 
anxiety ; his wasted form, the suffering 
he had endured. Oh, can it be said that 
the greatest pang to a heart, not yet entire^ 
ly hardened, is unsuspicious confidence? 
Oh, can the momentary selfish pang a 

VOL. III. G 



122 GLENARVOtf. 

cold dissembling hypocrite may feel, 
be compared to the unutterable agony of 
such a meeting ? Conscience itself must 
shrink beneath the torture of every 
glance. There is the record of crime — 
there, in every altered lineament of that 
well known face. How pale the withered 
cheek — how faint the smile that tries to 
make light and conceal the evil under 
which the soul is writhing. 

And could Calantha see it, and yet 
live? Could she behold him kind, com- 
passionating, mournful, and yet sur- 
vive it ? No — no frenzy of despair,, no 
racking pains of ill requited love; no, 
not all that sentiment and romance can 
paint or fancy, were ever equal to that 
moment. Before severity, she had not 
bowed — before contempt, she had not 
shed one tear — against every menace, she 
felt hardened ; but in the presence of 
that pale and altered brow, she sunk at 
once. With grave but gentle earnest- 
ness, he raised her from the earth. She 



«LENARVON. 123 

<lurst not look upon him. She could 
mot stand the reproachful glances of that 
eye, that dark eye which sometimes soft- 
ened into love, then flamed again into 
the fire of resentment. She knelt not for 
mercy: she prayed not for pardon: a 
gloomy pride supported her: and the 
dark frown that lowered over his fea- 
tures was answered by the calm of fixed 
despair. 

They were alone. Lord Avondale, 
upon arriving, had sought her in her own 
apartment : he had heard of her illness. 
The duke had repeatedly implored him 
to return ; he had at length tardily obey- 
ed the summons. After a silence of some 
moments : " Have I deserved this?" he 
cried. M Oh, Calantha, have I indeed 
deserved it }" She made no answer to 
this appeal. " There was a time," he 
said, " when I knew how to address 
you — when the few cares and vexations, 
that ever intruded themselves, were light- 
ened by your presence ; and forgotten hi 
g2 



124 GLENARVON. 

the kindness and sweetness of your con- 
versation. You were my comfort and 
my solace : your wishes were what I 
most consulted; your opinions and in- 
clinations were the rule of all my actions. 
But I wish not to grieve you by remind- 
ing you of a state of mutual confidence 
and happiness which we never more can 
enjoy. 

" If you have a heart," he continued, 
looking at her mournfully, " it must al- 
ready be deeply wounded by the remem- 
brance of your behaviour to me, and can 
need no reproaches. The greatest to a 
feeling mind is the knowledge that it has 
acted unworthily; that it has abused 
the confidence reposed in it, and blasted 
the hopes of one, who relied solely upon 
its affection. You have betrayed me. 
Oh! Calantha, had you the heart? I 
will not tell you how by degrees sus- 
picion first entered my mind, till being 
more plainly informed of the cruel truth, 
I attempted, but in vain, to banish every 



GLENARVON. 12J 

trace of you from my affections. I have 
not succeeded — I cannot succeed. Tri- 
umph at hearing this if you will. The 
habit of years is strong. Your image and 
that of crime and dishonour, can never 
enter my mind together. Put me not 
then to the agony of speaking to you in 
a manner you could not bear, and I should 
repent. They say you are not yet guilty ; 
and that the man for whom I was aban- 
doned has generously saved you — but 
consider the magnitude of those injuries 
which I have received : and think me 
not harsh, if I pronounce this doom upon 
myself and you : — Calantha, we must 
part." 

The stern brow gave way before these 
words ; and the paleness of death over- 
spread her form. Scarce could she sup- 
port herself. He continued : " What- 
ever it may cost me, and much no doubt 
I shall suffer, I can be firm. No impor- 
tunity t'rom others, no stratagems shall 
g3 



I$6 GLENARVON. 

prevail. I came, because I would not 
shrink from the one painful trial I had 
imposed upon myself. For your's and 
other's sakes, 1 came, because I thought 
it best to break to you myself my irre^ 
vocable determination. Too long I have 
felt your power : too dearly I loved you, 
to cast dishonour upon your as yet un- 
sullied name. The world may pardon, 
and friends will still surround you. I 
will give you half of all that I possess on 
earth : and I will see that you are sup- 
ported and treated with respect. You 
will be loved and honoured ; and, more 
than this, our children, Caiantha, even 
those precious and dear ties which 
should have reminded you of your duty 
to them, if not to me, — yes, even our 
children, I will not take from you, as 
long as your future conduct may autho- 
rize me in leaving them under your care. 
1 will not tear you from every remain- 
ing hope ; nor by severity plunge you 



GLENARVON. 197 

into further guilt ; but as for him, say- 
only that he for whom I am abandoned 
was unworthy." 

As he uttered these words, the frenzy 
of passion for one moment shook his 
frame. Calantha in terror snatched his 
hand. " Oh, hear me, hear me, and 
be merciful 1" she cried, throwing her- 
self before his feet. — " For God's sake 
hear me." " The injury was great/' he 
cried : " the villain was masked ; but the 
remembrance of it is deep and eternal. ,, 

He struggled to extricate his hand 
from her grasp : it was cold and trem- 
bling--— " Calm yourself/' he at length 
said, recovering his composure: " these 
scenes may break my heart, but they 
cannot alter its purpose. I may see your 
tears, and while under the influence of 
a woman I have loved too well, be 
moved to my own dishonour. I may 
behold you humble, penitent, wretched, 
and being man. not have strength of 
mind to resist/' 

g4 



12& *,L£NABV05. 

" And is there no hope, Avondale ?" 
" None for me/* he replied mournfully: 
M you have stabbed here even to my 
very heartof hearts." "Oh, hear me! 
look upon me. 33 " Grant that I yield, 
wretched woman ; say that I forgive you 
—that you make use of an attachment 
that perhaps never yet was equalled,, to 
mislead my feelings — Calantha, can you 
picture to yourself the scene that must 
ensue ? Can you look onward intoafteJ 
life, and trace the progress of our me- 
lancholy journey through it ? Can you 
do this, and yet attempt to realize, what 
I shudder even at contemplating ? Un- 
blest in each other, solitary, suspicious, 
irritated, and deeply injured — if we live 
alone, we shall curse the hours as they 
pass, and if we rush for consolation into 
society, misrepresented, pointed at, de- 
rided,— oh, how shall we bear it?" 

Her shrieks, her tears, now over- 
powered every other feeling. "Then it 
is for the last time we meet. You com*? 



GLEN A R VON. 12[) 

to tell me this. You think I can endure 
it ?" " We will not endure it," he cried 
fiercely, breaking from her. <f I wish 
not to speak with severity ; but beware, 
for my whole soul is in agony, and fierce 
passion domineers: tempt me not to 
harm you, my beloved : return to your 
father : I will write — I will see you 

again. " " Oh ! leave me not — yet hear 

me.— I am not guilty — I am innocent— - 
Henry, I am innocent." 

Calantha knelt before him, as she 
spoke:-— her tears choaked her voice. 
" Yet hear me ; look at me once ; see, 
see in this face if it bear traces of guilt. 
Look, Henry. You will not leave me." 
She fell before him ; and knelt at his 
feet. " Do you remember how you 
once loved me } iy she said, clasping his 
hand in her's. " Think how dear we 
have been to each other: and will you 
now abandon me ? Henry, my husband, 
have you forgotten me ? Look at the 
boy. Is it not your's? Am I not its 
G5 



150 GLENARVON. 

mother ? Will you cause her death who 
gave him life? Will you cast disgrace 
upon the mother of your child ? Can 
you abandon me — can you, have you 
the heart ? — Have mercy, oh my God f 
have mercy.— I am innocent." 



GLENARVON. 131 



CHAPTER XV. 



The convulsive sobs of real agony, the 
eloquence which despair and affection 
create in all, the pleadings of his own 
kind and generous heart were vain. He 
raised her senseless from the earth ; he 
placed her upon a couch ; and without 
daring to look upon her, as he extricated 
his hand from the strong grasp of terror, 
he fled from her apartment. 

Mrs. Seymour had waited to see him ; 
and, when he had quitted her niece's 
room, she arrested him as he would have 
hastened by her, at the head of the stairs. 
Her ill state of health, and deep anxiety, 
had enfeebled her too much to endure 
the shock of hearing his irrevocable in- 
tention. He knew this, and wished to 
break it to her gently. She pressed his 



132 GLENARVON. 

hand; she looked upon his counte- 
nance. All a mother's heart spoke in 
those looks. Was there a hope yet left 
for her unhappy niece? "Oh, if there 
yet be hope, speak, Lord Avondaie ; 
spare the feelings of one who never in- 
jured you : look in that face and have 
mercy, for in it there is all the bitterness 
of despair." He sought for expressions 
that might soften the pang— he wished to 
give her hope; but too much agitated 
himself to know what he then said: " [ 
am resolved— I am going immediately/* 
he said, and passed her by in haste. He 
saw not the effect of his words — he 
heard not the smothered shriek of a 
heart-broken parent. 

As he rushed forward, he met the 
duke, who in one moment marked in 
the altered manner of Lord Avondaie — 
the perfect calm — the chilling proud re- 
serve he had assumed, that there was no 
hope of reconciliation. He offered hrm 
his hand : he was himself much moved, 



GLENARVON. 133 

" I can never ask, or expect you to for- 
give her," he said in a low broken voice. 
" Your generous forbearance has been 
fully appreciated by me. I number it 
amongst the heaviest of my calamities, 
that I can only greet you on your return 
with my sincere condolements. Alas ! 
I gave you as an inheritage a bitter por- 
tion. You are at liberty to resent as a 
man, a conduct, which not even a father 
can expect, or ask you to forgive/* 
Lord Avondale turned abruptly from 
the duke : " Are my horses put to the 
carriage ?" he said impatiently to a ser- 
vant. "All is in readiness." "You 
will not go ?" " I must : my uncle 
waits forme at the inn at Belfont: he 
would scarcely permit me....'* 

The shrieks of women from an adjoin- 
ing apartment interrupted Lord Avon- 
dale. The duke hastened to the spot. 
Lord Avondale reluctantly followed. 
"Lady Avondale is dead/' said one: 
w the barbarian has murdered her/'— 



13i GLENARVON. 

Lord Avondale flew forward. The vio- 
lence of her feelings had been tried too 
far. That irrevocable sentence, that as- 
sumed sternness, had struck upon a 
heart, already breaking. Calantha was 
with some difficulty brought to herself. 
" Is he gone ?" were the first words she 
uttered. " Oh ! let him not leave me 
yet." 

Sir Richard, having waited at Belfont 
till his patience was wholly exhausted, 
had entered the castle, and seeing how 
matters were likely to terminate, urged 
his nephew with extreme severity to be 
firm. "This is all art," he said: "be 
not moved by it." Lord Avondale 
waited to hear that Calantha was better, 
then entered the carriage, and drove off, 
" I will stay awhile," said Sir Richard, 
" and see how she is; but if you wait 
for me at Kelly Cross, I will overtake 
you there. Be firm : this is all subter- 
fuge, and what might have been ex- 
pected." 



GLBNARVON. 135 

Calantha, upon recovering, sought 
Sir Richard. Her looks were haggard 
and wild: despair had given them a 
dreadful expression. " Have mercy- 
have mercy. I command, I do not im- 
plore you to grant me one request/' she 
said — " to give me yet one chance, how- 
ever, undeserved. Let me see him, cruel 
man: let me kneel to him." "Kneel 
to him 1" cried Sir Richard, with indig- 
nation : " never. You have used your 
arts long enough to make a fool, and a 
slave of a noble confiding husband. 
There is some justice in Heaven. I 
thank God his eyes are open at last. 
He has acted like a man. Had he par- 
doned an adultress — had he heard her, 
and suffered his reason to be be- 
guiled — had he taken again to his heart 
the wanton who has sacrificed his ho- 
nour, his happiness, and every tie, I 
would have renounced him for ever. 
No, no, he shall, not return : by God, he 
shall not see you again." 



13& GLENARVON. 

" Have mercy/' still repeated Lady 
Avondale; but it was but faintly. " I'll 
never have mercy for one like you, ser- 
pent, who, having been fondled in his 
bosom, bit him to the heart. Are you 
not ashamed to look at me ?'* Calantha's- 
tears had flowed in the presence of her 
husband; but now they ceased. Sir 
Richard softened in his manner. " Our 
chances in life are as in a lottery/' he 
said; " and if one who draws the highest 
prize of all, throws it away in very wan- 
tonness, and then sits down to mourn 
for it, who will be so great a hypocrite, 
or so base a flatterer, as to affect com- 
passion ? You had no pity for him: you 
ought not to be forgiven. '* 

" Can you answer it to yourself to 
refuse me one interview ? Can you have 
the heart to speak with such severity to 
one already fallen?" "Madam, why do 
you appeal to me ? What are you ap- 
proaching me for? What can I do ?" 

"Oh, there will be curses on youi 



GLENARVON. 137 

head, Sir Richard, for this; but I will 
follow him. There is no hope for me 
but in seeing him myself." "There is 
no hope at all, madam, '* said Sir Richard, 
triumphantly: "he's my own nephew; 
and he acts as he ought. Lady Avon- 
dale, he desires you may be treated with 
every possible respect. Your childen 
will be left with you, as long as your 

conduct " "Will he see me?" 

" Never/' 



13S GLEN AR YON, 



CHAPTER XVI, 



Sir Richard ordered his carriage at 
twelve that evening, and did not even 
tell Lady Avondale that he was going 
from the castle. Calantha, fatigued with 
the exertions of the day, too ill and too 
agitated to leave her room, threw herself 
upon the bed near her little son. Mac 
Allain and the nurse spoke with her; 
promised to perform her last injunctions; 
then left her to herself. 

The soft breathing of Harry Mowbrey, 
who slept undisturbed beside her, soothed 
and composed her mind. Her thoughts 
now travelled back with rapidity over 
the varied scenes of her early and hap* 
pier days: her life appeared before her 
like a momentary trance— like a dream 
that leaves a feverish and indistinct alarm 



GLENARVON. 139 

upon the mind. The span of existence 
recurred in memory to her view, and 
with it all its hopes, its illusions, and 
its fears. She started with abhorrence at 
every remembrance of her former con- 
duct, her infidelity and neglect of the 
best and kindest of husbands— her dis- 
obedience to an honoured parent's com- 
mands, and tears of agonizing remorse 
streamed from her eyes. 

In that name of husband the full hor- 
ror of her guilt appeared. Every event 
had conspired together to blast his rising 
fortunes, and his dawning fame. His 
generous forbearance to herself, was, in. 
fact, a sacrifice of every worldly hope ; 
for, of all sentiments, severe and just 
resentment from one deeply injured, is 
that which excites the strongest sym- 
pathy; while a contrary mode of con- 
duct, however founded upon the highest 
and best qualities of a noble mind, is 
rarely appreciated. The cry of justice is 
alone supported; and the husband who 



140 GLENARVON. 

spares and protects an erring wife, sa- 
crifices his future hopes of fame and ex- 
alted reputation at the shrine of mercy 
and of love. She suddenly started with 
alarm. " What then will become of 
me ?" she cried. " The measure of my 
iniquity is at its foil/ 1 

Calaijtha's tears fell upon her sleeping 
boy. He awoke, and he beheld his 
mother; but he could not discern the 
agitation of her mind. He looked on 
her, therefore, with that radiant look of 
happiness which brightens the smile of 
childhood ; nor knew, as he snatched one 
kiss in haste, that it was the last, the last 
kiss from a mother, which ever through 
life should bless hun with its pressure. 

It was now near the hour of twelve; 
and Mrs. Seymour cautiously approached 
Calantha's bed. " Is it time?'* " Not 
yet, my child." "Is Sir Richard gone?" 
" No; he is still in his own apartment. 
I have written a few lines," said Mis 
Seymour tenderly; " but if you fail. 



GLENARVON. 141 

what hope is there that any thing I ean 
say will avail ?" " 3 lad my mother 
lived/' said Calantha, " she had acted 
as you have done. You look so like her 
at this moment, that it breaks my heart. 
Thank God, she does not live, to see 
her child's disgrace." As she spoke, 
Calantha burst into tears, and threw her 
arms around her aunt's neck. 

" Calm yourself, my child." " Hear 
me," said Lady Avondale. " Perhaps 
I shall never more see you. I have 
drawn down such misery upon myself, 
that I cannot bear up under it. If I 
should die, — and there is a degree of 
grief that kills — take care of my children. 
Hide from them their mother's errors. 
Oh, my dear aunt, at such a moment as 
this, how all that attracted in life, all that 
appeared brilliant, fades away. What 
is it I have sought for ? Not real hap- 
piness—not virtue, but vanity, and far 
worse." " Calantha," said Mrs. Sey- 
mour, as she wept over her niece, " there 



142 GLENARVON. 

is much to say in palliation of thy errors. 
The heart is sometimes tried by pros- 
perity; and it is in my belief the most 
difficult of all trials to resist. Who then 
shall dare to say, that there was not one 
single pretext, or excuse, for thy ill 
conduct? No wish, no desire of thine 
was ever ungratified. This in itself is 
some palliation. Speak, Calantha: fear 
not; for who shall plead for thee, if thou 
thyself art silent ?" 

" From the deep recesses of a guilty, 
yet not humble heart, in the agony and 
the hopelessness of despair," said Ca- 
lantha, " I acknowledge before God and 
before man, that for me there is no ex- 
cuse. J have felt, I have enjoyed every 
happiness, every delight, the earth can 
offer. Its vanities, its pleasures, its 
transports have been mine ; and in all 
instances I have misused the power with 
which I have been too much and too 
long entrusted. Oh, may the God of 
worlds innumerable, who scatters his 



GLENARVON, 143 

blessings upon all, and maketh his rain 
to fall upon the sinner, as upon the 
righteous, extend his mercy even unto 
me/' 

i( Can I do any thing for you, my child ?" 

said Mrs. Seymour. " Speak for me to 

Sophia and Frances," said Calantha, *'and 

say one word for me to the good and the 

kind; for indeed I have ever found the 

really virtuous most kind. As to the 

rest, if any of those with whom I passed 

my happier days remember me, tell 

them, that even in this last sad hour I 

think with affection of them; and say, 

that when I look back even now with 

melancholy pleasure upon a career, which, 

though short, was gay and brilliant — 

upon happiness, which though too soon 

misused and thrown away, was real and 

great, it is the remembrance of my friends, 

and companions — it is the thought of 

their affection and kindness, which adds 

to and imbitters every regret-— for that 

kindness was lavished in vain. Tell them 



144 8LENART0N. 

I do not hope that my example can 
amend them : they will not turn from 
one wrong pursuit for me ; they will not 
compare themselves with Calantha; they 
have not an Avondale to leave and to 
betray. Yet when tbey read my history 
—if amidst the severity of justice which 
such a narrative must excite, some feel- 
ings of forgiveness and pity should arise, 
perhaps the prayer of one, who has suf- 
fered much, may ascend for them, and 
the thanks of a broken heart be accepted 
in return. " 

Mrs. Seymour wept, and promised to 
perform Calantha's wishes. She was still 
with her, when Mac Allain knocked at 
the door, and whispered, that ail was in 
readiness. " Explain every thing to my 
father," said Calantha, again embracing 
ber aunt; c; and now farewell." 



GLEXARVON. 143 



CHAPTER XVII 



" Sure what a stormy night it is ! Lord 
help us, Mr. Mac Allain," said the 
nurse, as she wrapped her thick cloth 
mantle over the sweet slumberer that 
fondled in her bosom, and got into a 
post-chaise and four with much trepida^ 
tion and difficulty. " I never saw the 
like ! there's wind enough to blow us 
into the sea, and sea enough to deluge 
the land. The Holy Virgin, and all the 
saints protect us !" Gerald Mac Allain 
having with some trouble secured the re- 
luctant and loquacious matron, now re- 
turned for another and a dearer charge, 
who, trembling and penitent, followed him 
to the carriage. " Farewell, my kind pre* 
server/' said Calantha, her voice scarcely 
audible. " God bless, God protect you* 

VOL. III. H 



146 GLENARVON'. 

dear lady," said the old man in bitter 
grief. " Take care of the children. Tell 
my father that I have been led to this step 
by utter despair. Let no one suspect 
your friendly aid. Lord Avondale, 
though he may refuse to see me, will 
not be offended with the kind hearts 
that had pity on my misfortunes." " God 
bless you, dear lady," again reiterated the 
old man, as the carriage drove swiftly from 
the gates. 

But the blessing of God was not with 
Lady Avondale; she had renounced his 
favour and protection in the hour of 
prosperity; and she durst not even im- 
plore his mercy or his pardon in her 
present affliction. Thoughts of bitter- 
ness crowded together: she could no 
longer weep — the pressure upon her 
heart and brain would not permit it. 

a Eh ! dear heart, how the carriage 
rowls !" was the first exclamation which 
awoke her to a remembrance of her 
situation. " We are ascending the moun- 



GLENARVON. 147 

tain. Fear not, good nurse. Your kind- 
ness in accompanying me shall never 
be forgotten/* " Och musha, what a 
piteous night it is ! — I did not reckon 
upon it." " You shall be rewarded 
and doubly rewarded for your goodness. 
I shall never forget it. Lord Avondale 
will reward you." " Hey sure you make 
me weep to hear you ; but I wish you'd 
tell the eattle not to drive so uncom- 
mon brisk up the precipice. Lord 
have mercy, if there ain't shrouds 
flying over the mountains V* " It is 
only the flakes of snow driven by the 
tempest." 

" Do not fret yourself thus," conti- 
nued Lady Avondale. " I will take care 
of you, good nurse." " I have herd 
say, and sure I hope it's no sin to mention 
it again, my lady, that the wind's nothing 
more than the souls of bad christians, 
who can't get into Heaven, driven on- 
ward, alacks the pity ! and shrieking as 
they pass." " 1 have heard the same," 
H 2 



148 GLENAHVON. 

replied Calantha mournfully. " Och 
lord ! my lady, I hope not : Tarn sure it's 
a horrid thought. I hope you don't be- 
lieve it. But how terrible your dear 
ladyship looks, by the light of the 
moon. I trust in all the saints, the rob- 
bers have not heard of our journey.— 
Hark what a shriek \ 3f " It is nothing but 
the wind rushing over the vast body of 
the sea. You must not give way to 
terror. See how the child sleeps: they 
say one may go in safety the world over, 
with such a cherub: Heaven protects it. 
Sing it to rest, nurse, or tell it some 
merry tale." 

The carriage proceeded over the rocky 
path, for it could scarce be termed 9, 
road ; the wind whistled in at the wiu^ 
dows ; and the snow drifting, covered 
every object. " There it comes again," 
said the affrighted nurse, " What comes ?'* 
" The shroud with the death's head 
peeping out of it. . It was just such a 
night as this, last Friday night as ever 



GLENARVON. 149 

came, when the doctor's brother, the 
prophet Camioli, on his death bed, sent 
for his ungrateful daughter, and she would 
not come. I never shall forget that 
night. Well, if I did not hear the shriek 
of the dear departed two full hours after 
he gave up the ghost. The lord help us 
in life, as in death, and defend us from 
wicked children. I hope your dear 
ladyship does'nt remember that it was 
just on this very spot at the crossing, that 
Drax O'Morven was murdered by his 
son : and is'nt there the cross, as I live, 
just placed right over against the road 
to warn passengers of their danger. — 
Oh !"— 

" What is the matter, nurse ? For Hea- 
ven sake speak." " Oh !" — " Stop the 
carriage. In the name of his Grace the 
Duke of Altamonte, I desire you to stop," 
cried a voice from behind. " Drive on, 
boys, for your life. Drive on in mercy. 
We are just at Baron's Down: — I see 
h 3 



UO GLENARVOtf. 

the lights of the village, at the bottom 
of the hill." Drive for your life: Thcnurs,e 
shrieked; the carriage flew; jolts, ruts, 
and rocks, were unheeded by Calan- 
tha. " We are pursued. Rush on :— 
reach Baron's Down :-— gallop your horses. 
Fear not. I value not life, if you but 
reach the inn— if you but save me from 
this pursuit. " " Stop," cried a voice of 
thunder." " Fear not/' 4i Drive Johnny 
Carl," screamed the nurse. 4i Drive 
Johnny Carl," repeated the servant. 

The horses flew ; the postboys clashed 
their whips; the carriage wheels scarce 
appeared to touch the ground. A yell 
from behind seemed only to redouble 
their exertions. They arrive: Baron's 
Down appears in sight: lights are seen 
at the windows of the inn. The post- 
boys ring and call : the doors are open: 
Lady Avondale flew from the carriage :--- 
a servant of the duke's arrested her pro- 
gress. " 1 am sorry to make so bold ; 



GLENARVOX. 151 

but I come with letters from his grace 
your father. Your Ladyship may re- 
main at Baron's Down to-night ; but to- 
morrow I must see you safe to the castle. 
Pardon my apparent boldness : it is un- 
willingly that I presume to address you 
thus. My commands are positive/' 

" Sure there's not the laist room at all 
for the ladies ; nor any baists to be had, 
all the way round Baron's Down ; nor 
ever so much as a boy to be fetched as 
can take care of the cattle over the 
mountain," said the master of the inn, 
now joining in the conversation, " What 
will become of us ?" cried the nurse, 
" Dear, dear lady, be prevailed on : give 
• up your wild enterprize : return to your 
father. Lady Anabel will be quite kilt 
with the fatigue, be prevailed upon : 
give up this hopeless journey/' " You 
may return, if it is your pleasure : I 
never will." " Your ladyship will ex- 
cuse me," said the servant, producing 
some letters: but I must entreat your 
H4 



132 GT.ENARVON. 

perusal of these, before you attempt to 
proceed." 

w You had better give my lady your 
best accommodations/' said the nurse 
in confidence to the landlord : "she is a 
near connexion of the Duke of Alta- 
monte's. You may repent any neglect 
you may shew to a traveller of such high 
rank." "There's nae rank will make 
room/' retorted the landlord. " Weife 
she the late duchess herself, 1 could only 
give her my bed, and go without one. 
But indeed couldn't a trifle prevail with 
the baists as brought you, to step over 
the mountains as far as Killy Cross ?'* 
" There's nae trifle," said a man, much 
wrapped up, who had been watching 
Lady Avondale— " there's nae trifle 
shall get ye to Killy Cross, make ye 
what haste ye can, but what we'll be 
there before ye." Calantha shuddered 
at the meaning of this threat, which she 
did not understand; but the nurse inform- 
ed her it was a servant of Sir Richard 
Mowbrey's. 



GLENARVON. 153 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



The letters from her father, Lady Avon- 
dale refused to read. Many remon- 
strances passed between herself and 
the duke's servant. The result was a 
slow journey in the dark night, over a 
part of the country which was said to be 
infested by the marauders. No terror 
alarmed Lady Avondale, save that of 
losing a last, an only opportunity of once 
more seeing her husband— of throwing 
herself upon his mercy— -of imploring 
him to return to his family, even though 
she were exiled from it. " Yet, I will not 
kneel to him, or ask it. If when he sees 
me, he has the heart to refuse me," she 
cried, " I will only shew him my child; 
and if he can look upon it, and kill its 
mother, let him do it. 1 think in that 

H5 



154 GLKNARVON. 

case---yes, I do feel certain that I can en- 
counter death, without a fear, or a mur- 
* mur." 

The carriage was at this time turning 
down a steep descent, when some horse- 
men gallopping past, bade them make 
way for Sir Richard Mowbrey. Calan- 
tha recognized the voice of the servant : 
it was the same who had occasioned her 
so much alarm at the inn near Baron 
Moor. But the nurse exclaimed in ter- 
ror that it was one of the rebels : she 
knew him, she said, by his white uni- 
form : and the presence alone of the ad- 
miral, in the duke's carriage, convinced 
her of her mistake. " Thanks be to 
heaven," she cried, the moment she be- 
held him, " it is in ra'al earnest the old 
gentleman." M Thanks be to heaven,*' 
said Calantha, " he either did not re- 
cognize me, or cares not to prevent my 
journey." " We'll, if it isn't himself," 
said the nurse, " and the saints above 
only know why he rides for pleasure, 



GLENARVON. 155 

this dismal night, over these murderous 
mountains; but at all events he is well 
guarded. Alack I we are friendless." 

Lady Avondale sighed as the nurse in 
a tremulous voice ejaculated these ob- 
servations ; for the truth of the last re- 
mark gave it much weight. But little 
did she know at that moment, when the 
admiral passed, how entirely her fate 
depended on him. 

It was not till morning they arrived at 
Kelly Cross. tf Bless my heart, how ter- 
rible you look. What's the matter, sweet- 
heart ?'* said the nurse, as they alight- 
ed from the carriage. — " Look up, dear.. 
—What is the matter?" — fi Nurse, there 
is a pressure upon my brain, like an iron, 
hand ; and my » yes see nothing but dim- 
ness. Oh Heavens ! where am i ! Sendj 
oh nurse, send my aunt Seymour— Call 
my— my husband— tell Lord Avondale 
to come— is he still here ?-— There is 
death on me : I feel it here — here."-— 
if Look up, sweet dear :— cheer yourself : 



136 GLENARVON. 

—you'll be better presently." " Never 
more, nurse — never more. There is death 
on me, even as it came straight upon 
my mother. Oh Heavens !" — " Where 
is the pain ?" " It came like ice upon 
my heart, and my limbs feel chilled and 
numbed.— A vondale---Avondale." 

Calantha was carried to a small room, 
and laid upon a bed. The waiter said 
that Lord Avondale was still at the inn. 
The nurse hastened to call him. He 
was surprised ; but not displeased when 
he heard that Lady Avondale was ar- 
rived. He rushed towards her apart- 
ment. Sir Richard was with him. "By 
G—d, Avondale, if you forgive her, 1 will 
never see you more. Whilst 1 live, she 
shall never dwell in my house." " Then 
mine shall shelter her," said Lord Avon- 
dale, breaking from Sir Richard's grasp : 
" this is too much ;" and with an air of 
kindness, with a manner gentle and af- 
fectionate, Lord Avondale now entered, 
and approached his wife. " Calantha/' 



GLENARVON. 157 

he said, " do not thus give way to the 
violence of your feelings. I wish not 
to appear stern.— My God ! what is 
the matter ?" " Your poor Lady is 
dying/' said the nurse. " For the love of 
mercy, speak one gracious word to her." 
M I will, I do," said Lord Avondale, 
alarmed. " Calantha," he whispered, 
without one reproach, Cf whatever have 
been your errors, turn here for shelter 
to a husband's bosom. My uncle and 
the world may scorn me; but I will do 
for thee, what many have done for those 
less worthy. Whatever the sacrifice, be 
it life, or even fame, I swear by Him 
who created me, to forgive, to stand by 
thee to the last. Every one has— every 
one may forsake thee, but I— never, ne- 
ver ! Come here, thou lost one. Thou 
hast strayed from thy guide and friend : 
thou hast renounced thy religion to fol- 
low after the vanities and false light of a 
cold and vain philosophy. — I, too, have 
erred, for I left thee without a guide; 



1,58 GLEXARVON, 

and now I will dedicate every hour of 
my life to restore and to reclaim thee. 
Oh ! come again, unhappy, lost Calantha. 
May Heaven forgive you, as I do, from 
my soul.— What means this silence— 
this agonizing suspense?" 

" She faints," cried the nurse. " May 
God have mercy |V said Lady Avondale. 
" There is something on my mind. I 
wish to speak-— to tell— your kindness 
kills me. I repent all.— Oh, is it too 
late?" — It was. — For amendment, for 
return from error, for repentance it was 
too late. Death struck her at that mo- 
ment. One piercing shriek proclaimed 
his power, as casting up her eyes with 
bitterness and horror, she fixed them 
upon Lord Avondale. 

That piercing shriek had escaped from 
a broken heart. It was the last chord of 
nature, stretched to the utmost till it 
broke. A cold chill, spread itself over 
her limbs. In the struggle of death, she 
had thrown her anus around her hus«* 



GLENARVON. 159 

band's neck ; and when her tongue 
cleaved to her mouth, and her lips were 
cold and powerless, her eyes yet bright 
with departing life had fixed themselves 
earnestly upon him, as if imploring par- 
don for the past. 

Oh, resist not that look, Avondale ! 
it is the last. Forgive her — pity her: 
and if they call it weakness in thee thus 
to weep, tell them that man is weak, 
and death dissolves the keenest enmities. 
Oh! tell them, that there is something 
in a last look from those whom we have 
once loved, to which the human soul 
can never be insensible. But when that 
look is such as was Calantha's, and when 
the last prayer her dying lips expressed 
was for mercy, who shall dare to refuse 
and to resist it ? It might have rent a 
harder bosom than thine. It may ascend 
and plead before the throne of Heaven. 
It was the prayer of a dying penitent:-— 
it was the agonizing look of a breaking 
heart. 



16G GLENARVON. 

Weep then, too generous Avondale, 
for that frail being who lies so pale so 
cold in death before thee. Weep; for 
thou wilt never find again another like 
her. She was the sole mistress of thy 
affections, and could wind and turn thee 
at her will. She knew and felt her 
power, and trifled with it to a dangerous 
excess. Others may be fairer, and more 
accomplished in the arts which mortals 
prize, and more cunning in devices and 
concealment of their thoughts; but none 
can ever be so dear to Avondale's heart 
as was Calantha. 

And did she thus die, some may per- 
haps exclaim, unpunished for her crime! 
Did she not live to feel its consequences 
in all their magnitude and bitterness— 
to hide under smiles of levity the an- 
guish of her soul — to mask under the 
appearance of pride and insensibility, the 
remorse, the terror, the despair, she felt 
—to receive from strangers unmerited 
kindness— to hear from malice all that 



GLENARVON. l6l 

she too well deserved ? Did she not 
linger on to see the husband she adored 
reproached by the cold and stern, for his 
mercy to herself-— to trace in his coun- 
tenance the bitterness of a proud but 
injured spirit struggling to conceal its 
sufferings and its wrongs, perishing, by 
slow degrees, of the crudest of all ma- 
ladies—disappointment, regret, injured 
honour, and blasted happiness? Oh did 
the God who made her, in commiseration 
for what she had already felt, spare her 
this trial ?---He did in mercy; and on a 
bed of death, she lay insensible to the 
present, as to the past. 



169 GLENARVON, 



CHAPTER XIX, 



Sin Richard wished to say one word 
to console Lord Avondale; but lie could 
not. He burst into tears; and knelt 
down by the side of Calantha. u I am 
an old man," he said. " You thought 
me severe; but I would have died, child, 
to save you. Look up, and get well. 
I can't bear to see this: — no, I can't 
bear it." He now reproached himself. 
" I have acted rightly perhaps, and as 
she deserved ; but what of that: if God 
were to act by us all as we deserve, 
where should we be ? Look up, child- 
open your eyes again-— I'd give all I 
have on earth to see you smile once on 
me— to feel even that little hand press 
mine in token of forgiveness/' " Uncle,*' 
said Lord Avondale, in afaultering voice, 



GLENARVON. 163 

u whatever Calantha's faults, she forgave 
every one, although they might have in- 
jured her; and she loved you." " That 
makes it all the worse'," said the ad- 
miral. " I can't believe she's dead." 

Sir Richard's sorrow, whether just or 
otherwise, came too late. Those who 
act with rigid justice here below-— those 
who take upon themselves to punish the 
sinner whom God for inscrutable pur- 
poses one moment spares, should some- 
times consider that the object against 
whom their resentment is excited will 
soon be no more. Short-lived is the en- 
joyment even of successful guilt. An 
hour's triumph has perhaps been pur- 
chased by misery so keen, that were we 
to know all, we should only commi- 
serate the wretch we now seek to subdue 
and to punish. The name of christians 
we have assumed; the doctrine of our 
religion, we have failed to study. How 
often when passion and rancour move us 
to shew our zeal in the cause of virtue* 



164 GLENARVON. 

by oppressing and driving to ruin unuU 
terable, what we call successful villainy, 
the next hour brings us the news that 
the object of our indignation is dead.—- 
That soul is gone, however polluted, 
to answer before another throne for its 
offences. Ah ! who can say that our 
very severity to such offender may not 
turn back upon ourselves, and be re- 
gistered in the Heaven we look forward 
to with such presumption, to exclude us 
for ever from it. 

Sir Richard gazed sadly now upon 
his nephew. " Don't make yourself ill, 
Henry/' he said. " Bear up under this 
shock. If it makes you ill, it will be my 
death." " I know you are too generous," 
said Lord Avondale, " not to feel for me/' 
" I can't stay any longer here," said Sir 
Richard, weeping. " You look at me in 
a manner to break my heart. I will 
return to the castle ; tell them all that 
has happened ; and then bring the chil- 
dren to you at Allen water. I will go 



GLENARVON. l6i 

and fetch Henry to you." " I can't see 
him now," said Lord Avondale: " he is 
so like her." *f Can I do any thing else 
for you f" said Sir Richard. " Uncle," 
said Lord Avondale mournfully, " go to 
the castle, and tell them I ask that every 
respect should be shewn in the last rites 
they offer to " " Oh, I under- 
stand you/* said Sir Richard, crying : 
16 there will be no need to say that— - 
she's lov'd enough. " Aye, that she 
was," said the nurse; " and whatever her 
faults, there's many a-one prays for her 
at this hour; for since the day of her 
birth, never did she turn away from those 
who were miserable or in distress." 
" She betrayed her husband," said Sir 
Richard." " She had the kindest, noblest 
heart," replied Lord Avondale. ic I 
know her faults: her merits few like to 
remember. Uncle, I cannot but feel 
with bitterness the zeal that some have 
shewn against her." " Do not speak 
thus, Henry," said Sir Richard. '* I 



166 GLENARVON. 

would have stood by her to the last, had 
she lived; but she never wou'd appear 
penitent and humble. I thought her 
wanting in feeling. She braved every 

one ; and did so many things that ** 

" She is dead/' said Lord Avondale, 
greatly agitated. " Oh, by the affection 
you profess for me, spare her memory." 

" You loved her then even " u I 

loved her better than any thing in life." 

Sir Richard wept bitterly. " My dear 
boy, take care of yourself/' he said. 
,c Let me hear from you. J> " You shall 
hear of me," said Lord Avondale. The 
admiral then took his leave; and Lord 
Avondale returned into Calautha's apart- 
ment. The nurse followed. Affected 
at seeing his little girl, he pressed her to 
his heart, and desired she might immedi- 
ately be sent to Allenwater. Then 
ordering every one from the room, he 
turned to look for the last time upon 
Calantha. There was not the faintest 
tint of colour on her pale transparent 



GLENARVON. \6j 

cheek. The dark lashes of her eye shaded 
its soft blue lustre from his mournful gaze. 
There was a silence around. It was the 
calm — the stillness of the grave. 

Lord Avondale pressed her lips to 
his. " God bless, and pardon thee, 
Calantha," he cried. " Now even I 
can look upon thee and weep. O, how 
could'st thou betray me ! * It is not an 

* open enemy that hath done me this dis- 
8 honour, for then I could have borne it : 

* neither was it mine adversary that did 

* magnify himself against me; for then 
4 perad venture I would have hid myself 

* from him: but it was even thou, my 
4 companion, my guide, and mine own 

'familiar friend/ We took sweet 

counsel together farewell ! It was my- 
self who caused thy ruin. I loved thee 
more than man should love so frail a 
being. I could not bear to grieve thee; 
I could not bear to curb thee; and 
thou hast lost me and thyself. Fare- 
well. Thy death has left me free to 



16S GLENARVOX. 

act. My vengeance till this hour, for 
thy sake, was sheathed. Thou had'st a 
strange power over my heart ; and, oh, 
Calantha, how thou did'st misuse it!" 

As he uttered these words, while yet 
in presence of the lifeless form of his 
departed, his guilty wife, he prepared 
to leave the mournful scene. " Send 
the children to Allenwater, if you have 
mercy." These were the last words he 
addressed to the nurse as he hurried from 
her presence. 

O man, how weak and impotent is 
thy nature ! Thou cau'st hate, and love, 
and kiss the lips of thy enemy, and strike 
thy dagger into the bosom of a friend. 
Thou can'st command thousands, and 
govern empires; but thou can'st not 
rule thy stormy passions, nor alter the 
destiny that leads thee on. And could 
Avondale thus weep for an ungrateful 
wife? Let those who live long enough 
in this cold world to feel its heartless- 
ness, answer such enquiry. How many 



GLENARVON. 1 69 

daily sacrifice themselves for the wives 
of others. — How many for a mistress re- 
nounce both fame and country ! What- 
ever she had been, Calantha was still his 
friend. Together they had tried the joys 
and ills of life; the same interests united 
them : and the children, as they turned 
to their father, pleaded for the mother 
whom they resembled. — Nothing, how- 
ever, fair or estimable, can replace the 
loss of an early friend. Nothing that 
after-life can offer will influence us in 
the same degree. It has been said, that 
although our feelings are less acute in 
maturer age than in youth, yet the young 
mind will soonest recover from the blow 
that falls heaviest upon it. In that 
season of our life, we have it in our 
power, it is said, in a measure to repair 
the losses which we have sustained. 
But these are the opinions of the aged, 
whose pulse beats low — whose reasoning 
powers can pause, and weigh and mea- 

VOL. III. T 



17* GLENARVON. 

sure out the affections of others. In 
youth these losses affect the very seat 
of life and reason, chill the warm blood 
in its rapid current, unnerve every fibre 
of the frame, and cause the phrenzy of 
despair. 

The duke was calm ; but Lord Avon- 
dale felt with bitterness his injury and 
his loss. The sovereign who has set 
his seal to the sentence of death passed 
upon the traitor who had betrayed him, 
ofttimes in after-life has turned to re- 
gret the friend, the companion he has 
lost. " She was consigned to me when 
pure and better than those who now 
upbraid her. I had the guidance of her ; 
and I left her myself, when temptation 
and ruin surrounded her. Can a few 
years have thus spoiled and hardened 
a noble nature! Where are the friends 
and flatterers, Calantha, who surrounded 
thee in an happier hour? I was aban- 
doned for them : where are they now ? 



CfLENARVON. 171 

Is there not one to turn and plead for 
thee — not one! They are gone in quest 
of new amusement. Some other is the 
favourite of the day. The fallen are 
remembered only by their faults." 



if 



172 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XX. 



Lord Avondare wrote to Glenarvon, 
desiring an immediate interview: He 
followed him to England ; and it was 
some months before he could find where 
he was. He sought him in everyplace 
of public resort, amidst the gay troop of 
companions who were accustomed to 
surround him, and in the haunts of his 
most lonely retirement. At length he 
heard that he was expected to return to 
Ireland, after a short cruize. Lord 
Avondale waited the moment of his ar- 
rival ; watched on the eve of his return, 
and traced him to the very spot, where, 
alas ! he had so often met his erring 
partner. 

It was the last evening in June. 
Glenarvon stood upon the high cliff; 



GLENARVON. 173 

and Lord Avondale approached and 
passed him twice. " Glenarvon/' at 
length he cried, " do you know me, or 
are you resolved to appear ignorant of 
my intentions ? Long, long have I de- 
sired this interview. For one cause 
■4 alone, I sacrificed myself, my feelings— 
my just resentment. You know my 
wrongs. My heart is bleeding. Defend 
yourself; for one of us must die. 
" Avondale, '* said Lord Glenarvon, I 
" will never defend m}self again . t : you. 
You are the onlv man who dares with im- 
punity address me in this tone a- ,i lan- 
guage. 1 accept not this challenge, Re- 
member that 1 stand before vou defe e- 
less. My arm shall never be raised 
against your's." 

" Take this, and defend yourself," 
cried Lord Avondale in violent agitation. 
" I know you a traitor to every feeling of 
manly principle, honour and integrity. 
I know you ; and your mock generosity, 
I 3 



174 GLENARVON. 

and lofty language shall not save you. 55 

" Is it come to this?" said Glenarvon, 

smiling with bitterness. " Then take 

thy will. I stand prepared. 'Tis well 

to risk so much for such a virtuous wife i 

She is an honourable lady— a most 

chaste and loving wife. I hope she 

greeted thee on thy return with much 

tenderness: I counselled her so to do ; 

and when we have settled this affair, 

after the most approved fashion, then 

bear from me my best remembrances and 

love. Aye, my love, Avondale : 'tis 

a light charge, and will not burthen 

thee," 

" Defend yourself," cried Lord Avon- 
dale, fiercely.— -St. Clare, at that moment, 
rushed forward with a troop of followers ; 
and placing herself between the furious 
combatants : " Avondale," she cried, 
" thou shalt not raise thy hand against 
Glenarvon. By this bleeding heart, I 
adjure you— by Calantha's last prayer, 



ftLENARTON. US 

and the solemn vow you made her, sully 
not thy upright honour with this mockery 
and exhibition. Who doubts thy prow- 
ess, and thy power? Splendid is the ray 
that surrounds the youthful head of 
Avondale :— yon miserable victim has 
yet to live and to repent. "Oh, hear 
me," she continued, throwing herself 
forward before him: "reserve that arm 
to defend an injured country. Ca- 
lantha's spirit cries to thee from the 
grave : oh, hear that prayer, and remem- 
ber thy solemn vow. Let the worth- 
less live to repent and suffer." 

" 1 sought thee not," said Glenarvon, 
fiercely breaking from St. Clare ; " but 
since it is thy rash desire to strike at one 
who defies thee— take this.** — He rushed 
forward as he spoke, and struck his 
dagger into Lord Avondale's bosom, then 
departed. " Let me pursue. Let me 
revenge," said St. Clare, as she consign- 
ed Lord Avondale to the care of her 
I 4 



176 GLENARVON. 

followers.— tc Monster, bereft of every 
principle, this is too horrible. I did not 

think thee capable of this/' Glen* 

arvon fled not from her pursuit: he con- 
tinued his course unmoved. " I could 
have loved that man," he said and sighed. 
---" He has nobleness, generosity, sin- 
cerity. I only assume the appearance 
of those virtues. My heart and his 
must never be compared : therefore I 
am compelled to hate him : but-— oh ! 
not so much as I abhor myself." Thus 
saying, he descended with a firm step by 
the side of the mountain. 

He stopped not for the rugge,d path- 
way ; but he paused to look again upon 
the stream of ElLe, as it came rushing 
down the valley; and he paused to cast 
©ue ^lanrp of welcon e upon Inis Tara, 
Glenarvoii Bay, and the harbour termi- 
nating the wide extended prospect. The 
myrtles and arbutes grew luxuriantly 
intermixed with larch and firs. The 



GLENARYON. 177 

air was hot: the ground was parched 
and dry. The hollow sound of the fo- 
rests ; the murmuring noise of the waves 
of the sea; the tinkling bell that at a 
distance sounded from the scattered flocks 
— all filled his heart with vague remem- 
brances of happier days, and sad fore- 
bodings of future sorrow. As he ap- 
proached the park of Castle Delaval, he 
met with some of the tenantry, who in- 
formed him of Calantha's death. 

Miss St. Clare stood before him. 
Perhaps at that moment his heart was 
softened by what he had just heard. 
-—Approaching her, ie St. Clare," he 
cried, " give me your hand: it is 
for the last time I ask it. I have 
been absent for some months. I have 
heard that which afflicrs me. Do not 
you also greet me unkindly. Pardon 
the past. I may have had errors : but 
to save, to reclaim you, is there any 
thing I would not do?" St. Clare n.ade 
no answer. " You may have discom- 
15 



178 GLENARVON. 

forts of which I know not. Perhaps 
you are poor and unprotected. All that I 
possess, I would give you, if that would 
render you more happy." Still she 
made no reply. "You know not, I 
fancy, that my castles have been restor- 
ed to me, and a gallant ship given me 
by the English court. I have sailed, St. 
Clare : I only now return for a few 
weeks, before I am called hence for 
ever. Accept some mark of my regard ; 
and pardon an involuntary fault. Give 
me yourhand. ,, — " Never/' she replied : 
11 all others, upon this new accession of 
good fortune, shall greet and receive 
you with delight. The world shall smile 
upon you, Glenarvon ; but I never. I 
forgave you my own injuries, but not 
Avondale's and my country *s." 

" Is it possible, that one so young as yoa 
are, and this too but a first fault, is it pos- 
sible you can be so unrelenting }" — " A 
first fault, Glenarvon t The lessons you 
have taught were not in vain : they 



CLENARVON. 179 

have been since repeated ; but my crimes 
be on you !"-— " Is it not for your sake, 
miserable outcast, alone, that I asked 
you to forgive me ? What is your for- 
giveness to me ? I am wealthy, and pro- 
tected : am I not ? Tell me, wretched 
girl, what are you ?"— " Solitary, poor,, 
abandoned, degraded," said Miss St. 
Clare : " why do you ask ? you know 
it/'—" And yet when I offer all things 
to you, cannot you bring that stubborn 
heart to pardon I*'—" No: were it in 
the hour of death, I could not/*-—" Oh, 
Elinor, do not curse me at that hour. I 
am miserable enough." — " The curse of 
a broken heart is terrible," said Miss St. 
Clare, as she left him ; " but it is already 
given. Vain is that youthful air; vain, 
my lord, your courtesy, and smiles, and' 
fair endowments : — the curse of a broken* 
heart is on you : and, by night and by 
day, it cries to you as from the grave. 
Farewell, GJenarvon : we shall meet no, 
more." 



ISO GLENARVON. 

Glenarvon descended by the glen: his 
followers passed him in the well known 
haunt; but each as they passed him 
muttered unintelligible sounds of dis- 
content: though the words, " ill luck to 
you," not unfrequently fell upon his ear. 



GLENARVON. 131 



CHAPTER XXI, 



It was at Kelly Cross that Lord Avondale 
remained till he was sufficiently recovered 
from his wound to proceed. From Kelly 
Cross to Allenwater, the road passes 
through mountains, which, rough and 
craggy, exhibit a terrific grandeur. The 
inhabitants in this part of the country are 
uncivilized and ferocious. Their appear- 
ance strongly betokens oppression, pover- 
ty, and neglect. A herd of goats may 
be seen browzing upon the tops of the 
broken cliffs; but no other cattle, nor 
green herbage. A desolate cabin here 
and there ; inactivity, silence,, and de- 
spondency, every where prevail. The 
night was sultry, and the tired horse of 
Lord Avondale hung back to the village 



182 GLENARVON. 

he had left, and slowly ascended the 
craggy steep. When he had attained 
the summit of the mountain, he paused 
to rest, exhausted by the burning pain of 
his wound. 

Lord Avondale then looked back at 
the scenes he had left. 

Before his eyes appeared in one ex- 
tensive view the bright silver surface 
of Glenarvon Bay, breaking through 
the dark shades of distant wood, under 
the heights of Inis Tara and Heremon, 
upon whose lofty summits the light of 
the moonbeam fell. To the right, the 
Dartland hills arose in majestic grandeur ; 
and far onwards, stretching to the clouds> 
his own native hills, the black moun- 
tains of Morne ; while the river Allan, 
winding its way through limestone rocks 
and woody glens, rapidly approached to* 
wards the sea. 

Whilst yet pausing to gaze upon these 
fair prospects, on a night so clear and se- 
rene, that every star shone forth to ligbt 



GLENARVON. 183 

him on his way, yells terrible and dis- 
orderly broke upon the sacred stillness, 
and a party of the rebels rushed upon him. 
He drew his sword, and called loudly to 
them to desist. Collingwood, an attend- 
ant who had waited for him at the inn, and 
had since accompanied him, exclaimed: 
c£ Will you murder your master, will you 
attack your lord, for that he is returning 
amongst you ?"— " He wears the English 
uniform/' cried one. " Sure he's one of 
the butchers sent to destroy us. We'll 
have no masters, no lords : he must 
give up his commission, and his titles, or 
not expect to pass."—" Never/' said 
Lord Avondale, indignantly : " had I no 
commission, no title to defend, still as a 
man, free and independent, I would pro- 
tect the laws and rights of my insulted 
country. Attempt not by force to oppose 
yourselves to my passage. I will pass 
without asking or receiving your permis^ 
sion/' 

u It is Avondale, the lord's son/ 1 * 



1S4 GLENARVON. 

cried one : t€ I know him by his spirit, 
Long life to you ! and glory, and pleasure 
attend you. 5 '— " Long life to your ho- 
nour \" exclaimed one and all; and in a 
moment the enthusiasm in his favour 
was as great, as general, as had been at first 
the execration and violence against him. 
The attachment they bore to their lord 
was still strong. " Fickle, senseless 
beings!" he said, with bitter contempt, 
as he heard their loyal cry. " These are 
the creatures we would take to govern 
us: this is the voice of the people: these 
are the rights of man/'---" Sure but 
you'll pity us, and forgive us ; and you'll 
be our king again, and live amongst us; 
and the young master's just gone to the 
mansion ; and didn't we draw him into 
his own courts ? and ain't we returning 
to our cabins after seeing the dear crea- 
ture safe : and, for all the world, didn't 
we indade take ye for one of the mur- 
derers in the uniform, come to kill us, and 
make us slaves ? Long life to your ho- 
nour l** J 



GLEN A R VON. 185 

All the time they thus spoke, they 
kept running after Lord Avondale, who 
urged en his horse to escape from their 
persecution. A thousand pangs at this 
instant tortured his mind. This was 
the retreat in which he and Calantha 
had passed the first, and happiest year 
of their marriage. The approach to it 
was agony. The fever on his mind aug- 
mented. The sight of his children, whom 
he had ordered to be conveyed thither, 
would be terrible:— he dreaded, yet he 
longed to clasp them once more to his 
*dao*Nfc The people had named but one, 
and that was Harry Mowbrey. Was 
Anabel also there ? Would she look on 
him, and remind him of Calantha? These 
were inquiries he hardly durst suggest 
to himself. 

Lord Avondale hastened on. And 
now the road passed winding by the 
banks of the rapid and beautiful Allan, 
till it led to the glen, where a small villa, 
adorned with flower gardens, wood and 



186 GLENARVON. 

lawn, broke upon his sight. His heart 
was cheerless in the midst of joy : he 
was poor, whilst abundance surrounded 
him. Collingvvood rang at the bell. 
The crowd had reached the door, and 
many a heart and many a voice, wel- 
comed home the brave Lord Avondale. 
He passed them in gloom and silence. 
" Are the children arrived P* he said, 
in a voice of bitterness, to the old steward, 
whose glistening eyes he wished not to 
encounter. " They came, God bless them, 
last night. They are not yet awakened. 
ii Leave me, said Lord Avondale. ' I 
too require rest ;" and he rocked him- 
self into the room prepared for his recep- 
tion ; whilst Collingwood informed the 
astonished gazers that their lord was ill, 
and required to be alone. " He was net 
used," they said, as they mournfully re- 
tired, " to greet us thus. But whatever 
he thinks of his own people, we would 
one and all gladly lay down our lives t3 
serve him.'* 



CLJENARVON. 1S7 



CHAPTER XXII. 



Upon that night when the meeting be- 
tween Lord Glenarvon and Lord Avon- 
dale had taken place, the great procession 
in honour or St. Katharine passed through 
the town of Belfont. Miss St. Clare, 
having waited during the whole of the 
day to see it, rode to St. Mary's church, 
and returned by the shores of the sea, at 
a late hour. As she passed and repassed 
before her uncle's house, she turned her 
dark eye upwards, and saw that many 
visitors and guests were there. They 
had met together to behold the proces- 
sion. 

Lauriana and Jessica stood in their 
mother's bow window. Tyrone, Carter, 
Grey, and Terney, spoke to them con- 
cerning their cousin. *' See where she 



ISS GLENARVOX. 

rides by, in defiance/' said one. " Miss 
St. Clare, fie upon this humour," cried 
another; " the very stones cry shame on 
you, and our modest maidens turn from 
their windows, that they may not blush 
to see you." " Then are there few 
enough or' that quality in Belfont," said 
St. Ciare smiling: " for when I pass, 
the windows are thronged, and every eye 
is fixed upon me." " What weight has 
the opinion of others with you ?" 
" None." " What your own conscience ?" 
" None." " Do you believe in the reli- 
gion of your fathers ? M " Jt were pre- 
sumption to believe : I doubt all things." 
" You have read tliis: and it is folly in 
you to repeat it : for wherein has Miss 
Elinor a right to be wiser than the rest of 
us }" " It is contemptible in fools to 
affect superior wisdom." 4f Better be- 
lieve that which is false, than dare to 
differ from the just and the wise : the 
opinion of ages should be sacred: the 
religion and laws of our forefathers 



GLENARVON. 189 

must be supported/' " Preach to the 
winds, Jessica : they'll bear your mur- 
murs far, and my course is ended." 

The evening was still : no breeze 
was felt; and the swelling billows 
of the sea were like a smooth sheet of 
glass, so quiet, so clear. Lauriana played 
upon the harp, and flatterers told her 
that she played better than St. Clare. 
She struck the chords to a warlike air, 
and a voice, sweet as a seraph angel's, 
sung from below. " St. Clare, is it you ? 
Well I know that silver-sounding voice. 
The day has been hot, and you have 
ridden far : dismount, and enter here. 
An aunt and relations yet live to receive 
and shelter thee. What, though all the 
world scorn, and censure thee, still this is 
thy home. Enter here, and you shall be 
at peace." " Peace and my heart are at 
variance. I have ridden far, as you say, 
and I am weary : yet I must journey to 
the mountains, before I rest. Let me 
ride on in haste. My course will soon 



190 GLENARVON. 

be o'er." " By Glenarvon's name I 
arrest you," said Lauriana. " Oh, not 
that name: all but that I can bear to 
hear." 

Cormac O'Leary, Carter, Grey, and 
Terney. now came down, and assisted in 
persuading her to alight. " Sing to us/' 
they cried. " What hand can strike the 
harp like thine ? What master taught 
thee this heavenly harmony }" " Oh, 
had you heard his song who taught me, 
then had you wept in pity for my loss. 
What does life present that's worth even 
a prayer ? What can Heaven offer, hav- 
ing taken from me all that my soul 
adored ? Why name Glenarvon ? It is 
like raising a spirit from the grave ; or 
giving life again to the heart that is dead : 
it is as if a ray of the sun's glorious light 
shone upon these cold senseless rocks ; or 
as if a garden of paradise were raised in 
the midst of a desert : birds of prey and 
sea-fowl alone inhabit here. They should 
be something like Glenarvon who dare 



GLENARVON. 191 

to name him." " Was he all this in- 
deed ?" said Niel Carter incredulously. 

" When he spoke, it was like the soft 
sound of music. The wild impassioned 
strains of his lyre awakened in the soul 
every emotion : it was with a master- 
hand that he struck the chords ; and all 
the fire of genius and poetry accompa- 
nied the sound. When Heaven itself 
has shed its glory upon the favourite of 
his creation, shall mortal beings turn in- 
sensible from the splendid ray ? You 
have maddened me : you have pro- 
nounced a name I consider sacred." 
" This prodigy of Heaven, however/' 
said Cormac O'Leary, " behaves but 
scurvily to man. Glenarvon it seems has 
left his followers, as he has his mistress. 
Have you heard, that in consequence of 
his services, he is reinstated in his father's 
possessions, a ship is given to him, and 
a fair and lovely lady has accepted his 
hand ? Even now, he sails with the 



192 GLENARYON. 

English admiral and Sir Richard Mow- 
brev." 

The rich crimson glow faded from 
Elinor's cheek. She smiled, but it was 
to conceal the bitterness of her heart. 
She knew the tale was true ; but she 
cared not to repeat it. She mounted her 
horse, and desiring Cormac O'Leary, 
Niel Carter, and others, to meet her that 
night at Inis Tara, she rode away, with 
more appearance of gaiety than many a 
lighter heart. 



©LENARVON. 193 



CHAPTER XXIII. 



Elinor rode not to the mountains; she 
appeared not again at Belfont; but turn- 
ing her horse towards the convent of 
Glanaa, she entered there, and asked if 
her aunt the abbess were yet alive. "She 
is alive/ 5 said one of those who remem- 
bered Miss St. Clare ; "but she is much 
changed since she last beheld you. 
Grieving for you has brought her to this 
pass." 

What the nun had said was true. The 
abbess was much changed in appearance; 
but through the decay, and wrinkles of 
age, the serenity and benevolence of a 
kind and pious heart remained. She 
started back at first, when she saw Miss 
St. Clare : that unfeminine attire in- 
spired her with feelings of disgust: all 

VOL. III. K 



194 GLENARVON. 

she had heard too of her abandoned con- 
duct chilled her interest; and that com- 
passion which she had willingly extend- 
ed to the creeping worm, she reluctantly 
afforded to an impenitent, proud, and 
hardened sinner. 

" The flowers bloom around your gar- 
den, my good aunt ; the sun shines ever 
on these walls: it is summer here when 
it is winter in every other place. I think 
God's blessing is with you/' The ab- 
bess turned aside to conceal her tears : 
then rising, asked wherefore her privacy 
was intruded upon in so unaccustomed a 
manner. " I am come,'* said Elinor, 
u to ask a favour at your hands, and if 
you deny me, at least add not unneces- 
sary harshness to your refusal. 1 have a 
father's curse on me, and it weighs me 
to the earth. When they tell you I am 
no more, say, will you pray for my soul ? 
The God of Heaven dares not refuse the 
prayer of a saint like you/ * 

" This is strange language, Miss St. 



GLENARVON. 195 

Clare ; but if indeed my prayers have the 
efficacy you think for, they shall be 
made now, even now that your heart 
may be turned from its wickedness to re- 
pentance." — u The favour I have to ask 
is of great moment : there will be a child 
left at your doors : and ere long it will 
crave your protection ; for it is an orphan 
boy, and the hand that now protects it 
will soon be no more. Look not thus at 
me : it is not mine. The boy has no- 
ble blood in his veins : but he is the 
pledge of misfortune and crime. 

The abbess raised herself to take a 
nearer view of the person with whom she 
was conversing. The plumed hat and 
dark flowing mantle, the emerald clasp 
and chain, had little attraction for one 
of her age and character ; but the sunny 
ringlets which fell in profusion over a 
skin of alabaster, the soft smile of en- 
chantment blended with the assumed 
fierceness of a military air, the deep ex- 
pressive glance of passion and sensible 
K 2 



196 GLEXARVON. 

lity, the youthful air of boyish playful- 
ness, and that blush which years of 
crime had not entirely banished, all, all 
awakened the affection of age: and, 
with more of warmth, more of interest 
than she had wished to shew to one so 
depraved, she pressed the unhappy wan- 
derer to her heart. " What treacherous 
fiends have decoyed, and brought thee 
to this, my child ? What daemons have 
had the barbarous cruelty to impose upon 
one so young, so fair }'* 

" Alas ! good aunt, there is not in the 
deep recesses of my inmost heart a re- 
collection of any whom I can with justice 
accuse but myself. That God who 
made me, must bear witness, that he 
implanted in my breast, even from the 
tenderest age, passions fiercer than I had 
power to curb. The wild tygress who 
roams amongst the mountains—the young 
lion who roars for its prey amidst its 
native woods— the fierce eagle who soars 
above all others, and cannot brook a 
rival in its flight, were tame and tractable 



GLENARVON. 197 

compared with me. Nature formed me 
fierce, and your authority was not strong 
enough to curb and conquer me. I was 
a darling and an only child. My words 
were idolized as they sprung warm from 
my heart ; and my heart was worth some 
attachment, for it could love with pas- 
sionate excess. In my happier days, I 
thought too highly of myself; and for- 
give me, Madam, if, fallen as I am, I 
still think the same. I cannot be hum- 
ble. When they tell me I am base, I 
acknowledge it: pride leads me to confess 
what others dare not; but I think them 
more base who delight in telling me of my 
faults: and when I see around me hypo- 
crisy and all the petty arts of fashionable 
vice, I too can blush for others, and smile 
in triumph at those who would trample 
on me. It is not before such as these, 
such canting cowards, that I can feel 
disgrace; but before such as you are 
— so good, so pure, and yet so merciful, 
I stand at once confounded/' 
K 3 



198 GLENARTON. 

" The God of Heaven pardon theeP 
said the abbess. " You were once my 
delight and pride. I never could have 
suspected ill of you." " I too was once 
unsuspicious," said St. Clare. Ci My heart 
believed in nothing but innocence. I 
know the world better now. Were it 
their interest, would they thus deride 
me ? When the mistress of Glenarvon, 
did they thus neglect, and turn from me ? 
I was not profligate, abandoned, har- 
dened, then ! I was lovely, irresistible ! 
My crime was excused. My open de- 
fiance was accounted the mere folly and 
wantonness of a child. I have a high 
spirit yet, which they shall not break. 
I am deserted, it is true ; but my mind is 
a world in itself, which I have peopled 
with my own creatures. Take only 
from me a father's curse, and to the last 
I will smile, even though my heart is 
breaking." 

" And are you unhappy ?" said the 
abbess, kindly. " Can you ask it, 



GLENARVON, 199 

Madam ? Amidst the scorn and hatred of 
hundreds, do I not appear the gayest of 
all? Who rides so fast over the down? 
Who dances more lightly at the ball? 
And if I cannot sleep upon my bed, need 
the world be told of it ? The virtuous 
suffer, do they not ? And what is this 
dream of life if it must cease so soon ? 
We know not what we are: let us doubt 
all things— all but the curse of a father, 
which lies heavy on me. Oh take it 
from me to-night ! Give me your bless- 
ing; and the time is coming when I shall 
need your prayers." 

" Can such a mind find delight in. 
vice ?" said the abbess, mildly gazing 
upon the kneeling girl. " Why do you 
turn your eyes to Heaven, admiring its 
greatness, and trembling at its power, if 
you yet suffer your heart to yield to the 
delusions of wickedness ?" " Will such 
a venial fault as love be accounted infa- 
mous in Heaven ?" " Guilty love is the 
k 4 



200 GLENARYON. 

parent of even 7 vice. Oh, what could 
mislead a mind like your's, my child r" 
" Madam, there are some born with a 
perversion of intellect, a depravity of 
feeling, nothing can cure. Can we 
straighten deformity, or change the rough 
features of ugliness into beauty ?" " We 
may do much." " Nothing, good lady, 
nothing ; though man would boast that 
it is possible. Let the ignorant teach 
the wise ; let the sinner venture to in- 
struct the saint ; we cannot alter nature. 
We may learn to dissemble; but the 
stamp is imprest with life, and with life 
alone it is erased." 

" God bless, forgive, and amend thee !" 
said the abbess. " The sun is set, the 
hour is late: thy words have moved, but 
do not convince me. Rise, daughter, 
kneel not to me : there is one above, to 
whom alone that posture is due." A 
St. Clare rode from the convent, she 
placed a mark upon the wicket of the 



GLEN A R VON. 201 

little garden, and raising her voice, " Let 
him he accursed/* she cried, " who 
takes from hence this badge of thy secu- 
rity: though rivers of blood shall gush 
around, not a hair of these holy and just 
saints shall be touched." 



k d 



202 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



The preparations made this year by 
France, in conjunction with the allies, 
and the great events which took place in 
consequence of her enterprizes, belong 
solely to the province of the historian. 
It is sufficient to state, that the arma- 
ment which had been fitted out on the 
part of the Batavian Republic, sailed at 
a later period of the same year, under 
the command of Admiral de Winter, 
with the intention of joining the French 
fleet at Brest, and proceeding from thence 
to Ireland, where the discontents and 
disaffection were daily increasing, and 
all seemed ripe for immediate insur- 
rection. 

Lord Glenarvon was at St. Alvin 
Priory, when he was summoned to take 



GLENARVON. 203 

the command of his frigate, and join Sir 
George Buchanan and Admiral Duncan 
at the Texel. Not a moment's time was 
to be lost : he had already exceeded the 
leave of absence he had obtained. The 
charms of a new mistress, the death of 
Calantha, the uncertain state of his af- 
fairs, and the jealous eye with which he 
regarded the measures taken by his uncle 
and cousin de Ruthven, had detained him 
till the last possible moment ; but the 
command from Sir George was peremp- 
tory, and he was never tardy in obeying 
orders which led him from apathy and 
idleness to a life of glory. 

He prepared, therefore, to depart, 
as it seemed, without further delay, 
leaving a paper in the hands of one of 
his friends, commissioning him to an- 
nounce at the next meeting at Inis Tara 
the change which had taken place in his 
opinions, and entire disapprobation of 
the lawless measures which had been re- 
cently adopted by the disaffected. He 



204 GLENARVON. 

took his name from out the directory; 
and though he preserved a faithful si- 
lence respecting others, he acknowledged 
his own errors, and abjured the desperate 
cause in which he had once so zealously 
engaged. 

The morning before he quitted Ireland, 
he sent for his cousin Charles de Iluth- 
ven, to whom he had already consigned 
the care of his castles and estates. " If 
I live to return/' he said gaily, " 1 shall 
mend my morals, grow marvellous vir- 
tuous, marry something better than my- 
self, and live in all the innocent pleasures 
of connubial, felicity. In which case, you 
will be what you are now, a keen ex- 
pectant of what never can be your's. If 
I die, in the natural course of events, all 
this will fall to your share. Take it now 
then into consideration : sell, buy, make 
whatever is for your advantage; but as a 
draw-back upon the estate, gentle cousin, 
I bequeath also to your care two children 
— the one, my trusty Henchman, a love 



GLEN A R VON. 205 

gift, as you well know, who must be 
liberally provided for — the other, mark 
me, Charles ! — a strange tale rests upon 
that other: keep him carefully: there 
are enemies who watch for his life: be- 
friend him, and shelter him, and, if re- 
duced to extremities, give these papers 
to the duke. They will unfold all that I 
know ; and no danger can accrue to you 
from the disclosure. I had cause for 
silence/' 

It was in the month of August, when 
Lord Glenarvon prepared to depart from 
Belfont. The morning was dark and 
misty. A grey circle along the horizon 
shewed the range of dark dreary moun- 
tains; and far above the clouds one 
bright pink streak marked the top of Inis 
Tara, already lighted by the sun, which 
had not risen sufficiently to cast its rays 
upon aught beside this lofty landmark. 
Horsemen, and carriages, were seen driv- 
ing over the moors; but the silent lone- 



206 GLENARVON. 

liness of Castle Delaval continued un- 
disturbed till a later hour. 

It was there that Lady Margaret, who 
had returned from England, awaited with 
anxiety the promised visit of Glenarvon. 
Suddenly a servant entered, and informed 
her that a stranger, much disguised, waited 
to speak with her.— His name was Vi- 
viani.— He was shewn into Lady Mar- 
garet's apartment. A long and animated 
conversation passed. One shriek was 
heard. The stranger hurried from the 
castle. Lady Margaret's attendants found 
her cold, pale, and almost insensible. 
When she recovered. " Is he gone }'• 
she said eagerly. " The stranger is 
gone," they replied. Lady Margaret 
continued deeply agitated ; she wrote to 
Count Gondimar, who was absent; and 
she endeavoured to conceal from Mrs. 
Seymour and the duke the dreadful alarm 
of her mind. She appeared at the hour 
of dinner, and talked even as usual of 
the daily news. 



GLENARVON. 207 

'* Lord Glenarvon sailed this morning/* 
said Mrs. Seymour. " I heard the same," 
said Lady Margaret. " Young De Ruth- 

ven is, I understand " " What?" said 

Lady Margaret, looking eagerly at her 
brother — " appointed to the care of Lord 
Glenarvon's affairs. You know, I con- 
clude, that he has taken his name out of 
the directory, and done every thing to 
atone for his former errors." " Has he?" 
said Lady Margaret, faintly. " Poor 
Calantha," said Mrs. Seymour, " on her 
death-bed spoke of him with kindness. 
He was not in fault," she said. " She 
bade me even plead for him, when others 
censured him too severely." " It is 
well that the dead bear record of his 
virtues," said Lady Margaret. " He has 
the heart of....*' 

" Mr. Buchanan," said a servant, en- 
tering abruptly, and, all in haste, Mr. 
Buchanan suddenly stood before his mo- 
ther. There was no need of explanation. 
In one moment, Lady Margaret read in 



208 GLENARVON. 

the countenance of her son, that the 
dreadful menace of Viviani had been ful- 
filled ; that his absence at this period 
was but too effectually explained; that 
all was known. Buchanan, that cold 
relentless son, who never yet had shewn 
or affection, or feeling — whose indiffer- 
ence had seldom yielded to any stronger 
emotion than that of vanity, now stood 
before her, as calm as ever, in outward 
show ; but the horror of his look, when 
he turned it upon her, convinced her 
that he had heard the dreadful truth. 
Mrs. Seymour and the duke perceiving 
that something important had occurred, 
retired. 

Lady Margaret and her son were, there- 
fore, left, to themselves. A moment's 
pause ensued. Lady Margaret first en- 
deavoured to break it: " 1 have not seen 
you/' she said at length, affecting calm- 
ness, " since a most melancholy scene — 
I mean the death of Calantha." 

" True," he cried, fixing her with 



GLENARVON. 209 

wild horror; " and I have not seen you 
since Do you know Viviani ?" — " Re- 
member," said Lady Margaret, rising 
in agitation, " that I am your mother, 
Buchanan ; and this strange manner 
agitates, alarms, terrifies me." " And 
me," he replied. " Is it true," at length 
he cried, seizing both her hands with 
violence — M Say, is it true?" " False 
as the villain who framed it," said Lady 
Margaret. " Kneel down there, wretch- 
ed woman, and swear that it is false," 
said Buchanan ; " and remember that it 
is before your only son that you for- 
swear yourself— before your God, that 
you deny the dreadful fact." 

Lady Margaret knelt with calm dig- 
nity, and upraising her eyes as if to 
heaven, prepared to take the terrible 
oath Buchanan had required; " Paus.e," 
he cried : " I know it is true, and you 
shall not perjure yourself lor tne." " The 
story is invented for my ruin/- said Lady 
Margaret, eagerly. " Believe your mo- 



210 GLENARVON. 

ther, oh, Buchanan, and not the mon- 
ster who would delude you. I can prove 
his words false. Will you only allow 
me time to do so ? Who is this Viviani ? 
Will you believe a wretch who dares not 
appear before me? Send for him: let 
him be confronted with me instantly : I 
fear not Viviani. To connect murder 
with the name of parent is terrible— 
to see an executioner in an only son is 
worse." " There are fearful witnesses 
against you." " I dare oppose them all.** 
" Oh, my mother, beware." " Hear 
me, Buchanan. Leave me not. It is a 
mother kneels before you. Whatever 
my crime before God, do you have com- 
passion. I am innocent — Viviani is...." 
" Is what?*' " Is false. I am inno- 
cent. Look at me, my son. Oh, leave 
me not thus. See, see if there is mur- 
der in this countenance. Oh, hear me, 
m y boy, my William. It is the voice 
of a mother calls to you, as from the 
grave." 



GLENARVON. 211 

Buchanan was inexorable. He left 
her.— He fled.— She followed, clinging 
to him, to the door.— She held his hand 
to her bosom : she clasped it in agony. 
He fled : and she fell senseless before 
him. Still he paused not ; but rushing 
from her presence, sought Viviani, who 
had promised to meet him in the forest. 
To his infinite surprize, in his place he 
met Glenarvon. " The Italian will 
not venture here," said the latter; "but 
I know all. Has she confessed?" " She 
denies every syllable of the accusation," 
said Buchanan; "and in a manner so 
firm, so convincing, that it has made 
me doubt. If what he has written 
is false, this monster, this Viviani, shall 
deeply answer for it. I must have proof 
—instant, positive proof. Who is this 
Viviani ! Wherefore did he seek me by 
mysterious letters and messages, if he 
dares not meet me face to face? I will 
have proof/' " It will be difficult to 
obtain positive proof," said Glenarvon, 



212 GLENARVON. 

" La Crusca, who alone knows, beside 
myself and V iviani, this horrid secret, is 
under the protection of my cousin de 
Ruthven. Plow far he is acquainted 
with the murder I know not; but he 
fears me, and he dares not openly oppose 
me. Lady Margaret has proved her in- 
nocence to him likewise," he continued 
smiling bitterly; " but there is yet one 
other witness."—- " Who, where?" 
"The boy himself.'' " Perhaps this is 
all a plot to ruin 1113' wretched mother/' 
said Buchanan. " I shall have it 
brought to light.'' " And your mother 
publicly exposed ?" " If she is guilty, 
let her be brought to shame." "Arid 
yourself to ruin," said Glenarvon. " To 
ruin unutt. rab..e." 

They ferrfved at Belfont, whilst thus 
conversing. The evening was dark. 
Th y had taken a room at the inn. 
Gtenfi > -M enquired of some around 
him, if Colonel St. Alvin were at the 
abbey. He was informed* that he was 



GLEN AR VON. 213 

at Col wood Bay. " Ask them now," 
said Glenarvon in a whisper, " concern- 
ing me." Buchanan did so, and heard 
that Lord Glenarvon had taken ship for 
England that morning, had abandoned 
his followers, and received a bribe for 
his treachery from the English court. 
The people spoke of him with much 
execration. Glenarvon smiling at their 
warmth: <c This vvas your idol yester- 
day: to-morrow," he continued, " I 
will give you another." As soon as 
Buchanan had retired to his room, as 
he said, to repose himself, for he had 
not closed his eyes since he had left 
England, his companion, wrapping him- 
self within his cloak, stole out unper- 
ceived from the inn, and walked to St. 
Alvin Prior v. 



214 GLESARVON, 



CHAPTER XXV. 



Shortly after Buchanan's departure, 
Lady Margaret had recovered from her 
indisposition. She was tranquil, and 
had retired early to rest. The next 
morning she was in her brother's apart- 
ment, when a servant entered with a 
letter. " There is a gentleman below 
who wishes to speak with your grace." 
" What is his name?" " I know not, my 
lord ; he would not inform me." The duke 
opened the letter. It was from Colonel 
De Ruthven, who entreated permission 
to have a few moments conversation 
with the duke, as a secret of the utmost 
importance had been communicated to 
him that night; but it was of the most 
serious consequence that Lady Margaret 
Buchanan should be kept in ignorance 



GLENARVON. 215 

of the appeal. The name was written in 
large characters, as if to place particular 
emphasis upon it; and as unfortunately 
she was in her brother's apartment at 
the moment the letter was delivered, 
it was extremely difficult for him to 
conceal from her its contents, or the agi- 
tation so singular and mysterious a com- 
munication had caused him. 

Lady Margaret's penetrating eye ob- 
served in a moment that something un- 
usual had occurred ; but whilst yet com- 
manding herself, that she might not shew 
her suspicions to her brother, Mac Allain 
entered, and giving the duke a small 
packet, whispered to him that the gen- 
tleman could not wait, but begged his 
grace would peruse those papers, and he 
would call again. " Sister," said the 
duke, rising, " you will excuse. Good 
God! what do I see? What is the matter ?" 
Lady Margaret had arisen from her seat : 
— the hue of death had overspread her 
lips and cheeks: — yet calm in the midst 



216 glenarvon. 

of the most agonizing suspense, she gave 
no other sign of the terror under which 
she laboured. Kindly approaching, he 
took her hand. 

" That packet of letters is for me," 
she said in a firm low voice. " The 
superscription bears my name, said the 
duke, hesitating. " Yet if— if by any 
mistake— any negligence-— " — "There is 
no mistake, my lord/' said the servant 
advancing. " Leave us," cried Lady 
Margaret/ with a voice that resounded 
throughout the apartment ; and then 
again faltering, and fainting at the effort, 
she continued: " Those letters are mine : 
—my enemy and your's has betrayed 
them :— Viviani may exhibit the weak- 
ness and folly of a woman's heart to 
gratify his revenge ; but a generous 
brother should disdain to make himself 
the instrument of his barbarous, his un- 
manly cruelty.'* " Take them," said 
the duke, with gentleness : " I would 
not read them for the world's worth. 



GLENARVON. $17 

That heart is noble and generous, what- 
ever its errors ; and no letters could ever 
make me think ill of my sister." 

Lady Margaret trembled exceedingly. 
" They wish to ruin me/' she cried — " to 
tear me from your affection — to make 
you think me black— to accuse me, not 
of weakness, brother, but of crimes/'— 
" Were they to bring such evidences, 
that the very eye itself could see their 
testimony, I would disbelieve my senses, 
before I could mistrust you. Look then 
calm and happy, my sister. We have all 
of us faults ; the best of us is no miracle 
of worth; and the gallantries of one, as 
fair, as young, as early exposed to temp- 
tation as you were, deserve no such se- 
verity. Come, take the detested packet, 
and throw it into the flames."— 4 ' It is of 
no gallantry that I am accused ; no weak- 
ness, Altamonte ; it is of murder !" 
The duke started. " Aye, brother, of 
the murder of an infant/' He smiled. 
" Smile too 3 when I say further— of the 

VOL. III. L 



218 GLENARVON. 

murder of your child;"— " Of Calan- 
tha!" he cried in agitation. " Of an 
infant, I tell you ; of the heir of Dela- 
val." 

" Great God ! have I lived to hear that 
wretches exist, barbarous, atrocious 
enough, thus to accuse you ? Name 
them, that my arm may avenge you 
•—name them, dearest Margaret; and, by 
heavens, I will stand your defender, and 
at once silence them/' " Oh, more than 
this: they have produced an impostor— 
a child, brother — an Italian boy, whose 
likeness to your family I have often 
marked/' u Zerbellini?" " The same." 
" Poor contrivance to vent their rage 
and malice ! But did I not ever tell you, 
my dearest Margaret, that Gondimar, 
and that mysterious Yiviani, whom you 
protected, bore an ill character. They 
were men unknown, without family, 
without principle, or honour." "Bro- 
ther," said Lady Margaret, "give me 
your hand : swear to me that you know 



GLENARVON. 219 

and love me enough to discredit at 
once the whole of this : swear to me, 
Altamonte, that without proving their 
falsehood, you despise the wretches who 
have resolved to ruin your sister." 

The duke now took a solemn oath, 
laying his hand upon her's, that he 
never could, never would harbour one 
thought of such a nature. He even 
smiled at its absurdity; and he refused 
to see either the stranger, or to read 
the packet— when Lady Margaret, falling 
back in a hollow and hysteric laugh, 
bade him tear from his heart the fond, 
the doating simplicity that beguiled 
him: — " They utter that which is true/' 
she cried. " I am that which they have 
said. She then rushed from the room. 

The duke, amazed, uncertain what to 
believe or doubt, opened the packet of 
letters, and read as folio wis : — 

" My gracious and much injured 
patron, Lord Glenarvon's departure, 



220 GLENARVON. 

whilst it leaves me again unprotected, 
leaves me also at liberty to act as I think 
right. Supported by the kindness of 
Colonel de Ruthven, I am emboldened 
now to ask an immediate audience with 
the Duke of Altamonte. Circumstances 
preclude my venturing to the castle:— 
the enemy of my life is in wait for me.— 
The Count Viviani and his agents watch 
for me by night and by day. Lady 
Margaret Buchanan, with Lord Glenar- 
von's assistance, has rescued the young 
Marquis of Delaval from his perfidious 
hands; but we have been long obliged to 
keep him a close prisoner at Belfont 
Abbey, in order to preserve him from 
his persecutors. My Lord Glenarvon 
sailed yesternoon, and commended my- 
self and the marquis to the colonel's care. 
We were removed last night from St. 
Alvin's to Colwood Bav, where we 
await in anxious hope of being admitted 
into the Duke of Altamonte's presence. 



GLENARVON. 291 

This is written by the most guilty and 
miserable servant of the Duke of Alta- 
monte. 

"Andreav Macpherson." 

" Thanks be to God," cried the duke, 
" my sister is innocent; and the mean- 
ing of this will be soon explained. " The 
remainder of the packet consisted of 
letters— -many of them in the hand-wri- 
ting of Lady Margaret, many in that of 
Glenarvon : some were dated Naples, 
and consisted of violent professions of 
love : the letters of a later date contained 
for the most part asseverations of inno- 
cence, and entreaties for secrecy and 
silence: and though worded with caution, 
continually alluded to some youthful 
boy, and to injuries and cruelties with 
which the duke was entirely unacquaint- 
ed. In addition to these extraordinary 
papers, there were many of a treasonable 
nature, signed by the most cons derable 
landholders and tenantry in the country. 
l 5 



223 €LEx\ARVON. 

But that which most of all excited the 
duke's curiosity, was a paper addressed 
to himself in Italian, imploring him, as 
fie valued the prosperity of his family, 
and every future hope, not to attend to 
the words of Macpherson, who was in 
the pay of Lord Glenarvon, and acting 
under his commands; but to hasten to 
St. Alvin's Priory, when a tale of horror 
should be disclosed to his wondering 
ears, and a treasure of inconceivable 
value be replaced in his hands. 



GLENARVON. 223 



CHAPTER XXVI. 



So many strange asseverations, and so 
many inconsistencies, could only excite 
doubt, astonishment, and suspicion ; when 
Lady Margaret, re-entering the apartment, 
asked her brother in a voice of excessive 
agitation, whether he would go with 
Colonel de Ruthven, who had called for 
him? And without leaving him time to 
answer, implored that he would not. 
" Your earnestness to dissuade me is 
somewhat precipitate — your looks — 
youragitation...." ** Oh, Altamonte, the 
lime is past for concealment, go not 
to your enemies to hear a tale of falsehood 
and horror. I, whom you have loved, 
sheltered, and protected, I, your own, 
your only sister, have told it you-— wjll 
tell it you further; but before I make 

L 4 



224 GLENARYON. 

my brother loathe me— oh, God ! before 
I open my heart's black secrets to your 
eyes, give me your hand. Let me look 
at you once more. Can I have strength 
to endure it ? Yes, sooner than suffer 
these vile slanderers to triumph, what 
dare I not endure ! 

" I am about to unfold a dreadful mys- 
tery, which may no longer be concealed. 
1 come to accuse myself of the blackest 
of crimes." " This is no time for explana- 
tion," said the duke. "Yet hear me; 
for I require, I expect no mercy at your 
hands. You have been to me the best 
of brothers«-the kindest of friends. 
L' arn by the confession I am now going 
to make, in what manner I have requited 
you/* Lady Margaret rose from her 
chair at these words, and shewed strong 
signs of the deep agitation of mind under 
v h:ch she laboured. Endeavouring not 
to meet the eyes of the duke, " You re- 
ceived me/' she continued, in a hurried 
manner, " when my character was lost, 



GLENARVON. 225 

and I appeared but as a foul blot to sully 
the innocence and purity of one who 
ever considered me and treated me as a 
sister. My son, for whom I sacrificed 
every natural feeling---my son you re- 
ceived as your child, and bade me look 
upon as your heir. Tremble as I com- 
municate the rest. 

" An unwelcome stranger appeared in 
a little time to supplant him. Ambition 
and envy, moving me to the dreadful 
deed, I thought by one blow to crush his 
hopes, and to place my own beyond the 
power of fortune." " Oh, Margaret! 
pause— do not, do not continue—. I was 
not prepared for this. Give me a mo- 
ments time— I cannot bear it now. ,> 
Lady Margaret, unmoved, continued. 
" To die is the fate of all ; and I would 
to God that some ruffian hand had ex- 
tinguished my existence at the same 
tender age. But think not, Altamonte, 
that these hands are soiled with your 
L 5 



236 GLENARVON. 

infant's blood. I only wished the deed — • 
I durst not do it. 

" I will not dwell upon a horrid scene 
which you remember full well. There 
is but one on earth capable of executing 
such a crime : he loved your sister ; and 
to possess this heart, he destroyed your 
child. — How he destroyed him I know 
not. We saw the boy, cold, even in 
death — we wept over him : and now, 
upon plea of some petty vengeance, 
because I will not permit him to draw 
me further into his base purposes, he is 
resolved to make this scene of blood and 
iniquity public to the world. He has 
already betrayed me to a relentless son ; 
and he now means to bring forward an 
impostor in the place of your murdered 
infant!"— " Who will do this?"— « Vi- 
viani ; Viviani himself will produce him 
before your eyes. 5 ' " Would to God 
that he might do so V cried the duke, 
gazing with pity and horror on the fine 



GLENARVON. 22? 

but fallen creature who stood before 
him. 

" I have not that strength, w he con- 
tinued, " you, of all living mortals, seem 
alone to possess. — My thoughts are dis- 
turbed. — I know not what to think, or 
how to act. You overwhelm me at once; 
and your very presence takes from me all 
power of reflection. Leave me, there- 
fore." "Never, till I have your promise. 
I fear you : I know by your look, that 
you are resolved to see my enemy — to 
hear." " Margaret, I will hear you to- 
morrow." " No to-morrow shall ever 
see us two again together." " In an 
hour I will speak with you again — one 
word." — As he said this, the duke arose : 
and seizing her fiercely by the arm: 
" Answer but this— do you believe the 
boy this Viviani will produce — do you 
think it possible— answer me, Mar- 
garet, and I will pardon all — do you 
think the boy is my long lost child ?'* 
" Have no such hope ; he is dead. Did 



22S GLENARVON. 

we not ourselves behold him ? Did we 
not look upon his cold and lifeless 
corpse ?" " Too true, my sister." " Then 
fear not : Buchanan shall not be defraud- 
ed." " It is not for Buchanan that I 
speak : he is lost to me : I have no son." 
cc But I would not have you fall a prey to 
the miserable arts of this wretch. Be- 
ware of Viviani — remember that still I 
am your sister : and now, for the last 
time, I warn you, go not to Colvvood 
Bay ; for if you do...." " What then ?" 
<c You seal your sister's death." As she 
uttered these words, Lady Margaret look- 
ed upon the duke in agony, and retired. 



GLENARVON. 229 



CHAPTER XXVII. 



The duke continued many moments on 
the spot where she had left him, without 
lifting his eyes from the ground — with- 
out moving, or speaking, or giving the 
smallest sign of the deep feelings by 
which he was overpowered ; when sud- 
denly Lord Glenarvon was announced. 

The duke started back :— he would 
have denied him his presence. It was 
too late:— Glenarvon was already in the 
room. The cold dews stood upon his 
forehead ; his eye was fixed ; his air was 
wild. " I am come to restore your son, 5 ' 
he said, addressing the duke. " Are 
you prepared for my visit ? Has Lady Mar- 
garet obeyed my command, and con- 
fessed ?" " I thought," said the duke, 
" that you had left Ireland. For your 



f30 GLENARVON. 

presence at this moment, my lord, I was 
not prepared." " Whom does Lady 
Margaret accuse ?." said Lord Glenarvon 
tremulously. "One whom I know not," 
said the duke — " Viviani." Glenarvon's 
countenance changed, as with a look of 
exultation and malice he repeated : — 
if Yes, it is Yiviani." He then briefly 
stated that Count Gondimar, having ac- 
companied Lady Margaret from Italy to 

Ireland in the year — had concealed 

under a variety of disguises a young 
Italian, by name Yiviani. To him the 
charge of murdering the heir of Delaval 
was assigned ; but he disdained an act so 
horrible and base. La Crusca, a wretch 
trained in Yiviani's service, could answer 
for himself as to the means he took to 
deceive the family. Lord Glenarvon 
knew nothing of his proceedings : he 
alone knew, he said, that the real Marquis 
of Delaval was taken to Italy, whence 
Gondimar, by order of Viviani some years 
afterwards, brought him to England, pre- 



GLENARYON. 23T 

senting him to Lady Avondale as her 
page. 

In corroboration of these facts, he was 
ready to appeal to Gondimar, and some 
others, who knew of the transaction. 
Gondimar, however, Lord Glenarvon 
acknowledged, was but a partial witness, 
having been kept in ignorance as to the 
material part of this affair, and having 
been informed by Lady Margaret that 
Zerbellini, the page, was in reality her 
son. It was upon this account that, in 
the spring of the year *"***, suddenly 
mistrusting Viviani, Lady Margaret en- 
treated Count Gondimar to take the boy 
back with him to Italy; and not being 
able to succeed in her stratagems, on ac- 
countof himself (Glenarvon) being watch- 
ful of her, she had basely worked upon 
the child's feelings, making him suppose 
he was serving Calantha by hiding her 
necklace from his (Lord Glenarvon's) 
pursuit. On wnich false accusation of 



232 GLENARVON. 

theft, they had procured the boy to be 
sent from the castle. 

Lord Glenarvon then briefly stated, 
that he had rescued him from Gon- 
dimar's hands, with the assistance of a 
servant named Macpherson, and some of 
his followers ; and that ever since he had 
kept him concealed at the priory. " And 
where is he at this time?" said the duke. — 
" He was with Lord Glenarvon's cousin, 
Colonel de Ruthven, at Colwood Bay." — 
" And ,when could the duke speak with 
Viviani?" — " When it was his pleasure." 
" That night?" — " Yes, even on that very 
night."-" What witness could Lord Glen- 
arvon bring, as to the truth of this ac- 
count, besides Viviani ?" — " La Crusca, 
an Italian, from whom Macpherson had 
received the child when in Italy — La 
Crusca the guilty instrument of Vi- 
viani's crimes/' — " And where was La 
Crusca ?" — " Madness had fallen on him 
after the child had been taken from him 



GLENARVON. 233 

by Viviani's orders : he had returned 
in company with Macpherson to Ireland. 
Lord Glenarvon had offered him an 
asylum at his castle. Lady Margaret one 
day had beheld him ; and Gondimar had 
even fainted upon seeing him suddenly, 
having repeatedly been assured that he 
was dead.''-— " By whom was he informed 
that he was dead }" — ct By Lady Margaret 
and Vivian i."-" Was Gondimar then aware 
of this secret ?" — (i No; but of other se- 
crets, in which La Crusca and Viviani 
were concerned, equally horrible per- 
haps, but not material now to name.'' 

This conversation having ended, the 
duke ordered his carriage, and prepared 
to drive to Colwood Bay. Lord Glen- 
arvon promised in a few hours to meet 
him there, and bring with him Viviani. 
" If he restore my child, and confesses 
every thing," said the duke, before he 
left Lord Glenarvon, " pray inform him, 
that I will promise him a pardon." " He 
values not such promise/' said Glen- 



234 GLENARVON. 

arvon scornfully. m Lady Margaret's 
life and honour are in his power. Vi- 
viani can confer favours, but not receive 
them." The duke started., and looked 
full in the face of Glenarvon. " Who is 
this Viviani ?" he said, in a tone of voice 
loud and terrible. " An idol/' replied 
Glenarvon, " whom the multitude have 
set up for themselves, and worshipped, 
forsaking their true faith, to follow 
after a false light— a man who is in 
love with crime and baseness— -one, of 
whom it has been said, that he hath an 
imagination of fire playing around a 
heart of ice— one whom the never-dying 
worm feeds on by night and day— a 
hypocrite/' continued Glenarvon, with a 
smile of bitterness, " who wears a mask 
to his friends, and defeats his enemies by 
his unexpected sincerity—a coward, 
with more of bravery than some who 
fear nothing; for, even in his utmost 
terror, he defies that which he fears." 
" And where is this wretch ?" said the 



GLENARVON. 235 

duke: " what dungeon is black enough 
to hold him ? What rack has been pre- 
pared to punish him for his crimes?" 
" He is as I have said," replied Glen- 
arvon triumphantly, " the idol of the 
fair, and the great. Is it virtue that 
women prize? Is it honour and renown 
they worship ? Throw but the dazzling 
light of genius upon baseness, and cor- 
ruption, and every crime will be to them 
but an additional charm/' 

46 Glenarvon," said the duke gravely, 
and as if conquering some sudden emo- 
tion, " you have done me much wrong; 
but I mean not now to reproach you. If 
the story which you have told me is 
true, I must still remember that I owe 
my son's safety to you. Spare Lady 
Margaret ; keep the promise you have 
solemnly given me ; and at the hour 
you have mentioned, meet me with the 
Italian and this boy at Colwood Bay.'* 
Glenarvon left the presence of the duke 
immediately, bowing in token of assent. 



226 GLENARVON. 

The Duke then rang the bell, and or- 
dered his carriage. It was about four in 
the afternoon when he left the castle : 
he sent a message to Lady Margaret 
and Mrs. Seymour, to say that he had 
ordered dinner to await his return at 
seven. 



OLENARVON. 23J 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 



No sooner had the duke, accompanied 
by Macpherson, who waited for him, left 
the castle, than Mrs. Seymour sought 
Lady Margaret in her apartment. The 
door was fastened from within :— it was 
in vain she endeavoured by repeated 
calls to obtain an answer— a strange 
fear occurred to her mind. — There were 
rumours abroad, of which she was not 
wholly ignorant. Was it credible that a 
sudden paroxysm of despair had led 
her to the last desperate measure of 
frantic woe ? The God of mercy forbid ! 
Still she felt greatly alarmed. The 
duke returned not, as he had promised : 
the silence of the castle was mournful; 
and terror seemed to have spread itself 
amorlgst all the inhabitants, Mac Allain 



235 6LENARV0N. 

entered repeatedly, asking Mrs. Seymour 
if the duke were not to have returned at 
the hour of dinner; and whether it was 
true that he was gone out alone. Eight, 
nine, and ten sounded ; but he came 
not. 

Mac Allain was yet speaking, when 
shrieks, long and repeated, were heard. 
The doors burst open ; servants affrighted 
entered; confusion and terror were ap- 
parent in all. " They are come, they 
are come!" exclaimed one. "We are 
going to be murdered. The rebels have 
broken into the park and gardens: we 
hear their cry. Oh, save us -save us 
from their fury ! See, see, through the 
casement you may behold them : with 
their pikes and their bayonets, they are 
destroying every thing they approach/' 
Mac Allain threw up the sash of the 
window : the servants crowded towards 
it. The men had seized whatever arms 
they could find : the women wept aloud. 
By the light of the moon, crowds were 



-GLENA.RVON. 239 

^een advancing through the wood and 
park, giving the alarm by one loud and 
terrific yell. They repeated one word 
more frequently than any other. As they 
approached, it was plainly distinguished : 
— murder! murder! was the cry ; and the 
inhabitants of the castle heard it as a 
summons to instant death. The Count 
Viviani's name and Lady Margaret's 
were then wildly repeated. The doors 
were in vain barricadoed and defended 
from within. The outer courts were so 
tumultuously crowded, that it became 
dangerous to pass. Loud cries for the 
duke to appear were heard. 

A rumour that the heir of Delaval 
was alive had been circulated — that blood 
had been spilt. " Let us see our young 
lord, long life to him !" was shouted in 
transports of ecstasy by the crowd ; 
whilst yells of execration mingled against 
his persecutor and oppressor. " Return : 
shew yourself to your own people: no 
ruffian hand shall dare to harm you* 



240 GLENARVON. 

Long life to our prince, and our king !" — 
Suddenly a bugle horn from a distance 
sounded. Three times it sounded ; and 
the silence became as general as the 
tumult previously had been. In the 
space of a few moments, the whole of 
the crowd dispersed ; and the castle was 
again left to loneliness and terror. 

The inhabitants scarcely ventured to 
draw their breath. The melancholy 
howling of the watch-dogs alone was 
heard. Mrs, Seymour, who had shewn 
a calm fortitude in the hour of clanger, 
now sickened with despondency. " Some 
direful calamity has fallen upon this 
house. The hand of God is heavy upon 
us." She prayed to that Being who 
alone can give support: and calm and 
resigned, she awaited the event. It was 
past three, and no news of the Duke. 
She then summoned Mac Allain, and 
proposing to him that he should arm 
himself and some others, she sent them 
forth in quest of their master. They 



GLENARVON. §41 

went; and till their return, she remained 
in dreadful suspense. Lady Margaret's 
door being still locked, she had it forced; 
but no one was there. It appeared she 
had gone out alone, possibly in quest of 
her brother. 



VOL. III. M 



242 GLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXIX, 



When the duke arrived at Colwood 
Bay, he found Colonel de Ruthven pre- 
pared to receive him ; but was surprised 
and alarmed at hearing that Lord Glen- 
arvon had that very morning sent for 
Zerbellini, and neither himself nor the 
boy had been seen since. The duke 
then informed the colonel that Lord 
Glenarvon had been at the castle about 
an hour since; but this only made the 
circumstance of his having taken away 
the child more extraordinary. It was 
also singular that Lord Glenarvon had 
engaged a packet the night before, and 
had taken leave of his friends, as if at that 
moment preparing to sail : his presence 
at the castle was, however, a full answer 
to the latter report: and whilst every 



GLENARVON. 248' 

enquiry was set on foot to trace whither 
he could be gone, the duke requested 
permission of the colonel himself to exa- 
mine the maniac La Crusca and Mac- 
pherson : the former was still at St. Alvin 
Priory — the latter immediately obeyed 
the summons, and prepared to answer 
every question that was put to him. 

The duke first enquired of this man 
his name, and the principal events of his 
life. Macpherson, in answer to these 
interrogations, affirmed, that he was a 
native of Ireland ; that he had been taken 
a boy into the service of the late Coun- 
tess of Glenarvon, and had been one of 
the few who had followed her into Italy ; 
that after this he had accompanied her 
son, the young earl, through many 
changes of life and fortune; but having 
been suddenly dismissed from his ser- 
vice, he had lost sight of him for above a 
year; during which time he had taken 
into his pay a desperado, named L* 
M 2 



244 GLENARVON. 

Crusca, who had continued with him 
whilst he resided at Florence. 

After this, Macpherson hesitated, 
evaded, and appeared confused ; but sud- 
denly recollecting himself: " I then be- 
came acquainted/' lie said, " with the 
Count Viviani, a young Venetian, who 
took me immediately into his service, 
and who, residing for the most part in 
the palace belonging to Lady Margaret 
at Naples, passed his time in every ex- 
cess of dissipation and amusement which 
that town afforded. In the spring of the 
year, the count accompanied Lady Mar- 
garet secretly to Ireland, and, after much 
conversation with me, and many remon- 
strances on my part, gave me a positive 
command to carry off the infant Marquis 
of Delaval, but to spare his life. He 
menaced me with employing La Crusca 
in a more bloody work, if I hesitated ; 
and, having offered an immense bribe, 
interest, affection for himself, and fear, 



GLENARVON, 243 

induced me to obey. My daughter," 
continued Macpherson, " was in the 
power of the count: — she had listened 
too readily to his suit. 4 I will expose 
her to the world — I will send her forth 
unprovided/ he said, ' if you betray me, 
or refuse to obey." 

" No excuses," cried the duke, 
fiercely : " proceed. It is sufficient you 
willed the crime. Now tell me how 
amongst you you achieved it." " I 
must be circumstantial in my narrative," 
said Macpherson ; " and since your 
grace has the condescension to hear me, 
you must hear all with patience; and 
first, the Count Viviani did not slay the 
Lord of Delaval : he did not employ me 
in that horrid act. I think no bribe or 
menace could have engaged me to per- 
form it: but a strange, a wild idea, oc- 
curred to him as he passed with me 
through Wales, in our journey hither; and 
months and months succeeded, before it 
was in my power to execute his com- 
m 3 



246 GLENARVON. 

mands. He sent me on a fruitless search 
to discover an infant who in any degree 
might resemble the little marquis. Hav- 
ing given up the pursuit as impossible, 
I returned to inform the count of the 
failure of his project. A double reward 
was proffered, and I set forth again, 
scarce knowing the extent of his wishes* 
scarce daring to think upon the crime I 
was about to commit. 

" It is useless to detail my adventur s, 
but they are true. I can bring many 
undoubted witnesses of their truth : and 
there yet lives an unhappy mother, a 
lonely widow, to recount them. It was 
one accursed night, when the deemons of 
hell thought fit to assist their agent — 
after having travelled far, I stopped at an 
inn by the road-side, in the villiage of 
Mary vale, in the County of Tyrone. I 
called for a horse ; my own was worn out 
with fatigue : I alighted, and drank deep 
of the spirits that were brought me, for 
they drove away all disturbing thoughts : 



GLENARVON. 247 

—but, as I lifted the cup a second time 
to my lips, my eyes fixed themselves 
upon a child ; and I trembled with agita- 
tion, for I saw my prey before me. The 
woman of the house spoke but little 
English ; but she approached me, and 
expressed her fear that I was not well. 
Sensible that my emotion had betrayed 
me, I affected to be in pain, offered 
her money, and abruptly took leave. 
There was a wood not far from the 
town. 

" On a subsequent evening I allured 
her to it : the baby was at her breast. I 
asked her its name.—' Billy Kendal/ 
she answered, ' for the love of its father 
who rights now for us at a distance.' 'I 
will be its father/ I said. But she chid 
me from her, and was angrily about to 
leave me: striking her to the earth, I 
seized the child. The age, the size— 
every thing corresponded. I had bar- 
tered my soul for gold, and difficulties 
and failures had not shaken me* I had 
m 4 



24S GLENARVON. 

made every necessary preparation s aad 
all being ready and secure, I fled ; nor 
stopped, nor staid, nor spoke to man, nor 
shewed myself in village or in town, till I 
arrived at my journey's end." 

I arrived in the neighbourhood of 
Castle Delaval, and continued to see 
my master, without being recognized 
by any other. He appeared much 
agitated when he first beheld me. I 
cannot forget his smile. He desired me 
to keep the boy with me out at sea 
that night ; and directing me to climb 
from the wherry up the steep path of 
the western cliff (where but yesterday 
I stood when the colonel sent for me), 
he promised to place food, and all that 
was requisite for us, near the chapel. 
' But trust no one with your secret/ he 
said : ' let not the eye of man glance 
upon you. Meet me in the night, in the 
forest near the moor, and bring the 
child. Mind that you do not utter one 
word, and let it not have the power of 



GLENARVON. 249 

disturbing us. Do you understand me?' 
J Yes,' I said, and shuddered because 
I did so. My master saw me shrink, 
and reminded me of the reward. I un- 
dertook punctually to fulfil every in- 
junction : it was now too late to repent. 
But, oh, my lord ! when I think of that 
night j that accursed night, what horror 
comes over me ! 

" It was past twelve o'clock when I 
took the boy up from a sweet sleep, and 
fastening the wherry near the foot of the 
rock, with one hand I climbed the steep 
ascent, while with the other I carefully 
held the child. In one part the cliff is 
almost perpendicular: my foot slipped, 
and I was in danger of falling ; but I re- 
covered myself with much exertion. 
There was no moon ; and the wind whis- 
tled loud and shrilly through the church- 
yard. It is, I believe, two miles from 
thence to the castle ; but through the 
thick wood I now and then caught a 
glimpse of its lighted portico; and, re- 
M 5 



950 GLENARVON. 

membering its former gaiety, ' you re- 

* joice to-night/ I thought, ' with music 
4 and dancing, regardless of my sorrows, 

* or the hardships of others, even more 

* wretched than I : but to-morrow, the 

* black foot of care shall tread heavy even 
4 upon you/ 

46 The wind rustled among the trees. 
This was the spot in which I was to 
meet my employer. I heard a step ; it 
approached ; and I pressed the child 
nearer to my bosom. ' Some mother is 
weeping for you sorely, little boy,' I 
said ; 4 and would give all she is worth 
to see that pretty face again. She little 
dreams of your hard fate, or into what 
rough hands her treasure has fallen ; but 
I will not harm thee, boy. Hard must 
be the heart that could/ Such were my 
thoughts: God be witness, such were 
my intentions at that moment. I now 
saw La Crusca ; and well I knew by the 
villain's countenance his horrible inten- 
tions : the lantern he carried glimmered 



GLENARVON. 251 

through the trees: his eyes glared as in 
a low voice he enquired for the boy : 
and, as he was still concealed from him 
under my cloak, he seized me by the 
arm, and asked me why I trembled. He 
urged me instantly to deliver the child to 
him ; but finding that I hesitated, he 
rudely grasped him ; and the boy waking 
suddenly, cried aloud, * Did not our 
master tell you to prevent this }' said 
the Italian, enraged, as, bidding the child 
be at peace, he abruptly fled with it. I 
heard not long after one piteous shriek* 
and then all was silent. 

" I returned to the boat. All there 
looked desolate. The little companion 
who had cheered the lonely hours was 
no more. The mantle remained. I threw 
.myself upon it. Suddenly, upon the 
waves I thought I saw the figure of the 
child. I heard its last cry. I ever hear 
that piteous cry. The night was dark, 
the winds blew chilly over the vast wa- 



2.52 GLENARVOX. 

ter : my own name was pronounced in a 
low voice from the cliff. 

" It was my lord — " "Who?" cried the 
duke. " My master, the Count Viviani. 
He had returned to give me further in- 
structions. I ascended the fearful steep, 
and listened in silence ; but, before he left 
me, I ventured to ask after the boy, 
* Leave him to me/ said the count, in an 
angry tone. * He is safe : he shall sleep 
well to-night.' Saying this, he laughed. 
' O ! can you jest V I said. ' Aye, that 
I can. This is the season of jesting,' 
he answered ; ' for, mark my words, 
Macpherson r we have done a deed shall 
mar our future merriment, and stifle the 
heart's laugh for ever. Such deeds as 
these bleach the hair white before its 
time, give fearful tremblings to the limbs, 
and make man turn from the voice of 
comfort on the bed of death. We have 
sent a cherub thither,' continued the 
count, pointing up to heaven, ■ to 



GLENARVON, 253 

stand a fearful testimony against us, and 
exclude us for ever from its courts.' 

iC Saying which, he bade me hasten to 
some distant countrj'. He entrusted the 
Lord of Delaval to my care, repeated his 
instructions, and for the second time that 
night departed. The morning sun, when it 
rose, all glorious, and lighted the eastern 
sky with its beams, found me still mo- 
tionless upon the cliff. My eye invo- 
luntarily fixed upon the great land-mark, 
the mountains which extend behind yon 
beautiful valley; but, starting at the 
thought of the crime I had committed, I 
turned for ever from them. I thought 
never again to behold a prospect so little 
in unison with my feelings. It is many 
years since I have seen it ; but now I 
can gaze on nothing else. My eyes are 
dim with looking upon the scene, and 
with it upon the memory of the past/' 

Macpherson paused : — He turned to 
see what impression his narrative had 
made on the duke: he was utterly 



254 CLENARVON. 

silent. — Macpherson therefore continued : 
,c So far we had succeeded but too well 
in our black attempt ; but the fair boy 
intrusted to me sickened under the hard- 
ships to which I was obliged to expose 
him. The price agreed on was paid 
me. La Crusca joined me ; and together 
we reared the child in a foreign country, 
so as I hope to do him honour. But 
a dark malady at times had fallen upon 
La Crusca. He would see visions of 
horror ; and the sight of a mother and a 
child threw him into frenzy, till it 
became necessary to confine him. I had 
not heard for some time from my master. 
1 wished to bring my young charge back 
to his own country, before I died. I 
wrote; but no one answered myl etters. 
I applied to the Count Gondimar ; but 
he refused to hear me. 

46 1 had assumed another name ; I lived 
apparently in happiness and affluence. 

" Accompanied by La Crusca, I return- 
ed first to England and then to Ireland. 



GLENARVON. 955 

I sought Count Gondimar; but he evaded 
my enquiries; and having taken the child 
from me, insisted upon my silence, and 
dispatched me to Ireland with letters for 
the Lord Glenarvon, who immediately re- 
cognized and received me." " Where ?" 
cried the duke. Macpherson hesitated.*— 
" At the priory, where he then resided, 
and where he remained concealed: La 
Crusca was likewise permitted to dwell 
there; but of this story my lord was ig- 
norant till now." " That is false/' said 
the duke. " One morning La Crusca be- 
held Lady Margaret even as in a vision, 
on that spot to which I every day re- 
turned ; but he had not power to speak. 
Madness, frenzy had fallen on him. 
Lord Glenarvon protected him. His 
house was also my only refuge. He ga- 
thered from me much of the truth of what 
I have related, but I never told him all. I 
durst not speak till now. He was deeply 
moved with the wrongs of the injured 
boy ; he vowed to revenge them ; but he 



%56 GLENARVON, 

has forgotten his promise; he has left us, 
he has forsaken us. I am now in the ser- 
vice of another : this gentleman will be- 
friend me; and the Duke of Altamonte 
will not turn from the voice of his mi- 
serable servant." 

" Where }" said the duke starting, 
" where did you say Viviani, that damned 
Italian, had once concealed the child ? 
He is there now perhaps ! there, there let 
us seek him. ,, — " In the chapel," said 
Macpherson hesitating, " there is a vault, 
of which he retains the key ; and there is 
a chamber in the ruined turret, where I 
have ofttimes passed the night. " " Let 
us hasten there this instant," said the 
duke.—' 6 What hour is it ?" " Nine." 
M Oh ! that it may not be too late ! that he 
may not already have taken advantage of 
the darknessofeveningto escape !" Saying 
this, the duke and Colonel de Ruthven 
having previously given orders to the ser- 
vants to watch Macpherson carefully, 
drove with all possible haste to the chapel, 



GLENARVON. H5j 

near the Abbey of Belfont. Hut still they 
hoped that Vivian i was their friend- 
He could have no motive in concealing 
the child : his only wish was probably to 
restore him, and by this means make 
terms for himself. With such thoughts 
they proceeded to the appointed spot. 
And it is there that for some moments 
we must leave them. The duke was 
convinced in his own mind who his real 
and sole enemy was; he was also firmly 
resolved not to let him escape : he knewr 
also what part of Macpherson's narrative 
to believe. 



c 25& GLEKARYOK. 



CHAPTER XXX. 



Viviani had long and repeatedly me- 
naced Lady Margaret with vengeance. 
In every moment of resentment, on every 
new interview, at every parting scene, 
revenge, immediate and desperate, was 
the cry ; but it had been so often repeated, 
and so often had proved a harmless threat, 
that it had at length lost all effect upon 
her. She considered him as a depraved and 
wealc character— base enough to attempt 
the worst; but too cowardly to carry his 
project into effect. She knew him not. 
That strong, that maddening passion 
which had taken such deep root in his 
soul, still at times continued to plead 
for her ; and whilst hope, however falla- 
cious, could be cherished by him, he 
would not at once crush her beyond 



GLENARVON. 259 

recovery. A lesser vengeance had not 
gratified the rage of his bosom ; and the 
certainty that the menaced blow when it 
fell would overwhelm them both in one 
fate, gave him malignant consolation. 

Her renewed intercourse with Lord 
Dartford he had endured. Lord Dart* 
ford had prior claims to himself; and 
though it tortured him to see them in 
each other's society, he still forbore: 
but when he saw that he was the mere 
object of her hate, of her ridicule, of hti 
contempt, his fury was beyond all con- 
troul. He wrote to her, he menaced her; 
he left her, he returned ; but he felt his 
own little importance in the unprovoked 
calm with which she at all times receiv- 
ed him: and maddening beyond endur- 
ance, " This is the moment," he cried : 
4i now, now I have strength to execute 
my threats, and nothing shall change 
me." 

It was in London that Count VivianL 
having left Lady Margaret in anger, ad» 



260 GLENARVOtf. 

dressed Buchanan by letter. " Leave 
your steeds, and your gaming tables, 
and your libertine associates," he said, 
" Senseless and heartless man, awake at 
last. Oh ! you who have never felt, 
whose pulse has never risen with the 
burning fires of passion, whose life, un- 
varied and even, has ever flowed the 
same—awake now to the bitterness of 
horror, and learn that you are in my 
power." Buchanan heard the tale with 
Vncredulity; but when obliged to credit 
it, he felt with all the poignancy of real 
misery. The scene that took place be- 
tween himself and his mother had left 
him yet one doubt: upon that doubt he 
rested. It was her solemn asseveration 
of innocence. But the heart that is ut- 
terly corrupted fears not to perjure itself; 
and he continued in suspense ; for he be- 
lieved her guilty. 

Such was the state of things, when 
Viviani, having by fraud again possessed 
himself of Zerbellini, sought Lady Mar- 



GLENARVON. 26l 

garet, and found her a few moments 
after the duke had left the castle. He 
well knew whither he was gone ; he 
well knew also, that it was now too late 
to recall the vengeance he had decreed ; 
yet one hope for Lady Margaret and 
himself remained : — would she fly with 
him upon that hour. All was prepared 
for flight in case he needed it ; and with 
her, what perils would he not encounter. 
He entered the castle, much disguised : 
he made her the proposal ; but she re- 
ceived it with disdain. One thing alone 
she wished to know ; and that she so- 
lemnly enjoined him to confess to her : 
was Zerbellini the real heir of Delaval ? 
—was she guiltless of the murder of 
her brother's child? " You shall see him, 
speak with him," said Viviani, " if you 
will follow me as soon as the night is 
dark. I will conduct you lo him, and 
your own eyes and ears shall be con- 
vinced. 3 ' 
So saying, he left her to all the horrors 



262 GLEXARVOtf. 

of her own black imagination ; but, re- 
turning at the time appointed, he led 
her to the wood, telling her that the boy 
was concealed in an apartment of the 
turret, close to the chapel. Suddenly 
pausing, as he followed the path : — 
" This is the very tree," he cried, turning 
round, and looking upon her fiercely; 
" yes, this is the spot upon which La 
Crusca shed the blood of an innocent 
for you." " Then the boy was really 
and inhumanly murdered," said Lady 
Margaret, pale with horror at the thought, 
but still unappalled for herself. " Yes, 
lady, and his blood be on your soul ! 
Do you hope for mercy ?" he cried, seiz~ 
ing her by the arm. " Not from you." 
" Dare you appeal to heaven ?" She 
would not answer. " I must embrace 
thee here, lady, before we for ever part." 
" Monster!" sakl Lady Margaret, seeing 
the dsgger in his hand, as he placed his 
arm around her neck. " I have already 
resolved that I will never survive public 



GLENARVON. 263 

infamy ; therefore I fear you not ; neither 
will I endure your menaces, nor your 
insulting and barbarous caresses. Trifle 
not with one who knows herself above 
you— who defies and derides your power. 
I dare to die/' And she gazed unawed 
at his closely locked fist. " Stab here— 
stab to this heart, which, however lost 
and perverted, yet exists to execrate thy 
crimes, and to lament its own." " Die 
then— thus— thus," said her enraged., her 
inhuman lover, as he struck the dagger, 
without daring to look where his too 
certain hand had plunged it. Lady 
Margaret shrunk not from the blow ; 
but fixing her dying eyes reproachfully 
upon him, closed them not, even when 
the spirit of life was gone. 

Her murderer stood before her, as if 
astonished at what he had dared to do. 
" Lie there, thou bleeding victim," 
he said, at length pausing to contemplate 
his bloody work. " Thou hast thought 
it no wrong to violate thy faith — to make 



264 GLENARVON. 

a jest of the most sacred duties. Men have 
been thy victims: now take the due 
reward of all thy wickedness. What art 
thou, that I should have idolized and 
gazed with rapture on that form ? — 
something even more treacherous and 
perverted than myself. Upon thee, 
traitress, I revenge the wrongs of many ; 
and when hereafter, creatures like thee, 
as fair, as false, advance into the world, 
prepared even from childhood to make a 
system of the arts of love, let them, 
amidst the new conquests upon which 
they are feeding their growing vanity, 
hear of thy fate and tremble." 

Saying these words, and flying with a 
rapid step, his dagger yet reeking with 
the blood of his victim, he entered the 
town of Belfont, at the entrance of which 
he met St. Clare, and a crowd of fol- 
lowers, returning from the last meeting at 
Inis Tara. " Hasten to the castle," he 
cried, addressing all who surrounded 
him ; " sound there the alarum ; for 



GLENARVON. $65 

the heir of Altamonte is found; Lady 
Margaret Buchanan is murdered. —Has- 
ten there, and call for the presence of the 
duke; then return and meet me at the 
chapel, and I will restore to your gaze 
your long forgotten and much injured 
lord." The people in shouts re-echoed 
the mysterious words, but the darkness 
of evening prevented their seeing the 
horrid countenance of the wretch who ad- 
dressed them. St. Clare alone recognised 
the murderer, and fled. A iviani then re- 
turned alone to the chapel, 



vol. m. 



%66 CLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXXI 



The carriage which had conveyed the 
Duke of Altamonte and Colonel De 
Ruthven from Colwood Bay could not 
proceed along that narrow path which 
led across the wood to the chapel ; 
they were therefore compelled to alight; 
and, hastening on along the road with 
torches and attendants, they enquired 
repeatedly concerning the loud shouts 
and yells which echoed in every direction 
around them. 

They were at some little distance from 
the chapel, when the duke paused in 
horror.— The moonlight shone upon the 
bank, at the entrance of the beech trees; 
and he there beheld the figure of a female 
as she lay extended upon the ground, 
covered with blood. Her own rash 



GLENARVON. 267 

band, he thought, had perhaps destroyed 
her. He approached,— it was Lady 
Margaret ! That proud spirit, which had 
so long supported itself, had burst its 
fetters. He gazed on her in surprise.— 
He stood a few moments in silence, as 
if it were some tragic representation he 
were called to look upon, in which he 
himself bore no part— some scene of hor- 
ror, to which he had not been previously 
worked up, and which consequently had 
not power to affect him. Her face was 
scarce paler than usual ; but there was a 
look of horror in her countenance, which 
disturbed its natural expression. In one 
hand, she had grasped the turf, as if 
the agony she had endured had caused a 
convulsive motion ; the other was stained 
with blood, which had flowed with much 
violence. It was strange that the wound 
was between her right shoulder and her 
throat, and not immediately perceivable, 
as she had fallen back upon it:— it was 
more than strange, for it admitted little 
w 2 



36S GLENARVON. 

doubt that the blow had not been in- 
flicted by herself. Yet, if inhumanly 
murdered, where was he who had dared 
the deed? The duke knelt beside her: 
—he called to her; but all mortal aid 
was ineffectual. 

The moon-beam played amidst the 
foliage of the trees, and lighted the plains 
around: — no trace of the assassin could 
be observed : — the loneliness of the scene 
was uninterrupted. A dark shadow now 
became visible upon the smooth surface 
of the green — was it the reflection of 
the tree— or was it a human form? It 
lengthened— it advanced from the thicket. 
The shapeless form advanced ; and the 
heart of man sunk before its approach ; 
for there is none who has looked upon 
the murderer of his kind without a feel- 
ing of alarm beyond that which fear 
creates. That black shapeless mass- 
that guilty trembling being, who, start- 
ing at his own shadow, slowly crept for- 
ward, then paused to listen— then ad- 



GLENARVOX. 269 

tranced with haste, and paused again,— 
now, standing upon the plain between 
the beech wood and the chapel, ap- 
peared like one dark solitary spot in the 
lonely scene. 

The duke had concealed himself; but 
the indignant spirit within prompted him 
to follow the figure, indifferent to the 
fate that might await on his temerity. 
Much he thought that he knew him by 
his air and Italian cloak ; but as his dis- 
guise had entirely shrouded his features, 
he could alone indulge his suspicions ; 
and it was his interest to watch him un- 
perceived. He, therefore, made sign to 
his attendants to conceal themselves in 
the wood ; and alone, accompanied by 
Colonel De Ruthven, he followed to- 
wards the chapel. There the figure 
paused, and seemed to breathe with dif- 
ficulty, slowly turning around to gaze 
if all were safe:— then, throwing his 
dark mantle back, shewed to tbe face of 
Heaven the grim and sallow visage of 

N 3 



270 GLENARVON. 

despair— -the glazed sunken eye of guilt 
—the bent cowering form of fear.— 
M Zerbellini," he cried, " Zerbellini, 
come down.— Think me not your enemy 
—I am your real friend, your preserver. 
—Come down, my child. With all but 
a brother's tenderness, I wait for you." 

Arouzed by this signal, a window 
was opened from an apartment adjoining 
the cloister; and a boy, lovely in youth, 
mournfully answered the summons. " Ol 
my kind protector!" he said, " I thought 
you had resolved to leave me to perish 
here. If, indeed, I am all you tell me— 
if you do not a second time deceive me, 
will you act by me as you ought ? Will 
you restore me to my father?" The 
voice, though soft and melodious, sound- 
ed so tremulously sad, that it imme- 
diately awakened the deepest compassion, 
the strongest interest in the duke. 
He eagerly advanced forward. Colonel 
De Ruthven entreated him to remain a 
few moments longer concealed. He 



GLENARVON. 271 

wished to know Viviani's intention; and 
they were near enough to seize him at 
any time, if he attempted to escape. 

They were concealed behind the pro- 
jecting arch of the chapel ; and whilst 
they beheld the scene, it was scarce pos- 
sible that the Italian should so turn him- 
self as to discover them. By the strong 
Jight of the moon, which stood all glo- 
rious and cloudless in the Heavens, and 
shone upon the agitated waves of the 
sea, the duke, though he could not yet 
see the face of the Italian, whose back 
was turned, beheld the features of Zer- 
bellini — that countenance which had 
often excited a strange emotion in his 
bosom, and which now appealed forcibly 
to his heart, as claiming an alliance with 
him. Let then the ecstasy of his feelings 
be imagined, whilst stili dubious, still 
involved in uncertainty and surprise. 
Viviani, having clasped the boy to his 
bosom, said in an impassioned voice 
these words:— " Much injured child, 
N 4 



£72 GLENARVON. 

thou loveliest blossom, early nipped in 
the very spring-time of thy life, pardon 
thy murderer. Thou art the heir and 
lord of all that the pride of man can de- 
vise ; yet victim to the ambition of a 
false and cruel woman, thou hast ex- 
perienced the chastening rod of adver- 
sity, and art now prepared for the fate 
that awaits thee. 

" Albert/* he continued, " let me be 
the first to address thee by that name, 
canst thou forgive, say, canst thou for- 
give me?" " I know as yet but imper- 
fectly/' said the hoy, " what your con- 
duct to me has been. At times I have 
trusted you as a friend, and considered 
you as a master/* " This is no time, my 
dear boy, for explanations-— are you pre- 
pared ? At least, embrace the wretch 
who has betrayed you. Let these tainted 
and polluted lips imprrss one last fond 
kiss upon thy cheek of rose, fair opening 
blossom, w hose young heart, spotless as 
that of cherubims on high, has early felt 



GLENARVON. 273 

the pressure of calamity. Smile yet once 
on me, even as in sleep 1 saw thee smile, 
when, cradled in princely luxury, the 
world before thee, I hurled thee from 
the vanities of life, and saved thy soul. 
Boy of my fondest interest, come to my 
heart, and with thy angel purity snatch 
the fell murderer from perdition. Then, 
when we sleep thus clasped together, in 
the bands of death, ascend, fair and un- 
polluted soul, ascend in white-robed in- 
nocence to Heaven, and ask for mercy 
of thy God for me V 

" Wretch V* cried the duke, rushing 
forward :-« but in vain his haste. With 
the strength of desperate guilt, the Italian 
had grasped the boy, and bearing him in 
sudden haste to the edge of the frightful 
chasm, he was on the point of throw- 
ing himself and the child from the top of 
it, when the duke, with a strong grasp, 
seizing him by the cloak, forcibly de- 
tained him. — " Wretch/* he cried, " live 
to feel a father's vengeance!— live to..., ty 
» 6 



274? GLENARVON. 

M To restore your son/' said Glenarvon? 
with a hypocritical smile, turning round 
and gazing on the duke. " Ha, whom 
do 1 behold! no Italian, no Viviani, but 
Glenarvon." " Yes, and to me, to 
me alone, you owe the safety of your 
child. Your sister decreed his death — I 
sav'd him. Now strike this bosom if you 
will."-"" What are you ? Who are you ?" 
said the duke. " Is it now alone that 
you know Glenarvon ?" he replied 
with a sneer. "I suspected this; but 
that name shall not save you."—" No- 
thing can save me," said Glenarvon, 
mournfully. " All hell is raging in my 
bosom. My brain is on fire. You can- 
not add to my calamities." " Why a 
second time attempt the life of my child ?" 
" Despair prompted me to the deed/' 
said Glenarvon, putting his. hand to his 
head : " all is not right here-— madness 
has fallen on me." '* Live, miserable 
sinner/' said the duke, looking upon 
him with contempt: " you are too bass 






GLENARVON. 275 

to die — I dare not raise my arm against 
you/' *• Yet I am defenceless," said 
Glenarvon, with a bitter smile, throwing 
the dagger to the ground. " Depart 
forever from me, 5 ' said the duke— -"your 
presence here is terrible to all." 

Zerbellini now knelt before his father, 
who, straining him closely to his bosom, 
wept over him. ---In a moment, yells and 
cries were heard ; and a thousand torches 
illumined the wood. Some stood in hor- 
ror to contemplate the murdered form of 
Lady Margaret; others, with shouts of 
triumph, conveyed the heir of Delavai 
to his home. Mrs. Seymour, Mac Al- 
lain, and others, received with transport 
the long lost boy: shouts of delight and 
cheers, long and repeated, proclaimed- 
his return. The rumour of these events 
spread far and wide; the concourse of 
people who crowded around to hear and 
inquire, and see their young lord, was 
immense. 

A. mournful silence succeeded. Lady- 



%76 GLENARVON. 

Margaret's body was conveyed to the 
castle. Buchanan followed in hopeless 
grief: he prest the duke's hand; then 
rushed from his presence. He sought 
St. Clare. " Where is Glenarvon ?" he 
cried. " In his blood, in his blood, I 
must revenge my own wrongs and a 
mother's death." Glenarvon was gone. 
One only attendant had followed him, 
O'Kelly, who had prepared every thing 
for his flight. Upon that night they had 
made their escape, O'Kelly, either igno- 
rant of his master's crimes, or willing to 
appear so, tried severely but faithful to 
the last. They sailed: they reached the 
English shore ; and before the rumour of 
these events could have had time to 
spread, Glenarvon had taken the com- 
mand of his ship, following with intent 
to join the British fleet, far away from 
his enemies and his friends. 

Macpherson was immediately seized. 
He acknowledged that Lord Glenarvon, 
driven to the necessity of concealing 



GLENARVOST. 277 

himself, had, with Lady Margaret and 
Count Gondimar's assistance, assumed 
the name of Viviani, until the time when 
he appeared in his own character at Sr 
Alvin Priory. The rest of the confes- 
sion he had privately made concerning 
the child was found to be true. Wit- 
nesses were called. The mother of Billy 
Kendall and La Crusca corroborated the 
fact. La Crusca and Macpherson re- 
ceived sentence of death. 



§?S GLEN A R VOX. 



CHAPTER XXXIF. 



The heart sometimes swells with a fore- 
thought of approaching dissolution ; and. 
Glenarvon, as he had cast many a home- 
ward glance upon his own native moun- 
tains, knew that he beheld them for the 
last time. Turning with sadness towards 
them, " Farewell to Ireland/' he cried; 
"and may better hearts support her 
rights, and revenge her wrongs ! I must 
away." Arrived in England, he travelled 
in haste; nor paused till he gained the 
port in which his ship was stationed. 
He sailed in a fair frigate with a gallant 
crew, and no spirit amongst them was so 
light, and no heart appeared more brave. 
Yet he was ill in health; and some ob- 
served that he drank much, and oft, and 
that he staited from his own thoughts; 



GLENARVON. 279 

then laughed and talked with eagerness^ 
as if desirous to forget them. <c I shall 
die in this engagement, " he said, ad^ 
dressing his first lieutenant. " Hardhead,, 
I shall die; but I care not. Only this 
remember— whatever other ships may do, 
let the Emerald be first and last in action. 
This is Glenarvon's command.— -Say, 
shall it be obeyed?^— -Upon the night 
after Lord Glenarvon had made his escape 
from Ireland, and the heir of Delaval had: 
been restored to his father, a stranger 
stood in the outer gates of St. Alvin 
Priory — It was the maniac La Crusca,, 
denouncing woe, and woe upon Glenar- 
von. St. Clare marked him as she re-. 
turned to the Wizzard's Glen, and,,. deeply 
agitated, prepared to meet her followers, 
It was late when the company were as- 
sembled. A flash of agony darted from, 
her eyes, whilst with a forced smile, she 
informed them that Lord Glenarvon had 
disgraced himself for ever; and, lastly,, 
had abandoned his country's cause. 



2S0 GLENARVON. 

" Shame on the dastard !" exclaimed 
one. " We'Ml burn his castle/' cried 
another. " Let us delay no longer/* 
was murmured by all. " There are false 
friends among us. This is the night for 
action. To-morrow— -v ho can look be- 
yond to-morrow }'' " Where is Cormac 
O'Leary?" said St. Clare. « He has 
been bribed to forsake us." " Where is 
Cobb O'Connor ¥' " He is appointed 
to a commission in the militia: he is 
a rat/* " Trust not the faithless var* 
let: they who take bribes deserve no 
trust." 

" OhjGodl^criedSt.Clareindignantly ; 
* have I lived to see my country bleeding; 
" and is there not one of her children firm 
" by her to the last?" M We are all united, 
" all ready to stand, and die, for our li- 
•* berty," replied her eager followers. 
" Lead on : the hour is at hand. At the 
* f given signal, hundreds, nay, thousands, 
" in every part of the kingdom, shall 
" rush at once to arms, and fight gallantly 



GLENARVON. 231 

" for the rights of man. The blast of the 
" horn shall echo through the mountains, 
" and, like the lava in torrents of fire, we 
" will pour down upon the tyrants who 
M oppress us. Lead on, St. Clare: hearts 
•■ of iron attend you. One soul unites 
" us — one spirit actuates our desires : 
" from the boundaries of the north, to 
" the last southern pcint of the island, 
te all await the signal." (e Hear it kings 
<f and oppressors of the earth/' said St. 
" Clare: " hear it, and tremble on your 
" thrones. It is the voice of the people, 
fi the voice of children you have trampled 
" upon, and betrayed. What enemy is 
" so deadly as an injured friend ?" 

Saying this, and rushing from the ap- 
plause with which this meeting conclud- 
ed, she turned to the topmost heights of 
Inis Tara, and gazed with melancholy 
upon the turrets of Belfont. Splendid 
was the setting ray of the sun upon the 
western wave ; calm was the scene before 
her: and the evening breeze blew softly 



2S2 GLENARVOX. 

around. Then placing herself near he* 
harp, she struck for the last time its 
chords. Niel Carter and Tyrone had 
followed her. Buchanan, and de Ruth- 
ven, Glenarvon's cousin, stood by her 
side. " Play again on thy harp the sweet 
sounds that are dear to me. Sing the 
song of other days," he said. " Oh, 
look not sad, St. Clare: I never will 
abandon thee." " My name is branded 
with infamy/' she cried : " dishonour 
and reproach assail me on every side. 
Black are the portals of hell— black are 
the fiends that await to seize my soul— 
but more black is the heart of iron that 
has betrayed me. Yet I will sing the 
song of the wild harper. I will sing for 
you the song of my own native land, of 
peace and joy, which never more must 
be mine/' 

" Hark ! what shriek of agony is 
that?" — " I hear nothing. " " It was his 

dying groan. What means your altered 

brow, that horrid look ?" It was the 



GLENARVON. 283 

sudden inspiration of despair. Her eye 
fixed itself on distant space in wild alarm 
—-her hair streamed-— as in a low and 
hurried tone she thus exclaimed, whilst 
gazing on the blue vault of heaven : 

<{ Curs'd be the fiend's detested art, 
Impress'd upon this breaking heart. 
Visions dark and dread I see. 
Chill'd is the life-blood in my breast. 
I cannot pause — I may not rest: 
I gaze upon futurity. 

u My span of life is past, and gone : 
My breath is spent, my course is done. 
Oh ! sound my lyre, one last sad strain ! 
This hand shall wake thy chords no more. 
Thy sweetest notes were breath'd in vain : 
The spell that gave them power is o'er." 

" Dearest, what visions affright you ?" 
said de Ruthen. " When shall the wishes 
of the people be gratified ? What sudden 
gloom darkens over your countenance ?* 
said her astonished followers. " Say, 
prophetess, what woe do you denounce 
against the traitor V In a low murmur- 
ing voice, turning to them, she answered : 



2S4 GLEN^RVON. 

Ki When turf and faggots crackling blaze ; 

When fire and torch-lights dimly burn ; 

When kinc at morn refuse to graze, 

And the green leaf begins to turn ; 

Then shall pain and sickuess come* 

Storms abroad, and woes at home. 

When cocks are heard to crow at ev'n, 

And swallows slowly ply their wing; 

When home-bound ships from port are driv'n, 

And dolphins roll, and mermaids sing; 

Then shall pain and sickness come, 

Storms abroad, and woes at home. 

When the black ox shall tread with his foot 

On the green growing saplin's tender root; 

Then a stranger shall stand in Glenarvon's half, 

And his portals shall blaze and his turrets shall fall; 

Glenarvon, the day of thy glory is o'er; 

Thou shalt sail from hence, but return no more, 

Sound mournfully, my harp; oh, breath a strain, 

More sad than that which Sion's daughters sung, 

When on the willow boughs their harps they hung, 

And wept for lost Jerusalem ! A train 

More sorrowful before my eyes appear : 

They come, in chains they come! The hour of fate 

is near. 
Erin, the heart's best blood shall flow for thee. 
It is thy groans I hoar — it is thy wounds I see-. 
Cold sleep thy heroes in their silent grave : 
The leopard lords it o'er their last retreat. 



GLENARVON. 2S5 

O'er hearts that once were free and brave, 
See the red banners proudly ware. 
They crouch, they fall before a tyrant's feet. 
The star of freedom sets, to rise no more. 
•Quench'd is the immortal spark in endless night: 
Never again shall ray so fair, so bright, 
Arise o'er Erin's desolated shore." 

No sooner had St. Clare ended, than 
Buchanan, joining with her and the rest 
of the rebels, gave signal for the long 
expected revolt. ce Burn his castle — de- 
stroy his land," said St. Ciare. Her fol- 
lowers prepared to obey : with curses 
loud and repeated, they vented their exe- 
cration. Glenarvon, the idol they had once 
adored, they now, perhaps, with greater 
show of justice despised. " Were he only 
a villain/^ said one, " I, for my part, 
would pardon him : but he is a coward 
and a hypocrite: when he commits a 
wrong he turns it upon another: he is a 
smooth dissembler, and while he smiles 
he stabs/* All his ill deeds were now 
collected together from far and near, to 
strengthen the violence of resentment 



236 GLENARVON. 

and hate. Some looked upon the lonely 
grave of Alice, and sighed as they passed. 
That white stone was placed over a 
broken heart, they said : another turned 
to the more splendid tomb of Calantha, 
and cursed him for his barbarity to their 
lady : u It was an ill return to so much 
love — we do not excuse her, but we 
must upbraid him." Then came they 
to the wood, and Buchanan, trembling 
with horror, spoke of his murdered mo- 
ther. " Burn his castles," they cried, 
" and execrate his memory from father 
to son in Belfont." St. Clare suddenly 
arose in the midst of the increasing- 
crowd, and thus, to inforce her purpose, 
again addressed her followers: — 

" Let not rage against Glenarvon ac- 
' tuate your resolves: whatever he may 
4 have done, 4 we shall not live to see his 
4 like again.' Shew not such pleasure 
4 in trampling upon the high: my ven- 
* geance is just resentment— but how 
4 has he offended you ? England, thou 
4 hast destroyed thy sister country," 



GLENARVON. 237 

she cried. " The despot before whom 
" you bow has cast slavery and ruin 
" upon us. O man — or rather less, O 
46 king, drest in a little brief authority, 
" beware, beware ! The hour of retri- 
" bution is at hand. Give back the pro- 
" perties that thy nation has wrested from 
" a suffering people. Thy fate is decreed ; 
" thy impositions are detected; thy word 
" passes not current among us: beware ! 
64 the hour is ripe. Woe to the tyrant who 
*' has betrayed his trust!" — These were 
the words which Elinor uttered as she 
gave the signal of revolt to her deluded 
followers. It was even during the dead 
of night, in the caverns of Inis Tara, 
where pikes and bayonets glittered by 
the light of the torch, and crowds on 
crowds assembled, while yells and cries 
reiterated their bursts of applause. 

The sound of voices and steps ap- 
proached. Buchanan, de Ruthven, and 
St. Clare, parted from each other. " It 
" will be a dreadful spectacle to see the 
" slaughter that shall follow/' said St, 



2SS GLENARVOX. 

•« Clare. i4 Brothers and fathers shall 
" fight against each other. The gather- 

44 ing storm has burst from within : it 
" shall overwhelm the land. One des- 
" perate effort shall be made for free- 

45 dom. Hands and hearts shall unite 
44 firm to shake off the shackles of ty« 
* 4 ranny — to support the rights of man 
44 — the glorious cause of independence* 

46 What though in vain we struggle— 
44 what though the sun that rose so 
44 bright in promise may set in darkness 
44 — the splendid hope was conceived— 
44 the daring effort was made ; and many 
44 a brave heart shall die in the sacred 
44 cause. What though our successors! 
fi be slaves, aye, willing slaves, shall 
44 not the proud survivor exult in the 
64 memory of the past! Fate itself can* 
44 not snatch from us that which once 
64 has been. The storms of contention 

44 may cease— the goaded victims may 

45 bear every repeated lash ; and in 
44 apaihy and misery may kneel before 
" the feet of the tyrants who forget 



GLENARV02C. 28$ 

11 their vow. But the spirit of liberty 
" once flourished at least; and every name 
" that perishes in its cause shall stand 
" emblazoned in eternal splendour— glo- 
M rious in brightness, though not immor* 
" tal in success. 3 ' 



VOL. Ill 



290 GLENARVON, 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 



" Hark!" said the prophetess : "'tis the 
screams of despair and agony : — my 
countrymen are defeated: — they fall :— 
but they do not fly. No human soul can 
endure this suspense: — all is dark and 
terrible : the distant roar of artillery ; the 
noise of conflict ; the wild tumultuous 
cries of war ; the ceaseless deafening 
fire. — Behold the rolling volumes of 
smoke, as they issue from the glen ! — 
What troop of horse comes riding over 
the down r — I too have fought. This 
band has dyed itself in the blood of a 
human being ; this breast is pierced; but 
the pang I feel is not from the wound of 
the bayonet. — Hark ! how the trumpet 
echoes from afar beyond the mountains. — 
They halt — they obey my last com- 



GLENARVON. 291 

mands — they light the beacons on the 
hill ! Belfont and St. Alvin shall blaze; 
the seat of his fathers shall fall ; and 
with their ashes, mine shall not mingle ! 
Glenarvon, farewell! Even in death I 
have not forgiven thee!— -Come, tardy 
steed, bear me once again ; and then 
both horse and rider shall rest in peace 
for ever." 

It was about the second hour of night 
when St. Clare reached Inis Tara, and 
stood suspended between terror and ex- 
ultation, as she watched the clouds of 
smoke and fire which burst from the 
turrets of Belfont. The ranks were every 
where broken : soldiers in pursuit were 
seen in detached parties, scouring over 
every part of the country: the valley of 
Altamonte rang with the savage contest,as 
horse to horse, and man to man, opposed 
each other. The pike and bayonet glit- 
tered in the moon-beam ; and the distant 
discharge of musketry, with the yell of 
triumph, and the groans of despair, 
o 2 



292 CLENARVON. 

echoed mournfully upon the blast. Elinor 
rose upon herj)anting steed to gaze with 
eager eyes towards Belfont. 

It was not the reflection of the kind- 
ling fires thai spread so deathlike a hue 
over her lips and face. She was bleeding 
to death from her wounds, while her 
eye darted forth, as if intently watching, 
with alternate hope and terror, that 
which none but herself could see— it 
was a man and horse advancing with fu- 
rious haste from the smoke and flames, 
in which he had appeared involved. He 
bore a lovely burthen in his arms, and 
shewing her Clare of Costollyas he pass- 
ed. " I have fulfilled your desire, proud 
woman/' he cried : " the castle shall 
burn to the earth : the blood of every 
enemy to his country shall be spilt. I 
have saved the son of Gleuarvon ; and 
when I have placed him in safety, shall 
de Ruthven be as dear ?" " Take my 
thanks, 5 ' said Elinor faintly, as the blood 
continued to flow from her wounds. 



GLENARVON. 293 

w Bear that boy to my aunt, the Abbess 
of Glanaa: tell her to cherish him for 
my sake. Sometimes speak to him of St. 
Clare. 

" Now, see the flame of vengeance how 
rt rises upon my view. Burn, fire; burn. 
Let the flames ascend, even to the Hea- 
vens. So fierce and bright are the last 
fires of love, now quenched, for ever and 
for ever. The seat of his ancestors shall 
fall to the lowest earth — dust to dust— 
earth to earth. What is the pride of 
man ?— The dream of life is past ; the 
song of the wild harper has ceased ; fa- 
mine, war, and slavery, shall encompass 
my country. 

ii But yet all its fond recollections suppressing, 
One last dying wish this sad bosom shall draw : 
O, Erin, an exile bequeaths thee his blessing ; 
Land of my forefathers, Eriu go bran." 

As she sung the last strain of the song, 
which the sons of freedom had learned, 
she tore the green mantle from her breast, 
o 3 



294? GLENARVOPC. 

and throwing it around the head of her 
steed, so that he could not perceive any 
external object, she pressed the spur into 
his sides, and gallopped in haste to the 
edge of the cliff, from which she beheld, 
like a sheet of fire reddening the heavens, 
the blazing turrets of Belfont. She heard 
the crash : she gazed in triumph, as 
millions of sparks lighted the blue vault 
of the heavens ; and volumes of smoke, 
curling from the ruins, half concealed the 
ravages of the insatiate flame. Then she 
drew the horn from her side, and sounding 
it loud and shrill from Heremon cliff, 
heard it answered from mountain to 
mountain, by all her armed confederates. 
The waves of the foaming billows now 
reflected a blood-red light from the scorch- 
ing flames 

Three hundred and sixty feet was the 
cliff perpendicular from the vast fathom- 
less ocean. "Glenarvcn, hurah ! Peace to 
the broken hearts! Nay, start not, Cla- 
rence: to horse, to horse! Thus charge; 



GLENARVON* 295 

it is for life and honour." The affrighted 
steed saw not the fearful chasm into 
which, goaded on by his rider, he in- 
voluntarily plunged. But de Ruthveti 
heard the piercing shriek he gave, as he 
sunk headlong into the rushing waters, 
which in a moment overwhelming both 
horse and rider, concealed them from the 
view of man. 



© 4> 



S{)6 OLENARVON. 



CHAPTER XXXIV, 



Short is the sequel of the history which 
is now to be related. The strong arm of 
power soon suppressed this partial rebel- 
lion. Buchanan was found stretched 
in death upon the field of battle, lovely 
in form even in that hour. 

The Marquis of Delaval, restored to 
his family and fortune, soon forgot the 
lesson adversity had taught. In the same 
follies and the same vanities his prede- 
cessors had passed their days, he likewise 
endeavoured to enjoy the remainder of his. 
The Duke of Altamonte lived long 
enough to learn the mournful truth, which 
pride had once prevented him from be- 
lieving, the perishableness of all human 
strength, the littleness of all human great- 
ness, and the vanity of every enjoyment 
this world can offer. Of Sophia, of Frances, 



GLEN A ETON. 997 

of Lady Dartford, what is there to relate ? 
They passed tranquilly with the thousands 
that sail daily along the stream of folly, 
uncensured and uncommended. Youth, 
beauty, and vanity, were their's : they en- 
joyed and suffered all the little pleasures, 
and all the little pains of life, and resisted 
all its little temptations. Lady Mande- 
ville and Lady Augusta Selwyn fluttered 
away likewise each pleasureable moment 
as frivolously, though perhaps less inno- 
cently ; then turned to weep for the errors 
into which they had been drawn, more 
humble in themselves when sorrow had 
chastened them. Then it was that they 
called to the flatterers of their prosperous 
davs ; but they were silent and cold: 
then it was that they looked for the friends 
who had encircled them once; but they 
were not to be found: and they learned, 
like the sinner they had despised, all 
that terror dreams of on its sick bed, 
and all that misery in its worst moments 
can conceive. Mrs. Seymour, in acts 
o 5 



298 GLENARVON. 

of piety and benevolence, retired to 
the Garden Cottage, a small estate the 
Duke of Altamonte had settled on her; 
and she found that religion and virtue, 
even in this world, have their reward. The 
coldness, the prejudice, which, in the 
presumption of her heart had once given 
her an appearance of austerity, softened 
in the decline of life ; and when she 
considered the frailty of human nature, the 
misery and uncertainty of existence, she 
turned not from the penitent wanderer 
who had left the right road, and spoke with 
severity alone of hardened and trium- 
phant guilt. Her life was one fair course 
of virtue ; and when she died, thousands 
of those whom she had reclaimed or be« 
friended followed her to the grave. 

As to the Princess of Madagascar, she 
lived to a good old age, though death re- 
peatedly gave her warning of his ap- 
proach. " Can any humiliation, any sa- 
crifice avail ?" she cried, in helpless 
alarm, seeing his continual advances, 
" Can I yet be saved ?" she said, ad- 



GLENARVON. 299 

dressing Hoiouskim, who often by a 
bold attempt had hurried away this grim 
king of terrors. " If we were to sacrifice 
the great nabob, and all our party, and our 
followers — can fasting, praying, avail? 
shall the reviewers be poisoned in an 
emince ! shall — " It was hinted to the 
princess at length, though in the gentlest 
manner possible, that this time, nor sa- 
crifice, nor spell, would save her. Death 
stood broad and unveiled before her. ie If 
then I must die," she cried, weeping bit- 
terly at the necessity, " send with haste 
for the dignitaries of the church. I would 
not enter upon the new world with- 
out a passport ; I, who have so scru- 
pulously courted favour every where 
in this. As to confession of sins, what 
have I to confess, Hoiouskim ? I appeal 
to you : is there a scribbler, however 
contemptible, whose pen I feared might 
one day be turned against me, that I 
have not silenced by the grossest flat- 
tery ? Is there a man or woman of note 
in any kingdom that I have not cram- 



300 GLENARVON. 

med with dinners, and little attentions, 
and presents, in hopes of gaining them 
over to my side ? And is there, unless 
the helpless, the fallen, and the idiot, 
appear against me, any one whom it 
was my interest to befriend that I have 
not sought for and won ? What minion 
of fashion, what dandy in distress, what 
woman of intrigue, who had learned to 
deceive with ease, have I not assisted ? 
Oh, say, what then are my sins, Hoiou- 
skim? Even if self-denial be a virtue, 
though I have not practised it myself, 
have I not made you and others daily 
and hourly do so V 9 Hoiouskim bowed 
assent. Death now approached too near 
for further colloquy. The princess, pinch- 
ing her attendants, that they might feel 
for what she suffered, fainted: yet with 
her dying breath again invoking the high 
priest: " Hoiouskim/' she cried, " obey 
my last command : send all my attendants 
after me, my eider down qui its, my coffee 
pots, my carriages, my confectioner : and 
tell the cook—- y> As she uttered thatshon 



GLEN AH VOX. 301 

but comprehensive monosyllable, she 
expired. Peace to her memory 1 I wish 
not to reproach her: a friend more false, 
a foe more timid yet insulting, a princess 
more fond of power, never before or since 
appeared in Europe. Hoiouskim wept 
beside her, yet, when he recovered (and 
your philosophers seldom die of sorrow) 
it is said he retired to his own country, 
and shrunk from every woman he after- 
wards beheld, for fear they should remind 
him of her he loved so well, and prove 
another Princess of Madagascar. It is 
said, that all the reviewers, who had bar- 
tered their independence for the comforts 
and flattery of Barbary House, died in the 
same year as the princess, of an epidemic 
disorder; but of this, who can be secure ? 
Perhaps, alas ! one yet remains to punish 
the flippant tongue, that dared to- assert 
they were no more. But to return from 
this digression. 



302 GLEXARYON. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



At Alien water the roses were yet in 
bloom : and the clematis and honey- 
suckle twined beneath the latticed win- 
dows, whilst through the flower gardens 
the stream of Allen flowed smooth and 
clear. Every object around breathed the 
fragrance of plants — the charms and 
sweets of nature. The heat of summer 
had not parched its verdant meads, and 
autumn's yellow tints had but just 
touched the shadowy leaf. Wearied 
with scenes of woe, Lord Avondale, 
having broken from society and friends, 
had retired to this retreat— a prey to the 
fever of disappointment and regret- 
wounded by the hand of his adversary, 
but still more effectually destroyed by the 
unkindness and inconstancy of his friend. 



GLENARVON. 303 

Sir Richard, before he departed to 
join the fleet, called at Allenwater.— 
Ci How is your master V y he said, in 
a hurried mani,er. " He is ill/' said 
James Collingwood. " He will rise 
from his bed no more/' Sir Richard 
pressed forward; and trembling exceed- 
ingly, entered Lord Avondale's room.--- 
" Who weeps so sadly by a dying father's 
bed }" " It is Harry Mowbrey, Calantha's 
child, the little comforter of many a 
dreary hour. The apt remark of enquir- 
ing youth, the joyous laugh of child- 
hood, have ceased. The lesson repeated 
daily to an anxious parent has been 
learned with more than accustomed as- 
siduity: but in vain. Nature at last 
has given way :— the pale emaciated 
form— the hand which the damps of 
death have chilled, feebly caresses the 
weeping boy.'' 

James Collingwood stood by his mas- 
ter's side, his sorrowful countenance 



304 cle or voir. 

contrasting sadly with that military air 
which seemed to disdain all exhibition 
of weakness ; and with him, the sole other 
attendant of his sufferings, Cairn of Cole- 
raine, who once in this same spot had 
welcomed Calantha, then a fair and 
lovely bride, spotless in vestal purity, 
and dearer to his master's heart than the 
very life-blood that gave it vigour. He 
now poured some opiate drops into a 
glass, and placed it in the feeble hand 
which was stretched forth to receive it. 
■• Ah ! father, do not leave me, " said his 
little son, pressing towards him. " My 
mother looked as- you do before she left 
me: and will you go also ? What then 
will become of me ? M Tears gushed into 
Lord Avondale's eyes, and trickled 
down his faded cheeks. " God will 
bless and protect my boy," he said, en- 
deavouring to raise himself sufficiently to 
press his little cherub lips. It was like 
a blushing rose, placed by the hand of a£- 



GLENARVON. 305 

fection upon a lifeless corpse—so health- 
ful bloomed the child, so pale the parent 
stem ! 

" How feeble you are, dear father/' 
said Harry : " your arms tremble when 
you attempt to raise me. I will kneel 
by you all this night, and pray to God to 
give you strength. You say there is 
none loves you. I love you ; and Col- 
lingwood loves you ; and many, many 
more. So do not lea^e us."— " And I 
love you too, dear, dear Harry," cried 
Sir Richard, his voice nearly suffocated 
by his grief; " and all who knew you 
honoured and loved you ; and curse 
be on those who utter one word against 
him. He is the noblest fellow that ever 
lived." " Uncle Richard, don't cry," said 
the boy : " it grieves him so to see you. 
Don't look so sad, dear father. Why is 
your hand so cold : can nothing warm 
it?" " Nothing, Harry.— Do not weep 
so bitterly, dear uncle." " I have suffered 
agony. Now, all is peace.— God bless 



306 GLENARVON. 

you and my children/' " Open your 
dear eyes once again, father, to look on 
me. Oh ! Collin^wood, see thev are clos* 
ed : — Will he not look on meever again ? 
My sister Annabel shall speak to him.— 
My dear mamma is gone, or she would 
sooth him.— Oh, father, if you must leave 
me too, why should I linger here ? How 
silent he is !"— " He sleeps, Sir/*— " I 
think he does not sleep, Collingwood. 
I think this dreadful stillness is what 
every one calls death. Oh ! father, look 
at me once more. Speak one dear word 
only to say you love me still. " " I can't 
bear this/' said Sir Richard, hurrying 
from the room. " I can't bear it/' 

The hour was that in which the setting- 
sun had veiled its last bright ray in the 
western wave:— it was the evening of 
the tenth of October ! ! ! 

On the evening of the tenth of Octo- 
ber, Glenarvon had reached the coast of' 
Holland, and joined the British squadron 
under Admiral Duncan. The Dutch 



GLENARVON. 307 

were not yet in sight ; but it was known 
that they were awaiting the attack 
at a few miles distance from shore, 
between Camperdown and Egmont. It 
was so still that evening that not a 
breath of air rippled upon the glassy 
waters. It was at that very instant of 
time, when Avondale, stretched upon 
his bed, far from those scenes of glory 
and renown in which his earlier years 
had been distinguished, had breathed his 
last ; that Glenarvon, whilst walking the 
deck, even in the light of departing day, 
laughingly addressed his companions : 
" Fear you to die?" he cried, to one 
upon whose shoulder he was leaning. 
44 I cannot fear. But as it may be the 
fate of all, Hardhead," he said, still 
addressing his lieutenant, " if 1 die, 
do you present my last remembrance to 
my friends. — Ha ! have I any ?— Not I, 
l'faith. 

65 Now fill up a bowl, that I may pledge 



308 GLEN A It VON. 

you; and let him whose conscience 
trembles, shrink. I cannot fear; 

* { For, come he slow, or come he fast, 
It is but Death that comes at last." 

He said, and smiled — that smile so 
gentle and persuasive, that only to behold 
it was to love. Suddenly he beheld 
before him on the smooth wave a form so 
pale, so changed, that, but for the stern- 
ness of that brow, the fixed and hollow 
gaze of that dark eye, he had not recog- 
nized, in the fearful spectre, the form of 
Lo^d Avondale. ''Speak your reproaches 
a& a man would utter them," he said. 
" Ask of me the satisfaction due for 
injuries ; but stand not thus before me, 
like a dream, in the glare of day-— like a 
grim vision of the night, in the presence 
of thousands. ,, — The stern glazed eye 
moved not: the palpable form continued. 
Lord Glenarvon gazed till his eyes were 
strained with the effort, and every faculty 
was benumbed and overpowered* 



GLENAUVON. 309 

Then fell a drowsiness over his senses 
which he could not conquer; and he 
said to those who addressed him, " I am 
ill:— watch by me whilst I sleep/' He 
threw himself upon his cloak, listless 
and fatigued, and sunk into a heavy 
sleep. But his slumbers were broken 
and disturbed; and he could not recover 
from the unusual depression of his spirits. 
Every event of his short life crowded fast 
upon his memory : — scenes long for- 
gotten recurred :— he thought of broken 
vows, of hearts betrayed, and of all the 
perjuries and treacheries of a life given up 
to love. But reproaches and bitterness 
saddened over every dear remembrance, 
and he participated, when too late, in the 
sufferings he had inflicted. 

All was now profoundly still : the third 
watch sounded. The lashing of the waves 
against the sides of the ship— the gentle 
undulating motion, again lulled a weary 
and perturbed spirit to repose. Suddenly 
upon the air he heard a fluttering, like 



S10 GLENARVON. 

the noise of wings, which fanned him 
while he slept. Gazing intently, he 
fancied he beheld a fleeting shadow pass 
up and down before him, as if the air, 
thickening into substance, became visible 
to the eye, till it produced a form clothed 
in angelic beauty and unearthly bright- 
ness. It was some moments before he 
could bring to his remembrance whom it 
resembled,— till a smile, all cheering, and 
a look of one he had seen in happier 
days, told him it was Caiantha. Her 
hair flowed loosely on her shoulders, 
while a cloud of resplendent white sup- 
ported her in the air, and covered her 
partly from his view. Her eyes shone 
with serene lustre ; and her cheeks 
glowed with the freshness of health :— - 
not as when impaired by sickness and 
disease, he had seen her last— -not as 
when disappointment and the sorrows of 
the world had worn her youthful form-- 
but renovated, young, and bright, with 
superior glory she now met his ardent 



GLENARVON. 311 

gaze; and, in a voice more sweet than 
music, thus addressed him: 

" Glenarvon," she said, " I come not 
to reproach you. It is Calantha^s spirit 
hovers round you. Away with dread; 
for I come to warn and to save you. 
Awake— arise, before it be too late. Let 
the memory of the past fade from before 
you : live to be all you still may be-^-a 
country's pride, a nation's glory ! Ah,* 
sully not with ill deeds the bright promise 
of a life of fame." As she spoke, a light 
as from heaven irradiated her counte- 
nance, and, pointing with her hand to the 
east, he saw the sun burst from the clouds 
which had gathered round it, and shine 
forth in all its lustre. " Are you happy?" 
cried Glenarvon, stretching out his arms 
to catch the vision, which hovered near.— 
" Calantha, speak to me: am I still 
loved? Is Glenarvon dear even thus in 
death ?" 

The celestial ray which had lighted up 
the face of the angel, passed from before 



512 GLENARVOX. 

it at these words; and he beheld the form 
of Calantha, pale and ghastly, as when 
last they had parted. In seeming answer 
to his question, she pressed her hands to 
her bosom in silence, and casting upon 
him a look so mournful that it pierced 
his heart, she faded from before his sight, 
dissolving like the silvery cloud into thin 
air. At that moment, as he looked 
around, the bright sun which had risen 
with such glorious promise, was seen to 
sink in mists of darkness, and with its 
setting ray, seemed to tell him that his 
hour was come, that the light of his ge- 
nius was darkened, that the splendour 
of his promise was set for ever*: but he 
met the awful warning without fear. 

And now again he slept; and it seem- 
ed to him that he was wandering in a 
smooth vale, far from the haunts of men. 
The place was familiar to his memory ; — 
it was such as he had often seen amidst 
the green plains of his native country, in 
the beautiful season of spring ; and ever 



GLENARVOX. 313 

and anon upon his ear he heard the 
church-bell sounding from afar off, while 
the breeze, lately risen, rustled among 
the new leaves and long grass. Fear 
even touched a heart that never yet had 
known its power. The shadows varied 
on the plain before him, and threw a me- 
lancholy gloom on the surrounding pros- 
pect. Again the church-bell tolled ; but 
it was not the merry sound of some vil- 
lage festival, nor yet the more sober bell 
that calls the passenger to prayer. No, 
it was that long and pausing knell, which, 
as it strikes the saddened ear, tells of 
some fellow-creature's eternal departure 
from this lower world ; and ever while it 
tolled, the dreary cry of woe lengthened 
upon the breeze, mourning a spirit fled. 
Glenarvon thought he heard a step slowly 
stealing towards him ; he even felt the 
breath of some one near ; and raising his 
eye in haste, he perceived the thin form 
of a woman close beside him. In her 
arms she held a child, more wan than 

VOL. III. p 



31<* GLENARTONT. 

herself. At her approach, a sudden chill 
seemed to freeze the life-blood in hie 
heart. 

He gazed again. " Is it Calantha?" 
he said. fi Ah, no ! it was the form of 
Alice." She appeared as one returned 
from the grave, to which long mourning 
and untimely w r oes had brought her. — 
" Clarence," she said in a piercing voice, 
" since you have abandoned me I have 
known many sorrows. The God of 
Mercy deal not with you as you have 
dealt with me!" She spoke no more; 
but gazing in agony upon an infant which 
lay at her bosom, she looked up to Heaven, 
from whence her eyes slowly descended 
upon Glenarvon. She then approached, 
and taking the babe from her breast, laid 
it cold and lifeless on his heart. It was 
the chill of death which he felt— when, 
uttering a deep groan, he started up with 
affright. 

The drops stood upon his forehead — 
bis hands shook— he looked round hrm, 



GLENARVON. 315 

but no image like the one he had beheld 
was near. The whiteness of the eastern 
sky foretold the approach of day. The 
noise and bustle in the ship, the signals 
of the boatswain, and the busy din 
around, told him that he had slept enough. 
The Dutch squadron now appeared at a 
distance upon the sea: every thing was 
ready for attack. 

That day Lord Glenarvon fought with 
more than his usual bravery. He was 
the soul and spirit which actuated and 
moved every other. At twelve the en- 
gagement became general, every ship 
coming into action with its opponent. 
It was about four in the afternoon, when 
the victory was clearly decided in favour 
of the British flag. The splendid success 
was obtained by unequalled courage, and 
neroic valour. The result it is not for 
me to tell. Many received the thanks 
of their brave commander on that day ; 
tnany returned in triumph to the country, 
p 2 



316 GLENARVON. 

and friends who proudly awaited them. 
The Emerald frigate, and its gallant cap- 
tain, prepared likewise to return ; but 
Glenarvon, after the action, was taken 
ill. He desired to be carried upon deck ; 
and, placing his hand upon his head, 
while his eyes were fixed, he enquired of 
those around if they did not hear a sig- 
nal of distress, as if from the open sea. 
He then ordered the frigate to approach 
the spot whence the guns were fired. A 
fresh breeze had arisen : the Emerald 
sailed before the wind. To his disturbed 
imagination the same solemn sound was 
repeated in the same direction. — No sail 
appeared— still the light frigate pursued. 
" Visions of death and horror persecute 
me," cried Glenarvon. " What now do 
I behold — a ship astern ! It is singular. 
Do others see the same, or am I doomed 
to be the sport of these absurd fan- 
cies? Is it that famed Dutch pirate, 
condemned through all eternity to sail 



GLENARVON, 317 

before the wind, which seamen view with 
terror, whose existence until this hour I 
discredited ?" He asked this of his com- 
panions ; but the smile with which Glen- 
arvon spoke these words, soon gave plaCe 
to strong feelings of surprise and alarm.— 
Foreign was the make of that ship; sable 
were its sails; sable was the garb of its 
crew ; but ghastly white and motionless 
were the countenances of all. Upon the 
deck there stood a man of great height 
and size, habited ui the apparel of a friar. 
His cowl concealed his face; but his 
crossed hands and uplifted attitude an- 
nounced his profession. He was in 
prayer: — he prayed much, and earnestly 
—it was for the souls of his crew. Mi- 
nute guns were fired at every pause; 
after which a slow solemn chaunt began ; 
and the smoke of incense ascended till 
it partially concealed the dark figures of 
the men. 

Glenarvon watched the motions of that 
vessel in speechless horror; and now be- 
p 3 



313 CLENARVON. 

fore his wondering eyes new forms arose, 
as if created by delirium's power to aug- 
ment the strangeness of the scene. At 
the feet of the friar there knelt a form so 
beautiful— so young, that, but for the 
foreign garb and well remembered look, 
he had thought her like the vision of his 
sleep, a pitying angel sent to watch and 
save him.—" O Fiorabella," he cried; 
*' first, dearest, and sole object of my 
devoted love, why now appear to wake 
the sleeping daemons in my breast-— to 
madden me with many a bitter recollec- 
tion ?'* The friar at that moment, with 
relentless hand, dashed the fair fragile 
being, yet clinging round him for mercy r 
into the deep dark waters. <s Monster,'* 
exclaimed Glenarvon, " 1 will revenge 
that deed even in thy blood." There 
was no need:-— the monk drew slowly 
from his bosom the black covering that 
enshrouded his form. Horrible to be- 
hold ! — that bosom was gored with deadly 
rounds, and the black spouting streams 



GLENARYON. 319 

of blood, fresh from the heart, uncolour- 
ed by the air, gushed into the wave. 
" Cursed be the murderer in his last 
hour!— -Hell waits its victim. '*— -Such 
was the ehaunt which the sable crew ever 
and anon sung in low solemn tones. 

Well was it understood by Glenarvon, 
though sung in a foreign dialect. " Com- 
rades/' he exclaimed, iC do you behold 
that vessel ? Am I waking, or do my 
eyes, distempered by some strange malady, 
deceive me I Bear on. It is the last 
command of Glenarvon. Set full the 
sails. Bear on,— bear on : to death or 
to victory ! — it is the enemy of our souls- 
you see before you. B^ar on — to death, 
to vengeance; for all the fiends of hell 
have conspired our ruin." They sailed 
from coast to coast — They sailed from sea 
to sea, till lost in the immensity of ocean. 
Gazing fixedly upon one object, all mad* 
den ing with superstitious terror, Lord Glen- 
arvon tasted not of food or refreshment. 



520 GLENARVON. 

His brain was burning. Mis eye, darting 
forward, lost not for one breathing mo- 
ment sight of that terrific vision. 

Madness to phrenzy came upon him. 
In vain li is friends, and many of the brave 
companions in his ship, held him strug- 
gling in their arms. He seized his op- 
portunity. " Bear on," he cried : "pur- 
sue, till death and vengeance-— " and 
throwing himself from the helm, plunged 
headlong into the waters. They rescued 
him ; but it was too late. In the strug- 
gles of ebbing life, even as the spirit of 
flame rushed from the bands of mortality, 
visions of punishment and hell pursued 
him. Down, down, he seemed to sink 
with horrid precipitance from gulf to 
gulf, till immured in darkness; and as 
he closed his eyes in death, a voice, loud 
and terrible, from beneath, thus seemed to 
address him : 

" Hardened and impenitent sinner! 
the measure of your iniquity is full : the 



GLENARVON. 3Q\ 

price of crime has been paid : here shall 
your spirit dwell for ever, and for ever. 
You have dreamed away life's joyous 
hour, nor made atonement for error, nor 
"denied yourself aught that the fair earth 
presented you. You did not controul 
the fiend in your bosom, or stifle him in 
his first growth : he now has mastered 
you, and brought you here : you did 
not bow theltnee for mercy whilst time 
was given you : now mercy shall not be 
shewn. O, cry upwards from these lower 
pits, to the friends and companions you 
have left, to the sinner who hardens him- 
self against his Creator— who basks in 
the ray of prosperous guilt, nor dreams 
that his hour like your's is at hand. Tell 
him how terrible a thing is death ; how 
fearful at such an hour is remembrance 
of the past. Bid him repent, but he 
shall not hear you. Bid him amend, but 
like you he shall delay till it is too late. 
Then, neither his arts, nor talents, nor 



3~2 C 2 GLENARYON. 

his possessions, shall save him, nor 
friends, though leagued together more 
than ten thousand strong; for the axe 
of justice must fall. Cod is just ; and 
the spirit of §vil infatuates before hd 
destroys," 



THE END. 



B. Clarke, Printer, Weli Street, London. 
