GRANBY.



CHAPTER I.

V

Montroie. See how weak

An ill cause is! You are already fallen:

What can yon look for now?



Claremond. Fool, use thy fortune:

And so he counsels (hoc, that if we had

Changed places, instantly would hare cut thy throat,

Or digged thy heart out.

Montroee, In requital of

That savage purpose I must pity yon.

The Parliament of Love.

Arrived at the door, Granby stopped once more to collect his thoughts. Irresolution partially triumphed, and a slight tremor came over him as he raised his hand to the knocker. The half minute that elapsed before his "clamorous appeal" received its answer, appeared, as we commonly say, "an age;" and with burning impatience, and much withal of trepidation, did he listen to the shuffling and creaking of the footsteps within.

The door at length was half opened by a drowsy servant, with a candle in his hand, who, peeping at him, with a look of much surprise at the unseasonableness of the visit, told him that his master was still in his sitting room. This was sufficient, and Granby hastily passed the servant, and without waiting to be announced, proceeded quietly but rapidly to the room. On opening the door, he saw Tyrrel, his head resting on one hand, while the other held a pencil. He was deeply intent on a paper before him, on which he appeared to hare been writing figures; two candle. burnt almost to the socket, threw their dim light upon his face; and on the same table stood a wine glass, and a small phial containing laudanum, to the use of which





Eernicious drug, Tyrrel had lately begun to habituate imself.

Tyrrel did not raise his eyes from the paper immediately upon Granby's entrance, thinking probably that it was the servant; but scarcely had he made two steps into the room when Tyrrel looked up, and on seeing him, started from his chair in seeming terror, and crumpling up the paper, threw it from him into the fire place.

"How now, Granby? here again!" said he; and then catching the stern expression of his countenance, he faintly added, "For heaven's sake what is the matter?"

Granby carefully closed the door, before be returned him any answer. "My errand," said he, " concerns Courtenay."

"Courtenay! good God! what has happened to him?"

"Nothing but what you know already."

"What I know! explain yourself."

"I mean to do so—and briefly too. I come to demand that you renounce all claims upon him for money which he has lost to you, and that you refund—"

"Granby, are you mad?" (

"Hear me out—and that you refund what you have unfairly won this night."

"Unfairly! 'sdeath! does the scoundrel presume to say—" ^

"Be calm if you can," saia Granby firmly, "for violence is useless. He says nothing—he knows nothing; it is I who say it, and know it, and make this claim for him in consequence."

"And by what authority, Sir," exclaimed Tyrrel, in a lofty tone, "by what authority do you dare to say this to me?"

"By the authority of a friend to both, and a relation to you."

"Cant!—cursed cant!—Friend and relation! Is





this jour cloak for a scandalous charge? Do you think this will serve, Sir? No—give me proof of what you insinuate."

"I insinuate nothing; my charge is a direct one, and will require a direct reply. As for proofs, you shall have them; and for this purpose I shall ask for the dice and dice box that you used this night."

"With all my heart," said Tyrrel, "and I would show them as freely to the whole world—There—take them—examine them well—but remember, Sir, you will do it at your peril; for if they are not proved deceptive," said he, striking his clenched hand upon the table, "then by heavens—"

"This threat is useless," interrupted. Granby, "for I shall not even examine them. But observe me for a moment—"

Tyrrel muttered something between his teeth, and turned away.

"• Observe me, I say," repeated Granby sternly; "you asked for proofs, and I am prepared to give them;" and then, without uttering another word, he slowly exemplified with the dice the whole process of Tyrrel's fraudulent manoeuvres.

A dead silence ensued; Tyrrel leaning in guilty confusion on the back of a chair, while Granby stood opposite, erect, and motionless, with his hands clasped, apparently lost in painful thought. He was balancing in his mind conflicting sentiments of justice and mercy, anJRneditating in what way to meet the probable contrition of his guilty relative; but he was.uot prepared to see him seek a rofuge in effrontery, and started as if a thunderbolt had fallen at his feet when Tyrrel stepped up, and with a coarse smile slapped him famrliarly on the shoulder.

"Bravo, young one!" were his first words. "Curse me, if I thought you so knowing! I see you understand a trick or two—you are training in a promising way— we shall have you down at the Hells soon!"

"Tyrrel! Tyrrel! I did not expect this," said Granby, turning from him with disgustt





"Then, what the devil did you expect? Did you think 1 should whine and cant about it, and fall on my knees like a blubbering school-boy to escape a whipping? Why, what a cursed long face you make—as if rooks and pigeons were birds unheard of; pshaw—man—come—damn it—where can you have lived to look so serious about such a trifle? I thought you had been more of a man of the world. We jolly Greeks are never down in the mouth about these things. Where was the harm, if the fellow chose to be a fool, to treat him with a taste of my art? Prejudice apart, where is the sin in a quiet bit of legerdemain? None on earth—and so you would think, if it was not for those rusty, eld woman's notions, which I wonder how the devil you came by. I have done no more than many others."

"Tyrrel," said Granby, " though you have a right to be heard in your defence, yet I almost blame myself, for having patiently listened so long to this monstrous attempt to palliate your crime."

"Crime!" repeated Tyrrel, with a scornful laugh— "by what statute? Crime, indeed! you talk it well upon my soul; but learn, young man, to make distinctionslook at the dice—are they loaded? Look at the box— is it not a fair one ? Did 1 fight with false weapons ? No, Sir—the devil, himself, dare not say it. I met my man, and beat him down in a fair trial of address. 1 employed an art which I had been practising for months, and which I had surely acquired a right to profit by. I%on by skill—sheer skill—skill which 1 had gained by my own exertions, and which I am therefore justified in using."

"I will no longer listen to such paltry sophistry," replied Granby; "It cannot deceive me—you cannot even deceive yourself by it. My object, Tyrrel, in coming hither, was, not to hear your efforts at exculpation—for none that you can make will be sufficient— your offence is only aggravated by what you have already said—I come to enforce a demand—you have heard it, and I expect your answer."





"You shall have it," said Tyrrel, with a malignant scowl; and he went and opened a bureau, while Granby stood regarding him in silence. Tyrrel searched for something; at length he closed the bureau : what he had taken oat of it, Granby knew not, for his back was towards him; till on turning round he displayed to his astonished eyes a brace of pistols, and a card.

"Here is my answer," said he, holding up the pistols, "and there," throwing on the table an ace of clubs, shot through the middle, " is my pledge for its proving satisfactory. You see my mark at twelve . paces—a pretty fair certificate of a cool eye, and a steady hand. Be advised, young fellow," he added, in an insulting tone —" think twice before you drive to extremities a man who can split a ball upon a knife, and shoot a couple through the same hole. You will find I am not to be trifled with."

"And you will find," said Granby, calmly, " that it is not my intention to trifle with you. My object is fixed and serious—I come to insist on satisfaction for my friend."

"Satisfaction !" said Tyrrel, with savage glee," have at you then—the sooner the better—name time and place—and I am your man."

"Tyrrel, you mistake the satisfaction I/require—.*it is not to shed the blood of a relation. If you mean to give me a challenge, understand distinctly that I will not acceptit."

"4^u will not?" retorted Tyrrel. "Say you dare not."

"I will not," said Granby; " and if you urge me, the world shall know my reason for refusing."

"And what is that reason ?" said Tyrrel, with a sneer.

"I shall tell them that the challenger is no longer worthy of the consideration due to a man of honour."

"Insolent coward!" said Tyrrel through his clenched teeth.

"I shall not descend to bandy invectives," replied Granby firmly. "I repeat my demand for reparation."





"Granby—Granby—have a care—be cautious how you goad a desperate man. Are you aware," said Tyrrel, taking up the pistols, " that one of these is loaded? You defy me, because you think that my reputation is in your power. Remember that your life is in mine." And he retreated a few steps, and deliberately examined the priming of his pistol.

"Do you think so meanly of me," said Granby, "as to expect that I shall be terrified from my purpose by this impotent bravado?"

"I do," said Tyrrel. "Impotent bravado! Good sounding words, faith! but very little to the purpose. I would advise you to think of something better by way ^of a dying speech, and quickly too, for your time is but short. Now, Sir, death or recantation ?" and he levelled the pistol at Granny's head.

Granby neither moved nor spoke, but looked steadily in Tyrrel's face. There was a deep silence, which was first broken by the click of the pistol. Tyrrel had cocked it. Granby heard the ominous sound, but his frame never trembled, nor did his cheek grow paler, nor his eye wander, but remained still sternly bent on Tyrrel in sad and resolute defiance.

"Tyrrel!" said he, in a solemn tone, " I have no fear. You dare not be a murderer."

Tyrrel returned no answer, but still presented the cocked pistol.

"You will never," continued Granby, " charge your conscience with such a.crime." ffc

"My conscience !" said Tyrrel, with frightful irony, lowering his pistol as he spoke; "how did you know I had a conscience?"

"You have—you must," said Granby. "I will not think you utterly depraved. You may stifle the voice of your conscience for a time, but.be assured it will be heard. Tyrrel—there is a God that sees and judges you; and if you shed my blood, the hour of retribution will surely come:" and Granby, as he spoke, fixed his eyes with impressive solemnity upon Tyrrel's.

The latter could not encounter their appeal. His





own fell beneath their glance. The hand that held the pistol trembled; and the countenance was convulsed with a sudden pang. He muttered something indistinctly, turned away, and deposited the pistols in their former place.

"1 did it but to try you," said he in a low voice. "Heaven knows, that for the world's worth 1 could not be your murderer; but you had almost driven me past myself. Granby, you are too hard with me. Do not oppress a fallen man. Temperyour justice with mercy. Circumstances have made you powerful; let them show that you are generous. Remember whom you are about to sacrifice. Remember that it is a friend and a relation."

"Tyrrel, I remember it but too well," said Granby mournfully. "It is a fact which I shall never forget, and deep will be the anguish it will cost me. Bitter as your own reflections must necessarily be, you can but feebly judge of what I feel, to find myself at once cut off from one who is still my relation, aud whom a few short hours ago I vainly fancied I might call my friend. Tyrrel do not endeavour to deceive yourself. You have committed that, which if -known, would render you an _ outcast from every reputable circle in which you have • ever moved."

"I know it all," said Tyrrel impatiently, "and feel it too. Why should you torture me with this repetition? Surely that punishment is enough.'.'

"No, Tyrrel, it is not enough. The world's scorn is slight to that which your own heart ought to inflict. Remember the victim of your arts—the ruin the destruction which you would have entailed on him. Tyrrel— the person whom you have so deeply wronged, suppressed perhaps in your presence the dreadful agony of his mind ; but had you lately seen, as I have done, the burning frenzy, the feverish effort to snatch a temporary forgetfulness of misery; his wild, frantic, intemperate mirth, and the horrid recklessness of his despair; had you seen all this, and said, as you needs must, " 'Twas 1 that caused it,' you would have cursed yourself for the misery you had produced; it would have been reflected doubly on yourself, and you would then have felt— ay, in its deepest bitterness—that real—that mental punishment to which the world's scorn is as dust in the balance. You cannot have so hard a heart but from your very soul you would have pitied him."





Tyrrel stood during this appeal with folded arms, downcast eyes, and head bent forward on his breast. Once or twice he tried to raise his head, but as his eye caught that of Granby, it sunk beneath the powerful gaze of conscious rectitude. At length some new idea appeared to strike him, and the rigid muscles of his face began to relax into an expression of sullen exultation. "Pity him!" said he, " not I. I have little pity to bestow upon any one, and shall not waste it on unworthy objects. He suffers, does he? Well he may. and so he ought. Just retribution Granby, and no more. Has Courtenay caused no pain to others?"

"I will not say that he has not," said Granby, starting

at the bitter thought which this question had conjured

up; "but if he ha?, it is not of that we are speaking

now. He is injured, Tyrrel. It is in that light only I

.0 can now regard him. He is injured, and by you ; and

* he must have redress. I am here, not to recall my

own misfortunes, but to demand reparation for my

friend."

"Your friend."' said Tyrrel, in a mingled tone of scorn and compassion. "Poor credulous gull! are • you still willing to think him so? Think on—think so still. Why should I disturb your dreams? It would be cruel to rouse you from such a satisfied state of ignorance. What if a certain lady does not smile on you as sweetly as she did? We need not think that he is the cause. What if she smile on others? what, if on him? We need not think he sought it, Granby. We need not think that to purchase those smiles he sacrificed an ancient friendship, and trampled on the characted of a kind, credulous, confiding rival."

"Confiding ?—nay, you wrong him, I never trusted him—I told him nothing."

"And why should you ?—and if you did not, must he therefore needs be ignorant? Granby, there are other roads to a person's sentiments than through his tongue—and a lover's sentiments—pshaw! it is impossible but he must have known them. But do you think he would seem to know them? No, he is wiser. Pretended ignorance is his coat of mail. It excuses him both to you and her. It is a place of ambush, out of which he can slander you the more securely."





'' Tyrrel," said Granby, trembling with anxiety. "tell me I entreat you by what means you are informed of this?"

"By none but such as you may use. I employed my senses. I observed them well. I was not credulous as you are. My eyes were open. My ears were attentive. I was alive to much that you might have seen had you been willing. And why were you not? Why let another be more keen sighted in that which so nearly concerned yourself? Beware, Granby—mark my words before it is too late—beware—beware of a false friend."

"I will," said Granby. "A false friend! Ay, Tyrrel! I had one who was false indeed; false to his kindred, to his character, to himself; false to every principle of worldly honour; one who has shamefully relinquished his fair fame and honourable bearing, and shrunk to a detected sharper. This is the friend that has deceived my hopes."

"Rail on, rail on," said Tyrrel. "Reproach me for my warning. I can bear it. Be blind if you will. Be not only blind, but ungrateful. Yes, I say again— ungrateful. You cannot, or you will not see what I have wrought in your behalf. To what purpose have I clipped the wings, and tamed the courage of this aspirer, if you, you, who of all persons should be least willing to support him, should actually lend your aid to forward his unworthy views? Granby, if you have still a hope of that which is dearest to your heart, be cautious ere you banish it for ever. Look at me. I not only can, but will assist you. I have the viper in my .. toils. I can check him—crush him—nay, I can track





him in his course of slander—I can blight his villanous projects—I can baffle the insidious go-between: I, and I alone: and the gain and the triumph shall be yours—all through my means shall be cleared— Caroline shall learn to detest the creature who de ceives her now, and you shall be restored, through me, to more than all her former love."

Granby turned away his face, to conceal the powerful conflict of his feelings.

"Dear Granby," pursued Tyrrel, "do not hesitate. Second my plans to aid your happiness. Leave this reptile to his fate. Show your firmness, and by one bold act confound a villain, and spare the errors of a misguided relation—misguided, Granby—I say it with sorrow—but one who still preserves that warm friendship which he felt for you in happier days."

The struggle in Granby's mind was evident; and Tyrrel greedily watched its workings. Once his resolution almost failed him; but principle resumed its force.

"Peace, tempter! peace," he said—" Oh, God!" he inwardly ejaculated, "forgive me if I wavered. Tyrrel, it is in vain you urge me—I have a duty to perform, and I trust in Heaven I shall not desert it. Speak no longer against Courtenay—I will suppose him all that is treacherous—but his vices, his follies, do not excuse your shameful practices. You have wronged him—ruined him—;md he shall be redressed. I know not—I care not what he is—he may have loaded me with a thousand injuries, but he was my friend, and I will save him."

Tyrrel bit his lip, and turned away. "How will you save him ?" said he tauntingly.

"By obtaining redress. Tyrrel, I am still firm to my purpose. I do not know to what extent you have plundered him; but, be it what it may, I here demand that through me you restore the whole.'5

"And what if I refuse?" said Tyrrel.

:f Public exposure will be the consequence. Before another day is past I shall publish your conduct to the world."





"And who will believe you?"

"Many, Tyrrel, many. A week hence I should have thought that nobody would believe the tale; but I have since learned, and it was a painful hearing, that there are those who already suspect You of dishonest practices, aod would eagerly receive such confirmations of their worst suspicions. Your character totters—a word of mine can destroy it,—and shall, unless you comply. To-day, Sir, this very day, I gained an insight which I little expected. Do you remember Althorp ?—ay, Althorp, alias Wilkins?"

Tyrrel started, and a deep burning flush of guilt passed hastily across his countenance.

"I shall say no more of him," said Granby. "I only mention him to show that I at length know you. Deceit and evasion are now useless. Choose, therefore —redress, or public infamy."

Tyrrel visibly trembled. "One moment," said he, and, approaching the table, poured a small quantity of laudanum from the phial. Granby looked at him with dread, as he raised the horrid beverage to his lips. Tyrrel remarked his look of horror. "Do you think I am going to poison myself?" said he, with a ghastly smile of derision. "I am not come to that yet. Your health," he added, nodding to Granby, before he drank it, with an expression of countenance that made him shudder. He then paced several times across the room, as if endeavouring to regain composure. At length, in a calm and altered tone, he again addressed him.

"Granby, my father is the head of your house. In me you will dishonour the representative of your family. Do not, if you have still remaining any generous pride of ancestry, do not stain it with reproach. In me it has been grievously disgraced; but, oh, Granby! by all of great and noble that ever has adorned your name, do not aggravate the evil by giving publicity to my offence." .

"Tyrrel, it is useless to pursue these arguments.

Vol. u. 2





/

Dear to me as is the honour of my family, it cannot weigh against my duty; and if you compel me to reveal it? shame, on your head be the infamy. My course is taken, and shall not be relinquished. I demand for Courtenay full restitution of all thatyou have won from him, this night, and on that condition only will I be silent on all that has passed."

"And will you be silent on that condition I" asked Tyrrel.

"I will."

"Promise solemnly," said Tyrrel.

"I do."

"Then you shall have what you require."

He then went to the bureau from which he had taken the pistols, and searched for the guilty proofs of his success. Granby, meanwhile, afflicted and harassed with the recent conflict, sat down at the table, leaning forward, his tace buried in his hands, painfully recalling the past scene of this eventful night.

Tyrrel now approached th£ table, and laid before him, in dogged silence, the evening's spoil, consisting of cash, notes, drafts, and engagements, in Courtenay's. hand, to pay immense sums, specified on the paper, by post obit bonds on his grandfather's estate. The magnitude of these sums struck Granby with astonishment and indignation; and he could not help suspecting that Courtenay had been maddened by intoxication before he • could have been brought to put his hand to that which would render him for life a beggar. ,

"Are these all V said Granby, laying his hand upon them.

"Are you not satisfied?" was the answer.

"Not yet. I demand an acknowledgment, in your handwriting, that you have no further claim to any sums yet unpaid^ that may have been won by you from Courtenay."

. Tyrrel answered only by a glance of unutterable rage—wrote the required acknowledgment—and saw it al§9 signed by,Granby.

"And how, kind cousin," he said, with a forced.





ironical composure, "I must also be satisfied in my turn. I ask your promise, your written promise, Sir, that you will never reveal to human being, the—the"— (passion and shame half choked his utterance)—i' the history of this night."

"You shall, have it," said Granby; and he wrote, and gave it. Tyrrel received it with an insulting smile. "'Tis well," said he, '' and now I laugh at future malice."

"Malice! Tyrrel," said Granby, " I bear you none. ! ;u-.i<-<i in sorrow rather than in anger. I fteve for you—1 pity.you." ^

"i scorn your pity!" cried Tyrrel, furiously.— "Wretch! would you grind me to the dust, and see me writhe beneath the pity of such as you? I laugh at your forbearance. You have not my thanks—you have my curses for it. It is your mean groveling pridethat saves me from exposure. You will not brand the head of your house. No, no!—ha! ha!"—(and he laughed wildly)—" who would have thought that my blood would have stood me in such good part? Hence! away! sweep frooi my si^ht that hellish trash for which I sold myself! It and you are poison to me. I hate you . deeply—bitterly—eternally! Ha ! do you disbelieve? 'Tis true—true as there is a hell. Do you now know it for the first time? Then learn, blind fool! that you have deemed yourself the friend of one who could have stabbed you while he shook your hand. Know that you are, and ever have been, the object of my mortal hatred —that I loathe—I detest you—that my blood curdles at you with abhorrence!" and he foamed with frantic violence.

"Tyrrel, I never gave you cause," said Granby, shocked and astounded at this dreadful ebullition of rage.

"No cause, did you say?" replied Tyrrel, grinding his teeth with an almost insane expression of fury. "No cause! an eternal one! But you don't know it—and may you never. You are-a viper! a loathsome pestilential viper, crawling ever in my path. You haunt my





dreams; you poison even my daily pleasures. Do you remember the shudder of detestation with which 1 (Irs? cast my eyes upon you?"

"-Surely, I had not harmed you then? Tyrrel, explain yourself."v

Tyrrel seemed to start, as if a sudden recollection crossed him. A marked change took place in his countenance, and anger appeared to be lost at once under the mastery of some more powerful passion.

"It was my presentiment," said he, in an altered tone, while lifl'eatures stiffened into rigid, gloomy ferocity. "You fflree done your office,—go—leave me."

Granby silently took the papers, and moved towards the door. His face was averted from his cousin, and his hand already on the lock, tie was about to take a last, perhaps an eternal leave. Thoughts rushed fast upon him—thoughts that would have filled whole days were pressed into a second. He had indignation boiling at his heart: but the swell of grief was still more powerful, and old affection was not yet cold. Tears were rising in his eyes, and he drew his hand hastily across them. He stepped back towards Tyrrel—'• God forgive you!" were his last words; " farewell—perhaps for ever;" and with one short, sorrowing look, he turned away, and the door closed after him.



CHAPTER II.

Though with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick,

Vet with my nobler reason 'gainst my injury

Do I take part: the rarer action is

In virtue than in yengeance.—The Tempest.

Granby rose the next morning, after a short night of stupor rather than of sleep, fatigued in mind and body, and ill-prepared for the distressing interview with Courtenay, which he still had to undergo. The past





scenes had not expended all the bitterness of his trying situation—much was still reserved. He was goingi under the guise of friendship, to one whom in his heart he must now abhor. Rival is a hateful name—but a dark slanderous supplanter—an ancient friend still masking rivalship under the cloak of kindness! what reptile could be more abhorrent!

And yet with all these painful views there was mingled a sense of satisfaction, nay, even of triumph, in thus being able to practise one of the most sublime and distinguishing precepts of the Christian faith, in nobly rendering good for evil. But he also felt that he but imperfectly executed this glorious injunction. His illustration, however bright, had more of semblance than of truth; for he was conscious that he did not in his heart forgive. But such, alas! is human nature, which still sho.ws its weakness even in its most transcendent moments; for few indeed are those in whom the noblest acts of charity are not alloyed with imperfection. •. And now an anxious question was suggested. Should he intimate the suspicion of his wrongs, and call on Courtenay for redress? Powerful as the temptation was, his generous heart revolted at the thought, and he internally and resolutely answered, no. He would never stoop to sully his present act of benevolence by casting charges in the teeth of him whom he affected to relieve. To employ the advantages which chance had given him —-to make conditional the redemption of his character —to drive a bargain of recompense, and purchase exculpation at the price of his rival's deliverance from ruin— from acts like these he shrunk with abhorrence.—" If he has wronged me," said he, " let his own self-accusing conscience work his punishment, and teach him to repair his fault: from me he shall never meet reproach."

He then .reflected on the mournful fatality by which the very circumstance of Courtenay's distress, however apparently unconnected with the mysterious displeasure of Caroline, still conspired to debar him from arriving at a knowledge of the truth.

At the appointed hour, Granby set out to call upon Courtenay. On entering the room, he found him neg ligently dressed, with eyes sunk and heavy in token of a sleepless night, looking pale, haggard, and dispirited, bis head resting on his hand, and a huff-written letter lying on the table before him.





"I am glad you are come—I thank you for this;" said Courtenay, in a low sad tone, rising to receive Granby, and pressing his hand as he spoke.

Granby could not return the pressure—it was painful to receive it. "I do but fulfil my promise," said he, •gravely. "My visit is not one of mere condolence :.iit •has another object—an important one; and when that is accomplished, it must end." ,. •.

"An object! an important one!" said Courtena.y, trembling with fear and hope. •

"Yes, Courtenay; but I first demand a solemn promise, which may perhaps startle you, but on whYcti, nevertheless, I shall firmly insist, before I explain Jhfi . business upon which I come. I ask your promise to ro nounce from henceforth all communication with nfyV, cousin Tyrrel. I see you are surprised at this request;" but understand that it is one upon the granting of whichyour future welfare must depend. It is my primary Q&i- • dition. Refuse me that, and I must withhold the happi-; ness I have in store for you." . :•,•

Courtenay looked irresolute. "He has been ind£efr.. f a dangerous acquaintance," said he," but—to renouifce. '•" entirely his acquaintance! May not I eve» speak ?to. him?" •.:•*••'

"No. Courtenay—my condition upon that points: 7 absolute. I have reasons for it> so powerful, that if you heard them you would not for an instant hesitate to comply. But those reasons I may not explain. Rest assured that I, the near relation of Tyrrel, Would notinsist upon these conditions, were I not influenced by cir- ."•• cumstances of more than ordinary weight." . *

A light seemed to break in upon Courtenay. "Say •no more," said he, " I promise."

"'Tis well," said Granby; "and now Courtenay I •will relate the errand upon which I come. .But first let me say, that if I do not also saddle you with a promise from henceforth to renounce play, it is because I trust that your present sufferings will sufficiently deter you from such a course, and the warning will not have been fruitless. And now," said he, producing the notes and papers, " look carefully over these, and tell me if they include all your losses of last night."





Courtenay gazed at the papers, and at Graiiby, in mute astonishment, as if unable rightly to comprehend his meaning.

"Examine them," repeated Granby, " examine them, and return your answer."

The colour came and went on Courtenay's cheek, as he complied with this demand, and his band trembled as he turned over the papers. "They contain all I lost," said he, at length, " but why," he added, with a flush of shame, " why do you ask ?—and why are they produced? It may be difficult to conceal it, but I could still wish to hide from you in its full extent my folly and its consequences."

"You will soon have reason to thank heaven that your wish was not granted. Courteuay, those notes and bonds are once more your's. You are not ruined—your losses are remitted—and here, in Turret's writing, is nn acknowledgment that he now considers you to owe him nothing."

Courtenay heard with breathless attention. His countenance assumed an expression of emotion which it would be difficult to define ; an ejaculation of gratitude half escaped him ; and then his features quivered, and he sunk on a chair, and buried his face in his hands.

Granby regarded him in silence—heard a deep and stifled sob—and saw a tear trickle through his fingers. His own feelings, as he thus observed him, experienced frequent and violent changes. Now, he viewed him as the former friend, and now again as the suspected slanderer —one instant he would burn with deep and fiery indignation against the man who had blighted all his budding blossoms of happiness; and thena better feeling would return, and his heart warm towards the humbled, self-reproaching being whom his own. baud had raised from ruin,





Courtenay, after the first burst of emotion had in some degree subsided, rose from his seat and fervently pressed Granby's hand. He was the first to speak, though his labouring feelings half denied an utterance to his words.

"Granby," he said, "I cannot thank you as I ought. You have saved me from destruction. I never can repay the debt I owe you. I judge how my deliverance was effected; but I will ask nothing, nor will I ever utter what I think. Silence on that point is due to you, and 'tis a small part, Granby, of my debt. Do not think me cold or sparing in professions.—I feel too deeply what I owe you, to express fluently my sense of it. All that I would say to you seems inadequate. But you will understand me, Granby; you will not think the worse of an old friend, for want of words to tell his thanks."

"No," said Granby, in a grave tone, "I shall not think the worse of you for that. I did my duty and am satisfied. I do not want profuse thanks. I value deeds —not words."

"And by deeds my gratitude shall be shown," said Courtenay. "Direct me as you will; point out the course, and I will take it. You have restored me to the power of acting, and it is fit you should govern my proceedings. Name your wish and I will do it."

"I make no terms," said Granby, coldly. "Probe your conscience, and that will best direct you, Courtenay;" and as he said this, he cast upon him a keen look at once of scrutiny and scorn.

Courtenay did not steadily withstand it. His countenance fell, and he turned away with a deep sigh. "I do," said he, at length, "and it accuses me as much, and more perhaps, than you can do. I am not blind to my own errors. I have shamefully yielded to an infatuation, which at its first approach I might have resisted. I have suffered myself to be hood-winked by a—but no— no matter—he is your relation, and I will say no more. Some might try to screen their conduct under the name of folly, rather than of wickedness; but it is wickedness, and sorely has it been punished. Even to regain one's losses is but a feeble recompense. There is no recompense for the anxious days, the sleepless nights, the fevered, racked, agitated spirits, strained to torture. And then those sudden, terrible alterations of hope and fear—at one moment, despair, that weighs one as it were to the earth, and then a short glimpse of triumph and joy—but, vile, moody, horrid joy the joy of a devil rather than a man. Oh, Granby, I cannot describe what I have felt, nor can you understand it all—for you have never felt it—and may you never. But it is past, thank God—the misery is past, and with it the infatuation. I will look forward cheerfully; and if you, Granby, will still be my friend, I may yet be happy—happier than I deserve."





"I would be your friend," said Granby, "but not in mere appearance, Courtenay—not the mere convenient friend, to be worn with the best gloss on, and thrown aside like a cast off glove."

"Granby, 1 know I have much to answer for. I have neglected you; I know it; and if I repented it before, think how I must repent it now. But, Granby, hear the real fact: I durst not meet you—I confess it most humbly. My conscience accused me so bitterly, that I felt as if I could not see you with the same composure and confidence as before."

Granby attentively regarded him, as if expecting a confession. But Courtenay relapsed into mournful silence, folded his arms, and sighed heavily. Granby moved towards the door, as if to depart, and Courtenay recovering from his fit of abstraction, stepped forward to prevent him. "Do not go yet," said he; "say first that I may still consider you my friend."

"Courtenay," replied Granby, in a severe tone, "if your own heart sincerely tells you that I have not shown myself deficient in good offices towards you, and you have not made an ill return—if you are still what once I thought you, you may consider me your friend. But iny eyes have become more vigilant of late, and my feelings, too, perhaps more keen. I will not tamely be deceived. I will not be the friend of "slanderer and hypocrite were on his tongue, but he remembered his resolution, and suppressed the accusation.





"A gambler, did you mean to say? Well, be it so— I am not worthy, I confess, that you should regard me as you once did. You cannot think more meanly of me than I do of myself. Your opinion of me may have been widely changed, and well it may; but I must 'ever preserve for you that grateful regard which I now feel."

"I cannot judge of your present feelings," said Granby.

"Do you then think that I am not grateful, Granby? Say any thing but that. I do not know whether I have expressed myself properly, but I thought at any rate you would supply what was deficient. I could have said more—much more; but I thought you did not seem to wish it."

"No, Courtenay, you have said enough; and now farewell," said he, extending his hand.

rt Say first," said Courtenay, grasping it, "that you believe me grateful."

Granby covered his eyes with his hand, and a momentary struggle seemed to agitate his mind. "I do," he replied, "and now farewell. May you be happy and successful in every worthy endeavour; and if you sacrifice my friendship, it is a trivial sacrifice, and may you find others to replace it." Then looking at him steadily and mournfully, and with one more pressure of the hand, he left the room.

The impressions Granby received during this last interview, were gloomy and dispiriting. He was touched by the sense of Courtenay's misery; and compassion struggled hard at times with jealousy and indignation. But there was in Courtenay's manner a conscious acquiescence in the justness of his rebukes, which recalled his doubts, and might well appear to justify suspicion. Was Courtenay's application of them to his gambling offences sincere and real? or was it but a cloak to account for the embarrassment which he could not conceal? These were questions which he laboured fruitlessly to decide.





Granby occupied himself the more with these speculations, because he felt that they rendered him less sensible of the desolate nature of his situation: for when he turned to look upon that, what a deserted being did he appear! And yet he half wondered why he felt so; In London, the centre of society and amusement, in possession of a large acquaintance, the loss of five, nay, three individuals, had made that busy world to him a wilderness. There was the Jermyn family;—they were lost to him. Of the parents he thought not much—but Caroline! that was indeed a blow. There was Courtenay—one whom he had long and intimately known— whose character he had once esteemed—whose society was so agreeable to him;—he was worse than lost—a thorn in his side—a rival—a foe under the mask of friendship; and though he had long dispensed with his society, the loss came heaviest on him now. Then, there was Tyrrel—a case still more cruel—the near relation—the friend so earnest in profession—to whom he had begun to cling with a brother's love. Here the reverse was horrible: infamy in the place of honour—instead of a support, a blot—instead of friendship, deadly hate—hate rankling he knew not why—ever burning, and long concealed under the semblance of affection.

Each of these cases was sufficiently agitating; but the combination of them was desolating and oppressive, to a degree that seemed to shut out comfort. It is true, he had many other acquaintance whom he esteemed, and at other times was pleased to see; but in this present wayward state of gloom, they all alike seemed valueless. He had been cruelly deceived by those on whom he most relied; and why look for consolation in others, from whom he could have less expected it? He seemed • a solitary being. London became hateful to him. Every favourite resort recalled past scenes of melancholy result. Recreation lost its zest; society became a blank; and town a sort of hateful prison, from which he was eager to escape. There was nothing to detain him;





and accordingly, a few days after his last interview with Courtenay, he quitted London.



CHAPTER III. .

The world has been long amused by the mention of policy in public transactions, and of art in private affairs; they have been considered as the real effects of great qualities, and as unattainable by men of the common level. Yet I have not found many performances, either, of art or policy, that required such itupendons efforts of intellect, as might not have been effected by falsehood and impudence, without the assistance of any other powers.

Johnson.

We must now return to trace the dark and devious course of Tyrrel, with the real depravity of. whose character past circumstances have already acquainted Us. It will be remembered, that in a previous conversation between Granby and his uncle, on the subject of Tyrrel, it was stated by the former, that on his first introduction, Tyrrel evinced considerable coldness, which was, however, afterward exchanged for that friendly warmth of manner which in the end so effectually conciliated the affections of his cousin.

It must now be stated, that Tyrrel's first manner, however repulsive, was more praiseworthy than his subsequent conduct. The first was the natural expression of his true feelings; the second was the deliberate result of treacherous design. The feelings with which he met Granby for the first time, singular as it may appear, were those of the most determined hatred—a hatred which the unexpectedness of the rencontre did not allow him utterly to suppress. He had not at the moment considered the part he was to act; but a few hours of calm reflection enabled him to digest his plans, to smooth his brow, and call into exercise those pliant powers of dissimulation, with which few .persons were more amply endowed.

The result of his deliberation was, a treacherous design to gain the friendship and confidence of his cousin, and by the seductive influence of play to lure him onward to his ruin. Granby, he knew, had not much to lose, nor were his expectations from his uncle by any means considerable. His qualifications for a pigeon, on the score of fortune, were not therefore very evident; and on this account it is probable that it was rather in Tyrrel's contemplation, to obtain an ascendancy over his victim, than to gain immediate advantage of a pecuniary nature. He saw with regret that Granby's mind was not strongly tinctured with a love of play, and that any violent exhibition of that passion in himself, would put his cousin on his guard, and probably induce him to dissolve that intimacy, which fatso vile a purpose he laboured to cement. He, therefore, cautiously kept out of sight the formidable extent of his own proceedings, and instead of alarming his companion by the abrupt display of hundreds, carelessly lost and won, he delicately strove to excite and cherish the dormant passion by the frequent application of trifling bets, which he artfully laid on the losing side.





This plan was partially successful; and Tyrrel, after joyfully observing the increased avidity with which these easy baits were taken, determined to commence the siege; and accordingly opened his first parallel with the whist party at his cyrn rooms. The failure of this coup d'essai we have already witnessed. He had been too hasty in his measures. His destined victim was not ripe for plunder; and fearful of discovery, should he repeat the same attack, or what was almost as bad, suspicion, he cast about for other means, and resolved, if possible, to act through the medium of another person.

For this purpose he selected Courtenay; and there were many circumstances to confirm his choice. He had much to lose, was of an easy temper, fond of play, and the friend of Granby. Tyrrel could enrich himself with his spoils, and then, having got him completely in his power, would use him as a species of decoy to draw Granby into the same snare.

VOL. II. * 3





The apparent ruin in which he involved Courtenay, and the consequent despair to which he drove him, may seem to militate against this design. But Tyrrel did not intend that the ruin should be real, or the despair lasting. He fully intended on the following morning to have restored to Courtenay a considerable part of the losses of the preceding night; consisting of sums vvhich he had not the present means of paying, and engagements for their discharge, which Tyrrel obtained not so much with a view of rendering them available in a pecuniary point of view, as for the purpose of terrifying his victim into a sense of absolute dependency. He then, with apparent generosity, would have remitted what was of no immediate use; thereby establishing, as he expected, a powerful hold on his companion's mind; and this he intended still to strengthen, by the loan of money to supply his immediate necessities. Then, by the assistance of certain accommodating Jews of his acquaintance, he doubted not that he should soon be able to lead Courtenay into such a maze of embarrassment and vice, as should preclude escape from his trammels. He should then engage him to assist in the furtherance of his designs on Granby; and thus assailed by the two most intimate of his friends, Granby, he thought, would surely fall.

But there was one circumstance above all others, which appeared to Tyrrel to present a serious obstacle to the accomplishment of his designs on Granby; and this was, the attachment of his cousin to Miss Jermyn —an attachment by which his mind would be rendered less accessible to the insidious fascinations of play. In order, therefore, that he might succeed, it was necessary that this attachment should be suppressed, and the hopes of an alliance quenched for ever in Granby's breast.

After the confirmation of his previous suspicions by the disclosure of the lock of hair, he seriously began to devise means for counteracting the dreaded union. It was desirable, in the first place, that he should establish himself as soon as possible on a familiar footing with the Jerrnyn family. This he found no difficulty in effecting; nor was it likely that he should. He was a sort of relation, and a relation whom, though distant, they were happy to acknowledge. He was also a man of rank and fortune, good address, and one who knew the world, and was much seen in society.





It had been whispered, indeed, that Tyrrel played; but so did many fashionable people. And if he did, what was that to them? Caroline remembered, too, the harsh remark on Tyrrel's character, made in her hearing by Trebeck at Hemingsworth. But Trebeck was so much in the habit of saying very severe things, of persons whom she had heard well spoken of in other quarters, that she was not inclined to place much reliance on his opinion.

Thus, therefore, in spite of all that the busy world had whispered to his disadvantage, Tyrrel ensured to himself an uniformly good reception from every member of the Jermyn family. Sir Thomas Jermyn liked him for lending such a patient ear to his oft-repeated interminable advice, to get, like him, a seat in parliament. Lady Jermyn liked him because he was somebody, and a good partie, and fashionable, and all that. And Caroline— she had her reason too:—she liked him because he was Granby's cousin.

The intimacy which Tyrrel thus established, he was careful to conceal from Granby, and seldom spoke to him unsolicited about the Jermyns, or talked much to them in his presence. He became, as Granby had with pain observed, less communicative respecting his engagements, and began to devote (hose mornings, which he used to pass with him, to the company of Courtenay, and an occasional hour with Lady Jermyn and her daughter.

In the presence of the latter, Tyrrel uniformly spoke of Granby with.the kindness natural to such near relationship; hinted many trivial foibles, but always laughed good-humouredly, and seemed disposed to palliate them; and though he never gave an imposing picture of his cousin, he was always careful not to present them with an unamiable one. In short, from the tone of his conversation, a stranger would have gathered, that Granby was a good sort of youth, not overburthened with intellect, for whom Tyrrel could not help feeling a aort of liking, although at the same time he rather despised him.





We say a stranger would have gathered this impression from Tyrrel's remarks on Granby; because in fact they failed in conveying this idea to the mind of Caroline. Her previous opinion of Granby so fully occupied her mind, that she was quite unable to admit another so dissimilar. That Ty rrel should despise Granby, was to her so inconceivable, that she never gave room to the supposition; and, for her, Tyrrel's insidious, well-aimed blows at the dignity of his relation, fell pointless.

But there were other impressions respecting Granby, which Tyrrel laboured to convey, in which he was infinitely more successful, and to which her jealous love had made her feelingly alive. He represented Granby in all the various lights in which he could be viewed by the eye of love with most dissatisfaction. He described him as being, in scenes from which she was absent, gay, light-hearted, and eager for amusement; generally capricious in bis taste, and obviously inconstant in his attachments. He made him a sort of male coquet: but in so doing took care to strip him of the more captivating features of that character. He drew him as the seeker, rather than the sought; not as one whose powers of pleasing had encouraged him in a pursuit where success was ever adding fresh fuel to his vanity, but as the heedless, restless flutterer, the nine days' captive of every new wonder; for ever the slave of successive loves at first-sight, and one whose vain and fleeting homage generally excited the ridicule even of her who was its temporary object.

All this it was distressing to hear; more so perhaps than more serious charges might have been. But distressing as it was, she durst not show the grief she felt; nor if she had, could she have expected the sympathy of the narrator. What—should they lament that Henry Granby was gay, happy, and amused? No; while her heart throbbed, and her cheek grew pale with agitation,





she must still force a sickly and unmeaning smile at Tyrrel's lively narrative.

Tyrrel recalled tliese painful thoughts wit^unmerciful assiduity. He knew that prudence did not permit his touches to be strong, and as he understood the force of repetition, he gave to them in frequency what they wanted in force and distinctness. Scarcely a beauty of the day was mentioned, but he backed his own commendations by the authority of his friend Granby; and ventured once to relate a story made up of misrepresented facts, describing Granby's ludicrous manoeuvres to secure himself an introduction to some fashionable fair one, and his laughable misery till he succeeded.

In short, by frequent indirect strokes of this description, did Tyrrel labour to convey t6 Caroline the same species of impression, whic,h by one able coup de main, Trebeck had implanted in Granby's mind. But the lady, to her credit be it spoken, was less credulous than her lover; and though she could not impeach the veracity of Tjrrel, yet she was willing to think, that in his lively and superficial way of looking at his cousin's conduct, he might very easily be mistaken; especially as he had already shewn a defect of judgment, (in her opinion,) in undervaluing Granby's talents.

In this warm, guileless confidence in a lover's truth, Caroline might long have continued firm, had not Granby, by his own conduct, impelled her to withdraw it. She knew what he once was, and in spite of all that could be said, she would fain believe him still the same. But when she saw him the infatuated followerof a vain, heartless coquette—the willing worshiper of Miss Darrell—she began to think that she it was who had been mistaken; and all that Tyrrel had ever dropped in conversation recurred to her with double force. . .

We know the line of conduct she pursued; we know how she laboured to affect an indifference which, she did not feel; and we may guess how she suffered. Caroline's outward indifference was observed by Tyrrel with satisfaction, but it was a satisfaction founded chiefly on delusion. He little knew the secret struggles of her wounded, yet still warm affections. He thought the feelings of the softer sex lay ever flickering on the surface, observable to every eye. He did not give them credit either for depth of feeling, Or for the power of concealing it. He thought he had attained his end, and flattered himself that Granby was already an object of indifference to Caroline, and soon to be forgotten by her.





Having thus obtained one object, another soon presented itself. He had heard, or read the observation, that at no period are we more susceptible of attachment than after the subsiding of the first burst of disappointment, caused by the unprosperous termination of a former passion. This he thought was precisely the case with Miss Jermyn, and were he disposed to play the suitor, no time could be better than the present.

He also derived additional encouragement from her . demeanour towards himself. It was frank, and almost affectionate. She met him evidently with pleasure, and talked to him with less reserve than to any other gentleman in whose company he had ever seen her. The cause of this was plain and simple. Caroline regarded Tyrrel only as the friend and relation of Granby. This was the principal point of view, under some modification, of which he never failed to appear to her; and hence all her ideas respecting him were insensibly derived. Springing as they did, from such a source, they could net fail to be agreeable. Between her and Tyrrel there seemed to arise a secret bond of union, in mutual regard for Granby. Hence her open friendliness of manner—hence her air of confidence. All the coquettish delicacies of love were banished utterly from her mind. She never thought of treating Tyrrel as one who might become her suitor. He seemed, by his relationship to Granby, to be within that close-drawn pale which must preclude the very notion of a nearer connexion.

All this did Caroline feel; but Tyrrel could not see it. He was a man of quickness and address, and no mean judge of character. Few were better qualified for the defensive warfare of society, or could with more acuteness penetrate deceit. But it was with the worst parts of human nature that Tyrrel was the best acquainted—its softer features frequently escaped him. With all his exterior refinement, he had an innate coarseness of sentiment, that prevented him from ana* lyzing the delicate mazes of a female heart. He viewed it with a cold, dull, generalizing eye. He understood, as well as most, the hackneyed tactics of gallantry; but a certain obtuseness of mental vision, concealed from him the finer springs of action with which a woman's breast is fraught. A heart like Caroline's was to him inscrutable. He could not penetrate the delicacy of it's sentiments, and accordingly drew from her behaviour only these two unqualified facts—that she had ceased to care for Granby, and that his own society was agreeable to her.





It now also occurred to him, that she was very pretty and attractive, and therefore one with whom it was excusable to fall in love; and that she was heiress apparent to a considerable fortune, and therefore one whom it was desirable to marry. With a mind made up on these points, he began to increase the frequency of his morning visits, and endeavoured to glide quietly in the character of an "ami de mamm." He now, too, began to direct his conversation rather more exclusively than heretofore to Caroline.

Lady Jermyn saw all this; but had no intention of interfering. It was exactly the sort of case in which she might safely gain some credit by forbearance, and make amends for past violence on her daughter's affections, by leaving her, in this instance, to do exactly as she liked.



CHAPTER IV.

I'll devise sonic honest slander

To stain my cousin with; one doth not know

How much an ill word ma; empoison liking.



Much Ado About Nothing .

On the day previous to the dinner party at Mrs.





Dormer's, where Granby met the Jermyns, Tyrrel called at Sir Thomas Jermyn's, and having ascertained from the servant, that Sir Thomas and Lady Jermyn were both of them from home, and that only Miss Jermyn was left within, contrary to custom in such cases, went in, and was shown into the drawing room, where he found Caroline sitting alone.

An opportunity so tempting was not to be resisted; and as Tyrrel had a great idea of the efficacy of a coup de main, after a few preliminary declarations of his high consideration, admiration, and love, and a few little encomiums on her manifold perfections, he made at once an offer of his hand.

Caroline listened to his proposal with an air of unqualified astonishment. Wonder was her prevailing sentiment. Tyrrel saw her perplexity, though he did not understand its cause—assured her he was serious— and repeated, with additional force, his protestations of unalterable love.

"Mr. Tyrrel!" said Caroline, still almost breathless with surprise and embarrassment, " you do me great honour—but indeed—I was not prepared for this—I never regarded you in this light—1 never even thought it probable—" /

'" But you will not," interposed Tyrrel, eagerly. "you will not suffer the unexpectedness of my proposal to be any bar to my future happiness? You shall have ample time to view me in this new light. 1 will not press for an immediate answer. I shall pass a painful period of suspense, it is true ; hut I shall make the sacrifice with pleasure, if it will be any satisfaction to your mind. Think further—think at your leisure, and alone, on all that I have had the boldness to say. I trust that time will aid my cause." And so saying, he manifested an intention to depart.

"No, Mr. Tyrrel," said Caroline, with recovered firmness and composure, "you shall not go away with this impression. Surprised as I am, the longest deliberation could not enable me to return you a more decisive answer than I can give at this moment. I must positively refuse your offer."





"Dear Miss Jermyn! on what account?" said Tyrrel, with mingled surprise and disappointment.

"I am sorry that you should have asked me that question," replied Caroline. "I thought you must have understood, from the terms on which we always met, that nothing like attachment," said she, blushing deeper at the word, "could ever exist between us. We have been used to converse familiarly, and have maintained terms of perfect friendship; and I can say, with great sincerity, that I have never seen any thing in your character that deserves to forfeit my esteem. But still I must tell you frankly, I do not feel towards you those sentiments which I must feel towards the man whom I can ever think of as my future husband.' "Permit me to ask you, Miss Jermyn, if that is your only reason for refusing me ?" said Tyrrel, in a dry inquiring tone.

"At any rate, Sir, it is a sufficient one," she replied.

"Perhaps," pursued he, not choosing to attend to

her reply, "you have no general disinclination to the

marriage state; and such a proposal might not have

been unacceptable from another person?"

Caroline coloured deeply. '• I cannot, Sir," replied she, indignantly, "consider you justified in asking such a question; and on that account I shall refuse to answer it."

"I will not presume to dispute that point," said Tyrrel, with a bow; "but it is certainly not an irrelevant question, or an unimportant one. It is of no slight moment to the feelings of the rejected person." "I also have feelings," said Caroline, "which have some claim to consideration."

Tyrrel returned no immediate answer. The whole truth presented itself to his mind. He saw that the love which he thought cold, was only smothered for a while. He saw, that if he was rejected, it was for Granby's sake alone, and that it was probably not so much his own merit, as the relationship with Granby, which had procured him her regard.

Wounded pride, mortified ambition, malice, revenge, and the hatred which he bore to Granby, now rose in quick succession in his mind. He walked once or twice across the room before lie again addressed her.





"Miss Jermyn," said he, at length, "I am satisfied. I give you full credit for being explicit; but more I am not disposed to grant. I had heard that consistency was not a female virtue; but you had made me doubt it till now. Caprice may have its charms for some, and to such I leave it. You have deceived me, Miss Jermyn—I do not say wilfully, but you have deceived me nevertheless."

"My sentiments," said Caroline, "have never been changed to your disadvantage. They have never been more favourable to you than they are now. But I will say no more," said she, with emotion,—" I am not required to defend myself against every assertion which you may choose to make."

"No, Miss Jermyn," replied Tyrrel, "you are not bound to offer any explanation. Perhaps," he added, with a malicious smile, "it is I who rather ought to account for my behaviour ; and considering the displeasure which it appears to have excited, I cannot refrain from so doing.- Indeed, I can again say, that I have been deceived. I have had wrong impressions given me by one who must have known you. Nay, I was even advised to propose to you—urged to it by a friend—one with whom you used to be tolerably well acquainted,— one, in fact, who was formerly an admirer, as he himself told me. There can be no harm in mentioning his name—I mean my cousin, Henry Granby.

Caroline, though in some degree prepared by the preceding description, could not help starting when the name was uttered. "Mr. Tyrre), what are you saying?" said she, turning pale with agitation.

"I merely mean to say," replied Tyrrel with an air of calmness, "that if I have been guilty of presumption in making this seemingly unexpected proposal —if I have ventured to think that you were easily to be won—more easily than to my sorrow I find—I may plead, as some excuse, that I was misled by the suggestions of another."

"And do you mean to tell me that this person"





<{ Yes, this person was my cousin Granby."

"Oh, no, no, Impossible!" exclaimed Caroline, in uncontrollable agony of mind.

"Impossible ! why so Miss Jermyn?"

"Oh ! he would never speak of me so."

',' He ought not to have spoken so of you; that I admit, and the result proves it. Good as his intentions doubtless were, I cannot help feeling some displeasure at him myself, for having led me to entertain hopes that are now proved to be false."

"But you must have misunderstood him," said Caroline. "Upon what grounds could he have said that I was likely to admit your addresses?"

"I am sorry that you should press the inquiry, because if you do I am afraid I shall be obliged to say that which may offend your delicacy. But since you desire it, I will tell you all. My cousin Granby never actually presumed to say, that you would accept me if I offered myself; but discovering the bent of my wishes, he at various times, sometimes directly, sometimes indirectly, threw in arguments to remove the diffidence I felt. I cannot mention the precise words he may have used ; I only recollect their sense. This, however, I remember —that one day, when my cousin had been talking a great deal of good-natured complimentary stuff, which I was fool enough to believe, about my expectations and so forth, and the propriety of my marrying soon and well, and mentioned you as the most proper object of my choice, (excuse my saying this, Miss Jermyn—remember that I tell it at your request)—he then went on to say —(I must beg your pardon beforehand for what I am going to repeat,)—he went on to say, that I should have very little trouble in gaining your consent, for that he knew from circumstances which had passed, relative to yourself and him, that you were of a very susceptible disposition—' susceptible' was his word, and he smiled significantly as he said it." *

Caroline burst into tears.

"Miss Jermyn," said Tyrrel, after a short pause, in a soothing, apologetic tone, "I entreat your pardon most humbly, most sincerely, for having given you this pain. I did not mean to afflict you so. I never thought you would have felt it so keenly."





"Oh ! it cannot be true," said Caroline, still weeping, "and if it is true, why is it told me?"

"Nay, Miss Jermyn, was it not at your request?"

"I never expected to have heard such calumny," said Caroline, without regarding him.

"Calumny!" repeated Tyrrel, turning pale at the word, but quickly recovering his composure. "Calumny is a strong word ; and I must say, in justice to my cousin, that I do not think he had any intention of misrepresenting you wilfully."

"Oh, no, no; I am sure he had not. When I spoke of calumny, I did not mean calumny of myself, but of him. I am sure he must be falsely charged."

"Miss Jermyn!" said Tyrrel, in a well assumed tone of surprise and indignation, "this is a serious imputation, but it is a hasty one, and I forgive it. Why should I wish to accuse my cousin Granby falsely? Good heavens ! how could you suppose it? Besides, of what have I accused him? In what, after all, consists his crime? In a mere trifling error of judgment. No, Miss Jermyn, on his account it is but fair in me to say, that if there is a fault anywhere, it is not so ranch in his having carelessly said these idle things, as in my repeating them to you. It is I, not he, that deserve your anger. I am willing to bear the blame. I cannot suffer your displeasure to light unfairly upon an absent person. And furthermore allow me to say, that had I known I was to be called upon for proofs, I could easily have procured a pretty good memorial in confirmation of my words—a little love token that he showed me, that perhaps you have by this time almost forgotten. It was a mere childish keep-sake, he told me—a thing that meant nothing—a little romantic whim of the time. I believe he said he asked you for it. It was of no consequence, but it only showed, as he observed, that you were easily wrought upon. Perhaps you may remember it—it was a lock of your own hair."





Caroline,,who had listened in breathless anxiety. almost screamed at the mention of the lock, and covered her face with her hands.

"I am sorry I mentioned it," said Tyrrel, in a soft compassionate tone. "I see it distresses you, though I really do not know why it should. I am sure I imagined you would think as lightly of it as he does. He laughed and talked, and joked about it, and so I thought perhaps would you."

"And did yon see it ?" said Caroline anxiously.

"Certainly I did."

"Aqd did he show it you?" she added in the same hurried tone.

"Certainly—how otherwise could I have seen it?" though I remember now, he mentioned something about a promise not to do so, but quite in a careless sportive way, so that I scarely recollected it. I am sure, by his manner, that he did not regard it as a serious promise, of any moment; if he had, he certainly would have kept it. I can answer for it, Miss Jermyn, that my cousin is too much a man of honour to violate a promise which he considered to be binding. He must not forfeit your good opinion for such a slight offence as this. I am sure he looked upon the lock of hair, as a mere innocent girlish gift."

"] have heard too much of this, Sir," said Caroline; "say no more I intreat you."

"You shall be no longer teased by further importunities from, me," said Tyrrel, bowingand stepping back: "but say h'rst that you forgive me for my boldness;— grant that one simple favour to a rejected man. And poor Granby—I shall be vexed, Miss Jermyn, if I have been the cause of rendering you displeased with him. Say that you forgive him too. Poor fellow, he has sorrows enough already, without being visited with your displeasure."

"Sorrows! what sorrows?" said Caroline, eagerly.

"Sorrows which I know how to pity. He is a rejected man, like me. That flirt, Miss Darrell, will no' accept him. I knew how that affair would end."

VOL. II. 4





Caroline uttered a faint exclamation—turned away her face—and rose hastily to depart.

"Pray, Miss Jermyn, do not repeat this," continued Tyrrel, "it would not be kind to Granby;—and besides, the fact is not generally known."

Caroline returned no answer, and still moved towards the door.

"Say that you forgive me before you go," said Tyrrel, stepping before her. "Your hand at parting— may not I ?" said Tyrrel.

She extended it towards him in token of forgiveness. Tyrrel attempted to kiss the proffered hand; upon which she hastily withdrew it, and without another word or look, walked instantly out of the room.

Any comment on the feelings excited in Caroline by this scene, would be superfluous. Of the tendency of those feelings we can easily judge, though not of their acuteness; and we-have already witnessed their unfortunate result, in her behaviour to Granby on the following day at Mrs. Dormer's.

Tyrrel, the guilty cause of her distress, after the first malicious glow of exultation at the success of his calumnious practices, began to feel a certain fear, lest Car61ine in her indignation, should reproach Granby with his imputed sins, and thereby betray the slanderer, and mar his plans by an explanation. A consideration of Caroline's character and habits, frequently led him to admit, that such a circumstance was by no means probable; yet nevertheless he determined, if possible, to mar all intercourse between her and Granby. For this purpose he began to attach himself closely to the former, that he might be a constant spy upon his actions and intercourse, in case of danger.

The interview between Caroline and Granby, at Mrs. Dormer's, turned out exactly as Tyrrel wished; but the invitation of Sir Thomas Jermyn struck him with no slight dismay. If Granby should once become a visiter, detection would infallibly ensue. He made, as we have seen, ineffectual attempts to work upon his cousin's pride, and induce him to reject the proffered civility. He then endeavoured, and succeeded in postponing the visit to another day ; but still his hopes were almost desperate; and it is probable that his purpose would have failed, but for the timely fracas at (he Opera. This gave him an opportunity of putting the crown to his villanous duplicity towards Granby, by encouraging him to write to Sir Thomas Jermyn, in explanation of the circumstances just alluded to, and then taking Charge of the letter, but in reality withholding it, and sending to Granby, as the supposed reply to it, that insulting note, which seemed necessarily to put an end to all future intercourse between the two families.





Such were the extensive and insidious plans of Tyrrel, to effect the ruin of his cousin Granby; an object which, according to the reader's present knowledge of (he relative situation and prospects of the two parties, will seem scarcely adequate to the means employed in gaining it. But on this point, the course of our narrative tvill speedily open other views.



CHAPTER V.

What equal torment to the griefe of mind*,

And pynins; anguish hid in gentle heart,

That inly feeds itself with thoughts unkicdc,

And nourisheth her own consuming smart?

What medicine can any leeche's art

Yield such a sore, that doth her grievance hide,

And will to none her maladie impart?



Spenser.

We return once more to Henry Granby, whom we shall now find at the house of his uncle, sad and dispirited, brooding gloomily on the past, and hopelessly looking towards the future. He had gone up to town with high hopes, and miserably had they been disappointed. He had sought amusement—he had encountered care. He expected agreeably to extend his circle of acquaintance; and while gaining a few whom he little regarded, he had lost those whom be most valued. He fondly hoped to be gradually reinstated





in his former intimacy with the Jermyns. But how was the prospect darkened here! He was irretrievably excluded from their society; and Caroline, even Caroline, was the least favourably disposed towards - him; and it was an aggravation of the case, that he knew not the cause of her displeasure.

He frequently debated with himself, whether he should acquaint the General with all the painful circumstances that had befallen him in London. It would be a great comfort, to be able to communicate his sorrow to one so kind and liberal as his uncle. But this was a selfish consideration, to which he did not allow himself to yield. Hehad no right to give his uncle needless pain, and destroy the generous satisfaction which he seemed to feel in the idea that Henry bad passed his time in town agreeably. In his letters to his uncle he had studied to be gay, and never communicated any but the bright and cheering side of every object; and in this well-intended plan he resolved still to persevere.

Accordingly, he said very little about the Jermyns, but told his uncle that they had made civil inquiries after him, and did not appear to have taken serious offence at the affair of the letter. Of the Opera-house squabble, and the subsequent note, he made no mention,—thinking that such a disclosure would only tend to exasperate his uncle, from whose interference in such a case he could not look for benefit.

He preserved the same silence with respect to Tyrrel, and his offence. Indeed he doubted whether he was not bound to this by his promise; as he had made no reservation in favour of the General. But though he kept from his uncle's sight his various subjects of uneasiness, and strove to speak on every topic that occurred, if not with gayety, at least with contentment; yet were his efforts ineffectual, and vainly did he strive to assume in appearance the cheerfulness which he did not feel.

His depression did not escape the General's eyes. He had hoped that society would not have, been without its use, in awakening the energies of his nephew;





and upon observing the recurrence of his former melancholy, began to be uneasy on his account. He frequentlyblamed himself for havingthwartedhis nephew's wish to enter a profession; the stimulus of which, he now thought, would probably have been effectual in counteracting the growing evil of depression. He almost doubted whether he had not judged amiss in not having even compelled him to embrace some active course of life. "Heaven knows," said he, "I have acted as I thought for the best,—with good intentions, if not with wise ones. I have done all I could for the boy, and ever will, please God. He thinks perhaps that I ought not to have brought him up in idleness: but he cannot know my reasons for doing so, nor may I tell them to him yet; but the time will come, and soon perhaps."

The old man sighed as he said this, and he took an early opportunity of sounding his nephew on the subject of entering a profession. But the incentive which before had proved so powerful in Henry's breast was now lost, and despondency had chilled and paralyzed his once keen spirit of exertion. He therefore replied with languid indifference to his uncle's inquiries, and professed with truth to have no disposition for any particular line of employment.

Satisfied on this point, the General's benevolent mind was soon at work to devise some other remedy that might prove suitable to his nephew's case. He remembered the delight with which Henry frequently recurred to his former tour on the continent; and cheerfully sacrificing the pleasure whice he felt in his society, strongly urged him to go abroad.

Henry liked the idea of this as much as in his present state of mind he was disposed to like any thing; but having been latterly so long separated from his uncle, he felt some scruples about leaving him. The General, however, made such a point of his travelling, that Henry eventually complied; and about a month after his return from London set out for the continent.

"Voyager," says Madame de Stael, "est, puisse dire, un det plus tristes plaisirs de la vie;" and so in truth it is, to those who use it as the means of flying from that unhappy, morbid self which they must ever carry with them. To such as these, to travel is but "to drag a lengthening chain;" and the home-sick repining of the wearied tourist, is ever adding fresh fuel to nis former malady. The separation from our friends, which travel necessarily induces, must throw some gloom across its pleasure; but its natural influence is cheering. Perhaps, of all amusements, it alone has the property of lengthening time to our perception, even when it makes it glide more smoothly. Our ideas are multiplied by change of scene, so that we seem to live a doable existence, even in the midst of doubled pleasure. With good health and buoyant spirits, a journey will always be the object of present recreation and lively retrospect. In truth, our pleasures are what we make them. They spring less from external objects, than from our own internal sense of them. The eye of gloom sees only strangers, where the lively and curious mind regards the same as persons from whom it hopes to extract information or amusement. We hate, as heartily as Sterne could do, "the man who travels from Dan to Beersheba, and finds all barren."





Such jwas not exactly Granby's case in his journey from Calais to Paris; for though his spirits were not gay, his mind was much alive to inquiry, and he looked about him with some degree of interest, though he did not recognise "la belle France" in the treeless, bare, interminable corn-fields, or "la Grande Nation," and '"la gaiete Fran^oise," in the squalid mendicant population of the desolate villages through which he passed. He saw, however, a vast expanse of cultivated ground, which must necessarily diffuse its plenty somewhere; and though he looked in vain for the rich confusion of an English landscape, lie might reflect that no space was lost in hedgegrows, and think with the American that the country around him was "finely cleared."

In Granby's case, too, the journey teemed with old recollections, which were, many of them, pleasantly revived. It was agreeable to live over the past again, and to recognise in a foreign land, when all was expected to be new and strange, a motley host of old acquaintance, both living and inanimate. From the same window of the same hotel, he saw the very Diligence that he had admired before, and just the same, even to its dirt;—looking as if it had not been cleaned since; respectable in its dinginess; each dusty wheel creaking in well-known accents. And there was the very pigtailed postilion, with his short blue jacket laced with red, shining black hat, with rim curved like a half moon, and boots that seemed his better half. And there was Monsieur le Conducteur, the counterpart of our mail-coach guard; fat, like his fellow on our side of the water; but there the resemblance ceases—for Monsieur le Conducteur has a martial air about him, which not even the red coat could ever give to our English guard. Instead of the broad brimmed, low-crowned hat, a blue foraging cap is jauntily cocked over the right temple; instead of the Belcher, he has a loose black handkerchief round his neck; chitterlings up to his eyes; a long velveteen jacket without skirts; and a large military cloak to supply the place of an upper benjamin.





Reminiscenees of this kind, in some degree compensate for the want of that eager, wondering interest, with which one traverses a foreign country for the first time. But Granby's wonder had not been all expended in the first tour; and he still felt an emotion of surprise, when, after crossing a very extensive common-field, scarcely occupied by a single house, he found himself at the gates of Paris.

There he found abundant materials for the business of amusement: as who can doubt that has seen Paris? and who, of the few that have not seen it, will refuse to believe? Much he had to see and hear—and much did he see, and much did he hear accordingly. Often did he pace the Louvre,—that "gorgeous gallery of dainty devices," splendid still, though stripped of its worse than borrowed plumes; and ever, as he did so, did he lament the neglected state of many of its pictures, and let slip, sometimes, a hearty malediction on the evil deeds of the "Restaurateurs."





There were many other sights to occupy his mornings. He pushed his way through the Exposition des Arts, where he saw a considerable deal of laborious trifling tastefully displayed, and a very imposing exhibition of misdirected ingenuity, mingled with much that was really admirable. He looked into the French Annual Exhibition, and found that, as usual, it was crowded with many historical pieces of stiff affectation, from the formal followers of the school of David, intermingled here and there with one of better promise. He strolled through the Palais Royal, that unique epitome of gayety, luxury, and vice; entered some of the Cafes, and saw the French exquisites stow away the surplus of their sugar in their breeches' pockets, to make "eau sucri" on the morrow; looked once more into that little room, stuck round with mirrors, which attracts, by its imposing name, so many of our countrymen, and disappoints them when they see it; smiled at the grave obsequious homage paid by her countrymen to the presiding goddess, "line peu passes," that sits with the air of a princess, at a splendid table decked with flowers, gracefully dispensing copper change. He went now and then to the Academie Royale de Musique, and reprobated their screaming singers, as strongly as he commended the Ballet. He visited the Theatre Franqois, and would certainly have gone to sleep there, had it not been for wonder at the animation which Talma gave to his heavy, prosy, spiritless part; and barring certain clawings, and pawings, and shakings of the hand, that were neither natural nor graceful, thought him the finest actor he had ever seen. He enjoyed their comedies and farces; saw grace personified in Mademoiselle Mars, and genuine humour in the quiet drolleries of Potier and Perlet. He admired again, as warmly as ever, some of their beautiful public buildings, and reprobated just as much their narrow, dirty, unsavoury streets; and in spite of that exculpatory phrase, could not approve "la totalite de la rue." He did not revisit the Salon





des Etrangers; it put him too much in mind of Tyrrel, Nor did he lose his way, as heretofore, in the Catacombs. But excepting these, he once more made the tour of almost all that this far-famed capital offers to the curious.

Meanwhile he had not been unmindful of affording his uncle the frequent satisfaction of hearing from him; and he had received one letter in return. It contained a good deal of that quiet gossip, which is peculiarly acceptable from a correspondent at home, but which cannot be interesting to any but those whom it immediately concerns"; nor would it probably have been very interesting to Granby, had it not come across the channel. There was, however, one part of the letter, which excited his attention in a high degree, and surprised him not a little at the same time. The following is the part in question.

"You will be glad to hear that our misunderstanding with the Jermyns is in a fair way of being entirely made up, and I trust that we shall soon become as good friends as we ever were. I have received a letter from Sir Thomas Jermyn, which I wish you were here to see, for it is a very civil, friendly letter, and I think would give you pleasure, and do him credit in your mind. He inquires very kindly after my health, and says how happy it would make him and Lady Jermyn, to see me at Brackingsley. But that is quite out of the question. I suppose he does not know that I never go out any where. However, it was very well meant. He also mentions you, and regrets that he saw so little of you in town. He says, the last he saw of you was for a few minutes at the Opera, where he was in trouble about his carriage. I don't know what he alludes to. You never mentioned any thing of the kind to me. He says he thought he should have met you again, but that probably you went out of town soon afterwards. A Mr. Smith, a friend of his, is going to stand for Bradley, in which I have a few houses, and consequently a vote, as perhaps you know. Sir Thomas Jermyn wishes me to support his friend.—I know nothing of him; but for Sir Thomas Jermyn's sake, (if I hear nothing meanwhile to his disadvantage,) I shall be very glad to give him my vote." The latter part of this extract perfectly accounted for the civility described in its commencement; and Granby could hardly help smiling at the benevolent simplicity of his worthy uncle, while he almost envied the happy tranquil feeling which such guilelessness of heart promoted. But with the part relating to himself he was completely puzzled. What could Sir Thomas Jermyn mean, by saying that he thought he should have met him again? as if it was Granby's fault that he did not, and as if he himself had not committed an act by which to render all farther intercourse impossible? Was it shame that led him to assume forgetfulness, and gloss over his former conduct? or was it sheer hypocrisy? To be sure, he could not tell how far electioneering views would lead the Baronet to oringe to those whom he had previously insulted; but that he should dare td use such language, when, for any thing he knew to the contrary, General Granby was acquainted with the whole case, and might even have seen his very note, was perfectly inconceivable.





Granby knew not what to think. His mind fluctuated between satisfaction and displeasure. Sometimes he was pleased to think that former intercourse might be resumed, and all that had passed be forgotten; and then again doubt and suspicion, and disgust at Sir Thomas Jermyn's meanness, poisoned all his promised pleasure.

He debated long what course he should pursue. At length he resolved, in his answer to the General, to give a softened explanation of the disagreement which had taken placa between himself and Sir Thomas Jermyn; tell his doubts; beg his uncle's assistance in removing them; and request an extract of that part of Sir Thomas Jermyn's letter which referred to him, in the precise words of the original. Having despatched a letter to this effect, he, as soon as the lapse of time would permit, begau to look anxiously for a reply. But day succeeded day, and he ex.





V

pccted one in vain. He became impatient—but what availed impatience here? He intended to have quitted Paris, and passed onward to the Rhine; but he now waited beyond the settled time at his old quarters, for fear of missing the expected letter.



CHAPTER VI.

The chamber where the good man meets his fate

Is privileged beyond the common walk

Of virtuous life, quite in the verge of heaven.—Young.

One morning, on Granby's retura to his hotel, from Galignani's reading-room, he was gratified with the intelligence, that there was a letter for him from England. On opening it, however, his joy was quickly changed into the deepest sorrow, at reading an account from his uncle's house-keeper, that her master had been suddenly seized with an illness which threatened to prove fatal.

Granby immediately resolved to set out for England that very day; and consequently much was to be done in the short time previous to his departure. Fortunately he had got his passport signed and counter-signed as many times as is deemed essential by the prudence of the French government, and had gone through all those troublesome forms, by which we are sometimes usefully reminded that there are countries which possess rather less freedom than our own.

A young single man always is, or ought to be, endued with the locomotive faculty in a high degree. By a prompt exertion of this power, Granby, in the course of a few hours, found himself beyond the barriers on his road to England. We will not accompany him in his rapid, but melancholy journey. Suffice it to say, with such expedition did he travel, that having left Paris on the Tuesday evening, on Friday about mid-day he drove into the village of Ashton, and stopped at the well remembered turn, where a bye-road led from the highway into his uncle's house. This was situated about a quarter of a mile from the public road; and Granby got out and walked to it.





It was a fine but melancholy day; one of those which this cloudy climate rarely affords, but which, when it comes, is apt to temper our admiration with a certain feeling of gentle sadness. Not a cloud was to be seen, to relieve and brighfen by its contrast the monotonous expanse of dull, deep, greyish blue. Not a breeze was heard to rustle through the trees; scarce a sound disturbed the silence, except the sky-lark twittering on high, you knew not where, and the long-drawn chirrup of the grasshopper. A thin haze which was spread over the landscape, gave a gloomy indistinctness to the distance, and deepened the flat solemnity of the dark-green trees. There was a general, unrelieved, dull light; so that, unless when looking at your own shadow, you might have almost questioned the reality of the sunshine; and you might have thought the landscape cold, were not your ideas otherwise diverted, by the enervating heat that poured down from the luminary above you.

The scene conveyed a sentiment of gloom to the mind of Granby,—who perhaps was predisposed, by the depressing object of his return, to seek food for melancholy. He walked on slowly, with his eyes on the ground, till on turning a well-remembered corner, the house appeared immediately before him, and he raised his head to look at it. The shutters had been closed to keep out the sunshine,—which gave it a deserted air. It looked to Granby like the mansion of death; and as he gazed upon the well-known window of his uncle's roo^m, he shuddered to think how soon he might be told, that this room contained the corpse of one so justly dear to him.

He involuntarily stopped as the thought arose, anil dreaded to advance and learn the worst; but after a brief internal struggle, he.pressed onward with a quickened pace. Still he saw no face that he knew, and heard no sound familiar to him, till, as he was almost e.t the door, an old favourite dog of his uncle's came bounding round the corner with a loud angry bark, which on recognising Granby, he instantly softened into a fondling whine, and writhed himself into many an expressive gesture of greeting.





Granby could not forbear, however occupied with other thoughts, from bestowing a short caress on his first welcomer, and then looking up, saw one of the shutters partially unclosed, and a female head appear through the chink. In an instant he was at the door with his hand on the bell, doubtful whether he should venture to ring. He removed his hand, for he heard the low pattering of feet in the hall within; the door was carefully opened; and behind it, as he entered, was Mrs. Robins, the old house keeper, with a face that struggled between pleasure at seeing him, and grief for the cause of his return.

"Is my uncle alive ?" were Granby's first words: they were uttered in a tremulous whisper.

"'Tis all we can say," replied Mrs. Robins; "but thank God, Mr. Henry, we can say that."

"I am anxious," said he, "to see him. Is he sensible? Does he expect me?"

"Yes, Sir, he does, I am pretty sure, for I told him myself that you would be back soon ; and he made signs, as if he understood me. But I think I had better prepare him for it, if you please, Sir. Will you just walk in here ?" and she opened the door of the room in which he and his uncle used to sit.

It was almost dark, the shutters being closed to exclude the sun. He half opened one of them, and as the light ponred in, looked round with mournful interest on the desolate apartment. Every thing in it reminded him of times that had been, and now, he feared, never would return. There was his uncle's chair in the spot in which he always sat, and another placed opposite, as if for himself, on the other side of the small Pembroke table. On that table lay the last newspaper that his uncle had been reading—perhaps the last he ever would read—marking by a day in advance the date of his first

VOL II. 5





Illness; and near it was an accumulation of unopened papers that had arrived since, and several sealed letters in well-known hands. On the chimney piece was a small old-fashioned clock—the last appeal from all other clocks, and watches in the house,—which his uncle, with scrupulous punctuality, always wound up with his own hand. 1^ had now stopped—a mute predicter of the fate of him to whose daily care it owed its motion.

Each of these trifling features in the scene before • him, conveyed to Granby its portion of sorrowful remembrance; and he continued sadly to dwell upon them, when the door was gently opened, and Mrs. Robins, with a few low words, intimated that she was ready to conduct him to his uncle's chamber. He followed her in silence, treading still softer and softer as he approached the room. She unclosed the door, and he entered; and as she told his name, he heard from the bed a faint inarticulate exclamation, which shocked him, from its utter want of resemblance to the usual tone of his uncle's voice.

The room was darkened by the window curtains being drawn, and it was some minutes before Henry could distinctly see the altered being that lay stretched before him on the bed,—now the wreck even of that pale, decrepid person that he had seen a few weeks before; He feebly returned the pressure of his nephew's hand, and turned his glazed eyes upon him with a faint expression of glad recognition. He tried to speak, but could not express himself distinctly. Seeing that he failed in making himself understood, he motioned Henry to sit beside him.

Some time elapsed before the latter could speak, for his tears flowed fast, and would not be restrained. When he did speak he could say little. Hope of recovery he durst not breathe, for he saw that the hand of death was upon his uncle. Things of this world were topics scarcely proper for such a time, and preparations for the next would be better enjoined from the pious and feeling lips of the excellent minister of the adjoining church. Granby therefore sent to request his presence, and .he administered, with affecting solemnity, the last consolations of religion to the aged and dying man.





After this, the sufferer sunk into a state of stupor, in which he continued for a considerable time. He seemed as if he were about to pass, by an easy transition, from insensibility to death; but he revived again, and was awakened to an increased anxiousness of what was passing around him. A feeling of interest and anxiety seemed at one time to agitate his features. He pressed his nephew's hand as strongly as his feeble strength would permit, and earnestly uttered, at several successive times, expressions which were scarcely articulate, but in which Henry thought he distinguished the words "open,"or "oaken bureau."

He thought these expressions were intended to refer to the place in which the will was kept; and by a look, and a few short words, he signified his comprehension of his uncle's meaning. The old man, upon this, seemed satisfied and resigned, and appeared once more to abstract himself from worldly thoughts, and prepare his spirit for its momentous flight.

The physician came again, but soon turned away with a saddened brow; and as Henry followed him from the room, and pressed his eager inquiries, whispered gently, that hope was past.

Night approached, and brought with it no amendment. The household had been fatigued with constant previous attendance, and therefore Henry, after snatching a short repose in the early part of the night, resolved to watch alone by his uncle's side until the following morning. He was left alone with him a little before midnight, and sat by his side with one hand grasped in his. The rest of the house was still as death, and no sound was audible within the chamber but the ticking of a watch, and the low perturbed breathings of the aged sufferer. This last sound became gradually less and less audible, and at times appeared to cease entirely; so that Granby hardly knew if life remained, and inclined his ear towards him, and touched the pulse with anxious dread, to ascertain its motion.





Midnight was past", and (he hours rolled on slowly and solemnly toward.* the morning; when all at once the light in the chamber was extinguished, and Granby was left in darkness. He could not quit his situation, for his uncle still retained his hand. The pressure was for some time linn and unvaried; till at length he suddenly felt his hand squeezed more strongly, and afterwards the hold was gradually relaxed.

A faint light was now perceptible through the crevices of the shutter, which was seen by Granby with heartfelt satisfaction. It increased rapidly, and he longed to rise and admit still more, but feared to disengage himself. He could easily have done it now, for the grasp was dull and feeble, and the hand seemed rather to be closed upon his own than to retain it. He thought, with horror, that a clammy coldness was coming over it. He benl his ear forward to the bed; but no breathing was audible. With an indefinable feeling of dread, he then touched the cold wrist, but could distinguish no pulsation. He extricated his hand from the stiffened fingers that enclosed it, rose gently, went to the window, unbarred a shutter, partially opened it, then turned his face, and as the cold gray light of morning fell upon the bed, saw at a glance that his best friend was gone for ever.

We will not dwell upon his feelings. Those who, like him, have lost the sole protector of their youth, can best imagine what he suffered. He gazed a while in a sort of stupefaction, on the lifeless body of his kind relation; then approached, and knelt by the bed for some minutes in silent prayer; then with recovered firmness looked once more upon the corpse, and closed its glassy eyes, that seemed to gaze unmeaningly upon him. Afterwards, turning from it, he gently opened the window shutters, with a careful and a noiseless hand, as if the sleep of death should still be respected, though it could not be broken.

It was a bright and joyous summer's morning. A clear light just tinged the edges of the hills, while a thia cool haze, like a silver gauze, was lightly thrown





across the valleys. The air was mild and fresh, and innumerable dew drops sparkled in the grass. The birds had began their early carol, and "the cock's shrill clarion'' echoed in the distance. All told of re* novated life—all spoke the voice of joy and promise.

It was a sight to cheer all hearts—all. save that of the desolate mourner, who looked out upon this fair scene from the silent chamber of death. To him it gave far other feelings. It added an impulse to his grief—it seemed as if Nature had unkindly withheld her sympathy. All without was bright and gay, and breathed of life and cheerfulness—all within was solemn as the grave. He turned his eyes from the death bed of his benefactor, to the brilliant spectacle of reviving nature, and the cruel contrast deepened the gloom of his situation.

There still was silence within the house, and Granby almost feared to disturb it. He waited awhile. It seemed as if all slept but him. At length a sound was heard, and then softly unclosing the door, he stepped forth to communicate the melancholy tidings.

The sad event was soon known to the whole household, and deep was the affliction it caused; and Granby's tears flowed afresh on witnessing their's. They had, indeed, lost much—an ever kind and generous master. But Granby's loss was greater far: he had to mourn for one whose benevolent spirit had fostered him almost from infancy, and who, in his worst of necessities, had been to him a second father; the heart was cold whose warmest affections had ever been for him alone; and stiff and motionless was the hand.that reared his orphan childhood.

In cases of affliction, the necessity of occupation, even though the duties that engage us be of a melancholy kind, is ever found a stern, but useful corrector of our grief. It is fortunate for us, when, after the loss of a cherished friend, or near relation, we are instantly plunged into a current of business which demands our close and constant attention. We are thereby prevented from indulging in that train of sad but unavailing thoughts, which such a circumstance wiii naturally induce.





Happily this was Granby's case. A whole day was before him, the wretchedness of which would have been almost insufferable, had it not been for the prompt exertions, and multifarious business by which that day must necessarily be occupied. The direction of every thing devolved upon him. He had to acquaint a long list of friends and relations with the sad event; to appoint the time and manner of the funeral; and finally, to examine the state and disposition of his uncle's affairs.

Among other directions for the funeral, a wish was expressed in the will, that Henry and Lord Malton should be the chief mourners; a request which the former immediately made known to his Lordship by letter, stating at the same time the day, and the place appointed.

This done, Granby could not help recurring to the words so earnestly expressed by his uncle, relative to some bureau. He thought he said, "open," or "oaken,"—but could not tell which, so imperfectly were the words articulated. He recollected that there was a small old bureau of oak, standing in a back room, which was called, as such rooms often are, the study, but which was certainly little used for studious purposes, and was more than half filled with dusty moveables of various descriptions. He opened it, but found nothing of any moment, and was thence led to conclude, that it was not of this his uncle meant 'to speak.





CHAPTER VII.

Time as he courses onward still unrolls

The volume of concealment.



Remorse.

For several days Granby was closely occupied, either in superintending various arrangements, or in examining and destroying the various letters and papers, •which the General, during a long life, had allowed (in some instances rather heedlessly) to accumulate. On the evening before the funeral, in turning over the leaves of a memorandum book,—to see if it contained any article of moment, the following words caught his eye—" Mem. To tell Harry that when I am gone, he will find the paper in a secret drawer of the oaken bureau, in the back study."

He started from his chair as he read this. It explained, at once, his uncle's meaning. It was to this bureau that he meant to direct him, and from the earnestness of his manner he could not doubt that the paper in question must be one of deep importance. With a strong feeling of curiosity and interest, in which hope and fear were very equally blended, he took a light and went to prosecute his search. He opened the bureau, and after a careful scrutiny discovered the secret drawer.

It contained a thick packet, sealed with his uncle's seal, and directed in his hand writing, " To my nephew, Harry Granby, to be privately opened by him after my death."

He eagerly returned with it to his room, broke the seal, and tore off the envelope, which was found to contain several sheets closely written in the hand writing of his uncle. By the many various shades of the ink, it appeared to have been written at several successive times. The date of the beginning was that of many years back, and there was another at the end, which was the 16th of the preceding November.





Granby could not help looking with a feeling of awe on a paper which promised to disclose so much of interesting matter, and which might so materially influence his future prospects. He drew a candle towards him, sat down, and read as follows.

"My Dear Harry,

"Before you read this, I shall be no more, and you will have lost, if not an able director, at least a zealous and attached friend. It was my wish to be to you all that a father could have been, and you, 1 think, have been no less desirous to show towards me all the affection and deference of a son. How far 1 have well and wisely executed my task, 1 cannot say; but God knows that I ever acted as I thought for the best; and you, I am sure, will not be backward in doing justice to the integrity of my intentions. 1 have a long story to tell you, and one which nearly concerns yourself'. I should have wished to have told it otherwise than thus; but I have been fettered by a solemn promise, and my honour has forbidden me to break it.% By this promise I am bound not to disclose the circumstances which 1 shall now relate, except by a paper to be opened by my executor after my death, or if before my death, only in case of the previous decease of another person. That person is Lord IVlalton, and it is chiefly of hi;n that I am going to speak.

"We have never talked much upon family subjects, especially those which are in any degree connected with him; but, I believe, you are nevertheless informed, that in case of the failure of male heirs to Lord Malton, the title, and mostof the landed property, would descend to the representative of the younger branch. This was a disposal which the present Lord Malton could not alter; but which, I am well persuaded, he would have altered had it been possible. Whether it was the secret cause of his disagreement with your father, or whether his quarrel with your father made him the more averse to this disposal of his property, I cannot say ; but certain it is, that he and my brother were hardly ever on friendly terms, and were at one time in a state of actual hostility. But I will not dwell on these things; I will rather remember that he never failed to acknowledge your father's good qualities, and was uniformly kind in his behaviour to me. Lord Malton, as you may have heard, married early. His first wife was a Miss Danvers; a very pleasing, amiable woman, who brought him a tolerable fortune. She did not livelong, and left only one child, a son, who died shortly after her. Lord Malton was very much grieved at her death; the more, perhaps, on account of the double loss which he sustained, and the consequent disappointment of his hopes of a successor.





"Within two years he married again. His second wife was Miss Stratford, sister to the late Sir James Stratford. My cousin seemed to be fortunate in his choice. I thought so, and so did many others, and there was reason for thinking so, for she was an excellent woman; so mild, and quiet, and compliant; and though not exactly handsome, she was very pleasing in her appearance. You know her picture, Harry—it is an excellent likeness of her—my cousin Malton gave it me.

"Well—as I said, he seemed to be fortunate, and they ought to have been happy. B'it somehow or other they were not. 1 am afraid it was mor>- his fault than her's,—as you will see when I have told you all. But 1 must also say that >he had one defect. I hardly like to call it even a defect; but it was unfortunate, and might have been in some degree the cause of their unhappiness. She was very diffident and reserved. He fancied she was cold, and did not care for him. I know that she did—too much, poor soul, for her own happiness.

"For the first three years they had no child; and this to him, who was so desirous of an heir, was a very serious mortification. It perhaps contributed in no small degree to weaken his affection for her; and she, poor dear woman, grew pale, and thin, and low-spirited, and quite unlike her former self. I am sorry to say that I believe this change was brought about by his unkindness. Not that he ever quarrelled with her, or used her violently ill; but his affection for her passed away, and she perceived it too plainly; and this to one who loved her husband, as I am sure she did, was worse to bear than any violence of temper. Then there were other distressing things, as you wilt see:—but I must not anticipate.





"Well—at length there was a promise of a family, and she was delivered of a son. This gave great joy to my cousin Malton; hut his joy Whs soon checked. Lady Malton was seized with what I believe they call a puerperal fever, and died in the first week of her confinement. Poor Malton! though I fear he did not love his wife, he certainly felt this blow severely. I believe his conscience reproached him for his past conduct to her—conduct that could not he recalled; and then, as I often heard him say, there seemed to be a sort of fatality which had attended his marriage prospects. It was indeed melancholy to have lost so soon a second wife, and in a way similar to that in which the first had died. And then it wounded him in the point on which his wishes harped, and endangered his hopes of an heir; for though the child had survived its mother, yet it was but a sickly infant, and probably might not live long.

"I went to «tay with him at Tedsworth about three weeks after poor Lady Malton's death. He had written to me very dejectedly; and as we had always been familiar friends, and he used to be cheerful when I was with him, and I knew that a little quiet society was good for people in low spirits, I wrote to offer him my company. He accepted the offer very gratefully ; and accordingly I went to see him. He seemed anxious about the child, which had become his only hope, and which wag, as I have said, a poor little sickly thing. He did not mention it often, and was rather short in his answers to me whenever I inquired after it. Nevertheless, he evidently thought a good deal about it, saw it several



I





times a day, and had frequent private conferences with the nurse that took care of it.

"But notwithstanding his great anxiety, and the apparent illness of the child, he never sent for a medical man. This circumstance surprised me; for one was living not far off, whose skill was highly spoken of; and I took the liberty one day to hint to him my thoughts, and to point out this as a proper person. But he did not seem to take my interference in good part; said that he was the properest judge; that I might be sure nothing needful was neglected ; and that the person in question knew nothing about children. The subject was dropped, and as he seemed inclined to take offence, I never thought proper to resume it.

"1 must now mention a circumstance which took place a few days afterward. -Remember, Harry, that this was in the year ninety. I was then young and active, eager for amusement of any kind, and very fond of field sports. Tedsworth was to me a paradise, for it abounded in game and fish; and as my cousin did not care about them himself, their management, while 1 was there, and the direction of the keepers, seemed to be vested solely in me. I walked out one evening after dinner (it was in July, on the loth,) and went, attended by one of the keepers, to superintend the laying of some night lines. It was a tine,-still, summer's evening; and the lines being properly disposed of, I was tempted to prolong my walk. 1 strolled along the edge of the Jake, and struck across from the upper end towards the western corner of the shrubbery.

"I remember that evening, Harry, as if it was but yesterday. It was twilight, and about nine o'clock; and I sauntered quietly through the close walks of the shrubbery, enjoying the coolness of the evening, sometimes walking, sometimes standing for a few minutes, and watching the bats that flitted.to and fro above my licad. While 1 was standing thus, I heard the sound of soft, quick steps, as if some one was stealing gently, but rapidly, along the path towards me. 1 stood still, and presently there came round Ihe corner a woman





muffled up in a dark cloak, with a large bundle under it. On seeing me, which was not until she came quite close, she started, and stopped, and made a sudden exclamation, and F knew immediately by the voice that it was Mrs. Franklin, the nurse. She seemed exceedingly alarmed; and thinking that she did not know me, (forit was almost dark) and was alarmed on thataccount, I spoke to her, and asked her where she was going, and - what she was carrying under her cloak. I remember her answer, and her manner of givingit. 'Nothing Sir,' said she; and her voice trembled, and she tried to pass me; but the walk was narrow, and as I stood in the middle'she could not get by.—' Nothing ?' said I, 'it is a nothing that lies in no very small compass.'—Those, I believe, were my very words, and I put out my hand to touch the bundle; upon which she hastily drew back, and told me it was only some linen that she was taking to the head keeper's wife to be washed; and on saying this she brushed hastily by me, and passed on.

"I stood considering for a few seconds. The woman's behaviour puzzled me; and I thought I saw strong ground to suspect that something was not right. She had a relation living near, and it struck me at once, that she was robbing her master, and carrying things from the house to this relation. Besides,—I remembered that she was not going the nearest way to the keeper'?, which made my suspicions stronger still. I therefore resolved at once to follow her. I hate the character of a spy; but I thought myself bound1 in duty to my cousin to protect him from abuse and fraud, and felt that I should almost become an accomplice, if I did not attempt to.sift this suspicious circumstance. I followed the woman at a distance, losing sight of her at times, and then again faintly seeing her through the twilight. I soon saw that she was not going to the keeper's lodge; and. I continued to watch her till she entered a lonely cottage by the edge of the park, where there lived a woman of the name of Wilson, who .was her sister, and widow of a former keeper, who had Jjeen settled by Lord Malton rent free in a cottage near the park. She had one daughter living with her— a beautiful blooming girl about nineteen.





"Poor Mary Wilson! 1 must tell you a litttaof her history, for she was deeply concerned in the events which

I am going to relate. It was her misfortune to attract Lord Malton's eye. The interest excited by the death of her poor father, had led my cousin, from charitable motives, to call in his rides occasionally at the cottage; and Mary, whose beauty was certainly great, did not pass unobserved by him. He continued to call at the Wilsons' cottage, but not, as at first, from charitable intentions; Mary alone had become his object. I can make no excuse for him. He knew his advantages of situation, and he pursued them: but it was a most unworthy use to make of those advantages. She was naturally blinded by the admiration, guilty as it was, of one so greatly her superior. I cannot think that she was ill-disposed; but it was a sore temptation, and she yielded to it. A few days after Lady Malton's confinement, she was delivered of a son. I knew this proof of her guilt, and more than suspected its author.

"But I must return to the events of that evening. After seeing Franklin enter the cottage of her sister, I doubted whether I should not follow her thither. But I felt some repugnance at appearing personally in this affair, and thought it sufficient to rouse my cousin's vigilance, and leave to him the work of detection; and with this view I returned home, and resolved to acquaint him with all 1 had seen. 'I have reason to fear,' said I, when we were alone, (I repeat as nearly as possible what I remember to have said,) ' I have reason to fear that one of your servants has been acting dishonestly, and conveying things to which she has no right out of the house.' He stared at me, and asked me whom 1 suspected. 'Franklin, your little boy's nurse,' said I.

I1 met her with a bundle under her cloak, coming through the shrubbery.' He seemed to start when 1 named the person, and gave me a very keen look. I can almost fancy I see him before me as I write, his manner made so great an impression. 'And where did

VOJy. II. 6





she go ?' he asked. I told him, to Mrs. Wilson's cottage, and advised him to investigate the circumstance, and said that I did not like to see him pillaged without telling him all I knew. He smiled upon my saying this, thanked me for my vigilance, but said that my suspicions were groundless, and then told me, lowering his voice, that Franklin bad gone by his orders to take such things as might be needful for the sick to Mary Wilson and her child ; and he added that the child was very ill.

"After a short pause, I said rather abruptly, ' If Franklin was taking these things by your order, how came she to say that she was carrying a bundle of linen'!' I looked up in my cousin's face as I said this, and was quite astonished at the effect which my simple question seemed to have. He turned very pale, looked distressed, and asked me, angrily, why I expected him to account for all that the foolish woman chose to say. Then, after consideration, he added, that perhaps, under all the circumstances, she felt an awkwardness in alluding to the situation of her niece Mary.

"I pursued the subject no farther, but I thought about it a good deal, and did not feel satisfied that there was not some mystery at the bottom. I determined to learn more; and soon after breakfast on the following morning, I walked to Mrs. Wilson's cottage. On entering, I found her and Mary in great affliction ; and was told by them that the child was dead. I said a few, things to comfort them, and inquired from what cause it had died so suddenly. They described the cause and manner of its death ; and I then asked them when it took place. Mary could not speak for weeping, but her mother told me, about one in the morning. Seeing them in deep distress, I forbore to allude to Franklin's visit on the preceding evening; and very soon came away. I think it was on my return that I met the nurse with the baby in her arms. I spoke to her, and asked her in a careless way, why she had been so much alarmed the evening before. She said it was late, and a lonely place, and she was startled at meeting me so unexpectedly, and did not at first know who it was; and she then told me that she had been taking food and medicine by Lord Malton's order to Mary Wilson. I asked her why <he could not have told me so at the time; and she accounted for her behaviour in the same manner that Lord Malton had done before. 'Perhaps, Sir,' she added,' you may not have heard that poor Mary has lost her child—I found them last night in great affliction ;'—and then she described their situation in very moving terms, and observed what a heart-rending sight it was to see Mary sitting weeping with her dead child upon her knee. 'Then the child was dead when you got there?' said I. Franklin said that it was. 'And you were there between nine and ten ?* She looked uneasy at the question, and said, after a short pause, that she. could not speak with certainty as to the precise time. I said no more to her, and we parted.





"The contradictory statements which I had just heard with regard to the time of the child's death, made no slight impression upon me. I was worked up to a state of suspicion; and the mystery of this affair, connected as it was with a scene of death, appeared to darken fearfully. Strange thoughts flashed across my mind, which I strove in vain' to drive away. They only returned with greater force. They haunted me the whole day; and I can remember even now the anxious sleepless night I passed, in trying to persuade myself of the impossibility of a scene of villany, which, could I suppose it to be true, would at once explain all difficulties. I remembered my cousin's anxiety for an heir, the weakly state of the infant—the mysterious care which had lat-' terly been taken of it—the sudden death of Mary's child —the contradictory accounts—and Lord Million's strange embarrassment. I passed one or two days in a wretched fevered state of uneasiness. Burf roused myself by the reflection, that if there was foul play, it would be incumbent on me to use all efforts to detect it; more especially when a brother's rights might suffer by the fraud.

"Iwatched my opportunity, that I might speak to Franklin alone. Sur.h an opportunity soon arrived. She was walking in the shrubbery, and had the child in her





arms, butf muffled up so that I could not see its face, I desired to be allowed to look at it; with which she complied after some demur. I began by praising the child's appearance; commented on its improved health; and observed that it was not like the same; and as I said this I looked at her very earnestly. I saw her change colour, and seem distressed; but she struggled hard for composure, and began to talk extremely fast in order to draw off my attention. This only served to increase my suspicion. 'Which was the finest child,' said I, in . a significant tone,' this or Mary Wilson's?' This was a question which she ought to have answered readily and without emotion. But she did not so answer it. She was evidently embarrassed. I believe she thought it an ensnaring question; and she was not furnished with a ready reply. She stammered, and hesitated; said first one, and then the other; and at last replied, that there was very little difference between them. I asked her what she was alarmed about, and why she could not answer, plainly and calmly, so simple a question. She said she did not know, and seemed to get still more and more confused. 'You were right, however,' said I, in a very. marked tone,' in saying that there. Whs little difference: there is indeed little or no difference. Ay,' said I,' no difference;' and I looked at her very keenly, and saw her tremble with alarm. 'I do not understand you, Sir,' said she, in a faltering voice, and then she attempted to walk away, and said she must take the baby in. • Stop,' said 1, catching her by the arm,' it is fit that you should understand me. I have much more to say to you;' and then I looked round, to see whether any one was within sight or hearing, and seeing nobody, I proceeded,' Now,' said I, in a stern tone,' tell me,—do you persist in saying that Mary's child was dead when you arrived at the cottage?' She answered ' Yes;' but she did not answer promptly. She paused awhile, as if to consider what she should say. It was not the answer of a person who speaks at once the simple truth, regardless of its consequences. 'Very well,' said I; 'now, I myself have been at the cottage, and they as





sured me that the child died about one o'clock in the morning. You were there before ten, and say that it was then dead. You cannot both of you be right.'

"Franklin seemed alarmed at first, but vehemently exclaimed against the possibility of either party having made a wilful misstatement; and she went on to talk very rapidly about the difference of clocks, and persons in affliction not attending to time; and at last added, that the child might not have been dead after all, and that she only knew that it looked as if it was. I had begun to feel that a mistake was possible with respect to lime; but this want of firm adherence to her tale again brought back my worst suspicions. 'When I met you,' said I, 'with the bundle in your arms, you first told me that it contained linen; you afterward said that it was food and medicine, carried by Lord Million's order. What if I believe neither of these tales were true?' 'You may think what you please, Sir,' said she, hastily; 'but what I did, I did according to my Lord's order; and so you will find, if you choose to ask him.' 'I do not doubt,' said I, 'that you acted according to your master's orders, but I doubt whether those orders.were such as you have represented.' 'If you are not satisfied upon that point, Sir,' she answered rather angrily, 'you had better ask my Lord himself;' and was going away, when, I again stopped her. 'I shall ask him,' said I, 'in due time; I am now questioning you.' 'I do not know, Sir,'said she, 'what you suspect me of.' 'Do you wish to hear ?' answered I, looking her steadily in the face. She had before been red with anger; she now turned very pale, and just uttered a faint ' Yes.' 'I suspect you,' said I ' of conveying in that bundle, the body of your late mistress's infant to Mary Wilson, that it might pass for her's; and I suspect that it is the child of Mary Wilson which you now carry in your arms.'

"She had not the address to assume surprise at the accusation, sudden and formidable as it was; she evidently knew what was coming. 'And what is your reason for thinking that?' said she, with a steadiness that surprised me—a steadiness which, I suppose, she owed to the desperate aspect of her situation. I answered, perhaps imprudently, that I had very strong suspicions of it; and told her that her own behaviour first excited them; and I urged her strongly to confess. But I found that I had lost my influence, by betraying the poverty of my resources, and in making so direct a charge without sufficient evidence to support it. She began to inveigh against me loudly, and said that she would instantly go and inform Lord Malton of all that I had said. I told her she was at liberty to do so; saw her re-enter the house; and went myself directly to the stables.





"My horse was ready saddled, and without delay I galloped to the cottage of the Wilsons. They looked at me, as I entered, with fear in their faces: they saw I Came upon no mild and pleasing errand. I did not give them time to recover, but entered immediately into the subject. I pressed for no'confession—I assumed the fact, and spoke as one who was informed of all. They could not utter a word in contradiction. Mary burst into tears; the mother threw herself on her knees before me, and tried to exculpate herself by saying (what I fear was true,) that Lord Malton had threatened to turn them out of the cottage, unless they consented to change the children, and receive the dead child as their own. Poor Mary also said, as well as her sobs would allow her, that she was lured by the idea that the situation of her child would be improved by the change, and that he would inherit wealth and rank, which otherwise could never have been his.

"I passed but little time in conversation with them. I made them produce pen, ink, and paper, and wrote a brief acknowledgment of their fraud, which I placed before them, and required them to sign. At first they hesitated, and pleaded their fear of Lord Malton's displeasure; hut I told them that the consequence of their refusal would be still more terrible, and thereupon they at length complied. You will find this paper in the packet. On receiving their signatures, I left the cottage, and returned home; and on re-entering the house,





was told that my cousin had been inquiring for me. I guessed the cause. He had been informed of my conv versation with Franklin, and wished to speak to me.'.' upon that subject. It promised to be an agitating in'* terview; for I had a serious charge to make; and it was probable that from this day our terms of intercourse would be changed for life.

"I retired to my room for a few minutes, to secure my paper, and compose my thoughts, and then walked down to the library. Before I opened the door, I could hear my cousin pacing the apartment; but on perceiving me about to enter, he had thrown himself into a chair, and pretended to be calmly occupied in reading. He looked up from his book, as I came towards him, and said to me, with an air of affected unconcern, 'Granby, you are a good-humoured free-spoken fellow, but be careful how you jest with servants; they don't always take things as they are meant. Here is Franklin has been to me with a cock-and-bull tale of a confabulation she has had with you this morning. You have frightened the woman out of her wits. She seriously believes that you mean to accuse her of being a kidnapper, or a fetcher and carrier of dead children, or something of that sort—-I hardly know what—for I don't quite understand her story. But really, cousin, begging your pardon, this subject is rather too serious forajest.' 'I didn't speak in jest.'said I. He changed colour very much. 'Do you mean,' said he, ' that you did not say what Franklin represents?' 'I do not mean it,' I replied, ' I do not doubt that she has stated correctly what I said.' He looked at me very earnestly, but with more of fear than amazement in his air; and desired to be told the cause of such extraordinary suspicions. 'Cousin,'said 1, 'it is needless to tell you the cause of my suspicions; at present, I do more than suspect, I know the fact. Since my conversation with Franklin, I have been to the cottage of the Wilsons, and they have made full confession/

"Lord Malton was utterly confounded; he actually staggered with the shock, aud the colour left his face entirely. I can fancy that I see his ghastly countenance fefore me now. I was silent, and allowed him time to recover himself. 'And do you believe these wretched people ?' said he, after a short pause; 'they have been tampered with by some person; they will say and unsay any thing.' 'They will not dare to unsay any thing they have already said,' I answered; 'they know I am prepared for that. I have their written confession, signed by both of them.' Lord Malton seemed ready to sink into the earth. He had not expected this precaution, and all escape seemed now precluded. He asked to be allowed to see the paper. 'No,' I answered, 'if you doubt my having such a paper, ask the Wilsons, and thej will tell you. It will be time enough for me to show it, when I am required to do so in a court of law.'





"At this my cousin's strength and spirits seemed to fail him; he sunk upon a chair, trembling violently, and grasped me earnestly by the hand. 'Granby,' said he, 'for heaven's sake don't ruin me. I am in your power; you know all, and can tell all; but have some consideration for me; think how nearly we are related;' and then he spoke of the disappointment of his hopes of an heir, and his wish to provide for his natural son; and said a great deal more to me with much earnestness of manner; so that, in spite of his offence, I could not help feeling for his situation. I told him I was sorry for him, but that, nevertheless, I must do my duty; and that, having detected this shameful fraud, I could not allow it to operate to the exclusion of the rightful claims of your father and his successors. He long urged me to suffer the affair to pass in silence ; but I continued to insist on the impossibility of sacrificing my brother's rights. I pressed" him to avow his fault, and to repair it; and said that, so soon after its commission, this could be done with greater ease, than if a longer period had elapsed. 'It is impossible,'said he; 'the thing is done, and cannot be recalled. The child is buried under a false name— the entry is made in the register. That must remain





in evidence against me.' And then he earnestly entreated, that if 1 had any regard for him as a friend and cousin, I would keep silence.

'* I was greatly perplexed, and did not know what course to take. By publishing the affair, I should bring my cousin into serious trouble; his character, at any rate, would be blasted. Besides, the child might die, and then if 1 did but hold peace, no harm could be done to any one. I was the depository of a secret deeply affecting the rights of others. But you were not born then; your father was not even married. Probably he also, had he known the facts, would have been inclined to secrecy and mercy. In short, after reviewing all these points, I resolved provisionally to comply. 'I cannot,'said I, 'consent to the sacrifice of my brother's rights; but I am sorry for you, and would not have you come to harm. 1 will keep silence upon these conditions ;—that my promise shall be considered binding only for the term of either of our lives, and that you give me here a written confession of the whole transaction, which must be also witnessed by Franklin.'

"He hesitated for a moment; then sat down, and wrote what I required. He afterward sent for Franklin. She came in. 'Sign that,' said he to her,' and witness my signature. It is a confession of all that has passed with respect to the children. You are safe as long as you keep your own counsel—Major Granby will not tell." She signed the paper, and left the room. You will find that paper in the packet. It is marked with two crosses on the outside.

"' And now,' said Lord Malton, ' it is but fair that I should have your written promise of secrecy.' 'You shall have it,' said I,' but remember, that I reserve to myself the liberty of disclosing all, by a paper to be opened after my death, by my executor; and that in case of your dying before me, I may publish it to whom 1 please. There is another thing which I must also mention. You will have it in your power to make ample provision, out of your personalty, for your natural son. But, nevertheless, it would be cruel to bring him up with expectations which must eventually be dis. appointf d; and I, therefore, require, and make it an express condition, that before he arrives at the age of ten, you fully inform him of his real birth and expectations; and observe,' said l^j(pr I saw him wavering, 'that from this condition y6ff shall not escape, for if you do not inform him of it, be assured that I will.0 'Never fear,' said he, his countenance inflaming as he spoke; 'he shall be taught to curse his parents at the proper age.—Have you any more conditions to impose?' 'No more,' I answered. 'Then sign your promise.' I did so, and he received it in silence.





"I recollect that silence well—it was terrible—it lasted, perhaps, only for a minute or two; but it seemed hours to me. There was my cousin, slowly folding up the paper, and seeming to ponder as. he did so; looking so stern, so sad, so pale with agitation, yet trying to be calm;—while I stood earnestly watching him, thinking on the terms on, which we were likely to part. On one thing I resolved—to be no more a visiter at Tedsworth. Under all these circumstances, my presence would necessarily be irksome to my cousin. I should be felt as a restraint, and should recall unpleasant thoughts. Besides, I could not bear the idea of seeming to take any advantage of my acquaintance with his secret, and thereby forcing myself upon him.

"I remember, that I was the first to speak. 'Cousin,' said.I, ' I trust you believe that I do not wish to be your enemy. We are near relations, and though we cannot, henceforth, be the intimate friends we used to be, yet I should wish to part from you in perfect kindliness of feeling. I will not reproach you for what you have done, for that might seern ungenerous. I must leave you, Malton; but it shall not be in unkind. ness. I trust you will still believe me your fervent well-wisher, and will never regard me as your enemy/ 'No,' said he, 'it is I that have been my own worst enemy.' He asked why I must leave him, and I told him my reasons. He thought for awhile; but appeared !atis6ed. 'Well,' said he, 'perhaps that is best for both parties. But stay with me for a few days. I wish for your presence, in order to smother any suspicion that may arise in my household. Franklin is the only servant that is at present in the secret. The rest know nothing, and I believe suspect nothing; but of this I cannot be certain. If the) should, your sudden departure might give them fresh grounds.'





"1 felt the truth of what he argued; pitied him for being driven to such precaution; and agreed to comply with his request. 1 remained at Tedsworth four days longer. They were four uncomfortable days. Each of us scrupulously abstained from alluding to the subject of the late affair, and tried to behave as if nothing material had occurred. But it would not do; we were both of us embarrassed and oppressed, and an awkward consciousness of our relative situations hung a perpetual load upon our spirits. A sense of guilt weighed heavily upon him, and 1 had many a harassing reflection, and was even haunted, w^en in my cousin's company, w^th the sense of what'he ought to feel.

"Iwasglad togo,though I could not but experience a pang at parting. On the day before my departure, 1 revisited arcry favourite haunt about the place. I do not knowEhy I did so, for it was a melancholy sort of pleasure. It scarcely deserved to be called a pleasure; it rather seemed a painful duty; for, I felt, as I looked at these scenes, that I was probably viewing them for the last time. And hitherto, it has been so. 1 have never set my foot in Tedsworth since. Perhaps

never shall again.

"And now, Harry, I have given you as full an account as I am able of this extraordinary transaction. You will perhaps be surprised, that after this lapse of time, I should be able to describe, with such minuteness, events so long passed. But 1 felt the necessity of preparing an account for my successor; and immediately after the discovery, even .during the four days of my stay at Tedsworth, I employed myself in noting down the conversations that had passed. These I embodied in a short paper, which I drew up for the inspection of your father ; but since his death, I have written it afresh, with a more minute detail of the tacts, and have addressed it to yourself.





"You see, my dear Harry, from what I have stated above, that you are the rightful heir of.Lord Malton; and that, on the event of his death, you will succeed to his titles, and all the Tedsworth property. May you live long to enjoy it. I may never see that day— I do not think I shall—I feel a certain presentiment, even while I write these few lines, which tells me that this paper will give you the first intelligence of your future fortune, at a time when I am dead and gone. I am older than Lord Malton, and do not think I shall survive him.

"And now, my dear nephew, you can best judge how far I have wisely executed the important duties of a guardian. You can now penetrate into the motives of those parts of my past system, which long ago I would have explained, had I been at liberty so to do. You now see why we held so little communication with our relations at Tedsworth. You now can understand why I have never given you a profession.

"Your cousin knows his situation—has known it from his boyhood. Lord Malton scrupulously performed the painful task which I imposed. This 1 know positively, having ascertained the fact once when I called to see your cousin many years ago, at the time when he was a Westminster school-boy. He seemed indifferent about it; which, though surprised at, I was glad to see. Time must have rendered him still more so, and it will be happy for him if it has; for in his case, quick and sensitive feelings would be a real misfortune.

"I say all this, that you may know that, with respect to him, you will have nothing to communicate. You will therefore be spared a painful office, and the equally distressing reflection of the sudden change of situation which your poor cousin must undergo. It will be greater in appearance than reality. It is but an event to which he had looked forward from childhood. Be. sides, I trust that although Tedsworth cannot be his, yet he will still have an ample provision out of his father's personalty. Again I commend him to your friendship. I am growing old and feeble—it is fit that I should think of death. Lord Malton, however unjustly, may probably be averse to you. Let me, if possible, extend the hand ef reconciliation even from the grave. In my will, I have signified a wish, that at my funeral Lord Malton should be a mourner .as well as yourself. This will convey to him the gratifying thought, (for such I trust it will be,) that though his offences have been great, and our consequent separation long, they have not extinguished my regard. It will also amoothen to yourself the difficulties of a first meeting. You will meet at atime when sorrow softens the feelings, and pride and stubbornness of spirit either are or ought to be repressed. You will be thrown into close communion, with your hearts subdued and chastened by the solemn scene before your eyes. Connected as you both are with him over whom you meet to mourn, you will feel, I trust, with greater force, the ties that bind you to each other; and though I cannot see that day, yet it will be one source of pleasure in my dying hour, to think my very dust may be a mediator between you, and that you will seal upon my grave the bond of future friendship.





"And now farewell, my dearest nephew. May you long dignify and enjoy that station, which must on some future day be your's. It is painful to me to conclude. I see you daily, it is true; and perhaps may continue so to do long after writing this farewell. But still, when I consider that I am penning the last address that you ever can receive from me, a certain sad and awful feeling agitates me as I write. I am taking a last and solemn leave; and were you distant from home, and did I not hear at this instant your horse's tread below my window, I should scarcely have courage to write the words. But I must—and will. God bless you, my dear boy. Once more—farewell for ever."

One of these few last words was blotted, as if a tear

VOL. II. 1





had fallen upon the writing. Granby could not view without a corresponding emotion, this silent record of his uncle's love. With a reverential feeling of grief and tenderness, he laid down the paper, and resting his forehead on his hand, briefly reviewed the circumstances of this extraordinary disclosure.

What a wonderful change in his prospects one short hour had effected! He seemed to be scarcely the same person who had so lately sat down, with less of hope than fear, to the perusal of this important document. A busy crowd of former circumstances pressed forcibly upon him,—circumstances which till now he had viewed under another light, or had hardly allowed himself to regard at all, and of which this paper furnished him at once with the brief and faithful explanation.

The darkest side of this new view of past scenes was occupied by Tyrrel. He recalled to mind those dreadful words, which, for the first time, he heard with such astonishment. "Know, that you have deemed yourself the friend of one who could have stabbed you while he shook your hand." It was horrible to have heard such words; and still more horrible to recall them, at a time when he was cruelly persuaded, by circumstances before unknown, of the dreadful sincerity with which they were uttered. Till now he had never thought that Tyrrel really was his enemy; and had been inclined to regard these terrible expressions as the mere result of temporary rage. But now what an altered retrospect! and what a serpent had begun to wind itself about his heart! Now he saw that his destruction had been the settled purpose of TyrrePs soul. He shuddered as the thought arose, and looking back to the infatuated confidence which he once reposed in Tyrrel's honour, he poured forth thanks to that providence which had saved his inexperienced youth from the hidden snares which were set around him.

But pity for his cousin's lot soon succeeded to his just icsentment; and he felt, were he to meet him at that moment, he could stretch forth the hand of reconciliatory friendship. His present splendid expectations did not much occupy his mind; and he was almost surprised at the indifference with which he viewed them. There was a time, when for the sake of Caroline, he would have regarded them with transport; but the hope which then possessed him was now extinct, and he looked upon his altered prospects, with a feeling rather of wonder than of satisfaction.





After giving way, for some time to the reflections that crowded on his mind, Granby turned once more to the packet, and examined two other papers which it contained. One of these was the confession of the Wilsons; the other that of Lord Malton. The former consisted only of these words, in the hand writing of his uncle :—" I, Mary Wilson, do solemnly affirm that the infant now lying buried in the church yard at Tedsworth, described under the name of James W ilson, and pur-porting to be the illegitimate child of me, Mary Wilson, is not my child, but was brought dead to this house by Elizabeth Franklin, on the night of Thursday, the 14th ult. i and I, Jane Wilson, do attest the same; and we do believe the said child to have been the male heir of Lord Malton; and we do further affirm, that the present supposed heir of Lord Malton is the illegitimate child of Mary Wilson, which child she resigned out of her own keeping, into the hands of the said Elizabeth Franklin, on the 14th day of the present month.

(Signed) Jane Wilson.

Mary Wilson.



Tuesday, July 19th, 1790."

The other confession, which was in the hand writing of Lord Malton, was much longer, and contained merely a recapitulation of much which has been related already. Granby carefully deposited all these documents in a place of safety, and then retired to snatch a repose, which his anxious and overburthened mind would scarcely permit him to enjoy.





CHAPTER VIII.

Every funeral may justly be considered as a summons to prepare for that: state into which it snows us that we must some time enter; and the summons is more loud and piercing, as the event of which it warns us is at less distance. Johnson.

The following morning was that appointed for the funeral; and Granby rose, oppressed with a sense of the melancholy scene in which he soon must act a part. The disclosure of the last night seemed like a troubled dream; and at first he almost questioned its reality. But soon an anxious thought arose. In a few hours he should find himself in the presence of Lord Malton. This would prove a trying situation. He could not suffer Lord Malton to depart in the belief of his ignorance of the real relation in which they now stood towards each other; and he knew not whether he ought even to allow a meeting to take place, without first informing him of the present posture of affairs, He determined that he ought not, and accordingly addressed to him the following letter:—

"My Dear Lord,

"At the time when I sent you the melancholy intelligence of my uncle's death, I was not in possession of any facts relating either to you or to myself, my knowledge of which it was necessary to intimate. Had I then known what I now know, I should have thought it my duty, even in that hour of grief, to have informed you of it. Since that time I have made a discovery of great moment. Yesterday evening I found papers containing the full account, and also the proofs, of a transaction which took place in the year 1790. The proofs consist of two statements, one in your hand writing, and signed with your name, and the other written by my late uncle, and bearing the signatures of Jane and Mary Wilson. I think it proper candidly and





i

explicitly to state to you the whole of the documents of which I am possessed. If it is your wish, I shall be happy to furnish you with copies of them all. We are soon about to meet in the discharge of a mournful duty; and I may therefore seem to have acted unnecessarily, in having sent you a previous written explanation of that which I might so soon relate to you in person. But I thought this course would spare much that must be painful to the feelings of us both. I felt unequal at such a time to make the disclosure personally; nor am I certain that such would be the most proper method of proceeding. I thought it hardly consistent with a due regard to your feelings, to allow you to enter unsuspectingly the presence of one who was possessed, unknown to you, of a secret so important. I will, with your permission, reserve all further discussion of this subject for another time; and meanwhile, believe me, my dear Lord, your's very faithfully,

"H. Granby."

Having written this letter, he despatched it by a servant, whom he directed to take the road by which Lord Malton was expected to come, and give it to him without delay.

The messenger who had been despatched with this letter soon returned, and said that he had met his Lordship, and had delivered it into his own hands: that Lord Malton stopped the carriage while he read the letter, and desired him to wait and see if any answer was required. The servant being further questioned by Granby, said, that after reading the note, Lord Malton did not immediately issue directions, but threw himself back in his carriage, and covered his eyes with his hand. At length he looked up, very pale and agitated, and told the servant to return immediately and inform his master of his coming. He then inquired the distance to Ashton; and as-the servant was riding away, he heard him order his people to drive on slowly.





The distance between Ashton and the place where the servant met Lord Malton was not great; and although the servant had ridden fast, he was not likely to precede Lord Malton by more than an hour. His arrival might therefore be shortly expected; and Granby looked forward to it with an anxiety which even his grief could not absorb. Undoubtedly he was rendered, by the present deep cause of sorrow, less accessible than at other times to the uneasy feelings which such a meeting would excite; but his spirits had been greatly harassed, and his frame weakened, by the agitation of his mind, and he was but little equal to this fresh trial.

Meanwhile, several of the friends of his late uncle, some of whom had come from far to pay their last tribute of respect, now began to assemble; and presently a carriage and four, with a viscount's coronet on the pannels, drove slowly up to the house. Granby's heart beat quick, while a low whisper ran round the room, that Lord Malton had arrived. In a few seconds the door was thrown open, and his Lordship entered the room.

All who were seated rose to receive him; and Granby advanced a little from out of the circle, and half raised his hand to welcome him. But.his hand was no sooner raised than dropped. That of Lord Malton, instead of being also extended, had been thrust hastily into his breast, while he bowed solemnly to Granby, walked past him, and without a glance at the rest of the party, threw himself into a chair.

His countenance was pale and sad, but it had not the meek composure of grief. Other feelings mingling there, had stamped on it their troubled image. Emotion of another kind was still more powerful than sorrow, if one could read aright that haggard, wrinkled brow—that downcast but restless eye—and the lips compressed so stubbornly and firmly, as if to control their quiverings.

He gave Granby but one look—one short, penetrating look. It would hare been difficult to say exactly what that look conveyed, but it was not the harbinger of peace and kindness. Granby understood this well, and saw with sorrow that thoughts were rankling in the breast of his relation, which even the loss of an ancient friend had not the power to subdue. Lord Malton sat for a few minutes, with folded arms, and head bent forward on his breast, as if attempting to abstract himself from the passing scene. Presently he cast round his eyes with fearfulness and hesitation, and exchanged a slight bow of acknowledgment with such of the party as he knew, and then relapsed once more into stern and sullen abstraction.





Lord Malton's entrance had been followed by a dead silence; which, though the occasion of the meeting might seem to justify it upon the score of sorrow, was felt by many to be oppressive and distressing. By none was this more keenly felt than by Henry Granby; for he both knew the cause of Lord Malton's altered manner, and was conscious that his own was the voice which ought first to break the pause. He therefore gently approached Lord Malton's chair.

"This is but the second time, my Lord, that we have met," said he, in a low and tremulous voice.

Lord Malton made no answer, nor did he even look at Henry again. On the contrary, he drew his hand across his forehead, and compressed his lips more strongly, as if to manifest the plainer his resolution not to speak. Granby drew back dispirited and distressed. Thus repulsed, he could not venture to address Lord Malton a second time. He thought that such an attempt would but betray more glaringly his alienated sentiments.

When next he ventured to look round, he saw the quick and benevolent eye of Mr. Thornton, the clergyman of Ashton, glance from him to Lord Malton, with an air of sad and anxious inquiry.

A dreadful interval succeeded; but the time of the funeral was at hand, and even its afflicting preparation, and the putting on of cloaks and scarfs then came as a seasonable relief.





CHAPTER IX.

When such strings jar, what hopes of harmony?

I pray, my Lord, let me compound this strife.



Henry VI. Pakt II.

We must now suppose the last ceremony performed, and many a tear dropped to the memory of the kind and generous being who was then committed to the grave—the funeral array dispersed—and the parties reassembled.

Lord Malton's countenance showed no varying symptoms of emotion; but at one time its. paleness became even ghastly, his strength appeared to be failing him, and he eagerly seized the nearest support.

Granby ceased to observe him. He was now absorbed by a grief as poignant as that with which he witnessed his uncle's death. This was a final separation; and the previous dissolution seemed but a preparatory blow. Even after life has fled, the visible presence of a departed friend almost cheats us into a persuasion that the lie is not yet indissolubly broken, But the grave removes all outward trace; and our grief receives a fresh impulse, when compelled to look our last.

The minutes slowly passed away, and some of the party began to depart; but no favourable change had yet been observed in the repulsive manner of Lord Malton. He had spoken occasionally to some of those who were present, but not one word had he exchanged with Granby. This was probably observed by all, but by none so much as by Mr. Thornton, the clergyman of Ashton, who had long known the late General, and consequently felt both grief for his loss, and interest in the fortunes of his successor.

Mr. Thornton was a truly exemplary specimen of a parish priest: strict, though not austere; pious, though not an enthusiast; zealous without bigotry; and tolerint without lukewarmness. He was a man of true humility—of unostentatious, unambitious benevolence. He did good for its own sake, and not that the fame of the doer might be blazoned. He thought not of public opinion, when a benevolent object was in view. Perhaps he consulted it too little. But this was an amiable fault. His zeal would sometimes be more conspicuous than his judgment; but it was an unpretending zeal, which pride had never influenced. Worldly fame he disregarded. He would rather be a steady than a "shining" light. He was no excursive proselytist; and did not leave his flock unheeded, while his wandering eyes were stretching far away to distant objects. He was richly endowed with " that most excellent gift of charity;'' and it proved with him to be indeed "the very bond of peace." He believed that he had no enemies, and in truth he had none; for those who were not with him, scarcely were against him; and even the straight-haired, stiff-necked preacher of the neighbouring meeting house bent in obeisance as he passed. No drop of sectarian gall had ever rankled in his breast—no spark of intolerance was kindled there. He could not sink the Christian minister in the partizan; nor smile at an imprecation because it was levelled at a hostile cause. He gave hypocrisy no quarter; and never winked at the sins of those who strove, by regular church-going and punctual payment of their tithes, to win his connivance, and compound for their offences. He had great simplicity and singleness of .character; and this was joined to an observant quickness, with which the former qualities seldom are united. He was full of cheerfulness himself, and therefore loved the voice of<innocent mirth in others, and sanctioned the enjoyment of temperate amusement.





Mr. Thornton had observed with some pain the hostile indications which presented themselves in the conduct of Lord Malion, and was grieved at this ill-timed expression of resentment; which, rightly judging from Granby's manner, he saw were neither expected nar returned. He thought from these appearances that he might possibly do some good; and as he was one who in such a case never gave a ready ear to the timid suggestions of punctilious delicacy, and who was even willing, when in pursuit of higher objects, to incur the risk of officiousmess and imprudence, he determined to speak to Lord Malton, and endeavour to compose the difference that existed between him and his young relation.





An opportunity soon occurred. Lord Malton was the last to depart, and the rest of the party being gone, andGranby absent tromthe room, Mr. Thornton found himself alone with him.

"Excuse me, my Lord," said he, advancing towards him, with a mixture of timidity and earnestness in his manner, "excuse me, if what I say should seem to you abrupt ami rude. I have nothing to plead but good intentions. You may think me foolish and officious; but my present appeal can do no barm to any but myself, and I am willing to incur that risk. I wish to speak to you of our lamented friend's nephew, Henry Granby."

"And what of him f said Lord Malton, dryly.

"My Lord," .*aid Mr. Thornton, "I have seen with pain this day that you are not upon terms of friendship; nay, that there is more than coldness—that on your side there is even positive displeasure."

"And who told you this, Sir?"

"I saw it, my Lord—your own conduct told it me. It was not grief, it was anger that influenced your behaviour; and at such a time it gave me pain to see it. I therefore resolved to use my endeavours to heal this breach; and with this view I speak to you. My conduct may be strange and bold; but, rny Lord, I have long known our lamented friend and his nephew, and I feel a natural interest in all concerning that young man, and think that at such a time as this no good offices of mine in his behalf sjiould be wanting."

"Your interposition, Sir," said Lord Malton, assuming an air of proud sarcastic composure, "may be very well meant; hut 1 am inclined to doubt whether it will be productive of any advantage to the person whom you intend to benefit."





"1 humbly hope it may," said Mr. Thornton. "At any rate, 1 trust it will not operate to the prejudice of bis cause."

"Of that, Sir, I shall speak hereafter: but I shall first ask whether you have thus interposed by his desire, and whether you have, ever had any conversation with him cm the subject?"

"None, my Lord, I solemnly assure you. I act upon my own suggestions; and may the evil consequences be upon my head, and mine alone. I ventured with the more boldness, because 1 judge that he is the offender. Anger is on your side, my Lord, and sorrow on his. I saw that he was much oppressed with the sense of your displeasure. I thought it even seemed to surprise him. I know him well. He is generous and amiable, and is not one who fosters evil passions. Forget and forgive, my Lord, I entreat you. What can, he have done that at such a time you should continue to show this unkindness towards him?"

"Sir," said Lord Malton, drawing himself up, and walking away a few paces, "I am not disposed to lay myself open to gratify the curiosity ol an unauthorized mediator."

"My Lord," said Mr. Thornton, "I entreat your pardon. I am not impelled by curiosity—1 do not ask to know the cause—1 only wish that your displeasure (unless the cause be great indeed) should not, in this hour of mourning, be so heavily added to the other ;riefs which he must feel. This is my sole request, rny Lord. I do not ask for explanation; reconciliation is all I desire to see."

"Sir," said Lord Malton, "I have heard you patiently, and with an attention which you owe more to your character and profession than to the subject of your appeal. I respect the clergyman, rather than the mediator. Your office, Sir, is that of peace; and I can forgive the zeal which makes you think this case within your jurisdiction. But I must now request your forbearance. I cannot allow my private sentiments to be invaded. You forget that you are interposing between near relations. There are family reasons for my displeasure, which I cannot suffer you to approach. My feelings upon this point are sacred."





"Nay, my Lord," said Mr. Thornton, "no feelings can be sacred, that encourage enmity with our fellowcreatures. I need not tell you that charity is the characteristic of our faith. You say I have forgotten that I am interposing between near relations. No, my Lord, it is that very circumstance which makes me more eager to tender my services on this occasion, My Lord, you are one of the nearest relations that now remain to Henry Granby. You are the person to whom he would naturally look up for support. Think how severe must be his grief, when newly bereaved of his former guide and second father, to find in you— you, my Lord, who are his next surviving guardian— instead of the open and protecting hand, only hostility and aversion. It is indeed a bitter thing to lose a cherished relation by death; but it is scarcely less trying to see them lost to us through enmity. Your young relation now encounters at once this double loss. 1 pity him, and may you do so likewise! Oh! my Lord —hold out to him the-hand of forgiveness. Whatever his offence has been, let his misfortune be a full atonement."

Lord Malton seemed to be moved by this appeal. The stubbornness of his features gradually relaxed; his eye twinkled, as if a relenting drop were struggling within it; and checking a sigh, he turned away and walked towards the window. But his eyes appeared to take no cognizance of external objects; the mind was too busily employed. After a short pause he turned to Mr Thornton.

"Sir," said he, "you have given me pain; but 1 excuse you—nay, I will even say, I thank you. You ask me to pardon the offence of my young relation. You will be happy to hear that there is none to pardon





Vet my conduct was not without its cause. I was harassed—irritated—scarce myself. I cannot explain— but you will be satisfied in knowing that were he present at this moment I would freely take him by the hand."

As he said this the door opened, and Granby entered. Lord Malton changed colour, and walked to the other end of the room, as if collecting strength for the parting effort. Then turning, he first briefly took leave of Mr. Thornton ; after which he walked up to Granby, and extending his hand, said, "Mr. Granby, you can understand, and can therefore excuse the feelings which have this day influenced my behaviour towards you. I lament that those feelings should have been beyond my control. I have been hurried into an injustice. Hear me then say before this gentleman, that you have committed no offence towards me, and that I bear you no ill will. I freely offer you my hand. It is, however, better for both of us that our communication, should be slight. But though distant, we need not be hostile. Friends we cannot be; but I trust we never shall be enemies: and with this wish I take my leave."

These words were uttered in a low impressive tone; after which, with a bow to Granby, which seemed to signify that he did not wish for a reply, he walked out of the room, and in less than a minute his carriage was heard in rapid motion from the door.



VOL. II.





CHAPTER X.

Like to the grass that's newly sprung,

Or like a tale that's new begun,

Or like the bird that's here to-day,

»Or like the pearled dew of May;

Or like an hour, or like a span,

Or like the singing of a swan:

E'en such is man, who lives by breath.

Is here, now there, in life and death.

The grass withers, the tale is ended,

The bird is flown, the dew's ascended,

The hour is short, the span not long,

, The swan's near death—man's life is done.



Simon Wastell.

Granby was nowileft alone. The gloom of his situation seemed to darken, and in spite of the brilliancy of his new prospects, he could not rouse his spirits to cheerfulness. The pressure of business had ceased; the exciting call for grief was past; and nothing remained but the comfortless resumption of a routine sufficiently resembling its former course, to preserve a constant recollection of past days, and the loss which had wrought the only difference in the present. Day after day came the solitary meal, and with it the daily sorrowing glance at the vacant seat of him that was no more; and so passed away another week of gloom and heaviness.

On the ninth morning after the funeral, a man in the Malton livery, mounted on a splashed and tired horse, was seen, to the surprise of Granby, to ride up to the house.

That a man on horseback should have been dispatched from such a distance, (for it was rather more than forty miles,1 betokened tidings of no ordinary moment; and Granby's anxiety to know the cause of such a visit was extreme.

A letter was soon brought, addressed to him by Lord Malton's steward, stating that his Lordship had caught a severe cold on the day of the funeral at Ashton; that an inflammation had come on; and that his life was almost despaired of; and that he now wrote by his master's order, to request the immediate pre,sence of Mr. Granby, at Tedsworth.





Such a summons could not be disobeyed, and within two hours Granby quitted Ashton. A few hours more spent in rapid travelling, brought him within sight of a dark line of undulating woodland, which stretched to a wide extent before him, and indicated his approach to a place of considerable importance'. Having been at Tedsworth only once, and having then approached it from another quarter, he was little acquainted with the localities of the ground, or its appearance from a distance, and therefore doubted whether those woods did indeed belong to the Tedsworth domain. He inquired from the driver, and was, told they did ; and he then looked at them with an interest very different from the vague and timid curiosity with which he viewed them a year before.

The distance, though little more than a mile, now seemed provokingly protracted till they arrived at the lodge, and drove under its proud arched gateway into the park. The view at this point was beautiful and imposing. On the right was a broad breast of wood, sloping to the edge of a long irregular lake of considerable size, which lost itself at one end behind a projecting groupe of trees; while at the other, diminished to a rippling stream, it wound along the valley in front, —ks course distinguishable less by the glittering of the water, than by the drooping alders that waved over it.

To the left was a varied extentof park-like ground, undulating in graceful slopes, and richly sprinkled with many an ancient twisted thorn, and oaks of gigantic growth and venerable character; while here and there a lofty birch contributed the pleasing contrast of its waving boughs and shining bark; and the dark green holly deepened the shade of the retiring masses. A few patches of gorse and fern gave an agreeable air of subdued vvildness to the character of the ground, over which were thickly spread numerous herds of fat





lazy deer, that nodd«d their branching heads, and stared with tame confidence at the passing carriage.

In front the road was now lost, and now reappeared at intervals, according to the rise and falling of the ground, and the occasional trees that intervened; and in the direction which it followed, above the top of a plantation of younger growth, appeared the pinnacled roof of a house, and numerous gray wreaths of smoke, which were relieved against the mass of distant wood that clothed the heights behind it.

As the carriage advanced a little farther, the house, a handsome edifice in the palladian style, came full in view, and beamed out in all the pomp of sculptured freestone, from the dark-green foliage in which it was embosomed. All around it breathed the air of pomp, dignity, and wealth. Nothing was out of character, even to the proud swan that floated majestically down the lake.

With such a scene before his eyes, in spite of the reported danger of its owner, Granby may perhaps be excused for suffering the idea to flash occasionally across his mind, with somewhat in it of exultation, that all this might eventually be his.

It was his already. Death had struck the blow, and Lord Malton was no more. A few minutes brought him to the knowledge of this awful fact. He was soon at the door; and the face and manner of the first domestic told him at once that all was over.

After the first whispered intimation, Granby was ushered in silence into the library, where the steward soon presented himself, and informed him that his Lordship had died that morning, a few hours previous to his arrival;—that he came from Ashton with the indications of a severe cold, which continued rapidly increasing, till there was little doubt that an inflammation of the lungs had taken place. As soon as he was sensible of his danger, he had desired that Mr. Granby might be sent for, and seemed to intimate that the management of every thing should devolve upon him. He had never mentioned his son but once, and that a few hours before his death.





Mr. Tyrrel had not been at Tedsworth for a considerable time; for he and his father were at variance. The steward did not know where he then was; nor, he believed, did Lord Malton at the time of his death. It was therefore impossible to inform him by letter of his father's decease; and the only mode of speedy intimation, was to make it public immediately. The steward also said, he understood it to be his master's wish, that the direction of every thing should devolve meanwhile upon Mr. Granby; and he added that he was ready to receive his orders.

Granby had now again to enter upon a painful repetition of those scenes which he had already passed through on a more affecting occasion. He could now, too, compare the respective characters and degrees of grief which were exhibited by the household at Tedsworth, and at Ashton; a comparison which greatly redounded to the honour of his excellent uncle. Here there was much decorous solemnity, and a very respectable show of sorrow; but not more than might spring from a contemplation of the possible loss of a good place, rather than the actual ^loss of a respected master. The servants walked softly, spoke low, and shut the doors more quietly than usual; but there was no halfaverted face, no quivering cheek, no tear-drop trembling in the eye, as there had been among the little household of his lamented uncle.

Granby at first felt doubtful how to act with respect to his claims: whether to give them immediate publicity, ortotally to conceal for awhile his actual situation. The former course he thought indelicate ; the latter timid and suspicious. He, therefore, resolved to pursue a middle line, and instantly to acquaint a few of the principal do-. mcstics with the actual disposition of the property and title; desiring, however, that it might, for the present, be kept by them a profound secret. He also desired that he might still be addressed as Mr. Granby.

On making inquiries respecting Franklin, the nurse, and Jane Wilson and her daughter, he was told that Franklin was alive, and so also was Mary Wilson, but that her mother was dead. Franklin, they said, was living in the house where she had continued for more than thirty years; and was now very old, and had almost lost her faculties.





He requested to see her, and desired that the steward alone might be present at the interview. The steward said he would bring her to him ; and soon a little, bent, emaciated, paralytic old woman, was led into Granby's presence.

There was an appearance of imbecility or second childhood in the vacant, yet inquiring look with which she regarded Granby. He desired her to sit down, and himself took a seat near her.

"Mrs. Franklin," said he, "I am a person whom you have never seen. My name is Granby."

The old woman seemed struck by the name, and peered at him earnestly from under her wrinkled eyelids.

"Are you the Major, Sir?" said she.

"She is thinking, Sir, of the late General," said the steward softly in Granby's ear.

"I am his nephew," said he.

"Then it is not him," exclaimed Mrs. Franklin. "Thank God !" and she tried to clasp her palsied hands.

The subject, connected as it was with his late uncle, became very painful to Granby; but he saw that the effort was necessary, and roused himself to pursue it.

"Are you informed," continued he, "of the death of my uncle, General Granby?"

"Of whom ?" said the old woman, advancing her ear towards him.

"Of him whom you remember as Major Granby."

"I do remember Major Granby—though it is a long time since I have seen him, and I am a poor old decrepid creature, and my memory is not what it was—but I remember him very well. He was here last—let me see—well, well. -no matter how long since ;—but what were you saying, Sir, about death? you were not talking of my Lord?"

H Of the Major's death," said the steward, in a low tone, considerately wishing to save Granby the pain of repetition.





"The Major?" said the old woman eagerly, "and is he dead ?—Then all is safe."

Granby and the steward exchanged looks. "No, Mrs. Franklin," said the former, "I am privy to the facts to which you allude ; but I do not wish to draw from you a repetition of what then passed—I only desire to call your recollection to a single circumstance. Do you remember signing a paper, in which it was stated, that Mr. Tyrrel was the son, not of Lady Malton, but of Mary Wilson?"

"Sir—Sir—what are you saying," exclaimed the old woman, staring wildly^her palsied frame trembling with increased violence.

"I have such a paper," said Granby, "and I ask you if you recollect the signature?"

"Stay—Sir—stay—I am old and feeble," said she, gasping as if for breath—" don't hurry me—give me time to think awhile—this has come upon me suddenly. But are you sure that you have the paper?"

"The paper !" said the steward in an under voice, as if to himself, and looked at Granby with an air of conviction.

"I have the paper," replied Granby, "and I wish to ask you whether you would acknowledge the signature, if it was shown to you in a court of justice."

"A court of justice!" exclaimed she, "Oh! you won't take me to a court! Spare an aged woman, Sir; I have done evil in my youth—but do not bring me to shame in my old age. A few years more, ay, or months, or days, young gentleman, and I shall drop into the grave. But I tell you I will not die forsworn—I will deny nothing that I have done. And now, Sir," added she, raising her hand to her head, as if seized with sudden pain, "say no more to me about it, and let me try to forget it all*"

"I am satisfied," said Granby, in a mild tone; "I will not press the subject farther:" and rising, he quitted the apartment.

He next repaired to Mary Wilson, now a woman of fifty, whose care-worn face still retained some faint traces of her former beauty. She was much afflicted; but seemed to be prepared for the blow, and attempted no denial of the circumstances.





The first important object of Granby's search was Lord Malton's will,—which, as heir-at-law, it was necessary that he should open. After long search he found a will, which bequeathed to Tyrrel the whole of his personalty, but maffe no mention of the landed estates, and desired that the funeral might be conducted in the most private manner possibL This will, however, was cancelled,—the seal being torn off, arid the signature partially erased. Further search became therefore necessary; but after the most patient investigation no other could be found. Lord Malton's attorney knew of none. He had not even been called in to assist in making that which was discovered, 'and which bore the date of four years back.

This, the only apparent document, being cancelled, it became necessary to conclude that Lord Malton had died intestate. By the conditions, however, of this imperfect will, Granby determined strictly ,to abide. It was, he thought, an act of mere justice to Tyrrel, and would place him in comparative affluence: which, however ill he merited, he had probably been brought up to expect. Granby had reason to fear that serious delinquencies on his part had induced his father to recall this favourable disposition; but still he could not suppose, that had not death come so suddenly upon Lord Malton, he would have gone to the grave, leaving his only child in a state of worse than beggary.

"There were also bequests to some old servants, and a provision for Mary Wilson, which Granby determined punctually to execute.

The funeral was next to be arranged ; and Granby, in compliance with the wish of the deceased, took all proper means to insure its privacy. This was facilitated by the circumstance of the church being close to the mansion, so that neither hearse nor coaches became necessary. It took place at an early hour in the morning. A few of the principal tenants were privately desired to attend; but none of the neighbouring gentry. Granby was the only relation present; and consequently the chief mourner. Thus, twice within one month, had he performed that solemn office to the two nearest of his male relations; and found himself, at their death, the heir and.successor of each.





Never before had so short a period teemed with events so important to Granby's future prospects ; events by which his views and condition had been at once completely changed. Such a change might easily have blown up the flame of pride in many a bosom young as his. But the solemn scenes which he had lately witnessed had brought with them an awful lesson, and taught him the nothingness of those distinctions which now expanded to his view.



CHAPTER XI.

I can be dishonoured only by perpetrating an unjust action. My honour is in my own keeping, beyond the reach of all mankind. No injury that you shall inflict shall provoke me to expose you to unnecessary evil.

Caleb Williams.

A Week had now elapsed since Lord Malton's death, and still no tidings had been heard of Tyrrel. It was found necessary that Granby should remain at Tedsworth at least two days after the funeral; and as Tyrrel had not yet appeared, he began to hope that he might be spared the pain of a meeting that would be doubly distressing under a roof which, to the exclusion of Tyrrel, Granby now might call his own.

But on the second morning, as he was sealing some papers previous to his departure from Tedsworth, which was to take place that evening, he heard voices, one of which, whose tone was somewhat loud and authoritative, made his heart beat quick with agitation, for he thought the sound was like that of Tyrrel's. They ceased—a door was opened and closed—steps were heard along the corridor—the door of the apartment in which he sat was hastily opened—and Tyrrel stood before him.





He was in a riding dress, bespattered with dirt, his features heated with exercise, and apparently distorted with passion. He closed the door with violence; then paused, and stood for an instant surveying Granby sternly and insultingly from th< other end of the room.

The apparition was so sudden, that Granby scarce knew how to address him. An exclamation of surprise alone escaped his lips. Tyirel with an expression of bitter scorn on his countenance, strode up to the table at which Granby was sitting, and resting his hands on a chair opposite, looked him deliberately in the face.

"Well, my Lord I" were his first words, "I hope your Lordship finds yourself at home—1 hope your time is passed agreeably—I hope your minutest orders have been strictly obeyed, and that every one in this house has been eager to anticipate your wishes. I, the humblest of your servants, have come at last, cap in hand, to know your Lonlship's gracious will."

"Tyrrel!" said Granby, looking gravely and sorrowfully at him, " this is a mockery which 1 had hoped to have been spared."

"Mockery, my Lord!'" replied Tyrrel, in the same insulting tone of feigned humility; "1 wish I could agree with you. There is rather more reality in the case, to my mind, than is either pleasant or convenient. Submission is my proper part. You, great Sir, are the master here. I am only come to pay my homage to the Lord of Teds worth. May I sit down in your presence?" said he, taking a chair at the same time, and seating himself opposite to Granby in a posture of defiance.

"Tyrrel!" said Granby, "for heaven's sake be ealm and temperate in your language. Our mutual understanding is not likely to be improved by this sort of conduct."

"This sort of conduct!" echoed Tyrrel, fiercely. "And what in my conduct do you find to blame? Am not I sufficiently lowly and respectful? Do you wish to have me lick your shoe? I meant to gratify you and do you honour^but I think, young Sir, you are hard to please. However, if you dislike the respectful tone, it can.be changed, and quickly too. And now, to talk more like an equal, let me congratulate you upon your prospects. They are great and gratifying every way. They involve the ruin of an enemy—a circumstance not to be overlooked by minds like yours, of an exalted stamp. I hope since this has opened upon you, your slumbers, Sir, have been as sound as heretofore."





"At any rate, Tyrrel, my conscience has been as pure; and you know full well that my present lot has fallen upon me without my contrivance, or even knowledge. I am not guilty even of a wish to dispossess you of your father's property. Why should you think that my change of condition should have wrought in me any ungenerous feelings of exultation? Such imputations are hard to bear. But, from you, in this instance, I forgive them."

Tyrrel ground his teeth with an expression of disappointed rage.

"Perhaps," pursued Granby, " you are offended at the part I have already taken. My actions in this respect do not call for a defence; but for your satisfaction I am willing to make one. I came here by your father's dying request. You were absent, and we knew not where. I wfis the only relative present; and on me necessarily devolved the management of every thing. And a painful task I have had to fulfil. But I have not been forward in assuming the air of a master". I did no more thah was my duty; and that being done, I prepare this evening to depart."

"Far be it, Sir, from me," said Tyrrel, scornfully, "to urge your departure, or abridge the sphere of your useful duties. I trust that nothing has been left undone. I hope you have duly perused the rent-roll, and studied the family pedigree. I hope you have taught your future menials to pay due worship to the rising sun. I hope you have instructed the tr«ncher-scraper of my father's kitchen to take the wall of the son of bis master. Indeed I need not ask that question. I know, Sir, I know already, that you have informed your household of my situation. I saw the state of the case at once, in the guilty look of Nicholls, the steward. The fellow changed colour and hung his head as soon as he saw me. I instantly asked the stammering scoundrel whether you had told him who I was; and he confessed, Sir, that you had; and that you had charged him—"





"Tyrrel," said Granby, interrupting him, "I allow much for the irritation which leads you to misinterpret my motives. I acted, as I.thought, considerately and kindly. But you are mistaken in supposing that all the household are informed. I mentioned it only to a few; and that with a view to my own security, and under injunctions of strict secrecy."

"And why not to all?" said Tyrrel fiercely. "A curse on such affected delicacy—such timid, sneaking policy! Why do not you publish it at once? Why do not you call in all your household? Why do not you point at me, and say, ' Look there—look at that man, whom you once thought the heir of a nobleman. He was the base-born brat ot a cottager's daughter. Use him as such. Revenge yourselves for the superiority which he once assumed over you, his betters.' Why do not you say all this? Do you feel as if you dare say it?"

At this moment the door was opened, and one of the footmen entered the room. "I am sent, my Lord," said the man, "by Mr. Nicholls, to inquire"

"To whom are you speaking?" interrupted Tyrrel, fiercely.

"To you, my Lord."

"My Lord! scoundrel! I am no Lord.—Quit the room," said he, stamping furiously; and the astonished servant hastily withdrew.

"Was this your plan to insult me, Sir," said he, turning to Granby. "I will tell you, then, that I spurn at the petty malevolence which can stoop to vent itself through the medium of a servant. And there you sit secure and calm, and Heavens! how I hate that smooth, specious mildness—that soft hypocrisy, that takes so much pains to seem unruffled."





"Tyrrel! Tyrrel!" exclaimedGranby, "for Heaven's sake, do not abuse my patience. Its bounds are almost exceeded now. I do not know to what your strange behaviour tends, unless you mean to insult me."

"You have it, young fellow! such is my meaning. I thought you could hardly be so dull but you would contrive to find out that; and I give you joy of the discovery. Now, Sir, we understand each other."

"Too well, Tyrrel—and I would fain have concealed from myself a little longer that such was the fact."

"But now you know it," interrupted Tyrrel; "and what is to be the consequence ?—What will you do? —What will you say ?—Dare not you order me to quit your presence ?—Have not you the spirit left to turn out of my father's house the man who insults its present owner?"

Granby returned no answer, but regarded him steadily, with a fixed look of compassion rather than of anger. Tyrrel's rage was instantly heightened to an ungovernable pitch, at the calm superiority of Granby's manner, and his features were powerfully distorted by a fresh accession of passion.

"Mean-spirited coward!" said he, "do you think to triumph by the dull, slavish property which you call forbearance? Fool! it shall not serve you long. I give you this to grace your coronet;" and with these words, stepping close up to Granby, he dashed him against the wall, by a violent blow upon the breast.

A long and terrible pause ensued. Granby's first impulse, on recovering from the shock, was to return the insult by a similar attack; and he made one step towards Tyrrel, with this intention. His hand was clenched, and half upraised; but in an instant it was dropped again. "God forbid!" escaped his lips; and turning away, he leaned against the chimney piece, and covered his face with one hand.

Tyrrel stood firm when he saw Granby advancing

VOL. II. 9





to return the blow; but on his turning away in silence, he looked at him earnestly for a while, then taking pen and paper from the table, wrote down his. address, and with deliberate steps, as if neither ruffled in temper, nor desirous of flying from his opponent, he walked towards the door, and closed it gently after him as he retired. His measured tread was heard along the corridor, in the same slow, unvaried cadence.

Granby was now left alone,—and with what feelings! Nothing that he had yet experienced could equal the burning agony ot that moment. What though no eye had seen the insult? It did not on that account appear less galling; and his intense consciousness of its aggravated nature prevented him from drawing comfort from such a reflection. Now a flush of overpowering shame, at having been so treated with impunity, would deeply dye his countenance, and he would brand, for a moment, with the name 'of irresolution, those better feelings which forbad retaliation. But these presently regained their empire; and then he would look with pity on his unhappy relative, stung with the bitter sense of his situation, and regarding him, though most unjustly, as the triumphant instrument of his downfall.

Occasionally, with venial infirmity, he would suffer himself to dwell with satisfaction on his triumph of superior temper; but this soon gave way to the mild influence of that Christian charity which "vaunteth not itself," and which prompts the return of good for evil.

"Yes," said he, "I will forgive. Circumstances, perhaps, have rendered me in some degree the aggressor. I cannot—must not challenge him. No insult that he can offer shall make me willingly his murderer. But should he require me to meet him, I shall not scruple to comply."

His eye rested at that moment on the paper on which Tyrrel had written his address. "It is fortunate," said he, "that he has left me this. Perhaps he expects from me a challenge. He wrongs me in expecting it. Tiiis shall assist me in performing a higher duty—a deed more worthy of a man and a Christian.





He sat down, and after some minutes spent in deep and anxious meditation, he addressed to Tyrrel the following letter:

"In addressing you at such a time, let me at once distinctly warn you, that this letter is not prompted by our late meeting, nor will it contain more than a mere allusion to th^ unpleasant circumstances by which that meeting was attended. It is not a letter of hostility or reproach. It is a dispassionate statement of measures upon which I had previously decided; which nothing but your conduct prevented me from announcing to you personally; and in the determination of which that conduct has produced no eventual alteration. I take this early opportunity of writing to you, because I am now apprized of your place of abode. You may soon be gone, I know not where; and as the tendency of my address is to allay your angry feelings, the sooner it is done the better.

"You have inflicted on me as severe an insult as man can offer to man. Let it forever be forgotten. I bear you no enmity on that account. I will not even say that you were unprovoked. You were naturally goaded, by adverse circumstances, to an irritation, the violence of which I can excuse. I therefore claim no merit to myself for not exhibiting the symptoms of an anger which I do not feel. I will say no more on this affair. Let its remembrance cease for ever. I will now turn to the subject of my communication.—It is briefly this :—Your father is found to have died intestate. His death, as you must have heard, was sudden; and he was probably thereby prevented from making such a disposition of his affairs as he considered just and desirable. As a variance between him and yourself had previously existed, it will be gratifying to you to hear, that your name was mentioned by him previous to his death, in the tone of affection. I therefore trust that all animosity on his part had ceased, and that an ample provision was in his contemplation. I must also inform you, that a will made several years back has been discovered; but that being cancelled, it is thereby rendered invalid. By this will you are made the heir to all his personalty. The freehold property is not mentioned, but is left to devolve by course of law. Not having been with your father in his last moments, so as to obtain from him any directions, and this being the only written expression of his intentions that I have been able to discover, I think proper to abide by the bequests of this his former will, however subsequently annulled; and I shall make over to you accordingly all the property specified therein. This I regard as an act of simple justice—an act which nothing that you could have said or done ought to have influenced either in one way or the other. It is done as a satisfaction to my own feelings of equity and honour. As such I view it, and as such I wish that it should be viewed by you.





"This is probably the last communication that ever will take place between us. I wish, therefore, that it should be one of charity and peace. It is better for each that we should meet no more. I feel that any further interview can be productive of no advantage. Even should it be peaceable, it cannot but be painful.

"And now, in the act of a separation which may chance to be eternal, let me earnestly entreat that all heartburnings be dismissed. Do not allow your anger to be directed unjustly towards one who clung to you as a friend so long as you suffered him to think you such; and who never, up to this houp; has intentionally wrought you injury. I am asking no.more from you than I have already fulfilled myself. I have banished all ill will. May you ere long be able candidly to say the same. Do not return a hasty answer. Time will produce a conciliatory effect. The resentment which you lately expressed will give way to milder feelings; and though you may never regard me with the eye of friendship, you will not, I trust, hereafter view me in the hateful light of a decided enemy.

"henry





CHAPTER XII.

Tend me to-night:

May be it is the period of your duty;

Haply you shall not see me more, or if—

A mangled shadow. - Perchance to-morrow

You'll serve another master.



Antony And Cliofatra.

Having written the foregoing letter, Granby instantly despatched a servant on horseback, who was directed to convey it with all possible speed to Tyrrel. He relinquished his plan of quitting Tedsworth that evening,— thinking that he might probably receive from Tyrrel an answer to his letter, for which answer it was important that he should wait.

Between three and four hours elapsed before the servant intrusted with the letter returned to Tedsworth. He brought back no answer, and had been told that none was required. This was singular and provoking, and Granby now began to lament that he had postponed his intended departure. While thinking thus, a note was brought in, directed to him in Tyrrel's hand, and he was told that the bearer was waiting for a reply. He opened it and read as follows:

"I have tried your courage and found it wanting.' Many hours have now elapsed since you tamely received the insult of a blow; and you have not yet dared to express your resentment, and claim from me that satisfaction which is required by the injured honour of a gentleman. I had thought your opened prospects would have roused in you the energies of a man, and that you would have dreaded to cast discredit on your new-fledged honours. But a sense of usurpation has benumbed your better spirit, and you shrunk before me to the mean supplanter that you are. But I can still be generous—nay, I have still some pride of lineage, and would not see you disgrace, by cowardice, a family





to which I have hitherto been considered to belong. I offer you the opportunity which you have neglected. I send you the challenge which you yourself ought to have sent to me; and invite you to wipe off the disgrace which my hand has inflicted. If you have the spirit of a man, meet me to-morrow morning at six o'clock, at the Old Park Quarry, with a brace of pistols. I shall bring no second. My servant only will attend me. You, if you choose, may be similarly provided. Do not attempt to put me off with idle cant, about the impropriety of a hostile meeting between near relations. Remember, Sir, that we are not relations. That imaginary tie I now utterly disclaim. 1 am not the relation of any one. Let your answer be short and speedy. Your eternal foe,

"Geokge Granby Tyrrel."

The shock of receiving such a letter was more severe than words will easily describe; but Granby struggled with his feelings; and had any one observed him at the time of reading it, they would perhaps have been utterly unsuspicious of the tremendous import of its contents. He paused for a moment, and then taking up a pen, wrote these words: "I accept your challenge. I will meet you at six to-morrow, at the Old Park Quarry. My servant alone will attend me."

Then folding up the note, he ordered it to be delivered to the messenger in waiting. When this was done, nothing remained but to reflect upon the dreadful past, or look forward to the more tremendous to-morrow. On either side the scene was terrible. After the letter which he had sent, the conduct of Tyrrel seemed scarcely human, and argued a fiendish depth of malignity, at which he shuddered while he considered it. Could his own letter have miscarried? Could there have been delay in the delivery? These were important questions, and with a view to their solution he summoned the groom who took the letter, and strictly questioned him on these points. But the mail persisted in saying that he had not loitered on the road, and on arriving, had delivered the letter into Tyrrel's hands.





Granby was therefore compelled to conclude, that Tyrrel, after the receipt of a letter which breathed only the spirit of kindness, generosity, and reconciliation, had, with almost unexampled ferocity, followed up his former insult by the aggravated addition of a challenge. He seemed to 'thirst for blood—he wished, if possible, to take the life of him who had robbed him of his father's lands, and maliciously resolved that if he could not hold them himself, they should at least be fatal to the heir.

"I am resigned," said Granby, as he walked to and fro in his apartment. "I go to meet my foe with a conscience which, if I do not presume to call it void of offence, is at least unchargeable with vindictive feeling towards him. I may fall by his hand; but he shall never incur such danger from mine.' No,—if I am sent to my last account, it shall not be with this dreadful addition to my other offences."

He then turned his mind to the consideration of the few, but solemn and important duties which remained to be discharged, in the brief time which in this life he could now with certainty call his own.

His first care was the formation of his will,—a considerable part of which was a transcript of the will of the late Lord Malton, so far as related to his legacies to old servants, and the bequest of his personal property to Tyrrel. The rest, with the exception of a few small t legacies to various friends and relatives, he left to the next heir at law, a cousin of his, a man of great respectability, of whom, however, as he lived at a great distance, and was of moderate fortune and retired habits, Granby had never seen much; and who, in the event of his death, would succeed to the estate, though not to the title. '^

He next prepared for himself a sever^. trijjJ-""Tf^e took from its envelope in his pocket bookie lock of hair which was given him by Caroline; and which, in spite of her unkindness, and his hopeless disunion irom that family, he still always bore aoout him. He looked at it with intense anguish, and with a fixedness of attention, as if he would count each individual hair. He painfully retraced all .those flattering visions of happiness, which that treasured relic had from time to time conjured up,—all alike fleeting and delusive. He looked back upon the frequent alternations of hope and fear, with which the period of their intimacy had lately been chequered. He seemed to have been Fortune's puppet; and brightly as she had lately smiled upon him, the prospect now was overcast with tenfold gloom. Wealth, rank, and honours were fading away, like the illusions of a broken dream, and near and distinct was the murderous weapon, in the hand of a vindictive foe.





He took the pen, and his hand trembled as he held it. . It was not through fear of his impending fate. He was agitated with a more tender affliction. He was about to write a last address to her whom he loved above all that remained to him in the world besides. He could not on such an occasion steel his heart against the softening influence of grief. A tear fell upon the paper— he saw it, and it warned him to struggle with his feelings. "Even this," said he, "shall not unman me; nor shall she see this testimony of my weakness;" and he pushed the blotted paper from him, and hastily took another sheet, and wiped from his eyes the rising drops. He then resumed his pen, and wrote as follows:—

"Receive from me a gii.t which I long viewed, perhaps mistakenly, as the pledge of love: a gift which 1 therefore valued as my life, and with life only do 1 novr resign it. .You may have already learnt from other sources the tale of my untimely end. You will, I trust, bestow a tear on the memory of one, whom if you never loved, you have at least long known, and probably regarded with some portion of esteem ; of one who has unhappily forfeited even that esteem, he knows not how, *nd must now remain for ever ignorant. In a moment so awi.ut,—knowing that when this meets your eye I shall be no more, and that before another night shall close, my end may be accomplished—I cannot hesitate to tell all that I have felt for you. I have loved you with an affection as sincere and ardent, as ever filled the breast of man; and however that love may have. been chilled for a time by our disunion, it has never—never been extinct; and I feel at this moment, that I shall carry it with me to my early grave, as warm and fervent as in the happiest hours of our ill fated intimacy. Do not shrink from the protestations of one, who when you read this will be in the tomb. He owes it to you, and to himself, to declare, in the last hours of bis existence, that, however slander and mischance may have blinded you to his affection, that alU.ction has never ceased. My last prayer shall be for you. Think of me kindly for awhile, and then let me be forgotten. I ask no more than a short but favourable remembrance, and your forgiveness of all in which I may have seemed to offend. May every blessing gather around you—may you be happily united to one worthy of your hand—one who can appreciate your virtues—who can love you as f have done, and whom you can love in return. Thus prays, in the last evening of his life, your fervently attached,





"Henry Granry."

The writing such an address—the enclosure of the treasured lock—Ihe directing—the sealing—were all trials of the severest kind. But the cup of grief was not yet full, nor had he executed all the tasks of this appalling night. He was alone in the large and gloomy library, surrounded by sealed papers which w^re to be re-opened after his death. After listening with suspense to the slow striking of the great hall clock, which sounded from above the portico, he rang and ordered his own servant to be sent. The man entered.

"Shut the door," said Granby, "but first see that nobody is within hearing."

The man looked surprised at his master's air of mystery, but promptly obeyed.

"William," pursued Granby," you are one on whose attachment and fidelity I trust I may rely. Promise first not to tell to any living individual what I am going to communicate."





"Certainly, Sir." said the man, '• I will promise, and will keep the promise faithfully."

"You will not have to keep it long. Before this time to-morrow, all need of silence will be past. Perhaps, *l may be no more."

"Sir!" said the man, turning pale.

"Yes," said Granby, .'it is very probable. I am to meet Mr. Tyrrel to. ..orrow morning at the Old Park Quarry, at six o'clock. We are to fight with pistols. You must attend me to witness the result, and to assist me if I fall."

The man turned his eyes upon his master with an expression of horror, to which no description could do justice. His knees smote each other, and he stood the picture of dismay. Then making a violent effort to speak, he said,—•' I would sta ,d by you, Sir, in any danger.—but thi* has come upon me so suddenly that —oh! I will attend you, Sir, wherever you desire me; but.I hope it will not come to fighting—I had as lief go and be shot at myself, as look on without the power to help you. But, I trust, Sir, there will be no necessity."

"Say no more about that—there is an absolute ne. oessity—the meeting is fixed."

"Oh ! if it could but be prevented! I would not ask you, Sir, to shrink from any man—but, oh, Sir, if thore is any thing in the whole world that I can do—any letter that I can tike—consider, Sir, pray. Mr. Tyrrel (my lord, I mean,) he is such a near relation to you, Sir —surely—surely—he can never think of fighting with you. But I humbly beg your pardon, Sir—l know it is not for such as me to interfere in this sort of matter; but I cannot help saying what I think, when my heart is so full—and if any thing should happen to you, Sir"—here his voice faltered, and he stopped as if unable to proceed.

"I must do my duty, William," said Granby, " and meet Mr. Tyrrel, as I have promised. The rest I leave to Providence. If I fall you will find that I have remembered you."





"God bless you, Sir, don't talk of that." "I will not hurt ydu by dwelling on the worst. Call me to-morrow at five, and say not a word to any of the household. I thank you for this proof of your regard; but let us try to make the best of what must happen. I am unfit to talk upon this subject longer, and you are affected by it. ^Perhaps you had better leave me."

The poor man, who stood during these words, covering his face with his hands, walked slowly and silently out of the. room, and Granby was again left to his own solemn meditations.



CHAPTER XIII.

So stands the Thracian herdsman with his speur

Full in the gap, and hopes the hunted bear;

And hears him snorting in the wood, and sees

His course at distance by the bending trees;

And thinks, here comes my mortal enemy,

And either he most fall in fight or I.



Drtden.

Granby rose early the next morning and attended by his servant, walked to the appointed place of meeting. It was a deep romantic glen, which after winding gracefully for a short distance, was abruptly terminated by a held semicircular front of naked lime stone. It had been originally a quarry, but had been long disused; and though the valley was executed by art, no one who now looked at those fine broken slopes, so thickly clothed with thorn and hftzel, could trace the operations of the spade ; nor viewing the beetling crags, now richly tinged with moss and lichen, could suppose that those picturesque masses had ever been submitted to the disiiguring action of the workman's tool.

A narrow path, almost closed with luxuriant underwood, conducted up the valley, which widened gradually as you approached the extremity. There beneath the curving ledge of rock, was a smooth level plot of the finest turf, which was skirted, on the side opposite to the crag, by a small ripling stream, which gushing out of a crevice, wound its way along a stony channel, to the entrance of the glen.





It was a pleasing, smiling spot, ill fitted, but from its loneliness, to be the scene of deliberate murder—for murder it still is, though sanctioned by the custom of civilized, of Christianized society.

Never was a more delightful summer's morning than this, which frowned so menacingly on Granby. The thrush was singing loudly and sweetly in the hazel thicket, which also resounded with the gay chirping of minor songsters. The sun shining over the edge of the rocks, which cast a broad gray shadow on the dewy grass, glanced brighly upon the thick brushwood that lined the edges of the slope; and the tall spreading oaks that nodded above them, added by their height to the sequestered depth of the ravine.

But this fair scene conveyed no pleasure to the sad eyes that viewed it then. Granny's were fixed upon the ground, as, with folded arms, he traversed the small green area to and fro, in painful anxious expectation. Now and then he raised his head, to see if Tyrrel were approaching; and stopped to listen for his footsteps, and thought sometimes he heard them. He was mistaken: it was but the ripple of the little gurgling stream that lost itself among the copse.

He had now waited long, and at length taking out hi= watch, found that the time of the appointment was considerably exceeded. It was awful to think of time at a moment like this, when he was standing, perhaps, upon the verge of eternity. The thought occurred to him as he looked at the watch, but it did not make his courage quail; and he replaced it with a steady hand. "Surely," said he half aloud, "he will not faifin his own appointment. I wish he were come. The sooner the better—since it must be so."

At this moment, looking up, he saw a figure emerge from among the brushwood, and advance towards him. It was Tyrrel. He was enveloped in a large cloak; and a travelling cap was drawn far over bis eyes. His face was bent downwards, and his step had lost its former steadiness of tread. He stopped when he saw Granby—paused for a moment, as if in the act of consideration—and then beckoned to him to approach.





Gran by looked at him with surprise, but without stirring from the spot where he stood. Tyrrel then approached him in a hurried manner, laid his hand upon his arm, and looking at the servant who was standing near, "Come with me, this way," said he to Granby. "I wish to speak to you in private."

Granby cast at him a suspicious look. The desperate character of Tyrrel flashed across his mind, and he allowed himself for an instant to anticipate a deed of violence. He said nothing; but Tyrrel read his apprehensions in his looks; and the blood rushed into his pale cheek, with shame, at being so suspected.

"Are you afraid," said he, in a tone of bitterness, "to trust yourself along with me? I am not such a ruffian as you think me. But perhaps I have deserved this. No matter—let it pass—come with me apart. By the heaven above us no treachery is intended.—I have much to say to you, which no mortal ears but your's must hear."

Granby nodded acquiescence. "Stop there," he added, turning to his servant; then rejoining Tyrrel, walked after him in silence.

Tyrrel presently stopped, and after looking round, "Granby," said he, " if you have any fears remaining, I can at once remove them. I am unarmed—I have neither pistols nor weapons of any kind—I could not harm you if I would."

"Have I then been under a delusion?" said Granby, looking at him with astonishment. "Did you not come to fight with me?"

"You have not been deceived," said Tyrrel; "I did challenge you; and I here meet you by that appointment. But do not think that I am now come to raise my hand against your life. God forbid that I should hurt a hair of your head. Granby, I struck

Vol. n. 10





you most foully and unjustly. I now express the deep* est, humblest sorrow for it—I will stoop even to receive chastisement from your hands. Forgive the frenzy of a moment. I was scarce myself when I so acted, and I was hardly less a madman when I wrote that horrible challenge. But 1 had not then received your letter."

"Thank God!" exclaimed Granby fervently. "It is a happiness to_ hear it—I thought you scarcely could have made so cruel a return."

"No. Granby, you judged rightly. Villain as 1 may have been, I trust it was not possible. But now 1 have read your letter, and I'shall never forget it. You deserve my gratitude—and you have it—my eternal gratitude—for you have acted nobly by me. 1 injured —insulted—grossly insulted you—to my shame I confess it. And you have returned good for evil. You say I owe you no acknowledgments:—a thousand! a thousand! You sa) that nothing which 1 could have said or done could have altered your determination :— I believe it—I firmly believe it. Let me have tried you as I might, you would still have acted like yourself. Oh, I am a scoundrel—a pitiable scoundrel—but 1 have still some good in me—I can applaud, though I cannot imitate."

"Nay, Tyrrel," said Granby, " I trust you can not only speak, but act well—your present step is a proof of it."

"Ay—ay—that shows some signs of grace—but I am softened by misfortune. Oh! you do not yet half know the miserable wretch I am. I thank you for your offer—it was very kind and noble—You said it was but an act of justice—oh, no, no—an act of generosity —of mercy. But it comes too late—it cannot save me. Ay—you look astonished—but hear me, Granby.. All my father's fortune, were it mine to-morrow, would not save me from beggary. I have lost house, lands, every thing; the very ground we stand upon, though it was not mine to lose. But the rascals did not know that— they will be cheated of their prey."





"Should you then still have been ruined had you been—"

"Had I been now Lord Malton? Yes—driven from my house by Jews and sharpers. So it is better as it is, you see. The scoundrels cannot touch you—and they none of them deserve a farthing. 'Tis well I am not the heir. Then I could not have been revenged —I should have lost all, and they would have triumphed in their gains. But then they could not have touched my person, and now they can. But no matter —they never shall—I will baffle them yet."

"Tell me, then," said Granby, " in what way I may best serve you?"

"I will," said Tyrrel; "I know that you are both able and willing. You are very kind—too kind about the personalty—but do not make that over to me. Under my present circumstances, I dare not hold, in my own name, any property in the funds, or place it in tbje hands of any banker. It would be seized immediately. Besides, if it was not, I could not with safety receive the dividends. I must lie incognito for a season—perhaps a long one—heaven knows how long. No, Granby, you shall be my banker. That is the way in which you may assist me. Take all—it is lawfully yours—but pay me a thousand a year out of it, and I can live abroad like a prince."

"Do you then intend to leave England?"

"Instantly—no other course remains for me. I cannot stay here long with safety; unless I lead a skulking life, in a constant state of self-denial and anxiety, that would be worse than actual imprisonment. No—I must fly, and quickly too."

"And how are the remittances to be made?" inquired Granby.

"Oh—for fhe present—let me see—you must direct for me under an assumed name. What shall I be ?— Smith?—Jackson?—Jackson will do. Send me a draft upon your banker for Reuben Jackson, or bearer. The amount I leave to you. Direct to me under that name, at the Old Slaughter's Coffee-house, in London. I must contrive before I leave England, to He bid a few days in some dingy abode in that neighbourhood. I shall not acknowledge your remittance. Even that might lead to my discovery. You will not, therefore, he .r from me again until I have crossed the Channel. You shall then know my next direction. I shall live a free, careless life abroad, with nothing on earth to trouble me. Perhaps I may die of pure ennui: though I rather think my recollection of past days will keep my hours from hanging heavy. Yes," said he, in a subdued, inward tone, pressing his hand to his forehead,—" there is fuel here to feed the flame. The fire is kindled—and while I live will ever go onburning—burning—"





Here his voice sunk till it became inaudible; though the motion of the lips showed that he was still speaking; while a sudden pang convulsed his features. It was but for a moment. He turned his face away. The mastery was gained; and when he looked again towards Granby, his countenance wore almost an air of careless gayety.

"And now," said he, "it is fit that this conference should end. It may be the last we shall ever have— yet still—why prolong it? Receive once more my heartfelt thanks for your generous treatment. Your very acceptance of nay challenge showed a nobleness of spirit which I admire from my very soul. Nay, do not shrink from my praise, unless you think it degradation to be praised by me. Well, well,'1 said he, checking Granby's attempted denial, "I believe you do not feel that. But perhaps you think it flattery,—which it is not. But I must now go."

So saying he stopped, and gave a loud clear whistle, which was presently answered from a distance. "That is no echo," said he to Granby, with a smile. "The signal is answered—! must go. Farewell, for the last time;" and so saying, he wrung Granby's hand; turned hastily away; drew his cap over his eyes; wrapped his cloak round him; and was soon lost in the windings of the path.





With a lightened heart Granby now returned to Tedsworth. Occupied with busy thoughts while in the presence of Tyrrel, and anxiously listening to all he said, he had not at first been aware of the heavy load that was removed from his mind. The lively joy of his faithful servant on hearing of the peaceful termination of the meeting, first awakened him to a truer sense of it; and a prayer of gratitude was internally and devoutly offered.

Left to himself, he presently reviewed all the ameliorated points of his present prospects. He was no longer at enmity with the man whom he had supplanted, and had heard from his lips that the property of which he seemed to have been so cruelly deprived, could in fact have availed him nothing: so that Granby, instead of robbing the son of his relation, was only rescuing a fine estate out of the hands of sharpers. He had converted a bitter foe into a grateful friend,— and a friend who, far from shrinking from his kindness, gladly relied upon him for assistance, and made him, as it were, the arbiter of his fate.

Rank and wealth now expanded proudly to his view; and with a mind more at ease, he had leisure to contemplate in its full extent the greatness which was already almost his. There was one point alone in the prospect, which still remained as dark as ever :—his separation from the Jermyns. "They would not probably now discourage that intimacy which has cost me so much," said he, with a sigh; "and perhaps, aided by rank and title, T might still be successful in renewing my acquaintance. But for this purpose I must stoop so low, that Caroline would despise me for my baseness. No, no, that must never be. And to what end should I again see her? To gain a fuller confirmation of her utter want of affection for me? And shall I, who once vainly tlattered myself that she could love me for myself alone, now solicit the aid of these externals of rank and wealth, in order to be tolerated? Never! never!"

Thus reasoned one who, conscious of no accession 10* •





of merit from his change of outward circumstances, scorned, as a mean, unfair advantage, the fictitious elevation which these might give; and who was not yet accustomed to the value which, even in the eyes of the most philosophic portion of society, these adventitious gifts reflect upon their owner.

This day Granby quitted Tedsworth; and though splendid, and his own, he quitted it without regret. The few associations with which it was connected, were all of an oppressive nature. He was therefore glad to dismiss them; and as he hurried from the gloomy grandeur of his new possessions, he looked forward with a lively glow of satisfaction to the humble dwelling of his youth.

It would be unnecessary to enter into a lengthened description of the preparatory steps which Granby took, for the purpose of establishing his accession to the title and estate of Lord Malton. No opposition was made to his claims, and as the proofs were full and satisfactory, a recognition of his right was the speedy consequence of the measures he adopted.

Within two months, Henry Granby stood before the world, the acknowledged and undoubted possessor of the property and title of the late Lord Malton.



CHAPTER XIV.



Zuleika, child of gentleness!

How dear, this very day must tell,

When I forget my own distress



In losing what I lore so well,

To bid thee with another dwell.

Btron.

Leaving the new Viscount Malton in the possession of his rights, we shall reconduct our readers to Brackingsley; where we shall find Sir Thomas Jermyn, his lady, and their daughter, quietly engaged in the regular exercise of their accustomed duties. We shall "take no note of time," otherwise than by observing, that a few weeks had elapsed from the death of Lord Malton, up to the period at which we recommence our notice of the proceedings of the Jermyn family.





At this period Mr. Duncan and his lady, and also our old acquaintance Courtenay, were upon a visit to Brackingsley. The acquaintance of the Jermyns with the Duncans, which had commenced at Hemingsworth, and been improved in town, had been strengthened into intimacy during a short stay at Brighton, in the latter part of the summer; and had produced the invitation which they now accepted.

The rise and progress of Courtenay's acquaintance we have partially witnessed; and as he was in company with the Duncans at the time when the invitation was made to them, it was considered by Lady Jermyn very allowable, nay, "highly proper," (upon second thoughts) to extend it likewise to him. It would perhaps be illiberal to inquire whether she was influenced in her civility by the consideration of his prospective peerage. We will rather suppose that she merely regarded him as a pleasant gentlemanly young man, who deserved attention as much on account of what he was, as of what he might be: and besides, Lady Jermyn was an hospitable woman, and as she often said upon such occasions, "liked to be civil to young people."

Courtenay accepted the invitation wiih great alacrity. Not that he felt much pleasure in the society of either Lady Jermyn or Sir Thomas, or was much flattered by their notice of him. The attraction lay elsewhere; it was the "one fair daughter and no more, which he loved passing well." He had begun to admire Caroline in town, and had thought of her as seriously as could reasonably be expected, considering that he had never met her but in the anti-matrimonial atmosphere of a London ball room.

His admiration thus awakened, began to ripen fast into attachment, now that he saw her in the less dazzling, but more seductive sphere of her domestic circle. Her's were gentle timid graces, which such a situation called forth; and in these consisted her greatest charm. Courtenay could not long regard her in this attractive point of view, without being deeply struck with the many captivating points of her character; her unvaried sweetness of temper,. natural, unforced cheerfulness, and perfect freedom from affectation. He saw her now in that situation where woman's power is most deeply felt—where alone she may expect to win the heart of a man of sense.





It is not amidst the gay distraction of a crowded party, or the lively prattle of the dance,—though with beauty heightened by the aid of brilliant lights, of costly jewels, and all the pride of millinery,—that her influence is most powerfully experienced. It is in the quiet interchange of that domestic species of society, in which display has less power to enter, and in which the sterling qualities of the mind have fuller leisure to expand.

Caroline, during the first few days of this visit, remained unconscious of those little indications of growing affection which presented themselves in Courtenay's manner, and which did not escape the more vigilant eye of Lady Jermyn. How soon Caroline would have found out the important truth by the unassisted exercise of her own sagacity, it would be difficult to say. But she was not destined long to remain in ignorance; for her eyes were soon gently opened by the dexterous hand of Lady Jermyn.

This lady had been thoroughly disposed to forward the wishes of Courtenay, quite as soon as he had begun •to form them, fearing le?t the unsuspicious frankness of her daughter's manner should tend to sink the lover in the friend, and chill the ardour of her, admirer. Thinking that in the place of this, a little bashful consciousness would not only be vastly proper in her daughter's situation, but eventually lead to a belter understanding; seeing also that the present defects of Caroline's deportment arose from a want of due information; she resolved to acquaint her with the passion she had raised.





"What a very pleasant young man Mr. Courtenay is!" said she to Caroline, by way of opening the subject, as the latter sat near her, deep in the manufacture of a bead bracelet.

"Yes," said Caroline, carelessly—"yes—very— (the gold b«ads are by you, I believe—thank you, mamma)—yes—he is very conversible—I begin to wish I had finished this bracelet."

"He seems to like his present quarters," said Lady Jermyn, modulating her voice into a significant tone.

"Yes—I hope he does," said Caroline-*-" pray how long does he stay?"

"You ought to know that better than I can.—"

"/—Mamma! why so?"

"Because I imagine his stay here depends less on me than you."

Caroline looked up from her work in calm and guileless wonder—"Indeed!" said she; "does it? I don't understand how that should be,."

"Do not you really?" said Lady Jermyn, with a very inquisitive scrutiny of her daughter's face. "No— you do not ?—who could have thought it? Poor Mr. Courtenay! I am afraid Caroline, he has paid his attentions to little purpose, if you have nut, by this time, been able to guess what he means by them."

Caroline blushed, for she now understood her mother's meaning. "I never thought," said she, with a little embarrassment, "that he intended more than mere civility."

"Then, my dear child, what magnificent ideas you must have of mere civility; or how highly you must think of the politeness of the gentlemen of ihis age, if you suppose that such attentions are paid by them as matters of course to every lady."

"I never thought much about that—but—I really do not observe any thing more than common in Mr. Courtenay's manner. To be sure, he always tries to make himself agreeable—but it is in a general way, not to one person more than to another, as far as I ever perceive,"





"No, my love," said Lady Jermyn smiling. "The one person to whom he does try to make himself particularly agreeable, is perhaps not likely to perceive it so plainly as others. Lookers-on see most of the game. You are one of the players, Caroline."

Caroline looked down, and was silent for a moment. "I cannot contradict yon, Mamma," said she at length. "but I hope it is not as you imagine."

"That remark is quite according to rule, my love," said Lady Jermyn, smiling, "and would have been perfectly correct, if there had been any body by to hear you, but as you are talking quite confidentially to your own mother, we will dispense with these sort of proper speeches, and talk explicitly about it."

"Indeed—I was in earnest," said Caroline, somewhat hurt at the imputation of prudish insincerity.

"Well—well, my lovr, the charge was not a very heavy one. But why are you in earnest? Why should you wish that his attentions were not directed particularly to yourself? You must allow, my love, that he is a remarkably pleasing, amiable young man, and every thing that one could wish, with respect to family and so forth; and I think it would be fair to tell you, (lor I do love openness in all I do —and 'plain dealing is a jewel,' as your father says) I think it fair to tell you, that if a certain event should take place —mind —I don't say that it will; and I certainly shall not do any thing to promote it, for that you know would be indelicate; but if, as I said, a certain event should take place —(I mean his proposing to you, Caroline,) and you should be disposed to accept hiin—we shall be sorrj to part with you, my love—for you are a great treasure to your father and me, and we should miss you amazingly; but Still, in that case, we should not feel ourselves justified in doing any thing to oppose it. I can answer for myself, and I am very sure your father would not set his face against the match."

"Thank you, Mamma: you are very kind to say what you do; but I think and hope that Mr. Courtenay has no such intentions. If he should make a proposal," she added, with firmness, .after a slight pause, "I really could not accept him."





"No, my love? on what grounds, pray?"

"Because, though I like him very well, and think him pleasant in society, I could not feel for him as I think I ought to feel, for the person I may choose as a partner for life."

"Ah !—wel!—well my love," said Lady Jermyn, smiling, and nodding her head significantly—" you are young at present, and young people are naturally a little romantic in their notions. But take my word for it, when you are older, you will not think these violent attachments so absolutely necessary. Nay—for my part, 1 question whether they are desirable. You have often heard, without a doubt, that no good comes of runaway matches; and what produces runaway matches but these violent attachments that we were speaking of? I do not accuse you, my love, of any such disposition. What I say is only by way" of illustration, to show the evil of violent attachments. Young people are apt to he irregular and high-flown in their ideas oujhese subjects. I don't say that you are so more than others. But most are rather inclined to it. Now, there is an idea they entertain sometimes, about what they call a first love. They make a great point of remaining true to that, and refusing, perhaps, excellent offers in consequence; though probably, this fine first attachment, which they make so much fuss about, nevej really existed, except on the lady's side._Jiayy .HJa.ve even heard of cases where they thought proper to keep up the farce after being slighted by the gentleman, and used extremely ill. This I call a great piece of absurdity. There is no danger of your doing so. You have too much good sense, and proper pride, I hope."

Caroline durst not trust herself to make any answer, but went on very perseveringly with her bracelet. She felt the application of the last remark, as keenly as her mother could have wished. The latter saw that her observations were not thrown away; and content





ing herself with what she had said, she made a few trivial comments on her daughter's work, and soon afterwards left her.

The preceding conversation had in some respects the effect that was intended; and Lady Jermyn had the satisfaction, that same day, of seeing Caroline twice blush when addressed by Courtenay, and witnessed, with even more delight, the glow of pleasure and admiration with which it was observed by the latter; of admiration at the heightening charm which it gave to her countenance, and pleasure at its happy presage; for Courtenay thought, with many others of his sex, that a lady's heart might soon be secured, when the "eloquent blood" had been taught to fly from that citadel to her cheeka.

Caroline's manner toward him quickly assumed a new character. Her former unrestrained, light-hearted frankness now gave place to a timid, conscious hesitating reserve,—which, as its very constraint was natural, and unmixed with prudery, was infinitely more fascinating than her former gayety.

Courtenay imagined this to spring, not from her first perception of his own devotion to her—for that he doubted not she must long have perceived—but from an awakening sense of something like a reciprocal feeling, which her shrinking delicacy prompted her to check, at least in appearance. There was something much more touching in these little timid efforts to avoid him, which now became observable to the quick eye of a lover; and in consequence, Courtenay's manner soon assumed a warmer shade of tender interest.

In fact, that which made these seeming indications of suppressed love in Caroline so peculiarly satisfactory, and imparted to her air so attractive a colouring of delicate reserve, was a circumstance which of all others was most calculatedvto overthrow his hopes; it was the circumstance of Caroline's not possessing a heart utterly unsubdued, but ever, when he seemed to press his suit, turning her thoughts, with fond regret, upon another. The image of Henry Granby was not yet effaced. It had suffered materially from the artful misrepresentations of Tyrrel; and she had made to herself a vow to dismiss him utterly from her mind. But this vow she found it impossible to keep. She soon began to view his offences with diminished anger. The illomened voice of Tyrrel died away upon her ear, like the sound of a passing storm; and that of Granby, as she used to hear it before the period of their separation, was heard again in fancy, almost as distinctly as if the reality were present. She felt, that however ill he might have returned her love, he had scarcely done any thing which should cost him her esteem. Why should she take upon herself to regulate his feeling by her own? No words had ever passed between them, to authorize such an assumption on her part; no pledge had been distinctly given. He was quite at liberty to attach himself to Miss Darrell, or any one else, without deserving her displeasure. "Nay," thought she, when she reflected on the cold behaviour which she had been forced to observe towards him, "may he not have been justly offended, and driven, by the supposition of my unkindness, to take refuge in the smiles of those who were not compelled, like me, to assume a coldness which they did not feel? No—though I must now withhold my love—for it were to him an useless gift—yet he must ever possess my warm esteem."





Thus, in the fervent simplicity of a young and innocent heart, did she persuade herself, that in changing the name of that sentiment, which still remained unchanged in nature, she had gained a signal mastery over her affections. But this esteem, as she now called .., was every day receiving added warmth from the frequeat earnest praises of Courtenay.

This young man w^s not one of those ungenerous spirits, who feel uneasy under the load of an obligation which they may be without the means or the .opportunity of repaying. He did not shrink from the implied superiority of him who had been his protecting genius in the hour of danger; and thought it but a small repayment of the debt he owed him, to sound his praises

VOL. II. 11





every where. He could not advert to the specific instance of signal assistance which had been afforded him in the case of Tyrrel; but he took many opportunities of speaking of his benefactor in strong terms of admiration and regard.

These expressions from his lips excited feelings in Caroline's mind of a mingled and peculiar nature. She knew not whether she was grieved or glad. She rejoiced to hear that Granby possessed, in the eyes of his friend, those virtues which she herself had seen in him; but she was pained to think that such excellence was lost to her. To hear his praise was always grateful, but it was cruel to hear it from the lips of one who was trying to supplant him; and though she seemed to like Courtenay the better for this appreciation of Granby's merits, she lamented that one so amiable should be suffered to cherish a hopeless passion, and destroy his prospects of success even by the very means through which he chiefly won her favour.

She began, however, to be sensible that these praises of Granby were too dangerous to be listend to with impunity, and that she was fast overleaping that sold boundary of esteem which she imagined herself to have so strictly drawn. She was obliged to have recourse to the thought, that since his demonstrations of affection to her, Henry Granby had loved, had offered himself to another; and thus, by this dedication of his heart to one whom she felt that she did not in the least resemble, had effectually precluded it from ever returning to her. This was a bitter, but a salutary thought. Yet even this was doomed to be disturbed, by a conversation which took place on the following morning.





CHAPTER XV.

Taut que l'amour dure il subsiste de soi-meme, et quelquefois par le choses qui semblent le devoir eteindre; par les caprices, par Us rigueurs par l'eloig. nement, par la jalousie.

La Brctere.

At the time referred to in our last chapter, the party were all assembled in the library. Sir Thomas Jermyn was writing at a table apart from the rest of the company, charmingly overwhelmed with a flood of correspondencej and much too busy, as he said, to speak a word to any body.— Lady Jermyn was searching in a well-filled but disorderly scrap-book, for some "Lines on Twilight," by an uncle of her's, that she wished to show to Lady Harriet.—Caroline was arranging materials for drawing.—Courtenay, with a book in his hand, which he had begun to read because she recommended it, was hovering near her.—Mr. Duncan was in an arm chair, reading a newspaper; and Lady Harriet, with her reticule on her lap, was languidly reposing in another opposite, perusing a letter she had received that morning.

"So Louisa Darrell is going to be married," exclaimed she—first breaking the short silence that had taken place, and folding up her letter as she spoke.

Exclamations were heard at once from several quarters.

"And what is the name of the happy man?'' said Mr. Duncan, laying down his paper.

"You may see the letter," said his lady, holding it out to him to take.

"I had rather be told."

"Well, then, Sir Basil Herbert," said Lady Harriet.

"Oh, poor Basil P' exclaimed Duncan, " I thought he was a lost man when we met him at Brighton. He was hard to please, when you praised the lady ;—the the most infallible sign of any. I remember one day talking of Miss Darrell. 1 said I thought her fascinating. Of course 1 concluded that this would do.—Not a bit of it. 'Fascinating !''Sir Basil said, and he looked at me as if I had called her disagreeble—' Fascinating! she is perfect.'"





"Perfect in some respects, no doubt," said Lady Jcrmyn with a civil sneer. '; Practice makes perfect. as we all know. She is a very showy young woman— quite one of your dashers."

"1 should think," said Caroline, " she must be clever, the has such an expressive countenance."

'• She has a great play of feature," said Courtenay, "and a good deal oi expression; but 1 doubt whether it arises so much from talent, as from lively spirits. There is something strikinj; about her certainly. A friend of mine was, I think, a little smitten at one time, or I should rather j.ay, not a'little."

Caroline durst not ask the name. In an instant, however, he had told her.

"It was Henry Granby," continued he. "I taxed him once with serious intentions; but he seemed rather sore upon that subject."

Caroline gained from this remark a little accession of comfort; and she would have given worlds to have heard him talk longer upon such a topic: but he dropped it, and Lady Harriet, who had not heard a syllable he said, proceeded to unfold her sentiments upon the character of Louisa Darrell.

"Yes." said she, with a thoughtful air, " Louisa has many shining qualities, and she is a very dear friend of mine; but I am not blind to her defects. She wants repose. There are many picturesque points in her character, viewing her as one would a picture j great freedom of outline—strong light and shadow ;—and

brilliant relief, but no neutral tint—'tis there she fails

one feels the want of intermediate tint."

"I wonder she did not marry sooner," said Lady Jermyn, in hope of hearing her opinion questioned.

Mr. Duncan had the prompt civility to. contradict ber. "Lady Jermyn," said he, "I beg leave to diffec





iii opinion with you—my wonder is that she is married so soon."

"Nay, Mr. Duncan," said her Ladyship, made quite happy by this remark, "surely—she was generally considered a very taking sort of person, and one whom gentlemen admired. To be sure, she is rather what one calls a flirt; and I know some gentlemen who think that rather alarming. I suppose that this was your reason for saying she was not likely to marry."

"Not entirely," said Duncan, " though it has a good deal to do with it. My chief reason was, that I think her too much a woman of display—one to look at—and prattle to—rather than to live with. She seems to be much admired; and so she is, in a certain way. But you are not to judge of the real feelings of young men in general, by the temporary admiration and attention which they bestow in a ball room. They generally select a partner for life, upon very different principles from those upon which they single out their partner for the next quadrille. Nay, they will even, sometimes, display the most outward gallantry to those whom in their hearts they esteem the least. Indeed, I will even go so far as to say, that were a man at .the same time in company with the woman whom he means to marry, and one comparatively indifferent to him, he might possibly, nay, he in all probability would talk most to the latter."

"That is going a great way," said Courtenay. "Do you think," he added, lowering his voice, and addressing Caroline, " that such conduct may be natural?"

Caroline secretly hoped it was, and timidly answered, "I am rather inclined to agree with Mr. Duncan."

"There !" said Mr. Duncan, who overheard her, "ayoung lady does me the honour to think with me. Thank you, Miss Jermyn, foryour welcome support, t flatter myself, that the fact is very nearly as 1 stated. Whatever may be generally thought, depend upon it. people very much in love do not chatter nonsense to> one another."

"Nay, my dear Frederic," interrupted Lady Harriet, w do not say so, for you used to talk a great deal oS' charming nonsense when you were in love with: me. And now you are grown so'dreadfully sensible, I would give the world every now and then to hear you say a silly thing — it would put me in mind of dear old times." "I hope those happy days of nonsense are not past beyond recall," said Courtenay. N





"Yes — yes," cried Lady Harriet, "I am afraid they are — we all grow wiser and worse — oh ! you cannot think what agreeable things Duncan used to say to me." "I could say them still, with agreat deal of pleasure," said he, " but I am afraid you would think that they had lost their point by repetition."

"Truth never tires," said Courtenay. "Thank you for the compliment, though I question the position," said Lady Harriet. "Frederic," (addressing her husband,) " part of that belongs to you. Cannot you, in return, say something civil, that shall include both Mr. Courtenay and myself? I'm sure it would be a much better employment than attacking poor Miss Darrell."

"Nay, my love, since she will soon cease to be Miss Darrell, let us attack her while we can. l do believe that it is by reason of this pressing urgency of time, that brides elect usually become the subjects of such an increased portion of good natured criticism, when it is known that they are about to change their name. As for Miss Darrell, I am willing to allow that she has many attractive qualities; but, nevertheless, I much doubt whether she would make an agreeable wife. As my little lady said, she wants repose of character— she is always too much on the 'qui viveS She is a lively. sparkling, brilliant creature— but nobody wants eternal glitter in a tete-a-tete — she has more shining than sterling qualities— she is not a comfortable sort of personshe is one who would always enliven one's neighbour's party much more than one's own home— in one word she is not domestic."



that horrid word!" exclaimed Lady Harriets "I hate.to hear of domestic people — I always associate the term, with, a vulgar, house-wifely, bustluig body, thai





goes rummaging about the house with a jingling bunc of keys in her pocket, and a ball of worsted in her hand, and thinks it the first best duty of a wife to make good tea, and hem. cravats, and carve a turkey for sixteen people, and know at first sight, when she sits down to table, if the fish is done a bubble too little."

"My dear Harriet, spare your philippic," said Mr. Duncan; " I cannot allow you to satirize yourself at this rate. You are yourself an excellent tea maker, and I have no doubt have a genius equal either to hemming a cravat, or darving a turkey ., and as for a subtle judgment in fish, you know that you ordered out the underboiled salmon yourself, the day we stopped to dine at Northampton."

"You only say that to provoke me," said Lady Harriet; "but it does not provoke me, or convince me either. No—I still hate domestic people. If I were a man, the woman whom I should admire and choose, should be one of a high, commanding intellect—another Corinne, if that were possible. She should have a great deal of imagination—bright, warm, glowing imagination—full of spirit, and taste, and feeling—tremblingly alive to every little shade of sentiment—yet firm and powerfully minded. Beauty I would not quite dispense with—but it would not be uppermost in my thoughts. The mind—the mind—that is the first grand point with me—she must have a mind—if she had not a mind, I would not marry even an angel."

"Oh, certainly," said Lady Jermyn, who had not ex^ actly heard what preceded this last expression of Lady Harriet, "I quite agree with you in that. I myself, if I were a gentleman, would never propose to any woman if I thought she had not a mind to have me."

"I was not speaking of inclination," said Lady Harriet, "I meant capacity, spirit, feeling—in short—a soul—that was my indispensable requisite."

"Yes—yes—of course," said Lady Jermyn, who had* begun to catch a glimpse of her mistake, and was anxious to make amends by prompt acquiescence: "I believe we think very much alike upon this subject. I am not for having the lady of a house too much of a house keeper, or too much of a nurse, or too much of any thing—too much of any one thing is always bad— don't you think 80^ Mr. Duncan ?" directing her conversation to that gentleman—for Lady Harriet, who had no idea of attending to any body a moment longer than she liked, had began to look another way.





"Lady Jermyn," said Mr. Duncan, "I bow to your opinion. Nothing can be more unquestionable. But what is «too much?' There remains the only doubt. I, for my part, cannot help thinking, that as you ladies do ten thousand things so much better than we men, the sphere of a wife's duties should be considerably enlarged. She should conduct all the "internal management, and as much of the external as the gentleman is wise enough to surrender. All the minor offices of social life are so gracefully rendered by a female hand, that it were a pity they should ever be touched by any other. A wife's highest praise is to save her husband all possible .trouble. She should suffer him to abstract himself from all such petty cares as the turning away of servants, the ordering of fresh furniture, and so forth. He should be left at leisure to think all day of the Sinking Fund, the Catholic Question, and the Corn Laws. Nay, I do not know, if he were hi Parliament, whether she should not even, frank his letters. What says Sir Thomas Jermyn?"

"A frank?" said the baronet, whose parliamentary ears caught quickly at the flattering sound ;—" Oh certainly. Who is it for I I have just one to spare. 1 have directed my ninth this very moment."

"Thank you," said Mr. Duncan; "but nobody wants a frank at present. We were only proposing, that in the consideration of the many other things you have to do, Lady Jermyn should henceforth be requested to perform the office of writing your franks for you."

Sir Thomas looked extremely shocked. "Are you aware," said he, "that such an act would be felony? Felony by two acts of the last reign, and punishable by transportation for seven years ?.".





Mr. Duncan only laughed, in which Lady Jermyn and Courtenay joined. Lady Harriet was all this while in a reverie. She had not heard a word that had been uttered since Lady Jermyn spoke last, but had been summing up all that had been said by herself and others upon the subject of Miss Darrell.

"Really," said she, speaking as if she thought aloud, "I scarcely know whether Louisa was or was not the sort of girl that was likely to marry early. But," added she, "turning to the company, "I can tell you a fact which inclines me to think that she was not. Not long ago—it was in July—the day before we left town—in the course of conversation I asked her how many proposals she had ever had."

"Nay, nay, Harriet, not in direct terms?" said Duncan.

"Oh, but I did. Why not I? I asked her expressly the question I tell you; and she assured me that she never had one."

"Indeed!" exclaimed several voices at once, and Caroline's among the rest,—who had more powerful motives for surprise than any of the company; for she remembered Tyrrel's intimation that Granby had made Miss Darrell an offer of his hand; a piece of information which ever since had deeply preyed upon her mind.

"Yes, indeed," said Lady Harriet; "are not you surprised? Who would have thought it! So charming as she was! It argues a shocking want of taste in the men. Poor dear girl! I have got her picture somewhere here. I'll show it to you." And going to the table, she took out of her tortoise-shell work-box the identical miniature which Henry Granby had carried to Gray's. "It is very like her—is not it?" said she, showing it to Caroline. "Did you ever see it before?"

"Not this," said Caroline, "but one very like it—a copy, I suppose."

"No, this never was copied. But whose was it that you saw?"

"I saw it at Gray's," said she, with a slight blush of confusion, which she endeavoured to conceal by bending down her face to examine the miniature.





"At Gray's? Ah—then I dare say it was this. The setting was different when ydu saw it. I sent it there to be re set. I made young Granby take it for me. It was a very good commission for him. I treat young men as I should a poodle—I always teach them to fetch and carry. It is the only thing you are good for," said she, in a laughing tone to Courtenay.

With what pleasure did Caroline now gaze upon the miniature which had once caused her so severe a pang! What an agitating, yet delightful revolution had been effected in her thoughts and feelings almost within the space of a single minute! Fearing lest her emotion might be visible, and wishing to enjoy alone the undisturbed contemplation of this brightened view, she hastily replaced her drawings, and retired from the party, to indulge in blissful meditations in the solitude of her own apartment.

There, on reviewing the past, and considering the effect of this disclosure on her mind, she soon became sensible that she had imposed on herself a false persuasion, in endeavouring to think that henceforth she could regard Granby with the indifferent sentiments of cold esteem. That delusion was now fast melting away. The impression which afflicted her most deeply, namely, that of his devotion to Miss Darrell, had now been dissipated in an instant; and though much still remained to prevent their union, it seemed to her ardent mind, at that happy moment, as though all had been removed; and she dared once more to whisper to herself that she loved.

Connected with this subject there arose another of serious consideration: the increasing attachment of Courtenay; of which, though little had been explicitly declared, she now felt not the smallest doubt. How far would she be justified—feeling as she then did, that her heart was not her own to give, and that she never could return his love—in encouraging this hopeless passion' And encourage it she necessarily must, unless she did





.

something effectual to thwart it? What that should be remained a question. She could not behave to him with rudeness; nor did she wish, from her great respect for his many estimable qualities, to give him an unkind dismissal, or entirely dissemble the degree of esteem in which she held him. She had no mean coquettish feelings, and abhorred the treachery which would lure another onward by false hopes, and feed a heartless vanity with the homage of one whom she could nerer reward. She did not prize herself so highly as to suppose that the loss of her would blast for ever the happiness of Courtenay. But she was not quite inexperienced in the pains of an unfortunate attachment; and she did the other sex the justice to believe that they might also possess feelings scarcely less susceptible than her own : and on this account she was amiably desirous to do no unnecessary violence to those of Courtenay.

Something, however, must be done; and on the nature of that "something" she seriously and maturely pondered. At length, after many a struggle with herself, and frequent balancing of contrary opinions, she resolved candidly to tell him that her affections were preengaged; and least he should endeavour to resist the previous claims of his rival, she would also inform him that that rival was no other than his friend Granby.

This was a bold and appalling measure, for a young woman of great natural timidity, and the most sensitive delicacy of feeling. But agitating as the confession must necessarily be, she did not allow her purpose to cool upon subsequent reflection. It was a plan, not hastily devised, but one which she approached with fear and repugnance. The more she turned it in her mind, the more adviseable did it seem; and the increased demonstrations of attention which betrayed themselves in Courtenay's manner that same evening, added fresh arguments to her former stock. Still she was sensible, that since she could not assume, from his manner alone, however unequivocal, the fact of his attachment, her communication must necessarily be preceded by some declaration on his part to that effect. This, however,





she doubted not that the following day would afford; and after much consideration, she decided that in such a case it would be no violation of female propriety to throw opportunities in his way, and induce him to become explicit. With these intentions she retired to rest.



CHAPTER XVI.

I .os choses les pins scmbaitees n'arrisent point; on si elles arrivent ce u'c»i ui dans le temps, ni dans les circomstanccs ou elles auroient fait un extreme plaisir.—La Bruyere.

Wit.h an unaltered resolution did Caroline meet the party assembled at the breakfast?table on the following morning; and she did not feel her courage droop even on again encountering the admiring gaze of Courtenay.

Much conversation took place; but it was at length broken by the arrival of the post, which produced, as usual, numerous letters and papers. This interesting Interruption soon occupied the attention of all the party. There was a letter a-piece for Mr. Duncan, Lady Harriet, and Courtenay, and a considerable number directed to Sir Thomas Jermyn.

Sundry noddings, and " will you excuse me's," passed round the table, and Courtenay and the Duncans were soon deeply engaged with their respective letters. Sir Thomas was deliberately breaking seal after seal of his numerous envelopes; Caroline was watching him; and Lady Jermyn, by way of a resource, had taken up the newspaper.

Not a word was spoken for several minutes; and nothing was heard but the crackling of paper. Lady Jermyn was the first to break the silence.

"Pray, Mr. Duncan," said she, raising her eyes from the newspaper, and seeing that he had finished his letter, "can you assist me in this? Here is a most rays. terious paragraph. Perhaps you know the parties it alludes to. I will read it to yon. 'It is confidently reported that a singular discovery has taken place, affecting the legitimacy of the only son to a late noble Lord. The succession of the title and estates thereby devolves upon a cousin of the deceased. The investigation of this singular affair will probably ere long furnish matter of employment to the gentlemen of the long robe. The reputed heir is said to have absconded, leaving unpaid flay debts, and divers bonds against him, to a considerable amount. This event has caused great consternation in certain attic circles in the neighbourhood of Pall Mall, and to some respectable money lenders of the fraternity of Duke's place. We trust in the course of a few days to be able to furnish our readers with fuller particulars.' Well, now, who are these people? Who is the Lord that is dead? and who is his cousin? and who is the reputed heir that has run away? I dare say you can tell us all about it?"





"No, really, I fear not," said Mr. Duncan. "I can help you to guess, and that is all. There is not sufficient clue to admit of more. We had better consider first what Peers have died lately. There was Lord Stratford, about a fortnight ago. He has left only one son—a wild youth too, and fond of play. The latter part of the paragraph made me think of him directly. But then Lord Stratford has two brothers, and the title would go to the eldest of these, and not to a cousin."

"But, Mr. Duncan," said Lady Jermyn, " newspapers do make such mistakes. It may be Lord Stratford, after all. There is no such thing as accuracy in a newspaper. Why, now, only two months ago, when \ve met you at Brighton, in the 'Fashionable Changes,' they chose to send us all to Worthing, and they spelt Jermyn with an * a.' It is the second time they have done so. I never believe a newspaper."

"But in this instance," said Duncan, "unless we make up our minds to believe all the tattle they choose to tell us, it will be vain to attempt to guess their

Vol. ii. • 12





meaning. Let me see—Lord Walton died not long ago—I cannot belp thinking it may nu'an.him. Tyrre'l. too, was said to gamble, and is not a very unlikely man to get into the sort of scrape this paragraph alludes to."

"What! abscond and because of his play debts! Oh, Mr. Duncan! I assure you we know him intimately, and never suspected any thing of the kind. He used to be a great deal with us in town this summer. A most agreeable person indeed. We have not seen him since he became Lord Malton.— Indeed, you know—it is so recent—we were not likely—though we are related. Poor old Lord Malton! he was an excellent man, I believe. He went off very suddenly—we are only just out of mourning for him."

"Ay — poor Malton !" said Sir Thomas, who caught the name without having heard the paragraph, or being conscious of what had passed—" Poor Malton! I wonder how he has left his affairs."

"There is the doubt," said Mr. Duncan; "Lady Jennyn has found a paragraph in that paper about <a late noble Lord,' and we were questioning whether it might not possibly refer to Lord Malton."

Lady Jermyn held out the paper to Sir Thomas, pointing to the passage in question, and received in exchange a letter, which he had just taken from an envelope. "I doubt it," said the Baronet, after having read the paragraph. "If this had been Lord Malton, from our connexion with the family we should certainly have heard something about the business before it appeared in a public paper."

"Stay—stay," said Lady Jermyn, looking up from her letter with a.very significant smile; "I think, ladies and gentlemen, I can throw a little light upon it. Here is a letter from my old friend Mrs. Dormer. You shall hear what she says. 'My dear Lady Jermyn—' but I need not read you all the letter—I will pass on to the important part. 'You will be surprised to hear of the extraordinary event thnt has taken place in the family of our relation, Lord Malton. It is discovered that Mr. Tyrrel was not the son of the late Lady Malton, but was substituted when an infant for the real heir, who died very young. This circumstance was known only to our good friend the General, who was bound to keep it secret until the death of the late Lord. My nephew, Henry Granny, (I suppose I must now call him Lord Malton,) found an account of the whole transaction among his uncle's papers; and this has been proved by the testimony of some of the parties concerned, who are still alive. I would give you fuller





Particulars, but that I hardly know them yet myself. t is a strange business; and has surprised and shocked me very much: though I cannot help rejoicing at my nephew's good fortune. He wrote to me a few days ago, and told me that I might now inform my friends of the event. I have knqwn it some time, but was not allowed to mention it sooner: for my nephew, from motives of delicacy, not wishing it should become a subjectof discussion and misrepresentation in the newspapers, determined to keep it a profound secret, except among his immediate relatives, until the business was brought more nearly to an issue. He, however, found out lately, that owing to the imprudence of some of the late Lord's household, the circumstance began to be known; and he therefore thought it adviseable to communicate the real fact.'

"That is all," said Lady Jermyn, folding up her letter, and highly pleased at having been the channel of such a communication. "I must write directly to Lady Oaventry, and tell her all about it." She then handed the letter to Sir Thomas, and looked round triumphantly at the faces of the company, who were all too much surprised to utter more than exclamations.

"Well," said Mr. Duncan, first breaking silence, "a part of this intelligence gives me great pleasure. I am glad to hear that the title goes to young Granby. He is a great favourite of mine. I think he will^ do credit to his new honours."

"He will, indeed," said Courtenay, in a tone of unaffected earnestness,. "I know no person who a.





deserving of every advantage that the world can bestow, or is less likely to misuse them."

Caroline looked up unconsciously at his animated countenance, as he uttered these words, and was rivetted by the enthusiastic beauty of it's expression, lu her eyes that countenance had never before appeared so pleasing. An instant recalled to her mind the too earnest steadfastness of her gaze; and she cast down her eyes, and blushed at the seeming impropriety of her momentary forgetfulness.

Courtenay's attention was instantly directed from Granby to her, and forgetting every thing else, he was looking at her averted face, and indulging himself with a flattering interpretation of that beautiful blush.

"Very clear and satisfactory," said Sir Thomas Jermyn, returning the letter to his Lady. "I knew that I should be informed, if any thing really material occurred. And you see, so it has turned out; and as for that puzzling stuff in the paper, it did not arrive a bit earlier than the letter ; 'nay, in point of fact, this letter was written—if you look at the date—this letter was written before that paragraph was printed— so that I may fairly say, I received the first intelligence from a private quarter. I am very glad," pursued the Baronet, with a ludicrous effort to appear well pleased —" I am very glad Lord Malton did not make me his executor. Good gracious! only conceive! With all these things coming to light—what a chaos of business I should have found myself involved in! and very awkward business too, let me tell you. Heaven knows how I should have got through it all. I have my hands so full already, that I hardly know how to tarn myself."

"Dear!" said Lady Harriet, "what can you have to do?"

"Ah! Lady Harriet," said the Baronet, with a smile of exquisite importance, "you ladies can have no conception of the weight of business which we are obliged to undergo. Why, now, to give some idea of it, you shall hare last week as a specimen: on Monday





I had to take the chair at a turnpike meeting; on Tuesday, I went to throw out the encroachments on Prescot Heath; on Wednesday, I held my petty sessions with Dealtry; on Thursday—what did I on Thursday? Oh! on Thusday we held our adjourned Vestry; on Friday, I rode with another magistrate along the old road to Westborough, that Lord Dorrington wants to stop—clearly a nuisance—to him at least, though some of the farmers seemed to think they should miss it —but those people never know what they want;—this was on Friday; and then on Saturday

n

"Ah! true," interposed Lady Harriet, " I see that your time is fully occupied. You certainly have no leisure to act, even as an executor."

"Even as an executor! Do you knotv," said the Baronet, " what an executor has to do? No? Then I'll tell you. In the first place—"

"Oh, no, no, no," exclaimed Lady Harriet, "you shall not tell me. Now pray don't. I want to try to find it all out; that is so much more interesting. I shall poke out some old book that treats about it. There is that book the lawyers read. What is it? Coke upon Littleton; ay, that is the name. I shall

get that, and study it. Well, but really," she added,

after a moment's pause, " I am quite delighted to hear that Henry Granby is to have a title and a fine estate. Now he wants nothing but a wife. I think I must write to congratulate him, and tell him to look out for some lady directly. All rich young men should marry early. Don't you think so, Sir Thomas Jermyn. Don't you think he ought to marry immediately?"

Lady Jermyn heard the question, and sat in breathless apprehension, lest her lord and master should commit himself upon a certain subject. Caroline also felt uneasy, though from thoughts of a different kind. Neither of them had cause to fear; the Baronet's reply was perfectly safe.

"Why, as to his marrying immediately," said he, "I cannot honestly say that I should advise that. A mail who comes into a new estate, has too much to do to think of marrying. He has his hands pretty full—I promise you—as full—ha! ha!" (with a chuckle that augured an approaching joke) "as full—ay, and fuller too in some cases, by a pretty deal, than his pockets." Here he gave vent to a hearty laugh; then quickly regaining his composure, he proceeded to enumerate the duties to which he had alluded. "He has to look Over the steward's accounts. He has^to ride over the estate. He has to look at the buildings on it. He has to inquire into the state of the leases, and see when they drop, and when they want renewing, and whether they ought to be raised or not And then," added he, with a little dry laugh, and a twinkle of the eye, "there are such things as mortgages now and then upon estates; and, perhaps, by way of a pleasant thing, he may have to inquire into some of these, and find out how much they leave him really worth."





"Ah—yes—yes," said Lady Harriet, to whom all this had been worse than Hebrew—" I think I understand what you mean:—a man who has all this to do, cannot give up the time, and pay the attention to his lady, that all ladies naturally expect. If he has all this employment at home, he cannot be travelling about as new married people always do. By the bye, to my mind, that is an odious way of spending the honey-moon. I cannot think," (turning to her husband) " how we came to fall into it. If I were to mary you over again, I would not do so, certainly. It is the finest plan in the world to make people tired of each other.''

"Do you mean, Harriet," said Mr. Duncan, " to cite ourselves as instances of its bad effects?"

"No—no—"said she laughing, "but it really is a bad plan. People travel over each others minds, as rapidly as they do over the country, and I fear, very few are the instances in which they do not soon arrive at the barren tracts!"

"Lady Harriet," resumed the Baronet, " I perfectly agree with you upon the subject of travelling. That was not, I conceive, the way in which .the time and attention of a newly married man ought to be taken up. No—at that period he has many important things to think of—many important things to inquire into himself;—unless he trusts implicitly to his lawyer; and I hold it a bad system to trust implicitly to any body. There are the settlements—"





"Settlements!" exclaimed Lady .Harriet,—" Oh! don't mention them. 1 am as great an enemy to the contamination of love with law, as any Lydia Languish that ever was imagined."

The Baronet looked blank and disappointed, at not being allowed to talk of settlements; for he had much to say upon that subject, and hoped thereby to have brought in a story which he had often told, and which iie still believed to be a good one. But he could not proceed in defiance of Lady Harriet's prohibition, and he consoled himself with prosing a little about the Tedsworth estate, and Henry Granby, and slid in a few commendations, in which (in consideration of his altered circumstances) Lady Jermyn heartily concurred—and so ended breakfast.

And what had Caroline said all this while, on the subject of Granby's sudden elevation? Not one word. Though sensible that she might freely have given vent to expressions of gladness, without having her words weighed and noted by any but her parents, yet there was a deep consciousness that restrained their utterance, and not even a murmur or gesture of surprise was suffered to escape.

But her feelings who shall describe? Her own tongue refused to become their herald, and vain would it be for the pen of another to attempt clothing them in befitting terms. All was joy—deep, overpowering, rapturous joy—mixed with surprise, and gratitude, and thickly chequered with bright prospective visions, which danced awhile before her eves, then faded into doubtful gloom, and were anon replaced by new.

And then arose a thought of serious moment and bringing with it new disappointment;—that thought was of Courtenay. The plan which she had formed of com





municating to him the engaged state of her affections, must now be entirety abandoned. It could never be borne, that an explanation which ought to carry with it the undoubted impress of having sprung from none but feelings of the purest candour, should appear to be sullied at its source, by the suggestions of sordid interest— that a step, which even, under the most propitious-circumstances, prudery might plausibly term indelicate, should now bear the additional imputation of heartless ambition. On the very eve of his rising greatness to avow an affection, which in his poverty she had struggled to conceal! It was impossible. How could she reply with dignity and firmness,,to the well merited taunts which such a conduct would call forth in Courtenay? How would he turn with disdain from one who never seemed to have rejected his affection, till a richer prize appeared in view! Should she tell him that her affections were engaged, without informing him of their object? By so doing, she would fail in the openness which ought to characterize such a measure. Besides, should fortune, hereafter, unite her fate withGranby's, that object would be effectually discovered; and then, how deep and just would be the contempt with which her name must be pronounced by her husband's warm and early friend. No—the plan she had formed must be abandoned.

How, then, was she to escape from the addresses ol' Courtenay? for this she must do at all events. Fortunately he was going early on the morrow. But might he not, before his departure, make the dreaded offer oi' his hand? Or if he did not, was it right, by the friendship which she exhibited, to add fresh fuel to his hopes? Was it not better altogether to avoid him? She longed for some excuse—some illness, even—that might confine her to her room.

This wish was soon realized, in the shape of a headach, caused probably by ihe agitation ol her spirits. It soon became sufficiently severe to justify an entreaty to her mother to be allowed to absent herself from the dinner table, and to dispense with her reappearance at least until the following morning.





The entreaty was granted. Caroline saw no more of Courtenay that day; and on the following morning, with a joyful heart, did she from her window witness his departure.

"He is gone," said she, " for months at least—perhaps for years. He will soon cease to think of me. He will see others who can return his affection ; and I trust, when at some distant period we meet again, he may be happily united to some one worthy of his choice; or if not he will have learned to look on me with mere regard.n

While she was thus communing with herrelf, Lady Jermyn entered the room, and after inquiries about her health, and comments on her looks, proceeded to speak of Courtenay's departure. "I think, Caroline, he was very sorry to go away without seeing you. He made many earnesi inquiries. I suppose you know he is coming to us again in November?"

Caroline was no less surprised than sorry—" No, mamma," said she, " I never beard of it."

"Oh! I thought I had told you. We asked him two or three days ago. We found that he would be returning this way fram Scotland, about the beginning of November—exactly the time that the Daventrys have promised to come to us. There could not be a nicer opportunity. I asked him to meet them. It was an excellent reason to give. It is a difficult thing, in our situation, to invite young single men to come and stay with us. It would be very imprudent, not to say indelicate, to appear to do it on your account. One cannot be too nice and guarded upon these points."

Poor Caroline! her fancied vision of security was dissipated in an instant. " Well," thought she. '• two months may work a change;" and sighing,.she withdrew to muse upon the scanty consolation which this thought conveyed.





CHAPTER XVII.

Waken, Lords and Ladies gay,

On the mountain dawns the day \

AH the jolly chase is here,

With hawk, and horse, and hunting spear .

Hounds are in their couples yelling,

Hawks are whistling, horns are knelling;

Merrily, merrily mingle they;

Waken, Lords and Ladies gay.



i' W. Scott.

November came, and with it came Lord and Ladf Daventry, their son, and two eldesi daughters; with it came also Courtenay. The Duncans, who had been pressed to repeat their visit at this period, also came. A farther addition to the Brackingsley party appeared in the person of Mr. William Charlecote, who was invited as being the friend of Mr. Clifton, and tolerably well known to Courtenay ; and who, as he was a young maa of small expectations, was considered a very proper person to give a disinterested colour to the whole arrangement, and throw a little farther obscurity over the real object of Courtenay's visit.

Caroline soon found, to her sorrow, that two months had no) wrought the change which she anticipated; and that Courtenay, ,>n his second visit, came prepared to admire her as much as before,and to testify that admiration no less plainly. This now became .more unpleasant, on account of the extended party before whom it would be so openly exhibited; for she doubted not that it would excite the quick observation of her cousins, the Miss Cliftons; and .she.regarded as a serious punishment the playful remarks with which they were likely to assail her. Nor could she upon a reconsideration of Courtenay's manner, doubt any longer that it was his intention to propose to her, and that this proposal was not far distant. His devotion to her was much more manifest, now when there were other young ladies present, who might reasonably be expected to engage some portion of hia attention; for she found herself perpetually engrossing, in rather a distressing manner, a very unfair proportion of his civilities. ,





Caroline did not, however, feel more favourably disposed towards an acceptance of hia offer. It was not that she thought less of Courtenay, but that she believed the state of her affections to remain unchanged. No direct communication had taken place between her parents and the new Lord iMalton. Sir Thomas meditated atone time a letter of congratulation on Henry's accession to the title; but on reflection he felt, or thought he ouuht to feel, a little nettled at having received no direct intimation of that circumstance from the person himself; and upon consulting with Lady Jermyn, it appeared to both that there were "awkwardnesses" in the case, which rendered it adviseable to take no notice of that event.

The same consideration probably sealed their lips; for from the time that Courtenay and the Duncans quitted them, they hardly ever mentioned the subject. Caroline had therefore received no impulse to her sentiments, in any direction, from the opinions of her parents, except that she experienced a disheartening chill, from this obstinate silence upon a subject which ought to have been so interesting—a silence which indicated a decided hostility between the parties. There were times also when she felt ralher indignant at Henry for having taken this mode of showing his persevering remembrance of a former slight; but she was still as much as ever averse to receive the addresses of any other person.

Courlenay had now arrived at the determination of making Caroline a formal offer of his hand; and intended speedily to carry his intent iuto execution. He wished, however, before taking this final step, to receive some more unequivocal testimony of her good will than he had hitherto been able to obtain; for notwithstanding the excusable blindness of a lover's ardour, which can often interpret mere civility into posi. tive encouragement, he was not altogether satisfied that Caroline had yet arrived at such a state of acquiescent kindness as would secure him from the humiliation of a refusal. He consequently purposed td await the result of a few days,—assuring himself that at the end of that period he might safely propose to her, should he in the interim perceive no discouraging symptoms of disinclination.





Meanwhile, a circumstance occurred which materially influenced his prospects. In consequence of a request from Sir Thomas Jermyn to Sir Cuthbert Andrews, who kept fox hounds, and hunted in that neighbourhood, it was arranged that the hounds should meet at Brackingsley while the Daventr) s and Duncans were staying there; and the day now finally appointed was the third after their arrival.

Sir Thomas Jerm)n was not a sportsman. He had pursued the amusements of. the field very little in his youth, and cared still less about them in his rip »• years. He thought, nevertheless, that the reputation of being somewhat versed in these pursuits was desirable, in a country gentleman. He. therefore, did not neglect the means of securing to himself a small portion of this fame; but attended the Higleston coursing meeting, and always made a point of taking out his gun. on the first of September. He was also pleased to have the hounds meet at Brackingsley; not from any interest which he took in their proceedings, but because it seemed to give a temporary importance to himself and his place. It also gave him much to do; called forth all the little sporting lore which he possessed; and gave him a plea for instructing persons, who on that subject were much wiser than himself, and for enlightening the.field upon the subject of his manorial rights, and the extent of his domain; for he never failed to inform a favoured few, that if the fox would go in a particular direction, which he pointed out, they would have the pleasure of running no less than two miles and a half, in a pretty straight line, over his property.

Then he had many preparatory directions to give, about stopping earths, and opening gates, and cautioning tenants to keep up their dogs; and much comfortable grumbling on the excessive trouble it gave him at the time, and the damage that was done when all was over. In short, on the morning of such an event, Sic Thomas Jermyn was in his glory.





The morning came; and an auspicious morning it was; just the day that sportsmen love: there was the "southerly wind," and the "cloudy sky," in full perfection: the wind just indicating its existence by a slight accession of coolness on your face when you turned to the south, and the gentle motion of the feathery tops of the tall birch; the sky fleckered with dull gray clouds, which lay lapped closely one over the other, with that settled appearance which conveyed no more the expectation of rain than if the heavens had been one blue.

There had been no shower for several days, and the turf was in a most tempting state, for the curious in canters to prick their gentle steeds upon. It was yielding without softness, and firm and elastic without being hard. In short, every thing was as it should be; and Sir Thomas Jermyn was quite happy.

Half-past ten arrived; and punctual to their time, the hounds were seen, with their attendant huntsmen and whippers-in, in their little round caps, trotting across the lawn towards the house. Beyond, in groups of three or four, were sundry sportsmen, emerging from various points towards the place of rendezvous. Some we,re well mounted, and dressed in scarlet: others there were, whose bottle green jackets, and dusky corderoys, mounted as they were on stiff useful horses, or washy bits of blood, denoted the tight, spruce, gentleman farmer, who thinks he is well to do in the •world—takes a gentlemanly bit of pleasure—catches to admiration the knowing look which is not despised by our aristocracy—keeps a good grey hound or two —bets hard and loud, if not high, at a coursing meeting —and rides his own horse for the farmers' plate.

These, as they came nearer to the house, slackened

Vol. H." 13





their pace, and filed off towards the huntsman and his pack ; while those whose appearance, aided by that of their horses, bespoke -their superior pretensions, advanced boldly to pay their respects to the owner of the mansion. Several of these latter were ushered in; and first in dignity Sir Cuthbert Andrews, the master of the hunt.

Sir Cuthbert Andrews (equally well known among sportsmen by the familiar name of Old Cutty) was a stout, hard featured, middle aged man, still hale and active, but exhibitingin his countenance many symptoms of wear and tear. His face was marked with frequent lines, not of thought, but furrows engraved by hard drinking and hard riding. He was a grave, gentlemanly looking man, heavy in air and conversation; a man of few words, and fewer ideas; who occasionally, but not often, uttered a dry joke, and would laugh now and then at the jokes of others,—particularly of his huntsman, who was a wag and a character. He was a solemn man of pleasured Amusement was his business; and like business, though it interested and occupied, it could not animate him. Even of the chase he talked without vivacity. Dearly as he loved it, he never seemed to feel the lively enthusiasm by which some are excited; and as for speaking of it in a gay or sportive manner,—it never entered his mind. The subject appeared to him too serious to be treated lightly. In his youth Sir Cuthbert was always considered "a good fellow," and still preserved the reputation of a "steady hand,1' and a "regular goer;" and he was sometimes designated, by those who sported with him, when somewhat mellow with drinking after a hard run, as a " good-natured old boy." In what consisted his good nature, it would be difficult to say; for he never lent a horse in his life, rode jealous in the field, an^ would not have stopped at a practicable fence, even it he had seen his best friend lying on his back on the other side. Perhaps his good nature consisted in his liberal view of moral obligations; for he never in his life severely denounced any known sin, except shoot





/

ing a fox; and "a man who did that," as he observed; "deserved to be hung, drawn, and quartered."

Such was the person who was ushered into the saloon at Brackingsley, and who, after a few bows to the ladies, and a few inquiries addressed to Sir Thomas about earth-stopping, and other preliminaries, pulled out his watch, and proposed to proceed to business, and adjourned immediately to the scene of action.

The whole of the Brackingsley party were presently in motion. Courtenay, Clifton, and Charlecole, all appeared well mounted, and "point device," in their accoutrements. Lord Daventry and Mr. Duncan rode to look At the hounds, on quiet hacks, dressed in their usual morning habiliments. Sir Thomas, who was no adventurous horseman, and whose age was sufficient to plead his excuse, took the field upon a small punchy galloway, upon which he used to ride about his farm; an animal free from all vice, and whom no consideration could have induced to run away with hia rider.

Of the ladies, Lady Harriet Duncan and Lady Daventry pleaded cold and want of curiosity, and did not go out to partake of the amusement. Lady Jermyn had settled that Caroline should ride; and had offered horses to the Miss Cliftons in case they should like to accompany her. But these young ladies, though excellent horsewomen at home, could no more ride my but their own horses, than many other young ladies can play out of any but (heir own music books. It was therefore decided finally, that they should go as spectators with Lady Jermyn, in an open carriage.

In this manner they all set out,—Caroline mounted on horseback, to the delight of Courtenay, who was ever at her side—of the Baronet, whom she accompanied—and of Lady Jermyn, who kept an eye perpetually upon her, and thought with reason that she appeared to great advantage.

The whole, jicld was now in motion; and a gay and gallant sight it was: steeds and riders equally animated) passing and repassing here and there in quick confusion, and forming unconsciously such charming,





varying groups for a painter's eye. And then, with all this bold picturesqueness of general effect, there was such brilliance of detail! So much withal of a drawingroom air in their dainty equipments for this bold, rough sport; .the perfect style of the coat—the immaculate whiteness of the boot top—the finished neatness of the horse furniture—in short, the absolute completeness of the whole set.out! ..

Meanwhile they aproached the cover; and Sir Thomas, delighted with the bustle, and feeling himself to be lord of the ascendant for the time being, jogged along in conversation with Sir Cuthbert Andrews,— whose fast walking hunter kept his brother Baronet's galloway on a continued trot.

"A glorious day indeed, Sir Cuthbert," said his companion; "we have bespoke you that at any rate. But you have always good weather when you meet at Brackingsley."

"It is a tolerably good scenting day," said Sir Cuthbert, drily, taking a pinch of snutf as he spoke. "But the ground is too hard; we want rain!" Then turning in his saddle, he shouted out a direction to his huntsman, to draw the cover from the further end.

"Allow me, Sir Cuthbert," said Sir Thomas, "to recommend a contrary course."

Sir Cuthbert stared with surprise, that any one should presume to direct him upon such a point.

"If I were you," pursued the other, "I would do exactly the reverse; I would put in my hounds at this end, and beat it up to the other. Thereby, Sir Cuthbert, you will force the fox—understand me—you will force the fox to take a better line of country—a line with which I am well acquainted, in which for the space of four miles are excellent bridle roads along the fields."

"Humph! thank you," said Sir Cuthbert, "but I don't care a curse for the bridle road. I leave that to the cock tailed fellows that cannot ride across a country. Ah! ware hare!" he shouted, "Dick! look at Wanton and Restless—I shall draft those dosrs " (to





himself,,) —" have you any friend that is setting up harriers ?" (turning to Sir Thomas,)—" Ned, take 'em on," (to his huntsman.) "No riding yet, if you please Sir," (to a young man who was galloping by.) "Charlecote, will you sell that beast?" (addressing our acquaintance.) "Damn that son of a journeyman tailor!" apostrophizing a dapper apothecary, who was rather too forward on a raw hot horse.

"Perhaps, pursued Sir Thomas, as soon as he saw an opportunity, "you think me interested in the direction you take—not the least I assure you; I was not thinking about my fences; that is my tenants' affair, and so I tell them when I see them. Besides, whichever way you go, you traverse nearly an equal portion of my property. Behind, for instance," (turning his own, and his horse's body, while bis companion looked carelessly over his shoulder,) "behind, I reach to within three fields of that church steeple. On my right—do you see—to that red house on the farthest hill—and straight before"—here he stopped,—for Sir Cuthbert had made his horse move briskly forward, and nobody else was sufficiently near to receive the remainder of the sentence.



CHAPTER XVIII.

Hark! from yon covert where those towering oaks

Above the humble copse aspiring rise,

What glorious triumphs burst in every gale

Upon our ravish'd ears! The hunter's shout,

The clanging horns swell their sweet winding notes,

The pack wide opening load the trembling air

With various melody; from tree to tree

The propagated cry redoubling bounds.



SOMERvILLE.

The hounds had now began to draw the cover, and the party stood in eager expectation, listening to the rustling of the horses and dogs among the brushwood, the occasional call of the huntsman, and the loud cracking of the whip.





Sir Thomas and his daughter, and several others of their party, were stationed on a small knoll, under the shelter of a clump of oaks, which stood rather detached from the cover; while on the other side a smooth expanse of turf sloped down towards a brook, which rippled irregularly along—now rapid and shallow, now deep and still—lined here and there with sedges and straggling alders, that shot aslant from out of the bank, and dipped their twisted branches in the stream. On the right was a large park-like enclosure, separated from the ground on which they stood by a deep fence, with rugged paling on the top of it. On the other side was a range of fields with low fences, and gates wide open, along which the eye followed a fine sweep of woodland, which was terminated in the distance by a long dark line, formed by part of the Brackingsley Belt. On the side of the cover, opposite to the place where they were stationed, was a gate and road, which led through the wood to the other side, and which would enable them to see something of the sport, in whichever direction the hounds might go.

Courtenaywas near Caroline, thinking, even at such a time, more of her than of the sport. And yet he was under ordinary circumstances, a keen sportsman. Need we say, after this, how deeply he was in love?

Sir Thomas Jennyn was near them, and was looking earnestly at some of the sportsmen in the centre of the cover, who seemed to be tugging at a bridle gate, as if they wished to take it off the hinges.

"Good Lord !" exclaimed he, "they'll pull it down! it is locked—see there—there is carelessness! I'm obliged to look to every thing myself. It ought to have been opened as well as the rest—stop—stop," (-he shouted,) "you shall have a key"—(feeling for one in his pocket,)—"ah—there's a ditch between us—I can't get to them—where is John ?" looking around for the groom, who had lagged a little way behind.

"Let me take it to them, said Courteoay; and re





ceiving the key, he leaped the ditch, and arrived in time to save the gate from demolition. Sir Thomas then trotted off to speak to a person whom he saw in the next field, and Caroline offered to follow him.

"You had better stay where you are," said he, "you cannot be better situated, and I shall come back to you directly."

He had scarcely turned his horse's head, when Charlecote joined Caroline. "Well, Miss Jermynl" said he, "how do you like it? Capital day for the purpose, isn't it? Rather tiresome, waiting so long— but never mind—we shall find soon. Capital situation this—a good place to get away from—it is a horrid nuisance to be in a place where you cannot get away. It was my case at Baddestone yesterday. There was a high park paling on one side, and a great wide hedge on the other—a terrible ugly place, I assure you—half the field were craning at it. I'm not one that is stopped by a trifle; but you know there are things that one cannot take. I never was so puzzled in all my life. But here it is quite a different thing. That brook is fordable, Pm sure; and there's a very easy fence to the left, and a nice short cut right through the cover, in case they go away on the other side." At this instant a cry was heard from the hounds in the cover—then came a shout—then a horn was sounded, and at the same moment every horse in the adjoining fields was in motion.

"Pug's off, by Jove!" cried Charlecote, and clapping spurs to his horse, he dashed down the road that leads to the other side of the cover. At the same time many a scarlet coat was seen in swift progress through the wood; and there was a general rush from the fields on the left towards the gate near which Caroline was stationed, and the quick trampling of the numerous hoofs thundered furiously upon the springy turf.

The horse from which the groom had dismounted plunged, threw up its heels, and ran back to the full extent of its rein, at which it pulled so violently as to draw off all the attention of the servant, who was just then begining to fasten the curb of Caroline's bridle. Her horse, though naturally a quiet animal, now began to exhibit strong symptoms of restiveness. He sidled, pawed, tried to advance as each successive sportsman galloped by, and at last, upon a man in red (one of the vvhippers in) coming near, at a quick pace, cracking as he went a long lashed whip, the animal after a furious plunge, finding that the bit in its present state was unequal to restrain it, set offat full speed down the. slope towards the brook.





The groom in vain attempted to remount his horse, which still pranced and curvetted, and used every effort to escape, while Sir Tho:nas, who saw his daughter's danger from au adjoining field, laboured uselessly to urge his poney to a speed that might enable him to overtake her.

Meanwhile Courtenay, having assisted in opening; the bridle gate, recognised among those who were anxious to get through, au old college acquaintance, whom, from some accident or other he had not yet seen among the assemblage. He therefore passed with him to the other side of the wood, and stood for several minutes in conversation, when they heard the horn, and presently saw hounds and huntsmen emerge from the cover, and sweep along in front of them. They were instantly wrapt in the high-wrought interest which the scene excited, and they dashed forward with all the glorious enthusiasm of fox hunters.

They rapidly turned the corner of the wood, and entered the large park-like field which adjoined that wherein we have left Caroline. Even in the first heat of pursuit, Courtenay could not help turning his eyes towards the place where he knew she would be seen.

He did see her, and in what a situation! Her horse was galloping furiously towards the brook, and she leaning back, apparently exerting all her strength in a vain endeavour to check it. No one was near to assist her; and Courtenay fancied that his ear caught a cry for help. He saw at once all the danger of her situatioo, and to fly to her succour was with him, the result of impulse rather than of thought.





A difficult fence, composed of ragged irregular piles and a wide ditch, lay between them. He spurred his horse resolutely at it, and the animal being a powerful hunter, and now quite fresh, cleared it gallantly. He heard some exclamations of surprise at the feat and the direction in which he was going, from voices behind him, one of which was that of Charlecote; but he paid no attention to them, and urged his horse forward with furious speed in the direction which Caroline's had taken.

Courtenay saw the terrified animal which bore her, without slackening its pace, reach the edge of the brook, plunge in, and disappear beneath the high bank. He uttered an exclamation of horror, and spurred and lashed his horse more furiously still, ami strained his eyes to look after her.

He saw the animal in a few seconds mount the opposite bank without its rider, and gallop off along the meadow. In another moment, he was at the brook side, had thrown himself from the saddle, and was looking earnestly into the stream below. He caught a glimpse of her blue riding dress floating on the surface of the water—loosed his bridle—and plunged in.

There was at this place a deep hole, caused by the eddy of the stream, and Courtenay immediately found himself out of his depth. However, with prompt activity seizing by one hand a large root which projected from the bank, he supported himself with this, while with the other hand he grasped Caroline, whose clothes, heavy with water, had drawn her down below the surface. He obtained a footing against the side, and availing himself of this, and whatever presented itself to his grasp, by a vigorous exertion of his strength he raised himself upon the bank,—drawing after him the apparently lifeless form of Caroline.

She was insensible,—partly through terror, partly from the effects of her emersion, and the suspended animation which it had temporarily produced. Her hat and cap were lost, and her beautiful hair hung in long dripping threads down her neck and shoulders. Her face was pale, and her eyes were closed; yet, even then Courtenay could not but gaze on her with admiration, as kneeling on the turf beside her, he supported with his arm that drooping head, and thought with a glow of inward rapture, of the service he had afforded to such a being.





Sir Thomas Jermyn and the groom now came up, and Courtenay committed his interesting charge to the arms of her father. The agony of the Baronet had been extreme; and the doubtful appearance of his daughter's state hardly yet allowed it to subside. He pressed her in his ami*, and continued earnestly gazing at her pale face, and uttering low moaning sounds of lamentation, interrupted occasionally by fervent cries of "thank God it is no worse," and broken expressions ofthanks to Courtenay.

"But what must we.do with the poor dear child?" said he at length—" we must not stay here with her."

Courtenay mentioned the barouche; " Oh, ay, true,'1 said Sir Thomas, "the barouche—where is it?"

The servant was immediately sent for it.

"But do not alarm Lady Jermyn," added Courtenay; <l merely say that Miss Jermyn has been in the brook, and is quitftwet, and wants to return in the carriage."

"Ob, look! look!" exclaimed Sir Thomas delightedly, "her colour is returning—I cannot tell you my obligations—I shall always feel them—you have saved her life."

"See!" exclaimed Courtenay, "thank God! she opens her eyes."

She did so, and turned them at the same time with a grateful expression upon him. The first words she heard distinctly, in returning consciousness, were her father's thanks to Courtenay, coupled with the information that to him she owed her deliverance. Her first look was a faint gmile, to reassure her anxious father, who on seeing these unequivocal symptons of revival, fervently kissed her pale cold cheek, and.ejaculatcd many a warm expression of grateful joy.





Courtenay now looked up in quest of the barouche. "I see it coming," said he, joyfully, "but 1 think it cannot drive down to the brook side; we must take Miss .lermyn to the top of the field."

"Are they within sight," said Caroline to her father; "pray raise me up—my mother will be alarmed if she sees me resting on your knee—there—thank you—with help I think I can walk—no, I am still weak—oh, it all seems like a dream! How did I get into the water? I think I recollect—my head grows clearer—Oh! Mr. Courtenay, how much I am indebted to you!''

Courtenay felt himself amply, richly rewarded by these words, and the soft sweet smile which accompanied them. His mind was too full to allow him to say any thing in return. Before they reached the carriage they were met by Lady Jermyn and the Miss Cliftons, who seeing that something serious had occurred, ran pale and breathless towards them. Lady Jermyn was much affected by her daughter's appearance, and shuddered at the frightful retrospect of tho danger from which she had so narrowly escaped. She cried, and smiled, and cried again, and pressed her daughter's hands, and kissed her cheeks, and asked her how it happened; and then, without waiting for an answer, went on exclaiming, and heartily rejoicing that the worst was past.

Caroline could give but little information of the way in which the accident had occured. The shock had driven it from her mind. She rather wanted information herself; and as Lady Jermyn urgently appealed to the rest of the party, she had soon an opportunity of learning, from the joint testimony of Sir Thomas Jermyn, Courtenay, and the groom, how the event took place, and how the deliverance was effected. Lady Jermyn was profuse in well-merited thanks to Courtenay, in which Caroline could not but,concur; and though she said little, yet at such a moment she could not conceal from him that she felt much. She was lifted into the barouche; and the whole party returned home, all busy with thoughts of their own, and with no slight wonder at this unexpected and critical termination of a morning which had commenced so gayly.





Courtenay was soon assailed with praises from every quarter, for his gallant exertions in Caroline's behalf. The ladies were astonished at bis boldness in venturing, '' accoutred as he was," into a brook out of his depth; the gentlemen dwelt upon the perils of his leap.

"Upon my word, Mr. Courtenay," said Lord Daventry, in his somewhat pompous manner, "you took a leap this morning which 1 should have been very sorry to have taken even in the best of my hunting days, though I used to be rather a hard rider. I remember about the year ninety, when Lord Westbury hunted the

shire country, riding over Sir Godfrey Davison's

park paling. PoorDaviion! he was a very good sportsman too. There were many of us at that time who rode hard and well. It is a fascinating pursuit, Mr. Courtenay; you are a young man, and likely to follow it with ardour. Let me warn you against its excess. I found that it engrossed me too much, and I made a point of withdrawing myself from it —1 found that I could not conscientiously remain a fox hunter—it was incompatible with my other avocations;" and so saying, his Lordship took a pinch of snuff, and walked away full of the satisfaction with which a great mind looks back upon a former sacrifice of pleasure to duty.

Mr.Duncan now put in his compliment. "Courtenay," said he, "you are the very mirror of modern chivalry —ycu may let your spirit of enterprise lie fallow for the next half year—you have immortalized yourself by the deeds of one half minute. 1 was in the field you quitted so daringly. Excuse me for having at the time thought you mad. J did not then see the all-sufficient cause for such an experiment—for an experiment it really was."

"Oh, it was no such great thing," said Courtenay. laughing. "My horse was fresh—1 knew he would do it."

Clifton and Charlecote now came in, well splashed from their run.





"Egad ! Courtenay," said Charlecote, "you did the thing in proper style,—and a devilish ugly place it was. Gad! you gathered him up, and crammed him at^it! There was no denial—go he must. You remembered old Toby's rules for leaping. 'Keep his head straight, and go over,' says Toby. You know old Toby—Tennyson's Toby—as good a huntsman as ever crossed a horse. But why did not you follow us? It is a thousand pities (isn't it, Clifton ?) that Courtenay did not follow us. We had a real good day, I promise you. You saw what a pretty burst we had. Well, Sir—Pug went straight away for Westwood Gorse—and a steady hard run we had of it—not a single check, and a burning scent, and all of us fresh as two year olds. It was as good a part of the day as any. But when we got to the gorse we lost him,—and we lost time too, which was quite as bad—drawing, and drawing, and all to no purpose. So then w<> went to Campley Wood, and before the hounds were half through it, (1 was on the outside) —Gad, Sir! out (here came a big old fox—so we laid them on—and away like fun by Claverton Grange, and over the hill above Baddesley Pool, and down again by Nether Twycross—and then we came to a sort of check —and once we thought we had fairly lost hirn; but old Cutty made a cast—a devilish good one; and again we were on him—and away across the grass fields by Crawford. Gad ! you should have seen us then! We all streamed down in rank—no choosing, or gap-hunting —every man took his fence as it lay before him—and away we went like devils over the new enclosures on Penderton Edge. Gad! Sir, didn't we go the pace! The pace kills—nothing like going it. Ah ! you should have been with us then. But we had not much of that --for then he took us across the low grounds by Muddyford and Sludgeley Bottom—stiff, heavy country— infernal bad going—up to the shoulders pretty nearly— most of the horses were dead beat before they came out of it. Well, then, we got upon Dartington higher level, and the Badsworth country—ugly work, so late in the day—but no matter, nothing stopped us. Didn't we

VOL, II. 14





charge them ! ox fences, double fences, and all, my boy! You should only have seen us—that's all! Well, Sir! here, we gained upon pug, and within.half a mile of Dingley Coppice we viewed him, Sir,—we viewed him —beat—quite beat—I knew he was—I said he was— fifty to one, says I, he does not reach the wood. No more he did. On we went—and in two minutes more ran into him, in the middle of a grass field. Who.hoop! glorious, by Jove! Have not seen a better thing this twelvemonth. There was nobody in but I, Jack Han mer, old Cutty, Floxton, Dick Derby, and Cutty's Ned. You should only have seen the fellows behind, scattered by two or three in a field, over the country for the last two miles. Oh, it was a regular hard run. That second fox was such a tough one! Look here— I've brought away one of his holders;" and so saying, he pulled a tooth out of his waistcoat pocket. "An old stager, wasn't he? By the bye, I'll tell you a good thing of old Cutty. George Johnson, (he had been riding at me—going it, like smoke) well, he got a regular fall, horse and all, down together, neck and crop, in a deep, dry ditch. Johnson was for scrambling out. Old Cutty was just behind. 'Lie still you fool!' says Cutty. 'Damn you, lie still, till I get over.' So Johnson lay down in the ditch, frightened out of his life, and old Cutty leaped clean over him. Oh, Lord! you should have been with us. However, you were well employ, ed where you were, I confess; and lent a hand to some • purpose. Oh, there is Lady Jermyn—I must go and do the civil thing, and ask her how Miss Jermyn does," and so saying, he walked away into the next room.





CHAPTER XIX.

Obligation! why a water spaniel .would hare done as much. Well! I should never think of giving my heart to a man because he could swim.

The Rivals.

Caroline soon recovered from the effects of her accident; and after a day or two she made her reappearance. She felt a little oppressed by the attention which her situation had excited, and the eager solicitude with •which she was greeted, and would fain have withdrawn herself longer from the general gaze. But in this unnecessary seclusion there would have been a little duplicity, and an apparent coquettish manceuvreing to excite an. interest, from which the propriety of her feelings recoiled. Perhaps also she was somewhat unwilling on another account to make more of the incident than was necessary. She was grateful to Courtenay—very grateful; and she repeated it to herself a thousand times. But yet she felt no disposition to increase the sense of this obligation either in herself or others, by any act which she could avoid.

In truth she was mortified by the turn which the late event had taken, and had rather been assisted by any but Courtenay. Yet she felt that his services had given him so powerful a claim to her gratitude and esteem, that a proposal, supported as it would doubtless be by the approbation of her parents, could hardly with propriety be rejected. She could not doubt that real affection had urged him to such prompt assistance; but she determined, if possible, not to evince a consciousness that he had exerted himself for her in a greater degree than he would in behalf of any other female, and resolved that the firm unshrinking tone of her gratitude, while it acquitted her of unkindness, should make him, sensible that it was not mingled with the sensitive timidity of love.

Thus reasoned Caroline, and she tried to shape he? course accordingly. But in assuming an air of mere gratitude, and endeavouring to put upon his behaviour the construction which she wished to adopt in imagination, she found herself foiled by the significant manner and conscious looks of all around her. It was plain that Courtenay's devotion to her had become manifest to all the house ; and that this last act was merely regarded as a more direct practical avowal of that which was sufficiently evident before. Even her cousins, the Miss Cliftons, began to exchange looks of much intelligence, and did not banter her about her accident half so freely as she might have expected. They did not talk a tenth part of the usual nonsense about distressed damsels and valiant nights, and evidently because they thought the case was now too serious for a joke. Nay, what was worse than all, she began to perceive that most of the company now spoke of Courtenay in her presence, in that sort of bridled, guarded manner in which one comments on an absent person before a very near relation.





All this was exceedingly provoking. What was Courtenay to her?—a friend, a deliverer—not the master of her heart; and she earnestly longed to tell them so. This behaviour, on the part of her father's visiters, not only discomposed her plan of conduct, but impressed her more strongly with the difficulty of giving Courtenay an absolute rejection, whenever the decided proposal should be made. She could not, she said, positively accept him; but she must not dismiss him without hope—without an assurance that time might exert a beneficial influence in his favour—that she could wish to know him longer and better, before she took an irrevocable step—that her heart could not be hastily won—that he possessed at present her esteem—and that upon some future day he possibly might gain her love. And such was her final resolution.

And what, meanwhile, were Courtenay's thoughts? In truth they were nearly of as mixed and perplexing a character as those of Caroline. At first he was transported with pleasure, at having been the happy instrument of saving from such imminent peril one whom he





so truly loved. He thought, too, with intense delight of the powerful claim upon her affections, which his bold and successful assistance would afford him.

But to these brilliant and flattering prospects succeeded reflections of a more sober character—reflections, which induced him to postpone for a while his intention of asking her hand in marriage. There was something that accorded ill with his nice and honourable feelings, in the idea of thus hastily presuming upon a service which chance alone had afforded him the means of performing. Pride also whispered, that it was not to au act of such a kind, however signal and meritorious, that he would willingly owe the possession of her hand. If he was accepted, he would .that it were for merits of a more certain description—for instances of daily worth, and not for the dazzling exploits of a hasty moment; not for a service which a mere stranger might equally have rendered. He could not wish that the woman he loved should be entrapped into liking him, by the mere fortunate termination of a fortuitous event; or be induced to commit the dangerous error of thinking that to be love, which after all was merely gratitude.

"No," said he, "let my late services be forgotten. .It had been better had they never been required. Then I could not have undergone the danger of seeing the affections of my chosen bride rest on a circumstance* the remembrance of which must ever, as we live, grow more and more faint, and with it the delusive love which it seemed to cherish. My vanity shall not mislead me; I will at least observe her closely; I will see how my services are appreciated; I will mark attentively the tone—the manner with which she expresses her thanks. I shall be able to distinguish the unembarrassed air of mere gratitude, from the hesitating acknowledgments of growing love."

This was very well in theory; but the practice was not so easy. He experienced the same difficulties that had occurred to Caroline, though he was less sensible of their existence. He quickly discovered that all the circle had tacitly set them down as lovers. He saw, too, that Caroline perceived it; and thought that she seemed to acquiesce in the propriety of the opinion. Then, the expression of her gratitude had, in spight of her endeavours, a downcast diffidence, a certain air of timid tenderness, which gave it an inexpressible charm to Courtenay, and made his heart beat high with hope. His scruples melted fast away. He could not think that mere cold gratitude had given birth to that sweet confusion which he gladly traced to a warmer sentiment. In a word, he felt that she must be his ; and with a bounding spirit he decided that, ere long—nay, if possible, on that very day—the die should be cast.





Caroline had been out that day, riding with others of their party, and Courtenay among the rest; and on her return, he found himself alone with her in the saloon. She looked even more than usually attractive. A fresh colour, heightened by exercise, bloomed in her cheek, and her countenance was gay and animated.

"I am pleased with myself," said she, half laughing as she spoke, "for having ridden to-day. It is better to make the effort soon. One gains nothing by delay; indeed I think one's timidity only increases, and settles by time into habit. Pray, praise me a little for my courage; I am very desirous to be commended for that;—I suppose, because I am sensible of a great want of it. I pride myself most on having passed by the very scene of my disaster—disaster indeed, I should hardly call it, since it terminated so well,—thanks to your kind and prompt assistance."

"Indeed," said Courtenay, "you look so well at this moment, and seem to have suffered so little from it, that I am almost selfish enough to wish you would fall into a brook every day, that I might have the happiness of saving you. You are smiling at that. Don't you think it would really be a happiness?"

Caroline felt a little perplexity, which she tried to carry off with a laugh. "I was only thinking," said she, "that you are fortunate in having discovered a mode of happiness which nobody will ever wish to dispute with you."





"I am not very sure of that," said Courtenay ; "but if it is so, I can only say that I am obliged to the world for their blindness. But it would not make me quite happy; I should merely regard it as a passport. No— I should look much farther. I believe," he added with a smile of much meaning, "you hardly yet know all that is necessary to my happiness."

"1 dare say not," said she, in a tone that laboured hard to be indifferent; and turning her head, she walked to the window, where she endeavoured to occupy herself in examining the green-house plants that stood on a flower stand.

Courtenay followed, and remained for a moment regarding her in silence,—too much absorbed in admiration to think of resuming his address. The pause, however, boded something of less doubtful import, and was more awful to Caroline's feelings than any form of words in which he could have clothed his meaning. With nervous trepidation, wishing to be employed, she knew not how* she had broken off a geranium flower, and was trying to fix it in the button hole of her riding habit. The stalk broke, and it fell to the ground; Courtenay hastily picked it up; she thanked him, and held out her hand to receive i.t.

"Do not ask me to return it," said he, with an expressive smile, and put it into the breast of his waistcoat. Caroline blushed at the obvious air of gallantry, with which this trifling act was accompanied, and trying to pass it off with a hurried laugh, she gathered another flower."

"I shall deny your taste as a florist," said she, "if you keep that broken thing. If you want a flower, here is a better—take this,"—and she extended it towards him.

Courtenay eagerly seized her hand, with a glow of pleasure on his countenance.—" Any gift from you is precious," said he, his eyes sparkling as he spoke. "Oh, if I might but keep this hand that gives it to me!"

Caroline coloured deeply, and struggled to withdraw the hand that Courtenay held clasped between his own.





"Must I let it go?" said he, in a tone of tender entreaty. "Oh, no, no, I must—must keep it. If you will not utter a kind yes, one little look shall say it for you; I will understand the lightest token."

Caroline turned away her head. "Nay, Mr. Courtenay, I could wish to have avoided this," she said.in a tone of vexation, while Courtenay still stood detaining her hand, with his glistening eyes intently fixed on her countenance.

She had no time for more words, for at that instant the door was opened, and Charlecote burst into the room, laughing as he entered, and asked her to be umpire in a game at billiards, cue against mace, between himself and Miss Clifton.

Caroline was glad of an excuse to break off the conference, and hastened to the billiard room—leaving Courtenay somewhat disappointed at the abrupt termination of so interesting an interview, but consoled with the reflection that an opening had been made for the introduction of a more formal declaration, and satisfied with her qualified admission of his addresses.



CHAPTER XX.



You hare displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting

With most admired disorder.—Macbeth.



Next morning the whole party were reassembled at the breakfast-table. The welcome post arrived as usual, and letters and papers were soon seen picturesquely interspersed among cups, plates, egg stands, and toast racks. Some were reading letters; others glancing at newspapers, between the acts of coffee and rolls ; some talking; some few eating; all variously employed; while Lady Jermyn, under the august shadow of a lofty silver urn,—which, with a most musical simmer, sent up





a high wreathing column of steam—sat presiding, with a happy well-tempered air of dignity, over two large tea pots, and dispensed an even-handed justice to the rival factions of green and bohea.

Courtena) was looking rather unhappy, for he had failed in securing a seat by Caroline. However, as he sat nearly opposite, he consoled himself with the pleasure of looking at her, and thinking over the tender things he meant to say before that day was past.

Much light conversation, of one kind or another, was passing around.

"There—you political person!" said Lady Harriet, holding up a letter to her husband, who sat perusing the newspaper on the other side of the table, "take this, and read it. and dismiss the cares of the nation, and think of your wife's for half a moment. Oh, how I hate all politics!" said she, directing her observation to the rest of the company. "Begging the gentlemen's pardons, I don't think it improves them at all. It makes them so business-like and taiggy. As for us women, it really ruins us completely. Don't you think so., mv dear?" appealing to Mi^s Clifton.

"I agree with you entire!)," said the latter, "and I know several instances of its bad effects. There, our good friend Lady Highbury: what a charming woman she is, till she begins to rave about politics—and devoutly wishes the nation had no debt—and wonders how high the funds would be then—and talks so feelingly of that unhappy country, Ireland—and wishes ministers would compel the cotters to build chimneys, and give up potatoes. Do you know what made her such a violent Anti Catholic? She was disappointed at Rome—ill used, she says, about a front place at one of the ceremonies in the Holy Week! Fortunately she is a tory. That side suits our sex (he best. Wp ought to stand up for power and prerogative. I cannot abide a female democr*!. It is shocking to hear ladies raving about liberty, like Lady Crosstown. But she is a radical, which is ten times worse. A few years ago, when Hunt was in his glory, she sent htm a card for one of her parties. I believe he did not go, but the fact of the invitation is unquestionable* I had it from excellent authority." ,





"Oh, Eliza, you scandalous girl!" exclaimed Anne. 111 wont believe it. I am very fond of Lady Crosstown—she is such a dear odd creature!"

"It is really a fact," pursued Miss Clifton; "and you know the illness she had last spring—solely produced, I assure you, by sitting three successive nights in the roof of the House of Commons. One night was enough for me. By the bye what did we go to hear?" appealing to her mother, who having forgotten, passed on the question to Lord Daventry.

"You ought to know better than me," said his Lordship, "but if I remember right, it was the debate on the second reading of the Marriage-Act Amendment Bill."

"I think," added Sir Thomas Jermjn, " 1 can recall it to your memory. 1 said a lew words on that question myself. I am sure you will recollect it now. I do not know whether you happened to read the debates afterward, but they misrepresented me in the paper shamefully. If you remember, my speech was a short one—I hate to engross the time of the House as some people do. Such being the case, there was the less excuse for a false report. But when I came to look at the papers, egad, Sir!" (turning to Mr. Duncan) "they had put down—what were the words?—oh—'Sir T. Jermyn supported the motion. The honourable baronet fully concurred in the sentiments of the last speaker.' No, Sir, I did not fully-concur, in the sentiments of the last speaker. No, Sir, I had my own view of the subject, as I always have, and like to have, and think that every honest and independent member ought to have. I differed from the last speaker in many respects; and yet these fellows have the assurance to tell the world that I fully concurred in his sentiments. I think this sort of misrepresentation amounts to a breach of privilege. I had a good mind to have called the attention of the House to it. That step has been taken in cases which have been scarcely of greater importance."





"Public characters," said Mr. Duncan, "are continually exposed to these misrepresentations. It is the price they pay for notoriety.''

"Very true," replied the Baronet, swallowing the ironical compliment with greater gravity than could have been hoped. "But in fact," he added, " the reporting department is miserably defective."

"The only thing I complain of," said Lady Harriet, • is their putting in debates at all. I mean indiscriminately into every paper. There is really not one that a lady can take up. As Sterne says, 'they manage these things much better in France.' There they have their Journal des Debats, des Affiches, des Spectacles—in short, if you know what you want, you may know where to find it. But here they are all political. Hence arises the evil we were speaking of. This is the true origin of your Lady Highburys and Lady Crosstowns. I wish there were some journal expressly calculated for female readers. I should really like, if it were possible, to set something of that kind on foot. Don't you think it would succeed?"

"I am afraid," said Miss Clifton, "we are too well satisfied with the present order of things. I am sure I myself know several ladies who never read any thing but newspapers. There is old Mrs. Printley reads the Morning Post through every day—quite through— every advertisement—stamp mark and all. It exactly occupies her time from the breakfast hour till three o'clock."

"I think I shall follow her example," said Caroline, taking up a Morning Post which had hitherto lain disregarded.

"Courageous girl!" said Anne Clifton, "to dare to follow the example of a lady who is old enough to be your grandmother. Now, Lady Harriet, look at Caroline, and tell me if you don't think a newspaper is an unsightly thing in a lady's hand:—it makes even her look quite old-womanly."





"Shocking! shocking!" said Lady Harriet; "it looks as ill as a man with a muff."

"Well," said Anne, " I think I can safely say, that the united reading of (he whole female part of (he house of Daventry does not comprise more than Deaths and Marriages, and the Fashionable Changes. We never look at any thing else—we abstain upon principle."

"You deserve high praise," said Mr. Duncan. "It argues no inconsiderable firmness, to resist the perusal of those touching appeals 'To the British Fair,' and to leave unread an advertisement headed with ' Personal Beauty,' in large letters."

"Oh, yes," said Anne, "you fully appreciate our self denial. But do look at Caroline—how intent she is! How are the funds, my dear? Pretty politician! She does not hear me. 'Pretty Polly, say ;' " and she began to hum the air of the song; then suddenly stopping, exclaimed, " I don't understand—she turns quite pale."

"Are you ill, my love?" said Lady Jermyn.

Every eye at table was by this time turned upon Caroline. Well mi^ht they observe her, for an alarming paleness had spread over her countenance, which was agitated by a strong expression of horror. She dropped the paper, clasped her hands, and raised them with a shudder to her face; and, "Oh! he will die!" burst tremulously from her lips.

"Die! who ?" was uttered by every one in company.

Mr. Duncan, who was sitting next to her, glanced at the paper which lay before her on the table, and immediately his countenance also assumed an aspect of emotion; while, snatching it up, he exclaimed, "Good God! my young friend Granby!"

"Granby!" cried Courtenay, with unfeigned anxiety, stopping with surprise, while in the act of pouring out a glass of water for Caroline;—and his exclamation was echoed by most who were present.

"Yes, indeed," said Mr. Duncan, who read the following paragraph :—We, regret to state, that Lord Malton lies dangerously ill at the Clarendon Hotel. His Lordship's illness is supposed to have originated in the distressing event to which we alluded a few days back, and of the truth of which there is no longer the smallest doubt."





Meanwhile, mysterious looks passed round the table, and various restoratives were offered to Caroline, who, too much agitated to reply to the attentions of her friends, burst into tears, rose hastily, and, supported by her mother, left the room.

A blank silence followed her departure; each looking eagerly in turn at the eventful paragraph, and seeming too full of grief, or wonder, to express their thoughts aloud. At length, after a few half-whispered observations, scarcely addressed to any one,—"Great surprise of Miss Jermyn,"—" Could not be merely that,"— "Looked ill before,"—and," I'm sure it was the fire," several times repeated by Lady Daventry,—Lady Jermyn reappeared, and with a cheerful air assured the anxious inquirers that her daughter was much better.

"Poor thing !" said she, " It was the suddenness of the intelligence. She has been very nervous since her accident. You would not perceive it; but I know her well. I am not surprised at her being so overset by unexpectedly seeing this account of the dangerous illness of one she knew so well. You are aware," she added, looking by turns atCourtenay, Mr. Duncan., and Lady Harriet, "you are aware that Lord Malton is a cousin of her's. They used as children to be well acquainted—quite intimate—constant playfellows. He was a nice boy—Henry Granby as he was then—a very nice boy. He was often with us, but we have not seen much of him lately."

As she concluded these remarks, she cast a short side-glance at Courtenay, to see how they were received by him. His countenance was grave and thoughtful, and his abstracted air rendered it doubtful whether ho had heard her words. She was disappointed and perplexed, and knew not to what cause she might attribute his seriousness. Was it grief for his friend? or wa?

VOL. II. 15





he ruminating on her daughter's behaviour in the past scene?

Both these causes had contributed their influence to produce the serious air of Courtenay. He was much attached to Granby, and felt much pain at the idea of his danger; but this thought did not predominate at that instant. He was revolving in his mind the great and unusual grief exhibited by Caroline on this occasion. Her agonized exclamation, " Oh! he will die!" still rang in his ears. Was Granby then indeed so dear to her? or was it possible that she could be thus affected, in regarding the possible danger of a mere acquainttance? Cousins!—Playfellows when children! What was there in this that should adequately account for a sorrow so poignant? The relationship at least was so distant, that he was scarcely sensible of its existence. Former intimacy was more to the purpose. This accounted for a fact, of which, when he had once seized the clue, he rapidly supplied fresh proofs, and pressed onward to conviction. Each beaming, animating smile with which Caroline had ever listened to his praises of Granby, now rose distinctly to his view. And was their affection mutual? Yes—there were also points in Granby's conduct which he had not hitherto understood, which this supposition would explain at once.

Courtenay was now even inclined to wonder that he should have been so blind as not to have made this discovery sooner. And bitterly did he now regret it. He might have saved himself much pain—much of that unavailing regret which he now must necessarily endure.

Another question then arose, whether the parents were sensible of the attachment subsisting between their daughter and Henry Granby. If so, he felt that they had used him ill in allowing—nay, encouraging him to attach himself to one who they well knew could not return his affection. He thought they could not have been wholly ignorant; and there was a hurried consciousness in Lady Jermyn's manner, which strongly excited his suspicion.





This was a point he wished to fathom; and with this view, as she passed from the breakfast room to the library, he followed her; and prefacing with a repetition of his inquiry after Caroline's health, and hopes that she would soon recover, he added with a marked significance of tone,—" Miss Jermyn was more affected by this account than I was prepared to expect. I did not even know that she had much acquaintance with my friend Granby."

"Dear! didn't you? Oh, yes, that is—she used to know him very well; and then, poor girl! her spirits are tender. I am not surprised at her being affected by the report. And then, poor Henry Granby !—Lord Milton, I should say—hfi is such a delightful person— every body that knows him must be grieved, I am sore, at his danger."

•• Nobody was so much distressed as Miss Jermyn," said Courtenay.

Lady Jermyn looked uneasy at the remark.

"True, very true," was her reply; "but some people show it more than others; and then, you know, sht. saw the account first."

Courtenay could not think that this made any difference; and the sophistry of the remark, only confirmed him in his suspicion of the shuffling policy of Lady Jermyn. He made no reply, but walked away a few pares, knit his brows, and passed his hand across his eyes as if an anxious thought was struggling in his mind. Then returning, he said in a low voice, with an agitated manner, "I am sorry, Lady Jermyn, I cannot protract my visit even for a single day. I am under deep obligations to my friend Lord Malton, and I can-, not hear of his great danger, alone too, probably among strangers, and under circumstances of a distressing nature, without wishing to render him every assistance in my power. I wish to be with him—I think I ought —his life probably hangs by a thread—I must go and see him instantly, and I propose to set out for London by the earliest conveyance. I must therefore take my "•cave sooner than l had intended; and I do so with





very sincere thanks to yourself and Sir Thomas Jermyn, for the kind welcome that I have received here;" and so saying, he left the room to issue orders for his departure.



CHAPTER XXI.

Sorrow

, Would be a rarity most beloved, if all

Could so become it.



King Leak.

After the astounding intelligence related in the last chapter, Lady Jermyn repaired again to the apartment of her daughter. She found Caroline sitting with her head resting pensively on her hand. The tears that had lately been flowing so fast were now dried, but her eyes were heavy with weeping, and her cheek was stillpale and wan.

Lady Jermyn, with a soothing tenderness of manner, sat down by her, took her feverish hand between her own, and gently kissed her burning forehead. "Poor dear child!" said she, "I feared how it would be; your spirits were sadly shaken by that accident."

"Oh, mamma! it was not that," said Caroline.

"Ay, my love, so you think; but your nerves are not as they ought to be. 1 am sorry they got the better of you. It was very unfortunate, and may have given people false impressions, which I shall be careful to correct."

"Do not say that,", exclaimed Caroline, earnestly; "the time for disguise is past. Let me now be explicit—to you, at any rate. I ought to have been so sooner. But I have been a weak and foolish girl— perhaps I am such now, in loving one, who if he lives (which heaven grant he may) may never think again of me. This may be weak, but I cannot feel it to be wrong. Next to you and my father, 1 do indeed love





I



, and have long, though I never owned it—I wish I had; though I think you must have suspected it."

"To tell you the truth, my love, I have ; but I kept my suspicions to myself, and waited till you should make the disclosure, I never like to extort a confidence; and I did not wish to put your little heart into a greater flutter than was necessary. Besides, I thought this attachment would die of itself, especially after it had ceased on the other side; where indeed, I am inclined to doubt if it ever existed in a violent degree. Nay, don't shake your little head. I have no very high idea of the constancy of a person who could flirt as he did with other young women.''

"I will not think of that," said Caroline, weeping afresh, "and at suc{i a lime too—and oh, if any thing should happen to him! It is in vain—I cannot attach myself elsewhere. Do not think me froward in saying, that I have even tried to attach myself to Mr. Courtenay—to reconcile myself to his addresses—but all in vain. And yet, had he proposed to me, I believe I should have accepted him. 1 felt as if I ought. Thank heaven that I did not—for I should have sacrificed my happiness. I now feel, that never can I willingly accept any other than—than" (her voice faltering) "him who perhaps is now no more!" and she covered her face in an agwiy of tears.

"My dear love!" said Lady Jermyn, twinkling her eyes to check the drops that were rising in them—for she was moved by the sight of her daughter's distress, and felt, besides, some compunctious visiting?, mixed with sorrow for Henry's danger, which made the tenderness of her woman's nature triumph for a while over her worldly feelings. "My dear love, you must not harass yourself in this way. You will be quite ill. You must not think so gloomily of iU They exaggerate things in newspapers. There is really no believing them. We must not make the worst of it. I dare say he is not so very ill. But we shall know soon. Mr. Courtenay (you will be surprised to hear it) is going, to leave us immediately—going up loiowntosee Lord* Malton. He sets off to-day."





Caroline's pallid agitated countenance beamed with a passing glow of satisfaction. "It is kindly done," said she; "he deserves my gratitude for this, as much as if he had saved my life again."

"Yes," said Lady Jermyn, "it is very kind indeed; and a great act of self-denial, for I am confident that he is very sorry to leave you."

"1 cannot doubt it," said Caroline, "unless I could suppose him to have endeavoured to deceive me with a false show of attachment;—and of that I entirely acquit him. 1 trust that he has already seen the truth, and attributed my affliction to its real cause. His present step denotes that it is so. He declares at once by this generous act, that he withdraws his pretensions, and leaves me free and unsolicited."

"I am not quite sure of that," said Lady Jermyn, who was not yet willing to resign Courtenay, while a prospect of a renewal of Lord Walton's addresses continued so uncertain. "I am not quite sure of that. You know, his main object in leaving us is to see his friend. He said he was under great obligations to him; and that he was probably alone, and in extreme danger, and that he ought to go to him. He put it entirely upon that. I am not certain that he has any suspicion of the circumstance to which you were alluding, or has any other motive in going, than anxiety on Lord Maiton's account."

While saying this, Lady Jermyn looked inquiringly in her daughter's face. Caroline was silent, and remained for some minutes immersed in thought. At length, speaking in an earnest tone, with evident effort. "I have a request to make," said she: "I wish, before Mr. Courtenay goes, to speak with him alone. Pray do not oppose this wish. It nearly concerns my happiness ;"' and she looked at her mother with a supplicating ajr as she spoke.

Lady Jermyn returned no immediate answer, and put on a face of. doubt, which at first boded no auccess fo the request; She was balancing Hie pros and con*, and reflecting on the probable results of such an interview. Courleiiay and Lord Malton were both of them good matches; and she little cared which she had for a son-in-law. But she had great dread of losing both; and she was fearful lest her daughter should innocently dismiss the one before she had secured the other. However, upon consideration, she was inclined to think that no positive evil could arise from the proposed interview. Caroline might be won by the persuasive eloquence of Courtenay's manner. Then, leave-taking is a tender occasion, and if lovers ever have soft things to say, they generally contrive to say them then.





Besides, if Caroline should be explicit, might not Courtenay possibly become an intercessor between her and Henry? Might not some auspicious eclaircissement arise, which, while it extinguished Courtenay's hopes, and deprived Caroline of the reversionary Barony of Essendon, might tend to fix upon her brow the more exalted coronet of the Viscountcy of Malton?

It was enough. There were fair prospects on eithoi side, and no valid objection to granting the request. She therefore turned to her expecting daughter, and informed her, with a kind smile, that she complied with her desire.

Caroline then repaired, for this agitating meeting, to her mother's morning sitting room, where she was secure against the intrusion of any of their visitors. There she sat in terrible suspense, waiting for the expected coming of Courtenay, and trying to summon that composure which seemed fast waning by delay. Footsteps in the passage without, and a low tap at the door, soon announced his presence.- The door wasopened, and he entered.

His countenance was very grave, and his eye timidly raised to regard her, and quickly dropped as he approached. Courtenay spoke first. He began in a low tone,.by inquiring after her health, and hoping that she had recovered!from the effects of the late shock. He then alluded. to his sudden departure, and regretted that his visit should be curtailed by so melancholy an event.





"It has, indeed, been a great shock to us all," said he. "Every one who knows Granby so well as we do, must be greatly afflicted at the intelligence of his danger. To you, Miss Jermyn, who are in some degree related, who have known him from childhood, and have a mind that can appreciate his good qualities, the blow must be indeed severe."

He stopped, awaiting her reply; but Caroline spoke not. She made an effort, a feeble ineffectual effort, and half articulated one imperfect word. Bu* her voice faltered—she felt that tears were rising to choke her utterance—and resting her head upon her hand, she leaned in silence on the mantle piece.

Courtenay observed the fruitless struggle, and seemed, in his turn, to be labouring under some thought, too agitating for utterance. He hesitated—appeared about to speak—then stopped—then with a visible effort, drawing near her, he said, in a low tone, " Miss Jernayn, I need scarcely tell you of the presumptuous hopes I entertained.; you must have been conscious of them, though they have never been explicitly declared. I now offer to resign them, and will try, henceforth, to be to you as the stranger whom you saw but yesterday. I cannot easily misconstrue the cause of your grief for the danger of Lord Malton. Forgive me if I do—but I cannot think that it is mere friendship. It is a feeling which forbids you to accept the hand of any other."

He stopped, and Caroline turned to address him. She felt more confidence. The subject she so much dreaded to approach had been introduced by him. "You have understood my feelings rightly," said she, "and I thank you for the candid manner in which you have alluded to them. It has been a great relief to me,—it was for this I wished to speak with you; yet, when I came to the point, I knew not how; but you have paved the way for explanation, and I thank yoi1 for it. I would not have you go away in ignorance of my sentiments. They have been too long concealed already, and I wished to tell them to you myself, however great the effort, however painful and repugnant. 1 have been sensible of your intentions—you almost told them yesterday; but I have seen them long before, and perhaps 1 ought to have checked them sooner. I fear you may justly tax me with having treated you disingenuously."





"No," said Courtenay, with great earnestness, "be assured I never shall. 1 acquit you entirely. If there is any fault, it is mine."

"No—no," said Caroline, "do not accuse yourself. 1 ought, perhaps, to have acted differently; and yet I scarcely could. Gratitude, Mr. Courtenay, has lately withheld me from uttering any thing that could

F've you pain, and besides I knew not how ro tell you. could not assume the fact of your intentions till you yourself had declared them; but yet I fully intended to have done so;—however violent and strange the measure, I was prepared to take it. This was two months ago, when you were here before. But then came the sudden news of his accession to rank and fortune, and then I could not act as I had proposed. Had he been poor and humble, I could have owned all. But that time was past, and 1 never could have uttered it, and should not now, had it not been wrung from me by 'circumstances—oh !—what circumstances —how terrible! how unexpected!" and she covered her face with her hands.

Courtenay regarded her with strong anxiety and interest. He scarce knew how to address her. He could urge no topic of consolation; for he knew no more than she could know; and had he ventured to whisper sanguine expectations, they would have been contradicted by the very fact of his sudden departure —a fact which showed that however favourably he might speak on the subject, he had no slight fears for Henry's safety. Yet he could not resist breathing a hope, "I trust," said he, "that he may recover j 1 shall be anxious to see him."





"You are very kind," said she; "he is happy in having such a friend. You try to speak cheering])7, and I know you do it with benevolent intentions; but I do not think you feel the hope which you express."

Courtenay made no answer, for her remark was too true to be contradicted. 'T must take my leave," said he at length; and then, in a more timid tone, as if fearful lest the question might cither agitate or offend—" Is there any message, however simple? any expression? any communication of which I can be the vehicle? I would execute it with pleasure."

"None," said she, " none—no direct message. That must not be. He would not expect it. He might not wish it. If he should mention me, you may tell him that I am not changed. I am what I was a year ago. when he was last under this roof. But he. will not question you about me. He will be too ill. He may not be sensible—but if he should, you may say to him from me*—no, no—I cannot—I cannot"—(her voice faltering) " I can frame no message, but you know my sentiments, and will use that knowledge kindly and discreetly."

She stopped, and Courtenay with a low " farewell!" was now moving towards the door. His hand was on the lock, when she turned towards him, and said firmly, ".Stay, Mr. Courtenay ; you shall not go without receiving my last thanks. cYou deserve my gratitude, not only for the great exertions to which I owe my life, but for the generosity and delicacy of your present conduct. My esteem and regard are justly your's; more I cannot give."

So saying, she stepped forward, and extended her hand towards him. Courtenay's first impulse was to raise it to his lips; but the action seemed too much that of a lover—a character which he must now resign; and therefore checking himself, he pressed it fervently and respectfully, and without hazarding anu.





(her glance at its owner, turned from her, and left the room.

In another hohr he was borne rapidly from the scenes in which he had passed so many hours of dangerous happiness; leaving the party at Brackingsley in anxious expectation of the result of his friendly pilgrimage.



CHAPTER XXII.

Say, and unsay, fefgn, flatter and abjure.—Milton.

We must now return to Henry Granby,—whom, as he Is by this time firmly established in his new possessions, we must accustom ourselves to call by the appellation of Lord Malton.

It was about the end of October, when business, which had lately poured in fast upon him, produced the necessity of a journey to town. In his way thither, he had to pass the seat of the Earl of Allerdale, an old friend of his father,—who found former affection strongly revived on hearing of the recent change in (he fortunes of the son; and who testified his returning friendship, in pressing entreaties that he would favour him with a visit. Accordingly, as Lord Allerdale's place lay in his route, he stopped there in his way to town.

It was his first entrance into society since his accession to the title, and he felt surprised, and somewhat embarrassed, at the empressement with which he was received. He found that he did not know his place half so well as those about him—felt oppressed at the unusual circumstance of being the first person in company—and betrayed some symptoms of hesitation in taking precedence of an elderly baron, who, with the punctilious breeding of the old school, would rather have died upon the spot, than gone out of the room before him.





Among the visiters at Lord AHerdale's, was our old acquaintance Mr. Trebeck. The nature of his last interview with this personage had left an unpleasant impression upon our hero's mind, which all the ingratiating friendliness and vivacity of Trebeck's present address, could not entirely remove.

Trebeck saw the coldness with which his advances were received, and quickly understood its cause. But he stood too firm in conscious elevation, to be piqued by what he considered the ignorant neglect of so young a candidate for fashionable fame. He was even amused by the novelty of a slight. He thought it was really too ridiculous, that any one, comparatively so little known, should presume to treat him with coolness; and far from feeling offended, Whs charitably disposed to soothe the ire of the young peer, and bring him by gentle means to a proper sense of the high claims of his companion. Fie also meant to exhibit him in the ranks of his disciples.

The case of the Malton succession had excited much attention, and the eyes of the fashionable world were turned with no slight interest upon Henry. This was a circumstance in his favour, of which nobody could be more sensible than Trebeck; and he thought it would do him no discredit to secure an elevt who so well deserved to be taken up. Besides, he had lately made inquiries respecting the nature of the Tedsworth property, and found that, in addition to an extensive rent-roll. it possessed the advantages of a good house, and the best pheasant covers in the country. It was therefore a place where, should he be so inclined, he might contrive, very passably, to spend a week or two in the winter. His course was consequently taken, and Lord Malton was to be won.

It was not easy to withstand the ingenious cajoleries, which, when he chose to be agreeable, Trebeck could so artfully employ. He directed a good deal of his conversation to Henry, and paid a polite attention to all that he said. Then, Trebeck was such an agreeable listener—laughed so precisely in the right place5—and even threw, by his own quick comprehension, a stronger light upon the concealed humour of his companion's remarks.





Dexterously penetrating, at the same time, into the character and feelings of the young Lord, and willing to flatter him, by showing that he was not courting mere rank, he would sometimes, with the most natural air of inadvertence, call him by his surname, and affect to forget that he had arrived at the dignity of a peerage.

By these ingenious artifices, however, Trebeck only so far gained upon his young acquaintance, as to impress him with a stronger sense of his companionable qualities ; but by no means to secure in Lord Malton's mind, the smallest additional portion of confidence or esteem.

But there were other objects which also engaged some share of LoroVMalton's attention; these were three young ladies, the daughters of Lord Allerdale, to whom, as in civility hound, he directed much of his conversation.

Lord Allerdale had four daughters, co-heiresses, the eldest of whom was married, and the other three, young and blooming, were bursting forth in all the pride of beauty and fashion, before the eyes of the admiring world. They were all pretty and pleasing, and had lively powers of conversation. With one of these, Lady Emily Manvers, Lord Malton was more particularly pleased; he did not at first know why, till he discovered that she bore in her countenance and expression a considerable resemblance to Caroline Jermyn. This discovery did not abate the pleasure he took in talking to her; and though he could not help feeling that she presented but a weak transcript of the charming original, yet he often thought within himself, that were there no Caroline Jermyn in the world, or were she irrevocably lost to him, Lady Emily was the person to whom he could most easily attach himself.

This young lady appeared to have long known Lord Malton by report, and to be conversant with some parts of his former proceedings, to a degree for which he could not at first account. She seemed to know that he had been abroad, and where he had been; and was very cu

VOL. II. 16





rious in questioning him about his travels, and recurred again and again to the subject.

At length the reason was explained. The name of Courtenay happened to be mentioned; and her short slight start, quick turn of the head, and passing blush on hearing it, conveyed at once to Lord Malton's comprehension the source of her intelligence, and the object of her interest.

After this discovery, he could not resist attempting to confirm it, by the experiment of mentioning her old companion, to whom, from uneasy feelings of his own, he had hitherto abstained from alluding. The effect was obvious. Siir evinced a timid pleasure on hearing him spoken of—looking withal a little uneasy; hastily withdrew her eyes from the quick intelligent glance of one of her sisters, and relapsed into comparative indifference when Henry changed the subject.

To this young lady Trebeck was more than usually lavish of attention, and exerted himself with great apparent success for her entertainment. He was constantly at her side, laughing and talking with much animation; and with this careless pleasantry there was mingled, at times, an insinuating softness, as if he intended, ere long, to present himself in the quality of a suitor.

Lord Malton also thought that Trebeck was uneasy at the attention which he paid her, and wished to draw him off; but of this he judged rather from the probable inferences which such a supposition would suggest, than from any evident indication in Trebeck's manner: for that gentleman was too great a master in the delicate art of concealing his purposes, to render such an intention broadly visible.

If such was his view he certainly adopted an adroit method of effecting it, in striking what he suspected to be still a tender chord, and in leading Henry to the interesting recollection of Miss Jermyn. He entered upon the subject of this lady with that inimitably careless, picktooth manner, which he could assume to admiration, whenever he was talking of an interesting topic, about which he wished to seem indifferent. He began with a little gentle quizzery of the ladies Manvers, (nobody was then immediately within hearing;) and presently observed, after allowing them to be pretty," i have been struck with a strong likeness between Lady Emily and a Miss Jermyn, a daughter of Sir Thomas Jermyn. I met her last winter at Lady Daventry's, and have seen her once or twice in town. 1 believe you know Miss Jermyn? Does the resemblance strike you?" Lord Malton allowed that it did. "Only," pursued Trebeck," I think Miss Jermyn has the advantage."





Lord Malton agreed with him more fully than he chose to confess.

"I remember I was pleased with her," said Trebeck. "I was in the same house for about a week. Lord Chesterton was there ; and though not a very inflammable person, I thought he was a good deal smitten; more pleased with her than she with him."

Henry felt no slight relief. He had been prepared for a repetition of the same odious tale that had been forced upon him in the cabriolet. "I thought," said he, wishing to satisfy his doubts still farther, "I thought she had encouraged him—trifled with him in some degree. If I remember rightly, you said so."

"I? Did I ?" said Trebeck, with an admirable air of innocent surprise. "Oh, ay, true—I remember now, we had some talk once before on this very subject. Trifled? No, 1 should not say she trifled with him—she did not like him certainly—i should rather say she laughed at him. I thought her a very pleasing girl, lively and sensible, and natural, and unaffected, and seemed to have no nonsense about her, and not to be throwing out those lures for admiration that some girls do."

"1 am glad to hear you say this," said Henry, his countenance brightening as he spoke. "You give me now a much more favourable impression of her, than you did when you mentioned her before."

"Do I ?" said Trebeck, carelessly, " I'm glad to hear it, I am sure—I always speak well of the sex when I





"Yes," said Henry, " you now speak of her very differently. Indeed I am not surprised at your change of opinion. She is one who must gain upon acquaintance."

"Very likely," said Trebeck,"but that is not the case in the present instance, for I don't think I have seen her since I met you in town. No, faith! I believe if any thing has wrought a change in my mind, it is my knowledge of the state of her expectations. I have a prejudice, perhaps an absurd one, against your overwhelming women of fortune. They carry too much ballast to float in the stream of m v good graces. I have liked this Miss Jennyn a great deal better since I have known that she is not an heiress."

"Not an heiress!" exclaimed Lord Malton.

"No more than I am," replied Trebeck. "She will not inherit a foot of Brackingsley. Did not you know that? I thought you might. However, I believe uot many persons do know it. I will tell you how I happened to find it out myself."

He then briefly described the circumstance which led to this discovery. Trebeck had been passing a short time in the summer at the seat of one of those select friends whom he sometimes honoured by making their house his own. It so happened that the party there assembled, were neither sufficiently retined to satisfy his fastidious taste, nor did they display any peculiarities which could contribute to his amusement. He therefore treated them with supreme neglect; he condescended for a short time each day to show how agreeable he could be, if he did but think it worth his while ; and for the most part abstracted himself as much as possible from all communication with the rest of the visiters.

Partly with this view, partly through a whimsical love of novelty, he took it into his head to profess a great fondness for fly-fishing—a diversion .which he had hardly ever practised in his life before j and rod in hand he spent several mornings in solitary rambles along a trout stream.

While thus engaged he met with a person similarly Qccupied, in whom his observant eye instantly detected





the humourist. This was an elderly man, of quaint address, and singular exterior, yet in whom, with all his outward oddity, there was something that denoted the gentleman. He was habited in a dress admirably calculated forthe pursuit in which he was engaged ; full of little contrivances for facilitating his sport, but totally unlike any other that had ever been seen, and of which the only prototype must have existed in the imagination of its owner.

Trebeck, who delighted in odd people, and who was very familiar and conversible with those with whom he had no prospect of ever clashing in society, entered into conversation with the stranger, and with his usual address soon contrived to draw him out, and to conciliate his goood opinion.

On his return from his morning's sport, he mentioned to his host, (the Earl of Ambleside) the "character" with whom he had met, and was told that it was a Mr. Nowell, a recluse who lived near, and whose chief amusement was fishing; that he was a man of good family, and moderate independent fortune; that it was believed he was related to the Jermyns; but that very little was known concerning him, since for many years no visiterhad been permitted to cross his threshold.

This information was not lost upon Trebeck. It instantly struck him that this person might be able to furnish him with some information respecting the disposition of the Brackingsley property. He therefore laid a' bet that he would induce Mr. Nowell to depart from his rule, and would gain admission within his doors ; and with this ostensible purpose he sallied out in search of him. He m«t him again; talked to him upon the subject of his family,—of the antiquity of which he was not a little proud; and by dint of considerable adroitness, obtained the important information that Sir Thomas Jermyn having no male heirs,the Brackingsley property must, in the eve.jt of the1 Baronet's death, devolve upon him.

Nor did Trebeck's success end here; for with such ingenuity did he humour the peculiarities of his companion, that he was invited to accompany him on his walk homeward, and actually entered the house of the recluse. Mr. Nowell even went so far as to inform Trebeck that it was his intention to leave the Brackingsley estate, on his death, to Caroline; and showed him a miniature of her, (whom he had never seen) with her hair at the back, which Sir Thomas and Lady Jer myn had sent to him in their daughter's name, with her "best love."





Mr. Nowell had never acknowledged the receipt of the picture; but it is not improbable that the charming countenance which it displayed was nevertheless highly instrumental in effecting this favourable disposition. Trebeck spoke to him of Caroline, assured him that the beauty of the original much exceeded that of the picture, and added numerous encomiums, with more than usual sincerity. His praises too, (which was equally unusual,) were in this instance perfectly disinterested; for judging that Mr. Nowell, from his hale appearance and regular habits, was likely to live full thirty years, he had now resigned all intention of endeavouring to gain the hand of Caroline.

This information made a great impression on Henry; and the result was rather a pleasurable than a painful feeling. It is pointedly observed, and perhaps truly, tiy the acute, but cynical and heartless Rochefoucauld that there is something in the misfortunes of our best friends which is not entirely displeasing to us. The truth of this axiom was now exemplified iu Lord Mai ton, though not, perhaps, from any of the causes which its ingenious author had in view. If he was pleased on hearing that Caroline was not the heiress that he had hitherto supposed, it was because it seemed to remove a circumstance which had formerly checked the ardour of his hopes, and had presented her to his eyes as a prize which he sometimes doubted whether, poor as he then was, he ought so eagerly to attempt to gain. Secure in the purity of his own love, he sometimes thought, with a momentary recoil, of the mercenary





feelings by which the ungenerous world might think hiru actuated.

Changed as his present circumstances were, he should still have felt a difficulty in attempting a renewal of his former acquaintance, but for the discovery which he had just made. Fortune was now to him no object; and should any thing intervene of a favourable nature, which might enable him to repeat his addresses, he should feel a genuine satisfaction in evincing to Sir Thomas and Lady Jermyn, that the love which they were once inclined to treat with such suspicion and contempt, was still the same—pure and unsullied by any sentiment of a mercenary nature.



CHAPTER XXIII.

No port is free, no place

That guard and most unusual vigilance

Does not attend my taking. KiNO Lear.



Henry did not stay long at Lord AHerdale's. Ho left it on the day subsequent to the conversation just reported, and proceeded on his road to town, which he entered on the first of November.

Who that has visited London in November would ever wish to visit it in that month again ?—that month of suicidal fame, in which, however, we English neither hang nor drown ourselves one whit more than in any other. That raw, cold month, even in the country, in spite of the pleasures which it offers to the sportsman, conciliates but little of our good opinion. But in Lon-. don—half-denuded, smokey London—dense in smoke and thin in population—with an atmosphere that you may handle, and scarcely a pair of fashionable lungs to grasp it down—with its ever-sloppy streets, and its draggled, dingy foot-passengers, who tramp along so pinched and woebegone—in London, November is execrable.





To Lord Malton, as he drove into it, London scarcely looked like itself. Oxford-street—gigantic Oxfordstreet—the main artery in this mighty system, of human circulation—looked low and insignificant; and as for its length, you knew nothing about it, for the "vanishing point" was at three hundred yards, and all beyond was thickly shrouded in an impervious veil of dun-coloured haze.

Bond.street—the gay, the noisy, the frequented— the thoroughfare at each end of which should be written up "no thoroughfare" at certain fashionable hours— Bond-street oow looked like what it is—like what we should think it, were we not blinded by name and fashion—an ugly, narrow, crooked street, without half the real pretensions of many others of minor note. How are the mighty fallen! Bond-street, where be your throngs now!—your stanhopes, your cabs, and your coronetted coaches, that were wont to set the pavement in a roar? Not on*. to mark your own emptiness? Quite crest fallen. Where be your loungers? (so called, says an erudite Frenchman, from the "lounge" or "lunch" which they eat at the pastrycooks.) Gone —all gone; far in some favoured wild, snapping their percussion locks at the terrified tenantry of the brake. And, in place of these ornamental, personages, swinging their "fashionable length of limb" in slow and solemn saunter,—grave, spare, professions! men in black, with half gaiters and green umbrellas, patter alon* with a business-like air; and a few "lean, unwashed artificers" shuffle about with their hands in their pockets; while perhaps, in the very centre of the flags, struts some aspiring errand.boy, that "in the merry month ot. May" would have scudded along the edge of the curbstone.

Lord Malton, on arriving at these sad scenes of past gayety, established himself in the Clarendon Hotel, and was soon too deeply engaged in the business which called him up to town, to think much of its ineffable dulness. On the second day after his arrival, on returning from his solicitor's in Lincolu's-inn-fields, and in passing through some of the narrow streets in the neighbour* hood of Covent garden, his attention was excited by perceiving that he himself appeared to be an object of notice to a person who continued for some time to walk on the parallel side of the street, and shot inquiring glances at him from under a bushy pair of gray eyebrows.





He seemed an elderly man, rather meanly dressed, who stooped slightly, as if from age. Once he crossed over, as if with the intention of accosting Lord Malton, but instead of that, he merely dropped behind, and Lord Malton thought that he had lost him, and began to smile at his own simplicity, in supposing that a person .who happened to be going the same way, and had perhaps contracted a habit of staring, must necessarily be thinking of him. Happening, however, to turn round when he got into Coventry-street, he perceived that the man was still following him at no great distance.

He naturally felt uneasy at being thus dodged by a person whom he had never seen; but being still doubtful whether the pursuit was intentional or accidental, he deviated from his course, and struck up one of the small streets that lead towards Golden-square. After winding awhile through these, he looked round, and seeing no more of his pursuer, he began to smile, and be half angry at his own fancies; and emerging into Regentstreet, he bent his way with alacrity and unconcern towards the Clarendon Hotel,—meditating sometimes, as he walked, upon the wayward tricks of the imagination, and the nervous irritability which disposes us to clothe indifferent circumstances with important meaning.

However, in the midst of these musings, on entering the hotel, and turning to look down Bond-street, at about the distance of a hundred yards he again saw the same figure, apparently directing its attention to him. He started at the sight, and cast an anxious glance at the person who had so strangely haunted him. That person seeing himself observed in turn, immediately looked another way, and crossing over to Clifford-street; disappeared from Henry's view.





This last circumstance confirmed Lord Walton's previous suspicions, and he re-entered his apartment with no slight curiosity, and withal some portion of uneasiness. He could not dismiss the subject from his mind. The image of the keen-looking old man in the shabby dress, with the bushy gray eye-brows, haunted his imagination as pertinaciously as the original had his person. He followed him even in his dreams; and throughout the livelong night the grim, gray man was still walking after him.

He arose next morning with a less feverish apprehension of the mysterious follower; but still racking his brain to think where be could have seen such a person, where be could have been seen by him, and what was the probable nature of his errand. Perhaps after all it was a mistake on the part of the stranger, and he had confounded his identity with that of some other person; or was doubtful, and had followed him in the hope of having the uncertainty removed; and perhaps on seeing his place of residence, those doubts had been dispelled.

With this view of the subject he satisfied his mind, and once more repaired, according to appointment, to his lawyer's chambers at Lincoln's Inn. No gray man crossed his path in his way thither; and having concluded his business, he returned, viewing as a dream the events of yesterday,—and wondering that so slight a thing should so much have affected him. He could not, however, forbear casting an anxious glance as he turned the corners of the streets in which he had seen his pursuer yesterday.

He got into Long-acre, stopped at his coachmaker's to give an order, and then proceeded on his route, and was still hesitating between brown and yellow pannels when on crossing St. Martin's Lane, the identical person who had so haunted him the day before again met his astonished eyes. The stranger seemed to give him a keep look of recognition, and pressed closely after him as he walked on.





Lord Malton felt both curious and uneasy, and instinctively quickened his pace, even while he was debating whether he should stop and accost the man, and learn his business at once. He now got into Lislestreet; and the stranger was at this time walking almost abreast of him on the opposite flags. There seemed to be nobody else in the street at that time; of which the stranger was probably aware; for all at once, after looking back as if to see whether any one was near, he crossed over, came up to Lord Malton, and laid his hand upon his arm.

Lord Malton drew back, and showed by his manner that he was prepared to resist any act of personal violence.

•* Do you expect violence from an old man?" said the stranger, in a hoarse, cracked voice. .

"What is your business?" said Lord Malton, sternly.

"You shall know that presently," said the other.

"This is some mistake," said Lord Malton, looking earnestly at the man. "You take me for another person—I am"

"I know very well who you are," interrupted the other—" Henry Granby, Viscount Malton."

"You do know me, it seems," said Lord Malton, with surprise, "but I cannot conceive by what means —I never spoke to you in my life before."

"Would your Lordship swear that?" said the other.

"I would," replied Lord Malton, eyeing his querist as he spoke.

"Indeed!" replied the other, in a sarcastic tone: "Look at me well, my Lord."

"I have not the slighest knowledge of you," said Lord Malton, "I never saw you in my life till yesterday."

"Enough," said the other, in a different tone, "the disguise, I see, is quite complete."





Lord Malton started at the well known voice; 'Good God!" said he, "is it Tyrrel?"

"Hush!" said his companion. "Yes, it is Tyrrel."

The disguise was, indeed, complete; for in addition to the large gray eye-brows, and the silvery locks that peeped.from under his old mis-shapen, greasy hat, he had drawn in his mouth, and puckered his face into wrinkles. He had also given himself an elderly complexion; and this, together with his stoop, and the old fashioned cut of his shabby coat, gave him completely the appearance of a man on the verge of seventy.

"Well," said he, in his former tone of gayety, which assorted strangely with his present appearance— "Well—what do you think of me? Egad, there is not a harridan in town that can make herself young, so well as I can ape the elder. I flatter myself, too, that I have caught the stooping shambler's carriage to perfection. And as for voices, I have as many at command as Mathews. You knew that I was no bad mimic."

"But, why do you do this?" said Lord Malton, in a tone of wonder; "and where do you reside? I thought you had been abroad."

"I will tell you all; but not in the street. I dare not even be seen talking to you. Follow me, if you would hear more, and keep about twenty yards behind me, that we may not appear to belong to each other;" and so saying, he walked on, maintaining the same stooping elderly carriage; and Lord Malton followed him at the cautious distance which he prescribed.





CHAPTER XXIV.

Remene is as the heart in which it grows;

If that be gentle, it drops balmy dews

Of true repentance; but if proud and gloomy,

It is a poison tree that pierced to the inmost

Weeps only tears of poison.



Remorse.

Tyrrel led the way through several close alleys, till he arrived at Windmill-street, a long and narrow street that runs from Broad-street to the top of the Haymarket. Here be suddenly stopped, and making a sign to Lord Malton to observe him, entered the door of a house, which, like all others in that quarter, was tall, narrow, and dingy.

Lord Malton lost no time in folio wing him, and looking at the number that he might know the house again, he entered, and found himself with Tyrrel in a narrow gloomy passage, which when the door was shut, barely afforded them light sufficient to grope their way up the steep stairs that lay in front.

They scrambled up two flights, when Tyrrel threw open a door, and they entered his apartment. "Here is ray den," said he, as he looked round the room with an air half gay, half melancholy.

Its appearance was, indeed, most calculated to inspire the latter feeling. It was small, dark, and comfortless; the windows looked as if they were never cleaned, and as seldom opened; and the paint of the wood work, which had once been white, was now reduced to harmony with the brown pattern of the papered wall. A small dark mahogany table, three ricketty chairs, and a little high-backed, low-sided sofa, composed the whole furniture of this desolate apartment. In the small grate, under a thick cake of coal, a slight gleam of fire was slumbering, whichTyrrel roused into a feeble blaze, by the aid of a rusty poker. The only attempt at ornament which the room presented

VOL. II, 17

•4 .





was about a square foot of glass, freckled with imperfect silvering, and cracked diagonally through the middle, which stood in an old gilt frame over the discoloured chimney-piece.

Lord Malton surveyed the scene with sorrow and dismay. Tynel read his thoughts in bis countenance, and seemed to participate in them. "Yes," said he, "this is my splendour—here I live, and there, in the sty wiVhin, 1 sleep. It is bad enough, but I am satisfied. We gentry accustom ourselves to many fancied indispensables, that we can do very well without."

"But how came you into this situation?" said Lord Malton; "1 thought you meant to have gone abroad."

"I did," said Tyrrel, "and heartily wish 1 was there now. But 1 could not go—1 dared not. You know one cannot get over without a passport; and I found it was no easy matter to obtain that without detection. Those cursed scoundrels that want to catch me, had got word of my intentions, or else suspected that I should take the step, and lay ready to entrap me at the French Ambassador's office. 1 went there one day, and there I found that sneaking swindling dog, Labrosse He did not know me at the first glance, and I did not give him time for more; and then, this disguise, though it serves very well for walking the streets, would not bear the scrutiny that I should be exposed to there. No—I found the plan was hopeless; eo here I am, confined in London—the best place in the world for lying incog.: though I am as it were in the enemy's camp. But I like it all the better for that. I have a genuine satisfaction in cheating the infernal scoundrels. I pass the thieves at every corner, and laugh in my sleeve at their blank faces, and fancy 1 hear them croaking out their sorry curses upon me, for having levanted so cleverly."

"Do you then venture," said Henry, "to go where you are likely to meet with your pursuers? Is not this an imprudent exposure of yourself?"

"There is little risk," said Tyrrel. "You can bear witness of the excellence of my disguise. And if they come to speak to me, I can puzzle them more than ever. My old cracked voice would throw them off the scent completely. Yes, I sometimes walk amongst them, and take a peep behind the scenes, and see bow the pigeon trade thrives. I marched the other day into the billiard rooms in ——— street- There-was an old acquaintance, playing his worst to encourage a youngster—shamming nervous. Oh, I long to blow a few of them S^^But it is a sorry subject for me to talk upon,— me that—oh ! it drives me mad. Fool, fool!" he exclaimed, striking his forehead—"to have wrecked myself, to have sunk to this vile state, through worse than folly—through wickedness."





Here his voice seemed choked with emotion, and his countenance was frightfully agitated. He hid his face for a few seconds; then raising it and speaking in a calmer tone, "Granby," said he, "shun gambling as you would the plague. I have a right to warn you. No one better knows its pains and pleasures than myself. I have tried them thoroughly; I have drunk the cup from the sparkling froth to the bitter dregs. People tell you that it fascinates. Ay, and so does the rattlesnake. The poor bird, that is drawn within reach of the creature's jaws, is an apt type of the growing gambler; and the vice is scarce less deadly than the reptile. I know its pleasures well. I was a cool, calm, steady player—one who entered into its sober delights; yet I have sat whole anxious hours, even when a run of luck was in my favour, with a burning brain, parched and fevered, waiting in terrible agitation for the change of fortune that must soon come, and sweep my ill-gotten winings from me; yes, and envying the loser, the very loser, for having better things in prospect. This was my triumph! these were the glories of success .' I have given you now the bright side of the picture. Judge from that of the reverse. May you never know the horrid agonies of the losing gamester. I have tried that too; and to my cost, or I should not now be skulking here. Oh! that sinking of the soul—that struggle of the spirits—rs





ing, striving in vain, to bear up manfully. And then, the feeling that you must go on, and rapair the past and plunge deeper into the pit; and the growing consciousness that you must sink, sink for ever, or fight your way through by any means—no matter what, fair or foul! But I am wandering, I scarce know where. Madman!" (he muttered) " to dwell "on that! —oh, I could envy the damned!"

He rose hastily, with a countenance flushed and distorted with inward agony; and pacing quickly across the room, threw up the sash, and looked out into the street.

"The room grows hot," said he, in an altered tone, after a short silence—"I wanted air—I could hardly breathe ,"—and after leaning out for a few seconds, he turned again from the window, with features more composed. He even strove to throw into them a ternporary gleam of gayety. But the effect was appalling and discordant. His haggard smile was like the crevices in the blackening crest of the once glowing lava, through which you view the fire beneath: it only showed more plainly the desolation of the inward spirit. But that smile could not last: it passed away, and was quickly succeeded by a more congenial air of gloom.

"I said all this," exclaimed he, "to warn you. I once laboured to instil that hellish passion ; and it is fit that I should now undo the horrid work to which the devil prompted me. I uttered many an insidious thing in those days; but happily the seed fell on ground that refused to nourish such pernicious weeds. But if not for your good, yet for my own satisfaction, I now recall them all. I say again, shun gambling. The drunkard's vice is venial in comparison. Nay, better is it to indulge in the use of that pernicious dram to which I am equally a slave." And he pointed to a bottle of laudanum that stood upon the chimney piece. "I used to be admired for my coolness. They did not know that the calm was artificial—that it was produced by a remedy more fatal than the fever it tended to allay. Did you ever read 'The Opium Eater?' There yo u





may see its pains and pleasures—and a terrible picture it presents—terrible and true. I have hot reached nine thousand drops a day yet—no, nor nine hundred. Perhaps I never may. I shall not increase if I can help it, but I cannot diminish my allowance. It is my bane and antidote in one—perhaps more bane than antidote. But yet I cannot part with it. It is a convenient drug. It soothes one while one lives; and if one should grow weary of life, one may slip the tether through pure carelessness. It is but to forget to measure—and then—a tremble of the hand —or a casual tilt of the phial, and—eh?" staring him wildly in the face: "Come, come —I'll say no more of that —I am growing too sportive in my talk," he added in an appalling tone of merriment, in which despair and mirth were frightfully blended.

"Tyrrel!" said Lord Malton, shuddering as bespoke, "for heaven's sake do not talk so rashly. I trust that no pressure of misfortune will ever tempt you to commit the horrid crime-of suicide."

"I have," said Tyrrel, "been already induced, by slighter provocation, to do many a worse thing; and as for this, why do you speak of it as a horrid crime.? Come! you forget that it was the Roman's virtue."

"The Heathen's virtue may be the Christian's vice," replied Lord Malton.

"I will not contend that point with you," said Tyrrel, " but I Cannnot hold it to be a crime. I like to view these subjects dispassionately and philosophically—prejudice apart; to judge the question upon its own merits, and not to follow the mere opinion of the crowd, or the dogmas of a few old writers, who, in former days of ignorance, laid down that such and such a deed was wrong; and so, because they were fond of life themselves, put self-destruction under a taboo, as the South-Sea Islanders term it. I question if it be a crime. You stare—but I did hot mean to shock you—I merely meant to state a proposition. I am of a speculative turn," (with a moody smile at the double sense of the expression,) "and like to reason upon things, and reduce them to their first principles. Where can be the crime, I ask, of disengaging ourselves from a state of being in which we are a burden to ourselves, and can no longer contribute to the pleasure or advantage of others?"





"Before I distinctly answer that question," said Lord Malton, " I ask in return, who shall know that he has no friends who wish him still to live—to whom his life is an advantage ? Is this a fact to be received upon conjecture? Is a step so dreadfully important, so irretrievable, to be taken upon the wayward surmise of a disappointed man, who, angry with himself, wilfully thinks that there remains no person to whom he is not as much a burden as he is to his miserable self? The sorrow even of one true friend is not to be treated lightly. But I am content to dismiss this part of the question , to resign all the social duties by which we are so strongly bound, great and important as they are. I will suppose the suicide literally to have no friend ; to be rejected by all, and a burden to himself."

"Well!" interrupted Tyrrel, eagerly," and what remains for such a being, but to die? Why should he hesitate to free himself, by one bold measure, from cares that nothing else can cure?"

"That question," said Lord Malton," might be more difficult to answer if life were merely given us for our enjoyment,—a bauble to gratify us for a time, and to be cast off when it grows distasteful. But the most careless eye can see that life is not a scene of pleasure, nor ever could be meant for such. What is it to many, from birth to death, but one continued burden; a burden which they are bound to bear with fortitude? We have much to suffer and to do ; and were we sent to these duties with permission to fly from them when they grow irksome? Impossible. It pleasure be not the end of our being, the want of happiness cau never vitiate our contract, or afford us a plea for eluding it. Our life was lent us to be well employed."

"But if the means of employing it well are no longer in our power ?" said Tyrrel.

"They always are," replied Lord Malton. "If we





do not see them, we are not to plead our own blindness: we ought to see them, and to use them. But granting that we have no means of doing a visible benefit to any one, shall we even then dare to say that the end of our being is frustrated? There are other duties to perform. We can still suffer. I do not advocate the superstitious voluntary self-inflictions of the ancient anchorets. They centered all in suffering. They indulged in it (if one may so speak) to the neglect of useful duties. But if they could court this expiation, shall we shrink from affliction when it comes unsought? You think it allowable to fly from the rubs of fortune.: would you then also destroy yourself to escape the torment of an excruciating disease?"

"No," replied Tyrrel firmly. "I never flinched from bodily pain, and I never will. But I would sacrifice a limb to cure the evil. You say my life is only lent me to be well employed. No more than are my limbs? yet I may part with all of them. And what says scripture ?' If thine eye offend the, pluck it out and cast it from thee.' You see it even prescribes the sacrifice.—I know what you mean by that look. 'The devil can quote scripture for his purpose.'"

"That was not my thought," said Lord Malton. "I was only questioning how far you would venture to proceed with your quotation-. 1 see you do not choose to finish it."

« VVell—well," said Tyrrel impatiently, " If I do not, that is but little to the purpose. 1 say again, our limbs are lent us as our lives are; and they are a part of the whole human machine, just as our lives, it may be presumed, are a part of our whole state of existence here and hereafter. You see the parallel holds exactly. Why, then, may we not dispose of our lives to escape from worldly misery, as we would of our limbs to save us from mortal diseases?"

"You are instituting a comparison," said Lord Malton, " which is more specious than real. You cannot, in point of nature, compare a material substance with an immaterial soul; nor in point of importance, can you class a sacrifice which operates no change in our identity, with the transition into another state of being. Our limbs are not ourselves. They are mere instruments that we employ. Maim me as you will, and I am still an accountable human being, born to the same end, destined to the same duties, and equally capable of all the nobler functions of humanity. We are not born for the mere exercise of our hands and feet; no, nor to use our eyes or ears. They are all either mischievous or worthless without the moral impulse that directs them. And these are the machines that you compare with life itself. Tu rel, this is but sophistry."





"We have no umpire to decide that point," said Tyrrol; "but let it be so, if you will. I do not lay much stress upon that argument. No—I ground my sentiments upon broader principles; upon the immutable laws of human nature; and what law of our nature, I would ask, is more general, more imperative, than that which enjoins us to fly from pain, from misery, from evil of every description? and are we not obeying this, in ridding ourselves of a miserable existence?"

"To expose your argument," said Lord Malton, " I need only extend it. Are we not obeying another law of our nature, in assailing the man that has injured us? Why are we prone to anger, if we are forbidden to indulge it? Are vindictive feelings given us only to be stifled? Upon these principles you may justify murder. We know that our nature is depraved; aud shall we then suffer it to be our guide? The laws of our nature have been the cloak of crime, from time immemorial. Every thief can plead an impulse which he could not resist."

"But you speak of crimes that are forbidden," said Tyrrel. "We know we must abstain from those."

"And is not suicide forbidden? Do not you remember those few plain words, 'Thou shall not kill'"

"They refer only to the destruction of others," said Tyrrel.

"They may extend to all," replied Lord Malton; "and it is not for us to forge the exception."





"In our acceptation of doubtful precepts," said Tyrrel, "we roust be guided by the light of reason."

"The light of reason," said Lord Malton, "may be applied with equal advantage to your law of human nature. You say we naturally fly from evils ;—-true ; but have we not a sense given us—the light of reason, if you will—to institute a balance of evils? And what comparison can there be between the short-lived misery which we may endure here, and that eternal futurity of wo which we may incur, for aught we know, by the very act which transports us to another state And even if the act itself were not sinful, who shall presume at any moment to say that he is fit to die? Tyrrel, these things should weigh with you. Do you believe there is a hell?"

"Do I ?" exclaimed he, his countenance changing as he spoke. "Du I not? I have it here:" and he smote bis breast with violence.

Lord Malton was shocked at this terrible expression of a labouring conscience, and was silent for a while; but Tyrrel soon regained his tranquillity, and drawing his hand across his brow, "You have not convinced me yet," said he; "I will not give up the right of self-destruction; I stand up for the liberty of the species; nor will I hastily brand an act which has been sanctitied by so many heroic examples of ancient virtue; an act which mainly distinguishes us from the brute—for no brute would voluntarily part with life , an act by which we show our fortitude; by which we soar superior to the mere instinctive dread of death; by which we exhibit the proud triumph of mind over matter, and display first our strength of intellect in forming such a terrible election, and next, our unconquerable firmness in daring to carry it into execution."

"You lately contended," said Lord Malton, "that it was proper to comply with the laws of our nature. You now talk of soaring superior to vulgar instinct. On which of these grounds do you defend suicide? Is instinct, or, in other words, the law of our nature, to be thwarted, or obeyed? Your two arguments neutralize each other. One of them must fall. Let it be the former, if you will. Well, then, you talk of a noble triumph over instinctive fear, and commend suicide on the score of fortitude. Consider again, before you urge so weak an argument. Fortitude! Can the suicide lay claim to that? What! the man who dies because he has not the courage to live! who wants firmness to endure the evils of life; and who, like a short-sighted coward, flies from the present miseries that he sees and feels, to others that he fancies less, because they are not obvious to his senses! In what estimation do we hold the soldier who deserts his corps because he dares not brave the hardships of the campaign? Even such, and worse, is the suicide.'1





"Your parallel," said Tyrrel, "is not a just one. The deserter means to escape entirely from the power of his former masters; but the suicide, who believes in a future state, knows that though in another state of being, he shall still be equally under the control of his Creator, and for aught he knows may still serve him as acceptably as before."

"Would a deserting soldier be excused," replied Lord Malton, " because in quitting his proper duty he took refuge in a ship of war? It is not for us to choose in what state of being we shall serve our Maker; nor can we presume to say that our services would be equally acceptable in another. We know enough of the object of our being to induce us to bear with resignation the lot which Providence assigns: but did we know much less, our very ignorance, instead of nourishing such presumption, should teach us humility and caution. Tyrrel !" continued he, with great earnestness, "let this consideration weigh with you. If my arguments have failed to convince, still do not suffer so vital a question to pass unheaded from your mind, through the weakness of its advocate. If you have any doubts remaining, even they should plead against you, as strongly as the most powerful arguments that I could use. I solemnly entreat you, Tyrrel, let no pressure of worldly misfortune debase you so far as to lead you to the commission of this dreadful act."





Tyrrel was silent for a while. At length, with a slight, uneasy smile, he said, " There is little to be feared from one who can discuss the question calmly, as I do. Theory and practice do not often go hand in hand. But enough of this gloomy subject. Let us talk about ourselves, or rather about you—for I myself am but a woftil topic. You are young—younger by ten years <lian I am; and you will have rank and affluence. Your prospect is a happy one; and you ought to be happy; and I dare say you are." . ."Rank and wealth," said Lord Malton, "are never sufficient of themselves to produce happiness. I have experienced that already*"

;'••".You are not yet reconciled to the novelty of your situation," said Tyrrel, looking him earnestly in the face. "You probably feel its unaccustomed duties ..somewhat irksome. That feeling will wear off. All that you now dislike will soon be a source of pleasure to jou. You will have new ties to bind you to life. ..;• Before long you will probably marry."

~ ^ There is time enough for that," said Lord Malton, visibly disturbed; and rising from his chair, he walked towards the window, while Tyrrel followed him, with an inquiring eye.

*> Are you going already ?" said he. .•••','Yes—no; I will stay longer, if you wish it,''.. replied Lord Malton, as if scarcely conscious what he/.

saw}. •.;."."..

: He returned to his seat, and was thoughtful and .silent. Tyrrel was equally so; but his was a silence '. ruffled by agitation. His countenance lost its previous • composure; he rose with a restless air, walked to the fire and to the window, and then again resumed his seat, as if attempting by change of situation to rouse .; himself to the firmness necessary for the effort he was about to make. . ..

"You are right," said he", at last; "there is time enough before you." He paused awhile, and then proceeded: "I did not seek this interview for the .* mere pleasure of conversation, glad as I am to meet





you. Seeing you yesterday in the street, I followed you, as I thought, unobserved, that I might discover your place of residence. Having found out that, it was my intention to have written to you ; but I changed my mind, and determined, if possible, to waylay you again, and seek a personal conference. I have much to tell you!"

He stopped, and Lord Malton sat in breathless expectation, awaitint, the result. A deep flush passed over Tyrrel's countenance. "I cannot tell you now," said he; "no; not to-day—another time."

"Shall I come to you to-morrow?'' said Lord Malton.

Tyrrel did not return an immediate answer. "No," he added, " do not call. Your visits might excite attention. 1 will write to you—that is best. You shall hear from me to-morrow."

Lord Malton now rose to depart. "Be assured," said he, extending his hand to Tyrrel, " that you may ever command my services."

"I know it," said Tyrrel, with a voice of emotion, and he wrung his hand with an earnestness which showed he felt deeply what he said. He retained it for a while; looked at him fixedly and sadly; then turning his head, with a low and scarcely articulate "farewell!" he walked from him, and Lord Malton silently departed.



CHAPTER XXV.

O Mischief! tliou art swift

To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.



Romeo And Juliet.

On the following morning, Lord Malton received a packet, directed to him in Tyrrel's hand-writing. It was said to require no answer. He opened the en





velope, and found it to contain two letters, one for himself, the other directed to "Miss Jermyn, by favour of Lord Malton."

Within his own letter, the seal of which he eagerly broke, was a small note, with the words, " To be read last," written on the outside. He laid it by him on the table, and sat down with a strong feeling of curiosity and interest to the perusal of the letter, which ran thus:—

"In viewing the contents of this paper, you will no longer be surprised that I should have preferred the present mode of communicating them to you, and will easily comprehend the feelings which hare induced me to shrink from the painful task of a personal explanation. But the present mode, though less painful, will not, I trust, be less complete. Perhaps it will be more so. I shall dare to tell you many things on paper, which my tongue might probably have refused to utter; and you will be spared the embarrassment of hearing an appalling torrent of self-accusation, from the lips of one, for whom, with all his faults, your kindness shows that you still feel some portion of regard. Prepare, therefore, fora confession; a confession disclosing facts and feelings, some of which I now relate as a satisfaction to myself, and in.part of atonement for past transgressions; and others which nearly concern your happiness, and which the voice of justice imperatively bids mr no longer withhold.

"I will first speak to you of myself. I will lay open my failings boldly and sincerely; and though the task may be severe, yet shall I hail the self-inflicted punishment as a small portion of that which my grievous errors have deserved. You will perhaps see me presented in darker colours than you have yet known; but at the same time your indignation will, I trust, be softened by the candour which dictates my avowal. You know me already as the fraudulent gamester, and as the man of turbulent and misguided passions. You will know still worse of me anon. But T will not an

Vol. i;. 18





ticipate; I will rather pause to inquire how I became the wretch I am.

"I attribute many of my failings (I know not how justly,) to the unhappy circumstances of my birth, and the false character which I was instructed to maintain. My life has been one lie. I have been ever struggling onward under a burden of borrowed dignity, and I consequently became a creature of assumption and deceit. I wore my galling fetters till I grew callous to their reproach; and felt shamefully pleased in cheating the world into an obsequious homage to that which I knew was really base. My passage through society has been that of an utterer of false coin; and it is not, therefore, to be wondered at that I should have contracted the vices incident to such a course. Ought I not to have blushed with shame on receiving those attentions, however interested, which were paid to me as the heir apparent of a peer—I, who knew that the very servant at my chair's back, legitimate as he was, and of honest parents, was better born, in truth, .than I? I ought to have felt this keenly; but I did not. My finer.sentiments were blunted. I had begun my course of deception when yet a child; and early learned to view my fellows as beings that I was privileged to delude. Was not this fit education for a rising sharper? In truth it was; and the result has proved it.

"But you will say, by this early knowledge of my situation, I have been spared the shock of a painful discovery, at a time when I should have been fully sensible of its cruel aggravation. True ; and to inform me early was a seeming kindness; but I question.whether it has proved a real one. I do not impugn the motives of those who urged the disclosure. It was, if I mistake not, expressly stipulated by your late uncle, to whose * worth I am not a stranger, and whose memory I respect. I do full justice to the benevolence.of his intentions; I am only disposed to question their wisdom. But let me hasten to the catalogue of my offences."

The letter then described the deep-rooted hatred which Tyrrel had conceived for Granby, long before he knew him; his first struggles to suppress his display; his treacherous professions of friendship, and unsuccessful endeavours to instill into Granby a passion for gambling; his subsequent practices upon Courtenay; and the way in which he meant to avail himself of his co-operation. It then related his endeavours to frustrate the union of Granby and Caroline; his wish to win her for himself; his rejection by her; and his calumnious accusations of his cousin. He dwelt upon his dread of detection in the event of Granby's acceptance of Sir Thomas Jermyn's proffered civilities; the fracas at the opera, and the use he made of that event; and it conveyed the important information, that the insulting answer to Granby's letter, written in the name, and apparently by the hand of Sir Thomas Jermyn, was forged by Tyrrel. The letter then proceeded as follows :— "1 have told my offences; let me now endeavour to repair them. Enclosed, 1 send a letter, to be transmitted by you to Miss Jennyn. It will contain your full acquittal of all offences against her, with which I have ever charged you; and also an explanation of the cause which led you to reject the proffered civilities of her father. Sir Thomas and Lady Jermyn will not shrink, as heretofore, from your advances to their daughter. They will willingly go more than half way in opening the door (o reconciliation. Do not suffer your pride to take offence at being thus courted and accepted, for your glittering externals of rank and fortune. Content yourself with the recollection, that she whose love you chiefly prize can love you for yourself alone.





"Receive this explanation as a small atonement for my numerous offences,—an atonement trifling indeed, and insufficient, but all that I can now make. It is a consolatory reflection, that I who have marred your happiness, should be mainly instrumental in restoring it. It is a reflection that will gild my last hours with a brighter gleam of pleasure than I have lately known. Perhaps too, the last act of our existence carries with . a weight and solemnity which effaces the memory of





our former sins. An inward sentiment, springing .. know not whence, prompts me powerfully to this per'suasion. Perhaps the hope may be fallacious; but be it what it may, I have not strength to resist its impulse. My election is irrevocably made. May one of my last acts be tliia. Now, read the enclosed note."

It was with a cold shudder of suspicious dread, that Lord Malton read the few last lines of this important letter. He turned pale, and hastily took up the note. Eager as he was to see its contents, a dreadful presentiment half checked his hand as he opened it. In another instant he had cast his eyes upon the following lines:—

"The die is cast. My career must shortly close. Your observations yesterday startled me, at least, if they did not convince. But it matters not—with me it is no longer an affair of reason, but of impulse. I cannot live. I must quit this scene of misery and despair. My resolution is unalterable. Judge of my firmness by this writing. My hand does not tremble as it pens these lines; nor will it when it draws the trigger. Farewell for the last time. Yours in death.

G. G. T."

Lord Malton started from his seat with an exclamation of horror. First arose the dreadful impression that the fatal deed was already done. Next sprung up a ray of hope, suggesting that by great promptitude he might still save the life of Tyrrel.

At such a time, to think and act were one. He snatched up his hat, hastily passed his astonished servant, rushed out of the house, and ran with the note still grasped unconsciously in his hand, to Tyrrel's lodgings.

He soon arrived at the house. The door was open, and he entered. There was a group of people standing in the passage in the attitude of listeners, staring with an horrow-stricken air in the faces of each other. He hurried by, without addressing them, but heard as lie passed in a loud whisper, "who is that?" and "should we not tell him ?."





209

He saw at once that something terrible had occurred. With the energy of despair he rushed up the narrow stairs which led to Tyrrel's room. A man was at the top who said something which Lord Malton did not hear, and seemed by his gestures to forbid his progress. But Henry would not be prevented. "I am his cousin," said he, and pushing the man aside, forced open the nearest door, which was that of the room where Tyrrel slept.

It was dusky and full of smoke, and he could not at first distinguish what it contained. In a few seconds he perceived two men, one near the window, which he was attempting to open, and the other by the bed; and motionless on that bed lay extended the dark dim semblance of a human figure.

Henry tried to approach it—but could not. One of the men came near and spoke to him. What was said he did not know; he barely heard the sound of the voice, and that seemed to die away. The dim scene darkened around him, and became less and less distinct. The bed and its dreadful load were last seen, and they swam and flitted before his eyes; and then a mist came over them, and sight and sound were lost together. He had fainted.

On regaining his senses, Henry found himself seated on a sofa, in another apartment, which, on looking round, he recognised as Tyrrel's sitting room. He was attended by two persons,'one of whom was applying water to his face. After sitting awhile to regain his shattered strength, he rose and surveyed the apartment. On the table stood a writing desk belonging to his cousin, wide opea and empty; and on the hearth, beneath the grate, lay a large black heap of burnt papers, which showed the dreadful deliberation with which his unhappy relative had prepared for his end. Near the writing desk lay a sheet of paper doubled down, on the outside of which was written in Tyrrel's hand, "To H. G." He thought it might be meant for him, and took it up. Within it were the following words :—





310

"L have destroyed all my papers. L have left no memorial that can tell the world what I was. The secret rests with you. I charge you keep it. I have given my last sixpence to the people of the house; let them also have my clothes, and the few moveables that remain."

Below was the signature at full length, "George Gregory Thompson," the name by which Tyrrel was known to the people in whose house he lodged.

Henry was much affected by the sight of the last short address; and shuddered at a retrospect of the probable mental agonies of the unhappy man, who wished to preserve his disguise even in death, and slink unacknowledged to his untimely grave.

"Perhaps," said Lord Malton to himself, "it is better that it should be so. At any rate I feel strongly impelled to respect this expression of his dying wish. The secret does indeed rest with me; and if I withdraw myself, and withhold my .testimony at the inquest, who shall know that yonder corpes, disfigured as it doubtless is, was once Tyrrel?"

In consequence of this reflection, he determined not to inform the people of the house of his name or present address, less these should furnish an immediate clue to the identity of his unfortunate relation. Finding his strength increased, and his agitation somewhat subsided, he requested the presence of the master of the house, and told him that the remaining property of the deceased was his; and laying several sovereigns on the table, desired that after the inquest the funeral might be privately but decently performed. He also said that he should withhold both his name and address; but that he should be forthcoming again, in the course of a few days, and that if farther sums were necessary they should be supplied.

From this man he gathered some particulars, to which, distressing as they were, he could not deny himself the melancholy satisfaction of listening. He learned that Mr. Thompson, (who was regarded as an old man, so oomplete was the disguise) had sat up writing during the greater part of the preceding night, and was frequently heard to start up and walk about, uttering terrible groans, and broken exclamations of anguish; that early this morning, he had requested to see the master of the house,: and had placed in his hand a sum of money, considerably exceeding. the rent of his rooms, and desired that it might be kept till he demanded it again. After that, he was supposed to have employed himself for some time in burning papers. About an hour before his commission of the fatal act, he went out of the house with a small packet in his hand. What he had done with this, they knew not; but he very soon returned, and on re-entering his room, was heard to lock and bolt the door. After this nothing was heard, not even a footstep, for some time, during which period they were commenting on his strange and mysterious conduct, and drawing inferences, which the result had dreadfully verified. While they were thus employed, he was heard to pass from his sitting room to an adjoining bed-room, and in a few minutes the report of a pistol struck their ears. They knew the dreadful truth at once, and rushing to his apartment, forced open the door, but found life extinct. He was then lying across his bed, one pistol still grasped in his hand, while the other lay on the floor near him. They were both discharged. He must have fired them at the same instant, for only one report was heard.





Returned to his own hotel, Lord Malton strictly forbade all approach, and applied himself to the dreadful retrospect of recent scenes. With fearful interest, and sad misgivings, did he dwell upon the dying prospects of the misguided Tyrrel. He tried to wean his thoughts from the needless and agitating remembrance of this catastrophe, and turn them to the happier prospects which Tyrrel's last letter had opened to his view. But his mind refused to follow this direction, and lingered round the scene of death with. stubborn pertinacity.

When at length he. did turn to future prospects, the





scene which he had just quitted invested them with a dark colouring of its own. He looked only on possibilities of evil. He saw, in the visions of his disordered fancy, Caroline still averse to him, or engaged, or married to another, or ill, or dying, "or dead," said he to himself, as the mischievous phantom crossed his mind.

Then passed the parents in array; Lady Jenny; smiling on him in derision; the father penning fresh abuse, and loading him with added insults. Then as the hours of evening rolled away, came horrid forms, and flitted round him in terrible succession. There was his cousin in various past scenes and characters: he was shaking the accursed dice—levelling at his head the pistol—striking him in the room atTedsworth. Then he passed by in his disguise, and followed him, and glared upon him, till his blood seemed to curdle in his veins; and wherever he cast his eyes around, the walls were peopled with repetitions of his frightful image.

Then again all was swept away at once, and near and around him, whether his eyes were closed or opened, he seemed alike to view numberless resemblances of the bed, the very bed that he had seen that morning, and on it lay the mangled corpse; he could no longer bear the sight; but, trying to shun it, he rushed in desperation from the room, to seek repose and safety on his own couch.

But there—even there in imagination, a ghastly figure lay extended; the hands and clothes were stained with blood, and he thought it was Tyrrel, and it moved, and rose, and seemed to approach him: he tried to fly from it; but his limbs were weak and heavy —a painful numbness had crept over them—and he turned in despair to face the phantom—but it was gone. A racking pain was in his head, and a parching heat seemed to shrivel up his languid frame.

He was in a high state of fever, and the horrid images which his perverted fancy conjured up, were terrible effects of incipient delirium.





His illness rapidly increased, and on the following morning be had j ust strength and sense left, to issue orders that medical help should be called in, and then shortly afterward sunk into a state of stupor, which foreboded no slight danger. During the next day he was much worse, and was confined to his bed; nor did any symptoms of amelioration present themselves for some days afterward.



CHAPTER XXVI.

The matter of his great offence is dead;

And deeper than oblivion do we bury

The incensing relics of it.



AlVt Well that ends Well.

Meanwhile an inquest had been held upon the body of Tyrrel. The persons who lived in the house where he lodged were the only witnesses. They described him as a man of retired and inoffensive habits, who seldom spoke to any of them, and spent most of his time in his own apartment. They represented, that he did not appear to be in distressed circumstances, for he had punctually paid his weekly rent, and had given away sums of money on the morning of his death. He was, therefore, not driven to the rash act by embarrassments of a pecuniary kind. He would sit up the greater part of the night, and was sometimes heard exclaiming to himself, in a tone of great grief and bitterness. He had never any visiter, but one young gentleman in black, who came the day before his death, and sat with him a considerable time. They also stated, that the same gentleman, a short time after the commission of the fatal act, had rushed into the house, and had gone straight to the apartment of the deceased; that he staid a considerable time, seemed much overcome with grief, took a great interest in the affairs of the deceased, and deposited some money to discharge the expenses of the funeral; that he had refused to give his name and address, but promised to appear again,—which he had hitherto failed to do. The name of the deceased was stated to be George Gregory Thompson; which answered to the initials on his linen. His disguise was detected upon examination of the body, and this singular assumption of age, for which they could assign no reason, and some few other peculiarities, were thought by the jury to form a sufficient plea for a verdict of "insanity."





At the time of the inquest, no clue had been obtained to the discovery of Lord Malton's name; and the case, therefore, was simply recorded as the suicide of one Thompson. In the course, however, of a few hours, an accidental circumstance contributed to detail the identity of both parties. A card was discovered in. Tyrrel's bed room, containing the name and address of Lord Malton. It instantly occurred to the owner of the house, that this card might possibly have belonged to the unknown visiter, whose reappearance he was so anxiously expecting; and prompted by the desire of securing an ample remuneration for all expenses incurred on behalf of the deceased, he went to the Clarendon Hotel, to ascertain the identity, and there inquired for Lord Malton.

He was told by the servant, that Lord Malton was ill in bed, and in a state of great danger. Staggered by this intelligence, the man then asked how long he had been in this state; and his suspicions were confirmed by the information that Lord Malton had gone out suddenly on a particular morning, (naming that of Tyrrel's death,) and had returned in the course of a few hours, apparently much distressed; and that his illness had commenced from that time.

"Was Lord Malton's distress occasioned by the death of any relation?" said the man. The servant could not tell—perhaps it might. His master, in his delirium, bad often mentioned the name of one gentleman, a near relation; but he was not aware, for his own part, that he was dead: indeed, he did not know where he was— he had not been heard of for some time.





"And who is that gentleman?"

"Mr. Tyrrel, a cousin of my Lord's; the late Lord's son."

"The late Lord's son? How happened he not to have the title?"

"Why," replied the servant, in a confidential tone, pleased to commmunicate such an important piece of family history, "this Mr. Tyrrel as is cousin to my Lord, turned out, after the old Lord's death, to be an unnatural child, and thereby, you see, my master came to be Lord Malton."

Various other inquiries were then made, by which the querist soon elicited sufficient intelligence to render it tolerably certain that the deceased was no other than Tyrrel. Whatever doubts now remained were also dispelled by a subsequent communication with one of those persons who were interested in Tyrrel's detection. From him he received fresh confirmation of his suspicions; and as these suspicions came to the knowledge of some of those diligent persons, called in the slang of the trade "creepers," whose business it is to prowl about collecting incidents for the newspapers, a paragraph soon made its appearance, describing the disguise of the supposed Thompson, with other concomitant circumstances, and intimating that little doubt was entertained of the identity of the deceased with Mr. T 1,

whose illegitimacy and sudden flight had lately caused so strong a sensation in the fashionable world.

This was the paragraph which had been read by the party at Brackingsley, a few days previous to the account of Lord Malton's dangerous,illness ; and which, as it was intimately connected with.the former mysterious event, had been collected and introducedas an interesting appendage, by the same industrious creeper. The statement contained in that paragraph, was but too fully verified. Lord Malton had now lain many days stretched on the bed of sickness, in a state of considerable danger. At length his disorder began to take a favourable turn; his youth triumphed over the, influence of disease; and the physicians who attended him ventured to pronounce, that although recovery might be distant, all actual danger was now past. The fever abated, and with it the delirium which had rendered him scarcely, at any time, clearly sensible of what was passing around him.





One morning, on awakening from a more tranquil sleep than he had lately enjoyed, he heard a voice in his apartment, whose tones, though low, he instantly recognised. It was Courtenay. He started up, and saw him in another instant at his side.

Lord Malton extented his feeble hand, which Courtenay pressed with warmth. A few minutes were spent in the interchange of kind inquiries; when Courtenay slightly and delicately alluded to the distress of mind which his friend must lately have undergone.

Lord Malton looked inquiringly in his face, "To what do you refer ?" said he.

Courtenay hesitated, and feared to enlarge upon a topic so painful.—" Tyrrel," said he, almost in a whisper.

"Ah !" exclaimed Lord Malton, "are you then acquainted with that dreadful circumstance? I had hoped, the name would not have been known. How have you gained this knowledge?"

"From the public prints," replied Courtenay.

"Has it then indeed been made so public? Oh, my poor cousin! would he"had been saved that shame! I will tell you more of this at some future time. In my present state, and recent as it is, the subject is too distressing. I have many other things to mention; but I am still too feeble. 1 should speak to you of facts and feelings too interesting to be mentioned without much agitation; and that I dare not yet incur. Another day must suffice. I am rendered more sensible of my weakness, by my present slight effort at exertion."

Courtenay observed equal caution in abstaining, for the time, from alluding to any circumstances of a very interesting nature, and did not even inform him that he had come direct from Brackingsley. That name, he thought, weald probably bring with it associations which, in the present weak state of his friend's health, had better be avoided. He therefore contented himself with the assurance of his present safety, and wrote a favourable account, for the satisfaction of Caroline, to Sir Thomas Jermyn.





.Every hour now brought some accession of strength to Henry, and on the following day, when Courtenay was with him, finding himself much more equal to the task of talking, he could not refrain from expressing some of those thoughts which lay so deeply at his heart. Foremost of these was reparation for the unjust suspicions which he had suffered himself to entertain against the integrity of his friend.

"Courtenay," said he, "I do not know whether 1 have ever given you occasion to charge me with any positive act of unkindness. I tried to be guarded in my conduct; but still, I fear, you must have observed my altered manner."

"I did," said Courtenay, "but it did not surprise me; I felt that my own ruinous folly must have sunk me low indeed in your estimation. It was a kindness in you to show your disapprobation of it."

"No, Courtenay, I cannot allow you to put so favourable an interpretation upon my conduct. It was not that which caused the change. It was a mean and ungenerous suspicion, which I bitterly reproach myself for having ever entertained. I will not wound you by relating all of which I was weak enough to think you guilty. It would be also painful to myself—I should blush to do it. But it is on your account, not mine, that I withhold it. It is not necessary that you should know. There is nothing of which you have any need to clear yourself. Be the imputations what they may, 1 solemnly declare that I acquit you of them all. I remember, last summer, I ungenerously said, that I wished to be thanked by deeds, rather than by words. It is a demand which you have amply fulfilled. I cannot express to you how much I feel obliged by your great goodness in coming to see me in my illness. It was very—very kindly done. But what brings you to town at this strange season?"



vOL. II. 19





Courtenay hesitated, not wishing to magnify hia own exertions. "I came," said he, " to see you. The papers reported you in great danger."

"Indeed !" said Lord Malton. "It is strange that my illness should be considered worthy of mention. No—no," added he, after a moment's thought, "poor Tyrrel! his sad fate accounts for that. I suppose all is known by this time. Well—well—I ought to thank them for having brought you to me. But where did you come from?"

"From Brackingsley," said Courtenay.

"So far?" replied Lord Malton; and then after a short pause as if collecting courage to proceed, he added, "were they all informed of my situation?"

"They were," said Courtenay, '.' and were all much grieved to hear it."

Henry looked him earnestly in the face. • ~

"We received the intelligence,".pursued Courtenay. "one morning at breakfast. It was in the newspaper. Miss Jermyn saw it first."

Henry's pulse beat quicker at the name; but he said nothing, for he scarcely dared to ask a question, lest the answer should prove unfavourable.

"We were all of us much grieved at the news. Miss Jermyn in particular was very much affected at it —much more than any body else,"

"Was she ?" exclaimed Henry eagerly—" thank God! then she still cares for me."

"She does indeed," said Courtenay, "and is only fearful that your affection must have changed."

"Can this be true ?" said Henry.

Courtenay confirmed it by a look. Both were silent for some time. Henry's mind was too full to admit the fluent utterance of his thoughts; and they were of a nature to be rather secretly enjoyed than openly communicated. "Courtenay," said he, at lenglh, " why did not I tell you sooner what my feelings were on that subject? I, who saw you incurring the hazard of becoming attached yourself? I, too, who thought that you had injured me in that quarter ? I wish I had been more explicit. To a friend like you, I might have spoken freely, even on a point so delicate as this. But 1 have been a poor deluded creature. I dare say I was wrong even in imagining that you were ever disposed to pay Miss Jermyn more than the attention of ordinary civility."





Courtenay was silent. He had too much magnanimity to acquaint his friend with the extent of the sacrifice which he had made in his behalf.

"If you did appear to take more than ordinary plea-sure in her society," pursued Lord Malton with a smile, "I think I can now account for it, on the score of a certain resemblance that existed between Miss Jermyn and another lady, whom perhaps it is not necessary to mention, Perhaps, too, I who have been so secret in my own affairs, have little right to babble about your's. But I dare say you will excuse me. You will not be alarmed at hearing me mention the name of Lady Emily Manvers."

Courtenay exhibited no alarm, but some surprise, and a slight confusion. Me was thoughtful for a while, and then said, " I feel some ground for reproach on hearing the name of that lady. I fear I may have trifled with her. I paid her at one time a good deal of attention. I think she was pleased with it. I had no serious views; but such being the case, I ought not to have gone so far. We lost sight of each other for a long time, and on meeting again, from pure inadvertence I treated her, not with marked neglect, but at any rate with carelessness and indifference; and she grew cold in consequence, and fell into other society, and so the matter ended;— and I only hope that she really did not care about me." "I cannot encourage you in that hope," said Lord Malton.

"Indeed!" said Courtenay, looking inquiringly in his face. "But how came you to know any thing about it ?'»





"In my way to town," replied Lord Malton, "I staid a few days at Lord Allerdale's. I then saw a good deal of Lady Emily. I obsen cd that she felt an evMent pleasure in taking to me—knew more about me than I could account tor—and was particularly anxious to hear about past scenes in which you and I had figured together. At first I was naturally disposed to interfret this interest in a manner flattering to myself. But soon discovered beyond all question, that I was onlylistened to as your friend, and that the object of interest was yourself. Did not you know this? It seems, then, that like me you are a happier man than you thought you were." i

There was more of perplexity than pleasure in Courtenay's face at that moment: but the former gradually died away, and a gleam of faint satisfaction stole imperceptibly over it. "1 must endeavour," said he gravely, "to attach myself to her."

Here the subject dropped, and they parted.

Henry soon regained Sufficient strength to write a letter to Sir Thomas Jermyn, explanatory of the cause which led him to treat his civilities in town with such apparent disdain. In this letter he enclosed that which Tyrrel had directed to be conveyed through his means to Miss Jermyn. It was as follows:

"Do not hesitate to peruse this letter, however hateful may be its writer. It can contain no repetition ol the offer which you once so indignantly rejected; nor does it tend to corroborate those representations which then caused you such affliction. By the time you receive this, you will perhaps have heard the story of my unhappy fate, and will know that he who writes these lines, has sealed their testimony with his blood. I am not unconscious of the attachment that has subsisted between yourself and my cousin. I knew of its existence, at least on his side, at the period of my endeavour to obtain your hand. Accident first informed me of it, and enabled me to gain a full acknowledgment from him. Of your sentiments I know nothing, and my cousin either wojjld not or could not give me any information res





pecting your feelings toward himself. My own observations, until our last eventful interview, had led me to suppose you indifferent; and under that persuasion, and encouraged by the friendship of your manner, I ventured to address you in the language of love. Suffer me to confess that my love was feigned; that I approached you with mercenary views; and that I have been fortunately debarred from the possession of a treasure which I had not the sense to appreciate. This confession may seem needlessly offensive to you, and humiliating to myself; but if a stein uncompromising disclosure of my motives can add any thing to the confidence with which you receive the following statement, my purpose will be fully answered. I knew that my cousin loved and sought you; and from the moment I knew this, I determined to frustrate his wishes. For this purpose only did I, in the first instance, endeavour to extend that intimacy with your family which increased so rapidly during your stay in London. You know how I employed it. Doubtless you can now call to mind my many insidious observations, apparently of little import, but calculated to impress you with an idea of my cousin's indifference. All these I now recall. They were spoken with a design—the design of preventing the possibility of a union between yourself and him; and however the ground work might have been true and circumstantial, the colouring was that of falsehood. On one occasion only did 1 venture to make a direct assertion respecting my cousin. After my proposal,—rejected by you, and rejected, as it appeared, for him,—I was actuated by momentary pique to transgress the bounds of my usual caution. I said that my cousin had urged me to address you. It was false. If he did utter words to that effect, they were ironically spoken, and wrung from him by my attacks. I said that he had shown to me the lock of hair which you once gave him, and had spoken slightingly of the donor. It was false. He never spoke of you but with affection and respect; and the discovery of the hair was effected by accident. I told you that he had made an unsuccessful offer of mar





wage to Miss Barrel. This was also a falsehood. In spite of the kindness of your disposition—in spite of the partial atonement of this confession—you will probably abhor my memory for these acts of slander. But do not yet throw down the letter with disgust. I have more to tell. I have done still worse. I had slandered my cousin; and any subsequent communication between you and him would have exposed me to the danger of detection. This danger I made a desperate effort to avert. You probably know that your father expressed a wish to see my cousin at his house. You may also have known that a slight misunderstanding took place the following evening at the Opera, and that my cousin took no further notice of the proffered civilities of Sir Thomas Jermyn. But you do not know, nor does your father, that my cousin addressed to him a letter of great civility, explaining the circumstance that occurred. This letter I intercepted, and returned an answer written as if by your father, couched in insulting terms, and positively declining all further communication upon that or any other subject. You will no doubt show this statement to Sir Thomas Jermyn. I write it for his information as well as yours. I have sown the seeds of dissension—I have effected the separation of those who ought to be united in the bonds at least of friendship.—I, who did these things, am the properest person to repair them; and the reflection that I now do thus repair them, conveys to my wounded conscience a deep satisfaction —an inward calm, which effaces much of the pain and shame which this avowal should excite. May my explanation prove effectual. May you be happily united to one who still sincerely loves you, and who is worthy of your tenderest regard. He has not seen the contents ofmy letter—he has only been informed of its object. You are at liberty to show it to him, even before that period, when I trust you will feel yourself bound by duty to open to him your whole heart. Farewell. May every happiness attend you both. Thus prays sincerely a penitent and dying man; and this is the last address you will ever receive from the hands of

George Guanbjt





CHAPTER XXVII.

All of a tenor was their after life,

No day discolour'd with domestic strife;

No jealousy, but mutual truth believed,

Secure repose, and kindness undeceived;

Thus Heaven, beyond the compass of his thought,

Sent him the blessing he so dearly bought.

Palamon and Arcilt.

It would be difficult to describe the sentiments with which Caroline read this letter. It drew from her many tears—some of heartfelt joy, and some of grief for the miserable fate of the unhappy man who wrote it. The explanation of the cause of Henry's rejection of their civilities, gave great satisfaction to Sir Thomas and Lady Jermyn, who since his elevation to a peerage, had been longing for a dignified opportunity of recommencing their intercourse with him.

The result, after a little consultation, was a speedy answer to Lord Malton's letter, in which, without once mentioning their daughter, or Tyrrel, or any circumstance either very interesting or distressing, Sir Thomas expressed himself highly satisfied with the explanation, and kindly solicitous about the state of Lord Malton's health ; and he added, that since London at this time of the year must be a very unhealthy place, and change of air would doubtless be recommended, it would give Lady Jermyn and himself sincere pleasure to see him at Brackingsley, whenever he might be strong enough to remove from his present residence.

Lord Malton, conscious that his change of circumstances had now rendered him such a connexion as ambitious parents might be anxious to secure, was pleased at the delicacy with which they coloured their motives for facilitating an intimacy of which he was much more desirous than even they could be. He gladly accepted the invitation; and as soon as his physician pronounced him able to bear with safety the fatigue of a journey, he flew, in novelistic phrase, "on the wings of love," or in plain English, in a travelling carriage and four, to Brackingsley.





Caroline's heart beat quick as she saw his carriage cross the park; and when she knew that he was actually in the house, the eagerness to see him which she had felt so strongly a few days ago, now gave way to a sensation of timidity, which made her, for an instant, almost shrink from the interview. She stood for awhile with her hand on the lock, summoning courage to the effort, and balancing whether it was or was not proper that she should go to see him without a formal notification of his arrival.

While thus debating, she heard her mother's quick step along the passage. She presently entered with a face all beaming with pleasure.

"Well, my love," suid she, "he is come. I came to tell you. He has not lost much of his good looks, though he is rather pale and thin at present; but he would not look half so much so if it was not for his black dress. He is in deep mourning—crape on his hat, and every thing. His poor cousin, you know—though they were not cousins, as it turned out. He inquired immediately after you. I told him I would let you know he. was here ; so come with me and see him, my love. He will take it ill if you don't come soon. He is with your father in the library. How it agitates her! Poor dear foolish child! You must get the better of this nervous fturry.jlove, before you meet him ; and I must not have you look so pale. You don't look well when you arc so very pale—though, perhaps, he will not find that out. Oh! there—blush as much as you please—I dare say he will not quarrel with that."

In a few minutes Caroline was in the presence of her lover. As she entered, he rose and advanced quickly to meet her. It was for both an agitating moment. She could not look him steadily in the face; nor if she had would she have distinguished a single feature, for every object in the room seemed to float dimly before her eyes. She just perceived that his hand was extended, and she almost mechanically gave him her own. She knew not whether he pressed it, nor did he know himself; but there was a nervous tremor visible in each.





In a few minutes Caroline was enabled to regard him more composedly. A transient flush was then passing from his cheek, on which there did not yet appear the steady bloom of health. There was less elasticity in his step; and though pleasure sparkled in his eyes, yet it was rather the sober glow of intense satisfaction mixed with a shade of pensiveness, than the bright effulgence of heightened spirits.

But the eye of love is slow to recognise defects, and quick to turn them to advantage. Caroline was more touched and interested by his sunken cheek and pensive eye, than she could have been by all his former gayety. To her fond eye, there was something graceful in the very languor of recent illness ; and she thought that his present serious deportment, and melancholy suit of black, added to his manner a sombre dignity, more consonant with his present station.

This latter change often crossed her mind, and always with a slight portion of surprise; and though really gratified, and deeply too, she felt sometimes almost annoyed at it.

They did not talk much at first: their minds were too fully engrossed by interesting thoughts. They, however, endeavoured as far as possible, to banish all particularity from their manner. They tried to meet as friends—mere friends—and in this they partially succeeded. But this could not last long. Thrown together as they were, they soon gave way to the natural expression of their fervent feelings, and ere three days had passed, had exchanged mutual vows of lasting love.

Lord Malton took an early opportunity of acquainting Sir Thomas Jermyn with the conversation that had passed between himself and Trebeck, at Lord Allerdale's. In so doing, however, he was careful to introduce it with all possible delicacy, and to avoid conveying to the Baronet's mind the impression that he suspected him of wishing to keep this circumstance a secret.





He soon afterwards entered upon a more agreeable topic—told him his heart's best wish—and heard with delight Sir Thomas's expressions of pleasure at the communication, and assurances that he should look forward with great satisfaction to the prospect of their nearer relationship.

It was, indeed, highly satisfactory to the Baronet and his Lady; for in point of rank and fortune, Henry was every thing that they could wish; and after securing these first grand requisites, they would have preferred him individually to any body. Sir Thomas chuckled in anticipating the frequent instances in which his young and wealthy son-in-law, oppressed with the cares of his novel situation, would doubtless apply for the aid of his experience, and flattered himself that Henry's political proceedings in the Upper House, would be regulated upon the model of bis father-in-law's judicious conduct in the Lower, and that the arrangements of the "menage" at Tedsworth would "take their cue" from those of Brackingsley.

Lady Jermyn had perused already with her mind's eye the words, "Viscountess Malton on her marriage, by Lady Jermyn," in the list of presentations at the ensuing drawing room; and had almost composed a,description of her dress. She was never weary of looking forward to the high consideration to which her daughter would probably attain in fashionable circles, and even ventured to hope, that "with proper management," she might at some future time arrive at the supreme dignity of a patroness of Almack's.

Henry and Caroline thought not of these things. They were too happy in themselves to suffer their thoughts to stray into "the world," as it is called par excellence, out of that little world of love in which they were all in all to one another. Many an interesting hour did they pass, in explaining all the circumstances and feelings by which they had severally been eu. gaged and misled daring their long and cruel separation ; and many still more agreeable hours were spent in anticipating the happy scenes that lay before them.





Caroline also informed Henry of every particular of Courtenay's conduct in which she was in any degree concerned, and he felt his regard and gratitude to his friend rise high in the relation.

Placed, as he now was, in a state of unalloyed happiness, he rapidly improved in health; and his looks improved as .rapidly: though Caroline's partial eye saw no improvement in the latter, because in truth she sought for none.

From this time they were scarcely separated, except by short occasional visits on the part of Henry, to Tedsworth or to town, where he was employed either in expediting the preliminaries for their union, or in directing arrangements, the object of which was her future gratification.

Thus passed two happy months, which nothing tended to render long, but an impatient expectation of •aat happier period by which they were to be succeeded: and on the arrival of which, after being united at Brackingsley, in the presence of her approving parents, and a large circle of congratulating friends, they repaired with bright prospects of long-lived happiness, to fl;e splendid retirement of Tedsworth.

"C'en est assez," says Madame Cottin, ia one of the most agreeable of her works^t." arretons nous ici— reposons nous sur ces douces pensees. Ce que j'ai coanu de la vie, de ses inconstances, de ses esperances trompees, de ses fugitives et chimeriques fclicites, me lerait craindre, ci j'apretais une seule page a cette histoire, d'etre obligee d'y placer un malheur." Notwithstanding our fears that the observation of the abovenamed distinguished authoress may in too many instances be fully verrified, we shall venture to add some "more last words," and annex what might be termed, in the language of the Roxburgh Club, the " colophon" of our third octavo. In fact, we cannot resist the temptation of inserting, for the benefit of those who





did not see it, a passage which caught our eye a few days since in the columns of a Morning Paper. It ran verbatim thus :—" Expected Marriage in High Life.— It is confidently reported that Mr. Courtenay, grandson ayil heir of Lord Essendon, will shortly lead to the hymeneal altar Lady Emily Manvers, the beautiful and accomplished daughter of the Earl of Allerdale."

Saturday, March IQlh, 1825.
