CHAPTER I. 



BOG MOY HOUSE. 



Sic siti Isetantur lares." 



The ruin speaks that some time it was a worthy building. 

Cymbeline. 



Lord Arranmore had just returned from 
the refreshing luxury of a sea bath, on the fol- 
lowing morning, when the opportune arrival 
of a Galway carrier enabled him to appear 
before his aunts, with such advantages of 

VOL. IV. b 



2 THE O'BRIENS AND 

dress, as never fail to have their value, when 
brought to the aid of great personal endow- 
ments. As soon as he had breakfasted, and 
given his pony in charge to the " garlcd!,*" who 
was to ride it to Bog Moy, he freighted the St. 
Grellan chaise (the only public vehicle in the 
town), with his books and wardrobe ; and com- 
mitting himself fearlessly to its dislocating ma- 
chinery, set off for Bog Moy. 

Twelve years had so changed and improved 
his appearance, that if there were any persons 
in the town of St. Grellan, retaining a recollec- 
tion of the young Clan Tieg O'Brien of Arran, 
who now saw him, they no longer recognized in 
the elegant foreign-looking stranger, who had 
" put up at the OTlaherty Arms," the un- 
gainly, but comely boy, whose early talents and 
boyish adventures had left a due impression be- 
hind them, and were still the theme of occasional 
gossip over the winter's fire in the neighbour- 
hood. 

It was not till half an hour before his depar- 
ture, that the address on his luggage announced 
him to his host as Lord Arranmore, whose 



THE O FLAHEETYS. 5 

father's funeral had recently passed through St. 
Grellan, on its way for embarkation to the isles. 

The Connaught imagination immediately took 
wing. Rank, riches, a colonelcy in the Irish 
Brigade, and a claim to half the estates in the 
province, were soon added; and before Lord 
Arranmore entered his chaise, the news had fled 
through the High-street, reached the Cladagh, 
brought a crowd of idlers, beggars, and Isle 
of Arran boys, to the door, and filled all the 
windows in the town with gazers, of that sex, 
which, accused every where of the habit of 
window gazing, more inveterately indulge it in 
the country towns of Ireland, even than in those 
of Spain. It was as dreary and drizzling a day 
as the " great father of waters, 1 ' the Atlantic, 
ever sent to throw gloom over the town of St. 
Grellan, when Lord Arranmore began his short 
journey to Bog May. The day was, besides, a 
great catholic holiday, the festival of St. Grellan, 
the patron saint of the Bally boe. The streets 
were all mud, the houses all smoke, and the 
gaiety of the town was still further eclipsed by 
the shops being half shut. He in vain endea- 
b 2 



4 THE O'BRIENS AND 

voured to recall, as the chaise jolted through the 
long, ill-paved, and rutted street, the " fair city 
that lifted herself on high," in the imagination 
of his boyhood. All its dimensions seemed con- 
tracted : the High-street and Four-ways (the 
ayrso and the carrefour of his childish admira- 
tion), whose splendour and bustle used to fill 
him with wonder, when he came in from the 
isles, or the mountains, now seemed dwindled 
and deserted. In the Four-ways, however, ap- 
peared groups, which identified its old destina- 
tion: it was surrounded by shebean and pot- 
houses, and filled with females squatted in the 
mud, and selling Connemara stockings, eggs, 
fish, and other vendible commodities ; while 
spalpeens and cottiers, leaning on the sleaghans* 
and scythes, lounged around the great stone 
cross in the centre, waiting to be hired after mass, 
and too often waiting in vain. 

The High-street, too, was distinguished by 
many of its old features. It was still paraded 
by those batteurs du pave in all Irish towns, 

* Turf spades. 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 5 

the squireens; some galloping ostentatiously 
through the town on their new hunters, pur- 
chased by an I. O. U., more readily given, than 
redeemed ; while the dismounted cavalry, seated 
on the counters of the best shops, amused their 
strenuous idleness with such " bald, disjointed 
chat" as the news of the neighbourhood fur- 
nished them withal, repaying with a horse-laugh 
and a halfpenny the wit of the half-idiot, half- 
knave, who stood at the door, or bestowing a 
largess of equal value on the mendicant cripple, 
who, packed into a barrow, was wheeled from 
door to door by the "christian M for charity (ready 
" to do that, or more, for sweet Jesus's sake 11 ), 
or by the buckeens, who would do that, or any 
thing, " just for fun, or a bit of a frolic." 

Early as it was, the belles of St. Grellan 
were already clacking their pattens to prayers 
or parade, equally earnest in their double 
vocation of faith and flirtation ; or were seen 
dangling their legs over the sides of a low-backed 
car, on their way to the. " salt wattlier ;" while 
the few not thus employed with this world or 
the next, sat suspended, like Mahomet's coffin, 



6 THE o'imiEXS AND 

between both, in their window, too much occu- 
pied with other persons' affairs, to be very atten- 
tive to their own. From all these, the pochay 
of the OTlaherty Arms elicited observation and 
comments ; not only from the unusual circum- 
stance of the turn out itself (a rare event), but 
from the handsome head put forward alternately 
from every window, not permanently closed by a 
wooden, blind. All who had heard of the arrival 
of Lord Arranmore at once recognized the 
stranger (who was taking the coast road to Bog 
Moy, the tide being out), to be the son of the 
well-known, though long absent Baron O'Brien; 
and all who had not heard of that event, were 
full of queries and conjectures concerning the 
die shin,* whose black stock denoted his military 
calling, and whose unpowdered head was an 
innovation that portended some revolution in the 
Galway fashions, which had held their ground 
unchanged since the days of George the Second, 
and the great Lord Clanrickard. 

Among the spectators of him whose " youth 

* Literally, u Who is that ?" a notable person. 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 7 

and comeliness did pluck all gaze his way," 
there were two, in whom his apparition, as he 
passed the bay window at which they were sta- 
tioned, struck especial emotion, 

" As though they saw some wond'rous monument." 

These were the widow and Miss Costello, the 
friends and gossips of the Miss Mac Taafs, by 
whom the event of Lord Arranmore's arrival 
was devoutly wished, and long looked-for. 
From this watch tower of their perpetual vigi- 
lance, where, " from morn till noon, from noon 
till dewy eve," entrenched in snuff-boxes and 
pocket-handkerchiefs, with their knitting in their 
hands, with Pastorinf s prophecies on one side., 
and Betsy Thoughtless on the other, they took 
cognizance of every transaction, private and 
public, religious and commercial, that occurred 
in the town. No little voteen picked her way 
to mass in the morning or mall in the evening ; 
no dry-drum was given by the dowagers of one 
sex, nor jorum of punch by the dowagers of the 
other ; not a pair of Connemara stockings was 
sold in the Four-ways, nor a basket of fish 



8 THE O'BRIENS AND 

disposed of in the Cladagh, to the cadgers of 
Gal way and Tuam, without their knowledge 
and commentary. 

In the handsome head thrust through the left 
window of the St. Grellan chaise, and in the 
dark, bright eyes, raised to the widow's bay 
window, which she construed into a look of 
recognition, the ladies at once discovered the 
long-expected and often talked-of guest of Bog 
Moy ; for whose sake many an intended party, 
and above all the "Jug Day"* two years in con- 
templation, at Bog Moy, had been deferred by 
their dear friends, the Miss Mac Taafs. 

" I declare to Jasus, Prudence Costello," 
exclaimed the widow, as the old chaise rattled 
by, and the fine eyes flashed upwards, " I 
declare to Jasus, if that ar'n't Lord Arranmore 
at last, gone the coast road to Bog Moy ! Why 
don't you return his salute, girl?" 

Prudence Costello did return the salute ten- 

* The Jug Day was that, on which a pipe of claret, im- 
ported from France, was first broached in the old Con- 
naught House ; and when the friends and neighbours were 
invited togive their opinions of the merit of the importation. 



THE O FLAHERTYS. V 

fold ; if a slight inclination of the head, extorted 
by "the nods, and becks, and wreathed smiles" 
of the widow, could be so called. Throwing 
back a door, which literally opened into the 
kitchen (according to the Connaught establish- 
ment of that day, when every story had its own 
kitchen), the widow cried out, " Mary Blake, 
slip on your Connemaras, and run down to the 
OTlahertyArms, and inquire if it's Lord Arran- 
more that has just set off by the coast-road in 
the pochay, that's my girleen." 

Mary Blake dropped her work " right wil- 
lingly;" and without waiting to slip on her 
Connemara stockings, slipped her feet into her 
pumps, and ran down to the O'Flaherty Arms. 
The intelligence she brought back was of a 
nature to induce the widow Costello to expedite 
an order to Jemmy Lynch to have the car at the 
door by three o'clock : " for we're going to 
take tay at Bog Moy the evening." 

The best quilt and feather-bed were put in 

requisition for the service of the low-backed car ; 

and the sober wardrobe of the widow and Miss 

Costello (the one still affecting weeds as an in- 

b3 



10 THE O'BRIENS AND 

consolable widow, and the other black, as a sen- 
timental devotee, inconsolable for being neither 
widow nor wife), supplied its most becoming 
gravities, for welcoming home one whom they 
considered as hereditary prince of the Isles of 
Arran, the Lord of Arranmore, and the heir 
of Bog Moy and Bally slattery. 

Never had Lord Arranmore, in his wander- 
ings in far distant lands, looked upon scenes of 
classic association with more intense interest and 
curiosity, than he now sought out objects familiar 
to his recollection, on the road from St. Grellan 
to Bog Moy ; a road once so well known, but 
which seemed so strangely changed, since he had 
" plucked geese, played truant, and whipped 
top " on it. Nothing could be more dreary or 
desolate than the country through which he 
was passing; there was nothing to meet the 
feelings of the most moderate philanthropist, or 
to satisfy the hopes of the least sanguine agri- 
culturist ; — nothing either prosperous or pic- 
turesque. There were but few symptoms of 
artificial cultivation, and no neat farming, no close 
enclosures, no secure fences, no budding hedge- 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 



11 



rows, and doubled-faced ditches, no sod or pipe 
drains, nor one faint dawning ray of the new 
light of modern husbandry. The agricultural 
slate of the province was represented by swampy 
fields for pasturage, divided by stone mearings, 
with patches of earth, as yet unsown, but in- 
tended for a scanty provision of corn, (for little 
grain was then raised in a land which had once 
supplied foreign markets).* Of the old woods 
which once fringed the bases of the Connemara 
hills, and of which some stunted remains were 
still visible in his childhood, there was now as 
little trace, as of any attempt at new and improving 
plantation ; and to one more deeply read in the 



* " The people had not the folly to improve the pro- 
perty they had scarcely rescued from the gripe of forfeiture, 
being aware that its cultivation only invited fresh litiga- 
tion. Thus "Warner observes : * Whereas permanency of 
tenure, stable property, and even durable security in land 
or money, are prohibited the Irish papists by law, which 
obliges them to keep their lands waste, instead of improv- 
ing them, in order to prevent, as much as possible, any 
temptation to leases in reversion, which protestants only 
can take.' " — History of Ireland. 



12 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Irish story, than apprized of the actual state of 
Ireland, the name of the woody island would 
have appeared to have been given to it in irony 
or in reproach. The axe of the stranger had 
indeed been early laid to the root of the Irish 
forests, when they were the only fortresses of 
the brave hardy natives, — when to cut down an 
army it was necessary to root up a wood, — and 
when heroes and oaks, Irish champions and 
Scotch firs, fell together. The little, however, 
which was then spared, fell before the wants of 
the people, in the beginning of the eighteenth 
century. The noblest forest trees were consumed 
as fuel, and the uncertainty of every tenure, 
under the penal code, at that period, prevented 
that succession of coppice and planting, which 
might soon have supplied the place of the origi- 
nal produce. The mansions of the gentry were 
few and desolate ; and the neglect and discomfort 
of their exterior gave no adequate idea of the 
quantity of claret drank at a vast expense in 
the interior. The population was as dreary as 
the country, being made up of a few squalid 



THE o'FLAHEETYS. 13 

beggars, on their way to increase the mendicity 
of Gal way town, or to be shipped off to the 
West Indies, — an occasional pedestrian, going 
from Bally to Bally, with his brogues and hose 
on his shoulders instead of his feet, — or perhaps 
a scollog and his wife, mounted on a bare- 
backed garron, only shod before, according to 
the economy of those times. Here and there 
an equestrian of the higher order, the squireen, 
followed by his wise man, driver, or overseer, 
was distinguished afar off by the naked children, 
peopling every dunghill, as a" brass-buttoned 
gentleman." 

Lord Arranm ore's first glance at Bog Moy 
convinced him that there, at least, nothing had 
been changed. The morass or boggy plain, 
in which it stood, was as unreclaimed, as when 
he had last shot snipes upon it, within a few 
paces of the house. In the midst of its brown 
surface appeared the only verdant spot in the 
demesne, a horsepond in its " mantle of green." 
There, still flourished, or decayed, a few old 
stunted trees, called the Orchard or " Avalgort" 
with a mound covered with furze, called the 



14 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" Fin avain" or Vinery.* There too moul- 
dered the ancient Dovecote; and the well of 
" sweet water," under its vaulted arch of rudely 
cut stone ; a wall of stone or clay encompassed 
the bawn, (a square of two hundred feet,) the 
only pleasure-ground, which in former times 
" the unquiet state of the land'* permitted to 
the gentry of Ireland. Up to the commence- 
ment of the last century, the flocks of the most 
wealthy landholders were attended by armed 
herdsmen, who with spears for crooks, took 
their watch in the morning upon some high 
crag, to spy the neighbouring enemy, and at 
night drove their charge into the bawn, which 
afforded shelter alike for man and for beast. 
The bawn had been flanked by four square 
towers ; one of which was in good preservation, 
and distinguished by the name of the Briga- 
dier's Tower. Not so the mansion. Since Lord 
Arranmore had seen it, it had become confusion 



* In an old Irish almanack of the fourteenth century, 
once in the possession of Colonel Vallancey, the time of 
gathering grapes and drinking the new wine is mentioned. 



THE OFLAHERTYS, ID 

worse confounded ; preserving the remains of all 
the various changes from its first erection of 
ki cage-work and couples," through its progress 
of clay and stone and lime, " a castle began/' 
and a modern mansion never finished. On the 
outside of the bawn walls, rose a cluster of hovels, 
whose smoke rolled in masses from their chimnies 
down upon the road. These were the re- 
mains of the dwellings of tenants " planted and 
estated on the land," who had once been returned 
as constituting eleven families able to make 
twenty- live men at arms, and now the shelter 
of a band of Miss Mac Taaf's cottiers or under- 
tenants. It was dignified by the name of the 
town of Bog Moy. 

Lord Arranmore drew up before one of these 
huts, which lying next the bawn gateway, 
(without a gate), served as the lodge : and on 
the gassoon's inquiry, in Irish, if the Ban 
Tiernas were at home, the answer was given, 
that they were on the little bog convanient to 
the place. The future lord of Bog Moy alighted ; 
and ordering the chaise and pony to proceed 
to the house, took a little " thatched headed 1 ' 



16 THE O'BRIENS AND 

urchin for his guide, and walked towards the 
bog which was so convanient, as to be separated 
from the pleasure-ground or garden-plot only 
by the dilapidated walls of the bawn. A 
" mearing" of loose stones marked the separa- 
tion of this favourite bit of bog from the 
turlogh through which its red veins ran. 

Upon this meering Lord Arranmore leaned 
for a moment, to contemplate the singular scene 
and well-remembered persons before him. The 
Miss Mac Taafs were both on the ground, and 
both standing enough in profile, to give him a 
full and perfect view of their figure, without 
being seen by them. His first opinion was, 
that they were utterly unchanged ; and that 
like the dried specimens of natural history, they 
had bidden defiance to time. Tall, stately, and 
erect, their weather-beaten countenance and 
strongly marked features were neither faded, 
nor fallen in. The deep red hue of a frosty 
and vigorous senility still coloured their un- 
wrinkled faces. Their hair, well powdered and 
pomatumed, was drawn up by the roots from 
their high foreheads, over their lofty " sys- 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. IT 

terns ;" and their long, lank necks, rose like 
towers above their projecting busts; which with 
their straight, sticky, tight-laced waists, terminat- 
ing in the artificial rotundity of a half-dress 
bell-hoop, gave them the proportions of an hour- 
glass. They wore grey camlet riding habits, 
with large black Birmingham buttons (to mark 
the slight mourning for their deceased brother- 
in-law) ; while petticoats, fastened as pins did or 
did not their office, shewed more of the quilted 
marseilles and stuff beneath, than the precision 
of the toilet required : both of which, from their 
contact with the water of the bog, merited the 
epithet of " Slappersallagh," bestowed on their 
wearers by Terence O'Brien. Their habit-shirts, 
chitterlings, and cravats, though trimmed with 
Trawlee lace, seemed by their colour to evince that 
yellow starch, put out of fashion by the ruff of 
the murderous Mrs. Turner in England, was still 
to be had in Ireland. Their large, broad silver 
watches, pendant from their girdles by massy steel 
chains, shewed that their owners took as little ac- 
count of time, as time had taken of them, " Worn 
for shew, not use," they were still without those 



18 THE O'BRIENS AND 

hands, which it had been in the contemplation of 
the Miss Mac Taafs to have replaced by the 
first opportunity, for the last five years. High- 
crowned black-beaver hats, with two stiff, 
upright, black feathers, that seemed to bridle 
like their wearers, and a large buckle and band, 
completed the costume of these venerable spe- 
cimens of human architecture : the tout ensemble 
recalling to the nephew the very figures and 
dresses, which had struck him with admiration 
and awe, when first brought in from the Isles 
of Arran, by his foster mother, to pay his duty 
to his aunts, and ask their blessing, eighteen 
years before. 

The Miss Mac Taafs, in their sixty-first 
year (for they were twins), might have sunk 
with safety ten or twelve years of their age. 
Their minds and persons were composed of that 
fibre which constitutes nature's veriest hucka- 
back. Impressions fell lightly on both ; and 
years and feelings alike left them unworn and 
uninjured. 

The eldest Miss Taaf, — the eldest but by 
an hour, — the representative of the Green 



THE 0*FLAHEB,TYS. 19 

Knights and Barons of Ballyslattery, who stood 
erect, with her right hand leaning on a walking- 
cane umbrella, was laying down the law in 
a loud oracular voice, sometimes in Irish, 
sometimes in English, to an old man, who stood 
bare-headed and footed before her. Her direc- 
tions, though evidently " the law and the 
gospel,"" were strengthened by an occasional 
reference to a person, who sat on a clump of 
turf, with pen and paper in hand, and an ink- 
horn at his button-hole ; such as, " and here 
James Kelly will tell you the same, Dan Hogan ; 
and you know we consider James Kelly as the 
sense -keeper of Bog Moy ;" to which assertion, 
James Kelly, by a confirmatory nod of the head, 
fully assented. 

While Miss Mac Taaf and her premier were 
thus engaged in the legislative department, 
Miss Monica was busily employed in the exe- 
cutive. She stood a little in advance, her back 
supported against a turf-clump. Paddy Whack 
was -seated beside her on his hinder legs, and 
was looking into her face, watching for the stick 



20 THE O'BRIENS AND 

which she occasionally threw into the water. 
" to keep the baste quiet." She was, however, 
then occupied in counting the kishes of turf 
wheeled off, and receiving a tally from each 
driver as he passed, which she strung upon a 
cord. Sometimes chiding, sometimes praising, 
frequently soliciting, and always interfering, she 
kept up a constant fire of words, which were 
answered with more- respect than coherency, by 
the rustic interlocutors. " Thady Flaherty, it's 
what I hear, your bracket cow calved last week, 
and your woman never sent up a drop of the 
strippings* to the great house." 

" Och ! then she won't be so, Marram, I'll 
ingage, God bless you, Miss Monica.' ' 

" Drop that chip of bog wood now, Jemmeen 
Joyce ; is it to stale the timber, ye were let to 
come and help your daddy on the bog?" 
"Onor ny Costello, where's the tribute hose 
ye were knitting for me, in lieu of the ducks ?" 
" What is it ye are grubbing up there, instead 

* The first milk after the calf is dropped. 



THE. O'FLAHERTYS. 21 

of clamping the sods? Shew it here now : is 
it another copper Shamus ?"* 

(i No, plaze your honor, Miss Monica Marram ; 
it's an ould horse-shoe, the great luck!" 

u Wei], if it's only an old neile, I have often 
told you, that, as ladies of the manor, we have 
right and title to every screed found on the 
Fassagh. Take it up to the great house, Onor 
ny Costello." 

Thus occupied during some hours, they 
were on the point of breaking up their council, 
as the sun in its course, announced the hour 
which gathered the cottiers to their mid-day 
meal of potatoes and milk at the great house, 
when a little gassoon ran up to Miss Mac Taaf, 
and presented her a slip of paper, on which was 
written, " A stranger claims connagh and meaks 
of the ladies of Bog Moy, after the old fashion of 
Irish hospitality." 

Miss Mac Taaf put on her spectacles to read 
this note, which Miss Monica perused, over her 
sister's shoulder. Both ladies raised their large 

* " A copper James ;" i. e. one of James the Second's 
copper tokens, issued during his short reign in Ireland, 



22 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Irish eyes, when the gassoon, in answer to their 
die shin (who is it ?) pointed to the writer. They 
looked earnestly, and moved forward with state- 
liness, when the stranger, vaulting lightly over 
the mearing, took a hand of each lady, and 
pressed it with equal grace, and cordiality to 
his lips : exclaiming, " My dear aunts, has 
Murrogh O'Brien no longer a place in your 
recollection ?" 

" Chroist Jeesus, Murrogh CTBrien, is it you 
choild V" demanded both ladies, in a breath, and 
with a pleasurable amazement, tempered by that 
habitual stateliness, with which no emotion, 
either of pleasure or of pain, ever materially 
interfered. 

Equally charmed at the arrival of their titled 
nephew, and struck by the change in his person, 
they stood returning with cordial interest, the 
shake of the hand which followed his more 
courtly salutation. Looking with eyes eloquent 
in their curiosity and surprise, they continued 
welcoming him to Bog Moy, and passing com- 
ments on his person and dress, in rapid alterna- 
tion ; while James Kelly and Paddy Whack, 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. Qtt 

now both " on their legs," stood wondering and 
waiting for an explanation (the one bowing his 
head, the other wagging his tail) : sheagans and 
shovels were suspended ; barrows stood still, and 
ears and eyes, all opened to their fullest extent, 
soon conveyed to the gossiping followers of the 
Mac Taafs, the welcome news, that the mistress's 
nephew, the heir of Bog Moy, and Clan Tieg 
O'Brien of the Isles, had arrived among them, 
by the style and title (soon announced) of 
Lord Arranmore. Caubeens and barrads 
were now flung in the air, the " chree"* of the 
Mac Taafs was raised by the men, taken up by 
the women, and sent back by the boys ; and was 
followed by the burden of an old Irish song, that 
always comes so readily to Irish lips : 

" Welcome, heartily, 
Welcome, Grammachree ; 
Welcome, heartily, 
Welcome, joy." 

A half holiday was now asked for and 
granted, and an half cruiskeen* was voluntarily 
promised ; and these modern representatives of 

* Cruiskeen, — a pitcher. Thus used absolutely, the 
contained liquor understood is always whiskey. 



24 THE OBItlENS AND 

the old Irish Clans, showering blessings on the 
party, which now together quitted the bog for 
the bawn, were left to enjoy the hope of idleness 
and poteen, the only enjoyments and luxuries 
with which they were acquainted. 

Lord Arranmore, with an arm of either aunt 
drawn through his own, and with ears that 
lent themselves more readily to their questions, 
than his tongue did to the answers they requir- 
ed, proceeded with them to the house, accom- 
panied by Paddy Whack and James Kelly ; the 
former trotting behind, the latter somewhat in 
advance, on his way to announce in the kitchen 
the arrival of the young Lord and Tierna. 
Meantime, inquiries were intermingled with 
sarcasms on the recent life, conversion, and death 
of O'Brien's father ; on the arts and seductions of 
the confraternity at Cong ; on his own situation 
and appearance ; together with references to his 
visit to the Retreat ; hopes of his unaltered at- 
tachment to the church established ; hints at 
their own intentions in his favour ; and an implied 
conviction that he was now come home to " set- 
tle down for life at Bog Moy, which, sooner or 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 25 

later, would be his own ;" the whole com- 
posing a farrago, uttered by the elder, and 
reiterated by her double, the younger Miss Mac 
Taaf, to which it would have been impossible to 
have made reply or observation. None indeed 
was expected : the volubility of the Miss Mac 
Taafs was a sostenuto, uninterrupted by any 
inflexion of tone, or pause of ideas ; and their 
habits of dictation, and their confidence in 
their own infallibility (the natural self-sufficiency 
of persons living out of the world), excluded all 
chance of expressing either a difference or a 
coincidence with their opinions. 

Their nephew, however, was in a temper to 
be amused with every thing, and annoyed by 
nothing: and when Miss Mac Taaf observed, 
in the pompous accent, which Irish provincial 
ladies assume to subdue the peculiar brogue 
of their province, " But choild, I am amazed 
to see you as peel as peeper, and as thin as 
a lauth. Whoy, I expected to see you with 
cheeks as red as roses, and shoulders the full 
of a door," — he replied : 

" Campaigns through half Europe, dear 

vol. xv. c 



26 THE O'BKIENS AND 

aunt, and a typhus in Ireland, with other recent 
and melancholy events, but little favourable to 
the roses of high health, have, indeed, sent me 
back to you something less florid and fleshy, 
than when I was wont to come to Bog Moy, to 
shoot snipes at Christmas, and to fatten on cream 
and honey with poor old Norah-ny-Costello. !,> 

" Well, choild, never moind ; though poor 
Norah is gone, the crame and honey are to the 
fore ; and Til ingage, you won't be long at Bog 
Moy, till you are as stout as big Ben Joyce, and 
as fresh-coloured as the Flaherties of Killery. 
So, I hear, you got pandy at college, for 
getting into a 'ruction, as young Counsellor 
Costello wrote down to the widow. Well, 
sorrow pity you, Murrogh O'Brien; what call 
had you there, you (that had been in great fur- 
reign colleges, and living with kings and em- 
perors abroad, and in the high road to be a 
field-marshal, like your great uncle), to come 
back and make a schoolboy of yourself, instead of 
coming down at once to Bog Moy House, where 
pace and plinty, and the heartiest of welcomes 



the o'flakertys. 27 

awake J you, and every comfort in life ; and heir, 
as it is well known you are, far and near, to 
the toitles and estates belonging thereto, and 
the country round ready to be cap in hand to 
you. And there it stands/' added Miss Mac 
Taaf, passing through a breach made in the 
bawn wall, by the brawny shoulders of the 
herd, who thus gave ingress and egress to the 
cattle, collected as of old, within its protect- 
ing circle — " there it stands, just as you left 
it ; and a troifle will meek it the prettiest pile in 
Connaught, as it is the oldest, except the Abbey 
and Castle of Moycullen. And have it in con- 
templation to take down the rist of the old roof, 
and other great improvements, plaze God ; 
and there ) ou see is the bee (bay) of St. Grellan, 
forenent ye, and the mountains of Connemara to 
your rare." 

Lord Arranmore was much pleased by the 
manner in which his aunts had taken the affair 
of his expulsion ; and cheered by their affection- 
ate reception, he beheld even the dreary and 
dilapidated mansion (to which thev were, with 
such pride and pleasure, conducting him), with 
c2 



28 THE o'briens and 

less disgust, than he would have done, under 
feelings less gracious than those, for which his 
mountain journey, and returning health and 
spirits, had prepared him. Still he was struck 
with the slovenliness, and disorder, and strange 
substitutions, of the bawn and house. An old 
cart stopped up the gateway, to keep out the 
stray cattle and the cottiers; an old hat was 
thrust through the broken pane in the hall-door 
fanlight ; the offices were lying in ruins to the 
left, and to the right, the garden plot, where still 
many a flower grew, encumbered with weeds, 
marked a fatal inattention to that order and ar- 
rangement, which, wherever they exist, are the 
surest signs of civilization and security. The 
ancient seat of one of the oldest protectant families 
in the county, was indeed stamped with all those 
tokens of thriftlessness and neglect, which preju- 
dice falsely, invidiously, and exclusively assigns 
to the catholic population of Ireland. 

Lord Arranmore remembered the respect and 
admiration he had formerly felt for Bog Moy 
House, and was surprised to find how much it 
had shrunk in dimensions and grandeur, in an 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 29 

imagination schooled by the experience of "other 
and better worlds." Yet. minor and trivial di- 
lapidations excepted, nothing was changed in the 
interval of his absence. The fallen roof, which 
had caused the wing it had once covered to be 
shut up, had been overthrown forty years before. 
The beam which propped a tottering gable, was 
nearly as frail and decayed, as the ruin it up- 
held ; and many a glassless window was still 
stopped, as in times of yore, with such materials 
as chance, " high arbiter," had brought to hand 
ill the hour of need. The parts of the build- 
ing, however, which were habitable, were capa- 
ble of accommodating many guests ; the purpose 
for which in the estimation of its truly hos- 
pitable and Irish owners, an house alone was 
built ; and the Miss Mac Taafs, contented that 
this was the case, did not give an immediate 
or definite date to the improvements and resto- 
rations, which ever and anon floated " in their 
contemplation," as they had done in that of their 
uncle, the Brigadier, before them, for nearly 
half a century. 

At the approach of the party, the whole 



30 THE O'BRIENS AND 

domestic establishment turned out to welcome 
their future lord ; and from Granie-ny-Joyce, 
(the second in rank and command to the dames 
suzeraines themselves), down to " the ould 
woman," who for twenty years had occupied a 
stool near the bocaen or chimney corner, nobody 
knew why — (the girleen baun, the boccah, and 
the boy about the place included) — all were 
assembled at the hall door. The only person 
" reported missing," was James Kelly, who 
answered for his immediate appearance from 
the pantry, by replying to Miss Mac Taafs 
shrill cry of " Where are ye, James Kelly, and 
what are you about, man?" by exclaiming, 
" Arn't I drawing on my state small-clothes, 
Miss Mac Taaf, in honour of his lordship ?" 

H Jeemes Kelly's niver in the way, when most 
wanted," said Miss Monica, as they entered the 
parlour. 

" Why, then, that's more than can be said of 
your pet, Monica Mac Taaf," replied her sister, 
giving Paddy a kick, as he ran under her legs, 
" he's always in the way, like the parish church, 
wanted or not. And now, choild," she added, 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 31 

addressing her nephew with cordiality, " you 
are welcome to Bog Moy ; and long may you 
live to enjoy it," and she imprinted an audible 
kiss on either side of his face, after the French 
and old Irish fashion. Miss Monica reiterated 
the salutation, and Granie-ny-Joyce, the girlecn 
baun, and the u old woman, 11 who stood foremost 
of the group, near the parlour-door, seemed well 
inclined to follow the example. They were, 
however, dismissed in Irish, by Miss Mac Taaf, 
who seating herself on an old, ricketty, upright, 
straw bottomed settee, and placing her kinsman 
beside her, threw her eyes over his person with 
a scrutinizing glance. 

" Well, Monica Mac Taaf, 1 ' she observed to 
her sister, who had taken the place on the other 
side, " would ye ever have known this fine 
comhlindrah* of a fellow here, to be the stalking 
Voragahf that went off mitching twelve years 
ago, the Lord knows where." 

Why, then, never would, 11 said Miss 






• A handsome foppish feilow. 

f Stuc na Vongah, " the stake in the market place^ 
applied to any tall, ungainly person. 



32 the o'briems and 

Monica, taking snuff, " only for the Mac Taaf 
nose, and his being the very moral of Sir 
Columb over the chimney, and ever was from a 
baby up, and liker now than ever." 

O'Brien raised his eye to Sir Columb, whose 
grim visage and lank figure in armour was so 
humourously frightful, that he rose to conceal 
the too ready smile it was impossible to sup- 
press. Although the picture, like the rest of the 
furniture, was an old acquaintance, yet, as if it 
were a novelty, he now read aloud the inscrip- 
tion printed beneath : — 

" This is the true pourtrayture of the coragious 
Colonell Sir Columb Mac Taaf, Knight, who 
routed Colonell Ingoldesby in his own diffence 
in the pass between Cong and Headfort, and 
was afterwards knighted for said service by his 
excellencie the Duke of Tyrconnell. Sold by 
Patrick Smith, at y e Cross and Bible, Back- 
lane, 1652." 

" Niver moind that now, choild," said Miss 
Mac Taaf, dictatorially, " but come and sit 
down here. You have seen that picture a mil- 
lion of times : you will find nothing changed 



the o'flaiiertys. 33 

here, thank God, since ye went. There is the 
voyadore you used to play Jack Straws on, 
and the sideboard, and the ancient ould buffet. 
And there is vour great uncle Flavius's silver 
tankard, and the first cheney tay-pot ever used 
in the county Gal way ; and you see th' oula 
Persia carpet houlding to the fore ; and hopes 
them will come after us will do the place as 
much justice as we have done." 

" Ay," said Miss Monica, " I hope so too. 
It would be a great heart-break to see an iota 
changed in it." 

" But Murrogh, dear," continued Miss Mae 
Taaf, " (for its Murrogh we'll call you in pri- 
vate, after the ould fashion, and keep my lord 
for company), what sort of an head is that 
ye have got, without a dust of powder, or a taste 
of toupee? Why, boy, it's just the same curly 
caen dub that ye went away with." 

" I hope you will find both heart and head 
as little changed as your own Bug Mo\y' said 
O'Brien, smiling. 

" Oh, 1 11 ingage the heart's in the right 
place, choild;' but for the head, Murrogh 
c 3 



34 THE O'BRIENS AND 

O'Brien, I'd be better plased to see it more in 
the mode, craped, and powdered, and buckled, 
with a fashionable club, like young Counsellor 
Costello's, and not like Jemmy Skirret's water 
dog." 

" But, my dear aunt, I assure you it is in 
the very extreme of the fashion, — of the Paris 
fashion, at least, — where creping and powdering 
are now as much out of date, as the long love- 
locks of my brave ancestor, Sir Columb, there. 1 '' 

(i Why, what sort of a cauthah* is it at 
all ?" said Miss Mac Taaf, running her fingers 
through the luxuriant tresses of his hair. 

" It is called the Brutus head," he replied, 
with some annoyance, and drawing back. 

" Brutish enough !" interrupted Miss Mac 
Taaf, with a stately laugh, which was taken up 
by Miss Monica ; " and would not take the 
half of what I'm worth, to shew you with that 
head in the cathedral church of St. Grellan, 
when the eyes of the whole congregation and 
the bishop's pew will be on you. Monica Mac 

* The matted hair of the ancient Irish. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 35 

Taaf, moind me to sind in the boy about the 
place for Gill Duff-na-Kiruwan in the morning 
to dress his hair like a christian, and bring out 
an assortment of cues, till his own grows natu- 
rally. You remember Gill Duff-na-Kiruwan, 
I'll ingage, Murrogh, ' system, tete, and perriwig 
maker,' in the High-street; and has the good 
blood in his veins for all that, and might claim 
kin to the Castle-Kiruwans this day, high as 
they hould themselves. And I declare to good- 
ness, Monica Mac Taaf, the creature ha'n t a 
rag of weepers to his cuffs, and he in father's 
mourning. Well, if your poor foolish mother 
was living, or if it was with ourselves ye had 
been left, it isn't in this neglected state you 
would have return'd to us. But never moind, 
choild ; we'll tack you on something, and smarten 
ye up, agen the Jug Day : for we have it in con- 
timplation to ask the county round, in regard 
of the tapping of the pipe of claret sent over 
to us by our cousins, French and Co., of Bour- 
deaux ; and only waited for your coming home ; 
and we'll get you, when you are rested a taste, 
to write cards of compliments for same. What's 



*<3b THE BRIENS AND 

gone with th' ould pack, Monica, that stood in 
the buffet ?" 

" Why, shure Jeemes Kelly carried them off 
to the kitchen before they were half done with, 
sister Mable, though I told him ye wanted them. 
But who dare gainsay Jeemes Kelly ?" 

« Why then, I'll shurely part with Jeemes 
Kelly when he laste thinks of it," said Miss 
Mac Taaf, whose partiality to her sense-keeper 
could not stand the loss of a pack of cards, 
which had not been more than three years on 
service ; and which were destined to contain the 
compliments and invitations of the Jug Day. 

" It's what he's getting the head of you 
intirely,"" said Miss Monica, " and thinks the 
place is his own, as much as the Brigadier ever 
did ; and small blame to him, since it's yourself 
will let nobody cross him, and he disguised 
from morning till night. I would have him up 
before the altar, the first day Father Festus 
holds a station, and book-swear him too for a 
year and a day, against sup or drop. I'll 
ingage I'd make a good servant of you yet, 
Jemmy Kelly, if it's to me ye were left."" 



the o'flahertys. 37 

" Well, there he is, 11 said her sister, angrily, 
" take him to yourself, Monica Mac Taaf, 
and do your worst with him ; but as for turning 
out the cratur on the wide world, like a mangy 
hound, after twenty years' service, it's what I 
won't do, Monica Mac Taaf ; and, indeed, has 
long had it in contimplation to make him own 
man and body servant to Murrogh, which would 
put him out of the way of temptation ; for it's 
coshering and gostering with the tinants that 
lades him astray. And ye must have a man in 
livery to ride after ye, Murrogh ; for you must 
go and make your obeisance to th 1 ould fami- 
lies ; and, same time, Jeemes Kelly can drop 
cards for the Jug Day, and the sooner the better. 
For though you are a lord, we can't be sending 
out old Donagh-ni-Crone, the town-crier, to 
insense the people of your return, with a 4 uaisht ! 
uaisht V But you must mount your aunt 
Monica's filly, and ride first to the Lynches of 
Cloghballymore." 

" And to the Burkes of Derry-na-Cioghna," 
said Miss Monica, rubbing up her recollection, 
as she rubbed her high forehead. 



38 

" And the Darcys of Kiltalla," said Miss Mac 
Taaf. 

" And the OTlaherties of Tallikihan," said 
her sister. 

" And the Gno-beg O 1 Flaherty-more," added 
Miss Mac Taaf. 

" And the Skirrets of Claer-yn-dowl and 
Bally-duff, and the Joyces of Joyce's country," 
continued Miss Monica. 

" And the Drumshambos, and the Dangans, 
and the Marble Hills, and a mitte* others," said 
her sister. 

" For though," said Miss Mac Taaf, " we 
don't want to send you out to make cuttings on 
the county, like a Cromwellian scout-master, 
nor to make an house haunter, nor a wanderer, 
nor a wagger about streets and townlands, of 
you, like the young squirantry of the new 
comers, yet it is right ye should make yourself 
known to the ancient ould families, in and about 
county Gal way, Mayo, and Clare, where you 
will meet with the greatest of respect, in regard 

* A thousand. 



THE oVLAHERTYS. 39 

of the Mac Taafs. And as to the O'Briens, I lave 
that to spake for itself; for being a lord and a 
nobleman, as you surely are, in right of your 
father, though if it was not for us, Terry 
O'Brien, and ours, and the Brigadier's coffer, 
and the great recourse ye had to us and it, and 
a black day it was, abducting and seducing that 
poor omadaun of a cratur, Bridget Mac Taaf, 
for which if ye did not rot in Gal way jail, it's us 
ye had to thank for it ; for it's laid down in the 
statutes, ' that if any person or persons, by 
fraud, flattery, fear, or false promises'' — But 
far be it from us, choild, to make you suffer 
for the sins of your parents ; so come, now, and 
we'll shew you the ways of the p-lace, and you 
shall chose your own bed in the barrack-room, 
out of six, for life, as I may say; only must be 
con tint with a shake down in the Brigadier's 
tower, on the Jug Day, maning to put the four 
young Blakes, two Bells, and three Bodkins, in 
Bachelor's hall, as we call the barrack : and as 
to the six young OTlaherties, its little bed 
they'll trouble that night." The Misses Mac 
Taaf then rose, and sailing on majestically 



40 THE O'BRIF.NS AXD 

before their wearied and silent nephew, shewed 
off the lions of Bog Moy, with as much osten- 
tatious pride in its fusty rooms, mouldering 
furniture, its make-shifts and substitutions, as 
the rural Conte of Romagna exhibits his "apar- 
timenti noibili" to wondering travellers ; and 
then retreats to his own slovenly attic to share 
with his domestic, the buona niano which forms 
so considerable an item in his revenue. 

Those who have basked in the sunshine of 
an Irish welcome, can alone tell how intoxicat- 
ing is its cordiality ; and how many sins against 
taste, manners, and even against the indepen- 
dence of its object, it redeems. Lord Arran- 
more, with all the fear before his eyes of Gill 
Duff-na-Kiru waiVs creping irons, powder-puff, 
and scented pomatum, and his horror of the bed 
in the barrack-room, and the weepers to be tacked 
to his cuffs, with no faint forebodings of the dia- 
tribes to be dinned in his ears against his father's 
abduction of his mother, and the endless visita- 
tions to be made in Gal way, Clare, and Mayo, 
was still more amused than annoyed, during 
the first hours after his arrival, by manners and 



the o'flaitehtys. 41 

habits, a phraseology and accent, which seemed 
wholly to have changed their character, since he 
had last visited Bog Moy. His aunts, on their 
part, like all persons dwelling in solitude, to 
whom the least important event affords a sen- 
sation, were charmed to the extremest ex- 
citement by his arrival ; and before the " boy 
about the place" followed the party to the Bri- 
gadier's tower, to announce that " dinner was 
dishing," Lord Arranmore, with a Jesuitism wor- 
thy of the school from which he had just issued, had 
subverted many of the rules, and repealed many 
of the laws, which threatened to intrench upon 
his personal independence, or habitual comforts. 
Point after point was gradually abandoned (for 
the time being, at least,) to the insinuating 
earnestness, which in begging a respite, ob- 
tained a reprieve ; and Miss Mac Taaf, unable to 
resist manners, to which she was so wholly un- 
accustomed, and softened by a pleasurable 
excitement she so rarely experienced, yielded 
without being conscious of her submission, to 
the suggestions of her nephew, or mistook them 
for her own — 

" E reudea ad ascoltar dolce concento." 



42 the o'briens and 

This was indeed the sole, glorious, golden 
opportunity, which might ever occur for chang- 
ing her k high resolves : for to the newly arrived 
guest and restored friend, the Irish affections 
refuse nothing. 

It was therefore agreed upon, that Lord 
Arranmore, to assert the privileges of his "or- 
der," should await the visits of the neighbour- 
hood, before he paid any ; that during "the dry 
saison," he should occupy the only habitable 
room in the Brigadier's tower (his foreign 
habits and campaigning life, as he observed > 
rendering an airy situation preferable to a 
close room, even with the agrement of six 
well-tenanted beds) ; that the creping irons of 
Gill Duff-na-Kiruwan should not be called into 
service, until his aunts gave the Brutus a trial, 
and had endeavoured to reconcile themselves 
to its simplicity : and lastly, an assurance that 
weepers were no longer worn at Court being 
solemnly pledged, the bill to reform his toilette 
was " ordered to be read that day six 
months." 

" And now," said Miss Mac Taaf, as she 



THE o'flahertys. 43 

stood in the embrasure of the loop-hole of the 
Brigadier's tower," I hope you areplased,choiid, 
for ye see ye have your own way in every thing. 
Every man to his taste, as Pat Foley said, when 
he kissed his cow : but how any living christian 
can prefer this lonely, ould gazebo here, away from 
every sowl, to the barrack-room, where there is 
always a chance of somebody dropping in, it's 
what I can't concaive. However, we'll have the 
place readied up any how to-morrow for yo — 
and the swallow's nests swept out of the chim- 
ney, and the Brigadier's press-bed shaken well 
out, and a rattling turf fire kindled, to give it a 
sprightly look, and teebles and cheers put into 
the pleace. Then there's the Brigadier's fusil, 
and a map of the town lands, so you won't want 
amusement : and to be shure, a finer view none 
need desire than lies round ye, with the best 
bit of red bog in the country under your nose, 
and forenent you the mountains of Connemara, 
and the bee (bay) in your rare (rear). And look, 
choild, as far as you can see to the lift, that's 
the gleamings of Lough Corrib ; and under the 
shelter of that mountain, which stands out bolt 



44 THE O'BRIENS AND 

upright, ye may see th" ould woods, and new 
- plantations of Beauregard, as them upstarts of 
Knocklofties call it, instead of the fine ould 
name of Clogh-na-Corrig, which — but Chroist 
Jasus, choild, what is it ails ye ? Why, ye are as 
red as a turkey cock, and now again as peel as 
peeper." 

"• 1^ am perfectly well, aunt, only a little 
subject to flush, since my last illness," said 
Lord Arranmore; and he added carelessly, "Is 
the Knocklofty family in the country ?'' 

" Not that I heared tell," replied Miss Mae 
Taaf. "And now, Murrogh O'Brien, Lord 
Arranmore, once for all, and not to trouble you 
any more on the subject, there is one earnest 
request I have to make to you, and that is, that 
I lay my solemn command and injunction on 
you, as you value my feevour and regards, 
not to have any call or communication with any 
of the upstarts, patentees, or new comers of 
the pleece; among whom I reckon above all, 
the Hunks' family, and thim Knocklofties, who 
wasn't in existence two hundred years back, 
though they now look down upon th' ancient 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 4*5 

ould residenters, and cut their jukes upon the 
1 neetives,' as that new Lady Knocklofty, and her 
friend Lady Honora, call'd us all, last summer, 
and that turn-coat, their poor cousin and follower, 
Miss Kitty Maguire, that sowl'd her religion 
for a mess of pottage, and had the impudence to 
draw a pourtraiture of your aunt Monica and 
self, as the Leedies of Cashlanne-na-Hal'iah^ who 
scolded themselves to death, as the story goes. 

* The story goes, that two old ladies of the family of the 
OTlahertys becoming heiresses to the castle in question, 
took possession of the towers which are still standing on 
Lough Corrib; but not being able to adjust the partition of 
the property, an endless cause of quarrel arose. One of these 
ladies was nearly blind, and the other sadly afflicted with 
the asthma. Day after day they scolded at each other, 
from the rising of the sun till the going down of the same ; 
until the asthmatic lady, as might be expected, found her- 
self breathless, and on the point of yielding the last word. 
Taking advantage, however, of her sister's infirmity of 
vision, she dressed up a figure in her own clctaes, and 
placing it in her tower window, retreated to her boat, to 
recruit her forces in the cool air of Lough Corrib. The 
myopic lady, meantime, perceiving the window occupied, 
continued her diapason of invective, and receiving no 
answer, was only more irritated and inflamed by the im- 
plied contempt. The conclusion was inevitable. Death 



46 THE o'uitlENS AND 

But if ould Dennis Daly dies (and he's not 
expected, I hear), they'll be running down to the 
country, and be wanting to put their comluaider 
on Bog Moy, as they did afore. But vote or 
voice they'll not get from us or ours ; for we'll 
support th 1 ould blood of the county against 
all the Cromwellians and Williamites in the 
land, and call upon and expect you to do like- 
wise, Lord Arranmore ; and will engage that if 
you put yourself at the head of the Bog Moys 
and Ballyslatterys, and joins Martin's Conne- 
maras and Daly's Dunsandals, yez will keep 
the county in your own hands, and sit, plaze 
God, for St. Grellan in the parliament yet." 

With this prophecy, echoed by Miss Monica's 
" I'll ingage, troth, will ye,"' the ladies of 
Bog Moy descended the broken steps of the 
Brigadier's tower ; continuing to amuse their 
nephew with various details of the insolent airs 
of the party of Beauregard, on the occasion of 



alone could put an end »o «uch an unequal combat ; and 
the lady of Cusbianne-Oft-Haliah, was found, one fine 
morning, lifeless in her •' bower window." 



THE OFLAHEKTYS. 47 

their last visit to the country : and ended, as 
they entered the dining-room, with the expressed 
hope that it would be long before they paid 
another — a prayer in which Lord Arranmore 
most devoutly joined. 



48 the o'brieks AND 



CHAPTER II. 



THE JUG DAY. 



Our country's luuour roofed. 



SnAKSPr.AR K . 



The flanking turret of the bawn of Bog Moy, 
distinguished as the Brigadier's tower, had ob- 
tained that name in consequence of the siege 
which the Brigadier Flavins Mac Taaf had 
maintained against a host of creditors : and the 
Brigadier might have long retained possession of 
a place, within whose precincts the " king's writ 
could not run," had he not been compelled to 
surrender, on the summons of an apoplexy. 
Since his death the fortress had remained unoc- 
cupied, except by an old overseer, whose recent 
demise had again left it untenanted. Though 
abandoned to neglect, its massive walls (eight 
feet in thickness), had preserved it dry : and 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 49 

when the swallows' nests were destroyed, " the 
place readied up,'' and a few of such articles of 
furniture conveyed to it, as might be spared from 
the not very abundant garde-meuble of Bog 
Moy House : and when a huge turf fire blazed 
on its spacious ungrated hearth (necessary even 
in July), it was, if not comfortable, habitable. 
Beneath its roof, its new tenant might at least 
hope for that silence and solitude which would 
stand in the place of other enjoyments, and to 
pursue his studies uninterrupted by the dictation 
of his aunts, the endless gossip of the widow, 
Miss Costello, and father Festus, or by the 
probable descent of the Os and Macs, tribes 
and half tribes, who from the boasts of the 
Misses Mac Taaf, he concluded would drop 
in, in their passage from the interior to St. Grel- 
lan, with the good intent of bestowing all their 
tediousness upon the inmates of the mansion. 

In such a tower, in such a spot, sur- 
rounded by bogs and morasses, the most elegant 
dramatic writer of his day produced one of the 
most charming and classical comedies in the 

VOL. IV. d 



50 THE O'BRIENS AND 

English language.* Whatever gives concen- 
tration to genius, and excludes the distraction 
of external objects } is favourable to its labours. 
Some few writers, indeed, have thrown off* 
their happiest productions amidst the bustle of 
business, or the excitements of pleasure, — as the 
deaf are said to hear best during the rolling of a 
drum. But though Shakspeare may have written 
amidst the distraction of the green room, and 
Farquhar composed in the confusion of a country 
inn, still the activity of the senses is, generally 
speaking, but little compatible with energy of 
intellect. 

Rude as was this ruinous retreat, still here he 
had hoped to woo and win back that mood of 
mind which the unmeaning common-places and 
illiterate garrulity of the inmatesof Bog Moyhad 
effectually put to flight. But the woods of Beau- 
regard, too, seenfaintly, as they were, in the 
remote distance, kept up a feverish recollection of 
scenes and persons, which assumed a brighter 

* Cumberland wrote his "West Indian" in an old turret 
in his father's episcopal residtnce in Ireland. See his 
Memoirs. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 51 

and more attractive aspect, from their contrast 
with his present isolated and coarse mode of 
existence. The intellectual intercourse of the 
Historical Society ; the military festivities of the 
Dublin Volunteers; his adventures at the castle, 
and at Knocklofty House, the Sybil mask, too, 
all arose in rapid association ; but he endeavoured 
to forget all, 

" E'en as a flattering dream of worthless fancy :'* 

to think, as thought might be most pro- 
fitable to himself and others, and to pour the 
whole force of his mind upon such subjects of 
literary and national interest, as might serve 
the great cause to which he had devoted 
himself from sentiment, before principle had 
suggested its adoption as a duty. 

A few days residence at Bog Moy, however, 
convinced him, that there, he could not long 
remain ; that a dependence the most insupport- 
able must be the inevitable purchase of a resi- 
dence, in no instance attractive — a dependence, 
whose irksomeness could not long be relieved by 
the laughable absurdities, which at first had 
turned disgust into amusement. Perpetually 
i) 2 



iV**^ 



LIB- 



52 THE O'BRIENS AND 

urged to be useful, though rarely permitted to 
be so — condemned to listless inactivity, yet 
denied the repose of leisure: exciting jealousy 
by his interference, and resentment by his 
neglect ; he lived under the perpetual infliction 
of the vigilance and dictation of both his 
aunts. Even this childish subjection, to which 
they sought to reduce him, was scarcely more 
annoying, than the penalty imposed on his 
patience and taste, by the dull, monotonous 
details of their endless commerage. With views 
as narrow, as their sphere of action, and with 
a sharpness of temperament, concentrated in 
their own little interests, their eternal expres- 
sion of their petty grievances and fancied 
injuries was humorously contrasted with the 
remote obscurity of their lives and position. 
Impressed with the highest sense of their own 
consequence, full of contempt for all that was 
not of their own caste, class, and sphere, they 
were yet jealous at the fancied neglect, even of 
those on whom they looked down; and, per- 
petually at variance with each other, they were 
only united in an endless endeavour to repel 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 53 

fancied aggression, and mutually to support 
their own very questionable personal importance. 
Such as they were, the Ban Tiernas, or fair 
chieftains of Bog Moy, were strong, but not 
rare illustrations of the fallacy of those theories, 
which give to the world every vice, and to 
solitude every virtue. 

If retirement encourages those formal pecu- 
liarities which are at variance with the minor 
moralities of social intercourse, it is no less 
hostile to the development of regulated bene- 
volence ; which alone springs from an enlarged 
and practical philanthropy. In solitude the 
heart narrows, the feelings of personality 
acquire preponderance ; and self, magnified by 
the remoteness of other objects of comparison 
or affection, becomes the exclusive principle of 
existence. 

All these foibles of temper, temperament, 
and position, came out daily, and momentarily 
in the Miss Mac Taafs, after the flush of their 
first pleasurable excitement, occasioned by their 
nephew's arrival, had subsided. Isolated by 
their topographical situation (for Bog Moy when 
the tide was out, was only accessible by a bridle 



54 THE o'briens and 

way), their only habitual visitants were the widow 
and Miss Costello, and their director ; the two 
former repaying the hospitality of their compa- 
ratively wealthy friends, by feeding their peccant 
humours with the local scandal of St. Grellan ; 
and the latter (as far removed from the culti- 
vation and refinement of his predecessor, the 
Abbe O'Flahertv, as from the bigotry and 
zeal of the Abbate O'Brien), was neither of 
an age, nor of habits to render his society more 
than endurable, to one who had all the fastidious 
intolerance of youth, which time and experience 
eventually breaks down to universal indulgence. 
With the numerous cousins, friends and followers, 
" kith, kin, and relations" of whom Miss MacTaaf 
taid spoken, he perceived they held but little com- 
munication. The distance of their residences 
was considerable; the ways impassable; and the 
habits of his aunts home-bred and indolent. 
Nothing therefore less than some great family 
festival, like the Jug Day, sufficed to draw 
together the representatives of the ancient chiefs 
of Connemara, and lar Connaught, from their 
nooksin the mountains, or their courcs and castles 
w on the other side of Gal way town."" 



the o'flahertys. 55 

By the great protestant authorities, the 
Hunkses, the Proudforts, and their dependants, 
the Miss Mac Taafs were looked upon, like 
other very old protestant families, as half papists 
and whole Jacobites (a race in those remote 
regions, even then not quite extinct) ; their old 
fashion, manners, and habits, and above all, 
their having neither carriage nor horses, w T ere 
likewise impediments to a social intercourse in 
that quarter : though it was always " in their 
contemplation" to remedy the last objection, 
when they could a ready up the family coach," 1 
which mouldered under a shed in the bawn ; 
and when James Kelly could get time to look 
after the two long tailed greys, " the only bastes 
with which they could drive into St. Grellan 
town, after the Mac Taaf fashion, as introduced 
by Lady Betty Burke/' 

Lord Arranmore thus living in utter isolation, 
without either the enjoyments of solitude or the 
distractions of society, had no opportunity for 
sounding the political feelings of the country ; 
and he looked forward to the Jug Day, no less 
as an occasion for acquiring information for the 
society of the Union in Dublin, than as a relief 



56 

from the tedious sameness of his present 
existence. Meantime letters from Lord Walter 
cheered him, by accounts of the success of his 
pamphlet ; a success, however, which threatened 
to draw down on its author the vengeance of 
the party against which it was directed. 

The last of the old pack of cards had now 
been sent out by u Paddy the post," and distri- 
buted through the country ; and Lord Arran- 
more counted upon a general gathering of the 
clans: but where the numerous guests were 
to be stowed (even with the aid of the priest's 
house, which the Miss Mac Taafs had put into 
requisition), he had not the least idea. 

In about three weeks after the arrival of the 
future lord of Bog Moy, the long expected, long 
contemplated Jug Day arrived. But no vulgar 
bustle, no flutter of hope or fear, no vague ap- 
prehension of who would, or would not accept 
the invitation, disturbed the habitual stateliness 
of the; Miss Mac Taafs. Nothing of that 
horrible anxiety which clouds the gaieties of 
the demi-ton of more refined society, Jest the 
great should stay away, and the little come. 



the o'flaheetys. 57 

ruffled their equanimity. Each lady, sailing 
about with her hands dropped into the depths 
of her capacious pockets, gave orders for certain 
" cuttings and cosherings" on the county, which 
were always exacted upon such occasions. 
Tributary poultry, and tributary fish, came 
teeming in from tenants on sea and land, in kreels 
and kishes, with guizzard-trout from Lough 
Corrib, butchers'' meat from St. Grellan, and 
whiskey from every still in the Barony. Linen 
was drawn forth from chests and coffers, which, 
for colour and antiquity, resembled the " linge 
du Sorbonne^ quoted by Menage : and moulds 
were prepared by the indefatigable Grannie-ny- 
Joyce, which might have come within the 
meaning of the bye-laws of the town, directed 
against " candelles which give ne light ne sight.'' 
Cadgers came crowding to the back way, and 
beggars to the bawn. Pipers and harpers 
assembled from all parts : and the pipe of claret, 
in honour of which the feast was given, and 
which occupied the with-drawing-room, that 
had long served the purposes of a cellar, was 
crowned with green branches, and raised on a 
d 3 



.5S THE O'BRIEN'S AND 

lofty bier within view of the guests : the silver 
tankard of the Brigadier was placed beside it. 

As "the Jug Day" intimated an invitation of 
twenty-four hours, at least, no particular time 
was fixed upon for the dinner : and the guests, 
well aware that they could not come too early 
nor remain too late, poured in, as their own 
convenience, distance of residence, or previous 
occupations dictated. Two stately old coaches 
and four, with a chaise-marine and chariot, 
came by the coast-road, the " tide being out ;" 
guests from the coast, dependant on high water, 
sailed at an earlier hour into the creek of Bog 
Moy, from the seats on Killery Bay, and the 
headlands of Achille. The greater number, male 
and female, rode single or double over moor 
and mountain, " the bog being dry," — an event 
on which much of the hospitable intercourse 
of the Barony depended, and which was fre- 
quently announced in the invitation, to insure its 
acceptance. 

It was in vain that the ladies of the feast 
endeavoured to press their refractory, and now 
most unpopular nephew, into the service of the 



the o'flaheetys. 59 

day ; that a spigot was conveyed to his keeping 
for tapping the pipe, and filling the " first jug ;" 
that he was ordered to help Father Festus in 
making and mixing the punch (an operation 
performed with a certain hocus-pocus air, pecu- 
liar to the genuine parish priest of the second 
or third class) ; it was in vain that he was 
requested to have "an eye about the place;" 
and see that when the stables were full, the 
bastes should be turned into the paddock, and 
plenty of hay thrown down for them. With 
" an eye" only to his own sense of personal 
dignity, he had made a sudden retreat from 
spigot and tankard, from pipe and punch ; and 
having passed the early part of the day among 
the rocks of the sea shore, with Poly bi us in his 
hand, and a dreadful anticipation of the bore of 
the coming evening in his head, he returned 
only in time to dress for dinner. Bolted in his 
tower by the very bar which had excluded the 
Brigadier's invading creditors, he beheld from 
his loop-hole, the gradual coming in of the 
" mere Irish," as they descended from brake 
or hill on saddle or pillion, or were jolted along 



60 THE O^BRIENS AND 

the rutted road to the bawn, on low-backed cars,* 
or carriages. The women, who came on horse- 
back, he observed were nearly all cloathed 
in the same singular costume ; viz., enormous 
full-plaited cloth skirts, capotes, and calashes : 
and neither valise nor saddle-bag gave note of 
preparation for a more splendid or elegant 
toilette. 

Meantime, the boy about the place, the gir- 
leen bami, and as many other boys and girls as 
the exigencies of the day had pressed into the 
vatetaille of Bog Moy, had been sent to seek 
out him, in whose honour the feast was princi- 
pally given. Unable therefore to defer any 
longer his appearance, Lord Arranmore sallied 
forth to encounter annoyances, in part made 
up of his own fastidiousness, and of that over- 

• A low-backed car is the common vehicle used for 
the purposes of husbandry. It has no springs, and moves 
on wheels made of solid pieces of wood. Upon such occa- 
sions as the present, a feather bed and counterpane were 
formerly spread over the car, for the double purpose of state 
and ease ; and the author has seen as much beauty, and 
almost as much diamonds, thus transported to the seat of 
rural festivity, as she ever beheld gracing the dinners of 
the British metropolis. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 61 

refinement of taste, which youth so often affects, 
even to itself. 

As the fallen roof of " th 1 ould with-drawing- 
room" had not been restored, — as the floor of 
the new with-drawing-room (now the cellar), 
had never been laid down, —as the dining-room 
was strictly appropriated on the Jug Day to its 
proper purpose, and was scaffolded round with 
tables somewhat precariously, but rather pic- 
turesquely placed, in what Miss Mac Taaf 
called " horse-shoe fashion," — the best bed- 
room, which opened into the dining-room, was 
constituted a salon de reception for the time 
being,— an expedient often resorted to in 
the remote parts of Ireland, in days not very 
long gone by. As this room, which was 
literally on a ground-floor, was rarely inhabited, 
its damp and fusty atmosphere required a fire 
to render it endurable, even in summer : and 
the swallows of Bog Moy, not contented with 
the chimnies of the Brigadier's tower, had made 
so considerable a lodgment in that of the room 
in question, that more smoke was sent back 
than emitted through its channel. 

When, therefore, Lord Arranmore opened 



62 THE O'BRIENS AND 

the door, on making his first appearance, a 
sudden gush of smoke rushed down into the 
chamber, and scattered the ashes in such dark 
thick clouds, that he could see nothing dis- 
tinctly, but that the room was crowded to suffo- 
cation. 

" Weary on the smoke," said Miss Mac 
Taaf, making a motion with one hand to waft 
aside its vapours, and holding out the other to 
her nephew to lead him forward, and present 
him in form to the company. While struggling 
with her temper, she muttered in his ear, " This 
is pretty behaviour, Murrogh CTBrien ; — and 
the party made on purpose to introduce you to 
the ould families. Well, never mind now, but 
Jbghal Jolt, as your father used to say.*' 1 Then 
stepping forward majestically, she presented 
" her nephew, Lord Arranmore," separately to 
each guest, male and female, to the third and 
fourth generation ; evidently vain of the high- 
sounding title and splendid personal appearance 
of the young relation, for whom she was reserv- 
ing such a lecture, as she conceived his depend- 
ence, and her own authority over him, entitled 
her to pronounce. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 63 

One " dissonant consonant " name followed 
another, with genealogical illustrations as un- 
pronounceable as those of the Hebrews ; 
and cousinships, twenty times removed, were 
claimed and acknowledged, till Lord Arran- 
more (wearied and annoyed beyond all measure, 
at the awkwardness and formality of the cere- 
mony, which seemed to have no end), took 
refuge behind one of the massive head columns 
of Ci the best bed," upon which several ladies 
were seated, chatting and laughing with the 
most perfect ease and frankness, neither si- 
lenced nor interrupted by the approach of the 
noble stranger. Every seat in the room, 
indeed, was occupied by the female guests, 
while the men stood in groups in the centre and 
near the door, with all the propriety of separation 
observed in a cathedral. All, however, talked 
gaily and unreservedly : no rustic bashfulness, 
none of the awkward reserve and vulgar timi- 
dity usually observable in provincial society, 
embarrassed the conversation. Sheep and jus- 
tices, grand juries and road-jobbings, the usual 
conversational resources of country gentlemen, 
were indeed amply discussed ; but good stories, 



64 



THE OBKIENS AND 



and bon-mots, and sallies of humour, were plen- 
tifully poured forth to enliven the mere details of 
country and local topics. 

As the smoke passed off, and the atmosphere 
cleared up, Lord Arranmore observed with sur- 
prize that there was present, not only more 
personal beauty than he had ever seen assem- 
bled in so limited a circle, but that even a con- 
siderable elegance and sumptuousness of dress 
distinguished the female part of the company. 
The slough of over-all cloth petticoats and 
capots having been cast off in the hall, a display 
of French silks, and point lace, of fashions from 
Bourdeaux, and flowers from Oporto, was exhi- 
bited, which might have put the petites mattresses 
of the capital to the blush ; and which proved 
that the intercourse kept up between the Con- 
naught gentry and their exiled kindred and 
commercial correspondents on the continent was 
even still in considerable activity. He was struck, 
too, by the general animation and eveille look of 
all: every eye beamed life; every countenance 
was full of intelligence : and though the brogue 
of many was sufficiently obvious, and the 
prettiest lips made weavers rhyme to savours, 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 65 

meat toj'ate, and mean to gam (as Swift did, 
long after he had associated with the Harleys 
and the Bolingbrokes), yet to voices as soft 
as the smiles that accompanied them, much 
might be forgiven on the score of mere pronun- 
ciation. 

" Do you wish to sit down ?" asked a lady, 
(herself seated on the bed, in the shade of its 
moth-eaten damask curtain), and she made a 
movement which seconded the invitation. 

Lord Arranmore felt no very decided inclina- 
tion to accept the proffered seat. The person 
who made the offer did not appear particularly 
attractive ; partaking of none of the advan- 
tages of the toilette, which enhanced the charms 
of many of the younger members of the society. 
She was dressed soberly and dowdily, in a g r ey 
camlet habit, with a head-dress then worn in 
Ireland, called a bonne grace^ a sort of deep 
and simple bonnet, affected alike by the religious 
ladies and those of the better order of peasantry. 
To judge by a small gold cross, pendant from her 
bosom, she was evidently one of those lay nuns, 
whom the dissolution of convents, incidental to 



66 



THE O'BRIENS AND 



the French revolution, had driven home from 
the continent, to their friends in Ireland ; or 
perhaps a chanoinesse of some of those foreign 
orders, to which such Irish catholic ladies as 
can claim admission by quarterings since the 
flood, are occasionally elected. 

Dreading to encounter another devout Miss 
Costello, in the lady thus habited en precieuse* 
Lord Arranmore hesitated, to accept the prof- 
fered place, and bowed coldly. - 

" Ob, no ceremony," she added carelessly, 
" there is room enough ; and you may have 
some time to wait for dinner. In Connaught, as 
in France, ' les princesses^ (as Mademoiselle 
Montpensier tells us) ' ni les gens de la premiere 
qualite, nont point d heure precise pour se mettre 
a table.'' Time belongs to another class of 
persons than princes and chiefs, Irish or French ; 
so you had better sit down."" 

Struck by a manner so off-handed, a tone so 
pleasant, and a voice so mellifluous, in spite of 
its brogue and foreign accent, Lord Arranmore 
took the seat which was offered him on the best 
bed, observing: 



the o'flahertys. 67 

" Irish manners resemble the French in many 
respects." 

** Yes, v said the lady of the bonne grace, 
fci we have only to fancy this la ruelle, (the 
object of ambition to the coteries of the 
Longuevilles and the Nemours of the past 
age, and of the Grammonts and Polignacs of 
the present) and the thing is as correct as pos- 
sible : though in England it would fair e fremir 
the least prudish. What revolutions, by the 
bye, in church and state, has not the ruelle 
effected — what leagues and frondes." 

" Wherever woman presides," said Lord 
Arranmore, amused and surprised by a style of 
conversation so unexpected in such a place, 
" there, must be placed the focus of all power 
and influence. The most important events in 
the history of man are indeed referable to the 
ruelle and the boudoir ; which, after all, are the 
true counsel boards and star chambers, in which 
his destiny is decided." 

" Which only shows," said the lady, M that 
man is governed by his passions and his vanity ; 



68 THE o'briens and 

for the agency of woman is rarely directed to any 
higher faculties or feelings. 1 ' 

" I cannot exactly agree with you, Madam, 
he replied, warming in the conversation : " I 
believe there are women whose intellectual 
superiority gives them a higher vocation in 
society, and a more decided influence over its 
events, than even those personal charms, which 
however irresistible, must still have the informing 
soul to give them their full effect.*" 

" IS esprit de la plupart des femmes," said 
the lady, smiling, " sert plus a fortifier leur 
folie, que leur raison ; and I suspect a cunning 
woman will always have more iiafluence than a 
clever one. Pray who is that very pretty per- 
son, in the dirty lace and sparkling diamonds, 
who, like others of the belles present, reminds 
one of the heroines of the old romances, 'force 
pierreries, et point de linge blanch * 

" I don't know in the least, said Lord 
Arranmore, laughing. " I am almost a stranger 
here myself; and though my introduction was 
sufficiently formal, it confused me so much that 
I have not retained a single name. 1 ' 



THK O'FLAHERTYS. 69 

" Yes, 1 ' said the bonne grace, shrugging her 
shoulders, " I observed it; quelle corvee /" 

tC But who would not be c corveable et tail- 
lable a merci et miser icorde,' if the reward 
were to be the place I now occupy,'' replied 
Lord Arranmore, with warmth and with a 
gallantry as sincere, as it was graceful. For 
though he could not very well discover the 
age or figure of his muffled interlocutor, he 
was charmed with an intelligence, a frankness, 
an indescribable something, which lurked in 
certain tones and modulations of her voice, 
that attracted perhaps by their adaptation to the 
peculiar taste of the hearer, 

u I do not think, however, 1 ' said the lady, 
evading the compliment, " that my name was 
inflicted upon you : the fact is, I was not on 
the muster roll of the Jug Day : I have only 
stepped in, like many others, in the tail of my 
sept ; and have not yet been presented myself 
to the ladies of Bog Moy: for I got at once 
hitched here, out of the line of fire— and smoke 
too I' 1 

" My aunts cannot fail to be delighted with 



70 THE O'BRIENS AND 

the presentation of such a guest," said Lord 
Arranmore ; " will you allow me the honour ?'< 
and he half rose. 

" No, no," said the lady, eagerly, " 1 am only 
worthy to be confounded with the crowd : be- 
sides I am altogether deplacee here : my calling 
is not to feasts, but to fasts," (and she looked at 
her cross), 4C and my name has long ceased to be 
popular at Bog Moy." 

" Good heavens ! what is in a name ?" de- 
manded O'Brien, warmly, and still more fasci- 
nated ; but vainly endeavouring to get a view of 
the face of the speaker. 

" Every thing in Connaught," replied the 
bonne grace ; " it is the sign of feuds and 
alliances, of hatreds and of loves, of ancient 
inheritances and recent usurpations. What 
an abridgment of the history of the land, for 
instance, is the story of the ' O'Briens and the 
O'Flahertys,' names that to Irish ears speak 
volumes ?" 

" Yes," said O'Brien, startled at the obser- 
vation : " their local ambition, and private pas- 
sions, concentrated as they were upon this petty 



THE O'FLAHEIITYS. 71 

sphere of action, were an epitome of all that 
has shaken the world, under the high sounding 
names of the Caesars and the Alexanders/' 

" Exactly," said the bonne grace. " I remem- 
ber hearing in my infancy from my foster-mother, 
the story of my celebrated ancestors, Murrogh 
O'Brien, and the Abbess of Moycullen." 

" Were they your ancestors ? v demanded 
Lord Arranmore, in some emotion. " May I 
beg to know the name of the person I have the 
honour of addressing ?" 

" Beavoin O'Flaherty,' 1 was the reply. 
O'Brien started on his legs: the lady rose too, 
glided away, and piercing into the laughing, 
talking group, which had gathered round the 
open door, as if to recognize some acquaintance, 
was merged in the crowd. At that moment 
James Kelly, in a most stentorian voice, an- 
nounced that " the dinner was dished." Miss 
Mac Taaf, now sailing up to her nephew, seized 
his hand, and leading him to a venerable look- 
ing old lady, in a flowered saque, and velvet 
hood, exclaimed, " Lord Arranmore, lade out 
Lady 'Flaherty, of Limon field, who I believe 



7# THE O'BRIENS AXD 

now that the Moycullens are not to the fore, 
is the greatest lady in the county; for 11 (she 
added, addressing an elderly gentleman)" though 
I know you Burkes and De Burgos have the 
true Norman blood in your veins, and an Eng- 
lish earldom, and an Irish marquisate in your 
family since the invasion, yet its a rule in Bog 
Moy, that the Milesians ever take the wall of 
the Strongbownians ; and no disrespect meant 
neither to the English by descent, nor to the 
thirteen tribes, no, nor the half tribes ; since all 
here, are gentry bred and born ; and not a 
Cromwellian, nor a Williamite in the whole 
party, I'll engage." 

This exordium being pronounced, and followed 
by a general applause, OBrien was permitted to 
lead out the Dowager Lady OTlaherty — one of 
those noble representatives of Irish beauty, and 
of Irish gentility, which down to the close of the 
last century, were to be found in the remote 
provinces of Ireland ; and who in their courtly 
manners and stately habits, preserved the dig- 
nified graces of the Irish court of those days, 
when the Ormondes and Tyrconnels presided 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 73 

over its almost regal drawing-rooms. Supported 
by an high gold-headed cane, on one side, and 
on the other, by the arm of Lord Arranmore, 
this venerable subject of many of Carolan's 
inspirations, moved slowly on, followed by the 
O'Maillies of Achille, and Clare Island, the 
Joyces of Joyce's country, and others of the 
great aboriginal families of Connemara and 
Mayo. Then came the Darcys, the Dalys, 
the Skirrets, and the Frenches, with the Burkes, 
Blakes, Bells, and Bodkins, and all that filled up 
the list of tribes and half tribes of Galway of 
those who could and those who could not claim 
cousinship.* The protestant clergyman of the 
parish of Bog Moy (a parish without a congre- 
gation), bowed out Father Festus, the priest of 
a congregation without a church, and the pro- 
vost of St. Grellan gave the pas to the Mavor of 
Galway. 

* The feuds of the Bianchi and Xeri of Florence were 
poor and cold types of the dissensions which long dis- 
tracted the town of Galway concerning- the risht to "call 
cousin ;" a right claimed by the half tribe?, and refused to 
them by the whole. 

VOL. IV. E 



74 the o'bkiens and 

Sixty persons to be seated, where there was 
not comfortable accommodation for half the 
number, required no little pains and ingenuity: 
and the horse-shoe table would have been very 
inadequate to the wants of the guests, but for 
the never failing aid of the side-board, side- 
tables, and window stools, which with a " plate 
on the knee," and a " bit in the corner," at last 
providing for all. After much crushing, squeez- 
ing, and laughing, (all in the most perfect good 
humour and courtesy), the whole company were 
finally seated. Lord Arranmore at the head of 
the centre table, between his elder aunt, and the 
Dowager Lady O' Flaherty, presided as the re- 
presentative of the late Brigadier ; while Miss 
Mable, supported by a Joyce, and a Blake, did 
the honours at the further extremity. 

Grace being said by the minister of the esta- 
blished church, (while the Roman catholic 
guests cast down their eyes, moved their lips, 
and crossed themselves under the table-cloth, 
with a bashful and proscribed look,) — Miss Mac 
Taaf stood up, and with a cordial welcome in her 
eye, said aloud, " Much good may it do ye all ;" 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 75 

to which all bowed their heads. A rush of at- 
tendants, of all sorts and sizes, ages and ranks, 
including the servants of the guests, liveried 
and unliveried, — and the striking up of the 
pipes and harp (the performers being ceremo- 
niously seated at a table, on which wine and 
glasses were placed), on the outside of the door, 
announced that the •< hour of attack " had 
arrived ; and never did a more hospitable 
board offer to appetites, sharpened by sea and 
mountain air, a more abundant feast. No ex- 
pected releve (except such as were necessary to 
supply the place of the vanished contents of 
some favourite dish), kept the appetites of the 
gustateurs in suspense. Rounds of beef were 
the pieces de resistance, which none resisted. 
Haunches of venison and legs of mutton were 
entrees and entremets, that required no substi- 
tution. Pastry and poultry formed the hors 
d'oeuvres ; and a dormant of a creel of potatoes 
and a bowl of fresh butter left no wish for more 
brilliant or less substantial fare : while a vacant 
place was left for the soup, which was always 
served last. Jorums of punch were stationed 
e2 



76' THE O'BRIENS AND 

round the capacious hearth ; port and sherrj 
were ranged along the tables; and the door 
opening into the with-drawing-room, disclosed to 
view the cask of claret, the idol, to which such 
sacrifices were to be made, on altars so well at- 
tended and so devoutly served. The Brigadier's 
tankard, brightened for the occasion by James 
Kelly, was now filled to the brim with " the 
regal, purple stream," and placed before Lord 
Arranmore ; and before the palate was blunted 
by the coarser contact of port or punch, the new 
tap was tasted. The flavour, body and odour, 
were universally approved, in terms worthy of 
the convives du grand De La Reyniere ; and it 
required no skill in augury to divine, that the 
claret would be out, before the company. 

All were now occupied with eating, drinking, 
talking, laughing, helping and being helped; 
while old-fashioned breeding disposed every 
guest to be cordially at the service of his neigh- 
bour : — " Allow me to trouble you for a slice of 
your round, rather rare;"* was answered by, 

* Anglice <; raw." 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 77 

"Sir, the trouble's a pleasure," "Give me 
lave to call on you for a cut of your haunch, 
when you are at leisure," was replied to affirm- 
atively, with " the honour of a glass of wine ;" 
and a cross fire of " Miss Joyce, shall we make 
up that little quarrel we had?" — "Port, if you 
plaze, Sir " — " Hand me the tankard" — " James 
Kelly, tell Miss Prudence Costello, I shall be 
happy to hob-and-nob with her,, if she is not 
better engaged/' &c. &c, continued without 
intermission; and exhibited a courtesy, which 
not long ago prevailed in the highest circles; — 
a courtesy which, however quaintly expressed, 
was well worth the cold and formal reserve of 
what is now considered refinement, in the school 
of modern egotism. 

Meantime, Lord Arranmore, prompted by 
his aunt, and nudged by James Kelly " to press 
the bashful stranger to his food,'' did the honours 
to a circle, in which bashfulness was certainly 
not a distinguishing characteristic. His situa- 
tion was irksome, in proportion as his thoughts 
diverged from the mensal duties imposed upon 
him, in search of the bonne grace, which had 



78 THE O'BRIENS AND 

hidden from his eyes a face, that he was most 
anxious to behold. There was something in 
the voice, as well as the words, of this anoma- 
lous visitant at Bog Moy (even before she had 
announced a name having a poetical and fanciful 
interest in his imagination), which pre-occupied 
him, and which had even struck him forcibly, 
as not new to his ear. What a style of conversa- 
tion, too ! after the tedious prosing of Widow 
Costello, Father Festus, and the Miss Mac 
Taafs ; what a transient restoration to the world 
of intellect ! He looked down either side of the 
horse-shoe table, in vain. On either side, in- 
deed, bright eyes, that seemed lying in wait for 
his, sparkled to his inquiring glance : for many 
of the fair Os and Macs had " donnees dans la 
seigneurie, a bride abattue ;" and mistaking 
his scrutinizing glance, they replied by a nod 
of assent, that engaged him in a keen encounter 
of " wine and smiles, 1 ' for which he was utterly 
unprepared. 

At last, however, he discovered the object of 
his search at a side-table at the lower end of the 
room. She was seated in profile, leaning on her 



THE 0"FLAHERTYS. 79 

elbow and playing with her fork, in apparent 
attention to Father Festus ; who, never more 
in his vocation than when presiding over the 
rites of hospitality, was keeping his " table in a 
roar. 11 Lord Arranmore from that moment was 
wholly engrossed by the only person who had an 
interest for him, and he was about to send James 
Kelly to request permission to take wine with her, 
when Miss Monica Mac Taaf, (who, by her posi- 
tion at the foot of the table, commanded a view 
of the bawn through the open windows,) ex- 
claimed, with intense amazement — " The Lord 
bless us ! who can this be ? a coach and four, and 
a great party of horsemen and military officers ?" 

Miss Mac Taaf turned round her head, 
asking, " Is it the Walscourt livery ¥' 

" No ; it looks like the Browns of the Neale, 
or of Castle Mac Garret," said old Mr. Joyce. 

" Why, then, upon my honour and credit," 
said Miss Mac Taaf, rising and approaching 
the window, with the leg of a duck in her hand, 
and a napkin pinned over the breast of her cor- 
beau (as she called her raven habit, or dress of 
ceremony), "if it isn't the Knocklofty coach ; 



80 

and didn't know they were in the country, and 
thinks they might have waited till they were 
called on, anyhow. Jeemes Kelly, man, run 
to the door." 

" To come at this hour, too !" said Lady 
OTlaherty; 6C though that is just like them: 
their last morning visit to Lemon Field was paid, 
as Sir John and myself had sat down to crib- 
bage, after tea." 

" Why, then, come when they might,'" said 
Mr. Blake, " they could never take a happier 
moment to see Bog Moy in all its glory. It will 
give them an idea of county Galway hospitality, 
they have as yet shewn little inclination to fol- 
low themselves ; so I hope you'll admit them, 
Miss Mac Taaf?" 

A similar thought had crossed Miss Mac Taaf 
herself. Not 

" At the royal feast for Persia won, 
By Philip's godlike son,'* 

did Philip's " godlike son" himself look upon 
" his valiant peers around," with more pride 
and triumph, than Miss Mac Taaf surveyed her 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 81 

horse-shoe table, occupied by the members of the 
oldest steps and tribes in the province : and being 
secretly flattered with this first visit from Lady 
Knocklofty, she turned to the company and 
observed, 

" It shall never be said the door of Bog Moy 
was closed at maile times to friend or foe ; so 
I'll go and recaive them, and ask them to take 
pot- luck, if nobody has any objection ." 

A general consent was announced ; and Miss 
Mac Taaf, wholly preoccupied, and unconscious 
of the duck's leg in her hand, or the napkin on 
the breast of her corbeau, sallied forth to the 
hall door, to which a vis-a-vis had drawn up, 
driven four-in-hand by Lord Charles Fitz- 
charles, and followed by a young lady on horse- 
back, and some gentlemen in military uniforms. 

Several of the male guests had also risen from 
table, and accompanied Miss Mac Taaf to the 
door, which was so close to the dining-room 
window as to give to all within the full benefit 
of what was passing ; and all eyes and all ears 
were now directed to the same point. 

" My dear Miss Mac Taaf," said Lady 
e3 



82 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Knocklofty, alighting, followed by Lady Ho- 
noria Stratton (while Miss Macguire, assisted 
from her horse by Captain O' Mealy, the Gene- 
ral of the district, and his aid-de-camp, joined 
them) — " My dear Miss Mac Taaf, I have a 
thousand apologies to make, in the first place, 
for not acknowledging your hospitable invitation, 
which I only received yesterday, on my return 
from Lord Altamont's, (where I have left Lord 
Knocklofty in attendance on his Excellency the 
Duke :) and, in the next, for having kept you 
waiting dinner till such an unconscionable hour, 
as I fear we have done."" 

" My invitation ! — Kept me waiting ! — the 
Lord save us !" exclaimed Miss Mac Taaf, 
raising her eyes, and the hand with the duck's 
leg; while the other was shaken by the great 
lady, with true electioneering cordiality. 

" It was all Lord Charles's fault," said Lady 
Honoria; while both ladies, with much difficulty, 
kept their countenances. 

" But, pray,'' said Lady Knocklofty, " do 
not let us detain you from your guests. We 
will follow you to the dining-room. I hope 



THE OTLAHERTYS. So 

you will excuse our demi-toilette. You see. 
Miss Mac Taaf, I have taken you at your word. 
and brought the party at Beauregard, as yon 
desired." 

" As / desired ?" repeated Miss Mac Taaf, 
in utter confusion of ideas, and still standing in 
motionless surprise. 

" Miss Mac Taaf, ' said Lady Knockloftv, 
introducing her suite, " Major O'Mealy, Ge- 
neral Egerton ; — Lord Charles, come down off 
the box, and give the horses to the grooms ; — 
Lord Charles Fitzcharles, Captain Horace Mon- 
tagu, A. D. C. Miss Macguire and Lady Ho- 
noria you know, I believe, already." 

Miss Mac Taaf was now utterly confounded ; 
she endeavoured, but in vain, to recover her 
thoughts and stateliness ; and to make a curtesy, 
that should express her possession of both : for 
no French ultra of the old regime was ever more 
anxious to " representer noblement et avee di- 
g-nite" than the chieftainess of Bog Moy. 

" You cannot have mistaken the day,'' Raid 
Lady Honoria. " Miss Mac Taaf looks as if 
she scarcely expected you ?" 



84 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" I hope not. I am sure I have not," said 
Lady Knocklofty ; " but I have the card with 
me ;** and she shook a card from her scented 
handkerchief, as if its touch would have been 
contamination. " There it is," she said ; " some 
one pick it up." 

The only " one 1 ' who had presence of mind 
to do so, was James Kelly, who, standing at his 
mistress's elbow with a plate in his hand, ex- 
claimed, 

" Irs the ould knave of clubs, shure enough, 
Miss Mac Taaf: I'd know his ugly face any 
where, in regard of having dropped it into the 
dripping pan ; and there's the mark to this day.'* 

A general titter among the great party fol- 
lowed the observation ; and young Counsellor 
Lynch, whose modesty seldom lay in the way 
of his advancement, joined the laugh, with an 
intelligent look of mutual understanding with 
the Knocklofty party, and read the card aloud. 

" The Miss Mac Taafs (Mable and Monica) 
present regards, and request the pleasure of the 
Earl and Countess Knocklofty, and the party at 
Beauregard's, company to a Jug Day at Bog 



the o'flahertys. 85 

Moy, Tuesday, July 20.— N.B. Beds for the 
ladies, and a shake down for the gentlemen, if 
wanted." 

" Well," said Miss Mac Taaf, recovering 
from her confusion, and with all the ancient 
hospitality of the sept, and all the natural 
courtesy of an old Irish gentlewoman, " well, I 
know neither act nor part of that card, though 
it shurely is a card of th' ould pack, if not my 
writing ; and, I suppose, it's some of the St. 
Grellan humbugging ; but any how, Lady 
Knocklofty, I am happy to have the honour of 
seeing you and your's at Bog Moy ; and if you 
will take pot-luck, you will find a hearty wel- 
come, and good cheer left to the fore ; — to say 
nothing of the best blood in the county assembled 
to recaive you." 

Without further ceremony, Lady Knocklofty 
and her party accepted the invitation ; and she 
expressed her anger at the liberty taken with 
her with such a smile as, to an attentive observer, 
would have betrayed the secret of the hoax, and 
placed it to the account of its true authors. 

Miss Mac Taaf, with her head on high, stately 



86 THE O'BRIEN'S AND 

and stem, led the way, followed by the three 
dames of quality, Lord Charles, General Eger- 
ton, the Aid-de-Camp, and O' Mealy. The 
latter personage had been appointed to the office 
of Brigade Major of St. Grellan by Lord Knock- 
lofty, on the disbanding of the Royal Irish — 
broken, (as it had been raised), to answer some 
private interest of the founder. Nothing under 
the effrontery of the dashing party, which now 
entered the dining-room, primed for fun and ready 
for frolic, could have withstood the awkward for- 
mality of the introduction ; as Miss Mac Taaf 
presented each, " according to the scrip, 1 ' to the 
heads of all the families present, who all rose. 
When the ceremony was over, the new party 
took their places ; for although it might have 
puzzled the most accurate calculator of ames 
et demi-dmes, where to place an additional num- 
ber of guests, the board of Bog Moy seemed to 
afford a general accommodation to all consigned 
to it, and in a few minutes the new comers were 
seated at the upper end of the table. 

With that charming courtesy, which dis- 
tinguishes Connaught manners, and which springs 



8? 

from kindly feelings, and a deep reverence for 
all the rites of hospitality, those who had 
previously occupied the first seats had risen, 
and resigned their places to the Knocklofty 
party, shifting for themselves as they might. 
" Clane plates " were called for by Miss Mac 
Taaf, with an order for fresh relays of dishes, 
re-echoed by James Kelly at the sideboard, and 
reiterated from servant to servant, to the re- 
motest confines of the kitchen. Old Mr. Joyce 
called on Lord Charles to take wine ; Counsellor 
Lynch begged to be allowed that honour with 
Lady Knocklofty ; and a general challenge fol- 
lowing, the new arrivals were welcomed with such 
claret as Lord Charles and the General declared 
they had never before tasted. 

Meantime the bright eyes of the three great 
ladies, assisted by their glasses, were turned with 
much curiosity and amusement on the company. 

" Well;' said Miss Mac Taaf, " I am hoighly 
deloighted to have an opportunity of shewing 
your ladyship the ra'al rank and beauty of the 
country. For though this is not a pleasure I 
ever dramed of, and though there has long been 



88 THE O'BRIENS AND 

a trifling difference between your family and 
ours, yet if ye had found the door of Bog Moy 
shut agen you at dinner time, you would have 
done well, to serve the Mac Taafs, as Granuaile 
served the Howths." 

" And how was that, my dear Miss Mac 
Taaf ?" said Lady Knocklofty, leaving untouch- 
ed the pile of venison that smoked before her, and 
taking a survey of the table, through her glass. 

" Why, my lady, she carried off the heir of 
the family ; which is what I should be very 
sorry you would do with our heir ; and I beg 
to present to your Ladyship, my nephew 
Lord — Jasus, what's gone with Murrogh ?" 

" Murrogh" had in the first incursion of the 
grandees into the dining room, availed himself 
of the rising en masse to escape from his durance 
at the head of the table ; and hoping to evade 
observation, by confounding himself with a 
group of young men, who crowded round a 
side table, till he could find a moment for 
complete eclipse, he was on the point of darting 
forth, and flying he knew not, cared not 
whither, when his aunt's speech directed every 



THE CVFLAHERTYS. 89 

eye to his person, and arrested his flight. At 
that moment, a low voice close to his ear, 
muttered, "fais ce que doy, arrive que pourra:" 
the counsel acted like magic : he instantly- 
returned to his place, and his aunt presented 
him to Lady Knocklofty, saying — u This is the 
heir I alluded to; and you see, your Ladyship 
might do worse than follow Grace O'Mailly's 
example. Lord Arranmore, my dear, this is 
the Countess Knocklofty — Lady Honora Strat- 
ton — Miss Macguire — and as to the gentlemen 
I'll lave them till after dinner." 

Lord Arranmore, struggling against the most 
painful confusion, still mastered his emotions, to 
his uttermost power of self-controul ; and with all 
the ease he could command, bowed to the parties 
presented to him. A movement of something like 
recognition, with evident surprise, was made in 
return. Lady Knocklofty inclined her head 
coldly, and blushed deeply through her rouge ; 
and Lord Charles, with a sort of shy cordia- 
lity, acknowledged the acquaintance ; while 
O'Mealy, an ape in all things, went no further 
than the courtesy of his principal led him. 



90 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Lady Honoria, the first to recover from the 
unexpectedness of this rencontre, and anxious to 
divert the attention of the company from the too 
evident confusion of her friend, now drew out 
Miss Mac Taaf (who in the mean time presented 
her sister at the foot of " the horse shoe,'' as the 
co-heiress of the estate of Bog Moy, and the 
lordship of Ballyslattery, now in abeyance). 
Sending away her plate of " boiled duck, smo- 
thered in onions," and calling for soup, Lady 
Honoria put up her glass to the black, grim pic- 
tures over the chimney piece, and asked " Are 
those family pictures, Miss Mac Taaf? They 
are very well done." 

" They are," said Miss Mac Taaf. " The 
cintre, Lady Honora, is the portraiture of the 
courageous Colonel Columb Mac Taaf, who 
defated Colonel Ingoldesby at the pass of Cong, 

Jeemes Kelly, is it on the Persia carpet ye 

lave them dishes ? what are the cheers for, man ?" 
— (James Kelly in vain sought a vacant chair 
for the dish, he was replacing with a tureen of 
soup) — " which Colonel Ingoldesby was an 
upstart of Cromwell's, of whom the story runs, 



THE cfFLAHEIiTYS. 91 

that the first of the Hunkses that ever shewed his 
face in Connaught was his foot-boy." 

" I declare," said Miss Macguire, " I took 
that for a picture of King William ; the nose is 
so like. 

" It is the Mac Taaf nose, Miss Mac- 
guire,'" said Miss Mac Taaf : " who carried 
their noses, and their heads too, as high as any 
Williamite in the land. If you look at my 
nephew there, you'll see he is the very moral of 
Colonel Columb. The nose in particular, as 
the verse runs, 

' Whoever the comeliest beauty would spy, 
See the nose of the Taafs, and th' O'Brien's bright eye.' 

Nobody would mistake him. He has thim both, 
we flatter ourselves : so hold up y' head, choild, 
there's money bid for ye." 

Every eye-glass was now alternately directed to 
the picture of Sir Columb, and to his descend- 
ant ; and every lip was curled with a suppressed 
smile. 

" And pray," said Lady Honoria, puckering 
up her mouth, " who is the lady with a cat under 



92 THE o'BRl£NS AND 

her arm, and a piece of gingerbread in her 
hand ?" 

"The cat happens to be an Italian grey- 
hound, Lady Honora, and the piece of ginger- 
bread is the — bible, " said Miss Mac Taaf, 
drawing up. " The lady is our great great 
grandmother, Lady Mac Taaf ; an English lady, 
and daughter of Sir Roger Gammon, who came 
over to Ireland, as Escheator of Connaught. 
Through his pious efforts, and the grace of 
God, the Mac Taafs embraced the reformed 
religion. It was on occasion of this alliance 
with the Gammons, that we first quartered the 
boar in the family arms." 

" And the bore, I suppose, has remained in 
the family ever since ?"" said Lady Honoria, 
gravely. 

" Ever since, Lady Honora,'" said Miss Mac 
Taaf, as gravely. " But, Lord save us, what's 
gone with the goose ?" an interrogation to which 
none could reply, until a certain gnawing noise 
under the table announced that Paddy Whack 
had availed himself of Miss Mac Taafs pre- 



THE o'fl^hertys. 93 

occupation, and was doing those honours by the 
Solan goose, which she had neglected. 

" Well, it does not signify, Jeemes Kelly," ex- 
claimed Miss Mac Taaf, much irritated, " I'll 
have that cur hanged up to-morrow, if I live — at 
all events, turned out of the place." 

" If you turn him out, sister Mable," said 
Miss Monica, kindling, " you will turn me 
out too ; for, love me, love my dog, that's my 
motto. And if Jeemes Kelly was minding what 
he was about, the goose would be still to the 
fore/' 

A sisterly storm was now evidently brew- 
ing; which was, however, averted by the inter- 
ference of General Egerton, who alone kept his 
countenance with perfect good breeding, during 
the whole scene. He requested Miss Mac Taaf 
to take wine, passed fresh eulogiums on the 
ciaret, inquired the name of her wine mer- 
chant, and asked if Paddy Whack was an 
Irish wolf-dog, — a race of which he had heard 
and read so much. 

'* Is it he the hound," said Miss Mac Taaf, 
with much inveteracy, 6 * he is a spalpeen of a 



94 THE O'BRIENS AND 

cabin cur, Giniral, and as arrant a colley as ever 
caught a colt by the heels." 

Miss Monica reddened, and was whispered 
by the widow Costello, " to keep quite before 
the company. " 

" But if you wish to see a raal Irish wolf- 
dog," continued her sister, " look behind you, 
Ginerai, there is the portraiture of the famous 
Sus an chios,* and its celebrated lady." 

" Which is the lady?" asked Lady Honoria; 
" and which the wolf dog?'' 

"Which you please, young gentleman,'" 
whispered Miss Macguire, after the manner of 
the showman, while the courteous General, to 
cover the ridicule, put up his glass, and ob- 
served, "A very majestic looking person 
indeed. Pray who is she, Miss Mac Taaf ?" 

*< That, Ginerai, is our celebraated ancestress 
by the mother's side, Granuaile, or Grace 
O'Mailly, who kept the country round in awe 
and terror, and built the first tower in this pile, 
which came into our family by the marriage of 
her daughter by Richard Burke, her third hus- 

• Honeysuckle. 



THE FLAHERTYS. \)0 

band, with Emunh Mac Taaf. She was the 
terror of the nation along the coasts, and moored 
her large vessels in Clare Island, and her small 
craft in Carrig-na-Uile. Allow me to help 
you, Gineral, to some drawn butter ?" 

The General, in accepting an offer which de- 
luged his plate, observed, " I think I can per- 
ceive a very strong likeness between this eminent 
lady and yourself, Miss Mac Taaf." 

" So I am tould, Gineral," said Miss Mac 
Taaf, much pleased ; u and there are some think 
I've more of the O'Mailly, than the Mac Taaf." 
^Here is an O'Mealy, I can answer for it," 
said Lady Honoria, * who would be flattered 
by the resemblance : I mean our friend the 
Major." 

Miss Mac Taaf turned her stag-like eyes on 
the Major, whose name she had not before 
caught : and the inspection was evidently in 
favour of its object ; who pulled up his stock, 
and calling up one of his best looks, returned 
her glances with a smile of infinite insinuation. 

The persons with whom O' Mealy was now 
engaged, produced a very different effect on 



96 THE O'BRIENS AND 

his mind, from that which they had made on 
his party. His early impressions of the grandeur 
and consequence of the old families of Munster 
and Connaught, (whose names were to him as 
those of the Guelfs and Ghibelines,) were still 
fresh. He remembered the day, when to have 
been admitted into such a circle was beyond the 
reach of his hopes, as it had ever been the great 
object of his emulation. The plenteous board 
at which he was seated, and the quarters which 
Bog Moy might offer to the Brigade Major of 
St. Grellan, when Beauregard should be deserted, 
suggested the idea of securing the good graces 
of its stately mistress. When, therefore, Miss 
Mac Taaf, pleased with his comely appear- 
ance, asked him, "And are you an 0*Mailly, 
Meejor ?" he replied, in a soft voice, " I have 
that honour and glory, Miss Mac Taaf. 1 ' 

" And of which of the families ?" asked the 
lady. 

This was a puzzler. 

" Of which of the families is it, Miss Mac 
Taaf ?" reiterated the Major, evasively, pulling 
up his stock. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 97 

" Ay,'' said Miss Mac Taaf, " are ye of 
the O'Maillys of Clare Island, of whom the 
story goes that they were the discindants of the 
Mermaids, whose beautiful singing is heard to 
this day off the island ? Or are ye of the 
O'Maiilys, Lords of UmhaiUe, or the owls' 
country; called to this day Bru na Umhaille, or 
the race of the owls?'' 

11 Oh r said Lady Honoria, u that is not the 
genus in ornithology to which the Major be- 
longs, though he may be a descendant of the 
Mermaids; for he certainly inherits their musi- 
cal talents; of which, I am sure, he will be 
happy to give you a specimen, when the cloth 
is removed, Miss Mac Taaf.'" 1 

" We need not wait for that, Lady Honora," 
said Miss Mac Taaf, who was passionately fond 
of music, and thought it never could be ill-timed : 
and although the Major had scarcely swallowed 
his last morsel of venison, and washed it down 
with a glass of claret, she proceeded to ask him, 
" Might we take the liberty of troubling von. 
Meejor, for a song ?" 
vol. iv. f 



98 THE O'BIUEXS AND 

The Major, always pleased to be called out, 
and now resolved on pushing his relationship 
with the heiresses of Bog Moy, replied, " With 
the greatest of pleasures, Madam. Have you 
any favourite air you would wish in preference ?" 

" Any thing Irish, Meejor," replied Miss Mac 
Taaf. " May be you'd feavor us with « Molly 
Astore.' " 

" I am happy to have it in my power to 
obleege you, Miss Mac Taaf, and will give you 
the new words, as sung in the new opera at 
Lady Ely's private theyathricals." 

" Any words plazes you, must be plazing to 
me, Meejor. Mr. Joyce, keep silence there, at 
the ind of the table." 

The stillness of the tomb instantly prevailed, 
and every body looked as melancholy, as if about 
to descend into it ; while the Magnus Apollo of 
the moment, canvassing the several tables with 
looks of conscious merit, and anticipated success, 
cleared his voice, took another glass of claret, 
pulled up his stock, fluttered out his whiskers, 
and running through a few modulations, at last 



THE O'FLAHEKTYS. 99 

began, — directing his looks, and the words of 
the song to the lady of Bog Moy. 

'* Had I a heart for falsehood framed, 
I ne'er could injuie you; 
For though your tongue no promise claim'd, 
Your charms would make me true," kc. Sec. 

Applause, loud and long, followed this beau- 
tiful air ; which being sung with true Irish 
pathos, and the finest possible voice, produced 
an enthusiastic effect upon organs, the most 
adapted to respond to such an influence. The 
tears had come into Miss Mac TaaFs eyes, as 
she listened ; and wiping away the pearly brine, 
she said, " Cousin O'Mailly, I'll take a glass of 
wine with you, and to your health and song." 

" Cousin O'Mailly," delighted with the ac- 
knowledged relationship, accepted the challenge, 
with " the greatest of pleasures, Madam,"' and 
Miss Mac Taaf continued: — 

"And now, Meejor, you have every right 
and title to call upon whom you plaze, till you 
rest yourself, before we ask you again; and 
there's Miss Prudence Costello, who has a sweet 
little pipe of her own, as any in the county ; 
f 2 



100 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and will give us, ' Guardian Angels ' without 
further pressing, I'll ingage." 

" Guardian Angels," were now called for by 
all; and Miss Prudence Costello, who was the 
most imprudent looking person in the world, 
threw round her large swimming eyes, that 
seemed to roll en coulisse^ and declared " that 
she could not attimpt to sing after the Meejor." 
The Major, however pressed, as majors will 
press; and after much pretty delay, and affected 
bashf ulness, Miss Prudence promised to give 
fc< Guardian Angels," provided her sister, the 
widow, would join in and help her out. The 
widow, whose voice and looks were any thing 
but recusant, sighed and hemmed : and then 
pitching her voice to her sister's, after reiterated 
cries of silence, both ladies started off in perfect 
unison. With eyes cast down, and bosoms heav- 
ing, and looks of gentle sentimental martyrdom 
stamped on their broad, comely countenances, 
they sung with emphasis — 

" Guardian angels now direct me, 
Send to me the swain I love ; 
Cupid, with your bow protect me, 
Help me all ye powers above." 



the o'flakehtys. 101 

" The powers above " did not, however, help 
the widow and Miss Costello, but deserted them 
in the very beginning of the next verse, which 
they in vain endeavoured to recollect. After 
many hems, and ineffectual attempts upon their 
truant memory, Miss Prudence set off, on Mr. 
Joyce's suggestion, with " her own favourite 
little song of, 'Hark, sweet tally-ho, ho, ho !' " 
and when she came to the refrain^ of — 

" All my fancy lies in Xancy, 
Hark, sweet Tally-ho !" 

she turned her eyes on the young heir of Bog 
Moy, with an expression by no means equivocal 
as to "all her fancy ;" and the soft impeachment 
to which he was no stranger, compleated an 
embarrassment, that had already placed him in 
the purgatorv reserved for the proud, and the 
feeling. Under the most insupportable mor- 
tification, his changi ng colour betrayed 
confusion it was now no longer in his power to 
conceal. The well applauded " Hark, sweet 
tally-ho!" was followed by the songstress's 
earnest " Ahs," and " Ohs,'' applied to old Mr. 



102 THE O'BKIEXS AND 

Joyce, to sing " Bumpers, Squire Jones," a 
song for which the jolly old gentleman was 
celebrated all over the country. This he gave 
with great humour and effect, first in Carolan's 
own Irish words, and then in the excellent trans- 
lation, which had been made of it by a judge of 
the land,* commencing with — 

" Ye good fellows all, 
Who love to be told where there's claret, good store, 
Attend to the call 
Of one who's ne'er frighted, 
But greatly delighted 

With six bottles more. 
Be sure you don't pass, 
The good house Moneyglass, 
Which the jolly red god so peculiarly owns ; 
Twill well suit your humour, 
For, pray what would you more 
Than mirth, and good claret, and bumpers, 'Squire Jones." 
&c. &c. &c. 

" Bumpers, Squire Jones," was as usual en- 
cored and toasted, with three times three : and 

* Bumpers, Squire Jones, was translated by Baron Daw- 
son, from Cardan's " Planxty Jones," written in honour 
of Squire Jones, of Moneyglass, in the county Leitrim. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 103 

the cloth being in the interim removed, James 
Kelly announced to Miss Mac Taaf, " that the 
tay was wet, and the griddle cake, and sally lun 
buttered and served." She arose, gave " the 
king," (the preliminary to the departure of the 
ladies) ; after which they withdrew to the best 
bed-room, amidst many prayers and supplica- 
tions to remain, — always expected as matter of 
form from the gentlemen. 

While some flounced on the bed, and others 
sprang out of the windows, and romped on the 
bawn, the %t great ladies*' who had already 
ordered their carriage, gathered round the 
Miss Mac Taafs : and if to learn the particulars 
of whatever concerned the family of the Taafs, 
from the flood down to the present moment, 
was an object of interest and curiosity, they 
were amply gratified, through the garrulity of 
that self-love, which always finds its account in 
auto-biography. In these particulars, were in- 
cluded the birth, parentage, and education of 
their nephew ; his military career abroad, and 
the prospects that awaited him at home, " if 
he behaved himself to their liking ;" the in- 



104 THE O'BRIENS AND 

heritance of Bog Moy, and the reversionary 
honours of the Barony of Bally slattery, and 
the Green Knighthood of the Fassagh ; together 
with their intention of looking out for a suitable 
match for him. 

" The ould blood in protestant veins," said 
Miss Mac Taaf ; " one of the Lady Burkes of 
the Clanrickards, or the Lady O'Briens, of the 
Inchiquins, both his blood relations. And now, 
Lady Knocklofty," she added, in the honesty of 
her heart (won over by the well applied flattery 
of Lady Knocklofty and her party, but firm to 
her principles), " though I shall be happy to 
see you and yours, at Bog Moy House, when 
ever ye may plaze to feavor us, in the way of 
ould Irish hospitality, yet I will tell ye frankly 
and fairly, that vote or voice of me or mine, or 
of the tinants on the property, shall never be 
given to my lord ; for if th' ould blood does not 
stand by th' ould blood, what's to become of 
the country ? And Dinnis Daly, ye are the man 
for my money, if the King of England was to 
set up for the place to-morrow against ye ?" 

This was said with as honest and as dignified 



THE O'FLAHEETYS. 105 

a determination, as that with which Old Bess of 
Hardvvick, assured the reigning minister of Eng- 
land, " your man sha'nt stand." 

" Well, my dear Miss Mac Taaf, n said Lady 
Knocklofty, " I cannot expect you will do for 
us, what ye would not do for the king ; but 
leaving you and my lord to talk county politics 
when you meet, allow me to say, that I shall 
be happy to follow up this acquaintance, ori- 
ginating, as it has, in some vulgar practical joke 
of the town's-people ; and I hope that you will 
soon give us the pleasure of your company at 
Beauregard, where we expect the Lord-lieute- 
nant in a few days from West Port." 

The ladies then sent to let the gentlemen 
know that they were going. None of the gen- 
tlemen, however, attended the summons. 
O'Mealy was perfectly at home, and had his 
own reasons for remaining; and the General, 
Lord Charles, and Captain Montague, desirous 
to see the frolic out, delighted with the claret 
and the company, and calculating on the hu- 
mours of the ball, supper, and raking pot of 
tea, of which the pretty Mrs. Burke had informed 
f 3 



106 THE o'sriexs and 

her neighbour, Lord Charles (with such a com- 
mentary of eyes and smiles as detained him to 
whom they were directed) —they requested to 
have their horses left, and consigned the four- 
in-hand to the groom. 

The three ladies now departed, attended to their 
carriage, and bowed off by nearly all the gentle- 
men who crowded to the door. On the return of 
the party to the dining-room, the claret jugs were 
again replenished, the punch was placed by 
Father Festus on the table, and the company con- 
tinued their joyous orgies till midnight, when the 
hall was cleared out for the ball. As many as 
had preserved their centre of gravity were now 
busied in looking for partners for jigs and 
country dances. Lord Charles and Captain 
Montague secured the two reigning toasts, the 
beautiful Mrs. Burke, and the lovely Honor 
Blake; while Captain O'Mealy followed in the 
wake of Miss Mac Taaf, as she sailed about 
inquiring for her nephew, to lead out Miss O 'Fla- 
herty, of Lemon Field, and to open the ball, to 
the tune of Planxty Connor ; exclaiming, vo- 
ciferously, " What's gone with Murrogh ? Did 



THE 0'FLAHETtTYS. 107 

any one see my nephew, Lord Arranmore ? 
Meejor O'Mailly, would you do me the feavour 
to tell my nephew, that I lay my injunctions 
on him to lave oft'— he that never drinks — and 
open the ball with Miss O'Flaherty.'' 

The Major assured Miss Mac Taaf that his 
lordship had left the dining-room at an early 
hour, resigning the chair to old Mr. Joyce, on 
the plea of headache, as he had heard him say. 

Miss Mac Taaf now expedited an estafette to 
the tower, to the orchard, to the vineyard ; but 
Lord Arranmore was no more to be found, than 
the heir of the St. Lawrence's, after the visita- 
tion of Granuaile to Howth Castle. 

44 Well, 'pon my honour and credit, now. 
after all," said Major O'Mealy, 4i I would not 
wonder, Miss Mac Taaf, if Lady Knocklofty 
had kidnapped my lord, your nephew, after 
the manner of our great ancestor, you know." 

44 Nor I, neither,'' whispered Lord Charles 
to Captain Montague. 

While emissaries were sent in search of the 
truant hope of the family, the ball was opened 
by Lord Charles and Mrs Burke; Miss Mac 



108 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Taaf consented to move a minuet with Mr. Joyce 
(a custom of theirs for the last thirty years, upon 
similar occasions) ; and jigs, danced with a grace 
and spirit which astonished the members of 
English bon ton, gave the lovely animated per- 
formers another " renown," than that acquired 
by simply " tiring each other down." 

A supper, plenteous as the dinner, and quite 
as substantial, was served up, as soon as the last 
lingering devotees of the claret had left the din- 
ing-room; and the morning sun, as it rose, shone 
upon the unwearied votaries of pleasure, cele- 
brating the last rites of the Jug Day over the rak- 
ing pot of tea, which assembled as many of the 
party, as had not found it absolutely necessary to 
avail themselves of Miss Mac Taaf's barrack- 
beds and shakes-down.* Horses, carriages, 



* The shake down, barbarous as it may seem, had its 
precedent in those courts, to which we are now referred 
as models of manners. Down to the days of the Stuarts, 
the laying down at night and taking up in the morning of 
beds prevailed, from the king's own bedchamber, even to 
the steps of the canopy of state; where the esquire of the 
body flung his shakedown under the dais. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 109 

and cars, then filled the bawn, while sails were 
hoisted in the creek ; and of the merits of the 
claret, not a doubt was left in the mind of Miss 
Mac Taaf, for — not a drop was left in the cask. 



110 THE o'BRIEXS AXD 



CHAPTER III. 



BEAUREGARD. 



Starvaini sempre a contemplar quel volto, 
Ogni pensiero, ogni uiio bel disegno 
In lei finira. 



Akiosto. 



The sovereign ladies of Bog Moy, with all 
the love of power, and habit of exercising it, 
incidental to those who have not been broken 
down to a reciprocation of rights and privi- 
leges in the world's great school, ill-brooked the 
independence of their nephew ; whose comings 
and goings, whose wanderings, late and early, 
and preference of a book and a ramble, to their 
society, had already caused much bitter reproach 
and wearisome dictation. His elder aunt had 
more than once hinted that greater deference was 
expected from one who was destined to owe every 
thing to her favour ; but when she learned that 



THE oVLAHERTYS. Ill 

he had deserted the party, and vacated his place 
at the head of a table, where he had been placed 
to represent the Brigadier, her resentment was at 
its height. His evasion was deemed contempt ; 
and anger and indignation stifled every anxiety, 
which his protracted absence might naturally 
have excited. 

But when the night advanced, the morning 
and mid-day came, and the guests were all de- 
parted, save the Costellos and Father Festus, 
(who were invited to stay and partake of the frag- 
ments of the feast, and talk over its events), 
and still no tidings were received of their absent 
nephew, their apprehension for his safety pre- 
vailed over every other sentiment and consider- 
ation : and all the horrors of bog holes, preci- 
pices, unlucky places, and fairy grounds, were 
conjured up in fantastic array to account for his 
disappearance. 

The Miss Mac Taafs, who loved a sensation, 
even a painful one, would not be comforted ; 
and they were on the point of dispatching the 
priest, in addition to the numerous other emis- 
saries, in search of the object of their alarm, 
when a horseman in the Knockloftv livery gal- 



112 THE 0BRIENS AND 

loped passed the parlour-window ; and the next 
moment James Kelly, not yet quite sober, 
brought in two letters. 

" It's Murrogh's sale, thank God/' said Miss 
Taaf, eagerly breaking open one letter ; while 
Miss Monica, cutting round the seal of the other, 
said, " And this is the Knocklofty coronet." 

They read as follows : — 

" My dear Aunt, 
;t A thousand apologies, and a thousand re- 
grets for the anxiety and annoyance, which, I 
fear or flatter myself, my absence must have 
occasioned. I was literally driven from the fes- 
tivities of Bog Moy, by an insupportable head- 
ache, which rendered me incapable and un- 
worthy of enjoying them. I sought my usual 
remedy, the open air ; and with the intention of 
joining the ladies at the tea-table, on my return, 
sauntered over the cliffs. Pursuing my walk, 
however, further than I had intended, I had 
unconsciously arrived at that fearful precipice, 
Carrig-na-Pko\ika y when I perceived, on the 
strand beneath, a carriage and four, without a 
driver, the tide advancing, and (as well as I 



THE O'FLAKERTYS. 113 

could discern at that fearful distance, and by 
the fading light), some female figures standing 
on the sands. I saw, at once, the dilemma ; 
and scrambling down, as well as I could — 
(< The Lord bless me V said Miss Mac Taaf, 
raising her eyes and hands ; * scrambling down 
Carrig-na-Phouka ! where even the puffin- 
clifters scarce venture to go,') — and found that 
Lady Knocklofty's coachman had, under James 
Kelly's auspices, rendered himself incapable of 
sitting on the coach-box, — that the groom was 
not more sober,— and that the tide was rapidly 
approaching the strand road. In short, you 
will imagine the rest. I mounted the box, and 
had the good fortune to convey the ladies in 
safety to Beauregard; which, by the by, we 
did not reach till long after midnight. Here I 
am, then, and here I must remain, till you send 
me the pony and a valise, with a change of 
dress, when you may expect me, with all possi- 
ble expedition, at Bog Moy. 

" Your affectionate 

"Arranmore.'' 



114 the o'rriens and 

Miss Monica next read her letter. 

" Beauregard. 

" Mv Dear Miss Mac Taaf, 

" As I find Lord Arranmore is sending for 
dressing things, I take the opportunity of 
assuring you that he has not suffered by his 
gallantry ; and that having risked his life to 
save ours, in the most perilous descent from the 
cliffs to the strand (where we should have pe- 
rished but for his timely assistance and great 
presence of mind), he has sustained no other 
injury, than getting drenched with the spray of 
the tide, which all but overwhelmed us. You 
deserve the penalty of his absence, for making 
my servants so drunk ; but I hope to hear you 
have not suffered from your delightful Jug 
Day : and remain, with compliments to Miss 
Monica, 

" My dear Miss Mac Taaf, 
" Very truly your's, 

" Al.BINA KnOCKLOI'IY.*' 



THE O'FLAHERTYS- 115 

As Miss Mac Taaf felt it to be highly 
necessary to reply to so civil a note, and as 
highly politic to " lay her injunctions and com- 
mands," on her nephew to return home imme- 
diately, — and as writing notes at Bog Moy was 
not an occupation of daily occurrence and prac- 
tised facility, the Knocklofty groom was ordered 
" to put up and step in, and get entertainment 
in the kitchen while the answers were pre- 
paring." It was evening before the pony was 
caught, the valise rilled, the letters written, and 
the groom permitted to depart (much in the 
same state as his fellow servants had been sent 
from the hospitable threshold of Bog Moy, 
on the preceding evening). 

The incident altogether opened a new vein of 
discussion to the party assembled in the best 
bed-room; and the civilities of Lady Knock- 
lofty, her visit, and even the accident which 
marked her return home, were all considered 
by the Miss Mac Taafs as the results of deep 
calculation, and of a premeditated attack upon 
her own political independence, and on the heart 
and hand of her nephew and heir. u But Mur- 



116 THE o'bUIEXS AND 

rogh O'Erier!,' 7 apostrophized Miss Mac Taaf, 
tapping violently the lid of her snuft-box, " I\l 
sooner see ye in your winding-sheet, young and 
comely as you are, this day, than wedded to a 
follower of the Proudforts; and so the Honour- 
able Miss Kitty Macguire may carry her honour- 
ability to another market : for over rood or acre 
of Ballyslattery or Bog Moy she'll never reign, 
with my good will or consint." 

" Nor with mine," said Miss Monica. 

" Why, then, long may ye reign over it your- 
selves,'" said the priest, " for better can^t come, 
and worse may."" 

Beauregard was one of those remote and 
superb seats, which in Ireland, and more parti- 
cularly along the western and southern coasts 
of the island, rise like fairy structures, in the 
midst of dreariness and desolation. Wealth, 
taste, and luxury had given the word, 

" The desart smiled, 



And Paradise was opened in tha wild." 

The castle stood upon an eminence, over the 
Atlantic Ocean, of which it commanded a sub- 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 117 

lime view, to the verge of the horizon ; and it was 
sheltered by mountains piled upon mountains, — 
in the glens and recesses of which, the late Lord 
Proudfort had planted with a success which bore 
ample testimony of the fitness of the soil to 
such ornamental cultivation ; and authenticated 
all that has been sung of the " woody Morven." 
The spacious mansion was furnished in all the 
cumbrous sumptuosity of the day. Massive 
sofas and bergeres from Paris, carpets from 
Turkey, and crystal lustres from Venice, supplied 
the place of the nobler works of art ; while mir- 
rors covering every wall, occupied the spaces, 
which, in the houses of the old Anglo-Irish fami- 
lies, the Butlers, the Burkes, and the Talbots, are 
filled with the portraits of Vandyke and Lely. 

On arriving at this sumptuous palace, the 
ladies expressed their acknowledgments to Lord 
Arranmore, even to the very hyperbole of 
gratitude: and a supper en partie guarree, in 
Lady Knocklofty's dressing-room, enlivened by 
the wit of Lady Honoria, the humour of Miss 
Macguire, was rendered delightful to him by 
the increasing softness and courtesy of his noble 



118 THE O'BRIEN'S AND 

hostess ; which formed a striking contrast to 
the noisy and heart-whole joviality he had left 
behind him at Bog Moy. The circumstances of 
the adventure which had again rendered Lady 
Knocklofty and her friend Lady Honoria his 
debtors to so large an amount, and the humours 
of the Jug Day formed the principal topics of 
conversation : and though, in deference to their 
nephew, the Miss Mac Taafs were, spared no- 
body else escaped. The finery of the dresses 
was criticised and laughed at, and the beauty 
of the women, about which Lord Charles had 
raved, was utterly denied. 

" Animal beauty, indeed, there was," said 
Lady Honoria ; " but ' belle et bete"* is all that 
can be said of them. What do you say, Lord 
Ar ran more ?" 

" There certainly was a great deal of animal 
beauty, Madam ; a sort of beauty, however, 
soit (lit en passant, that goes well with every 
other; and without which, I fear more intellec- 
tual charms go for very little." 

" Oh, shocking !" said Lady Honoria. " Is 
this your doctrine ?" 



THE oVlAHERTVS. 119 

" For so sentimental a looking person, it is 
rather a coarse one," said Lady Knocklofty. 

* I do not say it is my creed,'' said Lord 
Arranmore ; " but I find it is a very prevailing 
heresy among the rest of my sex." 

" He is quite right," said Lady Honoria : 
u men are wretches, so there's no more to be 
said about them. There was one, however, 
among the women in the bed- room, that was a 
clever, odd creature enough. " 

" What, the sort of nun, or Madame La 
Chanoinesse" asked Miss Macguire, " that I 
saw talking to you at the window ?'' 

Lord Arranmore was all ear. 

" Oh, yes, by-the-by, ,> said Lady Knocklofty, 
" the woman in the bonnet. I heard her 
speaking French to you, which surprised me 
not a little." 

" She speaks it like a petite maitresse du 
Faubourg St. Germain," replied Lady Honoria. 

" Lord Arranmore, you are eating nothing,'" 
said Lady Knocklofty; " though you must 
have earned an appetite by your long drive, 



120 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and arduous exertions. Good heavens ! how 
could you venture down that horrible cliff ! 
did it not make you shudder to look down ?" 

" Oh !" he replied laughing, <: like Panurge 
je ne crams que le danger ; and my early educa- 
tion in the Isles of Arran but I beg 

your ladyship's pardon, you were speaking of 
the lady in the deep bonnet." 

" What did she say to you, Lady Honoria ?" 
asked Miss Macguire. 

" Not much ; but it was extremely piquant 
— sarcastic, indeed. I told her that our turn 
would come next, and she said 6 pourquoi pas ? 
moquons-nous des autres, et qitils se moquent 
de nous : c'est bienfait de tout part. ,' " 

" Oh ! she found you out, my dear," said 
Lady Knocklofty. " It was a pretty sentiment, 
however, for a religieuse."* 

" Yes," said Lady Honoria, " but she told 
me she had got a plenary indulgence from the 
pope, for saying and doing odd things, for a 
century to. come, in return for the sacrifice of 
coming to Ireland, to reform some order — I 



THE O'FLAHEKTYS. 121 

forget what — which she said amounts to 
nothing, but teaching the nuns to wear clean 
linen and wash their hands." 

" But are nuns allowed to wander about thi^ 
way?" asked Lady Knocklofty, yawning, yet 
looking under her eyes, and observing the in- 
terest with which Lord Arranmore listened to 
these details. 

"Yes," said Miss Macguire; u one of the 
nuns of Galway, is the toast of the county, and 
parades her veil and rosary every night on the 
Mall. To go into a nunnery here, is to take 
out a brevet of coquetry."* 

" How came she at Miss Mac Taafs, do 
you know, Lord Arranmore?" asked Lady 
Knocklofty. 

" No, Madam, I never saw her before, (heard 
her, I should say), for I scarcely saw her, even 
then." 

• This is now no longer true. Through the influence 
of protestant persecution, all catholic institutions an 
daily acquiring new force ; and (bigotry, engendering 
bigotry,) the papist grows more papistical, as the protestant 
becomes more proselytising. 

VOL. IV. G 



122 THE 0'.BIUEXS ASD 

*' I suspect," said Lady Honoria, smiling 
significantly, " she came in, like other people, 
on the invitation of the knave of clubs ; for Miss 
Monica knew nothing about her, and was just 
going to make some inquiries, when we came 
away." 

u How odd !" said Lady Knocklofty, yawn- 
ing again, and twirling a ring on her third 
finger, which now divided the attention of Lord 
Arranmore, with this account of the bonne 
grace. It was the pearl of Lough Corrib ! 

" Come," said Lady Honoria, now yawning, 
or affecting to yawn, as she took a candle, " it 
is time to go to bed, — I never was so weary," — 
and kissing her friend on either cheek, she 
wished Lord Arranmore good night, gave a nod 
to Miss Macguire, and departed, Miss Mac- 
guire following her example. 

" Lord Arranmore," said Lady Knocklofty ; 
" after so much fatigue, you will be happy 
to retire also. Shall I ring the bell for the 
groom of the chambers, to shew you to your 
room ?* 

" The night is so fine, 1 ' said Lord Arran- 



THE o'l'LAHERTYS. 123 

more, looking through the glass-door that 
opened on a balcony, near which he was 
standing, " and I feel so little disposed to 
sleep, that I believe, now I have the pleasure 
of seeing your ladyship perfectly safe, I will 
walk down to the beach, and get into one of 
those fishing-boats, which will soon put out ; 
and so relieve my aunts from their anxiety, as 
soon as I possibly can." 

Lady Knocklofty now rose too, and approach- 
ing the window, which she threw open, said, 
" We cannot possibly part with you thus ; you 
must not always arrogate to yourself the power 
of conferring obligations, and escaping even from 
the expression of the gratitude they excite. 
Come, you must remain ; and I will send for 
your dressing things, and write to my aunts 
Mac Taafs, to beg you off; and promise that 
they shall have their c faithless tassel back again.' 
Besides, 4 I have a long arrear of — hate — to 
settle with Alonzo,' * and she dropped her eyes 
and smiled. 

" And I, Madam," said Lord Arranmore, in 

considerable emotion, " I have also n At 

g 2 



124 THE O'BRIENS AX1> 

that moment, the groom of the chambers 
entered. 

" Morrison,'' said Lady Knocklofty, " bring 
in chamber-lights, and get meaglass of lemonade: 
and be in the anti-room to conduct Lord Arran- 
more to his bed-chamber." 

Morrison bowed obedience, and retired to 
execute his orders. 

Lady Knocklofty now passed the glass-door 
and advanced to the balcony, which hung imme- 
diately over a beautifully wooded inlet of the 
sea. A long line of silver moon-light was 
reflected from its glassy waters ; while the 
morning-star was already glittering above a 
dark and rocky promontory to the left of the 
castle. " What a lovely night ! what a sublime 
scene !" said Lady Knocklofty, throwing her 
arms over the balustrade of the balcony. 
O'Brien folded his, as he stood beside her, 
more occupied by herself, than even by the 
sublime and magnificent scenes, to which she 
directed his attention. " When I am here." 
she said, " I wonder how I can exist elsewhere. 
These arc the scenes, and these the objects for 



THE oVLAHERTYS. 125 

which I was intended," (and she raised her eyes 
to his face). "You will scarcely believe how 
little I belong to the world, in which my ill, 
(or as that world supposes, my good) fortune has 
thrown me. It is impossible, Lord Arranmore, 
to describe the emotions with which these scenes 
inspire me,— or the religious enthusiasm they 
awaken. Do you not think that such objects 
communicate to the mind a portion of their own 
grandeur, and raise it to a loftier cast ?*' 

" I can believe their influence, Madam," said 
Lord Arranmore, " for I have felt it ; but I can 
imagine a position, in which even such scenes 
lose their influence, and where there is that 
within the heart, which dulls < all feeling else, 
save what beats there.' " 

" Can there then be any state of feeling, 
which an hour so calm, a scene so sublime — I 
had almost said so holy — would not exclusively 
engross ? Can there be an emotion they would 
not compose, a thought they would not soothe ?"' 
asked Lady Knocklofty. 

" Yes, Madam, I feel at this moment that 
there is," said Lord Arranmore. He paused, 



126 THE O'BRIENS AND 

confused and agitated. Alone, and at such an 
hour, in such a place, with one who had once so 
deeply interested him, and who, through good 
and evil report, had still occupied his thoughts, 
he was at a loss how to proceed; but Lady 
Knocklofty had now turned her full and softened 
eyes, with a look of anxious inquiry on his face, 
and he yielded to the impetuous frankness of 
his nature, to his usual impulse to 

" Parlar prima, e pensar poi," 

and without any preliminary observation, he 
beffffed a moment's audience, and then entered 
at once upon the events of his recent life, his 
conduct and his feelings, as far as they were con- 
nected with the interest she had taken in his fate, 
and with the party to Avhich she was attached. 
While dwelling with an uncalled-for vehemence 
on his gratitude, his respect, his admiration for 
herself, he gave to sentiments of mere gallantry, 
drawn forth by the presence of their object, a 
warmth more consonant to the excitement of the 
moment, than to the nature of the feelings which 
prompted them. 



the o'flahertys. 127 

Lady Knocklofty listened with the deepest 
attention, leaning her cheek upon her hand, her 
eyes turned full upon his, and her quick respira- 
tion almost fluttering the curls upon his brow, 
and heaving the muslin scarf thrown over her 
bosom. 

" I have always believed you,* 1 she said, when 
he had ceased to speak, " more sinned against 
than sinning ; and party runs so high in this 
wretched country, while the government people 
feel themselves so imperiously called upon to put 
down every symptom of a revolutionary nature, 

that But this is not the point. Some of my 

dearest friends are among your party — Lord 
Walter, for instance. It was not, then, the poli- 
tical crimes alluded to, that injured you in my 
opinion ; my feelings were more at home, more 
selfish. What did you mean by returning me 
my ring?" 

" I return your ring, Lady Knocklofty ? 
Gracious heavens V 

" And with that insulting inuendo, too ; 
which, however well it might have become the 
standard of the Irish Brigade, was, when ad- 



128 THE O'BRIENS AND 

dressed to one, who, in the fulness of heF gra- 
titude, (which vanity might have construed into 
another sentiment !) " 

" Good God ! what can your ladyship allude 
to ? The ring, the precious ring, that is now 
on your finger, was drawn most mysteriously 
from mine, as I lay asleep in St. Patrick's 
Hall, and exchanged for that which I now 
wear.''* 

" It was sent to me," said Lady Knocklofty, 
" wrapped up in a fold of paper, on which was 
written, ' Fais ce que doy, arrive que pourraS " 

Lord Arranmore changed colour; the voice 
and counsel of the bonne grace seemed to 
sound again in his ear, even from the lips of 
one, who made him feel every moment how dif- 
ficult it was, in particular positions, to follow 
the admonition. 

" Lady Knocklofty," he said, after a pause, 
" I am the victim of some mysterious agency — 
be it for my good, or for my ill — of whose 
exivStence I am only conscious by the influence 
it exerts over my actions. By whom my ring 
was purloined, I know not. I had, indeed, sus- 



the cTflahertys. 329 

pected that it was yourself; and that, jo ue de 
tend part, this trick made a part of the general 
frolic, in which I played so very foolish a part."' 

" Then it was not you, who sent it back to 
its imprudent donor," said Lady Knocklofty ; 
" and covering an insult in an epigram, made 
her doubly feel her folly and indiscretion ?" 

" Me ! Good heavens ! what in my character, 
my conduct (even little as you can know of 
either), could lead your ladyship to indulge a 
suspicion so derogatory to the feelings of a 
gentleman — of a man ? Give me back," (said 
O'Brien, with eagerness), u that precious ring : 
1 reclaim it in right, in justice; it is the only 
indemnification I can receive for the injury you 
have inflicted to one, who (many as may be his 
faults and frailties), is yet guiltless in all where 
woman is concerned." 

The white hand, on which the ring gleamed, 
lay on the balustrade, like snow in the moon- 
shine. Lady Knocklofty sighed and smiled, 
and said, " No, I must not, ought not, cannot 
give it again. Remember, fais ce que day. 

" And I will take the advice as my wishes 
g 3 



130 

construe it," said Lord Arranmore, ardently ; 
and raising the unresisting hand, timidly and 
reverentially, he had nearly drawn off the ring, 
when a loud, shrill blast suddenly and sadly 
sounded from beneath. Lady Knocklofty started, 
and drew back her hand ; and the ring fell into 
the deep waters below. 

Both remained for a moment silent. To one, 
that solemn, savage sound, came with an awful 
effect ; for the erring are always superstitious. 
To the other, it came as a well-known warning — 
it was the mountain modulation of Shane's sylvan 
horn. A moment afterwards the splash of an 
oar was heard ; but the shadows of the beetling 
rocks concealed the boat — if boat there was — 
which might have skirted the indentures of the 
shore, and contained this strange haunter of 
woods and waters. 

" How wild, how strange V* said Lady Knock- 
lofty, shuddering. 

" I fear, 1 ' said Lord Arranmore, " I fear the 
sudden sound has alarmed you. It probably 
came from some fishing boat cruising about the 
creeks." 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 131 

" It has indeed shaken me," said Lady 
Knocklofty softly , " for I am horribly nervous : 
but suppose we take it as a warning." 

" Perhaps I should," said Lord Arranmore ; 
" for if there is danger it can be to me alone/' 

U I trust there is none to either ; and for you. 
though chance has led you into the enemy's camp, 
you are at least protected by the laws of war. : ' 

" But," said Lord Arranmore, smiling. <; I 
am here without the knowledge of the comman- 
der of the forces, and being neither hostage nor 
prisoner, I cannot claim the protection of those 
laws." 

" No," said Lady Knocklofty, " a prisoner 
you certainly are not ; and if you will go at 
this unseasonable hour, and after such fatigues, 
my carriage shall attend you ; but — " 

" Will go ! Good Heavens ! Lady Knock- 
lofty, I must, I ought : restored to your good 
opinion, flattered, perhaps intoxicated by your 

condescension But judge for me; the guest 

of Lord Knocklofty I can never be, and your 
guest, in his absence, I ought not to be.'' 

So young and so discreet ! and yet discre- 






J 32 THE O'BRIENS AND 

tion is not the virtue I suspect you of," replied 
Lady Knocklofty significantly. 

"You would wrong your judgment, if you did; 
but there is a certain feeling of self-respect, a 
voice that will be heard." 

" Come, come,'' said Lady Knocklofty, " place 
your feelings of self-respect in abeyance for the 
present ; and listen to a voice that is not used to 
solicit in vain. Instead of embarking in a 
fishing-boat for the port of Bog Moy, you shall 
commit yourself to a well-aired bed, to which 
Morrison, you see, is ready to pilot you. Still I 
enter into your feelings, and respect them ; and, 
had I such a son, thus would I wish him to act." 
She sighed softly. 

" And had I such a mother ," said O'Brien, 
taking her hand, " I would " 

" Endeavour to run away from her, as you 
do now from me," interrupted Lady Knock- 
lofty, laughing, and struggling to release her 
hand. 

" And fail in the attempt, as / do now," said 
Lord Arranmore. 

" Then you will stay," said Lady Knock- 



the o'flahertys. 133 

lofty, playfully, " under this fatal roof, for one 
night at least. Hark ! do you not hear * the 
raven himself is hoarse that croaks the entrance 
of Duncan under our battlements/ "' 

" I hear but one sound," replied Lord Arran- 
more with great animation, " 'tis the voice of a 
syren ! and I will not affect to resist a spell to 
which the wisest have yielded. I accept your 
ladyship's hospitality for this night, and to- 
morrow " 

" Oh ! for to-morrow," said Lady Knock- 
lofty, gaily, " * sufficient to the day is the evil 
thereof;' but I will sign a bond of release, if you 
have any fears for your personal liberty." 

" I confess I have, 1 ' he replied eagerly ; " but 
for the bond T 

" For the present, however," said Lady 
Knocklofty, throwing down her eyes, " you 
must accept my note of hand. Lord Arranmore 
pressed the hand thus graciously presented to 
him, to his lips, with uncontroulable ardour; and 
Lady Knocklofty, withdrawing it, in apparent 
confusion, re-entered the dressing-room, and 
called Morrison to conduct Lord Arranmore to 



134 THE o'keiens and 

his room. Morrison, who was dozing in the 
anti-chamber, entered, Lady Knocklofty rang 
for her maid, but suddenly turning round, and 
beckoning her guest back to the window, she 
said, in a low voice, 

" It is right I should tell you (for perhaps 
you are not aware) how deeply you have been 
calumniated by our side of the house. I do not 
allude alone to heresy and schism, atheism and 
sedition ; but there is a rumour that you were 
dismissed your regiment under circumstances 
which render it a delicate matter for military 
men to cultivate your acquaintance. This, my 
young friend, Lord Charles, is most desirous to 
do ; and, in short, you must take an oppor- 
tunity of talking with him to-morrow, after 
breakfast. Know him, and like him for my 
sake." 

Lord Arranmore turned pale with rage and 
indignation. His lips trembled with emotion. 
" Can I see Lord Charles now F* he demanded 
eagerly. 

" He is not yet returned, of course, or we 
should have heard of it, 1 ' replied Lady Knock- 
lofty. 



THE O'FI.AHERTYS. 135 

Lord Arranmore now stood biting his lips 
and looking at his nails ; and the conflicts pour- 
trayed on his changeful features, evinced that 
thoughts dark and stormy as thunder clouds were 
passing over his mind. Lady Knocklofty gazed 
on him with that expression with which a vir- 
tuoso eyes some splendid production of art. 

" I am sorry,'' she said, M that what I have 
mentioned has affected you. Pray think no 
more of it, till to-morrow at least. It was right 
you should know it before you met Lord Charles 
at breakfast.'' 

" Certainly," said Lord Arranmore ; " and I 
owe your ladyship a thousand thanks for putting 
it into my power to enter upon my defence 
against the blackest and most libellous calumny 
that the wickedness of party ever invented, to 
wring the feelings, and blast the reputation of its 
victim. And yet, Lady Knocklofty, I cannot, 
will not, stoop to justify myself from this 
groundless, infamous charge. If Lord Charles 
believes it, let him. To explain would be to 
commit the only dignity I have left. But to 
you '' 



136 THE O'BRIENS AND 

He drew forth a pocket-book, and taking 
from it a letter, he continued, " This letter was 
written to my father on my leaving the Austrian 
service. I had already tendered my resignation, 
which the Prince de Ligne did me the honour 
not to accept ; giving me time to re-consider my 
purpose. Meanwhile the insolence of a superior 
officer, who affected to treat an Irish gentleman 
as he was daily treating his subaltern officers — 
But I will not obtrude upon your ladyship a 
wearisome detail of circumstances, without in- 
terest for you, and full of disgust for me. Pour 
trancher le mot, my challenge was refused, and 
I was permitted to retire." 

Lady Knocklofty took the letter and said, 
" I find it is a service of danger to accuse you ; 
it only increases the prepossession which it is 
your privilege to inspire. Well, fies-vous a 
moi, and now, good night, and fair-boding 
dreams." 

M Good night, dear Lady Knocklofty," said 
O'Brien, soothed by her smiles, and more than 
soothed by her flattery. Bowing on the hand, 
again presented him, he followed the groom of 



THE OFLAHEETYS. 137 

the chambers along the carpeted corridors to 
the elegant sleeping-room prepared for him ; a 
strange contrast to the bawn, and the tower, 
and the Brigadier's press bed at Bog Moy. 

" What a creature P? said Lady Knocklofty ; 
which in a woman's lips means everything ex- 
pressive of admiration or of contempt, according 
to the inflexion of voice or expression of smile 
with which it is accompanied. A deep sigh 
was the comment on this text ; and, throwing 
herself into the cushioned depths of her fauteuil, 
while her maid placed a. peignoir over her shoul- 
ders and relieved her tresses from the confine- 
ment of black pins and bandeaus, she opened 
the letter of the Prince de Ligne, and read as 
follows : 

"A Milord Arranmore, §c. fyc. 

" Mi Lord, 

" Votre fils a fait une grande indiscretion, il 
ne fera jamais une bassesse. II s'est cru oblige 
de se battre avec un officier superieur, et la 
discipline Autrichienne s'est cru oblige de lui 



138 THE O'BRIENS AND 

donner sa demission; c'est dans l'ordre. II a 
ete mon aide-de-camp, je voudrais bien qu'il le 
f fit encore. Je vous le renvois avec regret, mais 
avec honneur. II est peu docile, il ne sera 
jamais rampant. Depuis l'age de quinze ans, 
volontaire dans mon regiment, il a eu des petites 
aventures tres-brillantes dans toutes les cam- 
paignes. Mais ce brave militaire n'est plus soldat 
— il m'as&ure qiTil ne le sera jamais. Cependant 
il sera toujours courtois chevalier, pret a venger 
les injures des femmes, et a redresser les torts 
de la societe. Voila une vocation assez dange- 
reuse ! Emoussez sa fougue par quelque pro- 
fession sobre, et il deviendra bon citoyen ; mais 
gardez-vous bien de lui oter ce feu de l'ame, 
source, peut-etre, de quelques imprudences, mais 
aussi de toutes les vertus. 
Je suis, milord, 

Avec la plus haute consideration, 
&c. &c. &c. 
" Le Prince de Licks." 

In an elegant breakfast-room, opening into a 
lawn, studded with flower beds, and command- 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 139 

ing the ocean with its numerous isles and islets, 
Lord Arranmore found himself on the morning 
following his arrival at Beauregard. Although 
it was mid -day, no one had yet attended the 
breakfast-table, and he had ample leisure to reflect 
on the unlooked-for events of the preceding 
evening. 

These incidents had not only occupied the 
sleepless vigils of Lord Arranmore, but fur- 
nished endless sources of reflection — as alone 
and spiritless he occupied, for far more than 
an hour, the sofa in the breakfast parlour. More 
than once he started, and asked himself if all 
were not a dream, — a question which the re-ap- 
pearance of his masked tormentor upon the 
scene, in a time and place so little expected, 
rendered not unnatural. He was now convinced 
that the voice of the bonne grace was not un- 
known to him ; and connecting it with her 
advice conveyed in his own motto, her peculiar 
foreign accent, and her spirited conversation, he 
was almost led to believe that this reformer of 
Irish convents was one of the penitenti rossi of the 
fancy ball in Dublin ; the Nuccia of the Carnival 



140 THE O'BRIENS AND 

in Rome, — perhaps the harpist at the castle, the 
vision of O'Brien House, the guide of the 
grotto at Cong, and, in a word, 

" Le fantome mysterieux qui troubla son repos," 

by an almost supernatural agency, wherever his 
wayward destiny had led him. Her transmu- 
tations, various as they were, seemed to him but 
to realize the artifices of Annibal, (as described 
by his favourite historian, Polybius,) " who pro- 
cured artificial suits of hair, adapted to persons 
of every age, and habits that corresponded with 
them ; and varying his dress continually, lay 
so well concealed, that not those alone who had 
seen him transiently, but even his intimate 
acquaintance could scarcely know him." 

What the object of this female Annibal might 
be, he could not conjecture. The sum of all 
his reflections, inferences, and combinations was, 
that she was Irish by birth, foreign by breed- 
ing; — that her name was O' Flaherty, and her 
residence a religious retreat in the mountains of 
Moycullen ; — that she was interested in his des- 
tiny, for others, or for himself; — that she had 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 141 

been known to his father, as she was to his uncie 
and to Shane, (one whom he now believed the 
agent of all). But if this " airy nothing" had 
indeed a local habitation and a name, what a 
woman ! how organized ! how gifted ! how ac- 
complished ! She justified all that he had heard 
of the talents and acquirements of the sister 
Irene of Rome, the foundress of Cuore Sagro. 
If with such a mind her person corresponded — if 
with such an intellect and such talents, she had 
the eyes, the smile of Lady Knocklofty,— such 
eyes, such smiles as gleamed on him at part- 
ing the night before, — he sighed and shuddered ; 
and folding his hands on his brows, threw back 
his head on the sofa, and wished he was safely 
away, even at Bog Moy. 

" II existe une morale fondec sur la nature dc 
rhommc, independante de toutes les opinions spe- 
cuhtives, anterieure a toutes Us conventions"'* 
This moral existed, and in great intensity, in the 
mind of him who now applied to himself the 
observation of one he loved to read and cite ; but 

* Franklin, cite par Condorcet, dans son £loge de ce 
philosophe. 



142 the cTbriens akd 

what passions had not this morale to combat ? 
Lord Arranmore determined, cost what it might, 
to return that day to Bog Moy ; yet three days, 
three delightful days, elapsed without his putting 
the sage resolution into practice. The letter of the 
Prince de Ligne had produced all the influence 
it was calculated to exert upon minds, on which 
the rank and celebrity of the writer were more 
powerful than even his genius and his worth. 

With Lord Charles it reinstated him as a gal- 
lant and distinguished officer. With the worldly 
Lady Hcnoria, and with Miss Macguire, the 
homme comme ilfaut, the aide-de-camp and friend 
of the Prince de Ligne, was a far different per- 
sonage from the son of a pauper peer and 
relapsed papist, " whom nobody knew."" 

Lady Honoria had now also other views, 
than when she had preached discretion to her 
fair friend and disciple, on the occasion of the 
review in the Phcenix Park. Mr. Stratton was 
ill in Dublin of an incurable disease, increased by 
daily intemperance. The influence she had ob- 
tained over Lord Knocklofty, through his vanity 
and indolence, was now becoming a habit,— the 



the o'flaheetys. 14?3 

tyrant of weak minds and of idle ones. Nature 
and fate, she believed, combined to complete 
the ruin of Lady Knocklofty. Nothing could 
save her : and as somebody must inevitably 
benefit by her errors (a wife being a necessary 
appendage to a great man), she saw no reason 
why she should not be the future lady of Proud- 
fort House, and of Beauregard, as well as 
another. Sometimes, indeed, her wavering 
calculations had been directed to influencing the 
Duke, sometimes to winning upon Lord Charles, 
who was aux ecoutes : but now they were all con- 
centrated on the point most consonant with her 
wishes, by the re-appearance of that individual 
upon the scene, whom, in her long experience of 
the fancies and passions, platonic or capricious, of 
Lady Knocklofty, was the person who had most 
worked on her imagination ; or on that very 
equivocal species of sensibility, she called her 
heart. 

She had purposely left them a champ libre 
for that mutual explanation, which must inevi- 
tably take place. The confident of all Lady 
Knocklofty's secret thoughts, she guessed, that 



14-4 THE O'BRIENS AXD 

the re-action would be favourable to the resto- 
ration of the offender to her good graces. When 
therefore she heard Lord Arranmore retire to his 
chamber, she stole softly to Lady Knocklofty's 
dressing-room, and found her in the first rap- 
tures of the perusal of the Prince de Ligne's 
letter. The maid was immediately dismissed. 

" There," said Lady Knocklofty, " you see 
my first impression was right ; and that this 
** boy with the eyes,'" turns out an hero of 
romance after all."" 

Lady Honoria read the letter with attention. 

" Is not this a charming character ?'' asked 
Lady Knocklofty. 

M Tant pis pour vous, ma belle" said Lady 
Honoria, with an admonitory shake of the 
head. 

"However," said Lady Knocklofty, "you 
know my way. I must be amused, and above 
all, in this tiresome place.'' 

" Amused !" said Lady Honoria, shaking her 
head again, and looking moral. 

" Come, come, 11 said Lady Knocklofty, 
smiling, " let me have my frolic out." 



the o'flahertys. 145 

" Your frolic, child! — your fever, you mean ; 
an intermitting one, however, for I thought you 
were ' dismissed cured,' long since." 

" Psha ! I never was on the sick list ; or if I 
were, I am now so perfectly convalescent, that 
you may trust me. I mean nothing but ' a 
little sport withal," 1 as Rosalind says, to enable 
me to get through this eternal electioneering 
summer ; nor no further in sport neither, than 
with safety of a pure blush I may in honour 
come off again.'' 

" Well, to quote from your own Rosalind, en 
tout bien et toute honneur, of course,** ? said Lady 
Honoria, laughing; " one thing is very clear, with 
respect to your 8 gentle, strong, and valiant Or- 
lando,' viz. that it rests only with you ' to cry 
hem and have him, 1 if such an idle victory can 
be an object to you." 

rt I am not so sure of that," said Lady 
Knocklofty, shaking her head ; " and in the 
difficulty of the conquest lies, perhaps, its sole 
value. His Irish spirit is sadly at odds with 
his Irish gallantry; and to fall in love out of 

VOL. TV. H 



146 THE O'BRIENS AND 

the ranks of opposition, he considers a mispri- 
sion of nationality ; in fact, he has as good as 
told me so." 

" And therefore you are pique au jeu^ 
observed Lady Honoria. " Oh ! there is no- 
thing like the quintessential coquetterie of you 
women of sentiment." 

" Come, now, confess," said Lady Knock- 
lofty, " that to vanquish the proud resistance 
of this ami Paladin, will be an amusing task 
for a dull summer at least ; and that it will 

' Be pastime passing excellent, 
If it be husbanded with modesty,' 

to witness the struggle between patriotism and 
prepossession in that young and ardent mind. 
What a principle to overcome ! what prejudice 
to vanquish !" 

"But you do not mean to let Lord K. and 
the Duke find him here? You will let the 
' foolish fluttering thing' go back to his cage 
at Bog Moy, after a day or two ?" 

"Certainly: just birdlime his feathers as a 
warning against presumption, and then let him 



the o'flahertys. 147 

<jo. In short, there is a pleasure in making 
a conquest, even though you should turn it to 
no account." 

u To what account can you turn it ?" said 
Lady Honoria, yawning, " except you could 
reconcile Lord K. to him, in the case of old 
Daly's death, and a new election ; then, indeed, 
the influence of his popular name might be of 
use." 

i£ A good idea," said Lady Knockloftv. 
" My dear Honoria, they ought to make you 
Chancellor of the Exchequer; your resources 
are exhaustless." 

" Such as they are, my dear Albina, they are 
always at your service," said Lady Honoria; 
and the dear friends and confidants then again 
kissed, and parted for the night. 

On the morning following this " colloquy sub- 
lime," the entrance of Miss Macguire with her 
keys of office (that is of the tea-store) , put to flight 
the train of thoughts, and scattered the thick- 
coming visions, which gave to the attitude and 
countenance of Lord Arranmore, the character 
of one absorbed in waking dreams of deepest 
h 2 



148 THE O'BRIENS AMD 

reverie. Smiling upon the aide-de-camp of the 
Prince de Ligne, as she had never smiled upon 
the prisoner of the castle-guard, whom she had 
assisted to play off, for the amusement of Lord 
Kilcolman, she now rallied him upon his deep 
abstraction, and hinted her suspicions, that some 
of the fair Os and Macs of the Irish Paphos, 
from whom they had conveyed him away, were 
the cause of it. There was something so obvi- 
ously false and heartless in this pleasantry, that 
Lord Arranmore replied to it coldly ; and he 
was relieved, though somewhat embarrassed, by 
the entrance of Lady Knocklofty, leaning on the 
arm of Lord Charles. They entered from the 
lawn, on which the breakfast-room opened by a 
French window. Lord Charles almost rushed 
on him, with an unmeasured cordiality, charac- 
terized by his usual awkwardness and brusquerie. 
He shook both his hands ; and without alluding 
to the past, muttered something, that seemed 
intended for an apology, or a compliment ; it 
was not easy to discover which. 

The entrance of Lady Honoria gave a turn 



149 

to the conversation, and the Jug Day at Bog 
Moy formed its principal topic. 

u When did you get home, Lord Charles P 1 
asked Lady Knocklofty ; " and where did you 
leave the General and Horace Montague ?'' 

" At their quarters in St. Grellan : they are 
going to a review at Gal way ; and they only ar- 
rived in time to dress and be off." 

" And the Brigade Major ?" asked Miss 
Macguire, laughing, u Cousin O'Mailly, of the 
Owl's country?" 

"Oh! by Jove, I never saw a fellow so 
happy. Lord Arranmore, he'll cut you out, 
you may depend upon that. I heard your aunt 
invite him to shoot on the bog ; and offer him 
the services of Paddy Whack, and a bed in the 
barrack-room." 

" I assure you," said Lady Honoria, " he 
asked me gravely, if there was raally a knight- 
hood in the family like the knight of Kerry's."" 

"Of course, you swore to the fact," said Lady 
Knocklofty. 

" Of course. But seriously, Lord Arran- 
more, I advise you to have a strict eye to 



150 THE O'BRIENS AND 

your elder aunt ; for CMealy is evidently 
enamoured des beaux yeux de sa cassette, and if 

you are not quite sure of the intail ." Lady 

Honoria stopped short, observing, that on the 
subject of his aunts, Lord Arranmore rientendait 
pas raillerie ; and then added, in another tone, 
" Joking apart, CTMealy is such a ways-and- 
means fellow, that I have no doubt he will make 
Bog Moy his head quarters, when the Knock- 
lofty s are gone.'' 1 

c * And excellent quarters they are," said 
Lord Charles. " Never tasted such claret 
in all my life. How it did flow, by Jove ! 
Then the women ! what lovely creatures. There 
is not a rout in London could shew such a 
turn out : and amazing good manners too, I 
can tell you. There is nothing in your Dublin 
set like that Mrs. Paddy Lynch, with her large 
eyes, and the dimple in her chin. By Jove ! 
only think of the four Miss Roistrums, as com- 
pared with these Connaught beauties." 

" The comparison is not fair," said Miss 
Macguire, piqued for the honour of Dublin 
society. " The Miss Roistrums are your tic 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 151 

douloureux, Lord C; besides, they are bad speci- 
mens. They owe their place in society, to their 
father's place under government; and are handed 
down from viceroy to viceroy, and regiment to 
regiment, with state-chairs and barrack-fixtures. 
Pray don't quote them, when you go back to 
your set in London, as specimens of the Dublin 
beauties.*'' 

" Why, one sees them every where," said 
Lord Charles ; " while quantities of pretty crea- 
tures, whom one only meets at the park, the 
theatre, or the rotunda, are kept back, because 
they don't belong to the official set. One does 
not come to Ireland to be rode rough-shod over 
by the demi-ton of London. Why, there are 
those nine Miss Flamboroughs, as we call them, 
who give themselves such airs here, and cut 
right and left in the hauteur of their ■ insolence 
of office.' In London, it is quite another thing 
With them." 

" But, still, they are so very pleasant, and 
talk so much, and so well," said Miss Macguire. 
" Yes, and talk and look so like, that Falk- 
land of our's made love t'other night to Miss 



152 THE o'briens and 

Emmeline, thinking she was his old London 
flame, Miss Anna Maria." 

" N'importe" said Lady Honoria: " it is a 
joint-stock concern, a family firm, — we call it 
the New Consolidated London Assurance Com- 
pany — and provided you deal with the house, 
it matters not with which of the partners/ ' 

Every body laughed. 

" Bravo," said Lord Charles. " You Irish 
women are so pretty and so witty, and give such 
good nick-names, you might carry all before you, 
if you were only true to yourselves. What do 
you say, Lord Arranmore ?" 

" I am of the non-imputation confederacy, 
of course," said Lord Arranmore, laughing. 
" Beauty is the staple commodity of the country, 
and superior to any fabric which foreign policy 
would impose on us. But it is the old fashion of 
Ireland to neglect its native produce, and to 
give the preference to whatever comes marked 
with the stamp of a distant market." 

Lord Arranmore now rose to take his leave ; 
but against this proposition there was a general 
outcry. The silken flag of a beautiful barge, 



the oVlahertys. 153 

which was that day to take the party to the 
Isles of Arran, was fluttering through the trees, 
in the bay below. 

M A long-planned expedition," said Lady 
Knocklofty, " for which you, Lord Arranmore, 
are yourself accountable ; and we could not pos- 
sibly undertake our voyage of discovery under 
better auspices, than when piloted by the chief 
of the Isles." 

The proposal was irresistible : but yet Lord 
Arranmore resisted. " He had only his evening- 
dress, — was in shoes and stockings." That was 
easily remedied ; Lord Charles had made up 
some jackets and trowsers for the boating parties 
of Beauregard ; and a suit of them was at his 
service. 

But his aunts ! He was desirous to relieve 
the anxiety, which his absence must naturally 
awaken. 

A man and horse would do that much more 
expeditiously. 

The man and horse were accordingly dis- 
patched; and the chief of the Isles of Arran 



154< THE O'BRIENS AND^ 

once more visited the rocks of his nativity, and 
realm of his fancied inheritance, under circum- 
stances the least probable, and least " dreamed 
of in his philosophy." 



the o'flahertys. 15-5 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE EXCURSIONS. 



Xoi ci mettemmo per un bosco 
Che da nessun sentiero era segnato. 



Dante. 



Your accent is something finer, than you could purchase in so 
removed a dwelling. 

As You Like It. 



Bright skies and favouring gales, with eves 
and spirits as sunny and as light, gave promise 
of an halcyon voyage, to the gay pilgrims bound 
to the Isle of Saints, as the party from Beau- 
regard, reinforced by two young militaires from 
St. Grellan, put off from the shore. Every 
feature of the beautiful Bay of Galway had its 
effect. The mountains of Connemara stood out 
from the clear and cloudless horizon ; numerous 
islands spotted the glossy surface of the deep; 
and green shores and gliding barks gave touches 
h 3 



156 THE O'BRIEXR AND 

of home scenery and a busy movement to the 
whole, which took from the usual dreariness of 
sea views. 

Lady Knocklofty observed to O'Brien, with 
whom she conversed in a low tone, that " it was 
all enchantment," and he felt that it was so : 
yet, like other spells, it operated with a mingled 
sensation of sadness and pleasure ; and more 
pleased with others than with himself, he sighed 
to think, that he was revisiting the Isles of Arran, 
under auspices the least appropriate to such an 
occasion. 

Scarcely, however, had the barge approached 
the first and smaller of the isles, when the wind 
changed, and a thick sea-fog sprung up and 
veiled out every speck of land. The pilot, 
unable to make for the port of Arranmore, with 
wind and tide against him, was glad to avail 
himself of the impatience and entreaties of the 
ladies, to run into the first of the islands which 
presented itself. They had scarcely landed, 
when the fog discharged itself in a heavy rain ; 
and the hovel of a kelp gatherer, situated among 
the rocks, was the only asylum against the 



the o'flahertys. 157 

c pitiless pelting of the storm," which the thinly 
inhabited and rocky spot afforded. 

Here an excellent cold dinner, the object and 
reward of all parties of pleasure, with wines of 
the choicest description, and all the fun of 
those little desagremens, which constitute the 
agremens of all such expeditions, occupied and 
amused the time, though it did not fulfil the 
intentions of the party. 

Towards evening, however, the deluge suddenly 
ceased ; a brilliant rainbow threw its arch of 
promise across the calm sky, the winds were 
hushed, and without a " breath the blue wave 
to curl," even had there been a wave (which 
there was not) to be curled by them. The 
part}' re-embarked at sunset ; the sails were 
furled, the oars plied, and moonlight seas, 
and a balmy atmosphere, with the exhilaration 
produced by Burgundy and Champagne, in 
some of the party, and with causes as exciting 
in others, rendered the prolonged voyage home 
still more delightful than the shorter transit of 
the outward-bound crew had proved in the 
morning. It was midnight when the voyagers 



158 THE O'BRIENS AND 

entered the well lighted dining-room of Beau- 
regard ; where a supper was served, which did 
not want the zest of a keen appetite to recom- 
mend it to the palates of the guests. A note 
from Miss Mac Taaf was put into Lord Arran- 
more's hands, as he had just seated himself by 
Lady Knocklofty at the table, which ran as fol- 
lows : — 

" Dear Murrogh, 
" I must take lave to inform you that I am 
highly displazed with your whole behaviour and 
conduct in regard of the Brigadier who never 
left his own table as long as he could sit at it 
nor after, more particularly on a Jug Day. No 
scrambler over rocks nor cliffs nor book-worm ; 
and wonders much ye got to the bottom with 
life, being the first bird or baste ever climbed 
down Carrig-na-Phoaka. And am highly de- 
lighted ye saved Lady Knocklofty's life under 
God's mercy to whom all praise with best re- 
gards, and would have written as intended (also 
my sister Monica) but not a scrap of paper left 
in the place, though have meditated sending for 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 159 

half a quire by Paddy the post from St. Grellan 
this week back for which call on your return at 
Mrs. Costello's. I send a change of linen with 
your foreign riding coat, also the pony and boy 
tied up in your white French cambrick pocket 
handkerchief. No need of saddle-bags which 
you can ride home the boy walking. And laj r 
my commands and injunctions on you to return 
to dinner, not forgetting the lock of the Briga- 
dier's fusil at Peter Lynch's — Major O'Mailly 
shooting himself here to-morrow — so mind you 
are back to the minute, as you value the regard 
of your affectionate Aunt, 

" Mable Mac Taaf." 

Lord Arranmore coloured as he read, twisted 
up the incoherent farrago, and crammed it into 
his pocket ; indignant at the servitude to which 
this despotic old woman sought to reduce him, 
and resolved to resist it, even for the short time 
he intended to remain at Bog Moy. 

" That note bodes no good to our gipsy party 
in the mountains to-morrow, I suspect,"' said 
Lady Knocklofty, whose eyes were fixed on his 



160 THE O'BRIENS AND 

countenance, on which annoyance was strongly 
painted. He smiled, and answered, 

" My aunts desire their best compliments to 
your Ladyship, and congratulate you on your 
safe arrival at Beauregard." 

u But is Cinderella's hour come?" asked 
Lady Honoria, jeeringly — " that's the point ; or 
does the ill-natured old fairy refuse a further 
furlough ?" 

" The old fairy," replied Lord Arranmore, 
" has every claim to my respect ; but none upon 
my time. It is at your Ladyship^s service, in 
any way you please to dispose of it. ,, 

" Take care what you say," said Lady 
Honoria : " you know not how much you may 
commit yourself. The man who makes me 
professions, gives me breath ; but he who gives 
me his time . . . Ask Lady Knocklofty if that 
is not the pierre de touche ; die s'y connoit, 
bonne femme? 

" Oh ! pray don't apply to me," said Lady 
Knocklofty, " I have no maxims on any subject ; 
I am the slave of impulse, and wholly led by my 
feelings, not by my experience: any one may 



THE O'FLAHEItTYS. 161 

deceive me, as long as I deceive myself, and that'* 
(she added with a sigh) " I generally do.'' 

u That is the true secret of deceiving others 
in time," said Lady Honoria. u On commence 
par etre dupe, on Jinit par etre fripon. That 
is we begin by being sensible, and we end by 
feigning it." 

" My hour is not then come," said Lady 
Knocklofty. " I fear— I feel it is far off." 

"But it will come," replied Lady Honoria, 
" it is the natural course of things V 

" I may grow old," observed Lady Knock- 
lofty, passionately, " but never insensible." 

" When you are old, my dear, you may 
grow what you like, but don't talk of it —to live 
to look through spectacles, and see nothing but 
wrinkles! Ouf!" 

Every body asserted, that she, beyond all her 
sex, never could grow old. 

u So the men told Ninon,' 1 said Lady Honoria, 
t€ and yet while entre les deux ages, what was her 
confession — ( Tout le monde me dit, que j'ai 
moins a me plaindre du terns qu'une autre ; mais 



162 THE O'BIUENS AND 

de quelfacon que ce soit, si Von m'avoit pro- 
pose une telle vie,je me serais pendu." 1 ^ 

"The most horrible of all fates," said Lady 
Knocklofty, " is not to live to grow old ; it is to 
preserve the feelings fresh, when the person is 
withered — and yet there are hearts, which time 
cannot reach." 

" Oh ! for your Lady Pentweasles, and 
Lady Wishforts, your green hearts and grey 
hairs, I give them up," said Lady Honoria, 
laughing, and every body laughed with her. 

The men all thought Lady Honoria very 
clever; but they felt that the credulous and 
passionate Lady Knocklofty was irresistible: 
the conversation was then abruptly turned by 
Lady Knocklofty to the intended excursion of 
the following day. 

Among the wildest and most romantic sites 
of the lower range of the Connemara mountains, 
and at ten miles distance from Beauregard, Lord 
Knocklofty had recently built and furnished a 
beautiful sporting lodge, to which, from its 
situation, he had given the name of " the 



THE o'flahertys. 163 

Heaths." To this lodge he was about to repair 
in the early part of the ensuing week, with a 
large party from Lord Altamont's (the Lord 
Lieutenant included). To inspect the necessary 
preparations for so distinguished a company, in 
so remote a place, Lady Knocklofty had planned 
a gipsy party into the mountains for the follow- 
ing day. Servants and sumpter-horses were to 
precede her ; and as the Heaths were only ap- 
proachable (after the first four miles) by bridle- 
ways, through the ravines and mams of the un- 
civilized region, the whole party went of neces- 
sity on horseback. Lord Arranmore had spoken 
of his return to Bog Moy on the next morning, 
yet no one was surprised to see him de la partie. 
Lady Knocklofty was a most accomplished horse- 
woman ; she never looked so well as on horse- 
back — the dress, the air, the exercise became 
her ; it was her strong-hold of coquetry, to 
which she never failed to resort in all cases of 
emergency : and as her two fair friends rode 
almost as well as herself, a cavalcata answered 
the views and purposes of all, and all took 
the field with grace and spirit. 



164 THE O'BRIENS AND 

The party was reinforced by the General and 
his Aide-de-Camps, all feathers and aiguillettes ; 
and as it passed the gates of Beauregard, it had 
that gallant air which characterized the courtly 
cavalry of Whitehall, or Newmarket, when the 
monarch himself acted as the cavalierotto to the 
Stuart or Jennings of the day. 

Lord Arranmore rode a favourite mare of 
Lady Knocklofty's (which seemed as much in- 
clined to keep close to its mistress, as its rider), 
having lent his sure-footed pony to Miss Mac- 
guire. He had got entangled in this second 
party by the provoking hit at his dependence, 
launched by Lady Honoria; at least he attri- 
buted the change in his intention to the circum- 
stance, which, perhaps, might have influenced, 
but certainly did not exclusively occasion it. 
His whole existence, since he had left Bog Moy, 
had been a thraldom. Dissatisfied with himself, 
every principle at variance with his position, he 
had got involved in lines the most delicate, and 
difficult to break through. Long and dangerous 
tete-a-Utes (the more dangerous, because their 
soft muttering was sanctioned by being carried 



165 

on in society,) had put him in possession of a 
secret, which men of the world well know 
how to appreciate, but which, to one, ardent and 
inexperienced, whose very '* virtues had turned 
traitors to themselves," was estimated by another 
standard, than that which the world supplies. 

Not even the seductions of Lady Knocklofty, 
(and her habitually haughty, high-spirited de- 
meanour rendered them but more seducing), 
had touched his heart. But at five and twenty 
there are other avenues to the frailties of nature 
than that of the heart. Lord Arranmore sighed 
to think that he had not even the excuse of feel- 
ing, to sanction his weakness, which, however, he 
placed to the account of gratitude; and he began 
this gipsy expedition with the firm resolution, 
that it should be his last. To provide against 
the possibility of again falling into temptation, 
he had dispatched " the boy" with every thing 
but the riding-dress he wore, to Bog Moy ; and 
he resolved to return to the Brigadier's tower, 
and to all the horrors of his temporary depend- 
ence, that night. 

The gipsy expedition was begun immediately 



166 THE O'BRIENS AND 

after breakfast, in all the brilliancy of spirits 
incidental to that first, fresh season of the day. 
The ornamental grounds, the flourishing planta- 
tions, and old stunted woods of Beauregard were 
soon passed. The verdure of its pasturage, and 
the yellow blossom of its meadows and corn 
fields, were gradually exchanged for the brown 
plains of peat bog and heathy swamps, studded 
with turf stacks ; while a few half-naked cottiers, 
walking up to their middle in the boggy soil, 
and bearing bushes and stones to patch the bog 
road lately laid down by the great lord of the 
district, exhibited in their famished looks and 
squalid rags, a painful contrast to the splendid 
party, who turned aside their eyes, as they passed, 
in pity or disgust. 

The high, wild mountains of Connemara soon 
came upon the eye in all their real ruggedness, 
and divested of those aerial tints, with which 
distance had hitherto beautified them ; and their 
gap, or pass, dark and narrow, was entered 
with feelings almost of awe and apprehension. 
On either side the ravine (scarcely admitting 
two persons to ride abreast), rose in a long Jine 



the o'flahektys. 167 

of lofty and magnificent precipices, shattered 
by the elements, into the boldest and most gro- 
tesque forms, ridge shelving above ridge, like 
artificial galleries. Hollows filled with dark 
vapours, or gleaming with living waters ; moun- 
tains succeeding to mountains, receding, soften- 
ing, and again starting forward upon the hori- 
zon, and admitting through their breaks blue 
glimpses of the distant ocean, or nearer gleams 
of the waters of Lough Corrib, cheated the 
weariness of the way, by that changeful variety, 
which mountain scenery alone possesses. 

Escaping from a mam, whose rocks appeared 
ready to split and fall upon the heads of the 
intruders, and suddenly descending a green and 
slippery track, which fell to the margin of a chain 
of small lakes, — and now again ascending another 
bridle-way, among hiils covered with a stool of 
stunted wood, — the elegant spectators of these 
savage regions, while they exhausted every 
phrase of admiration which Thomson or De- 
lille had supplied, began to exhibit symptoms 
of impatience and weariness ; and to express 
wishes for the termination of the expedition, 



168 THE O'BRIENS AND 

which were still disappointed and delayed. 
The General held up his repeater and touched 
the spring, as a warning to the party: it struck 
four. The guide, a gamekeeper attached to 
the establishment at the Heaths, was again and 
again interrogated as to their position. Did he 
see the lodge ? In which direction did it lie ? 
How far was it off? &c. &c. &c, to all which 
he replied as he could : " Och, you can see it, 
my lady, if yez were on the top of that rock 
there; and saw something very like it a good 
bit ago, but thinks it was Cushlanne-a-Haliah, 
or the Hag"^ castle, where th' ould lady scoulded 
herself to death." 

" That must be my aunt Mac Taaf," whis- 
pered Lady Honoria to Miss Macguire. 

The guide was then called upon for the story 
of " the ould lady," and a quarter of an hour 
was thus beguiled. Lady Honoria, however, 
(who hated parties of pleasure, but liked any 
thing better than remaining at home and alone,) 
at length called after Lady Knocklofty, who 
rode in advance in close conversation with 
Lord Arranmore 



THE o'flahertys. • 169 

" Lady K. we must certainly have a shake- 
down at the Heaths to-night, if indeed we reach 
the lodge before to-morrow morning." 

" I always intended it," said Lady Knock- 
lofty, laughing over her shoulder, " and have 
provided for you all accordingly." 

Every body expressed their surprise, but none 
their satisfaction at this intelligence. 

" Quelle perfidie /" exclaimed Lady Honoria, 
" I hope then, you have provided a compass ; 
and are not without flints and matches, and 
other necessaries for bivouacking, wherever we 
may happen to find ourselves at night fall." 

" I have forgotten nothing," said Lady 
Knocklofty : <4 a cargo of nightcaps and tooth- 
brushes accompany us; for you know our 
friend, Lord Charles, like the Dean of St. Grel- 
lan, is mighty particular who he lends his tooth- 
brush to ; but come, cheer up, you will soon 
find yourself in a palace in the desert, like the 
enchanted castle, in la Belle et la Bete." 

" Ma belle, c^etait Men bete de sefier a vous,' A 
said Lady Honoria, " I, at least, ought to know 
you better/' 

VOL. IV. I 



170 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" But look at that sublime view, Honoria ! 
Lord Charles, have you anything like that in 
Cumberland ?" 

" Never tried, by Jove ; never looked beyond 
the covers. A grove of fine chimneys, on the 
sweet, shady side of Pall Mall, for me." 

" How can you be insensible to such scenes?" 
said Lady Knocklofty. " Good heavens, what 
a prospect !" 

" The prospect of a soup and a sofa," said 
Lady Honoria pettishly, " would be the only 
prospect, that could have a charm for me at 
present. 1 '' 

" Exactly," said Lord Charles, " that's my 
idea too, Lady Honoria, of the sublime and 
beautiful." 

" Well, you are earning the enjoyment of 
both," said Lady Knocklofty, endeavouring to 
keep up the spirits of her party, to the level of 
her own, which were all abroad. " Look at 
that mass of tremendous rock, all sunshine on 
one side, and deep obscurity on the other — what 
a curious effect !" 

" I wish I was oil tlie other,"'' said Lady Ho- 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 171 

noric, u for I am done to a turn, grilUe aux os ; 
the heat is insupportable ; do let us escape from 
this cSte rotie" 

" Well, courage, mon enfant, we must be now 
nearly at our journey's end ; for the last time I 
was here, I rode with my lord, and Lord 
Clanrickard, in two hours and a half from gate 
to gate ; though we went the old road : this is 
the new line." She then asked the guide, what 
difference there was, in the distance between the 
two roads ? 

"Why then I would not take on me to 
say, my lady," replied the guide, taking off his 
hat, and wiping his forehead, with a look of 
some perplexity, as the party now rode up to 
him, " for never came this new line afore ; only, 
just, it was your ladyship's orders." 

" Never !" exclaimed Lady Honoria. 

ct Never V repeated the whole party, in 
various tones of impatience and annoyance. 

" No, in troth, never," replied the guide. 

" Then," said Lady Honoria, with much iil 
temper, " we may as well give up the ghost. I'm 
i 2 



172 THE O'BltlEKS AND 

already in a fever ; je rten peux plus, and here, 
it appears, all resource is cut off." 

The gentlemen affected to laugh ; but were 
not a little perplexed. It was clear that the 
guide had lost his way, or rather had never 
known it. There was, however, no alterna- 
tive, and they continued to follow as he led. 
Every trace of a road, or even of a path, was 
now gradually disappearing; and the horses 
floundered on, through rough masses of rock, 
rising out of the quaking swamps of a peaty 
vegetable soil, till the ravine terminated ab- 
ruptly over one of those deep and desolate 
hollows, which resemble the gaping crater of 
an extinct volcano. A dark, grey pool filled its 
lowest depths, overshadowed by a semicircular 
range of sheltering precipices, whose shaggy 
points were involved in the electric clouds, they 
had drawn from the surrounding atmosphere. 
A narrow stream appeared to unite this seques- 
tered spot to some lake, on the other side of its 
barren rocks ; but neither track, nor mam, nor 
path, nor pass, nor living form, cheered the hope- 
less prospect — which clouded by the now lurid 



the o'flahertys. 173 

and lowering atmosphere, was the very lascia 
speranza of the desolate region. 
Every body quitted their horses. 
u Here is a pretty cut de sac" said Lady 
Honoria, throwing herself on a bank of heather. 
Ci Even if we can find our way back, we have 
full four hours' ride, without relief or refresh- 
ment." 

Lady Knocklofty and Miss Macguire took 
their places beside her ; and the grooms led the 
horses to a natural basin of water, dripping 
from the rocks; while the gentlemen took the 
guide a little in advance (to free themselves 
from the embarrassment of the ladies'* questions 
and complaints), and entered on a consultation. 
But the guide had lost all presence of mind in 
losing his way. His intelligence all depended 
upon the sensible objects, with which it was 
associated ; and of these he had lost sight, after 
the first hour of their journey. He had, in fact, 
taken a totally different road from that recently 
laid down by Lord Knocklofty 's engineer, the 
precursor of one, to whose talents and industry 



174 THE O'BRIENS AND 

the regions of Connemara are now so deeply 
indebted.* 

"While others were consulting and conjecturing, 
Lord Arranmore, to whom these regions were 
familiar, and by whom such obstacles had often 
been encountered, substituted experiment for 
inference, and separating from the party, in 
quest of some means of escape from the embar- 
rassments in which the party were involved, he 
caught the figure of a lonely fisherman who was 
throwing out his line from a little canoe, in the 
depths below. He resolved therefore to descend 
the precipice, and obtain such information as this 
probably native inhabitant of the region, could 
best give them. The steep was not without 
danger : but his confidence in his own agility, 
address, and well practised activity, was autho- 
rized by similar feats, performed in similar difficul- 
ties. He had already began his descent from cliff 
to cliff, and from point to point, when, as he 
paused upon a slippy and rapid descent, almost 
apprehensive to proceed further, a loud, wild 
blast, from a mountain horn, called forth a 
• H. Nimmo, Esq. 



the o'flahertys. 17-5 

thousand echoes from the rocks. It was the 
warning tone, which, in such notes, had often 
checked the reckless temerity of his boyish en- 
terprises, and had of late so frequently sounded 
in moments of exigency and peril. 

He threw up his eyes, and perceived a figure 
perched on the pinnacle of a rock over the heads 
of the party he had left, who were sheltering 
from the sun under its beetling shadows. A 
form more appropriate to the region could 
scarcely be imagined, than this image of " the 
giant Danger," bestriding the toppling cliff, of 
which its rugged and boldly defined limbs 
seemed a part. 

Lord Arranmore again ascended, in the assur- 
ance that a guide was at hand, and that his good 
or evil genius still followed his steps. In his 
ascent he perceived a pathway up the rocks, 
which had hitherto escaped his notice, and that 
of the party : and though the figure of Shane 
had vanished, like a wreath of mountain vapour, 
still as the path led to the spot where he had 
disappeared, Lord Arranmore pursued it ; and 
suddenly found himself upon the smooth summit 



176 THE O'BRIENS AND 

of a table-mountain, which commanded a view, 
contrasting with that from which he had ascended, 
to an extent only to be met with in those altitudes, 
where nature seems relieved from her own laws, 
and sports in the wildest and most capricious 
freedom. 

It was a broad and fertile glen, centered by a 
beautiful lake, and sheltered on all sides, save 
one, by hills and rocks of various forms and 
tints, to which the receding and ruder mountains 
formed a back-ground. The clouds, which had 
obscured the other and steeper side of the accli- 
vity, were here broken into fleecy vapours ; and 
the sun poured a full flood of yellow radiance, 
tinging every hill and hollow, pool and torrent, 
and brightening the clustered walls and pic- 
turesque chimnies of a pile, which (half in ruin, 
half in preservation), lay along the edge of the 
lake. It was manifestly one of those relics of 
ecclesiastical architecture which, rude as they may 
be, are still in Ireland so superior to every other 
monument of antiquity. The lake confounded 
its waters with an inlet of the sea, which, like many 
others, indenting this coast, ran in a long and nar- 



THE o'flahertys. 177 

row channel between the hills. On the brow of 
one of these hills, appeared a cluster of pottages, 
surrounded by symptoms of verdure and cultiva- 
tion ; while a mill, turned by a mountain torrent, 
intimated some considerable progress in industry, 
and civilization, very little to be expected in a 
region so remote. Several figures were seen 
moving from various directions upon one point, 
and that point was the fabric which commanded 
the whole. 

A transition so immediate, from wild and 
boundless sterility, to a scene of such repose 
and loveliness, seemed more the work of magic, 
than of accident. Lord Arranmore gazed in 
emotion ; and for a moment, perceived not, that 
the mountain-sheep cropping the scented her- 
bage from the flat on which he stood, were 
attended by a boy, who lay under the branches 
of a stunted oak. The boy had, however, been 
looking upon him, from his first appearance, 
with a bashful, pleased, and sideling look. 

u What old building is that ?'' demanded 
Lord Arranmore, in as much Irish as he could 
command. 

i 3 



178 THE o'bUIEXS AXD 

" The Abbey of Moycullen," said the child. 

" Is it inhabited?" 

" Och, yes, by the religious ladies of the 
Holy Heart." 

A sudden revulsion of the whole frame, 
brought Lord Arranmore's blood from the heart 
to the head. The boy, who had now risen, 
fondly taking his hand, stood looking in his eyes 
with a glance of recognition. 

" You know me?" said Lord Arranmore, 
endeavouring to recollect him. 

" Agus the Uasal, shure."* 

" And your name, my child ?" 

" Padreen, the son of Emunli-na-Lung. 
That's my daddy, sure ;" and the boy pointed 
to a man, who was sculling over the ferry-boat 
with some passengers, to the other side of the 
lake. Lord Arranmore now recognized one 
of the objects of his commiseration at Ardcrow ; 
and he shook the child's hand heartily. 

" Your father, then," he said, M is the ferry- 
man of this lake, now ?" 

" Aye, indeed ?" said the boy. 
* The Gentleman. 



the oVlaheetys. 179 

Lord Arranmore paused and gazed. This 
then was, in all probability, the habitation of 
one, who, to his imagination, had not appeared 
like " an inhabitant of earth ;" and to this deep 
and lonely seclusion, to this fertile, fruitful do- 
main, the church had again found its way, after 
the lapse and persecution of centuries. For a mo- 
ment, too deeply interested to think of any thing 
but the scene before him, and the object with 
which he believed it to be intimately connected, 
he forgot those whom he had left behind, as if 
they had never existed : a shrill whistle from 
the guide, followed by the repetition of his 
own name, re-echoed among the nether rocks, 
brought him back to the remembrance of an 
association, so little in harmony with the scene 
of his contemplation. His first feeling was that 
of a miser, who suddenly discovering a hidden 
treasure, trembles lest others should follow in 
his track, and share his prize. He felt no desire 
to throw his party in the way of the ladies of 
Moycullen. It seemed a species of sacrilege. 
He knew not why, — he stopped not to inquire, — 
vet when the guide, followed by Captain Hon- 



180 THE O'BRIENS AND 

tague, appeared within a few paces of him, he 
felt something like embarrassment. 

He had been missed, and the party were full 
of anxiety for his safety. The mountain-horn 
had called their attention to the spot from which 
it had sounded ; and the pony ridden by Miss 
Macguire, as if led by the sound, had directed 
its steps towards the ravine, whose mouth, con- 
cealed by brush- wood, afforded a tolerable ascent. 
The party were toiling up on foot; and the 
horses, led by the grooms, followed. 

The scene, which discovered itself to the gaze 
of all, produced many exclamations of wonder 
and admiration. The descent was easy and over 
a mossy soil ; and the guides learned from the 
shepherd boy, that there was a wheel-way along 
the edge of the lake, which led to the shore of 
the Bay, where there was a fishery, and boats 
which plied to St. Grellan, and a bridle track 
along the strand. This was most welcome 
information. It raised the spirits and roused 
the energies of all. 

" So,'' said Lady Honoria, " we have only 
been playing the old part of the King of France 



181 

and his merry men, first * marching up the hill, 
and then marching down again. 5 " 

44 This view,' ; said Lady Knocklofty, "is 
worth all we have suffered. What old building 
is that on the edge of the lake ?* 

44 It's what they call it, the Retrate of the 
Religious Ladies," said the guide. 

44 Then,'" said Lady Honoria, with great 
glee, " this is probably the dwelling of the 
religieuse of Bog Moy, who said, if I would 
take convent fare, — roba di convento, she called 
it — she would be glad to see me. So pray let 
us row over, and beg her hospitality, for I am 
famished. ,, 

" By all means, said the General. u It will 
be quite a Mont St. Bernard adventure. 1 " 

44 1 never saw a nun in all my life, except on 
the stage," said the younger aid-de-camp ; « I 
would give any thing to see a real nun." 

44 I dare say it will be fun alive," said Lord 
Charles, rubbing his hands. 

44 We shall come in for a mouthful of ves- 
pers, too,'' said Miss Macguire : 44 this is just 
the time." 



182 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" And a mouthful of something more sub- 
stantial, too, I hope," said Lady Honoria, 
" though it be but a hot potatoe." 

Lady Knocklofty objected ; she thought it 
best to get home as fast as they could. What 
did Lord Arranmore think ? 

He was quite of her ladyship's opinion. But 
the question being put to the vote, the no's 
carried it. The party therefore descended the 
heights and reached the lake, just as Emunh-na- 
Lung and one of his sons were putting out from 
the opposite side. The boat was hailed, and 
the rower, instantly recognizing his benefactor, 
sprung on shore, and, unmindful of the splendid 
company which surrounded him, fell at Lord 
Arranmore's feet : with all the promptitude of 
Irish gratitude and its hyberbole, he burst into 
tears, kissed his hands, and uttered many excla- 
mations of surprise and delight, at so unexpected 
a meeting. 

" Here is a scene !" said Lady Honoria. 

" What does it all mean, Lord Arranmore?" 
demanded Lady Knocklofty, in the hope she 
would be called on for a sensation. 



the o'flahertys. 183 

He hastily explained ; but the ferryman, full of 
his own good luck, entered more in detail upon its 
history, adding, " that nothing but luck had fol- 
lowed him ever since the hour he had met with his 
honour's goodness ; for that shortly after he was 
visited in his poor cabin, by the supariour of 
the confraternity, and the Reverend Mother had 
taken him into her service, and given the childer 
plinty of laming, and the ateing and the drinking 
goloure? 

w Then pray row us over to the Reverend 
Mother,'' said Lady Honoria, stepping into the 
boat, " for you could not possibly be a fitter 
object of her charity, than we are." The rest of 
the party followed, and Lord Arranmore (last, 
and least willingly.) gave his arm to Lady Knock- 
lofty, who was bored and out of temper. The 
grooms, under the guidance of the shepherd-boy, 
took the horses towards the shore ; where, at the 
distance of a mile, was a tiglileana, or house of 
reception, opposite to which, stood a second 
ferry. The boat then put off ; the oars sparkled 
in the sun-beams ; the scene they were approach- 
ing came forward, in distinct features, as they 



184< THE o'briens and 

advanced, and in less than a quarter of an hour, 
the party landed. 

With a simultaneous expression of surprise 
and admiration, they paused. The Abbey of 
Moycullen, after the lapse of ages, still pre- 
served all its beautiful gothic forms : and, 
submitting more to the aggressions of time, 
than of man (though grey and moss-covered, 
mouldering, and decayed), still exhibited a 
most striking and picturesque exterior. The 
intricacies of the mountain passes, which led 
to it by land, had probably saved it from the 
spoliations of Cromwell's soldiery ; though the 
ferocious fanatics had penetrated into the deepest 
gorges of the Galway mountains, wherever mo- 
nastic establishments had held out the lure of 
plunder.* The. curiously-ribbed oak-roof of 
the church, with its arched and ornamented en- 
trance of the Saxon Gothic, its great window per- 
fect in its delicate tracery, and recently filled with 
stained glass, together with its belfry and clois- 
ters, were in the highest preservation ; while, lying 

* Not very far from Moycullen, at Anghnanure, twenty- 
seven priests were put to death by the Cromwellites. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 185 

partly in ruin, were still visible the old refectory, 
chauntry and cells of its once opulent commu- 
nity ; and a modern building, which harmonized 
externally with the rest, had been built by the 
late Count O' Flaherty, and was now the resi- 
dence (according to the ferryman who served 
as cicerone to the party) of the religious ladies 
of the Abbey. 

As the party advanced from the lake along 
the greensward that spread before the Abbey 
church, they halted to examine an escutcheon 
or lozenge, hanging over the arch of its principal 
entrance. It represented a woman in the habit 
of a nun, offering an heart irradiated by a glory, 
to a monk in the vesture of Loyola, with the motto 
of In hoc signo vinces. This singular sign (on 
which Lady Honoria made observations, which 
to the pious would have sounded like sacrilege), 
attracted the eyes of all, and increased the ge- 
neral amazement; for it was understood by 
none, save Lord Arranmore, who sighed as he 
gazed at it, — when suddenly the low sweet peal 
of the flute-stop of an organ, directed every sense 
to itself. The accidental rising of the dark 



186 THE O'BRIENS AND 

curtain (dropped before the entrance, as in 
foreign churches), by the hand of some peasant 
votarist, gave a transient view of the interior of 
the church ; and the gipsy party, with every 
other intention in abeyance, passed the velum of 
the temple, and entered the sanctuary. 

The perspective was striking. The church, 
though small, was most characteristic of the 
remote times in which it was raised ; and the 
lights which penetrated the fine gothic window, 
at its extremity, fell with singular effect on the 
delicate tracery and pillars. The high altar was 
richly decorated with all the paraphernalia, which 
the catholic church has borrowed from the 
Jewish. The altar-piece was a well-painted 
illustration of " Suffer little children to come 
unto me ; for of such is the kingdom of God :'' 
and little children, clean and well-dressed, to 
the number of thirty, were seated, with looks 
demure and folded hands, round the steps of 
the altar. A venerable ecclesiastic was cele- 
brating the vesper service before the holy table, 
while the responses were chaunted by female 
voices, accompanied by the organ. The chancel 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 1ST 

was separated from the nave by a screen : the 
latter was crowded to excess by a congregation 
of the peasantry ; and in the former, with their 
eyes riveted to the psalters from which they 
were singing, stood the sisters of the community 
of the Holy Heart. In the midst, upon a raised 
chair, sat the Superior, with a superb missal 
open on the desk before her, on which her 
folded hands, just escaping from the long and 
sweeping sleeves of her habit, were laid. Her 
ample robe and voluminous veil, her pose and 
air might have well become a Jeanne de Plais- 
ance, or other princess of the church, in the six- 
teenth century, to whom conscious power and the 
habit of command had communicated an haughty 
ease of demeanour, characterizing alike the move- 
ments and the repose of the possessor. Once, and 
only once, the Keverend Mother turned her head, 
and raised her eyes from the missal to which they 
were directed. It was at the moment when the 
entrance of the strangers, for whom all had made 
way, occasioned some slight disturbance. She 
again, however, let them fall, and remained dig- 
nified and motionless until the symphony of the 



188 the o'briens and 

anthem, which closed the service, commenced, 
when one of the choral sisters replaced her missal 
with a music-book, bowed the knee, and retired to 
her stall. The music selected was a.Salve Regina, 
whose simple counterpoint was well adapted to 
the not very educated voices of the choir. One 
voice, however, in the solo part, was strikingly 
superior to the rest. It was a contralto of the 
rarest description, rich and clouded, yet less 
remarkable for its quality than for the highly 
finished Italian manner of its execution. It 
was the voice of the Superior : and in its mellow 
and well modulated tones, was recognized by 
some of the strangers the voice of the Italian 
harpist of the castle ; while to the one alone to 
whom it communicated emotions the most mixed 
and powerful, it produced the full conviction 
that he again listened to the accents which, even 
in the land of the Syrens, had taken u the pri- 
soned soul, and wrapt it in Elysium."" 

The voice ceased. The organ in full diapa- 
son, commenced a voluntary. The community, 
preceded by their Superior, departed by a door 
that opened from the choir into the interior of 
the edifice. The officiating priest retired into 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 189 

the sacristy, and the sacristan extinguished the 
wax lights that burned in the altar, and veiled the 
shrine, and closed the sacred volume. The 
peasant congregation, each dropping a knee 
before the high altar, and dipping a finger into 
the stone vase of holy water, made their exit ; 
and the party from Beauregard still remained 
leaning against the screen, where they had taken 
their stand on entering, wholly occupied with 
sensations of surprise and pleasure. 

Released, however, from the silence imposed 
by the sacred ceremony, they soon broke forth 
in expressions of amazement and admiration. 
To the young men, the sisters (a very clumsy 
set of persons) appeared angels ; by the women 
they were pronounced dowdies, who in ordinary 
dresses would have been coarse and vulgar. 
Upon the subject of the Superior, there was a 
more general agreement : all felt the imposing 
influence of her dignified and abstracted manner. 
a As she sat," (said the gallant old General), 
u with only her pretty white hands to be seen, she 
reminded me of the charming portrait of the 
Abbess of Fontevrault — 



190 



Elle avait au bout de ses manches 
Une paire de mains si blanches, 
Que je voudrais, en v£rite, 
En avoir 6t6 souffleteV " 



" It is very extraordinary," said Miss Mac- 
guire ; M but I am persuaded that her voice is 
that of the Italian harpist at the castle, which 
threw old Lord Muckross into such raptures, 
and which Lady Honoria pronounced to be le 
plus bel asthme du monde." 

" I wish we had got a better view of her 
face,'" said Lord Charles, u but she shouldered 
us out very explicitly. Lady Honoria, where 
is the convent fare you promised us ?" > 

" I saw nothing that resembled my close 
bonnet acquaintance," said Lady Honoria. " I 
am afraid she is not of them. " But, coute qui 
cciite, we must try our luck ; so, Lady K., send 
in a message to request leave to view the in- 
terior, and trust to Irish hospitality for the 
rest." 

Lady Knock lofty, though least amused and 
most amazed of her party, declared she would 
rather suffer any inconvenience, than take so 



THE O^FLAHERTYS. 191 

great a liberty with a person of so forbidding a 
deportment as the Superior. 

" Forbidding ?" repeated Miss Macguire ; 
" Oh, I assure you that is only the tournure of 
the convent, and is put on and off with the veil 
and scapular/' 

" To be sure it is," said Lady Honoria ; 
" you may trust Kitty Macguire on these points 
— die sy commit" 

At that moment the sister who had played 
the organ descended from the organ loft, and 
Lady Honoria solicited her attention as she 
passed, by requesting her to present the Countess 
of Knockiofty's compliments; when she was 
stopped short by the sister waving her fore- 
finger before her face (the common movement 
of Italian negation), and saying " Non intendo 
llnglese, signora." 

" Who speaks Italian here?" said Lady 
Honoria. 

M Lord Arranmore, you do, of course — 
come forward and translate for us. 1 ' 

Lord Arranmore had hitherto remained apart, 
with his eyes fixed on an altar-piece of a small 



192 THE O'BRIENS AND 

lateral chapel, in the endeavour to conceal his 
pre-occupation, by a feigned admiration of a very 
indifferent work of art. Thus called upon, lie 
turned round ; and in spite of every attempted 
mastery over himself, he coloured to the eyes as 
he recognized in the organist, the elder of the 
Penitenti Rossi of the fancy ball. Lady Ho- 
noria repeated the message, of which he was the 
interpreter, and the foreign nun immediately 
retired to deliver it. 

* 4 Only think," said Lady Honoria, " of their 
having brought over a foreigner to teach these 
creatures music ? What are the papists driv- 
ing at r 

" What, indeed!" said the General, smiling. 
" That Abbess completely realizes my ideas of 
a dangerous papist. 11 

" By Jove, 1 " said Lord Charles, " I should 
like to be of this church militant. That old 
Father Confessor has a fine time of it. 11 

Other common-places followed, till one of the 
sisters returned, and bowing first to the altar, 
advanced with a slight inclination of her head, 
her hands folded sanctimoniously before her, 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 193 

and her demure and downcast look humour- 
ously contrasted with her handsome, broad, and 
very mundane countenance. In a strong brogue 
she delivered the Reverend Mother's compli- 
ments to Lady Knocklofty, inviting the party 
to partake of such poor refreshment as the 
place afforded, since there was nothing in 
the Abbey that was worthy of their inspection. 
As she spoke, she cast a furtive look at the 
military, and added, as from herself, with a 
smile that somewhat deranged the sanctity of 
her countenance, " It is seldom that the like of 
ye trouble this place, for few visit it ; not all as 
one, as Mary, John, and Joseph : God be with 
it!" 

As she spoke, she opened the door of the 
screen, and led the way to the interior. 

Inclined as the party were to draw out the 
discontented sister, ci-devant of Mary, John, 
and Joseph, there was no time left for the mys- 
tification ; for, walking rapidly before them 
across a little court, she threw open a door and 
ushered them into the refectorv. It was a 
plain, low roofed apartment, lined with bog oak, 

VOL. iv. K 



194 THE O'BRIENS AND 

lighted by small gothic windows, and furnished 
with a suitable simplicity. A long table down 
the middle of the room, with wooden benches 
on either side, a reading desk at the further 
extremity, with a replico of the picture of the 
Holy Heart suspended from it, and a good copy 
of Raphael's St. Cecilia, included the whole of 
its rnobilier. 

The table was already served by a female 
domestic in a lay habit ; the Italian organist and 
the sister of Mary, John, and Joseph, doing the 
honours. The service of the table was remark- 
able for its homeliness ; but the mountain wan- 
derers, who looked forward to potatoes and 
butter, as the probable fare of an Irish convent, 
were less surprised by coarse linen and yellow 
delf, than by delicacies worthy of the calendrier 
nutritif: these were a perigord pie, a pot de 
comfiture, some dried fruits, and dessert wine 
that might have put " le menu de la table 
a V apogee de sa gloire" 

The party were taken by surprise, and 
exchanged looks ; for the foreign lady not only 
kept them in check by her presence, but with the 



the o'flahertys. 195 

sharp and prying glance of a Sceur Ecoute, evi- 
dently produced the same effect on her Irish 
sister. Lady Honoria endeavoured, in vain, to 
discover if her acquaintance of Bog Moy was 
of the sisterhood. In answer to her side-wind 
questions, Sister Bridget replied, that though 
the community were not yet cloistered (and she 
laid a strong emphasis on the word), and it 
was not yet the custom in Ireland to lock up 
those, whom natural vocation had given volun- 
tarily to God, yet that none of the community 
went beyond the Abbey grounds, except the 
Superior, who had the church's leave to go out 
on its service. 

" And what is the Reverend Mother's name ?"" 
asked Lady Knocklofty. 

" Madame BeavoinOTlaherty," was the reply. 

Lord Arranmore rose from the table, and 
again seated himself, in obvious perturbation, 
increased by the fixed and penetrating glances 
of Lady Knocklofty. 

The Italian nun here rose to withdraw, beckon- 
ing the communicative Sister Bridget to follow 
her. 

k2 



196 the o'bkiens and 

" We should like extremely," said Lady Ho- 
noria, perceiving that the Italian understood 
English, (whether she could, or would not 
speak it), " to have the honour of being presented 
to the Reverend Mother, and of offering her 
our acknowledgments for her very hospitable 
entertainment." 

The Italian motioned to her sister to take the 
message ; and Lady Honoria, hastily writing a 
few complimentary lines on a drawing card of 
Captain Montague's, Sister Bridget undertook 
to deliver a request, in which all present, from 
various motives, were interested. In a few 
moments the sister returned, and presented a 
slip of paper to Lady Honoria, who read as 
follows : — 

" The Reverend Mother, Superior of the 
community of the Holy Heart, will receive the 
Countess Knocklofty and her party ; but she 
wishes it to be understood, that in complying 
with a request, which will by no means repay 
the curiosity that originates it, the Reverend 
Mother hopes her acquiescence may be deemed 
less a precedent than a concession.' | 



THE 0'FLAHERTrs. 197 

" Humph !" said Lady Honoria, in a low 
voice, " there is nothing like the humility of the 
church. This reminds me of the haughty Abbess 
of the Carmelites, who shut the door of her con- 
vent in the faces of les Tantes du Roi, when I 
was in Paris." 

" Are we to await the pleasure of your 
Superior here, or to follow you, Madam, to 
the presence?" demanded Lady Knocklofty, 
haughtily, much mortified at such want of de- 
ference to one, whose consequence she supposed 
could not be unknown, even in so remote and 
barbarous a district. The Italian answered by 
leading the way, and an expressive gesticulation 
not to be mistaken. 

" Cela passe outre!" whispered Lady Honoria. 

" Yes," said Lady Knocklofty, " it is all 
nonsense, and we had better go at once ; I am 
bored to death with this mummery ." 

" We are in for it now," said Miss Macguire; 
" but I dare say it will be good fun, for Sister 
Bridget is doubtless but a type of Mother 
O'Flaherty," 

In this hope the party followed their leader 



198 THE O'BRIENS AND 

across a small cloistered court, filled with flowers, 
which the Italian told Lord Arranmore was 
called the Abbot's Garden. It led by a low 
archway into a corridor, which connected the 
original building with the additions made by 
Count O'Flaherty. It had been painted in 
fresco, with subjects but little suited to its 
present purpose : they were evidently taken from 
the heathen mythology, and represented, among 
other subjects, the sacrifice of Iphigenia — the 
altar, the priest, the victim, and her sudden 
" translation to the skies ;" with such an accom- 
paniment of Zephyrs and Cupids, as indicated 
that something more was meant, than met the 
eye. A counterpart, representing Europa cross- 
ing the Hellespont, was separated from it by 
vases, dancing figures, and arabesques, which 
likewise ran beneath the frieze, and along the 
corners of the walls. 

" The thing," 1 said Lady Honoria, pausing, 
" is not only * rich and rare,' but one wonders 
how the — hem ! — it got there." 

" These are the representations, painted by 
the naughty Count, which the Archdeacon com- 



the o'flaheetys. 199 

plained of, I suppose," said Lady Knocklofty ; 
" and curious ones they are, for the walls of the 
retreat of a religious community.'" 

" Si chiama il torre del Conte" said the 
Italian to Lord Arranmore, pointing to an in- 
scription over the door, which terminated this 
singular gallery. It was, 

" Amicitiae et Libertati, S." 

" Translate for the benefit of the country 
ladies, my dear General," said Lady Knocklofty, 
now becoming insensibly interested. 

" Sacred to friendship and to liberty,'" said 
the General ; H a singular motto for the dwelling 
of one who has abandoned all earthly affections, 
and resigned her personal freedom, perhaps, for 
ever.'' 

The opening of the door cut short all further 
observation. The Italian introduced the visitors 
as la Contessa Knocklofty, e la sua societa. For 
a moment the party forgot their high airs of 
superiority and habitual tendency to mystify all 
that were not of their own set. Startled by the 
appearance of every thing around them, and 



200 the cTbriens and 

most by the occupant of the singular and elegant 
apartment, they stood for a moment, with that 
expression of constraint, which marks an invo- 
luntary subjugation to an unexpected and impos- 
ing exterior. The apartment was therez de chaussee 
of an octagon tower ; and it opened by its windows 
on one of the lesser lakes, which formed a chain 
with the greater, and escaped into the recesses of 
the wooded mountains, behind the Abbey. 

Its walls were of one of those colourless 
colours, which are so well adapted to give relief 
to the paintings which decorated them. These 
were portraits of the mothers of the church, or 
saintly women of all ages, set in massive frames 
of finely carved oak. The furniture, though 
sombre in its hues, was luxuriously contrived. 
The fauteuil, on which the Abbess reclined, and 
the table that stood before her, were pictures in 
themselves. Whoever had seen the splendid 
portrait of Pope Julius II. by Raphael, would 
at once have recognized the original of these 
close and picturesque imitations in the acccssoires 
of that wonderful production. The lady was 
seated at an open casement. Her table was 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 201 

piled with volumes richly bound, one of which 
lay open before her ; and from the implements 
scattered about, she appeared to have been paint- 
ing in it. A finely carved ebony crucifix stood 
before her. Her dress was a religious habit, 
with ample sleeves to the wrist, and confined by 
a girdle beneath the bust. The folds of her 
veil and sogolo were so arranged, as to give 
a strong resemblance of the bust of the Vestale 
in the capitol. 

Her countenance was rich in expression, 
passionate and intellectual, even in repose; it 
resembled the female heads of Correggio. Her fea- 
tures were mobile and full of play, and her com- 
plexion was of that tint, only found in Italy, — 
pale, but not fair; and of that high polish, pecu- 
liar to the skins of southern regions. Her eyes 
were Irish eyes, large, grey, deep set, and 
fringed, and arched by long, dark lashes and 
brows ; the extreme whiteness of the muslin 
round her face, formed a striking contrast to 
tints so mellow, and traits so marked. A slight 
flush passed across her transparent cheek, as she 
rose to receive her fashionable visitors ; and her 
k 3 



202 THE O'BRIENS AND 

smile, displacing the almost awful gravity of 
her look, at the entrance of her guests, exhibited 
perhaps something too much of her white and re- 
gular teeth, and gave an almost fearful expression 
to her countenance. It was a beautiful smile, but 
too acute, and seemed to indicate a spirit that 
" o'er informed its tenement of clay." Her 
real, or affected dignity, put even the effrontery 
of Lady Knockiofty and Lady Honoria out of 
countenance. Though they had entered armees 
de toute piece from that exhaustless depot, their 
habitual assurance, yet conventional insolence 
shrank before the natural influence of evident 
intellectual superiority ; and when she motioned 
them to a sofa opposite to her, they took their 
places with some little embarrassment. The 
gentlemen sat, or stood, as they pleased : the 
General and his aids-de-camp at an open window, 
Lord Charles on the arm of the sofa, and Lord 
Arranmore behind Lady Knockiofty, and lean- 
ing over its back. 

" I fear," said Lady Knockiofty, recovering 
her air prono?ice, " that we intrude on you ; 
but our natural desire to see a person so cele- 
brated, must be our excuse. " 



the o'flahertys. 203 

" Celebrated I' 1 interrupted the lady, coldly. 
" I did not suspect I was even Jenoam ; this re- 
mote solitude is not much adapted to bestow 
celebrity!" 

" At least/' said Lady Honoria, coming to 
her friend's assistance, " our desire to see one 
so worthy to be celebrated, a person so distin- 
guished.' 1 

" Distinguished !" repeated the Reverend 
Mother, opening her large eyes, with a look and 
tone so naive, that its naivete might almost pass 
for knavery. 

u Is it not a distinction r7! said Lady Honoria, 
a little posed how to proceed, " to have the 
courage — the devotion, to retire to ' these dark 
solitudes and awful cells,' with endowments 
every way qualified to adorn and to enjoy 
society ! With such mu-ical talents alone, with 
such a voice, you might aspire to '" 

" To be a seconda domia" interrupted the 
Superior, " in some provincial opera in Italy, 
with a salary of ten lire a night ; or to obtain 
the patronage of some great London lady, 
till I sang myself out of fashion ; and then 



204 THE O'BRIENS AND 

share the fate of so many others ; fetee to- 
day, far beyond my merits, forgotten to morrow, 
far below my deserts ; or perhaps I might even 
make my way to the Irish capital, and be called 
upon for a hunting song, in the midst of a 
bravura, or be interrupted in a concerto on the 
harp to play magical music, and symphonize 
' Hunt the slipper,' or ' Puss in the corner.' " 

Every body started, some smiled, and looks 
of intelligence and surprise were mutually ex- 
changed. 

" Oh ! you doubt the fact,"" continued the 
Reverend Mother, in the same strain of irony. 
"A friend of mine, however, was thus used, 
who brought her endowments to adorn the 
society of Dublin, and had hoped to make her 
fortune in that ' land of song,' which has taken 
an harp for its arms ; but she saw at once the 
fallacy of her hopes, and resigned them." 

"But you, Madam," said the courteous 
General, approaching the table, and throwing 
his eyes over a beautiful illumination she was 
painting on a leaf of a missal, " you at least 
could fear no failure ; such talents must com- 



the o'flahertys. 205 

mand success every where, as well as deserve 
it;" and he added, with the air of one who an- 
nounced a discovery, " talent, like knowledge, 
is power." 

" Talent is only available when seconded by 
the prestige of fashion,'' replied the Superior, 
coldly ; <; knowledge may be power, in nations, 
but wealth is the power of individuals. Those,"' 
she added, throwing herself back in her fauteuil, 
" whose endowments are of the highest caste, 
and who have not their age along with them, 
will find their knowledge not power, but im- 
pediment ; and they will be soon taught that the 
light thrown upon a society, which is not pre- 
pared to reflect it, serves but to consume the 
spirit that kindles it. 'Tis the bursting of a 
rocket, before it is launched ; but the world is 
governed by common places." 

Every body remained silent, while, as if to fill 
up the awkwardness of the pause, the Superior, 
turning to Lady Knocklofty, observed, 

" I cannot imagine how your Ladyship and 
your party, got into that line of mountain, 
which led you down upon this glen. There is 



206 THE O'BRIENS AND 

an old pass, recently repaired and opened, 
which leads down by the coast, to the town of 
St. Grellan : likewise it is a short and beautiful 
sail from Beauregard to the inlet, which com- 
municates with our lakes, and by which you 
might penetrate into our hills, with the aid of 
burlings and corricles, (the native means of na- 
vigating the shallows, and passing the rapids of 
this romantic solitude,) that is, if toutefois your 
object be to visit the wilds of Connemara, so 
rarely sought by such wanderers." 

" Our object," said Lady Honoria, whose 
brilliant flippancy yielded to the superior in- 
fluence of one, who sat like an intelligence in the 
midst of inferior agents ; " our object here, 
Madam, has been most agreeably disappointed. 
We set forth to take an early dinner au bout du 
banc, at a sporting lodge of Lord Knocklofty's, 
called the Heaths ; but our guide having mis- 
guided us, we have been thrown upon your 
hospitality, for a refreshment, that was becom- 
ing very necessary indeed : and we have been 
equally delighted with all we have seen and 
heard, for which, in the name of the party, I 
beg to offer our best thanks." 



the o'flahertys. 207 

The lady bowed slightly, and coldly observed, 
" There is nothing to see or hear in this lonely 
and rude retreat, to repay so much fatigue as 
you must have encountered. I once rode over 
these mountains ; they are terrible in their little 
way, even after the Alps and Appennines, for 
they are much less accommodated ; but the 
Heaths lie more towards Lough Corrib ; you can 
see the belfry of the offices, from a terrace 
which I have cut on one of those shelving hills 
on the other side of this little lake ; and you can 
reach it still," she said, looking at a time-piece, 
that lay on the table, " before sun set. You 
shall have a guide to conduct you, and the 
bridle way is much better, than any you have 
passed.'" 

" A broad hint, 1 ' whispered Lady Knock- 
lofty to Lady Honoria ; for though her imagina- 
tion lent itself freely to this singular scene and 
person, she was still impatient, and distressed at 
the whole adventure, and added, " pray let us 
be off." 

" However intricate the ways we have come, 1 ' 
said Captain Montague, who, with the rest of 



208 THE o'briens and 

the gentlemen, made no attempt to move, " I 
fear we shall find it more difficult to get away, 
than we did to arrive." 

" We must make the effort, however," said 
Lady Knocklofty petulantly, " for we cannot 
intrude longer on this lady, whose time is doubt- 
less precious, as well as sacred," and she rose as 
she spoke. 

Every one now of necessity arose : the Supe- 
rior rose also, and observed, 

" Time here is indeed argent comptant. 
Like other new colonists in barbarous regions, 
our labour is the currency by which we live." 

" There is nothing very barbarous here, how- 
ever," said Miss Macguire. " This beautiful 
apartment reminds me of the Abbesses* parlous 
in the great convents of France. May I beg 
to know of what order is this convent?" 

" We are a confraternity of no particular 
religious order : we are at least, as yet, subject 
to no rules ; but are one of those religious socie- 
ties so common in Italy, and particularly in 
Florence — a sort of demi-rcligieiises," she added, 
smiling. 



THE 0*FLAHERTYS. 209 

" Macchiavel," said Lord Arranmore, in a 
pointed manner, and now for the first time 
giving signs of life, M Macchiavel was a mem- 
ber of one of those nameless orders, I believe." 

u So I have read," said the Abbess, throwing 
down her eyes, and colouring slightly at the 
abruptness of the observation. " Macchiavel was 
a worthy and a pious man ; but acted and wrote 
under peculiar circumstances, and with views 
wholly mistaken or misinterpreted." 

" Then,"" said Lady Honoria, always ready 
to go out of her way, to say a smart thing, 
though rarely saying " a wise one," u we may 
apply to your catholic communities, what the 
Irish traveller said of Spain— point de religion, 
et beaucoup de devotion." 

" Which is the reverse of what may be said 
of your protestant communities, Madam," said 
the Abbess — "Point de devotion, et beaucoup 
de religion" 

Every body laughed, and Lady Honoria, more 
accustomed to be laughed with, than to be 
laughed at, said, petulantly, " I assure you we 
Irish protestants are deficient in neither : the 



210 THE O'BRIENS AND 

proof is, that we are daily making converts 
from your infallible church. Here, for example, 
is our last conquest ; you will allow we have 
reason to be proud of it, 1 ' and she drew forward 
Miss Macguire, by no means pleased at being 
thus distinguished for her apostacy. 

"Yes," said the Superior, fixing her pene- 
trating eyes upon the convert, " if you are sure 
of it. But there is something so papistical in 
the expression of that young lady's face (for, 
trust me, religions have their physiognomies), 
that I suspect she is like Fra Paolo, " catho- 
lique en gros, et protestante en detail" 

Miss Macguire blushed deeper than she had 
done for the last half of her life ; and the General 
evidently infatuated with the Reverend Mother, 
observed, "You are a dangerous person, Madam, 
if you read faces thus, d livre ouverte.'"' 

"Rosalba," she replied, "learned to know 
characters from her constant study of counte- 
nances, ' ed anclC io son pittore.' " 

<c So I perceive," said the General, " and a 
very charming one, too. I presume these pic- 
tures are from your easel ; they have the true 



THE cTfLAHERTYS. 211 

character of the Italian school. Are they ori- 
ginal, or copies P 1 

" Copies " (was the reply) " from Montegna, 
Da Vinci, and Raphael ; the last, I think, who 
painted pious women, because, about that 
time, the agency of such spirits ceased to be in 
demand. " 

" The fashion, however, may be revived," 
said Lord Arranmore, with the emphasis of 
one who spoke under some strong or acri- 
monious feeling, " and with the effect, which 
the subtlety of female agency has always 
produced." 

" By Jove ! if all pious women were as pretty 
as these," said Lord Charles, looking round 
him, " a charming fashion it would be : I would 
be a monk myself. I say, General, look at 
that lovely creature, with the angel touching her 
with an arrow tipped with flame ; there is nothing 
in the Windsor gallery like that. Look, Lady 
K., is it not like the Duchess?" 

" I am no judge of pictures," said Lady 
Knocklofty, who had moved towards the door, 
in vain ; for every one had gathered before the 



212 THE O'BRIENS AND 

beautiful portrait, which, as a close and ad- 
mirable copy, was well worth their attention. 

" That is a copy of the famous St. Teresa, 
at Genoa. The master is disputed. It is so 
inferior to the original, you cannot judge of the 
merit of the composition,'' said the fair artist. 

" I never saw a saint with eyes so like a 
sinner," said Lord Charles. 

" And yet she was a saint,'' said the Superior, 
gravely : " the church owed her much.'' 

" The church has owed such women every 
thing," said Lord Arranmore, vehemently ; 
"and Dante's apostrophe of c AM Constantino,' 
should have been addressed to Helena, rather 
than to her imperial husband." 

" Faith has always been upheld by sacrifice ; 
and who so fit to make it as woman," demanded 
the Superior, turning her fine eyes, for the first 
time, on him who made the observation. 

" Farth may also be upheld by imposition," 
said Lord Arranmore, pointedly. " It is well 
known that this St. Teresa was an agent of the 
pope's, whose councils she considerably in- 
fluenced." 



the o'flahehtys. 213 

" She was a chosen vessel of the church," said 
the Superior, dropping all that was mundane in 
her look and manner, and folding her hands 
on her bosom, M to forward the salvation of her 
erring children." 

" She was a chosen instrument to forward a 
system, injurious alike to the liberties and happi- 
ness of mankind, 1 ' said Lord Arranmore, with 
more acrimony than the subject demanded. 

" And well chosen, too," said the General, 
" if she was as lovely as that picture represents 
her, — 

1 From lips like those what precepts fail to move?' " 

" Her beauty is on record,' 1 said Lord Ar- 
ranmore, pointedly ; " it was perfect ; and her 
versatile talents may be estimated by their effects, 
at a time when the monastic system was breaking 
up. She was sent forth armed by the church, 
and by her own peculiar powers, for the mission ; 
and quitting her luxurious convent of Mount 
Carmel, she contrived to submit thirteen great 
monasteries to her reform, till her reputation 
was carried beyond the bounds of christian 



214 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Europe. Her writings are still but too popular 
in Italy." 

"She was an author, too?" asked the Ge- 
neral. 

" Many extraordinary works are attributed 
to her," said Lord Arranmore. " Her Action 
de grace is full of grace ; and her Chemin de per- 
fection is written in a manner very little calcu- 
lated to answer the end it proposes ; while her 
hymns are worthy of Sappho."" 

" There is one sentiment, at least,'' said the 
religieuse, with the meek manner of one accus- 
tomed to stand the brunt of such attacks. 
" which may plead her cause with souls as sensi- 
ble as her own — and that is ohime ! quanto son in- 
felicissimi i dannati, non possono amare"* She 
raised her eyes as she spoke, with a supplicating 
softness, as if to deprecate the critical severity, 
which had been so unsparingly directed against 
her favourite saint; and then let them fall 
beneath the shadow of their long lashes. In 
this look was concentrated all the intelligence 

* Alas ! how unhappy are the damned ; they cannot 
love. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 215 

" which soul to soul affordeth," when words are 
denied. 

Lord Arranmore turned away, and muttered 
between his teeth unconsciously, " The Jesui- 
tess!" then pausing before another picture, he 
said ; u here is a saint of another style.' 1 

" Yes," said the Superior, mistaking, or 
affecting to mistake his meaning, " 'tis an attempt 
at the manner of old Montegna, as you, Gene- 
ral, will perceive, by the formality of the figure 
and the golden ground : it is St. Catherine of 
Siena." 

" It is a most faithful imitation of that 
school, 1 ' said the General, much flattered by 
her reference to his judgment; " what, pray, 
was the vocation of this shrewd looking 
saint?" 

" Her mission," said the Superior, u was one 
of great activity, and belonged more to this 
world than the next. It was she who made up 
the breach between the Florentines and Pope 
Gregory the Eleventh. It was she who removed 
the chair of St. Peter from Avignon to Rome, 
and brought back the truant pontiff from the 



216 THE O'BRIENS AND 

shores of the Rhone to the Tiber. It was she 
who gave the victory to the Urbanites over the 
Clementines : and by prayer and preaching 
brought over all Italy to the cause of her 
favourite pope." 

" By prayer and preaching I" returned Lord 
Arranmore, " say rather by her perfect beauty 
and consummate art. She was educated for the 
mission she so ably filled, and her natural 
eloquence and energy did the rest." 

" Lord Arranmore," said Lady Knocklofty 
(who, " patience perforce," had again resumed 
her seat on the sofa), " it appears that you are 
wonderfully well read in the lives of the 
saints.' 1 

" The study, Madam, made part of my 
college course abroad, and came in under the 
head of divinity.''' 

" And a very proper head to come under," 
said the gallant General, " if the dead saints 
were as divine as the living," and he looked full 
at the Superior, who either did not make, or did 
not choose to acknowledge the application. 

She was occupied in shewing a small and 



the o'flaheetys. 217 

beautiful portrait on ivory to the two young 
men and Lady Honoria. The subject was 
dressed much in the same habit as she herself 
wore ; and the countenance, like her's, was more 
remarkable for its brilliant intelligence than its 
sanctity. 

" Now,'' said Lady Honoria, " in spite of 
the veil and rosary, that was a most mundane 
creature, or I am much mistaken. If coquetry 
had ever been canonized, I should say la voila." 

" It was one," said the Abbess, " accused of 
having more spirit than grace, and it was said 
of her, quelle avait de tons les genres d 'esprit. 
When this miniature was painted, she was a nun 
in the Monastery of St. Fleuri. It hangs here 
more for its value as a work of art, than from 
any estimation of the original ; for the nun of 
St. Fleuri broke the vows, forced on the help- 
lessness of her youth ; and returned to a world 
to which her genius was more adapted, than to 
the seclusion of a monastery : it is the portrait 
of the famous Madame de Tencin. 1 ' 

" And yet," said Lord Arranmore, " this 
arch-intrigante of the most intriguing times, 

VOL. IV. l 



218 THE O'BRIENS axd 

this femme d'etat, would in other times have 
respected her vows, and yet have fulfilled her 
natural vocation ; and as the agent and adjunct 
of popes and cardinals, she would have carried 
on a system which, in all times, has been best 
carried on by the subtlety of woman. In the 
fourteenth century, she would have been a 
Catherine of Siena ; in the fifteenth a Saint Te- 
resa ; and in the present age she might have made 
an abortive effort, to restore a system, which does 
not belong to it.'" 

" She had one merit at least," said the 
Superior, meekly : " she was capable of great 
devotedness. Her friendship knew no ob- 
stacles, acknowledged no impossibility, when 
to serve or to save, to rescue or redeem 
the object of her partiality or protection, was in 
question." 

" Her protection !" muttered Lord Arran- 
more, with bitterness. 

" Say no more, my dear Madam," said the 
General, " or all protestant as I am, I shall fall 
before the shrine of this mundane saint, and 
worship her image." 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 219 

" I never ^aw a more equivocal countenance," 
said Lady Knocklofty, " it has the look of a 
handsome imp." 

She rose as she spoke. Her patience and 
temper were now alike exhausted ; with that 
quickness, which renders woman, where her 
most powerful passions are concerned, omni- 
scient, she had detected the sudden pre-occu- 
pation, and total change of manners, of Lord 
Arranmore, from the moment they had passed 
the curtain at the church door. His relaxed 
attentions to herself, his frequent change of 
colour and countenance, his piqued and pointed 
manner, when addressing the Superior, and his 
intense inquiring eye, as he gazed on her, 
evinced that this was not their first interview ; 
and from this inference, a thousand painful 
and mortifying conclusions followed. Whatever 
was the nature of her partiality for one, whose 
character and condition were at such variance 
with her own position, whether it was the caprice 
of an unregulated imagination, or of a passion 
still less defensible — he had long occupied her 
thoughts ; and for the last few days his presence 



220 

and society had given interest to a mode of life 
she detested, and rendered the solitudes of 
Beauregard, not only endurable, but delightful. 
Now, however, making an effort at self com- 
mand, she tapped the General on the shoulder, 
and observed, " Come, General, lest we should 
lose the most agreeable sinner in the world, I 
must tear you from the saints : I perceive the 
Reverend Mother is bent upon your conversion, 
and I have no doubt that what she undertakes, 
she will perform. 1 ' 

" Je ne demandepas mieuxf said the General, 
drawing up, and looking as alert as fifty years 
" bien sonnzes" would let him. 

" Saint Ignatius was a soldier," said the 
Abbess, with grave simplicity. 

"Yes," said the General ; "but if I remain 
here much longer, I must belong to the army 
of martyrs ; and as that is a service for which 
I have no vocation, I shall seek safety in flight. 
I am ready to attend your Ladyship,'' and he 
turned with a sigh to Lady Knocklofty. 

Every body smiled at this malentendu, ex- 
cept the person to whom it was addressed; 



the o'flahertys. 221 

whose compressed lips, and knitted brows, 
but ill assorted with any expression of amuse- 
ment. She turned shortly on the Superior, 
and rather bowed, than spoke her acknow- 
ledgments. The party then took their leave ; and 
the Reverend Mother, resuming her dignified 
air, which had evidently been laid aside, for a 
conventional meekness, whenever religion came 
in question, accompanied the visitors to the 
extremity of the corridor. There they were 
received by the Italian sister, who conducted 
them back through the church. A boat with 
four oars, that resembled a pleasure barge, 
now neared the shore, for their reception. 
The party were soon seated, under an awning 
which had been spread against the ardour of 
the evening sun, and were launched on the 
placid bosom of the breathless lake. 

" Well, this has been an adventure," said 
Miss Macguire, " worth all we have endured to 
come at it. It was quite delightful.'' 

" I am quite of another opinion," said 
Lady Knocklofty, sulkily. 

The men however all agreed with Miss Mac- 



THE O BUI ENS AND 

guire, and were loud in their commendations, 
Lord Arranmore alone excepted, who had taken 
an oar, and was plying it with energy, by no 
means called for by the occasion. Each now pro- 
nounced an eulogium upon their hostess, after 
their own peculiar way ; but it was evident that 
her habit and singular manner, had gone for as 
much as her personal attractions and intelligence. 
" What do you think of her, Honoria ?" asked 
Lady Knocklofty, abruptly. 

"Why, as Madame de Sevigne says of 
somebody, « c'est la plus belle vocation pour la 
coquetterie.^ M 

"Exactly," said Lady Knocklofty, with a 
petulant laugh, " you have hit off the Reverend 
Mother to admiration. Lord Knocklofty will be 
a little surprised to learn, what sort of a com- 
munity he has got in his neighbourhood. This 
is a very different thing from the poor slovenly 
daudles of the St. Grellan convent. 

"I am convinced, Lord Arranmore," said 
Lady Honoria, " she is the very person in the 
close bonnet, I met at your aunts' ; but as she 
did not seem willing to acknowledge the ac- 



the o'flahertys. 223 

quaintance, good breeding forbade my recalling 
it." 

"Did good breeding forbid you also from 
acknowledging the acquaintance, Lord Arran- 
more?" asked Lady Knocklofty, significantly ; 
" or were you too cut by this reverend lady ; 
for it struck me that this visitor at Bog Moy 
was not so totally a stranger to you.'" 

Lord Arranmore, taken off his guard by the 
suddenness of the question, answered with some 
embarrassment : " I really don't know : that is, I 
think, with Lady Honoria, that the Superior, and 
the lady with whom I chatted for a few minutes 
at my aunts' may be one and the same person." 1 

" Come," said Lord Charles, laughing, " you 
are pushing him too hard. See how he blushes, 
' celestial rosy red ;' as Miss Roistrum said of 
my new uniform. I say, Arranmore, when 
next you go to the Abbey to confession, take 
me along with you : as I am no epicure, Sister 
Bridget will answer me, for a little pious flirta- 
tion/' 

Here the boat reached the shore; and the 
ladies, impatient to be off, ordered their horses 



5224 THE O'BRIENS AND 

One, however, was " reported absent without 
leave," as the young aid-de-camp announced 
it. It was Lord Arranmore's pony, which 
had strayed away ; " But," said the host of the 
Shebeen, " it will soon be found, and restored 
safe and sound to the owner, if it was gold.'" 
What was remarkable in this event, was, 
that the saddle had not strayed with the ani- 
mal, but was found lying in the shed, which 
was dignified with the name of stable. It was 
remarked, however, that the saddle was much 
too large, and that the pony might easily have 
gotten rid of it. 

The difficulty thus created was* not easily 
surmounted ; and Lord Arranmore, who insisted 
on giving up the mare he rode toMissMacguire, 
was compelled to await the tide, and return him- 
self by boat. 

"We shall wait supper for you,'' said Lady 
Honoria; while Lady Knocklofty scarcely 
returned his bow, as she rode off. 

tC I shall not fail," was the reply, made with 
the most absent air. 

" Honoria," (said Lady Knocklofty, as the 



the o'flaheetys. 225 

two friends rode side by side,) " 'tis all over. 
There ends my dream, like so many others." 

" Why, child, if a dream can amuse you, 
what prevents you from dreaming on ?" 

" You see what I mean, I perceive, " said 
Lady Knocklofty, with a deep sigh. 

" Oh ! yes," replied Lady Honoria, laugh- 
ing : " le sage enlend a demi-mot. You suspect 
that this Abbess is an acquaintance, of some sort 
or other, of Lord Arranmore's ?V 

" And what do you think — you who are so 
observing ?" 

u That there was evidently some intelli- 
gence between them — -that he was piqued — and 
that she was coquetting with her saintly eyes 
and sinful smile. But an old love is the safest 
of all loves : besides, you have amused yourself 
up to your bent with your Orlando ; who in spite 
of his patriotism, is on the high road to be 
desperately in love with you." 

" Yes, on the high road," 1 said Lady Knock- 
lofty, shaking her head ; " he was, I believe, de- 
terre ! but it is nothing to start such game, if 
one does not run it fairly down.'" 
l 3 



226 

" Well, and you have run it down." 

" No," said Lady Knocklofty, " far from it : 
yet it was royal 6port too while it lasted." 

" Why it was a heart (hart) to be sure," 
said Lady Honoria, " and therefore royal sport, 
if you will ; but any bush, if beaten, may turn 
out as good game." 

" No," said Lady Knocklofty, " there is no- 
thing like him — 

' Natura il fece, e poi ruppe la stampa.' n 

" What ! has he taught you Italian already ?" 
said Lady Honoria, laughing. " You have 
been an apt scholar." 

" I made him teach me that line, which he 
applied to Shakspeare, but which is equally ap- 
plicable to himself." 

" If you have come to books and Italian, 
your case is desperate ; cela sent la grande pas- 
sion, instead of an innocent flirtation, to get 
rid of a wet day in the country. You make 
me tremble, child. How can you be so fresh ? 
Is this the way you 6 make sport withal ?' " 

Here the gentlemen rode up, and the broad, 



the o'flahertys. 227 

strand road, permitting the party to ride abreast, 
the conversation became general. Without fur- 
ther adventure, the amused but wearied wan- 
derers arrived at Beauregard. 



228 THE O'BRIENS AND 



CHAPTER V. 



THE INTERVIEW. 



Lord Arranmore stood on the beach, as the 
party, from which he was now so unexpectedly 
released, rode away. He had impatiently watched 
the fading of their shadows from the pebbly 
shore, as they departed ; and when a sudden turn 
in the cliffs concealed them from his view, he 
breathed with a long and deep drawn respira- 
tion, as one who was released by their absence. 
Eager for silence and solitude, he turned away 
from the little creek, where a party of fishermen 
had just entered, for fresh water. He was well 
aware that at any moment a boat might be 
procured ; and he turned back upon his steps, 



the o'flahertys, 229 

and walked rapidly up a ravine along the 
lake. 

u His noble and most sovereign reason, 
Like sweet bells, jangled out of tune," 

was a chaos of perturbation. — The dream of his 
thoughts — the spirit of his adventures — the des- 
tiny that had linked itself to him, and in voice 
and form, in passing glances and partial reve- 
lations, had pursued him, from the choir of the 
Gesu Bambino, to the pavilions of the Borghese 
Palace — from the saloons of the castle, to the 
fallen ruins of O'Brien's house — from the caves 
of Cong, to the smoky chambers of Bog Moy — 
had now been manifested to him, in the palpable 
form of a young and beautiful woman ! — of a 
woman, however, veiled and vowed to a religion, 
to which it was possible that her ambition and 
her prejudices, were alike devoted. 

When he thus detected in the Superior of an 
obscure Irish convent, the influential member of 
a powerful community at Rome, — when he de- 
tected in the sister Irene (the foundress of a new 
culte, and the well known agent of the Jesuits at 



230 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Florence) an Irishwoman, his amazement was 
mingled with something of national pride. But 
other and remoter considerations all faded, before 
the conviction, that this gifted, powerful, lovely 
person had been long interested and occupied 
with himself and his wayward fortunes. To what 
purpose, — for what object, — or to what end, he 
resolved to learn from her own lips, in an im- 
mediate interview. With passions 

" that, like the Pontic sea, 

Ne'er knew retiring ebb," — 

with a vehemence of temper that had led to all 
the good or ill of his short, but checquered life, 
he was still impelled on ; and he paused not 
to reflect. To feel and to act, had been the 
habit of his life ; and piqued by the indiscri- 
minating indifference, with which the Superior 
had received him, in common with his very com- 
mon place associates, — annoyed by the insidious 
meekness, with which she had appealed to him, 
in behalf of those women, who like herself had 
acted a part through life, (thus treating him as 
a dupe, and probably considering him one,) he 
resolved to oppose the intrepidity of frankness 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 231 

to the mystery of intrigue ; and to demand the 
explanation of a conduct, into which he had a 
right to inquire, since it had influenced his own 
peace, and interfered with his actions. Firm 
of purpose, he was yet undecided as to the 
moment for putting it into execution. His 
petulance and ardour led him at once back to 
the Abbey, to the octagon tower, to the cell of 
the sorceress, where, surrounded by the imple- 
ments of her arts, she appeared more dangerous 
in her dignified grace and sanctimonious reserve, 
than she had even been in the brilliancy of her 
wit at Proudfort House, or in the playfulness of 
her fantastic character in the garden of the 
Borghese. But that he should obtain admis- 
sion to her presence at that moment was more 
than doubtful ; and would necessitate a breach of 
his engagement at Beauregard. He sighed from 
his inmost soul, the deep sobbing sigh of re- 
morse, of regret, that he had ever entered that 
Alcina's palace, — the first, the solitary event in 
his life, which had committed his principles, and 
impaired his self-respect. Still the feelings of a 
kind — (and he blushed to think how kind) — 
of a confiding woman, were at stake. He had 



THE O'BRIENS AND 

but too well observed that he had already 
awakened those suspicions, which place the 
tender and susceptible on the rack of doubt. 
And for whom was he to wound this warm- 
hearted, imprudent, but generous woman ? 
For one who was upholding a system he de- 
tested, and who if not an impostor, was at least 
a dupe ; — while Lady Knocklofty was simply, 
and only — a woman ! To return instantly 
and for the last time, to Beauregard, was there- 
fore a resolve, to which he had painfully come, 
at the moment, when he had reached a point, 
that gave a full view of Moycullen Abbey. 

Beguiled by thoughts as hurried as his steps, 
he had wandered to the ferry, which the party had 
first crossed, under the guidance of Emanh na 
Lung. The sun had already sunk beneath the 
horizon, leaving a yellow flush upon the remote 
line of the distant sea; and tinging the summits of 
the mountains, with tints that vanished,while they 
were looked upon. Every line, and point, and 
arch, and gate of the Abbey was sketched upon 
the stilly bosom of the lake. The breathless 
air fanned no leaf, nor bent the reed which 
feathered the water's edge. The boat-house 



233 

had been deserted and shut up; the boat (fas- 
tened by a rope to the stump of a tree,) had no 
undulation. The solitary but agitated spec- 
tator of this scene of peace stood with folded 
arms, the moral contrast of its material tran- 
quillity. He gazed wistfully, with thoughts 
suspended between desire and resolve, and still 
hesitated in all the torment of indecision. The 
light insensibly faded, and the shadows length- 
ened, forms mellowed into mists, and mists to 
darkness, and solitude itself looked more solitary ; 
until the moon rising majestically, gave a new cha- 
racter to the scene, of which the idealism was sin- 
gularly augmented by the tones of a harp, which 
came floating over the silent waters, as soft and 
silvery as the pure light, of which they seemed 
the harbingers. Their "sole auditor" hesitated 
no longer. The tones of the harp breathed on 
his excited senses, like 

u No sound that the earth owns ;" 

and obeying their almost supernatural solicit- 
ings, he resolved on seeking out, at once, 

" The Goddess on whom those airs attend " 



234 THE O'BRIENS and 

and eagerly and tremblingly, he uncoiled the 
rope of the ferry boat, sprung into it, and 
pushed off for the opposite shore. 

At that moment, the melancholy winding of 
Shane's horn came floating down from the 
heights, from beneath which the boat had just 
escaped. Lord Arranmore looked up in the 
direction whence the sound proceeded, and 
beheld the dark outline of a human figure, 
standing on the point of the rock above. For 
once, however, the warning sound had lost its 
influence. Whatever peril now awaited him, he 
scoffed at. A mind energized by passion, an 
imagination heated by excitement, an habitual 
love of adventure, an impatience of mystery, 
and above all, a secret infatuation, beyond 
what the senses can awaken, (which, unknown 
to himself, was operating with increasing in- 
tensity, in favour of the extraordinary person, 
into whose presence accident had at last so 
strangely led him) — all conspired to impel him 
to his purpose. 

He was already on the further shore, and had 
drawn up his boat. The sounds of the harp 



the cTflahertys. 235 

had died away ; the moon was clouded, and the 
Abbey, in the repose and majesty of its silent 
ruins, looked the very sanctuary of holy and 
innocent sequestration. To proceed, he felt was 
almost sacrilege : he paused for a moment ; and 
then crossing with a noiseless step the dewy grass, 
he approached, and raised the curtain of the ever 
open door of the chapel. All within was still and 
dark, save where before a pictured representa- 
tion of the Holy Heart, a lamp shed its concen- 
trated light, full on the head of St. Ignatius, the 
principal figure in the group. He dropped the 
curtain and shuddered ; and again he hesitated ; 
but urged irresistibly onwards, he passed be- 
fore the faqade of the antiquated pile; and 
doubling the angle formed by the transept 
of the church, encountered an iron railing, 
which separated that part of the Abbey, at 
all hours accessible to the public, from the 
building erected by Count O 'Flaherty, and 
now the habitation of the community. By a 
bound he cleared the barrier, and found himself 
on a greensward, that dipped into the waters 
of the lesser lake, and fronted a most irregular 
building. As yet he had found no door of 



236 THE o'briens and 

entrance ; no light, no sound, gave guidance to 
his steps; till as he advanced, a long and tremu- 
lous ray, dancing on the water, led him to the 
spot, from which it issued. With steps, slow, 
silent, and stealthy as those of a midnight mur- 
derer, he advanced, and paused, and advanced 
again. A glass-door, which opened almost on 
the verge of the lake, discovered, that the light 
which played upon the waters, proceeded from a 
lamp standing on a table within. The interior 
of the apartment lay open to his view ; and he 
perceived the Superior of a community which 
was already buried in the forgetfulness of sleep, 
seated between the window and the table, with 
her head reclined on her arms, and her arms 
folded upon her harp. Again he paused. He 
heard the strong beating of his own heart; 
and the sound but increased its palpitations. 
Agitated, doubtful for a moment whether to 
retreat or advance, he endeavoured, upon the 
very threshold of his wishes, to collect his 
thoughts, to subdue his emotion, to arm himself 
with equanimity and presence of mind, for an 
interview, thus sought under the most unwar- 
rantable circumstances. He stood at the ves- 



the o'flahebtys. 237 

tibule of the temple, where this priestess of 
Jesuitism celebrated her rites, and prepared 
her illusions. This idea armed him ; and tread- 
ing heavily, to announce his approach, and to 
prevent the consequences of a sudden alarm, he 
advanced to the open door. 

It was, perhaps, in the confidence of her pro- 
found retreat, and the safety of her chosen 
solitude, that the Superior was rather startled 
than alarmed at this intrusion. On hearing the 
approaching footsteps, she merely raised her 
head, and with a composure of mind, announced 
by the firmness of her voice, demanded who was 
there ? adding, in a tone of inquiry, " Shane ?" 

" No, Madam," said Lord Arranmore, with 
a voice faltering, in spite of every effort to 
steady its tones, and uncovering his head, as he 
inclined it; " No, Madam, it is not Shane; 
but it is one, as unlinked to the great chain of 
society — it is one as much out of sorts with 
fate and fortune, who perhaps inexcusable in 
his intrusion, thus ventures respectfully to solicit 
a moment of your attention." 

While he spoke, the lady had risen, and 
drawn herself up to the full height of her stature ; 



238 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and with a command over her emotions, if any 
such had been awakened, she calmly said, in a 
low, interrogating tone, " Lord Arranmore, I 
believe ?" 

" I blush to answer, Madam, to a title so 
unsupported by all which alone gives such 
sounds value ; but the unfortunate person who 
now obtrudes himself upon your notice, is Lord 
Arranmore." 

" The inheritance of a great name, ,, replied 
the lady, coldly, "is an awful responsibility, 
not always acquitted by the adscititious circum- 
stances which accompany it. But it is generally 
attended by a knowledge of those forms, which 
good taste, in any rank, never violates. May I 
beg to know, my lord, the purport of this 
extraordinary visit, at this unusual hour, and 
paid in this very indecorous manner?" 

She had now advanced ; and folding her arms 
within her long, full sleeves, leaned against the 
side of the glass-door, in an easy and command- 
ing attitude, as one who gave audience to some 
suppliant rustic, whose interests led him to 
consult the oracular decisions of his village 
suzeraine. 



the o'flahertys. 239 

*' I cannot speak, Madam, while you stand," 
he replied. 

She resumed her seat, without inviting him 
to enter ; but he advanced, and took the place 
she had a moment before occupied at the 
door. 

" I feel, Madam," he continued, " the full im- 
propriety of this intrusion. It is not, however, 
the result of temerity, but of that necessity, which 
you once pronounced to be * the master of gods 
and men.' I stand not here to plead for its 
fitness, but to demand of you the spring, the 
secret of those events, which have urged me to 
a violation cf the common forms of society, and 
placed me in the awkward position, in which I 
now appear before you." 

" You must excuse me, my Lord Arran- 
more," said the lady, imperatively. i: To 
whatever your allusions may point, this is not 
a moment to explain them. I am here, the 
head of a religious flock : my example is of 
more consequence than my precepts. Your 
intrusion here is a flagrant impropriety ; to 
endure it, is to sanction it. Whatever right 
you may suppose you have to question me, (and 



240 THE O'BRIENS AND 

/ admit of none), you must chuse another and a 
fitter time. I desire you will withdraw." 

" Madame O 'Flaherty," replied Lord Arran- 
more, with a decision of manner as peremptory 
as her own), " for I find that the Sister Irene 
of the Bambin Gesu, the Nuccia of the Borg- 
hese, the Pilgrim of Proudfort House, now 
chuses to assume the representation of the 
tender and unfortunate Abbess, who once 
reigned over these solitudes, and by a name 
consecrated in the superstitious reverence of the 
country — by the name of Beavoin 'Flaherty, 
to " 

" To what does all this verbiage lead ?" in- 
terrupted the Superior, half rising, in scornful 
impatience, from her seat. " The name I bear 
is mine, by every right that birth and inheritance 
can give. It was my father's name ; and has 
descended to me, from the brave toparchs of this 
now neglected region, the last of whom is repre- 
sented in my person : and now, my lord, this 
being said, I have only to reiterate my desire, 
that you will take your leave." 

" Then," said Lord Arranmore, advancing a 
step within the room, and heedless of an order 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 241 

evidently less peremptorily announced than the 
first, — " then you are the daughter and heiress 
of Count O' Flaherty, from whom this small 
portion of his inheritance was won by my un- 
fortunate father ; — a victory which terminated in 
the utter ruin, alike of his fortune and his mind." 

His voice was full of emotion. He paused 
for a moment, and then added wkh rapidity, 
" You are not perhaps aware, Madam, that the 
return made to my father was the seduction of 
his sister, one as lovely and as gifted as yourself, 
of one sacrificed on the altar of superstition, a 
victim to that system which you are here to 
revive." 

" You would not make me answerable for 
my father's sins ? v demanded the Superior, now 
not unmoved by an emotion so infectious. 

" No, Madam, but I would awaken some 
feeling for my father's wrongs." 

" In what manner do you call on me to evince 
it ?" 

" By shewing some sympathy for his son's 
misfortunes. " 

" You jest, Lord Arranmore," she replied, 

VOL. IV. M 



242 the o'brtens and 

with a bitter smile. " The boon companion of 
the dissipated and the great, the protege of a 
lady, whose power is absolute, whose will is law \ 
the associate of the despots of the soil and the 
enemies of Ireland — what can you want from 
one who belongs to the persecuted and degraded 
caste ? What sympathy can the member of a 
sect, which has been thrown beyond the pale 
of all sympathy, grant to the guest of the Earl 
of Knocklofty, to the protege of his — wife ? v 

" I am neither the guest of the one, nor the 
protege of the other," he replied, trembling 
with angry emotion. " Chance has linked me 
for a moment with a party, which in prudence? 
perhaps, I should not have known ; and which 
from inclination, I should never have sought. 
The accident, however, which formed so unna- 
tural a combination, has dissolved it : the link 
is severed, and — for ever.'* 

" Your resolve is, doubtless, taken on mature 
deliberation ?" said the Superior, giving peculiar 
signification to the question, by the tone and 
smile with which it was asked. 

The blood rushed to Lord Arranmore's face 



THE o'flahertys. 243 

at the implied sarcasm ; yet to blame was to be 
interested, and the conviction encouraged him. 
He had now, by an insidious progress, so far 
advanced into the room, as even to lean over the 
harp, supporting his head upon his hand, 
with eyes fixed earnestly on the extraordinary 
but beautiful countenance before him. After a 
silent and dangerous pause, he observed, with a 
faint smile, 

" What are the deliberations of man, when a 
breath, a glance, a tone is sufficient to overturn 
the deepest and the wisest ? Your words, Ma- 
dam, have effected all that reason should have 
done, but did not; and my resolve dates no 
farther back, than your reproach. 1 ' 

She waved her head expressively, not ap- 
provingly. 

" Such," she said, u was the plea, and such 
the temperament of Count O' Flaherty, with 
whose faults you have but just reproached his 
child. Alas ! with all his sins, he was but what 
you are." 

u And what was that V* demanded Lord 
Arranmore, eager] y. 

m 2 



214 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" An Irishman," was the cool reply. 
" That, I trust, is not a disgrace p." 
There was a sort of ironical hesitation, an 
humorous play of feature, as the Superior re- 
plied. " Why — a — perhaps not a disgrace ; 
but it is sometimes almost a ridicule ; and it is 
always a misfortune. With some it is a farce ; 
with others a tragedy, according as the person, 
on whom so fatal a birth-right is inflicted, is 
an O Mealy, or an O'Brien. To be born an 
Irishman is a dark destiny at the best ; the last 
that the wise would contend with, or the proud 
encounter. — Here, indeed, as every where, me- 
diocrity is safe ; dulness is its own protection, 
and insensibility its own shield : but genius and 
feeling, the pride, the hope, the ambition of 
patriotism, the bitter indignation which spurns 
at oppression, the generous sympathy which 
ranges itself on the side of the oppressed, — if there 
are lands where such virtues thrive and flourish, 
and force forward the cause of human happi- 
ness, Ireland is not one of them. Here virtue 
is made to turn traitor to itself; and the same 
passions that rouse the patriot to any sacrifice > 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. SM-5 

urge him into the snares of the profligate. 
Here the fortitude of long endurance corrupts 
into obsequiousness ; and the spirit of the 
gallant maddens into lawless intemperance. 
Here genius is the object of suspicion to dull 
rulers, and of insult to petty underlings ; and 
all that bends not — falls. Fly, then, Lord 
Arranmore, for here none like you, have ever 
lived and thriven. You start at advice so ab- 
ruptly given, and from one who has so little right 
to advise ; but I lay aside every personal con- 
sideration, to avail myself of this one, this only, 
(but far from prudent) occasion, to warn you of 
your danger. Trust me, by remaining here, 
you will but mar the cause you hope to aid. 
Honest, but indiscreet, gifted with every talent, 
but that which is necessary to direct all, you will, 
as others have done, and (I say it in fearful pro- 
phecy, are destined still to do) fall a victim, 
without effecting the good for which you suffer. 
Nay, Lord Arranmore, you must hear me out ; 
you have hunted the sybil to her cell, and now 
you must patiently listen to her gloomy oracles. 
Take the future upon the word of the past. 



£46 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Fly, while you have yet the power : the world 
is all before you. Every where, talents such as 
yours will avail, save only at home ! Whatever 
may be your vocation, the pathway of ambition 
is open to you. In France, your preceptor, the 
Bishop O 'Flaherty, has but to receive and make 
you known. In Italy, in Spain, your uncle, 
the Abate O'Brien, is still powerful; Russia 
wants officers of European intellect, to discipline 
her Tartar legions ; and in Germany, the Prince 
de Ligne will do for his distinguished aid-de- 
camp all, that influence can effect for talent in 
that land, where influence is paramount. I do 
not direct your views to England ; but I implore 
you to leave Ireland, where you cannot do good, 
but may cause evil. Means shall not be wanting 
to send you forth, as becomes your rank — means 
coming from a hand you have already said you 
would not reject, — the hand of your nearest 
living relation, which is now, for the first and 
for the last time, held out to you in the cordial 
amity of kindred." 

She paused ; her countenance irradiated with 
the animated energy of her awakened spirit, — 



the o'flahertys. 247 

her colour deepened by the obvious emotion she 
had excited. Lord Arranmore seized the ex- 
tended hand, and fell at her feet, while, wholly 
involved in the most powerful feelings, fascinated, 
bewildered, he pressed it to temples that throbbed 
with delirious pulsation, to lips that burned like 
living fire. Madame O' Flaherty rose in con- 
fusion, in agitation, and in anger. 

" My Lord," she said, " you must go — go 
this instant. This is not what I expected — what 
I have deserved. Your extraordinary appear- 
ance has anticipated and hurried on intentions, 
previously conceived : make me not repent that 
it has done so. Do not turn an interview of 
importance to you, to the purposes of mere idle 
and habitual gallantry. Reserve such flatter- 
ing insults for Lady Knocklofty, or any other 
lady of the high Irish autocratic society you 
frequent, whose manners belong to their sys- 
tem : they neither suit the time, nor place, 
nor person to whom you have the bad taste 
to address them. Let go my hand instantly, 
or " 

She had already taken up the silver bell that 



24$ THE O'BRIENS AND 

stood upon the table near her, but Lord Arran- 
more snatched it from her. 

u Whatever may be the penalty of my dis- 
obedience to this imperative command, " he said, 
with passionate vehemence, " I will not comply 
with it ! I am here, by a law superior to your 
own — all-powerful as you are — by the law of 
that instinct, which urges every being to inquire 
into the means by which his happiness is in] 
fluenced, his actions interfered with, his feelings 
worked upon, and his destiny taken out of his 
own hands. You have too long assumed a power, 
only belonging to Providence itself. Whoever you 
are, remember, that by assuming protection over 
me, you give me the rights of the protected. 
Who are you, that would lay me under obliga- 
tions, which, if your offers are sincere, as they are 
extensive, should bind me to you for ever ? You 
have said that the hand so freely given, so fear- 
fully withdrawn, was the hand of my nearest 
relation. Who and what I am, you but too well 
know ; and thus bending a knee which never 
bent before to created being, I demand who 
and what you are ? I ask it, in earnest suppli- 



THE o'flahertys. 249 

cation, — I demand it, as a right. And I vow 
by all that is sacred not to quit this place, or 
this position, come what may, till you satisfy 
doubts, and lay suspicions, that have become 
the torment and occupation of my life."" 

All the equanimity, the presence of mind pos- 
sessed, or dignity assumed by the Superior, now 
gave way in a natural feminine emotion, before 
the vehement and peremptory expression of manly 
passion ; her countenance changed, her voice grew 
tremulous. 

" This," she said, " is not the time nor the 
place suited to such a revelation : I cannot here 
tell you all, and, perhaps, what I can reveal is 
of the least importance." After a moment's 
pause, she added, in a hurried manner, " I am 
the daughter of Count O'Flaherty, and of that 
unfortunate Italian nun, whom the restless 
energy of your uncle and of mine, brought over 
to this country, for purposes utterly unavailing. 
My mother's abduction had been communicated 
to her uncle, the Abate O'Brien, by your in- 
dignant father, who had vainly challenged the 
seducer. The bravest officer in the French 
11 3 



250 THE O'BRIENS AND 

service refused to risk the life of the man, whose 
services he had repaid by such injury; and in 
one so petulant and fierce, this was a redeeming 
forbearance : let it plead for him. My mother's 
crime, which in Italy or Spain would have sub- 
jugated her to the living incarceration of the 
6 Vade in pacem,' was, in Ireland, safe from the 
vengeance of the ecclesiastic authorities ; and the 
error which the church could not punish, it took 
measures to redeem. By the Abate's influence, 
dispensations were procured from Rome, and 
after twelve months of sinful existence, the 
Abbess of St. Bridget became the wife of her 
seducer; who, under the moral influence of his 
kinsman, the Abbe OFlaherty, submitted to a 
yoke which, with him, broke for ever the tie of 
passion. The ceremony which legitimized my 
birth, preceded it but by a day. Your foster- 
mother assisted at my entrance into life, when 
my mother, vowing me to the Virgin as an ex- 
piatory offering on the altars she had violated, 
impressed upon my brow this holy sign, the in- 
delible mark of my destiny and immolation." 
(As she spoke, she raised her veil, and discovered 



251 

a small black cross imprinted on the centre of 
her white and polished forehead.*) 

Lord Arranmore looked and shuddered, al- 
most breathless, from intense interest and deep 
emotion — 

" In the solitudes of Moycullen," continued 
the Superior, " passed the ten first years of my 
romantic life, amidst such associates as gave to 
your ardent mind its first direction. I shared 
with you, in my infancy, the affectionate soli- 
citude and the wild legends of Mor-ny-Brien, 
and even the instructions of her wilder son/' 

" Good God !" interrupted Lord Arranmore, 
" how extraordinary ! I well remember her long 
and frequent absences from the Isles of Arran. 
I certainly, too, received some impressions of 
your name — your eyes — that have floated like 
half-forgotten dreams in my memory, but have 
never been effaced. " 

U We occasionally, I believe, shared the same 

* This was a very ancient custom in Ireland, where it 
is still practised. Ludlow alludes to it in his Memoirs. 
The mark is impressed with gunpowder, in the way so 
commonly employed by sailors. 



252 THE O'BRIENS AND 

cradle in infancy," continued the Superior, 
casting down her eyes. " I profited too by the 
instructions of the Abbe O'Flaherty." 

"You were known, then," said Lord Arran- 
more, "to all that surrounded me; — my father, 
my fosterers, my preceptor ; and to me alone 
your existence was a secret." 

"It was so to all, save those whom you have 
mentioned. For the honour of the church and 
the sept, my mother's abduction was covered by 
such little stratagems, as easily appease the cu- 
riosity and lull the suspicions of ignorance and 
superstition. Year after year her removal to 
some remote country was proposed, but was 
rendered impracticable by her state of mind and 
health : and those who were of necessity admitted 
to the secret, were sworn upon the cross of 
Onor-ny- Cruise, not to reveal it, so long as my 
unfortunate mother remained in a country, where 
Catholicism, persecuted and calumniated, needed 
all the support, which the virtues and discretions 
of its professors could give it. — But to continue : 
my father was recalled to France shortly after my 
birth, and never returned. My mother, with all 



the o'flahertys. 253 

the passions of an Italian, and the conscientious 
sensibility of a devotee, gradually fell a victim 
to remorse, awakened by disappointed affection : 
her mental malady took the fearful form of re- 
ligious melancholy. I became the companion 
and vigilant guide of her wild wanderings. 
Pity and affection so early developed, ripened 
intellect, and sharpened it, into premature acute- 
ness. I was also the pupil of her lucid intervals : 
she was a superior musician and linguist. I 
early benefited by her instructions, as I inherited 
her organization for the arts; but if I acquired 
her talents, I imbibed her enthusiasm and 
adopted her illusions." 

" Her illusions !'' reiterated Lord Arranmore, 
in the deepest emotion. " You are not, with 
all your powerful endowments, a dupe as well 
as a victim; and 'deceiving others, you are 
yourself undeceived.' " 

" Your decision, Lord Arranmore," she re- 
plied coldly, her dark brows knitting into a 
singular expression of sternness — " your de- 
cision is more prompt than liberal." 

" Forgive me, Madam," he replied, in con- 



254 THE O'BRIENS and 

fusion, " I beseech you. I am but — I am but 
guessing at a character, which defies all ordinary 
calculation of human intelligence and conduct. — 
Pray, proceed." 

" Strange means,'" she added emphatically, 
" were taken to subtilize my mind, from child- 
hood ; but they failed to deprave it. Intellect, 
well awakened, and blended with strong sym- 
pathies, can rarely be turned to false purposes. 
The utmost development of mind can lead but 
to truth ; and the sublimest philosophy teaches 
but to increase the sum of human happiness. 
Brought up to propagate dogmas, I soon arrived 
at facts ; and the veil dropped, — and for ever. 
Educated for the purpose of obtaining an in- 
fluence over the minds of others, I obtained a 
mastery even over those for whose service and 
secret views I was instructed. I have become 
their directing spirit, not their slave ; and I 
wield the power and influence they have given 
me, for purposes directly opposed to their in- 
tentions/ 5 

" Are you not, then," interrupted her de- 
lighted auditor, eagerly, — f* are you not here to 



THE O'FLAHERTYS, 255 

give grace and splendour to institutions which 
had fallen into desuetude in Ireland,— establish- 
ments offensive to the Deity, because incom- 
patible with the true duties and destinies of 
the species ?"* 

" If I have been brought here for that end, I 
have wielded my influence for far other purposes. 
You have heard and seen, there is nothing here 
that recalls the unaccommodated, slovenly de- 
votion of the old establishment of Mary, John, 
and Joseph : education is here going on upon a 
liberal plan, to fit woman for the useful, blessed 
duties, that belong to her sex, as wife and mother, 
— by the arts, which soothe and soften life. I 
have brought over with me, the ■ Soeur Clwriste' 
of my convent in Rome, to whom I am in- 
debted for the cultivation of my musical talents. 
Music is the natural language of an Italian, 
and I avail myself of its influence, as did the 
legislators of old. For the rest, — time is occu- 
pied : and intellect, once awakened, will soon 
find its level. You have heard the cheerful 
noise of that merry will, turned by a torrent, 
which is no longer a mere feature of picturesque 



%56 THE O'BRIENS AND 

desolation : you have seen the dwelling of the 
peasant, no longer a part of the soil, out of which 
it rises. Such is my Jesuitism, the only Jesuit- 
ism the age will bear, or Ireland, I trust, sub- 
mit to. But time presses, and digression now, 
even for self-defence, is ill-placed— The death 
of both my parents threw me into the power of 
my bigoted grand-uncle ; who received me at 
the foot of Mount Cenis, from your father's 
hands. What followed I will not detain you to 
relate ; my natural endowments answered the 
purposes of my employers, and were cultivated 
to the uttermost: for, from the petites mattresses 
of the Faubourg St. Germain, to the powerful 
superiors of Italian convents, Jesuitism has al- 
ways borrowed its agency from female arts, and 
female subtlety. I became in Italy the foundress 
of a new worship, the protected of popes and 
cardinals ; and I retained the prestiges of my mo- 
nastic position, with the advantages of every 
social distinction: bound to an order and its 
interests, — I was yet permitted to live in the 
world." 

She paused — her mobile countenance wholly 



the o'flahertys. 257 

changed its character. A look of arch gravity 
gave a new expression to her features ; and there 
was a tremulous movement round her beautiful 
moudi, as if she feared to smile, and vainly 
tried to look serious. The interest of her audi- 
tor, which deepened with every word she uttered, 
was now at its acme ; but he could only utter — 
" Well, Madam ?" 

She continued — cs It was at this period, that 
' my spiriting ' was employed to rescue from the 
dangers of that world, one marked out by an- 
cient prophecy to be the saviour of his country, 
and the restorer of the rights and the creeds or 
his forefathers. It so happened that this future 
champion, this hope of his family and his 
country, was a refractory young Jesuit, who, 
when still in his parvce, and deep in the innocent 
studies of Ludovicus Vives, had chosen to think 
for himself, to burst his bonds, and to break the 
chain of prophetic event he was born to fulfil." 

She paused again, and a significant and hu- 
morous smile passed over her features. 

" Of the person, Madam," said Lord Arran- 
more, u thus contemptuously alluded to, I am 



258 THE O'BRIENS AND 

not ignorant ; but the prophecy, — I beseech you 






4 If your lordship were as deeply read in 
the history of this unfortunate country, as I 
from necessity have long been, you must have 
known that the Irish have ever been supersti- 
tiously governed by their dependence on these 
prophecies. Such a prophecy was imagined to 
have you for its object. A mole on the cheek, 
(the antitype of that of Brian Borru) ; your 
birth in the ruins of Dun iEngus on the festival 
of St. Ignatius, were conclusive in your favour, 
and you became the object of the incessant vigi- 
lance and interference of our visionary relations. 
The confident of the general schemes of the 
order, I could not but become acquainted with 
this particular underplot of your grand uncle, and 
with his views on you. Our common ancestors 
and fosterage, our common destiny worked upon 
my rather Irish imagination, and your resist- 
ance to a thraldom which pressed so heavily on 
myself, your struggles, and extraordinary and 
adventurous life, still farther interested and 
engaged me. Accident led me to a nearer in- 



the o'flahertys. 259 

sight into your views and character, at the 
carnival in Rome; aud when an opportunity 
occurred of doing you an important service, I 
availed myself of it, something perhaps beyond 
the boundary of that conventional propriety, 
which governs the sex in ordinary life. Obliged 
by my position to avoid making myself known, 
the adventure necessarily assumed an air of 
romance, which in our subsequent intercourse it 
has been my — caprice perhaps to continue." 

" Your caprice T" repeated Lord Arran- 
inore, in uncontrollable emotion. 

44 I must not be interrupted," said the Su- 
perior, resuming her imperative manner ; " time 
presses, and I pass over all that is not essential 
to telL At the time of your leaving Rome, I was 
employed to found an affiliation of our establish- 
ment at Florence ; — but the spell was broken. 
A prince and a prelate for once were leagued 
with public opinion; and Leopold and Ricci 
succeeding in baffling the views of the order, and 
dispersing the devotees of the Holy Heart : — 
our house was suppressed. The French revolu- 
tion, with other changes in Tuscany, made by 



260 the o'bjiiens and 

the Grand Duke, followed up the blow ; and 
I accompanied my aged grand uncle to the 
Netherlands, and thence to England ; where alone 
his scattered order found shelter and protection. 
Still thrown by my sex and helplessness on my 
uncle's protection, I again accompanied him 
to Ireland, where my little property, inherited 
from my father, was held in trust for me. 
It was then that I resolved on establishing this 
house; to improve the female members of my 
persecuted sect ; to take them out of the hands 
of vulgar bigotry, — to refine, to liberalize. This, 
indeed, I have not effected, by the means I 
should have preferred, but my agency is limited. 
Availing myself of the Abate O'Brien's imper- 
turbable zeal and intentions, and of the influence 
of the popular religion I profess, I have esta- 
blished on the domains of my forefathers the 
institution in which you find me. I have worked 
with all the means afforded me. This, however, 
is not a moment to devote to my views ; it 
belongs to your interests — to your safety. 

" In a recent visit to Dublin with the Abate, 
for the purpose of assisting your father and my 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 26l 

uncle in his pecuniary involvements, you again 
came within the sphere of my observation at the 
review in the Phoenix Park. You might have 
remarked a foreign-built carriage which had 
got locked into the wheel of Lady Knocklofty's 
phaeton, close by the spot where you were sta- 
tioned?" 

" Yes, Madam, and I have heard her lady- 
ship allude to the singular persons it con- 
tained." 

" Becoming the involuntary auditor of a 
conversation, which gave me a glimpse of the 
danger to which my cousin was exposed, I re- 
solved to attempt his rescue, and you know, 

or have probably guessed the rest." 

" I know — I have guessed nothing !*' replied 
her anxious questioner : " it is for the Sphinx 
herself to expound her own enigmas. 1 '' 

" And yet," she replied, with a faint smile, 
" (Edipus was no conjuror; any school-boy 
might have guessed the riddle that made the 
fortune of his sagacitv : for, after all, be had 
only to deal — with a woman." 



THE O BIIIENS AND 



" Only, indeed !" exclaimed Lord Arran- 
Riorc, passionately. 

" A nd a woman is so easily seen through ; 
her feelings lie so obviously on the surface, her 
highest moral powers are so imperiously governed 
by her affections " 

" Her affections, Madam I 11 interrupted Lord 
Arranmore, " did you say her affections ?" 

'* Her sympathies, I should have said," re- 
plied Madame O' Flaherty, colouring deeply ; 
" and when her pity combines with her ingenuity, 
and both are called forth for the same object, 
then she becomes omnipotent. But to proceed : 
it was a curious coincidence, that I should have 
been a witness of the fray in which you were so 
deeply committed, (for I was lodged in the 
Franciscan convent in Wine Tavern-street) ; I 
availed myself of access obtained for other pur- 
poses, to the castle, where I was sure of learning 
what might be your fate; I was in St. Patrick's 
Hall, waiting for the means of returning home, 
during your interview with Lady Knocklofty ; 
and while you slept, I exchanged the gift of a 



265 

femme galante, — for the awful signet of St. 
Ignatius, a family relic presented to me by 
your father, which I used to arrest your pas- 
sions, through the influence of your imagina- 
tion." 

Lord Arranmore would have interrupted her, 
but she went on rapidly. " I was engaged in 
making a drawing of the antique mantlepiece of 
O'Brien House, when your arrival drove me 
into concealment ; when I nearly met my death 
in that horrible accident from which you would. 
and Shane did, rescue me ; and here (par par en- 
ihese) I will add, that my influence over Shane 
is of old date : it began in Connemara, where I 
was the ' delicate Ariel' of this Irish Caliban ; it 
was continued at Rome during his pilgrimage of 
penance, and has been confirmed by my as- 
sumption of the office of Abbess of Moycullen : 
the devotion of clanship and hallucination of 
mind have done the rest. Still anxious to serve 
and to save you, I accompanied your unfortu- 
nate father to the university, on the evening 
of your expulsion. He ventured to the hall 
of examination, and I awaited your sentence 



2fi4 THE O'BRIENS AND 

in the alley, from which I could not escape 
without discovery. I overheard your impli- 
cation in schemes, as pure in their motive, 
and patriotic in their ends, as they were 
visionary in their means, and impracticable in 
their conduct. It was myself and your father 
who left the note and money in your rooms, 
during your absence with Lord Walter ; and it 
was still your eternelle cousine, accompanied by 
her sceur choriste, who gave you rendez-vous 
on her own invitation (for the trashy invito 
worthy of the pen of such women as your Lady 
Knocklofty, was a tour de page, played off on 
your credulity, by the Reverend Mother of Moy- 
cullen)." 

Lord Arranmore coloured to the eyes, bit his 
lips, and reiterated, " My credulity, indeed !" 

Madame OTlaherty, with a shy, sly, down- 
cast look, continued : " It was I too, who 
worked your father, through his fanaticism and 
paternal solicitude, to the scene of the hospital 
fields ; for the purpose of removing you from the 
seductions, which your virtues and passions alike 
rendered dangerous to you. It was I, who, as a 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 



2.G5 



soeur de la charite, assisted at your sick bed, as 
I should have done at that of any other, who 
stood in such need of my assistance. It was I 
who met you in the caves of Cong, which 
curiosity had led me to visit by torch-light, 
under the guidance of Shane, who upon the 
occasion of this nocturnal visit to Cong, first 
detected the espionnage of a person employed to 
watch your movements by the constituted autho- 
rities. From that moment Shane has never lost 
sight of you, and has occasionally 6 done my 
spiriting,"' not indeed, gently, but ably. It was 
I who, with an effrontery worthy of Lady Ho- 
noria Stratton herself, came uninvited to the 

Jug Day ; partly pour megayer and partly 

but here ends my Jesuitry. I saw you safely 
lodged beneath your aunts 1 roof, but saw you 
still with regret exposed to an influence you 
are the least calculated to resist. You are, 
however, your own keeper. It neither is my 
office, nor my inclination further to interfere." 

She paused, and cast down her eyes, and 
then added, " Since the Sphynx is destined to 
remain in her desert, to reign in lonely so- 

VOL. IV. m 



266 the o'buiens and 

litude, and at best to excite the curiosity of 
some chance wanderer, whom accident brings 
to her remote region, you will not, I trust, 
misconstrue the interest she has taken in your 
behalf; though somewhat, perhaps, too fantas- 
tically manifested. But," (and she hesitated 
and looked significantly) "men (and above all, 
such men), are always more readily convinced 
through their sensations, than their reason — for 
arguments are words, but images are facts ; and 
a scene got up, is always well worth a case stated. 
I could not argue with you ; I would not lec- 
ture, — and —a " 

" In a word, Madam," interrupted Lord Ar- 
ranmore, piqued, through all his raptures and 
admiration, " the Ariel appointed to watch over 
the ( shallow monster,' by the pious Prospero of 
the Jesuit society, has acted much as her proto- 
type did ; and amused her own superior intelli- 
gence, while she played with the weakness and 
folly of the subject committed to her power." 

" At least," she replied, smiling, H give me 
credit for the purity of my motives, however 
capriciously evinced.'' 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. £67 

" I will give you credit for any amount of 
obligation you please to claim," replied her in- 
fatuated auditor ; "but I beseech you, wrench 
not from me the belief, that, all lonely as I am in 
this wide world, there is one who feels for me 
that interest, which angels are said to feel for 
man ! and that an agency so poetically wielded 
in my behalf, is not all the result of a caprice, 
or part of a system.'' 

He looked full at her, as if he would have 
read her soul in her eyes, but they were 
downcast, and fastened on the earth. 

u I cannot now," she said, after a long pause, 
" tell all that may be told ; and to tell less, may 
be dangerous alike to both. Your impetuosity 
and most unexpected intrusion have hurried 
on an event, which I wanted only a favourable 
opportunity to bring about. For the rest, 
trust to me, when I tell you, that there is not a 
moment to lose : for your sake, for both our 
sakes, you must leave this country. It is also 
for your safety (and I speak not of your moral 
safety), that you return no more to Beauregard. 
Lord Knocklofty is already there. He was seen 
N 2 



268 THE O'BRIENS AND 

with his suite, this evening, while his wife was 
here, passing the new line from the Heaths to St. 
Grellan. The lord-lieutenant has been suddenly 
recalled to Dublin, for the purpose of issuing a 
proclamation, for the suppression of the Volun- 
teers. Your last political brochure has attracted 
the attention of government ; and the first 
steps of a prosecution are taken against the 
publisher. Your gallant and imprudent friend, 
Lord Walter, has found it expedient to leave 
Ireland. 

cc This intelligence I have this night received ; 
and I was on the point of conveying it to you, 
by Shane, whom I awaited here, when your 
unexpected intrusion rendered it unnecessary. 

" I swear solemnly by all that man holds 
dearest to obey you to the letter, as a superior 
intelligence," said Lord Arranmore, rising, and 
approaching her, "if you promise that this 
interview shall not be the last ; that you will yet 
communicate with me ?'' 

" I promise," interrupted the Superior, rising, 
and taking his hand to lead him forth, while 
pointing to the starry firmament, which illumi- 



THE o'FLAHEIlTYS. 269 

nated and canopied a scene of infinite sublimity — 
" I promise,"' she added, with solemnity, " by 
these great mysteries of nature, by which we are 
surrounded — mysteries of which we ourselves 
make a part, I promise, provided you leave the 
time and place to me." 

" Provided I leave it?" said Lord Arran- 
more, waving his head, and pressing the hand 
he held to his lips (which was no longer with- 
drawn). "Alas ! What am I ? What avails my 
intentions ? There is a destiny, which has long 
governed the events of my life, preoccupied my 
thoughts, and left me without will or power 
to act, but by its sovereign inspirations. The 
sport, or perhaps, after all, the dupe of this 
assumed supremacy, my position is indeed far 
from dignified : but such as it is, I would 
not now exchange it, even for the independence 
I worship, and for which I have already made 
such unavailing sacrifices. So long as you honour 
me by an interest so flattering — so long as you 
condescend to guide, it shall be my glory to be 
guided ; but speak no more of me : one word, my 
lovely cousin, of yourself — of your strange and 



270 THE o'briens and 

most uncongenial destiny. It is your advice 
that I should fly this unhappy country ; it is my 
amazement, that you should remain here." 

" I cannot, like you," (she said with energy), 
u act for Ireland, — write for her — die for her ! 
but I will do more, / will live in Ireland; 
and trust me, to do so, is the purest proof of 
patriotism, that those, unprotected by power 
and faction, can give. 'Tis a perpetuated strug- 
gle to the liberal ; to the feeling, to those prone 
to sympathise, and unable to relieve, it is a per- 
petuated martyrdom — but this is no time for such 
discussion. Hark • 'tis Shane's horn." 

Lord Arranmore, startled by the informa- 
tion, listened, and the sound of Shane's melan- 
choly horn, was distinctly, though distantly, 
heard. 

" That," said Madame O'Flaherty, in great 
perturbation, and withdrawing her hand, 
M announces the arrival of one, who must not find 
you here ; and now farewell." 

" Of one !" said Lord Arranmore, with 
anxiety ; " whom do you expect ?" 
" Our uncle, the Abate O'Brien.' ' 



the o\flahertys. 271 

"Ours!" he repeated, as they proceeded to 
the edge of the lake, where his boat now un- 
dulated in the mountain breeze. w Ah, ma belle 
cousine y to have any tie in common with such a 
being, even one so dark and formidable ! — " 

"Ah! rnon beau cousin" interrupted Madame 
O 'Flaherty, in an animated accent, " this is no 
time for sentiment, I have promised, let that 
suffice — farewell : v and disengaging her hand, 
which he had again taken, she suddenly re- 
treated to the glass door, closed it, and taking 
her lamp, disappeared into the interior of the 
building. 

The splash of oars was now distinctly heard 
through the profound silence of the night ; and 
the next moment, the shooting of a boat down 
one of the rapids which connect the series of 
lesser lakes, was visible. Lord Arranmore 
sprang into his own canoe, and vigorously plying 
his oar, gained the opposite side unobserved. 

Exhausted by emotion, the most powerful 
he had ever experienced, fascinated to the 
spot, unable to tear himself from its vicinity, he 
threw himself on the bank under the shadow 



272 THE O'BRIENS AND 

of an old fantastic beech, and within full view 
of that Abbey, the dwelling of her, who for the 
moment occupied every thought and faculty of 
his existence. If eloquence be but " the putting 
together of passionate words, and applying 
them to the passions of the hearers,"* the musi- 
cal, fluent, and graceful details of the Superior, 
her deep philosophy, and deeper feeling, even 
her imperfect accent, and foreign rhythm, had 
all the charms of eloquence with one, whose 
passions had lent themselves to every word she 
uttered. But the inference was still more intox- 
icating than the facts. Neither the pride nor 
the prudery of the Superior had enabled her to 
conceal a deeper interest, than her guarded words 
revealed ; and that was a conviction which ab- 
sorbed or banished every other idea. All the 
ambition of self-love was realized in this belief. 
Not for a moment did a sense of his own perilous 
situation darken, by its gloom, the bright, warm 
visions that fevered and convulsed him (for he had 
already determined to resign himself to justice, 
and stand between his publisher and the law). 
* Hobbes. 



the o'flahertys. 273 

The moonbeams which played through the 
branches under which he lay, were not brighter 
than the waking dreams, that cheered his vision- 
ary reveries. To him, the small space that 
moonlight shone upon, was the world, or well 
worth all the world beside. In solitudes so 
lovely and remote, with a female so far above the 
level of her sex, almost of his own, what a life 
might be enjoyed! All that love and liberty 
could lavish on one, whose devotion to both was 
the crowning sentiment of his existence, might 
be here possessed to their fullest extent. In 
such sites his ancestors had lived, and loved, and 
wandered, and preserved their wild, and not 
always joyous independence; and he imagined 
circumstances which might render even the life 
of an Irish outlaw more than endurable. Thus 
wrapped in visions of the highest mental excite- 
ment, he dreamed and slept. 



n 3 



£74 THE O'BRIENS and 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE FESTIVAL OF ST. BEAVOIN. 



Report me and my cause aright to the unsatisfied. 

Shakspbare. 

u Id commune malum : semel insanivimus omnes." 



It is a splendid enjoyment to awaken to light 
and life with nature herself, and surrounded by 
her greatest works to participate in her brilliant 
renovation : but there is a more precious sen- 
sation still ; 'tis when the eyes, long closed in 
deep and oblivious sleep, open upon some de- 
voted being, whose fostering care has watched 
over the helplessness of our slumbers. The re- 
presentative of the Clan Teig O'Briens, had slept, 
as his ancestors had so often done before him, 
with earth for his couch, and heaven for his 
canopy ; and with a faithful follower watching 
beside him. He arose with the sun from his bed 



275 

of heather, refreshed indeed, but confused by 
his strange position. The mountains, the lakes, 
the Abbey, all the sublime objects, on which his 
senses had dwelt in the dim, mysterious light of 
a waning moon, and under the influence of a 
dreaming fancy, were now spread before him, in 
the full reality of form and colour. The 
branches of the beech, under which he had lain, 
had been woven into an impervious canopy 
above his head ; while, at the entrance of this 
fantastic bower, sat one who hummed the 
Lullaby of other times, which brought repose 
to the wearied. It was Shane-na-Brien. The 
object of his vigils gazed on him for a mo- 
ment unobserved ; and then springing upon and 
embracing him in a grasp, firm and nervous as 
the giant's own, he said, "Now, then, my 
dear Shane, you are mine : for once you can- 
not, and shall not escape me." 

Shane made no resistance, but looked on him 
with an expression of wild delight, and then 
cowering at his feet, and caressing his hands, he 
said, with a suffocated accent of pleasure — 

" Och ! musha, the great joy to be near ye, 



276 THE O'BRIENS AND 

cushleen-ma-cree ; and the pinance — and the 
vow — and too much joy for poor Shane, the 
murderer, croishna Chrishna ! n 

" You avoided me, then, as a penance ?" said 
Lord Arranmore, smiling, and raising him 
from the earth. 

" Mush a, ay ! only a vow upon the cross for 
two months and a day, and a bit of a promise 
to the blessed and holy lady, the Reverend 
Mother ; and now ye have met, and shure I'll 
ingage she tould you all herself, and the Broah 
Tanah;* and never lost sight of ye, day or 
night, but ever on the track of your traheens ; 
ay, troth, like the brach on the slot of the deer; 
and saw ye often on the edge of the pit, and the 
Breagaslah f on the steps of ye." 

Through these wild and incoherent phrases, 
Lord Arranmore could just discover that a vow 
of penance and of obedience to the Superior had 
prevented Shane from indulging in his society, 
even in the moments when he might have done 
so with safety ; and that there was some danger 

* The ancient prophecy. 

f A deceitful person, or traitor. 



THE O FLAHEfiTYS. XM 

hanging over himself, which had been averted 
by the vigilance, with which his foster-brother 
had haunted his steps. 

While these thoughts were passing through 
his mind, and he was preparing to follow Shane 
to the cabin of Emunh-na-Lung, where he was 
assured that a good breakfast, and mille welcomes 
awaited him, he was suddenly struck by a change 
of countenance in his companion, and by a 
crouching movement and a firing up of his eye. 
The next moment, Shane, with a tiger's spring 
darted down the declivity near which they stood, 
and disappeared in a copse of furze. Imme- 
diately a discharge of fire-arms was heard, and 
Lord Arranmore in horror and consternation, 
bounded forward to follow ; when Shane return- 
ing, met him, coolly wiping the pan of a pistol, 
which he replaced in his bosom. " Is anybody 
hurt ?" demanded Lord Arranmore, in great 
perturbation. " Whom have you fired at ?*' 

" The dioul takes care of his own," said 
Shane, sullenly : "he has escaped now; but he's 
a sold man, the Breagaslah — the informer — the 
blood-seller." 



278 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" Of whom do you speak ?" said Lord Arran- 
more, shocked by the phrenzy of Shane's rolling 
eye, and the distortion of every savage feature. 

"Of him, whose bought word hung me at 
St. Michael's Cross," replied Shane, in Irish; 
" of him who follows you in the mountains to 
betray you ; the blood-hound of the Sassoni that 
hunts the hart to its covert ; the informer of the 
Hunks creature of St. Grellan, and the BraitJier- 
na-Earla,* Corney the cadger, who has the 
brianna,f to dog and take you, ma Cushleen, 
but," he added in a low mutter, while raising 
his clenched hands and bloodshot eyes to the 
heavens : " but that moon, waning as it is, shall 
yet shine upon his corpse :" and he continued 
to move his lips in inarticulate and frenzied 
sounds, and preserving the same strongly marked 
attitude of religious invocation. 

" Miserable man L" exclaimed Lord Arran- 
more, shuddering in horror, at the state of a 
country, where such things could be, and yet 

• The Earl's overseer, or driver. Such persons were 
often used as informers during the rebellion of 1798. 
•j* The warrant. 



THE o'flahertys. 279 

pass unheeded ; and shocked at the sanguinary 
frenzy of the wild and unfortunate being, with 
whom his own wayward destiny had thus 
linked him, — "miserable man, would you, while 
still in penance for one involuntary murder, 
plan the destruction of a fellow-creature in cold 

blood r 

"Musha! shure God is good/' said Shane, 
sternly, and blessing himself; " and there's 
mercy for the pinitent, laudate Dominum de ccelis, 
amen. And shure I would not vex you, dear, 
only the ould Brehon law, a thumb for a thumb, 
and have sworn it by the hand of my father, 
and my mother's grave — and it must be done, 
judica me, Deus ! " 

Lord Arranmore saw that this was not a mo- 
ment to argue with one whose reason was in 
temporary abeyance ; and whose faith and 
feelings alike at variance with all judgment, 
nourished hallucinations, which, under other 
circumstances, they might have corrected or 
subdued. He stood therefore, a moment, in 
deep and dark meditation, awakened by his 
observation of the unhappy, fevered creature 



280 THE O'BRIENS AND 

before him, who continued to mutter incoherent 
prayers in Irish and in Latin ; till gradually and 
slowly coming to himself, his countenance fell 
into an expression of extreme exhaustion. 
Burying his rugged head in his huge hands, he 
wept ; then wiping away the tears with his long 
matted locks, he turned his haggard and me- 
lancholy eyes on his foster brother, and in a 
voice of shame and contrition, said, " Ma Cush- 
leen, shure, dear, you'll bear with poor Shane." 

Lord Arranmore took his extended hand and 
pressed it kindly; endeavouring to calm his agi- 
tation by a change of objects, he expressed a 
wish to go to the cabin of Emunh-na-Lung. 
Shane cheered up, seized his long twisted cipen, 
which lay on the ground, and led the way. 
Lord Arranmore followed in spiritless silence to 
the cabin, where the grateful Emunh and his 
children, prepared by Shane for his arrival, 
waited on the threshold to receive him, and 
where a frugal but wholesome breakfast was in 
readiness against his arrival. 

Thus humbly, but, he believed safely lodged 
in regions every way correspondent to his feel- 



the o'flahertys. 281 

ings and his views ; unrestrained by society, 
unfettered in his movements, by its duties and its 
forms, the late dweller in courts, and camps, 
and colleges, found that a mountain and wood- 
land life, 

" More sweet 
Than that of painted pomp," 

was infinitely preferable to a cell in Gal way gaol 
or a dungeon in Kilmainham. There was here 
none to distract his thoughts from the object 
which now ruled them with sovereign influence; 
none " to cope him in his sullen fits,"" or thwart 
him in the indulgence of those wild, but deli- 
cious reveries, which had preluded his sweet 
refreshing slumbers of the preceding evening. 
Here he determined to avoid the annoyance of 
his threatened caption, and to await the trial 
to which he was resolved to surrender himself. 

He determined, therefore, to write to his pub- 
lisher to inform him of the fact. He had also to 
acquaint his father's lawyer of his situation, and 
to direct him to make all necessary inquiries 
concerning his precise position, and prepare his 



282 the o'buikns and 

defence. With his plans thus arranged, it became 
necessary that he should collect as much of his 
papers and wardrobe, as was necessary for his 
immediate use, to take leave of his aunts, with 
whatever excuse might present itself at the mo- 
ment, and to return to Emunh-na-Lung's cabin, 
which he had fixed upon for his head-quarters. 

With his mind lightened by these resolu- 
tions, his heart far otherwise pre-occupied than 
by his own personal safety, with spirits revived, 
and a volition roused to firm resolve, wholly en- 
gaged with the exciting present, and leaving fate 
to futurity, he mounted his pony (which he was 
not surprised to find in Shane's possession), and 
took the road to St. Grellan. His inquiries at 
the post-office were answered by a letter from 
Lord Walter, dated from Dover, explaining the 
motives of his temporary absence, and one from 
his publisher, announcing that the government 
had issued a warrant for Lord Arranmore's 
apprehension ; and, in consequence of his dis- 
appearance, had likewise commenced proceed- 
ings against himself. 

He immediately adjourned to an obscure 



the o'flaheetys. 283 

public- house, between St. Grellan and Bog 
Moy, where in a long letter to Lord Walter he 
detailed the state of that part of the country, to 
which his mission had been directed ; and ex- 
plained the total absence of all immediate dis- 
content in the catholic gentry, who, (remote 
from official persecution, and living in habits of 
kindly intercourse with the old protestant fami- 
lies, their rents well paid, their cellars well 
stocked,) slept over the degradation of their 
caste, and were ignorant or unmoved by the 
events which were passing in the distant capital. 
Six hundred years of oppression were now pro- 
ducing their moral effects. The conscientious 
notions of passive obedience of the catholic, were 
then fortified by the seared and callous feelings of 
the man ; while the pride and ambition (which 
under happier circumstances, have since so ho- 
nourably, and in spite of some errors, so usefully 
directed their views and their energies to the 
future), were exchanged for a silly, but too na- 
tional vanity, which centred itself in the oft cited 
past — 

" When Malachi wore his collar of gold, 
Which he won from the proud invader." 



284 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Upon a population so dispersed, no political 
impression was feasible. The few who had 
sense and education sufficient to appreciate their 
disqualifications at their proper value, could not 
convene their less awakened countrymen, to 
arouse them by the infectious eloquence so pe- 
culiar to the Irish temperament. Orators could 
not fire, where there were no auditors to listen : 
and even, if all felt aggrieved, a constitutional 
resistance would have been a physical impossi- 
bility. In the corporate towns, as in those of 
other parts of the kingdom, fuel for disaffection 
was not wanting : trading loyalty and borough 
patriotism, shewed themselves in all the petty 
oppression of subaltern authority, and in all the 
gratuitous insult of triumphant faction ; but in 
the great towns, the catholics were decidedly 
inferior in influence and wealth, and the possi- 
bility of resistance was not even suspected. The 
United Irishmen had, therefore, nothing to 
expect from a population so unawakened, and so 
dispersed. 

Of his own personal views, Lord Arranmore 
could say little, for as yet they were floating and 



the oVlaheetys. %85 

undecided ; and on the subject which most nearly- 
touched him, the discovery of a near relation in 
the person of " the Jesuitess*' of a former com- 
munication, he was silent. 

By the same post, letters were dispatched to 
Mr. Fitzpatrick, the publisher, and to Mr.Fitton, 
the attorney ; and the sun had set before Lord 
Arranmore took the road to Bog Moy. The 
darkness of a gloomy, drizzling night was already 
falling on the desolate domain of his now rather 
uncertain inheritance. Bog and waste, sea and 
mountain, swift-drifting clouds, and pattering 
showers, formed a combination of dreariness and 
gloom which gave to the red blaze of the turf fire, 
which shone through the parlour window of Bog 
Moy House a splendour not its own, and seemed 
to render the hospitable hearth on which it burned 
the very focus of comfort. As Lord Arranmore 
approached the ever-open door, the full-raised 
chaunt of Major O'Mealy's well-known sonorous 
voice caught his ear. He alighted, and glancing 
his eye through the window, perceived a party 
at supper in all the enjoyment of true Irish con- 
viviality. The Major was seated, en maitre^ 



286 THE o'briens and 

at the foot of the table, Miss Mac Taaf at the 
head, and Mrs. and Miss Costello, Father Festus, 
and Miss Monica on either side. James Kelly, 
stifling with laughter, was stationed at the 
sideboard ; while the rest of the household, from 
" the ould woman" to the " boy about the place," 
were gathered round the door, purposely left 
open for such an auditory in all genuine Irish 
houses. 

To appear in such a circle, for the purposes 
which had brought Lord Arranmore to Bog Moy 
House, was impossible. Taking, therefore, the 
priest's lantern, which burned on the table in the 
hall, he proceeded to his tower. There, packing 
up in a valise the things necessary to his imme- 
diate wants, with all his papers, and a few of 
his books, he remained, only to pen an hasty 
note to his aunt, promising to explain his sudden 
departure at an early opportunity, and express- 
ing the gratitude and affection he felt for his 
quaint, old fashioned, but kind-hearted and 
affectionate relations. This note he sealed, and 
left on the table; then taking his portmanteau, 
and extinguishing the light, he mounted his 



the o'flahertys. 287 

pony, arid took his road towards the cabin of his 
refuge in the mountains. 

Within a mile of his destined home, Lord 
Arranmore was met by Shane-na-Brien, whose 
warning cornet he had more than once heard on 
his approach. Weary and dispirited, he ex- 
changed but few words with his foster-brother, 
who trotted beside him, humming an ancient 
cronau, the melancholy and monotonous drone of 
which, served but to deepen the depression it was 
meant to cheer. The welcome which awaited 
him was as warm as an Irish heart ever gave ; 
and the bed prepared for him had the best pro- 
perty that can distinguish the couch of the weary, 
cleanliness. Every thing in this humble shed 
was of suitable simplicity ; but the descendant 
of the supreme kings of Ireland thought of the 
wanderings of CTDonnel amidst the snows of the 
Dublin mountains, of O'Neil's bed of fern and 
rocky table, and acknowledged that his own 
position gained by the comparison. 

Lord Arranmore' s first act on the morning 
following his arrival, was to dispatch a note by 
Shane to the Superior of the ladies of the cuore 



288 THE o'briens and 

sagro. He thought he was fulfilling a duty, in 
informing one, so actively interested and so nearly 
related to him, of his intentions, and of the steps 
he had taken to retain his liberty, until it became 
necessary to resign himself to the law. He saw 
not that he was obeying an impulse, stronger 
than his reason or will to direct it. 

He concluded his note by observing, " Come 
what may, I will stand the trial that awaits me ; 
for though falsehood, leagued with corruption 
and protected by power, may accuse, there is 
still an impregnable barrier for innocence in the 
trial by jury." 

With a hurry of perturbation which defeated 
its own purpose, he tore open the answer received 
to this note, and read as follows : — 

" To admire the principle on which you act, 
is not to approve its application. You are about 
to make an unavailing sacrifice. Trial by jury 
is of no value, where influence strikes the panel, 
and prejudice and faction govern the conscience 
of the juryman. Like the other institutes of a 
free people, it is inapplicable to the circumstances 



THE o'flahertys. 289 

of our proconsular despotism. Stay, and you 
are lost ; fly, and you may yet serve that cause 
in other countries, which in your own you will 
now but mar. 

" Beavoin O'Flaherty." 

He instantly replied, and dispatched his answer 
by Shane. 

" Madam, 
u I have nothing left but honour^ It is a 
possession I will not forfeit, even though you 
command me. I will not fly. But I will wait 
here for a time, in the hope of the accomplish- 
ment of your promise ; and then I shall give my- 
self up to those laws, which it is my doctrine to 
uphold, and must not be my practice to despise, 
or evade. 

" I have the honour to be, 
" &c, &c, &c, 

" Arraxmore." 

To this second note no answer was returned. 
From the incoherent replies of Shane to his 
vol. iv. o 



290 THE 0'BRIEN9 ANJ) 

numerous questions, he could gather nothing, 
except that the Superior had met him in the old 
chauntry of the Abbey, an unfrequented spot, 
the burial-vault of the O'Flahertys, accessible 
only to Shane himself, by a subterranean 
entrance, and to the Abbess, by a c'oor, of 
which she kept the key. To this meagre intel- 
ligence was added, the knowledge that the 
Abate O'Brien was still at the Abbey; and 
that great preparations were making for 
celebrating the festival of the Foundress, at 
which many of the catholic clergy of the 
country were to attend. 

This was ungracious and provoking intelli- 
gence. Was Ireland then urged by its 
persecutions, to preserve those superstitious 
rites, which even the most catholic countries 
were now yielding to the progress of illumina- 
tion ? Connected with this reflection, was one 
of a more personal nature. The continued 
presence of his uncle must be a restriction upon 
his cousin's movements ; and it added to the 
necessity of his own concealment. He adopted 
therefore a disguise, which confounded him 



the oVlaheetys. 291 

with the simple inhabitants of the region: a 
coarse jacket, and trowsers of rateen, with a 
slouched hat of rye- straw, left him distinguish- 
able from the peasantry of the country, only by 
those personal endowments, which dress cannot 
conceal. He now almost lived upon the lake, 
in the little buirling, which just was large enough 
to permit him to ply his oars ; sometimes gliding 
under the shadows of its dismal rocks, and some- 
times lying beneath the shadow of the alders, 
whose branches fringed the sedgy banks. 
Occasionally the tones of a harp, stealing over 
the waters from the octagon tower, repaid him 
for these hours of listless, but impatient con- 
cealment. Once only he ventured to land, when 
penetrating the ruins of the Abbey, he was 
nearly discovered by the officiating priest, who 
attended to celebrate mass and vespers. Pursued 
to the lake, he plunged into it, and swam across. 
The incident excited suspicion, and was talked 
of at the Abbey, where it awakened considerable 
alarm. For it was known that a party at St. 
Grellan, who had recently assumed a particular 
colour, had a few days before burned a catholic 
o2 



292 

chapel (a rare occurrence in those times), un- 
punished by the magistrates, and unnoticed by 
the government. A strong re-action to the 
supposed operations of the United Irishmen was 
developing itself ; and every thing catholic was 
threatened with the vengeance of the protestant 
agitators. One of the authorities of St. Grellan 
had visited Moycullen, to inquire into the nature 
of the establishment, and some of the familiars 
of the Proudforts had been prowling in the 
neighbourhood. 

At the instigation of Shane, who was evidently 
but the organ of his sovereign mistress, Lord 
Arranmore absented himself for a few days, visit- 
ing, with his fosterer for a guide, some of the 
romantic sites in the upper regions of Bembola 
and Mam Turk. It was in such scenes, that the 
peculiar qualities of Shane came forth in singular 
adaptation. Light, rapid, and measured in his 
movements, this representative of the ancient 
Turbicolce, pursued his way with unshod feet, 
and unsheltered head, in a quick, even, dog-trot, 
throwing out from his broad, brawny, and naked 
chest, a deep, short-heaved respiration. Some- 



the o'flahertys. 293 

times, as he skirted a precipice, (while his 
'protege wound beneath in a narrow gorge), he 
balanced his long pole, with a skill admirably 
adapted to his perilous, but self-chosen position ; 
sometimes bounding down with fearless alacrity, 
he plunged the pointed end of his staff in the 
boggy earth, and then making it a point cTappai, 
sprung over the treacherous rut, which a cause- 
way of tangled brushwood hid out from all ken 
but his. Of this excursion, Lord Arranmore 
took advantage to work upon the unsettled reason 
of Shane, and to wean him from his murderous 
designs against Corney the cadger. But the 
hallucination was too fixed to be permanently 
removed, and though he had momentary power 
over the ideas and the tears of his foster brother, 
yet on the slightest allusion to the treachery of 
the informer, Shane relapsed into his wildness 
and insanity. Lord Arranmore therefore de- 
termined to place him under the surveillance of 
Emunh, and to employ the well-known influence 
of Madame OTlaherty and the clergy to bind 
him by a vow. 

In spite, however, of Lord Arranmore' s pru- 



294 THE O'BRIENS and 

dent resolves, and the solicitations of Shane to 
extend their wanderings, the morning of the 
third day found them returned to Emunh's 
cottage. Emunh had brought from St. Grellan 
a letter from Mr. Fitton, directed by Lord 
Arranmore's order, under the name of OTla- 
herty, so general in the district. It informed 
him of the near approach of his trial, and 
of the necessity of his immediate surrender. 
There was not a moment to lose. Of the sum 
of money left by his father and cousin, twenty 
guineas still remained ; and this sufficed for the 
present. He determined therefore to ride to 
Galway that night, accompanied by Emunh, to 
bring back the pony, and to proceed by the 
coach to Dublin, on the following morning. To 
get rid of Shane was a preliminary step, which 
was happily rendered unnecessary by his own 
sudden disappearance. He was seen running 
down the declivity, with his canoe on his 
shoulder, flinging it on the lake, and sculling 
to the opposite side. The lake indeed, on this 
day, was all alive : boats gliding down the 
rapids, passing up from the port, or crossing 



THE o'flahertys. 295 

from the opposite mountains, centred before the 
porch of the Abbey church : for it was the long- 
expected festival of St. Beavoin. 

To this shrine Lord Arranmore resolved to 
direct a last pilgrimage. The silence of his 
powerful cousin, the protracted accomplishment 
of her promise, her deep seclusion, contrasted 
with the active life she led before his arrival, 
were mortifying circumstances, which, during 
the few last agitated days of his life, gradually 
undermined his vague, but anxious hopes. Was 
it indifference ? was it caprice ? or was it sub- 
mission to that imperious relation, who seemed 
to have taken up his fixed abode at the Abbey ? 
There was now no time for conjecture or delay. 
Pausing only to write a few lines, to inform her 
of the cause of his immediate departure, and to 
in treat a moment's interview, the object of which 
he scarcely knew himself, (if it were not once 
again to see her, and bid her adieu for ever) he 
made a succinct toilet, assumed his disguise, 
threw himself into Emunh's boat, and mingled 
with the devotees, who were crowding the nave 
of the church to suffocation. 



296 THE O'BRIENS AND 

The preparations for the service were rendered 
unusually solemn, by the coincidence of a mass 
for the dead. The remains of a member of the 
confraternity of Cong had that day been con- 
veyed to the tomb of his ancestors, in the 
chauntry in the Abbey. Lord Arranmore 
shuddered to learn that it was his young and 
interesting friend, the Franciscan monk, whose 
melancholy prophecy was thus fulfilled. 

On entering the body of the church, and taking 
his place in an obscure corner, he raised his hat 
before his face, for other purposes, than those of 
mental devotion. He looked around him, and 
observed that the altar was hung in that 
mournful attire, which the church has been 
accustomed to use in the last obsequies of her 
departed children, since the days of St. Am- 
brose. The sanctuary was occupied by the 
high priest and his ministers, who were chaunt- 
ing the solemn service for the dead, alternately 
with the choir. The full and heavy notes of 
the catholic ritual, the moving appeals for 
mercy, were strikingly imposing. One object, 
however, alone fascinated the eyes of the con- 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 297 

cealed spectator, and engrossed every feeling. It 
was the Superior of the community ! — She 
was much changed : there was nothing in her 
appearance of that spirited dignity, which had 
characterized her air and demeanour, when 
he had last seen her in the choir. The deadly 
paleness of her cheek, the strong expression of 
anxiety, which knitted her dark brows, and the 
melancholy of her fixed and abstracted gaze, 
convinced him, that she had not brought a dis- 
engaged spirit to the awful ceremony, at which 
she so pompously presided : for she sat in a stall, 
apart, richly robed, and with the well preserved 
crosier of the ancient Abbesses of Moycullen, 
beside her. 

One person alone divided for a moment Lord 
Arranmore's attention, with this all engrossing 
object, and that was the high priest himself. He 
resembled, as he stood at the altar, none of his 
order by whom he was assisted, whose sub- 
missive and obsequious countenances, were 
strongly contrasted with the stern physiognomy 
of the haughty Hierarch of a once almost 
omnipotent church. Lofty above the rest in 
o3 



298 THE o'briens and 

stature, although loaded by years almost 
beyond the age of man, his singular and severe 
visage, evidently excited in the beholders a re- 
verence bordering on fear. The majesty of his 
air was increased by the magnificence of his 
vestments, (relieved by the shabby, faded cos- 
tume of the attendant priests) ; and as he stood 
in front of the altar, he threw round his still 
flashing eyes, in triumph : as if in the revived 
splendour of these long neglected ceremonies, 
he beheld the accomplishment of hopes long 
cherished, the reward of a pertinacious ambition, 
the crowning object and end of his labours and 
his life. 

Lord Arranmore shuddered, as he gazed 
upon this awful personage. It was the Supe- 
rior of the Jesuit college at Rome, the Secre- 
tary of the Propaganda, the ever ruling and 
mastering spirit of his unfortunate father — 
the Abbate O'Brien ; for whom high-sound- 
ing dignities abroad were but as feathers in 
the balance, when weighed against the hope of 
restoring his church and order, to their ancient 
supremacy, in his native land. Here he now 



the o'flahertys. 299 

stood; and though but presiding at the altars 
of a poor and remote Irish convent, he imaged, 
in his person, the pertinacity of ecclesiastical 
ambition, and the spirit of an order, not to 
be laid by the authority of princes ; and 
vanquishable only by public opinion. 

Lord Arranmore, wholly pre-occupied by the 
scene before him, alternately directed his anxious 
eyes, from the presiding priest, to the lovely, 
but absorbing Superior ; and forgetful of his 
own perilous position, of the circumstances in 
which he was involved, and the purposes for 
which he had assumed his disguise, — he had 
impetuously advanced, and placed himself 
directly opposite to the stall of the Abbess, 
unconsciously maintaining his upright position, 
when all around him was prostrate. In that 
awful moment, when the elevation of the Host 
images the hallowed presence of " God on 
earth," — when the altar bell tingled, and a low 
voice uttered the "Sanctus,sajiclus, sanctus" — at 
that awful moment, a murmur was heard, a band 
of armed men rushed to the spot, where Lord 
Arranmore stood ; he was suddenly seized — 



300 THE O'BRIENS AND 

resisted — escaped his assailant, and again was 
surrounded. The next moment a pistol was 
fired, and an uproar, a conflict ensued, whose 
horror was increased by the sense of sacrilegious 
violation entertained by the catholic congrega- 
tion. Aloft above all, and in front of the 
object of attack, stood Shane-na-Brien ; wild, 
infuriate, he held in his grasp, with maniacal 
force, the wretched victim of his long cherished 
vengeance, and was dragging him to the steps 
of the altar, as if to immolate him at the shrine 
of that Deity, whose rites he had impiously pro- 
faned : — it was Corney the cadger ! 

But even the maniac paused in his frenzy 
at the spectacle which at this moment presented 
itself. The inferior clergy had rushed among the 
people, as if to exert their powerful influence to 
preserve peace, and to prevent murder. But the 
high priest, the Caiaphas of the temple, stood mo- 
tionless and erect, as if awaiting the martyrdom he 
was ready to undergo. Here ended his short-lived 
triumph ; an age was summed up in an instant. 
The ghastly colour of his visage suddenly altered 
to a blood-red suffusion. His eye shot forth 



the o'flahertys. 301 

one flash of unearthly fire — a rattling sound died 
on his convulsed lips ; and raising the crucifix 
on high, which he held with the last gasp of 
vital force, he fell dead upon the altar steps, 
which were covered with his blood. In the 
eyes of the congregation it was the blood of a 
martyr. The signal was given — the scene which 
followed was indescribable. 

To execute a warrant from the Secretary of 
State was the pretence for this indecent violation 
of the temple of God ; to scare Catholicism from 
its altars, to insult, to outrage, and to provoke, 
were the motives which determined this choice 
of time and place. From the first moment when 
Lord Arranmore, foreseeing what must ensue, 
had shaken off his assailant Corney, he had endea- 
voured to reach the stall of the Superior, and 
to protect her from danger and insult. In the 
effort he had caught his uncle's eye, observed 
the sudden change in his countenance, and was 
hastening to his assistance, when he was himself 
knocked down, upon the altar steps, beside his 
dying relation. To all that followed he was 
insensible : and when he recovered his reason, he 



302 THE o'briens and 

found himself lying on the earth, his head sup- 
ported on a monument, a small pitcher of water 
by his side. He drank freely and was much 
refreshed. He had been stunned by a blow on 
the back of his head, but not much hurt ; and 
he looked round him and gradually recovered his 
powers of perception. 

The dreary place he occupied was of gothic 
architecture, and filled with very old and rude 
monuments. One grated window, in the fur- 
ther end, looked upon a lake, whose water 
dashed against its massive buttresses. He 
guessed, rather than knew, that he was in the 
old chauntry, mentioned by Shane, to whom, 
he took it for granted, he owed his safety. On 
approaching the window, the reviving influence 
of the air quickly dispelled the faintness left by 
the blow. The opening at which he stood looked 
diagonally upon the Abbey church ; and from the 
great window above the altar, a dense body of 
smoke rose in wreathed and voluminous folds. 
Shouts of savage triumph were mingled with the 
crash of broken wood-work : while, in the in- 
tervals, the low crackling of combustion was 



the o'flahertys. 303 

distinctly audible. As he remained for a moment 
fixed to the spot, a^tremendous crash announced 
the fall of the Abbey roof, which was followed 
by a burst of light, reflected in livid redness on 
the lake, above the lustre of a meridian but 
clouded atmosphere. Groupes of the peasantry 
were seen contending with the rioters beneath 
the walls; and at remoter distances, women and 
children flying from the contest, and horsemen 
and pedestrians hurrying to the rescue of their 
friends, or to extinguish the fire. 

Lord Arranmore flew to the low arched door, 
but it was fastened on the outside, and he 
sought in vain for any other egress. With the 
fury of an enraged tiger, he hurried through 
the gloomy house of death ; he examined 
every tomb and penetrated every recess, but no 
traces of the subterraneous entrance of which 
Shane had spoken met his eye. He mounted to 
the stone embrasure of the window, and strove 
with the whole force of desperation, to wrench the 
iron grating from the stone, — but in vain. In the 
full conviction of the inutility of his efforts, he 
threw himself on the earth in an agony of 



304 THE O'BRIENS AND 

mind, in which every form of insult and danger 
that unprotected female helplessness could en- 
counter, rose in rapid and terrible succession 
to torture and to madden him. One object, 
however, predominated in his fancy over every 
other; and the dreadful apprehension for his 
cousin's safety, the talented, the sensitive, the 
lovely Abbess, his benefactress, his guardian- 
angel, banished every recollection even of his 
own horrible lot: for if Shane had fallen in 
the affray, or had been made a prisoner by the 
police, what was the destiny which awaited him 
in this living tomb ? 

By degrees, however, the sounds of tumult 
died away. The fire in the church had either 
subsided, or had been extinguished. Hour 
passed after hour, and each with the tediousness 
of an age. The lake upon which the chauntry 
stood, was rarely navigated ; and no sounds from 
the interior gave indication that a human being 
still lingered round the ruin. At last the splash 
of an oar was heard, and coasting beneath the 
shadow of the craggy rocks, a boat was seen win- 
ning its devious and stealthy way to the window 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 305 

of the chauntry. Lord Arranmore's heart beat 
quick ; he put his hand out through the bars ; 
a note fastened to the point of a boat-hook, was 
thrust through the window ; and the boat again 
glided silently within the protecting shadows 
of the rocks. 

Lord Arranmore tore open the paper, and 
recognized with transport his cousin's writing. 
It ran as follows : 

" Those for whom probably you are most in- 
terested, are safe. Think only of yourself. 
Means for your evasion are prepared. You will 
be conducted to Emunh's cottage after sun-set ; 
flight will be still in your power : act as prudence 
and principle may direct ; and for the promise so 
solemnly given, believe that it shall be fulfilled 
at a more convenient season. For the present it 
must be deferred. " B. 0." 

Soothed and pacified, and furnished with the 
materials for gracious meditation, Lord Arran- 
more was enabled to pass the interval which 
preceded his enlargement with patience. Re- 
leased from his apprehensions for his cousin's 
safety, he sought and found gratification in this 



306 THE O'BRIENS AND 

new instance of the interest she manifested in his 
behalf; and the brief missive, cool and concise 
as it was, still came from her, and had his safety 
for its object. At the time appointed Emunh 
appeared, and leading the way through a vaulted 
passage, terminated by a flight of steps, conducted 
the prisoner to an opening upon the rocks, 
where a boat was moored, beneath the shelter of 
projecting underwood. 

On the way over, Emunh, in reply to Lord 
Arranmore's anxious questions, detailed in a low 
voice the events of the day. The death of the 
aged Abate had roused the peasantry to ungo- 
vernable madness. The Fencibles, who had been 
stationed at a small distance from the Abbey, 
were called to the assistance of the police ; and 
in the conflict which ensued, having obtained 
possession of the church, they demolished the 
seats, altars, and stall- work. Piling the wreck 
of their fury into a heap they had kindled a fire, 
which soon reached to the dry oak rafters ; and 
having destroyed the roof, burned itself out. 
In the mean time, the catholic gentry who had 
attended the funeral, having conducted the 



the o'flahertys. 307 

ladies of the community to a remote and secure 
part of the building, had aided in appeasing the 
riot Many of the peasantry had been made 
prisoners ; but Shane, who had fought with a 
desperate fury, had escaped to the mountains, 
hotly pursued by Corney the cadger, and a de- 
tachment of the military. 

On arriving at an unfrequented spot, on the 
opposite side of the lake, Lord Arranmore and 
his guide entered a lonely and untrodden glen, 
which after a quarter of an hour's brisk walk- 
ing, brought them to Emunh's cottage. There, 
refreshments were already provided, of which 
the former stood in much need. The welcome 
meal being hastily dispatched, Emunh led Lord 
Arranmore' s pony to the door, ready saddled, 
with the valise strapped in its place ; and urg- 
ing the necessity of immediate departure, pre- 
sented a letter which he said came from the 
Superior. It was an inclosure containing two 
fifty pound notes, and the address of Mad. 
O'Flaherty at the Franciscan convent, in Dublin. 

Lord Arranmore sighed as he unwillingly put 
up the inclosure, (of which he resolved to make 



308 THE O'BRIENS AND 

no use,) until he should have an opportunity of 
restoring it to the generous donor. The offering 
wounded him ; — one line from the hand that 
made it, would have been worth millions. But 
there was no time left for the indulgence of 
feelings, natural in one whose warm passions 
brooked no disappointment, and whose pride 
was sharpened by adversity, to a morbid excess. 
Forcing a small remuneration upon his humble 
but grateful host, he bade him a hurried fare- 
well, and struck into the bridle-way, which led to 
the high road to Galway. 

It was lonely and deserted. The setting sun 
was struggling through masses of dark and 
stormy clouds, and shot its long yellow rays 
over the distant ocean, casting a lurid light upon 
the highest tops of the mountains. The so- 
litary sojourner in wilds so dreary had advanced 
for a considerable time at a brisk pace ; but, 
by degrees, he had dropped his bridle on his 
horse's neck, insensible to his " whereabouts," 
unconscious of external objects, with one deep 
seated and master-thought, overruling every 
other, he was lost in reverie, when the clank- 



the o'flahertys. 309 

ing sound of a horse's feet caught his ear and 
roused his attention. He seized his bridle, and 
gave spur to his little steed ; but his progress 
was arrested by the approach of a person of 
muffled and mysterious appearance, preceded 
by a ragged boy, who seemed to act as guide. 
Lord Arranmore's first impulse was to plunge 
into the copse to his left, to avoid one, who 
was perhaps in pursuit of him; but he soon 
perceived that the intruder was a female, in 
the coarse dress of the country, a blue mantle 
and deep hood. 

He drew aside to let the traveller pass, but 
glancing his eye beneath her close-drawn hood, 
he discovered the agitated countenance of Lady 
Knocklofty. He halted in the shock of utter 
amazement; and in deep and uncontrollable emo- 
tion, exclaimed, as he alighted and approached 
her, 

" Gracious heavens ! is it possible ? Lady 
Knocklofty here ?" 

" It is possible !" she replied, in a voice tre- 
mulous with agitation ; " it is pitiable — it is 
true." A silence of a moment ensued ; when 



810 THE O'BRIENS A\D 

she added, with a deep-drawn sigh, " Yes, 
Lord Arranmore ; you see before you the un- 
fortunate, the imprudent, but not the un- 
grateful Lady Knocklofty." 

Lord Arranmore gave his horse to the boy, 
and taking the reins of Lady Knocklofty's, 
walked beside her. Another pause ensued, and 
he then said, 

" To meet you in so wild a place, in so un- 
suitable a dress, and unseasonable an hour, 
unaccompanied by friends, unattended by ser- 
vants, what can this mean ? — what has led you 
here?" 

She abruptly replied, " You ! v and the an- 
swer but deepened his consternation. He was 
unable, or unwilling to reply; and she con- 
tinued, " You see before you one whose pride 
is humbled in the dust, whose strength is her 
weakness, and whose sense is overpowered by 
her sensibility. My duty to my husband, to my 
children, my self-respect, my regard for repu- 
tation, are not merely surmounted, they are 
unfelt. Your liberty, your life, are in danger. 
To rescue, to save you, to warn you of your 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 311 

danger, and to offer you the means of escape, 
have led me into these solitary regions, unat- 
tended, unprotected.'' 

" Think not of me, dearest and most generous 
Lady Knocklofty — think but of yourself— your 
precious self,"' he exclaimed in most passionate 
emotion. " The evening is already falling — 
you are alone — you are far distant from Beau- 
regard. Be the consequence what it may, I 
will accompany you back. If my hours of 
liberty, or even of life are counted, could my 
last moments be better employed than in the 
service of the noblest, the most generous of 
created beings ?" 

"Never," said Lady Knocklofty, with pas- 
sionate vehemence, while her tears dropped on 
the hand that now pressed upon her's ; " and I 
swear by that sinking sun, never to return to my 
home, my children, 'till I have placed you 
beyond the reach of that persecution, which they 
with whom I am fatally linked, have raised 
against you. For me, I am wrecked beyond 
the reach of all redemption." 

Gratitude, admiration, pity, every sentiment 



312 THE O'BRIENS AND 

(save perhaps respect) agitated the object of this 
most generous infatuation. Confounded, alarmed, 
he knew not what step to take. " Let me, at 
least," he said, mounting his horse and holding 
the bridle of her's, " let me conduct you home- 
ward, while I reveal to you my means of escape. 
This ravine enters into the new line of road to 
St. Grellan, and — " 

Lady Knocklofty snatched the reins from his 
hand — " Ungrateful and insensible !" she said, 
" I know your infatuation for one as cold as she 
is false, renders you insensible to the feelings 
of humanity.' ' She turned her horse's head, 
and motioned Lord Arranmore, as if to dismiss 
him. 

" Be the consequence what it may," he said, 
" I will not leave you thus. For myself, I am 
reckless, and I am now hastening to Dublin to 
stand my trial.'" 

"Then you are lost!" interrupted Lady 
Knocklofty, impetuously. "This day I have 
heard your doom pronounced. The libel is not 
all that is laid against you ; charges of a most 
treasonable nature, on evidence as apparently con- 



THE o'i'LAHERTYS. 313 

vincing, as I know it to be false, which involves 
you in the proceedings of men, who are the 
dupes and the victims of hired instigators, and 
spies. I have seen the Chancellor's letters to my 
husband ; and it is determined to make an ex- 
ample of the first well born and marking per- 
sonage they can catch in their toils : you are 
that person. I have not lost a moment in seek- 
ing you. Think not that I am deceived by this 
appearance of generosity. Nothing that concerns 
you is unknown to me. I, too, have my spies ; 
and I heard from my informers that you were in 
these mountains, that you were lurking about the 
Abbey, and that you had been seen at midnight 
conducted to your boat by your Abbess." 

" Gracious God !" said Lord Arranmore, 
striking his forehead, in an agony beyond his 
power of concealment, at having thus impru- 
dently committed one for whom he felt so 
much, and to whom he stood so deeply 
indebted. 

" Lord Arranmore, continued Lady Knock- 
lofty, drawing from the breast of her habit bet 
handkerchief, which she bathed in her tears, 

VOL. IV. P 



314 the o'brtens and 

" your conduct was not grateful, it was not 
humane. ....." Her sobs interrupted her 

words. 

" If the sacrifice of my life could dry those 
precious tears," he said, tenderly and softly, 
" it should be offered at your feet. But, dear 
Lady Knocklofty — * 

" I want no sacrifice. I ask but to be per- 
mitted to save you ; and to leave to others the re- 
compense of a wayward heart, which gives itself 
capriciously, not gratefully.'' 

'< To owe my liberty, my life to you, would 
render both more valuable. But again I urge 
you, think not of me, consider only yourself, 
consider where you now are !" 

" Where alone I can be useful to you," she 
interrupted him. " Nobody knows the impru- 
dent step I have taken, but my friend Lady 
Honoria. Let me not err in vain ; we are now 
within a mile of the Heaths : that bright point 
of light is its vane. I mean to pass the night 
there. This gate leads to its young plantations.'" 
She advanced and pushed open an iron gate with 
the end of her whip, as she spoke. Lord Arran- 



THE o'flahertys. 315 

more followed her along the margin of a lake, 
and she continued : " I will not take you to the 
house. Neither the innocence of my conduct, 
nor the purity of my motives, would save me 
from censure, were it known that you accom- 
pany me. But alight ; and if that fishing-house 
is open, I will communicate there what else I 
have to say." 

Wild and agitated as herself, Lord Arran- 
more obeyed her, whom it was now so difficult to 
resist. A manly pity, a deep but honest com- 
miseration, gratitude the most profound, and 
fears for her safety and reputation, the most 
acute, were the feelings by which he was go- 
verned ; unmixed with one thought which virtue 
itself might disapprove. To leave her in such 
a moment, was to be more, or less than man : 
he advanced and perceived that the boat- 
house was open. The interior was dimly 
illumined by the fading twilight ; but it ap- 
peared to be an elegant pavilion, decorated by 
the hand of luxury and taste. In assisting Lady 
Knocklofty from her horse, he was shocked by 
her pale and altered appearance, and by the 
p 2 



316 THE O^BRlENS AND 

feebleness of her movements, as he supported 
her on his arm. He led her to a sofa; and 
leaned over a chair beside her. She wept freely; 
and relieved by this indulgence, she recovered 
her self-possession, and drew from her bosom a 
packet of papers: — " There," she said, u are 
copies of the informations which have been 
lodged against you. The facts they contain 
may serve you in — your hour of trial/' 

Lord Arranmore pressed the generous hand 
that offered them to his lips. " My hour of 
trial !" he exclaimed, with emotion. " Oh, Lady 
Knocklofty P 



The storms of a night, in which all the ele- 
ments had been thrown into fearful contest, were 
gradually subsiding into the low broken sobs of 
the gushing wind, the distant roll of retreating- 
thunder, and the faint gleam of innocuous 
lightning. The grey, faint dawn was struggling 
through the vapours, which canopied the summits 
of Bembola and Mam Turk ; when upon the 
brink of one of the precipices of the Glan Moun- 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 317 

tain, a human figure appeared, which well be- 
longed to a scene so wild, so awful, and so 
desolate. The fugitive (for such he must have 
been, unhoused, and wandering in such an hour 
and place), had just merged from a narrow 
ravine of furze and brambles ; and was tearing, 
with wondrous strength, the tangled branches 
of a scathed beech tree, to obtain a passage into 
the glen beneath. He had cleared a way, and 
was plunging headlong down, when (all reckless 
as he seemed), he was withheld by that instinct 
that survives even the love of life itself. 

The increasing light (for though the moon had 
not yet set, the dawn was faintly breaking), ren- 
dered the peril of his position fearfully obvious : 
yet not more fearful than his own appearance. 
There was blood upon his hands, his eye was 
wild and sunk, his colour ghastly, his features 
distorted. His uncovered head had caught, 
in its thick and matted locks, fragments of 
burrs and thistles, which he had encountered in 
his flight; his clothes uere torn, his neck was 
bare, and his whole exterior bespoke one hunted 
to the death. It was an awful, an affecting 



318 THE o'briens and 

spectacle : and the more affecting, because on 
that forlorn figure and distorted countenance, 
were still visible traces of the finest impression 
of God's own mark, when " after his own image 
he made man." The fugitive was Murrogh 
O'Brien, Lord Arranmore. 

He had eluded the pursuit of justice. He 
had escaped from the officers, who had traced 
him to the Circean bower, whose threshold he had 
crossed, in the consciousness of an unsullied life ; 
and from which he had escaped, with life indeed, 
but not unsullied. On the first alarm, he had 
sprang from an open window into the lake, 
urged only by the hope of saving her from 
shame, who had plunged him into crime. Weigh- 
ed down by the dripping waters, which he had 
endeavoured to wring from his saturated clothes, 
he had flung off his coat and cravat ; and ex- 
posed to the thunder storm, which shook even 
the mighty regions in which he wandered, he 
continued to ascend the acclivities of the Glan 
Mountain, in the hope of crossing to Lough 
Corrib. 

The first glimmering of the dawn disclosing 



the o'flahertis. 319 

to him the dangers of his horrible position, he let 
go the brarfches he had torn aside with his la- 
cerated hands; and ascending a craggy rock, per- 
ceived a bridle track ; while a column of smoke 
staining the pure morning sky, announced the 
proximity of some human habitation. 

As he advanced, his steps were arrested by a 
low, faint moan. He paused. It might be the 
complaint of some dying animal ; but his own 
wretchedness was in sympathy with all that suf- 
fered ; and he proceeded to the spot whence the 
sound had issued. A groan of human agony 
came from the glen beneath the shelving rock on 
which he stood. Thrown, as he himself was, 
beyond the pale of humanity, he still was tre- 
mulously alive to its sympathies ; and descend- 
ing the rocks with as rapid a step as their 
steepness would admit, he found himself in a 
deep, dark, narrow glen, whose shaggy rock> 
almost closed over his head; while the moon, 
shining faintly above, concentrated its rays on 
the body of a man, who lay upon his face wel- 
tering in his blood. A gory track was visible 
on the salient points of the rocky declivity, in- 



320 THE O'BRIENS AND 

timating that the wretched being had been 
hurled from the summit, on which he had re- 
ceived his death-wound. The victim still 
breathed % but a torrent of blood was gushing 
from his breast. 

Lord Arranmore raised the dying man in 
his arms ; and as his eyes fell upon the face, 
he recognized the distorted features of Corney 
the cadger. With an impulse of horror, he was 
on the point of letting him drop, when the victim 
grasped him in the strong gripe of death, and 
raised his dim eyes with a look of such agony, 
that, turning aside his own, he could only arti- 
culate, " Wretched man, what has brought you 
to this ?" 

The cadger, with an effort at articulation, 
which convulsed every hideous lineament, en- 
deavoured to pronounce the name of his mur- 
derer; when a shrill, loud blast from a horn 
echoed through the rocks above the glen. At that 
sound the dying man gave one fearful spring from 
the arms of his supporter, and fell a corpse upon 
the earth ; while the appalling figure of Shane, 
half way down the rocks, with one hand point- 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 321 

ing to the vapoury and waning moon, and the 
other clenched, as in triumph over the dead 
body, added to the horror of the scene. 

The wretched and solitary spectator of this 
awful tragedy, himself unobserved by Shane, 
now stood motionless, with every faculty 
frozen and palsied, unable, and perhaps unwil- 
ling to communicate with the perpetrator of a 
deed so bloody. Time, however, was not al- 
lowed him, either for reflection or for action : 
a sudden burst of sound roused him from his 
contemplation, and the next moment he beheld 
the mouth of the glen filled with armed men. 
He was instantly surrounded, seized, and bound. 
The horror of his fate overwhelmed him ; he 
had neither the wish nor the power to resist. 
Manacled and chained, he was placed on horse- 
back before a dragoon. The dead body, laid 
upon a bier of woven branches, was raised 
upon the shoulders of two smugglers, who had 
conducted the soldiers through the mountains ; 
one of whom had seen Lord Arranmore's escape 
from the lake into the ravines of the pass. 
The party proceeded ; and the exhausted and 
p 3 



322 the o'brikns axd 

almost senseless prisoner was lodged in the gaol 
of Gal way. The next morning he was conveyed 
in a chaise and four, escorted by a troop of horse, 
to Dublin ; and on his reaching that capital, 
(where, as the leader of the most brilliant of 
the Irish Volunteers, as the orator of the His- 
torical Society, and the most gifted member 
of the University, he had but a few months 
before " won golden opinions from all sorts of 
men,''') he was lodged in the state prison of 
Kilmainham, in whose dungeons some of Ire- 
land's most distinguished sons were then incar- 
cerated. 

His prison chamber rose above that high and 
terrible wall, then deemed so lofty, as to need 
no sentinel to add to its security. On the oppo- 
site bank, at a small distance, there stood an old 
and formless pile of ruined walls. 

The arrest of a young nobleman, so gifted, so 
accused, and in public supposition so guilty, 
excited a strong sensation in the metropolis, 
where the reign of terror, which preceded the 
horrible epoch of the Rebellion, had already 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 

began to spread dismay, and to agitate the public 
mind. The public papers were full of reports 
concerning the murder perpetrated in the Glan 
Mountain. The manner in which Lord Arran- 
more had been taken, — alone, — at day-break, — 
by the side of the corpse, from which life had 
scarce departed, all corroborated the probability 
of his guilt. He was likewise smeared with 
blood, and so overpowered by his own emotions, 
as to offer no defence, and to make no resist- 
ance : but above all, a warrant for his arrest 
was found in the pocket of the dead man, who. 
it was supposed, had fallen in a contest with 
the object of his pursuit. These just grounds 
of suspicion were almost confirmed by the ob- 
stinate and desponding silence of the prisoner, 
from the moment of his captivity. 

From the time, however, when he was visited 
by his counsel (for none others were admitted 
to him), considerable exertions were made for 
his defence. On the second week of his deten- 
tion, which resembled the car cere duro of an 
Austrian prison, his day of trial was appointed. 
Curran, Fletcher, and others of the most dis- 



324 the o'biukns and 

tinguished members of the bar were engaged 
for his defence. The court and all its avenues 
were crowded to suffocation. Multitudes of 
the people, with anxious countenances, were 
gathered in close array, muttering their feel- 
ings and opinions, as they drew back, to admit 
the carriages of the judges and the lawyers, em- 
ployed on either side. Within the halls, men of 
the highest rank, members of the government, 
and of both houses, were pressing and rushing 
on, to seek for places, already pre occupied by 
others, as anxious, as curious, and as influential 
as themselves. The leading members of the 
society of United Irishmen, with a sympathy 
and courage, which distinguished them in all 
the legal prosecutions of their brethren, were 
congregated near the dock. Convinced of the 
innocence of the prisoner, and suspicious of the 
foul purpose to which appearances might be turn- 
ed against him, they saw the necessity for their 
countenance and support ; and no personal con- 
siderations of danger could prevail with them to 
absent themselves. Many females also of the 
highest distinction, and most noted fashion (the 



325 

particular friends of Albina Countess Knock- 
lofty, whose protection of the accused was not 
forgotten), were seated on the bench. The three 
Ladies O'Blarney were conspicuous, with their 
three white pocket handkerchiefs, the insignia 
of their well prepared sensibility. The good 
Lady Mary was accommodated with a seat 
next the judge. Her ladyship had, from the 
first committal of the accused, exhibited as much 
zeal in behalf of his soul, as her husband had 
shewn perseverance in urging forward the pro- 
secution of his person. She had sent him tracts, 
and had written him frequent letters on faith and 
justification ; and though he had taken no notice 
of her pious endeavours, she counted upon, and 
announced his conversion, as among the triumphs 
which graced her mission. In his personal suf- 
ferings, she had no sympathy ; but in his salva- 
tion, as it was to be worked through her instru- 
mentality, she had a deep interest. And now — 

" The charge was prepared, the lawyers were met, 
The judges arrayed — a terrible show," 

and a silence the most awful followed. The pan- 



326 THE O'BRIENS AND 

nel being sworn, and the clerk of the crown 
standing in readiness to read the indictment, a 
short pause ensued; which was succeeded by a 
low, buzzing whisper, while all eyes were 
directed to the still empty dock. As the delay 
was protracted, anxiety increased. The judge 
whispered an officer of the court below him, and 
then desired the sheriff aloud, to produce his 
prisoner. The sheriff disappeared, and in a few 
moments returned, pale and breathless, to an- 
nounce that his prisoner had — escaped ! 

A loud murmur, amounting almost to approba- 
tion, arose among the crowd, at the extreme verge 
of the court ; while something like disappointment 
was visible on the countenances of the female 
auditory. The three Ladies OBlarney put up 
their three white pocket handkerchiefs, and or- 
dered their carriage to a morning concert at the 
Rotunda. Lady Mary desired her coachman to 
• take Kilmainham (in his way to an auxiliary 
supplementary branch society for converting 
Tippoo Saib and his subjects), to make inquiries 
concerning the flight of her proselyte. Inquiries 
were made; but the only details she could 



the o'flaheetys. 327 

learn, were, that certain mysterious characters 
had been found chalked on the ruins opposite 
his prison window, that a knotted rope had been 
found hanging over the lofty wall of Kilmain- 
ham, and that the impression of a gigantic foot 
was traced beneath.* 

A letter was found on the prisoners table, 
addressed to the judges. It was a simple and 
solemn denial of the political crimes charged 
against him ; and more especially of the murder 
of the informer. On the former point, opinions 
varied, with the prejudices and the interests of 
those who expressed them. But there was so 
evident an embarrassment in the short expla- 
nation he gave of the circumstances which 
brought him to the spot where he was taken, 
that the murder was almost unanimously laid to 
his account, until his reputation was cleared by 
the voluntary confession of — the murderer himself. 
It was Shane-na-Brien ; who, whatever might 
have been his motive — whether a desire to clear 

• Such are the literal details of the escape of an United 
Irishman, who has since been made known to fame, as 
one of the most gallant officers in the French service. 



328 the o'biue^s and 

his foster brother from the horrible imputation, a 
weariness of life — or the hope of expiating in this 
world, a crime for which he believed eternal 
punishment awaited him in the next - surren- 
dered himself to justice, and was, on his own 
declarations, convicted and executed. 

Of the Abbey of Moycullen, nothing but its 
ruins again remain. Its fair members, restored 
to the bosoms of their families (woman's best 
sanctuary), still cherish a feeling of admiration 
almost religious, for the gifted and extraordinary 
Superior, under whose auspices they had been 
for a time congregated ; and whose immediate 
departure from Ireland was believed to be con- 
nected with the flight of Lord Arranmore. To 
her agency, indeed, was attributed all the in- 
genuity with which the escape of the prisoner 
was conducted; and the gossiping of the town of 
St. Grellan had exaggerated circumstances, till, 
to the heated imaginations of its visionary in- 
habitants, they appeared a fulfilment of the old 
prophecies, predicted in the old times, of the 
inseparable connection between the destinies of 
The O'Briens and the OTlahertys. 



the o'flahertys. 3^9 



CHAPTER VII. 



CONCLUSION. 



Time is like a fashionable Lost, 
That slightly shakes his parting guest by th' hand, 
And then with arms outstretched, as he woull fly, 
Welcomes the comer. 

Shakspkare. 

La revolution ne vient pas'de tel ou tel homme, de tel ou tel lirrei 
Elle vient des choses. 

Chateaubriand. 



The French Revolution was the result of 
causes deep-seated in the institutions it destroyed. 
Its frequent re-organization gave to it a succes- 
sion of characters, each differing from the other. 
The reign of terror was the shortest, but its 
impression was the most permanent. The con- 
sular regime was the most perfect, but seems to 
have been the soonest forgotten. It, however, 
in its first epoch, met the hopes, and reconciled 
the opinions of all. The liberals looked with con- 



330 THE O'BRIENS AND 

fidence to the re-establishment of rational liberty; 
the royalists looked to the return of the Bour- 
bons ; and France in 1802, typified by England 
in 1660, beheld in Napoleon Buonaparte another 
Monk. The church, after her complete prostra- 
tion, elevated to her ancient alliance with the 
state, dignified the conqueror of Italy, and of 
the Pope, with the name of her " restorer." The 
people called for partem et circenses, and ob- 
tained both ; and he in whom " la puissance de 
la revolution" now centered, — the destiny of 
kings, and the pacificator of Europe,— as yet 
avoided all occasion of shocking public opinion, 
and refrained from assuming all external forms 
of power, beyond what might become the Chief 
Magistrate of a republic. 

It happened one evening, that as the First 
Consul was writing in his cabinet after dinner, 
and the ladies of his family, with the Generals 
Rapp, Bessieres, Lannes, and Lebrun were 
taking coffee in the saloon, a proposal, made by 
Madame Murat, to go to the Opera to hear the 
grand oratorio of Haydn, which was the rage 
of the day, was acceded to a Vunanimite. The 



the o'flahektys. 331 

General Lannes was deputed to invite the Chief 
Consul, who instantly adopted the proposition. 
The " piquet d" escort" was ordered, the car- 
riages drew up, and Mad. Buonaparte, linger- 
ing behind while " le brusque et brave Rapp' 
arranged her shawl " after the manner of the 
Egyptian ladies," was called upon by her lovely 
sister-in-law with " depechez-vous done, masasur, 
voila Bonaparte qui s'en va." 

The visit to the opera, thus uncalculated, was 
yet, in consequence of some strange reports, 
expected : and either this expectation, or the 
attraction of Haydn's Creation, had filled the 
house almost to suffocation, at an unusually 
early hour. Long before le premier coup 
d'archet was heard in the orchestra, the arrival 
of some high foreign donna aVimportanza had 
called forth all the interested civilities of the 
members of the box-keeping department. The 
controleur, from his little office, cried aloud to 
the Ouvreuse des loges, " Citoyenne Ouvreuse, 
la loge, si'l vous plait, de Son Excellence la Prin- 
cesse de Fustiburg" As this was the first night 
that Son Excellence, the wife of the Austrian 



332 THE o'briens and 

Plenipotentiary, had visited the opera, her titles 
rang sweetly in the ears of the attendants on 
the bureau de V Opera. Theatrical personages 
are all aristocrats ; and " la loge de Son Ex- 
cellence la Princesse de Fustiburg" seemed 
to find a deathless echo through the corridors 
and the saloons; while la Citoyenne Ouvreuse, 
scudding respectfully before the Princess, threw 
open the box door, drew forth the fauteuil, 
arranged the cushions, let down the grille, 
and presented limprime, or the book of the 
oratorio. 

The Princess was a true German Princess in 
appearance. Full, fair, and fresh, for one who 
had evidently passed her premiere jeunesse, she 
was not without pretensions ; and she had given 
to her somewhat redundant en bon point, all the 
advantages of a splendid toilet. In passing to 
her box, she had fixed the attention of a group 
of military, who stood laughing and chatting, 
in expectation of the commencement of the 
music; when one among them (but not of 
them, for he had a decidedly British tournure, 
and was in the dress of a Pekin) suddenly 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 333 

started off, brushed by the box-keeper, and 
abruptly entering the box, exclaimed — 

" Heavenly powers! can I believe my eyes? 
Kitty, my sweetest, is it possible? Can it really 
be you ? Weil, this is too much happiness l" 1 
and, shutting the door, he pressed the fair hand 
he had seized to his lips, exclaiming, " Surely 
you have not forgotten me, Miss Macguire?" 

" Lord Kilcolman, I believe," replied the 
lady, drawing up. After the first evident shock 
of her surprise had subsided, she fixed her eyes 
steadily, but somewhat humorously, upon him, 
and added, " I really did not at first recollect 
you ; how much you are altered. You have 
grown so very thin and yellow, that you are 
quite meconnolssuble.''' 

" And you too, my lovely friend, are altered, 
but it is not for the worse, by Jupiter. I give 
you my honour, you are a thousand times hand- 
somer than ever — may I perish, if I flatter." 

" 1 heard you were dead, Lord K ," said 
the lady, coolly pinning her imprime to the 
front of the box. 

" There never was the least foundation for 



334 the o'biuexs and 

the report, I give you my honour. It originated 
solely in my voyage to the Dead Sea : but never 
mind me, talk only of your lovely self- By all 
that's precious, I have not felt so much pleasure 
since I parted from you in the little study at 
Knocklofty House, an age back. But tell me, 
dear, what has brought you to this place ? Who 
is the Prince Fusty, something, this elegant set 
out belongs to ?" 

" He is the Austrian minister." 

w The Austrian minister ! to be sure he is, 
I remember now all about him. Then I sup- 
pose you are here, with your aunt the Countess 
Macguire, with whom, I understand, you went 
to live at Vienna ; and who is, by all accounts, 
the minister's minister." 

" No," said the lady, drily, <; I am here with 
the minister himself." 

" With the minister himself ! you take away 
my breath ; and in what capacity, my sweetest ?"' 

" In the capacity of his wife." 

" Heavenly powers ! do you tell me that ? 
Ah ! Kitty, you who — M and his lordship ac- 
tually brought those tears to his eyes, which 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 335 

the nervousness of dissipation so easily calls 
forth, 

"Why, what would you have me do?" said 
the lady, screwing up her pretty mouth, and 
looking down pensively. " You would not have 
me pass my life in weeping for your infidelity 
and breach of promise ?" 

" Infidelity ! and breach of promise ! By all 
the powers, you wrong me, Miss Macguire ! that 
is, Princess, I mane. You knew my unfortu- 
nate situation : cleaned out of the last shilling at 
Daly's, and eased of my last acre in Tipperary ; 
threatened by my creditors, and tormented by my 
mother, to make that odious match, which was 
to set all to rights ; urged, too, by my political 
friends, with respect to the union which was then 
brewing; in short, paint to yourself for a moment, 
the minister's niece with twenty thousand pounds 
fortune, a foreign embassy, and a pension for 
life. Could you blame me, Kitty, dearest ?" 

u Oh, no, my love, no !" hummed the Prin- 
cess, after the manner of Miss Macguire; *« but 
could you blame me, my lord, if in my despair, 
I I consented to become- ' 



336 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" Ah, you creature !'' sighed his lordship, 
languishingly. 

" A Princess of the empire,'' continued Miss 
Macguire, humorously. 

" Upon your honour ! and are you a raal 
Princess?" 

" Real and undoubted, as you are a real 
Irish peer. But come, Lord K., we have 
each of us fulfilled our destinies ; so a truce 
with sentiment and reminiscences. I hate 
thinking of the past ; its worth nothing : so pray, 
let's talk of the present. In the first place, 
what could have possibly brought you here? 
Je rten reviens pas,'* 

** Why, dearest, having joined the allied 
army as a volunteer, on my return from Jeru- 
salem, I .'' 

" From Jerusalem ! ha ! ha ! ha ! cela passe 
outre. What in the world could have taken you 
to Jerusalem?" 

4C Faith, 1 don't know ; that is, it's a long 
story. When I returned to England from my 
embassy, and our party was out, and poor 
Lady K. dead, I found there was no getting 



the o'flahertys. 337 

on, especially for us Irish Union lords, and the 
whigs coming in, and that sort of thing. So I 
got tired of the clubs and enniiye de ma personne, 
as we say in France, and I thought I'd just take 
a trip to Jerusalem." 

" But, why to Jerusalem? 1 ' 1 asked the Princess, 
still tittering, — " that was an odd place to go to, 
pour se desennuyer, and a distant one. How- 
came you to fix upon it?" 

" "Pon my soul and honour, I don't know, if 
it wasn't to eat Jerusalem artichokes on their 
own soil : one must have an object, you know. 5 ' 

" To be sure : and was that the only object 
which determined your pilgrimage?' 1 

u Not entirely. The fact is, do you see, there 
is no getting on in that tiresome dull London, 
if one isn't labelled and ticketed, somehow or 
other, for something. Rank there is a mere 
drug ; and Irish rank goes for less than 
nothing. But a man, you know, who has been 
at Jerusalem ! I defy you, by Jupiter, to tlirow 
a man in a corner, who has been at Jerusalem ! 
Ycu see how Lord Kilshandra got on, and 
Lord Stillorgan, after they had published their 
vol. iv. , o. 



338 THE O'BRIENS AND 

books, and got all those d d hard names and 

jaw-breakers into them.'' 

" You don't really mean to turn author," said 
the Princess, with one of her Miss Macguire 
comical looks. 

H Faith, I don't know ; but I give you my 
honour, my Journal is the most amusing thing 
you ever read. O'Mealy too has collected some 
scraps of Jerusalem songs, which he learned 
from the little black-eyed daughters of Sion 
there, which I might introduce: there is one 
that begins, — 'pon my honour, I forget it now ; 
but it is all about pooshum, and nooshum, 
and is the sweetest little thing you ever heard, 
as O'Mealy sings it. He swears too, it's all 
Irish.'' 

" O'Mealy !" almost screamed her Excellency, 
in a convulsion of laughter. " You are not 
really serious ? You don't mean that O'Mealy 
went with you to Jerusalem ?" 

" Indeed he did, poor fellow, every foot of 
the way ; and I was very near laving him 
behind me, in the valley of Jehosaphut, as we 
say in Jerusalem. For at a pic-nic dinner, 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 339 

that I gave at the pool of Bethesda, he drank 
more Greek wine than agreed with his head ; 
and so he fell asleep under the cedars of Leba- 
non, within view of the temple of Solomon, 
(the finest thing, upon my honour, you ever 
saw in your life, and every way suparior to our 
parliament house), where he caught a quinsev, 
which has left him no more voice than a frog : 
so, u Othello's occupations gone," as he says 
himself, from the celebrated Shakspeare, and I, 
of course, am bound to provide for him.° 

" Provide for him P said the Princess, still 
laughing, " why, he was handsomely provided 
for, when I left Ireland, as SirBarnaby O' Mealy, 
lord of Bog Moy : for he took the Green Knight- 
hood, on his marriage with old Miss Mac Taaf, 
in spite of the Red Book." 

u Oh ! but that turned out a bad spec. The 
old girl was such a lawyer, that she kept what 
she could in her own hands ; and he ran out 
all he could, sold the personals, brought the old 
house about her ears, shut her up in the Bri- 
gadier's tower, and then fled for the same. He 
Q 2 



340 the o'briens and 

got into trouble too, poor fellow; was shortly 
after shut up for a time in gaol, then came 
to London, applied to me in his distress, and 
became my tiger ; and there he is, as large as 
life, 'pon my honour." 

" Where, where, for heaven's sake ?" said the 
Princess, taking up her glass. 

" There," said Lord Kilcolman, " in the 
parterre, leaning over the back of the parquet, 
ogling that pretty little citoyenne in the baig- 
neuse to the left/' 

The Princess had no difficulty in detecting, 
in the flashy, dashing ci-devant jeune homme, 
whose bloated red face was set off by a pair 
of black mustaches, in addition to his original 
bushy, well powdered whiskers, the former led 
captain of KHocklofty House, and the Primo 
Tenore of the private theatricals of Dublin. 

" Well, all this is by much too droll," she 
exclaimed, more amused than she had been 
since she left Ireland. " I take it for granted, 
then, that if you and your tiger joined the allied 
army, on your return from Jerusalem, you are 
now prisoners of war, on parole." 



the o'flahehtys. 341 

" Exactly, upon my honour : and never was 
so happy in all my life. What between the 
Boulevards and the Champs Elysees, the Cafes, 
and the claret, and the theatres, and the Esta- 
minets, I will say, there is nothing in the world 
like the society of Paris — Kyr'ie Lleison ! as we 
say in Jerusalem ; what a difference, between 
Paris and London ! But tell me, when did you 
hear any thing of the Knockloftys ? I have 
lost sight of all that set for years." 

Ci I had a letter to day from the present Lady." 

" The present lady ! what do you mean ? Is 
poor Albina dead ?" 

(l Oh no ! she is only Duchess of Ludlow^ ; and 
her friend, Lady Honoria, is the present Lady 
Knocklofty." 

" You amaze me, Kitty — Princess, I should 
say. What the devil does that all mane ?" 

" Why it means, that Lord Knocklofty got a 
divorce three years ago." 

t; A divorce ! I thought it w 7 ould come to that ; 
who pays the damage ?" 

" Poor, good-natured, indolent Lord Charles, 
now Duke of Ludlow, whom you may rem em- 



342 THE O'BRIENS AND 

ber in the Prince's Own in Dublin, some years 
back." 

" Mashallah ! as we say in Jerusalem, est-il 
possible? Why, when 1 left Ireland, she was talked 
of about that young, insolent, rebelly CTBrien, 
that she wanted to cram down the throats of 
every one, — he, who was hanged afterwards in 
the rebellion, or something of that sort, as 
O'Mealy tells me. 1 ' 

" He would have been hanged, or something 
of that sort,"" said the Princess, laughing, u if he 
had not escaped from Kilmainham, where he 
was put up for a suspicion of murder, or libel, 
or both ; but that affair of her Ladyship's blew 
over. Lord K. did not want to be bored, and 
would believe nothing — at least would hear 
nothing; though there was a strange story 
about a boat-house and a pony. When, how- 
ever, the Knockloftys gave up Ireland, prepa- 
ratory to the getting up of the Union (which 
Lord Knocklofty was the principal person in 
bringing about), and settled in London, they 
renewed their intimacy with Lord Charles, who, 
you know, was always a dowager fancier ; and 



the o'flahertys. 84# 

so, Jike all young men qui se lament aimer, 
he made no resistance. The thing, however, 
might have gone on for ever ; but Lady 
Knocklofty was vain of her conquest, and would 
have a scene : some say she was urged to it by 
Lady Honoria, who had lived with the Knock- 
lofty s ever since the death of Mr. Stratton. 

" But be that as it may, Lady K.,one fine day, 
rubbed off her rouge, let down her hair, called 
her "friends, lovers, countrymen,'' about her, 
made a speech from Lady Townly, acknowledg- 
ing herself unworthy to be Countess Knocklofty 
any longer, stepped into a hackney coach, threw 
herself upon poor Lord Charles's honour, and is 
now, " Pamela, or Virtue Rewarded," alias 
Duchessof Ludlow. Lady Honoria, however, who 
has taken her place, finds that London bon ton, 
though headed by her beautiful friend, the Ex- 
Lady Lieutenant, will not admit Irish ladies into 
its particular set, who have been blown on in their 
own country. Besides, I believe Lady Honoria 
is altogether trop prononcee for the high societies 
of London ; and I perceive by the tone of her 
letter that, in the hope of a speedy peace, and the 



344 THE O'BRIENS AND 

return of the emigrants to France, she is doing 
the honours by them ail in London, pour se 
menager une retraite a Paris, one of these 
days. This is all I know of the old set, most of 
whom I believe are dead : so no more reminis- 
cences, for Heaven's sake. The Prince will be 
here immediately ; and remember that we high 
transparencies are all dans les hautes etiquettes: 
so pray let go my hand, Lord K." 

" Ah ! Kitty, ye creature ! *' sighed Lord K., 
imploringly — but Kitty had resumed her air de 
Princesse ; and Lord Kilcolman, with a maudlin 
look, and an Irish sigh, sunk back in his 
fauteuil. 

The orchestra now gave note of preparation for 
the commencement of the oratorio; and the throw- 
ing open of the box door announced the arrival 
of his Excellency the Hochfurstlich Durchlaucht, 
the Prince Von Fustiburg, a sovereign prince of a 
thousand acres, and lord of the lives, properties, 
and liberties of as many subjects. He was a tall, 
meagre, formal, elderly gentleman, dressed in a 
court suit, covered with orders, and glittering 
with stars. This enfant gate of the Aulic 



the o'flahertys. 345 

Council of Vienna, and worthy disciple of its 
deraison politique, fancied that he had come to 
Paris, to assist in settling the fate of nations ; 
and he brought to the task, a mind made up of 
precedents, authorities, etiquettes, and all the 
rubbish of by-gone diplomacy, wholly inap- 
plicable to the new order of things. Wrapt in 
the consciousness of his own importance, he was 
received and treated by the man, who then 
represented the spirit of the age, and was its 
type and sign, as his imperial master had been 
before him — en grand ganache ! 

The Princess presented the Earl of Kilcolman 
as an English Peer, a prisoner of war, an old 
friend, and a distinguished compatriot; and 
the Prince received him with all the ceremony 
due to his rank ; offering him, as a preliminary 
courtesy, a pinch of snuff, from a box, the lid 
of which was illustrated by the most foolish face 
in Europe, set round with the most brilliant 
diamonds. 

The ceremonial of presentation over, the 
Princess gave up her attention, not to the music, 
which had begun, but to the audience ; and 
q3 



346 THE o'briens and 

particularly to a side-box, within two of her 
own, to which every eye was now turned. The 
grille had been just lowered ; and two officers, 
in general's uniforms, entered. The younger 
of the two came forward, and raising his glass, 
seemed to reconnoitre the audience, whom his 
presence had thrown into movement, with great 
sangfroid. 

" Who is that young General P' 1 asked the 
Princess ; " I mean the pale, sallow, thoughtful- 
looking one, with his hair divided on his fore- 
head, and hanging en oreilles de chien ?" 

" Mein Gott," said the Prince, " er istder 
Consul, 'tis the General Buonaparte."" 

The Princess and Lord Kilcolman both rose 
in eager curiosity, and fixed their eyes intently 
on one who was then fixing the gaze of 
worlds : they were so near the box of the First 
Consul, as to hear him say in his clear, sharp 
voice, to an officer, who entered, " Et Jose- 
phine r 

The arrival of Madame Bonaparte was the reply 
to this inquiry, which was made in some emotion ; 
and the First Consul coolly added, " Ces coqulns 



347 

la ont voulu me fair e sauter. Rapp it faites-moi 
apporter limprime de T 'oratorio. :1 

There was at this moment a simultaneous 
rising : a general murmur of applause expressed 
that the Consul at that moment excited some 
very lively and powerful interest. The fine 
music of Haydn went for nothing ; and the 
plaudits of the audience were loud and long. 

" Qiiest-ce que cela veut dire, Monsieur de 
Yaudremont f demanded the Prince, of a gen- 
tleman who had just entered the box, pale, 
fluttered, and in evident emotion. 

" Cela veut dire^ said Monsieur de Yaudre- 
mont, " that the audience have just heard, that 
the First Consul, in his way to the opera, was 
near being blown up by the explosion of an 
infernal machine, and that the police, for once, 
have been taken an depourvu." 

" Mein Gott ! mein Goti!"' said the Prince. 
u is it possible, der mann des Schictsals ? "* 

" Eh, mon Dieu, eiz?',' ' said the ex-noble, " on 
ne pent s'empecher de reconnattre dans ses des- 

• The man of destiny ; the name then given by the 
Germans to Buonaparte. 



348 THE O'BRIENS AND 

tinees un providence, qui Va marque de loin 
pour Paccomplissement de ses vues."" 

" Count,'' said the Princess, " what an ad- 
mirer you are of Bonaparte, you, who were 
such a devoted adherent of the Bourbons !' 1 

" Eh,... eh,... eh, que voulez-vous f" replied the 
page of Marie Antoinette, afterwards chambellan 
of the Empress Marie Louise, and gentil homme 
de la chambre to Charles the Tenth ;— one, who 
represented in his person that particular class 
of the French nobility, who had been the 
first to fly their country in its exigency, and 
to avail themselves (in its prosperity) of the 
amnesty in favour of the prevenus d' emigra- 
tion. The idol of the aristocratic coteries of 
London, where he had been received as V homme 
immobile de la monarchic, the Count de 
Vaudremont, had accepted a little mission of 
corutesy from Louis XVIII. at the court 
of Vienna; but instead of returning to play 
'whist in the modest parlours of Hartwell, 
he was the first to get his name u rayef 
and to faire anti-chambre to the Bonapartes, 
under the magnificent towers of the Bourbons. 



THE o'fLAHEETYS. 349 

Admirably fitted by his old courtly habits of 
gossip and medisance, to administer to the 
master weakness of Napoleon, he became 
the founder of La Police de Caquetage, which 
afterwards so deeply embittered the life of his 
employer ; and he was as rarely missed from the 
saloons of St. Cloud, where he played saute 
mouton for the amusement of the consular family, 
as from the state apartments of the Tuilleries, 
where he taught the parvenus of the day the 
etiquettes, in which they soon learned to excel 
their teachers : for the forms that impose most, 
are those most easily acquired. 

The first act of the Creation was now 
finished, when a box which had hitherto re- 
mained closed, near to that of the prince, was 
thrown open, and a general officer, attended by 
his two aides-de-camp, came forward. He was 
rendered conspicuous by being the only General 
present who did not wear the new decoration 
of the Legion of Honour ; for though many 
of the military accepted it with reluctance, 
few had the courage to refuse what all consi- 
dered as a return to old institutions. This was 



350 THE O'BRIENS AND 

probably remarked by a little party of Liberals 
in the pit, who rose, and cheered the person more 
distinguished by the absence of that mark of 
note than he could have been by its adoption. 
The Genera], however, had possibly some other 
claims to popularity ; for the .manner in which 
he was received by the audience, seemed no less 
marked and emphatic than that of the Chief 
Consul; though the applause was much less 
universally bestowed. 

The person, thus noticed, was in the very 
prime of life, of lofty stature, and commanding 
air ; and so distinguished by personal advan- 
tages, that the Princess, fixing her lorgnette 
steadily at him, asked, " Who is that magnifi- 
cent looking person, Monsieur de Vaudremont ? 
I think I have seen him before." 

" Hal par exemple /" said the Ex-Count, 
who had the Memoires du genre hurnain at his 
fingers' ends, H that is, or would be, a person- 
age, a modern Alcibiades: like the Athenian 
General, he has figured as a statesman, a 
soldier, and a philosopher ; d'aitteurs fort joli 
gar$on." 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 



351 



" But, who is he ?" asked the Princess, still 
fixing her glass. 

" He is one of our Generals mal vus, ' un 
General suspect.' He belongs to a faction equally 
violent against royalists and jacobins ; although 
the First Consul, in his wisdom, has set the 
example of a necessary fusion of parties, by 
admitting the Ex-Grand-Seigneur, Talleyrand, 
and the Ex-Montagnard Fouche, to his councils 
and confidence " 

" But who is he ? M again interrupted the 
Princess, with increasing curiosity and earnest- 
ness. 

M He is one of the heroes of the Italian cam- 
paign, though you see he is not decorated with 
the new order of the Legion of Honour. In fact, 
he is at the head of those officers who have 
shewn the most decided repugnance to its esta- 
blishment ; and he even had the insolence to 
tell the First Consul the other day, that such 
distinctions ' netoient que les hochets du despo- 
iisme :' to which Buonaparte replied, " Eh bien, 
c'est avec des hochets quon a toujour s mene les 
hommes? 



352 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" But his name ?" said the Princess, " his 
name first, and memoirs after ! — his name ?" 

"It is General O'Brien, an Irishman by 
birth. Those Irishmen ! nous en avons comme 
s'M en pleuvaient." 

The Princess almost started, and exchanged 
a significant look with Lord Kilcolman, whose 
cpera-glass followed the direction of her own, 
while she muttered in English, k * I thought so; 
Lady Knock lofty 'shero, something changed, but 
not disimproved." 

" By Jupiter, 1 believe so," said Lord Kil- 
colman. 

" But it's impossible — a fellow like that, that 
no one would speak to in Ireland ! — he a Gene- 
ral in the French service ! and little Boney, so 
clever and clear-sighted. Poll ! 'tis impossible." 

" 'Tis true, however," said the Princess, 
still speaking English ; " it is not easy to mis- 
take him." 

" Nor to forget him either," said Lord Kil- 
colman, with the air of a man who had a right 
to be piqued. 

" These Irishmen," continued Mons. de 



the o'flahertys. 353 

Vaudremont, " sefourrent partout. There are 
the Generals Clarke, Lawless, Harty, Kilmaine, 
et tant d'autres" 

" All of whom," muttered Lord Kilcolinan, 
u would have run the risk of being hanged, had 
they staid at home." 

" Plait-il f" demanded the Ex-Count. 

" Oh ! nothing," replied the Princess, smiling ; 
" only my Lord observes that had these Generals 
remained at home, they would, no doubt, have 
been elevated as they deserve." 

" Eh! sans doutel ce sont de braves gens. 
There's General Clarke, for instance, who, from 
a simple lieutenant, has become — " 

" Never mind General Clarke, tell us more of 
General O'Brien," said the Princess, impa- 
tiently. 

" Eh ! voild les jemmes !" shrugged the 
Prince ; " qiCun liomme soit beau!" 

" Eh bien" interrupted the Princess, and 
addressing the Count. 

" Well, this Irish General is a perfect hero of 
romance. He narrowly escaped being hanged 
in Ireland, as some of his countrymen here 



354 THE O'BRIENS AND 

relate ; for the Irish have always a coup de patte 
to bestow upon each other. But, c'est egal. 
Thrown on the coast of France, where he was 
driven by stress of weather, having escaped 
from his own country in an open boat, he 
was taken up for a spy — sent to Paris — did 
not give what was deemed a satisfactory account 
of himself, — and had a letter found on his person 
signed by the noted aristocrat, the Prince de 
Ligne. That was enough. Pardi ! he was con- 
demned — ordered for execution— thrown into a 
dungeon, in order to be sent with the next batch 
to the guillotine, on the following morning ; and 
that morning — it was the 9th Thermidor. Then 
arrived the insurrection, which ended in the death 
of Robespierre ; and nothing more was thought 
for months of the prisoners, till a sosur de la 
charile (an order tolerated when religion itself 
was proscribed), took up the mission of seeking 
out the victims which the atrocious Robespierre 
had left to pine in their dungeons ; et viola mon 
general, not only restored to liberty, but ac- 
tually discovering in the present ancien Eveque 
de C , (the celebrated Abbe O'Flaherty, so 



355 

influential in the Convention), an old friend and 
near relation. Well, this O'Brien a de Vesprit, 
and a great talent for popular writing. He was 
immediately employed, became the Magnus 
Apollo of Cambaceres, BoissyD'Anglas, Carnot, 
and others, who have since styled themselves 
Constitutional Liberals. But this did not last 
long. The royalist reaction broke out, and tcok 
the dessus : et voila mon drole qui s'insurge ! 
and narrowly escaped deportation, or worse ; 
and now, seeing clearly enough that existing 
arrangements were but provisional, and that 
nothing permanent was possible, except nor, 
forthwith our modern Alcibiades quitted the 
senate and took the field, and, for once in his 
life, he was right. The army was his true vo- 
cation. He was bred sous tente, and distin- 
guished himself in every campaign, till, from a 
simple volunteer, he has become comme, vous le 
voyez, a Lieu tenant-General of the Republic. In 
the campaigns of Italy he performed prodigies of 
valour, was soon found out and distinguished by 
Buonapaite; but he is now risking all, by op- 
posing the First Consul in every effort to bring 



U56 the o'buiexs and 

back social order. ' General,' said the First 
Consul to him, immediately after the inaugura- 
tion of the Concordat in Notre Dame * General, 
comment avez-vous trouve la Ceremonie V 

"'II riy manquoif (replied the hot-headed 
Irishman) 6 qu'un million dliommes, qui ont 
ete tues, pour detruire ce que vous retablissez.''* 
And yet this man is cried up for his talent, and 
lives with Cabanis, and all the philosophers ! — 
' Ah, que les gens d esprit sont betes V " 

The Princess and the Peer had only with- 
drawn their eyes from the subject of these details, 
to exchange looks with each other. They had, 
from the first mention of his name, recognized in 
the French General, the unfortunate Lord Ar- 
ranmore ; and though much changed, — though 
the gloss and glow of youth was all dimmed 
and • faded, — yet in his fine melancholy and 
marked countenance, they still detected that 
peculiar beauty of a passionate and energetic 
expression, which had first attracted the atten- 

* " General, what do you think of the ceremony?" 
" It wanted nothing but the million of men who have 
been slain, to destroy all that you are now restoring." 



THE o'FLAHERTi'S. 357 

tion of Albina Countess of Knocklofty, at the 
review in the Phcenix Park. But the melan- 
choly which clouded his brow, and seemed 
its habitual character, dispersed like mid-day 
vapours from before a summer's sun, as he 
turned round to give his hand to a lady, who 
entered the box, leaning on the arm of a gentle- 
man en habit bourgeois. 

" By Jupiter ! what a beautiful woman," ex- 
claimed Lord Kilcolman. " "What a dress ! she 
looks like the priestess of the sun, in the new 
ballet." 

" Ah ! z'oila la Jin du roman /" said the Count, 
taking snuff. " Madame Buonaparte has been 
called la bonne etoile of her husband ; that 
beautiful woman, your priestess of the sun, my 
lord, is la mauvaise etoile de noire General ; 
she it is that governs him and misleads him in 
his present opposition." 

"Ah ! for heaven's sake, contcz nous cela," 
said the Princess, with renewed earnestness and 
interest in the subject. 

" Some pretend that this priestess of the 
sun, who is an ex-reHgieuse, is neither more 



358 THE o'briens and 

nor less than the very sister of charity, who re- 
stored the General to liberty ; and it is well 
known that she is ? the Lady of Lodi' (as she is 
called in a little vaudeville written on the sub- 
ject) who defended herself in her chateau on the 
banks of the Adda, where she lived in great 
retreat, at the head of a sort of semi-religious 
society. She is very rich, and inherits the 
wealth of a certain Jesuit uncle, whose name I 
forget. The chateau was attacked by a skir- 
mishing party of French soldiers, whom she 
kept at bay till the arrival of the main army ; 
when, throwing herself at the feet of the General 
of division, he recognized in the heroine of Lodi, 
la sceur de la charite ; and permitted her to 
march out of her fortress tambour battant, and 
with all the honours of war — Vous devinez, Mad. 
la Princesse, le denouement ? The General and 
his captive were married shortly after the battle 
of Lodi, at Milan, in the presence of Bonaparte. 
The bridegroom was ordered from the altar 
of the Duomo, to the siege of Mantua ; and 
before he rejoined his bride in Paris, the army 
of Italy, accomplishing the great work of the 



THE O'FLAHEHTYS. 359 

revolution, sent back its heroes to be crowned 
in the Capitol. 

" In the interval which has occurred since the 

treaty of Campo Formio, the constitutional 

party has begun an energetic but unavailing 

opposition to the measures of the First Consul ; 

and this faction has no more active members 

than the General and Madame O'Brien. Of her, 

one may say, as my friend Talleyrand said, the 

other night, of another pretty woman, * Cest la 

tete de Cromwell sur le corps d'une jolie femmeS 

Graceful, eloquent, adroit, and veiling all under 

an air of simplicity and bonhommie, she is, in fact, 

a perfect Aspasia, and is exercising sur notre belle 

jeunesse de France, the same influence which her 

prototype obtained over the Athenian youth ; 

enjin, c'est une femme ires-dangereuse, and it is 

thought will soon receive an order to quit Paris. 

En attendant, her saloons are nightly crowded 

with malcontents : you are sure of meeting 

there Lanjuinais, Gregoire, Garat, Le Noir, 

La Roche, Constant, Chenier, the celebrated 

Cabanis, with whom she now entered the box, 

all of whom are occupied enjciisant des emp'iete- 



SCO THE C/LRIENS AND 

mens, on the new system, which can only end 
in their own ruin— comme de raison." 

Here the dropping of the curtain and the 
rising of the consular family were signals for 
the Austrian Prince and the ci-devant lwmme 
immobile de la monarchie, to hurry to pay 
their respects to the First Consul, on his escape 
from assassination. Madame la Princesse, giving 
her arm to the Earl of Kilcolman, asked, "And 
now, Lord K., who do you think the heroine de 
Lodi turns out to be ?" 

" Upon my honour," said the Earl, " I have 
not the laste idaye ; but she is one of the finest 
looking creatures I ever saw, though not in 
her teens. What luck that O'Brien has always 
had/ 1 

'* Why, is it possible you do not remember 
her? She is very little changed, except that 
she is more en bon point, and differently dressed/' 
"Give you my honour and soul I have no re- 
collection who she is — not the laste in life." 

" She is, as the Count would say, ni plus ni 
moins than Madame O'Flaherty, the Superior 
of that Irish convent, where — " 



THE O'FLAHEUTYS. 361 

" What Irish convent ?" 

"Oh! I thought you had been of our gipsy 
party among the mountains of Connemara, where 
this Aspasia — but the crowd is intolerable ; 
xv ill you come and sup at the embassy ?" 

"I will, with all my heart and soul," replied 
Lord Kilcolman, backing his way through the 
multitude (all hurrying to see the First Consul 
pass), with shoulders only manufactured in Tip- 
perary. 

" I'll tell you all then ;" said the Princess. 
" There is, I assure you, de quol fed re un 
roman, if it were well treated." 

"And why not write it yourself?" said Lord 
Kilcolman, pressing the fair arm that leaned 
upon his : " you are such a talented creature !" 

" If I did, every body would say I put them 
into my book," said the Princess, " for all the 
blockheads and blockheadesses think themselves 
printable ; and draw what you may, ' each cries 
that was levelled at him.'' " 

"Upon my honour that's the raison I prefer 
writing my journey to Jerusalem. I defy any 

VOL. IV. R 



362 THE O'BRIENS AND THE o'FLAHERTYS. 

one to take offence at a book written just about 
nothing at all." 

" Don't be too sure of that," said her Excel- 
lency. 



THE END. 
