CONFESSIONS 



ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 




(f^WMm 



THE 



CONFESSIONS 



ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 



ILLUSTRATED BY SIX FEMALE PORTKAITS, FROM HIGHLY 
FINISHED DRAWINGS BY E. T. PARRIS. 



BY 

THE COUNTESS OF BLESSINGTON. 



LONDON: 

LONGMAN, REES, OUME, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMAN, 
PATERNOSTEK-UOW. 



MDCCCXXXVI. qC^ 



VoV-J 



WILLIAM WrLCOOKSOM, ROLLS BUILDINGS, KETTER LANK. 



THE CONFESSIONS 



ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 



I 



" Who cares, or thinks, about Elderly Gentle- 
men," methinks I hear a young lady exclaim, as 
throwing down this book with a disdainful air, 
she demands of the shopman at the library, " If 
there is not somethinsr new?" 

You mistake, fair lady, many are they who 
think of little else than of Elderly Gentlemen ; 
but, alas ! these are young ivives impatient to enact 
the part of young widows ; heirs in a hurry to 
come into possession ; holders of post obits ; ex- 
pectant legatees ; and faithful servants anxious to 
render the last duties to their dear masters, and 
to receive the meed of their disinterested services. 



2 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

This is an autobiographical-loving age: why, 
then, should / not amuse myself, if not my 
readers, by revealing the experience I have ac- 
quired, if it were only for the purpose of esta- 
blishing two facts, which many young men seem 
to doubt; namely, that vanity is not solely con- 
fined to women; and that all old gentlemen, 
however improbable it may appear, were once 
young. Perhaps, I have also another, and less 
disinterested object in view — the discomfiture of 
time, that ruthless enemy, which has lately be- 
^•un to press heavily on me. I endeavoured to 
kill it in my youth, but now it has laid me by 
the heels ; for, in sober sadness, I am a victim to 
gout, unable to move from my easy chair, and, 
consequently, more than ever sensible of the 
power of my antagonist. A propos of gout : I 
wish the erudite ' Doctor,' who has helped me 
to beguile many a tedious hour, by his recondite 
and ' right merie' lucubrations, would favour the 
world, in his next volume, with an etymological 
chapter on that malady ; proving, for instance, 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. iS 

as he might easily do, that it derives its cognomen 
from the French word f/out, which we translate 
by taste ; for who, loithout taste, ever had the 

gout ? and how few icith, have ever escaped it ! 

* * * * 

I have been many years absent from England, 
wandering in search of that yet undiscovered 
good, " a fine climate;" which, like happiness, 
for ever eludes the pursuer, though constantly 
holding out delusive prospects of its attainment. 
The searchers of one, like those of the other, are, 
in general, confined to the class who, possessed 
of more wealth than wisdom, make unto them- 
selves an imaginary good ; and then set out in a 
weary chase of it. 

Blase with that most fatiguing of all lives, a 
life of pleasure, and suffering under its never- 
failing consequences, a mind teeming with ennui, 
and a frame weakened by luxurious indulgence, 
I determined to visit the Continent; and tra^- 
versed France, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, in 
the vain belief, that a ' mind diseased,' and 

b2 



4 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Morn-oiit constitution, were to be renovated by 
the macrical air of the south. What its eifect 
might have been, I have yet to learn ; for, I have 
been nearly frozen l>y the hise in the south of 
France ; enervated almost to annihilation by the 
sirocco in Italy ; recluced nearly to a state of 
fusion in Sicily ; and scorched into a cinder in 
Spain and Portugal, without having yet dis- 
covered the object of my search, a fine climate. 

I returned to England after many long and 
weary years of absence, rather worse in health 
than when I left it; as the incursions made on 
my alieady debilitated constitution, by undue 
heat, unlocked for winds, and unwholesome diet, 
instead of retarding, tended to advance, the 
effects of that cruel enemy, Time. Wine too 
sour to admit of its copious use, food too insipid 
to induce even a gourmand, much less an epi- 
cure, to commit an excess, enforce the adoption 
of temperance on those who are the most opposed 
to it ; and this virtue^ so seldom practised at home, 
is the whole, the sole, advantage to be derived 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 5 

from a continental residence. Tired of feediii«>; 
on flour tortured into all the varied forms yclejied 
macaroni, vermicelli, lasague, tortellini, parpa- 
della, patta di puglia, ravioli, and half a hundred 
other insipid dishes; and of devouring becca- 
ficos, thrushes, and blackbirds, washed down by 
ungenerous liquids, misnamed wines, I left the 
Continent; my stomach weakened by unsub- 
stantial sustenance, and my skin seamed \)y 
the repeated and vigorous attacks of those mur- 
derers of sleep, mosquitos and sand-flies, that 
so often destroyed mine, in spite of all the futile 
aids of Russia leather pillows, and gauze cur- 
tains, entitled mosquito nets; which last, more 
frequently serve to imprison your tormentor with 
you, than to exclude him. 

Returned, thank Heaven ! to my native land, 
I resigned myself a willing victim to all the 
luxuries it can boast. I offered up whole heca- 
tombs of turtle and venison to appease the wrath 
of my long restricted and much injured appetite ; 
and felt most sensibly that patriotic sentiment so 



b THE CONFESSIONS OF 

much lauded by poets and orators, denominated 
love of country ; which is only another term for 
the love of its table and fireside. With what a 
gusto, as the Italians say, did I indulge in old 
sherry, madeira that had twice crossed the line, 
and claret such as one never finds out of Great 
Britain ! the thin and acid beverage of the Con- 
tinent known by the name of Bordeaux, bearing 
as little affinity to that excellent wine, as lachry- 
ma christi does to champagne. With how much 
more pleasure did I contemplate an orchard in 
Herefordshire, and the hop-grounds in Kent, than 
I had ever experienced in viewing the orange 
groves and vineyards of southern climes ; and a 
coal fire was hailed as an old familiar friend is 
welcomed after a long absence. So much was 
my amor patrice increased by a return to its 
comforts, that not even the opaque fog which 
presented itself, like a dense curtain of pea 
soup, to my startled sight, one morning in the 
November after my return, could disgust or 
alarm me. I ordered lights, shut out the day, 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. V 

and commanded an extra luxurious dinner. In 
a few months I was hardly to be recognised, so 
great was the change produced in my outwartl 
man. My white face had become of a rich ru- 
bicund hue, making the "erst pale, one red ;" my 
lank person, which, on ariving from the Con- 
tinent, resembled the portraits of " the lean and 
slippered pantaloon," assumed a portly protu- 
berance ; and my feet, those barometers of health, 
gave indications that good living had produced 
its certain eflPect, a severe fit of gout, which soon 
confined me to the sofa, a resting-place where- 
unto I am now generally condemned more than 
half the year. 

Change of air having been prescribed for me, 
I lately proceeded to this country seat of mine, 
which I have not visited for twenty- five years ; 
and, pour passer le temps^ as the French say, I 
have had the drawers of my old escritoire brought 
to my easy chair, and have sought amusement in 
examining their contents. What piles of letters, 
in delicate hand writing, tied up with ribands 



8 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

of as delicate die, met my pensive gaze; gen- 
tle ghosts of departed pleasures and forgotten 
pains ! What miniatures of languishing blue- 
eyed blondes, and sparkling piquantes brunettes ! 
What long ringlets of hair of every colour, from 
the lightest shade of auburne (maliciously called 
red) to the darkest hue of the raven's wing ! What 
rings, pins, and lockets, were scattered around, 
with mottoes of eternal love and everlasting fide- 
lity ! which eternal love and everlasting fidelity 
had rarely withstood the ordeal of six months' 
intimacy. What countless pairs of small white 
gloves ! What heaps of purses, the works of 
delicate fingers ! What piles of fans, the half- 
authorised thefts of ball-rooms, thefts so gently 
rebuked and so languidly reclaimed ! What 
knots of riband grasped in the mazy dance ! 
What girdles, yielded with blushing, coy delay ! 
with bouquets of faded flowers enough to stock 
the hortus siccus of half the botanists in Eng- 
land ! and a profusion of seals, with devices 
each more tender than the other ! 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 9 

The past, with all its long forgotten pleasures 
and pains, rose up to my imagination ; recalled 
into life by these f/ar/es (Tumour^ which had sur- 
vived the passions they were meant to foster ; 
but which now so far fulfilled dieir original des- 
tinadon, as to make their donors suddenly and 
vividly present to my memory, as though diey 
had been summoned into a brief existence by 
the magical wand of a necromancer. The loved 
— the changed— the dead — stood before me in 
their prisdne charms : and I felt towards each, 
and all, some portion of long vanished tenderness 
revive in my breast. — Beautiful sex ! soodiers in 
our affliction, and best enliveners in our hours 
of happiness, all that I have known of joy 
on earth, I owe to your smiles, to your par- 
tiality ! 

This miniature represents my first love, not 
the object of my crude, puerile fancy; for what 
stripling has ever passed from fifteen to twenty, 
without having fancied himself, at least half a 
dozen times, smitten with die tender passion? 

B 8 



]0 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

what youth has ever been philosopher enough 
to have resisted the charms of an attractive 
nursery governess; or the younger sister, or 
daughter, of the preceptor, under whose roof 
he studied lessons of love and erudition at the 
same time ? 

No — this picture has nothing to do with such 
minor phantasies. It represents her who engen- 
dered in me the first rational sentiment of attach- 
ment I ever experienced, the first woman that 
led me to anticipate with pleasurable feelings 
the holy state of wedlock, as a near, and not as 
a perspective good, as a happiness to be attained 
as speedily as possible, and not as a change of 
life to be endured, as best it might be, at some 
remote period. How vast is the difference, by 
the way, between a passion and a sentiment ! 
The first may be excited for an unworthy ob- 
ject, and in an unworthy mind ; by a silly girl 
for a sillier boy; but the second, can only be 
inspired by a pure woman, and entertained by 
an honorable man. One of the many distinc- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 1 1 

tions, between the two sexes, is, that women 
feel love as a sentiment; while with men, it is a 
passion : hence, it takes deeper root, and is of 
longer duration, with them, than with us. But, 
in proportion to our intellectual cultivation, this 
peculiarity becomes less frequent ; for imagina- 
tion and refinement once enlisted beneath the 
banners of love, that becomes sentiment, which, 
otherwise, would have been solely passion. 

But, to return from this digression (and I 
warn my readers, if I should be so fortunate as 
to find any, that I am given to digress), I now 
begin the narrative of my first love, verifying 
the words of the old French song — 

" On en revient toujours, 
A ses premiers amours." 

Louisa Sydney, the original of the miniature 
now before me, was one of the fairest specimens 
of her sex, that nature ever formed. There are 
the eyes, blue as heaven's own cerulean hue, and 
the cheek with its delicate tint, resembling the 
leaf of a newly blown rose. There are the long 



12 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

and silken tresses of lightest brown, that wan- 
toned over her finely rounded shoulders, de- 
scending to a waist, whose exquisite symmetry 
was unequalled. Well do I remember, when 
one of those silken glossy ringlets was severed 
trom her beautiful head, to fill the locket now 
before me ! Poor, dear Louisa ! how she loved 
me ! There is something soothing and delight- 
ful in the recollection of a pure minded woman's 
affection ; it is the oasis in the desert of a worldly 
man's life, to which his feelings turn for refresh- 
ment, when wearied with the unhallowed pas- 
sions of this work-o'day world. I would not 
voluntarily relinquish the memory of Louisa's 
love for all — all — what shall I say ! — Alas ! my 
all of enjoyment is now so limited, that I have 
little to resign ; but that, and much, much more, 
would I surrender, sooner than part from the 
conviction that she loved me. 

Louisa Sydney was not only beautiful, but 
she was mild and gentle, beyond description ; 
jet her gentleness, and amazing docility, had 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 13 

nothing of insipidity in them, for they originated 
in a perfect freedom from selfishness, that led 
her to yield her own wishes to those of the per- 
son she loved, a concession, not of reason but 
of volition. She absolutely lived for those dear 
to her ; and had more pleasure in obeying their 
desiiTs, than in gratifying her own. 

There was a sweet pensiveness in her nature, 
that harmonized perfectly with the peculiar cha- 
racter of her beauty. — Hers was not a mind 
prone to gloom, but of that subdued and tender 
order, . which, like a summer twilight, in itself 
beautiful, disposes all to feel its mild and sooth- 
ing influence. One could not have told hei; 
with the slightest prospect of success, a ludi- 
crous story, a whimsical quibble, or any one of 
the various bad jokes, with which the conversa- 
tion of the generality of persons is assisted in 
society. But, she was one, to whom the fairest 
flowers, the most imaginative poem, or the most 
elevated work on practical holiness, would be 
felt to be an appropriate offering. Strongly 



14 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

tinctured with romance, the romance of youth- 
ful refinement, which is a natural attribute of 
the best and purest of her sex, ere experience 
has driven the illusions of early youth away, 
Louisa shrank from the busy world, affrighted 
and stunned with its turmoil ; and opened her 
innocent heart to the contemplation of the 
charms of nature, and the adoration of the God 
who created them. 

What pictures we drew of the future ! — love, 
not in a cottage, because she knew my lot had 
rendered my home a stately one, but she would 
have preferred a more humble abode. 

" A cottage," has she often said, " overgrown 
with woodbine, jessamine, and roses, sheltered 
by a wood, with a clear stream gliding in front 
of a garden, redolent with flow^ers ; this, dearest 
Harry, would be my choice." 

" And our food,, dearest," would I reply, in 
bantering mood, " should be milk, honey, and 
curds, with new-laid eggs, and simple fruits." 
" Well, such food would amply content me" 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 13 

would Louisa say, " but you men are always 

thinking of a good dinner. Yet, would you all 

be better and happier, because more healthy, it" 

your diet was more simple ; but you ' yearn for 

the flesh pots,' the green fat of turtle, or the 

white muscle of venison, the racy juice of Spain's 

vines, and the iced vintage of France. Ah, 

Harry, Harry — 

' These little things, disguise it how you can, 
These little things are dear to little man ! ' " 

Ye gods, what a twinge that was ! it seemed 
as if a red-hot knittino; needle was shot throujjh 
my foot; and the exclamation it occasioned 
brought my blockhead of a servant in, with — 
" If you please, sir, did you call?" — Did I call ? 
if I had, he would not have been so prompt in 
his attendance: for, during the last twenty 
years, I have remarked, that servants rarely 
come, when one does require them, and always 
when one does not. Oh ! this plaguy gout ! 
how dependent it makes a man feel i for not 
only does it " fill all his bones with aches, make 



lf> THE CONFESSIONS OF 

him roar," but it impresses him with the agree- 
able conviction, that if a spark from the fire 
should by chance be attracted towards his gar- 
ments, he might be consumed at leisure, unless 
some servant should arrive to his rescue. Ah ! 
why did I not marry? why not have secured 
to myself a legitimate, a licensed nurse, whose 
duty, if not pleasure, it would have been, to 
have watched the paroxysms of this fearful ma- 
lady, and to have noted the want of philosophy 
with which they were endured? People are 
always so philosophically stoical to the sufferings 
of their near and dear relatives, and so ready 
to accuse them of not bearing the ills to which 
flesh is heirwith becomingequanimity. — Another 
twinge ! — Oh ! ye gods, what martyrdom ! 

Psha, psha, at this rate my confession will 
never be made. " T««/ miei/.v," says my tired, 
if not tiresome reader. Let me see, where 
was I ? Poor, dear Louisa ! we thousht not 
of gout in her day ; no, no, nor of the neces- 
sity of casTf chairs, in which persons are most 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 17 

uneasily placed ; nor of sofas, reclined on which, 
a wretch suffers more than on the bed of Pro- 
crustes. In her day, I only remembered that 1 
had feet for dancing. — Noio, Lord help me, 
when I look on my swollen and bandaged foot, 
which resembles a bloated Esquimaux child, I 
can hardly believe that I ever could have sported 
" on the light fantastic toe," or " brushed the 
dew-drops from the grass, at early morn." In 
Louisa's time, I as little contemplated my pre- 
sent state of purgatory, as I then, abandoned my- 
self to the indulo-ence which has entailed on me 
these sufferings. The indulgencies of the heart, 
then occupied me more than those of the sto- 
mach : would that the former had always con- 
stituted my enjoyment ! 

But to resume. — Let me open this pacquet of 
letters, written with a crow quill. How delicate 
is the writing, and the riband that holds them 
together, couleur de rose, like the cheek of the 
fair writer when they were penned — that cheek 
— what is it now? Poor, dear Louisa ! 



18 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Here is the first letter she ever wrote me, for 
I see I numbered them. 

" I fear you will think me too lightly won, 
and blame my imprudence in answering the note 
you placed in my hand on leaving the ball. That 
note has told me all that I longed to know, which 
I hoped, yet doubted. And yet a feeling of re- 
morse poisoned my enjoyment while reading it ; 
for, conscience whispered that I ought not to have 
received it, and that in perusing it I violated the 
duty I owe dear mamma. Every word of kind- 
ness from her (and never does she speak to me 
save in kindness) seems to reproach me for this 
duplicity. Do let me tell her; or, better still, 
confess to her yourself, that you love me ; for 
there is something that looks like guilt in mys- 
tery, which renders it abhorent to me." 

Poor dear Louisa ! 

Here is No. 2. ^ 

" What a delightful picture you have drawn of 
our future lives ! But can you, dearest Harry, 
give up the gay and brilliant world, which you 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 19 

have enjoyed with such a zest, to retire to some 
sequestered home with me? I rejoice that you hke 
green fields, trees, flowers, and birds, almost as 
much as I do." (Poor dear soul! I had per- 
suaded her, and myself too, that I was a perfect 
Corydon). " From my infancy I had felt delight 
in them, and this sympathy in our tastes is a new 
link in the chain of affection that binds us. I 
thought, but perhaps it was only fancy, that you 
looked pale last night, and this thought haunted 
my pillow." Poor Louisa, if she saw me now, 
with this rubicund face ! " I hope you are not 
ill, dear Henry ; or if ill, that you will not make 
light of your indisposition. Noio that you know 
the happiness of another depends on you, you 
must be careful of your health. It is by sug- 
gesting to me a similar reflection, that dear good 
mamma makes me submit to a thousand dis- 
agreeable remedies for colds caught, and anti- 
dotes a<?ainst catchinoj them. 

" Is it not even more culpable of me to write to 
you clandestinely, than to receive your letters?" 



20 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

(I had postponed declaring in form to her mo- 
ther, purposely that I might enjoy the selfish 
gratification of triumphing over Louisa's repug- 
nance to the maintenance of our secret corre- 
spondence). "Indeed, Harry, I must write to 
you no more until mamma knows all ; for, she is 
too confiding and indulgent to be deceived by 
her child, on whom she has lavished such unre- 
mitting care and affection. I know not how I 
shall acquire courage to place this note in your 
hand ; there is something so unfeminine, so in- 
delicate, in acting thus, and in the presence, 
too, of the dear parent I am deceiving, that I 
blush for myself. Do not, dearest Harry, think 
ill of me, that ray attachment to you has con- 
quered the maidenly reserve of your 

" Louisa." 



Dear, gentle soul ! I think I see her now, 
with that deep, earnest look of tenderness with 
which I so often caught her beautiful eyes fixed 
on my face ! Why, hang me, if I am not 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 21 

playing the woman, and weeping for a poor, dear 
girl that has been in her grave these forty years ! 
Well, I did not think I had so much softness left 
in mv ruffjied nature ; but if ever a girl merited 
to be loved and lamented, it was Louisa Sydney, 
I complied with her desire, and told her mo- 
ther of our attachment a week sooner than I 
had intended. The good lady seemed nearly as 
much hurt as surprised, that her daughter should 
have avowed a preference for any man without 
having first consulted her; but, a tear and a 
kiss from Louisa, and a few civil speeches from 
me, made our peace, and all was soon couleui- 
dc rose again. 

" Mr. Lyster," said Lady Sydney, " in con- 
fiding my child to you, I give you that which is 
dearer to me than life itself. Louisa's feelings 
are as delicate as is, alas ! her frame ; neither are 
formed to resist even the breath of unkindness. 
Watch over her happiness, be careful of ex- 
posing her fragile health to any sudden changes 
of temperature, and forget not that you have a 



22 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

precious, but tender plant : she requires a never- 
ceasing care, but will amply reward you for it, if 
it please the Almighty to spare her to you." 

There was a solemnity in the fond mother's 
appeal that threw a damp over my joy; but, 
when I saw the bright rose blooming on the 
cheek of my betrothed, and marked the lustre 
of her beautiful eyes, I attributed Lady Sydney's 
warning to the anxiety of maternal affection, and 
almost smiled at her thinking Louisa a sickly 
plant. The natural docility of this lovely girl, 
operated upon by her strong affection for my 
unworthy self, gave me a most despotic empire 
over her ; and I had the weakness of being proud 
of displaying it even to her mother. How often 
have I seen the cheek flush, and a tear start into 
the eye of Lady Sydney, when, to gratify some 
caprice of mine, her too gentle daughter has 
neglected some wise precaution relative to her 
health, which I deemed superfluous, though it 
was urged with anxiety by the alarmed parent. 

Louisa has reproached me for this conduct, 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 23 

saying, " How can you, Harry, make me act, 
even in trifles, contrary to mamma's advice. I 
cannot bear to see her look distressed or appre- 
hensive ; though I beheve there is no cause, for 
I feel well, quite well, and so happy !" 

How her soft lustrous eyes beamed on me with 
increased tenderness, as she referred to her hap- 
piness, implying that I was its source. 

*' It is my dear mother's excessive love for me 
that makes her see danger where none exists ; yet 
it is cruel, it is ungrateful of me, not to avoid 
exciting her apprehensions. I imagine myself 
in her place — and well can I fancy how I should 
feel at seeing a stranger come and usurp the 
authority, the love, all that had previously been 
exclusively mine. To resign this empire over 
the heart and conduct of an only child, must 
be a bitter feeling, until time has softened it. 
Why, then, take this ungenerous pleasure, 
dear Harry, in putting your wishes in compe- 
tition with hers ; knowing, as you too well do, 
that I cannot resist following yours, though I 



24 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

am not ungrateful enough not to suffer a painful 
sense of remorse while disobeying hers." 

When Louisa has thus spoken to me, I have 
tried to laugh her out of her scruples, calling 
her mother's precautions absurd, and her reme- 
dies the quackeries of an old woman. Many 
were the stupid pleasantries, and bad jokes, 
which I lavished on the subject; and derived 
an idle and a guilty gratification from conti- 
nually proposing plans of amusement, in opj)0- 
sition to the watchful care of Lady Sydney. It 
appeared to me that Louisa's affection for me 
was most strongly displayed, when it led her to 
thwart the counsel of one, whose slightest wish 
she had hitherto joyfully obeyed ; consequently 
my vanity and selfishness (and I had, Heaven 
knows, an undue portion of both), led me to 
indulge in this puerile, this unworthy gratifi- 
cation, even at the expense of the feelmgs of 
the creature dearest to me on earth. 

Lady Sydney, however, bore all my guilty 
perversity with exemplary patience. It was 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEiSIAN. 25 

plain, that seeing the extent of her daughter's 
attachment to me, she stifled her own senti- 
ments, rather than risk becoming a subject of 
contention between us; and frequently yielded 
her better, wiser judgment, in preference to 
wounding Louisa's feelings, by disputing mine. 

Yet, notwithstanding little altercations, or 
rather a forced submission to my will, how 
happy was the period that followed the accept- 
ance of my proffered hand ! Though Me met 
every day, and passed nearly the whole of it toge- 
ther, still I insisted on Louisa's writing to me ; 
and now, that our engagement was ratified by 
her mother, she poured forth, with the artless 
warmth of youthful innocence, the expression 
of her sentiments. Ay, those icere happy days, 
yet I thought not so then, for I was anticipating 
the still happier period when I should call this 
angelic creature mine. — How often have I since 
reproached myself for not having sufficiently 
prized them ! How often have I recalled each 
word and look of her, whose every word and 

c 



26 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

look gave me rapture. But such is man, never 
content with the present, always looking to the 
future, that mysterious future, whose secrets, 
could he but divine them, would make the pre- 
sent appear blissful. 

I had no father to consult, a large fortune at 
my own disposal, and, as parsimony was not then 
among my faults, I gave Lady Sydney carte 
hlanche for the mamage settlements. Title deeds 
were placed in the hands of the lawyers, those 
gentlemen, so blamed by impatient lovers, and 
commended by prudent parents, whose dis- 
agreeable duty apparently consists, not only in 
seeing that no error be committed by contract- 
ing parties, but in discovering that some over- 
sight has taken place in the lives of their de- 
funct progenitors. 

Jewels and carriages were ordered, our por- 
traits were exchanged, by which I became pos- 
sessed of the beautiful miniature now before me ; 
all (except the long ringlet of fair hair, and her 
letters) that remains to remind me of as lovely 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 27 

and pure a creature, as ever returned to that 
heaven from which, while on earth, she seemed 
an exile. The days of courtship are proverbial 
for their brevity and sweetness; mine passed 
with a velocity, that now appears like the quick 
fleeting visions of sleep, though I then often 
murmured at their slowness. "The twelfth of 
next month," have I often exclaimed, " oh ! 
would to heaven it were arrived (it was the 
period fixed on for our marriage) ; how into- 
lerably slow appears the progress of time !" 
When I thus vented my impatience, Louisa 
would rebuke me, and say it was wicked, it was 
ungrateful to Providence, as every hour seemed 
marked with happiness. Even now, I seem to 
see her angel face, and to hear the low sweet 
voice, whose tones were music to my ear, though 
forty long and dreary years have passed over my 
head since she was laid in the grave. 

We had agreed one evening to go on the 
water the following day, and to dine at Rich- 
mond. Louisa looked forward with almost 

c2 



28 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

childish pleasure to this excursion, as she longed 
to be in the country again, even for a few hours. 
I dispatched my groom with a letter to order 
dinner to be prepared for us, and we talked over 
our party with anticipations of delight. 

The next morning, the weather was sultry and 
oppressive, quick shifting and opaque clouds 
threatened rain, and Lady Sydney proposed the 
postponement of our excursion to a more fa- 
vourable day, I fancied I saw disappointment 
in Louisa's sv/eet face, and this — but why try to 
evade the avowal ? — With the wilfulness that had 
so frequently led me to oppose the prudent pre- 
cautions of Lady Sydney, I was now induced to 
overrule her objections, and to insist on our 
going. Louisa joined her entreaties, seeing the 
obstinacy with which I urged my wishes; and 
we embarked at Whitehall stairs, in high spirits, 
notwithstanding the alarmed glances with which, 
from time to time, Lady Sydney regarded the 
overcast sky. 

We possed a delightful day, rambling in the 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 29 

beautiful environs of Richmond; Louisa lean- 
ing on my arm, and her dove-like eyes seeking 
sjonpathy in mine, at every new feature of the 
enchanting landscape. 

Who that has ever enjoyed the pure hap- 
piness of a walk, in a beautiful countrj^, with 
the woman he loves, can forget it in after years ? 
Every word she uttered, every change of her 
lovely face is remembered by me, more freshly, 
oh ! how much more freshly, than any circum- 
stance of my later life. How often have they 
been recalled, and dwelt on, as only the words 
and looks of her we hsi\e first loved ever are. 

" When I feel as now, dear Harry," said 
Louisa, laying her small white hand on my arm, 
" the vast goodness of Providence in not leaving 
me a single wish unsatisfied, I have a sort of 
superstitious dread, a shrinking presentiment, 
that such happiness is too exquisite for this 
world, and that it cannot endure. My veiy 
soul seems to imbibe rapture from the glories 
of the sky and earth, and to expand in love to 



30 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

the Creator, for endowing me with this ecstatic 
feehng for his works. My eyes are gladdened 
with the all-enchanting scene around us; and 
you, dearest, are near me to share this hap- 
piness ! Oh ! who can regard that blue sky, 
and the soft, yet vivid tints, of the many-co- 
loured foliage, the verdant lawns, whence spring 
a thousand odorous flowers, and that limpid 
river, whose glassy water seems formed to mirror 
the lovely scenes on its margin, without feeling 
an adoration for the Power that created them ? 
Yet, in the midst of the tender, overflowing 
sense of gratitude with which such objects in- 
spire me, is mingled a sadness, as I reflect on 
the uncertainty of life ; and that, at a few hours' 
notice, we may be summoned to quit this beaute- 
ous, joyous earth, the blue and smiling skies, and 
those dearer to us — oh ! how much dearer ! than 
earth or sky. Before I knew you^ my Harry, 
I often contemplated death, and never with 
dread ; but, now^ I shrink from it with dismay ; 
for to leave you would be worse than death." 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 31 

I chided her for these gloomy forebodings, 
but she returned to them. 

" I have frequently thought," continued she, 
" that we do not talk of death sufficiently often. 
Wbat would be said of the unkind friend, who 
kno^sdng that a long and inevitable journey must 
part him for years from some dear, dear object, 
should neglect to speak of it to her ; or to leave 
her the memory that they had together made 
preparations for it. It is thus, Harry, that I 
would wish for us, to think of that longer jour- 
ney, that fearful and bitter separation, death, 
that the survivor may have the consolation, and 
a blessed one it is, of knowing that the departed 
went not forth, without ha%'ing often thought 
of, mourned, and prepared for, the inevitable 
parting. Yet, though I have dreaded death 
since I have known you, I still think, that blessed 
are they who die young, ere yet life has lost 
any of its charms, or that the eye has learned 
to look on nature without delight, or the heart 



32 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

to kindle at its beauties without gratitude. I met 
these hues the other day — 

' Who dies in youth 'scapes many wretched hours, 
And goes unschooled in truths long life must learn ; 
Truths that once known, each fair illusion flies, 
Never again to cheat us into joy. 
The early dead know not that love can die. 
And yet the hearts, that cherished it, survive : 
They think not smiling friendship can deceive. 
Nor that the ties of blood by nature wrought, 
Are weak as cords made of the ocean's foam. 
Which e'en the first rude fitful blast can break ; 
Or like snow wreaths that melt before the sun. 
Dissolving till no trace is left behind. 
No, to die early is to 'scape much pain, 
And pass away, with al, youth s gifts still with us. 
Leaving a sweet though mournful memory 
Of our yoimg lives, to be for ever kept 
In hearts, that loved us, while we tarried here.' 

And, as I perused them, I felt that to die 
young, is better than to survive happiness." 

There was something so sweet, though mourn- 
ful, in the tones of her voice, that though I at- 
tempted to chide her for thus dwelling on so 
painful a subject, I could not banter her, as was 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 33 

my wonted custom, whenever she was more than 
usually pensive. Lady Sydney interrupted us, 
by entreaties to return home; she saw storms 
and rain menacing in every cloud that floated 
over our heads, yet I lingered, in spite of her 
anxiety to embark, smiling at her fears. The 
unusual exercise had heated, as well as fatigued 
my gentle love, her mother, soon after we had 
entered the boat, remarked that she appeared 
flushed ; a term I was inclined to cavil with, as 
I thought I had never seen Louisa look so lovely 
before, the heightened tint of her cheeks im- 
parting an increased brilliancy to her eyes. 

We had only proceeded half way to London, 
when the threatening clouds poured a deluge; 
and, in a few minutes, Louisa was drenched by 
its torrents. How did I now reproach myself 
for my obstinacy, in having forced her mother 
to consent to this party. The alarmed glances 
with which she examined her daughter's face, 
seemed prophetic of some impending evil. I 
caught the infectious fear, which not all the 

c3 



34 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

smiles of the fair object of it could pacify; and 
with a bitter feeling of self-reproach, I mentally 
promised that never again would I expose her to 
a similar danger, by my wilfulness. 

All the remedies used by the doting mother 
to avert the consequences of this disastrous day, 
proved unavailing. The next found Louisa in a 
fever, and her mother almost distracted. 1 
hardly dared to meet Lady Sydney, and yet 
I could not bear to absent myself from her 
house. I felt that to my perverseness all the 
misery now impending over this late happy home 
w as to be attributed ; and, as each day increased 
the danger, I prayed, with my very soul hum- 
bled to the dust, and in a bitterness of spirit 
rarely felt, and never to be described, that 
Louisa might be spared. Her reason never 
left her for a moment; and she soon became 
fully aware that her hours were numbered. She 
entreated to be allowed to see me : and I was 
summoned to her chamber. 

I found her reclined on a sofa: the hectic 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 35 

blush of fever on her cheek, and her beautiful 
eyes sparkUng with an unearthly lustre. A tear 
dimmed their radiance as she gazed on me ; and 
her lip trembled with emotion, as she placed her 
burning and already nearly transparent hand 
within mine. Seeing that I was almost over- 
whelmed by the agony of my feelings, she tried 
to regain composure, and whispered to me — 

" Remember, dearest, that our separation is 
not to be eternal; for, though / cannot stay 
with you on earth, you will, through the Divine 
mercy, come to me, where no more partings are. 
— I die young, sin or sorrow have not blighted 
me; I die beloved too, and is not this to die 
happy? You will remember me, Harry, going 
down to the grave in my youth, leaving behind 
me no one to blame my life, and some dear, 
oh ! how dear, objects to mourn its bre\'ity. 
Comfort my poor mother when I am gone, and 
prove, dearest Harry, that you truly loved me, 
by so regulating your life on earth, that we may 
be united in heaven." 



36 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Exhausted by the exertion of speakhig, she 
fainted. Tlie physicians drove me from the 
chamber: and I never saw my angeHc Louisa 
again, until death had clasped her in his cold 
embrace. 

On the ticelfth of July, — 93, she breathed 
her last, that day, which was to have seen our 
hands joined at the altar ; that day, whose tardy 
approach I had so often impatiently longed for, 
and impiously blamed for its delay, saw her a 
corse. Oh ! Louisa, sainted love of my youth, 
the unwonted tears that fill these aged eyes, 
prove that years, long years, have not banished 
your cherished image from my heart. 

I have been recalled from the mournful past 
to the dreary present, by the indiscreet entrance 
of my stupid servant, who had to repeat his usual 
phrase of " Did you call, sir?" twice, before I was 
aware of his presence. The blockhead found me 
weeping passionately ; and it was one of the ex- 
clamations wrung from me by grief, that he mis- 
look for a call. His look of surprise and pity 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 37 



angered me. " Go away, go away, and be 



to you !" was the uncourteous exclamation which 
drove him and his pity away ; and left me looking 
very foolish, and feeling not a little ashamed at 
having been caught weeping like a blubbering 
schoolboy. Hang the fellow ! what will he, what 
can he think, has occasioned my grief? He'll be 
sure to imagine that my tears and exclamations 
were wrung from me by pain. This is too 
vexatious; I would not have even such a lout 
suppose that physical suffering could wring a tear 
from me. And yet, if he knew that his old gouty 
master has been weeping for a maiden who has 
been more than forty years in her grave, it would 
make the rascal laugh. Faith, there is some- 
thing ludicrous in my weakness, I must confess ; 
yet, such was the vividness with which memory 
brought back old thoughts and feelings, that I 
forget I am an old man. 

Nevertheless, there is a pleasure, though it is 
a veiy melancholy one, in remembering the days 
of our youth, those days when we could feel — 



38 TKE CONFESSIONS OF 

mentally, I mean ; for, most assuredly, senility is 
not devoid of its physical sensations, however its 
intellectual ones may be blunted. My regrets 
remind me of the old French woman, who said, 
*' Ah que je regrette ces bons vieux temps lorsque 
fetois si malheureuse" Let me, then, prolong this 
luxury of wo, by recurring again to my poor 
lost Louisa. I could not bear that she should be 
consigned to " the narrow house" without my 
once more looking at that angel face. I watched 
an opportunity when her heart-broken mother 
had been removed, in a state of exhaustion, from 
the chamber of death, for I dared not meet her 
there. I entered it with a heart bowed down 
by sorrow, and trembling limbs that almost re- 
fused to bear their wretched master. 

It was early morn, a soft balmy summer's 
mom, when all nature seemed to awaken with 
renovated charms, while she, the fairest of na- 
ture's works, was faded for ever. Though in 
London, the little garden into which the win- 
dows of the room opened, seemed as vernal and 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 39 

retired as if it belonged to the country. This 
garden had been the favourite retreat of Louisa ; 
it was filled with plants and rare flowers, the 
greater part of which had been raised by her 
ow^i fair hands. They were now in all their 
bloom, and redolent with fragrance, the dew- 
drops sparkling on their leaves, while she — oh, 
God ! how fearful w^as the contrast ! I drew 
near the bier, and looked on that still lovely 
face. How cold, how marble-like, was its re- 
pose; yet so exquisitely soft was the character 
of her beauty, that it more resembled sleep than 
death, Wliile I gazed on that countenance 
which the cold, dark grave was so soon to hide 
from me for ever, the birds which she had been 
accustomed to feed came gaily chirping to the 
window; and even ventured to pass the sill, 
chirping still more loudly, as if to claim their 
wonted repast. The gaiety of their notes almost 
maddened me; and I rose, like a maniac, to 
chace them, and close the windows, which had 
been opened, when Lady Sidney had with- 



40 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

drawn. Again I turned to gaze on that cold, 
pale face, which seemed to exert a magical 
power over my senses. 

" No, she cannot be gone from me for ever," 
said I. " How could I bear existence without 
her ? How think that hours, days, weeks, months, 
years, are to pass away, and I never more to see 
Jier, who was the light of my eyes, the joy of my 
heart ! Oh ! speak to me, angel of my life ! give 
me some sign that / am not all, all forgotten ! " 

While I apostrophized the beautiful statue 
before me, whose Promethean spark was ex- 
tinguished for ever, a musical clock on the 
chimney-piece commenced playing her favourite 
air, an air to which we had both often listened in 
happy hours. I almost expected it would awake 
her, so powerfully did its sound bring back the 
past ; and for the moment drive away the fearful 
reality of the present. As I gazed on her face, 
a fly, a large blue fly, fixed on her pale lip, and 
this awoke me to the dreadful truth. 

" What, is she already, even in my presence. 



AX ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 41 

to become the prey of such as thou?" cried I, 
approaching to drive away the odious insect. 
But it retained its place until my hand came al- 
most in contact with it ; and only fled when that 
hand fell on the lip it would have saved from 
profanation. Its icy, rigid touch seemed to 
freeze my blood ; and she I loved — yes, loved to 
adoration, became — oh, God ! that I should 
have felt it — an object of fear. 

I rushed from the room in a state of distraction ; 
and a violent brain fever released me, for some 
weeks, from the consciousness of suffering. 

I never again saw Lady Sidney, for she left 
England in a short time after her daughter's 
death : and died at Nice, %\ithin six months of the 
period that consigned Louisa to the grave. Be- 
fore she quitted London she addressed to me a 
mournful, but a kind letter, in which she in- 
closed the following stanzas, which was found in 
the desk of my lost and sainted love, and were 
the last she ever wrote. 



42 THE CONFESSIONS OF 



THE DYING GIRL TO HER 3I0THER. 

Oh ! lay me not in the dark vault, 
But let me rest my weary head 
In some sequestered verdant spot, 
Where the pale moon her beams can shed. 

I love to think 'twill shine upon 
The turf that soon will hide this breast, 
When I, within the silent grave, 
Have found forgetfulness and rest. 

And let the flowers I loved so much 
Be placed around my humble grave, 
For, ah ! in quitting this fair earth, 
What pleased in life I still would crave. 

And yet one other boon I'd ask, 
Dear mother ; when He comes, oh ! tell 
I dying bless'd him — now is past 
The bitterness of death — farewell ! 



Heigh-ho ! how melancholy I am — I did not 
think I had so much feeling left in my heart ; I 
thought it had all centered in my toe, which has 
lately been the most sensitive part about me. 
Bless me ! what a rueful figure the too faithful 
mirror opposite to me reflects ! the eyes nearly 
as red as the cheeks, and the nose redder than 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 43 

either. And this, is the face that poor dear Louisa 
delighted to looked on ! She was right ; it is better 
to die young than to outlive all one loved, and 
all that rendered one loveable. She went down 
to her grave in the bloom of youth and beauty, 
a ready made angel, wanting only the wings ; and 
she yet exists in my fond memory as she was, 
young, and oh, how lovely ! — while / have sur- 
vived every vestige of good looks, and am almost 
disposed to rejoice that she cannot behold the 
hideous old man yonder mirror shows me. 

How absurd it is to see a red-faced, fat, 
paunched sexagenarian weeping ! Faith, I'm 
ashamed of myself ; so, one glance more at that 
sweet mild countenance, and back that and her 
hair and letters go to their drawer, in the old 
escritoire; there to remain until my jackanapes 
of an heir consigns them to the flames, with, 
probably, sundry laughs at his old uncle, whom 
he cannot fancy ever having been other than 
such as he knew him, and unmindful that a day 
will come, when he too will be an old man. 



44 THE CONFESSIONS OF 



MY SECOND LOVE. 



Well, I think I may venture to recount the 
story of my second love, without the fear of be- 
coming lachrymose. No, no! Arabella Wilton, 
who was its object, never brought a serious 
thought into my head, unless it was on the folly 
of mankind in general, and mine in particular, 
for being so easily made the dupes of such 
women. 

Injustice to my fidelity and sensibility, I ought 
to state, that I sincerely mourned for my poor 
lost Louisa, during two long dreary years ; and 
I was romantic enough to believe that I never 
could love again ; a belief that most persons 
similarly situated are apt to indulge until ex- 
perience proves its fallacy. 




^-yZ^yy/^^ 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 45 

Here is the portrait of Arabella : the artist has 
caught the half-imperious, yet winning expres- 
sion of her sparkling black eyes, which seemed 
to say, as plain as ever such orbs could speak, 
" Resist me if you can." What a profusion of 
raven tresses fall round that oval face ! how rich 
is the sunny tint of her cheek, and the ripe 
crimson of her lips ; lips that never opened ex- 
cept to smile or give utterance to some sprightly 
hadhiage^ whose malice, as the French call it, was 
forgiven in consideration of the beautiful mouth 
that originated it. Arabella was the very oppo- 
site of the gentle Louisa; she commanded, rather 
than won, her admirers into love, and seemed so 
certain of their hearts, and gave so little security 
of yielding hers in exchange, that she kept them 
(and she had not a little battalion) in a perpetual 
state of qui vive. 

The sentiment, if such it might be called, that 
Arabella inspired, was a much more common 07ie 
than real affection. Her admirers commeni-'ed 
with love for he7\ but ended in love for them- 



46 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

selves; as she was eminently skilled in wielding 
that powerful weapon, V amour propre, and by its 
judicious treatment rarely failed to gain an em- 
pire over those she wished to influence. The 
equal encouragement she administered to all 
whom she desired to enchain, rendered the chace 
of her heart as exciting as — what shall I say — I 
have it — a fox chace ; if so homely a simile may 
be allowed to be addressed to so dignified a 
theme ; and like that exciting amusement, vanity 
creating the desire of surpassing all competi- 
tors, furnished the chief charm of the pursuit. 
Scarcely a day, nay, an hour, elapsed, that each 
candidate for her favour did not imagine himself 
the preferred; and did not inwardly smile at the 
vanity of his slighted rivals, while she was se- 
cretly laughing at them all, having predetermined 
to v/ed the richest, whoever he might be. If I 
called and found her with only her aunt, she 
never failed to amuse me with piquant anecdotes 
illustrative of the betise of Lord Henry, or pun- 
gent satire against Sir John; though her attention 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 47 

to each of these worthies had excited my jealousy 
the day before. Nay, so adroitly did she point 
out all the ridiculous defects in their characters, 
manners, and appearance, that she not only 
quieted my jealous fears, but actually created in 
me a degree of commiseration for these unhappy 
wights ; though, truth to say, I was never more 
amused, or more inclined to admire Arabella, 
than when she was using every weapon in the 
armoury of her wit, in attacking my rivals. 

It never for one moment occurred to me, that 
her hypocrisy, in thus ridiculing those whom she 
openly encouraged, was reprehensible; or that, 
probably, she was equally severe in her animad- 
versions on me during my absence. No: va- 
nity, gratified vanity, prevented my discovery of 
aught, except that she was charming, and that / 
must be the preferred, or she would never have 
thus selected me as the confidant of her real opi- 
nion of her admirers. Nay, I am persuaded, that 
had my best friend informed me that Arabella 
made vie the object of her ridicule, I should have 



48 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

disbelieved the assertion ; and attributed it to 
some little feeling of envy or jealousy on the part 
of the narrator. Such is the confidence vanity 
gives a man, not in the sincerity of his mistress, but 
in the irresistible power of his owti [attractions. 
Lord Henry and Sir John ware, nevertheless, 
the only formidable rivals among the train of 
her danglers ; not that they were superior in 
either mental or personal attractions to the rest, 
but simply because they were richer. Lord 
Henry had lately inherited a very large fortune 
from an old bachelor uncle, and was consequently 
considered an excellent j^ccfti ', and Sir John was 
in possession of a clear twenty thousand a-year, 
a possession which in those days, no less than in 
these, rendered the possessor very popular with 
all ladies who had to give, or were to be given 
in marriage. Neither of these admirers had as 
yet asked for Arabella's hand, save for a contre 
dance ; and she was skilfully playing them off 
against each other and me, in order to elicit a 
demand for her hand for life. Yet, this ma- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 49 

noeuvre, /, in my infinite wisdom, never once 
suspected; but, vain men (and I confess I was 
one) ever were, and will be fools to the end of 
the chapter. 

At this epoch, Lord Henry was called away 
by the illness of his father, and Sir John had 
taken his departure to attend the Newmarket 
meeting. The field was consequently left open 
to me, and I determined on making the best use 
of my time to bring Arabella to a decision in my 
favour before the return of my rivals. How de- 
lightful, thought I, to witness their mortification 
and chsappointment at my success ; and with this 
laudable motive — and I verily believe it was the 
predominant, if not the sole one — I looked for- 
ward to proposing to enter a state in which the 
whole happiness or misery of life depends on the 
selection of the object with whom it is to be 
shared, and the respect as well as affection en- 
tertained for her. Yet, if all about to assume 
the holy tie of matrimony were to analyse their 
motives for seeking it, how few would find them 

D 



50 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

stand the test of reason; or how few dare to 
conjecture the probable duration of the senti- 
ment — if sentiment such fancies may be deno- 
minated — that led to it. 

But a truce to moralizing, and back to my 
story. On my next visit to Arabella, after the 
departure of Lord Henry and Sir John, she re- 
ceived me with even more than her usual kind- 
ness ; congratulated me that I could exist without 
attending Newmarket, protesting that she held 
in horror the votaries of the turf, who, she said, 
seldom possessed as much intelligence as the 
quadrupeds on whom they betted thousands, and 
possessed infinitely less sagacity than the bipeds 
in the shape of grooms, who outwitted them. 
Severe animadversions on her absent admirers, 
and implied compliments on my superiority, en- 
couraged me to make her the proposal of my 
hand. I said all that it is customary to say on 
such occasions, when a man is, or fancies that he 
is, enamoured; but, while uttering these plati- 
tudes, I could not help thinking how different 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 51 

had been my sensations when making a similar 
declaration to my first love, my gentle, lost 
Louisa. Nor could I avoid observing, how dif- 
ferently the proposal was received. Here was 
no tremulous sensibility, no bashful timidity, no 
tears starting from the downcast lid, and, like a 
pearly dewdrop, stealing over a cheek of rose. 
No, her grandmother, had she been ahve, could 
not have been more perfectly unembarrassed; 
though, after the pause of a few moments, she 
affected (and even I, infatuated as I was, yet 
saw it was affectation) to look down, and mur- 
mur something about "the unexpectedness of 
my proposal." 

"Then, am I to understand that it is dis- 
agreeable to you," said I, piqued by her want 
of feeling. 

"Disagreeable?" repeated the Syren, "what 
a word ! " and she placed her small white hand 
in mine, as she turned away her head, to con- 
ceal, not her blushes, but her want of them. I 
was fool enough to throw myself on my knees 

d2 



52 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

before her ; by Jove, at this moment, the very 
thought of such an attitude gives me a twinge 
in my foot. There again — what a horrible 
shooting pain — and that blockhead, John, has 
let the time elapse for bringing me my col- 
chicum. — Here he comes at last — so, that will 
do, sirrah ! 

" Well, let me remember, where was I when 
that twinge put it all out of my head — oh ! I 
have it — I was on my knees, kissing the little hand 
she abandoned to me, and her head averted, 
probably to hide a smile of either triumph or 
ridicule, when a loud voice in the ante-room 
(loud voices in ante-rooms are often convenient) 
gave me notice that we were about to be in- 
terrupted. I had only time to start on my legs, 
and look nearly as unconcerned as — my lady 
love, ere her bustling aunt entered the apart- 
ment, to announce that a letter had just reached 
her, requiring their immediate presence at Clif- 
ton, where a near relative was dangerously ill. 
She had sent to order post-horses, and desired 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 53 

her niece to commence preparations for her 
journey. While Madame la tante retired to the 
ante-room to give orders to her femme de charge, 
Arabella whispered me to write to her aunt, *o 
make my proposal in form. 

" Why not make it now, and in person," 
said I, " and declare our mutual affection and 
engagement ? " 

" Oh ! no, on no account," rephed the de- 
ceiver, "you know not how precise and prudish 
my aunt is," (and that I was utterly ignorant of 
these features of her character, was very true, 
for I had never seen even the most remote 
symptom of them in the old lady). " She 
would never forgive us," pursued Arabella, " if 
she knew that you had proposed to me before 
you had asked her permission; so pray don't 
commit me. Write her a foi*mal proposal, and 
name the settlements you intend to make; for, 
though /, dear Henry, do not regard such mat- 
ters, she, I blush to say, regards little else (ava- 
rice being the besetting sin of the old), and we 
must conciliate her." 



54 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

There was something repugnant to my feel- 
ings in all this cold, calculating policy: and 
yet, fool as I was, I attributed the confidence 
reposed in me by the niece, relative to her 
aunt's mercenary disposition, to her affection 
for me. Thus, are we ever ready to be misled 
by our vanity ! 

I left the house with reluctance ; and no sooner 
reached home than I obeyed Arabella's dictates, 
and wrote the formal proposal ; in which, after 
expressing, with all the exaggeration of senti- 
ment usual to the occasion, my attachment to 
her niece, I offered settlements so liberal, that 
not even the most mercenary aunt could have 
objected to them. I waited impatiently for an 
answer ; for, though sure of Arabella's consent, 
I wished to have it confirmed by the sanction of 
one, who stood in the light of a parent and 
guardian to her. But no answer came; and, 
when I dispatched my servant a second time to 
demand one, he was informed that the ladies 
had left town. 

Day after day elapsed without bringing me 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 55 

the desired reply from the aunt, whose silence 
seemed most unaccountable. Various and pain- 
ful were the reflections it occasioned me, the 
prominent one being regret for having made 
the offer ; for I now began to feel that, when no 
longer present to dazzle me by her beauty, or 
to amuse me by her satirical sallies, Arabella's 
fascinations were forgotten, and little or no sem- 
blance of passion in my breast, reminded me 
that I had once fancied she was dear to me. I 
almost wished that the aunt would refuse her 
consent; though some little feeling of humi- 
liation as to what Lord Henry would say, or 
Sir John think of me, as a rejected suitor, 
crossed my mind each time I indulged the vague 
hope. 

At length, after many days of suspense, a 
letter was brought me from Mrs. Spencer, apo- 
logizing for not having sooner replied to me ; 
but stating, that the imminent danger of her 
relative had driven every thought, not connected 
with him, out of her head; that as he was now 



56 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

convalescent, she turned with pleasure to my 
proposal, admitted the liberality of the settle- 
ment offered, and would be in London in a day 
or two, when every preliminary for the marriage 
could be finally arranged. 

My feelings on reading this characteristic 
epistle were anything but of a joyous nature. 
It was unaccompanied by a single line, or even 
message from Arabella, indeed her name did not 
even once occur in the letter, an omission that 
both offended and disgusted me. 

They arrived in two days, and I almost got 
rid of my doubts and fears when I saw Arabella, 
in increased beauty and animation, meet my 
greetings with unrepressed symptoms of com- 
placency. The arrangements for our marriage 
were put en train ; but, with what different feel- 
ings did I enter into them, to those which in- 
fluenced me on the former occasion. Though 
I still admired Arabella's beauty, and felt her 
fascination, yet the passion she excited, if pas- 
sion it mieht be called, was of a nature that 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 57 

reflected little honour on the inspired or in- 
spirer. It was unrefined by the tenderness that 
ever accompanies real love, and unredeemed by 
the respect which hallows that sentiment, and 
robs it of all grossierte. All thoughts connected 
with my gentle Louisa, even in the heyday of 
our love, were characterized by a purity that 
led me to imagine her an angel, sent by mistake 
into this terrestrial sphere, through whose guid- 
ance I might become worthy of Heaven; but 
Arabella, I looked on as a woman fitted only to 
chain a man to earth, by her blandishments and 
personal charms. The two Cupids, Anteros and 
Eros, described by the ancients as governing 
the pure and impure passions of love, had pre- 
sided over my two very different attachments, 
and their effects on my mind, had been obvious. 
Louisa's influence would have purified my heart 
where she might have reigned; whereas Ara- 
bella's would but have sullied it. 

It was at this period that the miniature, now 
before me, became mine. I had expressed a 

d3 



58 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

desire to have a portrait of my intended wife ; 
but, observing that her aunt seemed unaccount- 
ably disposed to postpone its being painted until 
after our marriage, I, with the usual pertinacity 
of my character, determined on having it finished 
forthwith; and took her to one of the most cele- 
brated of our artists of that epoch, to whom I 
paid what was then considered an extravagant 
price. My vanity was not a little mortified by 
observing that my future bride seemed much 
more occupied by the preparations for her trous- 
seau than by the donor of it; and evinced a 
taste, or rather let me say a passion, for jewels 
and Cashmeres, which indicated that the organ 
of acquisitiveness was, as phrenologists would 
say, very largely developed in her. I was con- 
tinually told by Mrs. Spencer of the magnifi- 
cence of the diamonds, and rare beauty of the 
emeralds, presented by all the men similarly 
situated with myself to their future brides ; Ara- 
bella observing that, for her part, she envied 
not the diamonds of one, or the emeralds of 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 59 

another, but she owaied to the soft impeachment 
of liking rubies and sapphires excessively, and 
almost looked with en-^y at those presented by 
Sir Frederick Vandeleur to her friend, Miss 
Meadows. 

In short, I received many hints of what / was 
expected to give, with as many disparaging ob- 
servations on what I had given ; and I was weak 
enough to incur considerable expense to gratify 
the implied wishes of my future wife. 

Mrs. Spencer had removed to a villa at Rich- 
mond, to which I daily bent my course. I was 
in the habit of arriving there generally about 
three o'clock ; and had constantly met on my 
route an extremely good-looking young man, 
whose fashionable air and dress formed a striking 
contrast with the wretched looking hack on 
which he was mounted. I had so repeatedly 
encountered this equestrian, that his face be- 
came familiar to me ; and I set it down in my 
mind, that he was some spoilt son, returning 
from a daily visit to an exigent mother, or else 



60 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

a lover, returning from a stolen interview with 
the sultana of some Croesus in the city, during 
the absence of the said lich, if not wise men of 
the East. He seemed to regard me with a 
certain air oi Jierte and ill humour, that was 
unaccountable in a total stranger; except by 
imagining that he had surmised my suspicions 
of his erratic visits, and dreaded my being some 
busybody, who might betray them. 

I had been to Rundle and Bridges' one day, 
selecting jewels, and had far exceeded the sum 
I intended to expend there ; incited to this ex- 
travagance, I frankly own, much more by the 
broad hints of the aunt, and implied, rather 
than expressed desires of her niece, than by any 
spontaneous generosity. Lured by the beauty 
of the trinkets, and their " appropriateness to 
each other," as the bowing shopman observed, 
I was rash enough to conclude my purchases by 
a necklace of rubies, set in diamonds, requiring 
ear-rings, brooches, head ornaments, and brace- 
lets, en suite. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN 61 

Thus, instead of the few hundreds I had in- 
tended to disburse, I found, on a hasty and 
reluctant retrospect of my expenditure, that I 
must have dissipated some thousands; and I 
consequently returned from Ludgate-hill, feel- 
ing that species of self-dissatisfaction and ill- 
humour which a man, who is not quite a fool, 
never fails to experience when he has consciously 
committed a folly. In this state of mind I en- 
tered my club, to dine; when, not wishing to 
encounter any of my acquaintaiices, I ensconced 
myself in a corner of the large room, and had 
an Indian screen, of vast dimensions, so placed, 
that I was isolated from the general mass, and 
could not be seen by any new-comers. 

While I was discussing my solitary repast, 
I ^heard voices, familiar to my ear, command 
dinner to be brought to them at the table next 
to mine, and only divided from me by the 
screen. When I recognised the tones of Lord 
Henry and Sir John, for whose vicinity at that 
period I felt no peculiar desire, I congratulated 



62 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

myself on the precaution which had induced me 
to use this barrier. 

" When did you come to town ?" asked Lord 
Henry. 

" I only arrived an hour ago," was the reply. 

" I came late last night, and am on my way 
to Avonmore's." 

" Have you heard that our pretty friend, 
Arabella Wilton, is going to be married? and 
to Lyster too ?" 

'-^ Est il possible?" 

" Yes, positively to Lyster, whom we have 
heard her abuse and ridicule a thousand times." 

I felt my ears begin to tingle, and verified the 
truth of the old proverb, " Listeners never hear 
good of themselves." 

" By the by, you were a little smitten there, 
and at one time I began to think you had serious 
intentions, as they call it — Eh ! Sir John ?" 

" Why, so Arabella took it into her wise 
head to fancy too ; but, I was not quite so young 
as all that. No, no, Arabella is a devilish nice 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 63 

girl to flirt with ; but, the last, the very last, I 
would think of as a wife." 

" Now, there I differ from you ; for, she is 
precisely the sort of person I should think of as 
a wife" 

" You don't say so ? 

" Yes, I do ; but then, it must be as the 
wife of another; and, when she is so, I intend 
to be — one of her most assiduous admirers." 

I felt my blood boil with indignation ; and was 
on the point of discovering my proximity to the 
speakers, when Sir John resumed. 

" What a flat Lyster must be, to be gulled 
into marrying her. I never thought they could 
have succeeded in deceiving him to such an 
extent, though I saw they were playing us off" 
against the poor devil." 

" Oh ! by Jove, so did I too, and if our sup- 
posed matrimonial projects led to his real one, I 
don't regret it, for poor Arabella's sake ; for she 
was most impatient to change her name." 

" Only think of the aunt's sending me Lyster's 
letter of proposal." 



64 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

" Capital, capital, the plot thickens ; for, she 
also sent it to me." 
" You don't say so ?" 

" I swear she did ; and what is more, I can 
give you chapter and verse; for Lyster was so 
matter-of-fact in detailing his readiness to make 
liberal settlements, and liberal they certainly 
were, that I remember nearly the words of his 
letter to Madame la tante" 

" And what reason did the old she fox assign 
for consulting you on the subject ?" 

" The old one, to be sure ; of considering me 
as a friend to the family." 

" Exactly the same reason she gave for con- 
sulting me." 

" She stated to me that Arabella had a posi- 
tive dislike to Mr. Lyster; and she feared (mark 
the cunning of the old woman) that this dislike 
to so unexceptionable a parti originated in her 
having a preference elsewhere ; and therefore she 
had determined to ask my opinion whether she 
ought to influence her niece to accept Lyster." 
" In short, a round about way of soliciting 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 65 

you to propose for Arabella yourself. The exact 
sense of her letter to me." 

" I dare be sworn they were fac-similes. Ma- 
dame la tante added, that her niece was by no 
means committed with Mr. Lyster ; for, that she 
had been so guarded when he asked her (on 
observing her coldness) if his proposal was dis- 
agreeable to her, as merely to repeat, with a 
shudder, the word he had uttered — disagreeable." 

Well did I recollect this circumstance, trifling 
as it was ; and overpowering were the sensations 
of anger and mortified vanity that oppressed me 
on recalling it to memory ! 

" Well," resumed Lord Henry, " so you 
wrote, as did I, to advise by all means that Mr. 
Lyster should be accepted ?" 

" Yes, precisely; for I thought it the most 
prudent advice from ' a friend of the family' — 
ha ! ha ! ha ! — for the soul of me I can't help 
laughing !" 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! nor I neither. Both of us 
consulted, and from the same motive." 



66 THE CONFESSIONS OP 

" Its capital, and worthy of the old lady, who 
has as much cunning, and as little heart, as any 
dowager in the purlieus of St. James's." 

" I'll lay an even wager that we twain were 
not the only single men consulted on the oc- 
casion." 

" For my part, I should not wonder if the 
letters had been circular : ha ! ha !" 

" And how simple Lyster must be ; for while 
the aunt was sending round his proposal to all 
the admirers of her niece, he must have been 
impatiently waiting for her answer." 

"Luckless devil! I pity him;" (Oh! how I 
writhed !) "he has been atrociously taken in : yet 
I am glad that poor Arabella has at last secured 
a good establishment; for, I confess, I have a 
faiblesse for her. Indeed, to say the truth, I 
should have been ungrateful if I had not ; for I 
believe — in fact, I have reason to know, that the 
preference to which the old aunt alluded, had 
more truth in it than she imagined." 

" So / suspect, too ; for, without vanity, I may 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 67 

own, that I believe the poor girl had a penchant 
for your humble servant." 

" For you?" 

" Yes, for me. Is there anything so very ex- 
traordinary in her liking me, that you look so 
surprised and incredulous?" 

" Why, yes, there is something devilishly ex- 
traordinary; for if I might credit Arabella's men 
assertion, her penchant was quite in a different 
quarter." 

" You don't mean to say it was for you ? " 

" And what if I did ? Is there anything 
more astonishing in her feeling a preference for 
me, than for you ? " 

" / merely suppose that she could not have a 
penchant for us both at the same time; and I 
have had reason, and very satisfactory I'eason 
too, to be satisfied that she liked me." 

" And /can swear that I have heard her ridi- 
cule you, in your absence, until I have been com- 
pelled to take your part ; though she often made 
me laugh, the dear creature did it so cleverly. 



68 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Ha ! ha ! ha ! the recollection makes me laugh 
even now." 

" And / have heard her attack you with such 
acrimony that even an enemy must have allowed 
that her portrait .of you was caricatured; and 
yet, there was so much drollery in her manner of 
showing you up, that it was impossble to resist 
laughing. Ha ! ha ! ha ! " 

" Lord Henr)', I beg to inform you that I 
allow no man to laugh at my expense." 

" Peraiit me to tell you, Sir John, that I ask 
no man's permission to laugh when I am so dis- 
posed." 

" Am I to consider that you mean to be per- 
sonal?" 

" You are perfectly at liberty to consider what 
you please." 

" My friend shall call on you to-morrow 
morning, to name a place for our meeting." 

" I shall be quite ready to receive him." 

And exit Lord Henry, followed, in a few 
minutes, by Sir John. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN'. 69 

" And SO," thought I, " here are two vain fools 
about to try to blow each other's brains out for 
a heartless coquette; and a third, perhaps the 
gi'eatest fool of the three, was on the point of 
making her his Avife. What an escape have I 
had ! No, no, never will I ntiarry her. She 
may bring an action against me for breach of 
promise — and she or her aunt are quite capable 
of such a proceeding — but be united to her I 
never will. Ridicule and abuse me^ indeed ! 
Oh, the hj^ocrite ! And to think of all the 
tender speeches and loving insinuations she has 
laAnshed on me; the delicate flattery and im- 
phed deference to my opinions ! Oh ! woman ! 
woman ! all that has ever been said, written, 
or imagined against you, is not half severe 
enough. You are all alike, worthless and de- 
signing." 

As I finished this wise and temperate soliloquy, 
writhing under the wounds inflicted on my amour 
2)ropre, the gentle image of my lost Louisa seemed 
to reproach me for this unmanly satire against 



70 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

her sex. A thousand proofs of her angelic purity 
and sweet simphcity of character, arose to my 
memory ; and I felt ashamed of my injustice in. 
thus heaping obloquy on a whole sex merely be- 
cause / had possessed so little discrimination as 
to have chosen one of the most unworthy of it. 

I passed a sleepless night, yet I was relieved 
by thinking I was now saved from becoming the 
husband of Arabella. I felt rebuked when I 
recollected how frequently the artful syren had 
excited my merriment by her ridicule and abuse 
of her other admirers. We had all been, as it 
now appeared, laughing at each other, while she 
had been mocking us en masse; but, like vain 
blockheads as we were, we never suspected that 
we were each in turn alike the object of her 
ridicule : she having had the perception to dis- 
cover, that her most certain mode of acquiring 
an influence over the minds of her admirers, 
was to gratify their vanity by abusingj their com- 
petitors. 

I set out, at an unusually early hour, for 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 71 

Richmond, determined to come to an explana- 
tion with both aunt and niece ; and, shall I own 
it, anticipating, with a childish pleasure, their 
rage and disappointment at my breaking off the 
marriage. On arriving at the villa, I was in- 
formed that Mrs. Spencer had not yet left her 
chamber, and that Miss Wilton was in the gar- 
den. To the garden then I hied me, anxious 
to overwhelm her with the sarcastic reproaches 
I had conned over in ray mind. 

While advancing along a gravel walk, divided 
by a hedge from a sequestered lane, I heard 
the neighing and tramping of a horse ; and, on 
looking over the hedge discovered the lean 
steed on which I had so frequently encountered 
the good-looking Unknown on the road to 
Richmond. The poor animal was voraciously 
devouring the leaves of the hedge, his bridle 
being fastened to the stem of an old tree. A 
vague notion that the owner, who could not 
be far off, was now holding a parley with lUy 
deceitful mistress, instantly occurred to me, and 



72 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

seemed to account for his frequent visits to 
Richmond. I moved on, with stealthy steps, 
towards a small pavilion at the far end of the 
garden, where I correctly concluded Arabella 
to be; and whence, I soon heard the sound of 
voices, as I concealed myself beneath the spread- 
ing branches of a large laurestinas, close to the 
window. I will not attempt to defend my listen- 
ing, because I admit the action to be on all oc- 
casions indefensible ; but the impulse to it was 
irresistible. 

" Is it not enough," exclaimed Arabella, " that 
I am compelled to marry a man who is hateful 
to me, while my whole soul is devoted to you, 
but that you thus torment me with your ill- 
founded jealousy." 

" How can I refrain from being jealous," was 
the rejoinder, " when I know that you will soon 
be another's ? Oh, Arabella ! if I were indeed 
convinced that you hated ^im, I should be less 
wretched." 

" How amiable and unselfish ! " thought I 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 73 

" He wishes the woman he professes to love, to 
be that most miserable of human beings, the wife 
of a man who is hateful to her, that he, forsooth, 
may be less unhappy; and he has the un- 
blushing effi'onteiy to avow the detestable sen- 
timent." 

" How can you doubt my hating him ? " asked 
my syren, in a wheedhng tone, " Can you look 
at him, and then regard yourself in a mirror, 
without being convinced, that no one who has 
eyes to see, or a heart to feel, could ever be- 
hold the one without chsgust, or the other with- 
out admiration?" 

" Oh, the cockatrice ! " thought I ; " and this 
after all the flatteries she poured into my too 
credulous ear." 

Listeners beware, for ye are doomed never 
to hear good of yourselves. So certain is the 
crime of listening to carry its own punishment, 
that there is no positive prohibition against it: 
we are commanded not to commit other sins, 

£ 



74 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

but this one draws down its own correction, and 
wo be to him who infringes it. 

The speech of Arabella, which, I acknow- 
ledge, enraged me exceedingly, had a most 
soothing effect on my rival ; for, I heard sundry 
kisses bestowed, as I hope, for propriety's sake, 
on the hand of the fair flatterer. 

" Yes," resumed she, " Lyster is a perfect 
fright, and so gauche, that positively he can 
neither sit, stand, nor walk, like anybody else." 

Oh ! the traiteress ! how often had she com- 
mended my air degage, and the manly grace, as 
she styled it, of my movements. After this, 
who ought ever again to believe in the honied 
adulation of a woman ? 

" Now, I must disagree with you, Arabella," 
replied my rival (and I felt a sudden liking to 
him as I listened), " Lyster is a devilish good- 
looking fellow (I thought as much) ; one whom 
any woman whose affections were not previously 
engaged, might fancy." 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 75 

" Let US not talk or think of him, I entreat 
you," said Arabella ; " it is quite punishment 
enough for me to be obliged to see and hear him 
half the day, without your occupying the short 
time we are together in a conversation respect- 
ing a person so wholly uninteresting. Have I 
not refused Lord Henry and Sir John, to please 
you? yet you will not be content, do what I 
wiU." 

" Oh, Arabella ! how can you expect me to 
be otherwise than discontented, than wretched, 
when I reflect that your destiny depends not on 
me, and that another will be the master of your 
fate. He may be harsh, unkind; and /, who 
love, who adore you, cannot shield you from 
many hours of recrimination, when he discovers, 
and discover he must, that in wedding him you 
gave not your heart with your hand." 

" Oh ! leave all that to me to manage," said 
the crafty creature. " He is so vain and so bete, 
that it requires no artifice on my part to make 
him believe that I married him from motives of 

e2 



76 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

pure preference. He is persuaded of it: for 
what will not vanity like his believe?" 

" By flattery ; yes, by deception and flattery — 
I see it all, Arabella — you have acquired an em- 
pire over Lyster by that well-known road to a 
man's heart, the making him believe that you 
love him. Had you loved me you would not, 
you could not, have been guilty of this deception ; 
and in thus deceiving him you have," (and the 
poor young man's voice trembled with emotion) 
" wounded me to the soul." 

" You really are the most wrong-headed per- 
son in the world," said his deceitful companion. 
" Here am I, ready to sacrifice myself to a rich 
marriage, to save you^ Edward, from a poor one ; 
for, to marry a portionless girl like me would be 
your ruin, and I love you too well, ungrateful as 
you are, to bring this misery upon you. When 
you come as a visitor to my house, and see me 
in the possession of comforts and luxuries you 
could not give me, you will rejoice in the pru- 
dence, ay, and generosity too, that gave me 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 77 

courage to save you from a poor and wretched 
home, for wretched all poverty-stricken homes 
must be." 

« And could you think my affection so light, 
Arabella," replied her lover, impatiently, " as to 
believe that I could go to his house and see him 
in possession of the only woman I ever loved ^ 
No ! I am neither heartless nor philosophical 
enough to bear this. Such a position would 
drive me mad." 

« Then, what am I to think, what am I to 
make of you?" 

" Not a villain ! a mean, base villain, who be- 
trays hospitality, and consents that the woman he 
loves shall pursue a conduct at once the most vile, 
deceitful, and dishonourable ! " and he positively 
wept. His passionate grief seemed to touch even 
the marble heart of his callous mistress ; for, she 
gently asked him, why he had ever appeared to 
agree to her wedding another. 

" Can you ask me ? " replied he. " I knew 
you to be fond of luxury and display, which. 



78 THE CONFESSIONS OP 

alas ! my limited fortune could never bestow. I 
feared, trembled at the idea of beholding you 
pining for the enjoyments /could not afford; 
and it seemed to me less wretched to know you 
in the full possession of them with another, than 
lamenting their privation with me. It was for 
you^ Arabella, conscious as you are how fondly, 
how madly, I dote on you, to offer to share my 
poverty, and not for me to compel you to it. 
Had you really loved me, this course you would 
have pursued." 

" But, I tell you, I do love you ; and will 
prove my truth by following your wishes, if you 
will but express them," said Arabella, melted by 
his grief and tenderness. 

" If you really do love me, why may not a 
modest competence content you ? I would have 
you break off this hateful marriage, and accept 
love in a cottage with me. My grandmother 
would soon forgive our stolen union, for she 
likes me so well that she would quickly learn to 
like her who made my happiness. But, alas ! 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 79 

even she, good and indulgent as she is, has often 
told me that you were as little disposed to marry 
a poor man, as your aunt could be to give you 
to such a husband." 

« It was vei7 uncivil of your grandmother to 
say so, and still more so of you to repeat it. 
« But, bless me (touching a repeater I had given 
her a few days before), how late it is ! Lyster will 
be here almost immediately ; and if he should 
find you" 

« Your marriage with him would be broken 
off. Yes, I will leave you, Arabella; and meet 
this happy man whose wealth has won you from 
me. Oh ! how I have loathed his face of con- 
tentment, as I have passed him on the road and 
thought that he was privileged to approach you ; 
while I must seek you, by stealth, and leave 
you to make room for him. I can bear this 
no longer, Arabella; you see me now for the 
last time, unless you accept me for your hus- 
band." 

And, so saying, he rushed from her presence, 



80 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

mounted his lean steed, and was heard galloping 
along with a speed that indicated the troubled 
state of his mind. 

" Poor Edward !" exclaimed Arabella, " heigh 
ho ! I wish he were rich, for I do like him better 
than I ever liked any one else. And lie, too, is 
the only one of all my admirers who loves me 
for myself; the rest but love me for my flattery. 
Lord Henry, Sir John, ay, even this dolt who is 
about to wed me, all have been fascinated, not 
by my beauty (and for this I loathed them), but 
by my flattery. By this, I have charmed, by this 
I have won a husband. Poor Edward, it was 
not so with him ; but love in a cottage — I hate 
cottages — and then (in a few years) to see it 
filled with a set of little troublesome brats, and 
hear them screaming for bread and butter ! No, 
no, these hands (looking at them) were never 
fonned to cut bread and butter, like Werter's 
Lolotte ; or to make pinafores, like good Mrs. 
Herbert, the wife of the half-pay captain, in the 
little cottage down the lane." 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 81 

" And yet they might be worse employed, fair 
lady," exclaimed I, vaulting into the room. 

Arabella uttered a faint shriek, turned to a 
death-like paleness, and then became suffused 
with the crimson blushes of shame. 

" I have witnessed your stolen interview with 
my favoured rival; rival no longer, for here I 
resign all pretensions to your hand." 

She attempted to utter some defence, but I 
was not in a humour to listen to what lengths 
her duplicity and desire for a rich husband might 
lead her ; so, sans ceremonie, I interrupted her by 
saying, that what I had witnessed and heard, had 
produced no change in my previously formed 
I'esolution of breaking off the marriage. She 
sank into a chair; and even I pitied her con- 
fusion and chagrin, until I recollected her com- 
ments on my " gauclierie" and the polite epithet 
of " a perfect fright," with which she had only a 
few minutes before honoured me. I can now smile 
at the mortification my vanity then suffered ; but, 
■at the time, it was no laughing matter with me. 

e3 



6'2 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

I left Arabella to her meditations, which, I 
dare be sworn, were none of the most agreeable ; 
and returned to the house to seek an interview 
with her aunt. That sapient lady met me, as 
Was her wont, with smiles on her lips, and soft 
Words falling from them. 

" Look here, dear Mr. Lyster," said she, 
holding out an ecrin towards me, " did you ever 
see anything so beautiful as these rubies set in 
diamonds? Are they not the very things for 
our beloved Arabella? How well they would 
show in her dark hair ; and how perfectly they 
would suit the rich, warm tint of her cheeks and 
lips. None but brilliant brunettes should ever 
wear rubies. Are you not of my opinion ; and 
do you not think that this parure seems made 
for our sweet Arabella ?" 

I mastered myself sufficiently to assent with 
calmness to her observations, when she imme- 
diately resumed : " Oh, I knew you would agree 
with me, our tastes are so exactly alike. I was 
sure, my dear Mr. Lyster, you would at once 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 83 

select this in preference to emeralds or sapphires, 
which suit fade^ blonde beauties better ; but for 
our sparkling Arabella, rubies and diamonds 
are the thing. Yet, how grave you look ; — bless 
me ! what is the matter ? Perhaps, after all, you 
do not like rubies and diamonds; and in that 
case, though [entre nous) I knoiv that our darling 
Arabella dotes on them, I am sure she would 
prefer having only the ornaments which yoic 
like, for she is the most tractable creature in the 
world, as you must have observed. So, confess 
the truth, you do Jiot admire this parure ?" 

" Why, the truth is," said I, taking a spiteful 
pleasure in raising her expectations, that her 
disappointment might be the greater, " I yester- 
day bought at RuncUe and Brydges', a parure of 
rubies and diamonds more than twice the size of 
the one before me, and set in the best taste" — 
alluding to the very purchase for which I had 
been blaming myself, when I overheard the dia- 
logue between Lord Henry and Sir John. 

" Oh ! you dear, kind, generous creature. 



84 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

how good of you ! How delighted our sweet 
Arabella will be. Have you brought it with 
you ? I am positively dying with impatience to 
see it." 

" Then, I fear, madam," replied I, with 
sternness, " that your curiosity will never be 
gratified." 

" Why, what a strange humour you are in, 
my dear Mr. Lyster — nephew, I was going to 
call you ; but I shan't give you that affectionate 
appellation while you are so odd and so cross. 
And why am I not to see them, pray ? Surely 
you do not intend to prevent my associating with 
my sweet child when she becomes your wife ? 
No, you never could be so cruel." And the old 
hypocrite laid her hand on my arm in her most 
fawning manner. 

" I have no intention, madam, of separating 
two persons who seem so peculiarly formed for 
each other." 

" Good creature ! How kind of you, dear Mr. 
Lyster; how happy you have made me; I felt 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 85 

SO ^\Tetched at the thoughts of our sweet Ara- 
bella's being taken from me, for I have ever 
looked on her as if she were my own child. How 
considerate of you not to separate us. I am sure 
she will be delighted ; and / shall be the happiest 
person in the world to give up the cares and 
trouble of an establishment of my owni, which, 
at my advanced age, and deprived of Arabella, 
would be insupportable. Believe me, most cheer- 
fully, nay, gladly, shall I avail myself of your 
kind offer, and fix myself with you, and my 
affectionate child." 

The old lady was so delighted at the thought 
of this plan, that she made more than one attempt 
to embrace her dear nephew, as she now called 
me, and it was some minutes before I could 
silence her joyful loquacity ; during which time, 
I will candidly own, I had a malicious pleasure 
in anticipating the bitter disappointment that 
awaited her. Wlien, at length, she had exhausted 
her ejaculations of delight, I thus sternly ad- 
dressed her: — 

" When I declared my intention, madam, of 



86 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

not separating you and your niece, I did not 
mean to ask you to become a member of my 
family. I simply meant to state that I did not 
intend depriving you of the advantage of her 
society, as I have determined on not marrying 
her." 

" Good heavens ! what do I hear ?" exclaimed 
Mrs. Spencer. " Wliat do you, what can you 
mean, Mr. Lyster ? It is cruel thus to tiy my 
feelings; you have quite shocked me; I — I — 
am far from well." 

And her changeful hue denoted the truth of 
the assertion. 

" Let it suffice to say, madam, that I last 
evening heard Lord Henry and Sir John de- 
clare the extraordinary confidence you had re- 
posed in them ; that you had not only sent to 
each, my letter of proposal to your niece, but 
betrayed to them her more than indifference 
towards me, and the very words in which she 
expressed herself, when I made her the offer oi 
my hand." 

" How base, how unworthy of Lord Henry 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 87 

and Sir John," said Mrs. Spencer, forgetting all 
her usual craft, in the surprise and irritation 
caused by this infonnation. " Never was there 
such shameful conduct." 

" You are right, madam," replied I, " the 
conduct practised on this occasion has been in- 
deed shameful ; luckily for me, the discovery of 
it has not been too late." 

" If you are so dishonourable as not to fulfil 
your engagement," said the old lady, her cheeks 
glowing with anger, and her eyes flashing fury, 
" be assured that I will instruct my lawyer to 
commence proceedings against you, for a breach 
of promise of marriage ; for, I have no notion of 
letting my injured niece sit quietly down, a vic- 
tim to such monstrous conduct." 

" I leave you, madam," replied I, " to pursue 
whatever plan you deem most fitting, to redress 
her grievances, and blazon forth to the world, 
your own delicate part in the Comedy of Errors ; 
the denouement of which is not precisely what 
you could have wished. However, as comedies 



88 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

should always end in a marriage, let me advise you 
to seek a substitute for your humble servant." 

Then, bowing low to my intended aunt, I left 
her presence for ever : and returned to London 
with a sense of redeemed freedom that gave a 
lightness to my spirits to which they had been a 
stranger, ever since the ill-omened hour of my 
proposal to Arabella. 

Of all the presents that had found their way 
to the villa, and they were not, " like angel visits^ 
few, and far between," but many and costly, not 
one, except my portrait, was ever returned. I 
retained that of Arabella; not out of love, heaven 
knows, but because I wished to preserve a me- 
mento of the folly of being caught by mere 
beauty; and as it had cost me a considerable 
sum, I thought myself pri\aleged to keep it, as a 
specimen of art. 

Lord Henry and Sir John fought a duel, the 
day after their altercation at the Club, in which 
the first was mortally wounded; and the latter 
consequently compelled to fly to the Continent. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 89 

In a week from the period of my last interview 
with Arabella, and her aunt, the newspapers 
were filled with accounts of the elopement of the 
beautiful and fashionable Miss Wilton with Lieu- 
tenant Rodney of the Guards. It was stated 
that the young lady had been on the eve of mar- 
riage with the rich Mr. L. of L. Park, but that 
Cupid had triumphed over Plutus ; and the dis- 
interested beauty had preferred love in a cottage 
with Lieut. Rodney, to sharing the immense 
wealth of her rejected suitor, who was said to 
wear the willow with all due sorrow. 

The grandmother of the new Benedick showed 
to half a dozen of her most intimate friends, the 
letter written by him to announce to her, that 
his " adored Arabella had broken through all 
her engagements with Mr. Lyster, the inch Mr. 
Lyster, for him." The half dozen intimate 
friends repeated it, as in duty bound, to half a 
hundred of their intimate friends, who sent it 
forth to the world with all the additions that the 
imagination of each could suggest. Arabella 



90 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

was pitied, praised, or blamed, by turns ; and I 
was represented as a heartless brute, who, know- 
ing that her affections were engaged to another, 
had, aided by her mercenary aunt, tried to force 
this model of disinterested love and constancy 
into a marriage. 

Two years after her union, Arabella eloped 
with a young nobleman remarkable for weak 
intellect and large fortune ; leaving her betrayed 
husband deeply embarrassed by her extrava- 
gance, and with an infant daughter to bear 
through life, the stigma entailed on her by a 
mother's guilt. Subsequently to the event, I had 
it in ray power to render a signal service to 
Mr. Rodney ; and it gratified me to do so, as I 
had never forgotten his good-natured defence of 
my person against the attack of his hypocritical 
wife. This unprincipled woman was soon de- 
serted by her lover for some fairer face; and 
having dragged on a miserable existence of sin 
and shame for a few years, died unmoumed, in 
poverty and disgrace. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 91 



MY THIRD LOVE. 



The treatment I had experienced from the 
faithless Arabella influenced my conduct long 
after I had ceased to remember her, and its 
effects were baleful. Disgusted with the thoughts 
of marriage, I turned my attention to flirtations 
with married women, that most demoralizing of 
all fashionable follies, if what so frequently leads 
to crimes of a deep die may be so lightly named ; 
and, strange to say, rarely were my attentions 
repulsed, even by those who would have shud- 
dered at vice, could they have beheld it devoid 
of the blandishments with which sophistry, false 
sentiment, and meretricious refinement delight 
to adorn it. No, women, whose principles might 
successfully combat the assaults of vicious pas- 



92 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

sion, too frequently, by the levity with which 
they permit, if not encourage flirtations, lead 
the world to fonn the most injurious conclu- 
sions; and while their reputations are the sport 
of scandal, console themselves with the futile 
reasoning, that, as they have not incurred actual 
guilt, they have nought with which they need 
to reproach themselves. 

This species of folly is unknown on the Con- 
tinent, v.'here, though the women are much less 
virtuous than our own, a greater degree of ex- 
ternal decorum, and respect for appearances, 
exists. They, while too frequently violating vir- 
tue, pay it the homage of assuming its outward 
decencies; a species of artifice which the great 
majority of our females, satisfied with not out- 
raging the reality, totally disregard, 

I know this assertion, as to the superior ap- 
pearance of outward decorum in continental 
ladies, will be cavilled at ; but, the cavillers will 
be confined to those who have not had personal 
opportunities of judging, and I beg it may be 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 93 

remembered, I am referring to the semblance, 
and not to the reahty of virtue. 

Will my readers forgive this digression? I 
warned them, at the commencement of my con- 
fessions, that I was given to digress ; and, alas ! 
age does not diminish this failing. The truth 
is, I have much to say of all I saw and expe- 
rienced during the interval of my breaking off 
with Arabella, and forming another attachment. 
Yet, as the confession might compromise others, 
never shall the veil, that covers the errors of 
those who smiled on me, be removed by my 
hand: and never shall the grand-daughters of 
the present generation, have the blush of shame 
brought to their cheeks by my recital of the 
failings of their fair but frail grandmothers, 
many of whom resembled the spear of Achilles, 
which if it m.ade wounds, was ready to heal them. 

Let my readers then imagine, that two years 
were passed in the vortex of fashion ; that I was 
by turns, a victim, or a dupe, to the passions 
that mislead men in that maze of folly; and 



94 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

that, such were its debasing effects, I learned to 
view vice without disgust, and to consider virtue, 
a phantom. 

It was at this period, that I first encountered 
the beautiful Lady Mary Vernon. Ay, there is 
her portrait ; yet, exquisitely lovely as it is, how 
far short does it fall of the original, when I first 
beheld her. There are her soft, melancholy eyes, 
that seemed as if they were only made to look at 
the heavens, so sublime, yet chastened, is their 
expression. There is her lofty and expansive 
forehead; never had intellect a fairer throne; 
and those gently curved raven brows, that lent 
such a character of pensiveness to her face. How 
beautiful was the almost transparent paleness of 
her cheek, the paleness of high thought, not 
disease. Yes, Lady Mary's was a countenance, 
once seen never to be forgotten : it was the face 
we picture to ourselves of a saint, rather than 
that of an angel, for it denoted that she had 
known suffering and sorrow; though purity 
shone so conspicuously in its every lineament. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 95 

that no one could behold her, without a con- 
viction that hers was a spotless mind. 

It wEis at the Duchess of D 's that I first 

met her ; and, though accustomed to see beauty 
in all its forms, hers made such an impression 
on me, that I could scarcely withdraw my eyes 
from her face. Lady C. asked and obtained 
permission to present me; and I approached 
her internally hoping, with my accustomed 
vanity, that I might soon discover the art of 
thawing the frozen coldness of her looks. Her 
voice was low, yet distinct and harmonious, be- 
yond any voice I had ever heard; and who is 
insensible to this powerful attraction in a female ? 
an attraction that frequently atones for the want 
of all others. She looked full in the face of the 
person she addressed, with an expression of such 
calmness and purity, that the most reckless liber- 
tine could not have hazarded a light word, or 
indulged a gross thought, in her presence. The 
men approached her with an air of reverential 
deference: and even the women, the most re- 



96 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

markable for their levity, assumed a decorous 
reserve, as if rebuked by the dignified modesty 
of her demeanour. Such was the respect with 
which she soon inspired me, that I felt discom- 
posed at seeing some of my female acquaintances, 
whose purity I had reason to doubt, address her ; 
it seemed to me as if the very atmosphere she 
breathed, ought not to have been profaned by 
their presence. 

I should have judged her manner to me as 
being cold and reserved, beyond even the ge- 
neral reserve adopted towards a stranger, had I 
not observed that it was equally so to all the 
other men who addressed her; except a cer- 
tain old white haired admiral, whose visage re- 
sembled a frosted saffron cake, to whom she 
extended her hand, with a cordiality that formed 
a striking contrast to her coldness towards all 
the others of his sex. My female acquaintances 
were not slow at discovering the profound ad- 
miration with which Lady Mary inspired me; 
and many and bitter were the sarcasms with 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 9? 

which they commented on it. One said, that 
she was a tiresome prude, who threw a con- 
straint over every circle into which she came; 
another observed, that it was no wonder her 
husband avoided her, for she was too good to 
be agreeable; and a third remarked, that, not- 
withstanding her extreme prudery and frigidity, 
she did not dislike admiration. IMy respect for 
the ladies, who thus censured Lady Mary, had 
long vanished; but now, I positively detested 
them. 

Anxious to discover something of the history 
of my idol, for, even already, she was enshrined 
as such in my heart, I asked a dowager of my 
acquaintance, not more esteemed for her frank- 
ness, though it sometimes degenerated into brus- 
querie^ than beloved for her goodness of heart, 
who was Lady Mary ; adding, that it was strange 
I had never heard of her before. 

" It would have been more sti'ange if you 
had," replied she, " for Lady Mary Vernon is 
not a woman who is talked about. Nothing can 

F 



98 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

be said of her, except that her mind and Kfe are 
as faultless as her beauty; and such women are 
seldom much discussed in society. She is the 
daughter of the Duke of A., and the wife of 
Mr. Vernon, one of the richest commoners in 
England." 

" He may well be considered an object of 
envy in possessing such a wife," said I. 

" So thinks not he" resumed the dowager; 
" at least, if we may judge by his conduct; for, 
he totally neglects this lovely creature, and be- 
stows all his time, and, scandalous people say, 
most of his money too, on a certain lady, whose 
bad conduct is no longer apocryphal, though 
she is still tolerated in society. But Mr. Ver- 
non," continued the old lady, " resembles most 
of you men, who are more prone to admire a 
meretricious beauty, with whom you are per- 
fectly at your ease, than a woman of refinement 
and dignified manners ; who neither flatters your 
>'anity by her words, nor permits you to mislead 
the world into false conclusions by her actions. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 99 

Half your sex run after a woman, not because 
you individually admire her, but because it gra- 
tifies your inordinate amour propre^ to appear 
preferred by one, who has a train of adorers; 
though this very circumstance ought to create 
any sentiment but admiration, as it clearly im- 
plies an unpardonable levity, if no worse, on 
the part of the lady. See Mrs. Mortimer, the 
woman Mr. Vernon prefers to his wife, — for the 
fact is so well known, and the lady takes so little 
pains to disguise it, that I may name her with- 
out being considered censorious, — well, see this 
woman enter a ball-room, or a rout, and she 
will excite what is called a sensation. Men will 
crowd round and follow her, the herd will believe 
that this public homage is a proof of her charms, 
a belief in which the poor weak, vain, woman 
will also indulge; while Lady Mary Vernon, 
whose beauty admits not of a doubt, is neither 
tumultuously surrounded nor ostentatiously fol- 
lowed by your sex, for the veiy best reason, 
no one dare presume to affect familiarity with 

F 2 



100 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

her. Yet many of you, and probably her foolish 
husband amongst the number, conclude that the 
followed lady must be the more captivating, 
and urged by vanity, increase the crowd of her 
admirers." 

I endeavoured to deprecate the severity of 
the dowager against my sex; and then asked, 
how long Lady Mary had been married, and if 
hers had been what is called a love match. 

" Yes, quite a love match on both sides ; and 
it is said that, though her husband's attachment 
survived not the first year of their union, hers 
still exists in all its pristine force." 

" How strange," replied I, " that he could 
cease to love a woman, whose personal attrac- 
tions are, as your ladyship affirms, nearly equalled 
by her mental ones." 

" Not at all strange," she rejoined, " if one 
reflects on the selfishness, the frivolity, and the 
imbecility of the generality of our men of fashion. 
Attracted by the beauty of a woman, as they are 
by that of a horse, a picture, a statue, or any 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 101 

other object, the possession of which is hkely 
to excite the envy of their acquaintances, they 
eagerly seek to attain it. The novelty worn off, 
what remains? Incapable of appreciating the 
mental qualifications of their waves, or of feeling 
the thousand nameless charms that exist in the 
sacred union of congenial sentiments, and the 
endearing ties of habit, which in well regulated 
minds and warm hearts, ' render the wife dearer 
than the bride ; ' the heartless voluptuary of mo- 
dem days turns from the beauty he has won, to 
seek, not a fairer, but a newer, face ; leaving the 
disappointed, and often wretched wife, to weep 
over his neglect, or to resent it to her own un- 
doing. His club, the gaming table, Newmarket, 
and field sports, occupy his time so much, as to 
leave little, if any of it, to bestow on her, he had 
chosen, ' for better and for worse, in sickness 
and in health : ' and she has reason to be thank- 
ful if, in addition to neglect, he does not give 
her the mortification of seeing or liearimj of 
his preference for another, that other, too 



1^02 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

frequently, one of the most worthless of her 
sex." 

" Is Lady Mary Vemon aware of her hus- 
band's liaison with Mrs. Mortimer?" asked I. 

" How could she remain ignorant of it;" re- 
plied the brusque dowager, " with half a hun- 
dred kind friends to irritate her lacerated heart 
by their insulting pity; or to pique her pride 
by unavailing attempts to comfort her. In all 
the trials of life, but more especially in trials of 
the heart, be assured that there is nothing like 
a friend for envenoming the wounds. I am an 
old woman, Mr. Lyster, have seen much, per- 
haps too much, of the world, and its knowledge 
has convinced me, that no persons so closely re- 
semble enemies as friends ; the only difference be- 
tween them is, that the Jirst injure without any 
attempt to impose on you by an assumption of 
good will ; while the second inflict a deeper in- 
jury, professing, like the surgeon who probes his 
patient's wound, that it is for his good. 

" No, poor Lady Mary has too maxij friends, 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 103 

to be left in blissful ignorance of the evil doings 
of her husband. — Anonymous letters, 'prating 
of his whereabouts,' were poured in on her; 
she was advised by one friend to separate from 
him; by another, to. divorce him; and by all, 
to adopt some decided line of conduct that 
would make him ashamed of himself. This last 
advice she has, / think, judiciously followed; 
while they partly in disgust at her forbearance, 
and still more at her rejection of their in- 
terference, rail at her want of spirit, shrug 
their shoulders, shake their heads, and now 
suffer her to pursue her own course without 
further opposition, saying, that for so tame spi- 
rited a woman there is nothing to be done." 

" What then is the course that she has 
adopted?" inquired I. 

" The only course a sensible woman, who 
loves, and wishes to reclaim her husband, can 
adopt," answered the dowager. " She treats 
him with invariable gentleness; makes him no 
reproaches, hides her tears, and welcomes him 
to his home, whenever he returns to it." 



104 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

How well did this account of her conduct 
accord with the mild and beautiful countenance 
of Lady Mary ! I almost loved my loquacious 
dowager for being able to appreciate her, and 
listened with a breathless interest to every word 
that fell from her lips. 

" There, there, just entering the room, is 
Mr. Vernon," resumed Lady Glanmire ; " speak 
of the evil one, and he appears. — How self-satis- 
fied he looks ; it positively makes me angiy to 
see him !" 

My eyes followed the direction pointed out 
by Lady G., and encountered a singularly hand- 
some man. I turned to observe Lady Mary, 
whose cheeks assumed as deep a blush on seeing 
him, as probably his first declaration of love to 
her had elicited. He either did not, or would 
not observe her ; at least, he betrayed no symp- 
tom of recognition, but seemed sedulously search- 
ing for some more attractive object. In a few 
minutes his countenance brightened, and he 
approached the celebrated Mrs. Mortimer. I 
looked again at Lady Mary, and never shall I 



AN feLDERLY GENTLEMAN. 105 

forget the expression of her face. It had be- 
come of a marble paleness; her brows were 
contracted, as if some violent, but subdued 
pang, tortured her; and her lips were com- 
pressed, as if to restrain the utterance of her 
anguish. I expected to see her faint; but I 
knew not then what woman can bear; I knew 
not that fine union of exquisite sensibility and 
modesty, which calls up fortitude to guard both 
from exposure to the crowd. Lady Mary looked 
the very personification of a martyr, about to 
suffer in support of her faith, as she slowly 
retired from the room, to avoid seeing her hus- 
band lavish on another, those attentions which 
he had long ceased to bestow on her. How I 
hated him at the moment ! and how I despised 
the worthless woman, who seemed to occupy all 
his thoughts. Heavens ! what a contrast, did 
her meretricious beauty, and the coarse gaiety 
of her manner, present to the classical loveliness, 
and dignified demeanour of Lady Mary ! 

I sauntered up towards the sofa, on which 

f3 



106 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Mrs. Mortimer and her lover had seated them- 
selves, evidently as little restrained in their flir- 
tation, by the presence of the crowd around 
them, as if they had been alone. For a flirta- 
tion, however, there is certainly no place hke a 
crowded rout. Oh ! the things I have seen and 
heard therein, without any one appearing either 
surprised or shocked ! ! Mrs. Mortimer was con- 
sidered the Calypso of her day; but her charms 
being now considerably on the wane, she tried to 
repair them, much on the same principle, and 
with much the same effect, that experienced 
dealers adopt in their restoration of old pictures. 
Still she was, and particularly by candle-light, a 
fine, or what artists call, a picturesque woman ; 
and, from the peculiar character of her beauty, 
might have served as a good model for a painter, 
wishing to pourtray the unchaste wife of Potiphar. 
Her large bold eyes met those of her lover, for 
such it was plain he was, with an expression, 
from which I turned with loathing; and her 
ungloved hand was suffered to rest in his, be- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 107 

neath the folds of her India shawl, which was 
conveniently draped to conceal this violation of 
decency. I felt my anger and indignation ex- 
cited by their undisguised, and disgusting free- 
dom of manner, in presence of one of the most 
fashionable circles in London ; a circle in which 
their relative position seemed to be as perfectlv 
understood, as, I regret to add, perfectly tole- 
rated: and I left the apartment, sick at heart, 
and out of humour with the world. 

In the ante-room I found Lady Maiy Vernon 
waiting for her carriage; and as the groom of 
the chambers at that moment announced it, I 
offered my arm to conduct her to it. For my 
soul I could not force my lips to utter a single 
one of the common-place phrases, men address 
to women on similar occasions ; but, feeling her 
arm tremble within mine, I ventured to observe, 
that I feared she was ill. 

" Very slightly so ;" was the answer. "The 
sudden transition from a heated room to the cold 



108 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

air, often produces a nervous trembling of my 
frame that quickly subsides." 

I handed her to her carriage and saw it drive 
off, scarcely aware that I was standing uncovered 

at the bottom of the steps at House, and 

only remembering that her arm had rested within 
mine, that my hands had touched hers; — and 
never had the touch of mortal produced such a 
sensation on man ! No, none but a pure minded 
and chaste woman could excite such sensations. 
There was awe mingled with the passionate love, 
the exquisite pleasure, that sent the blood tingling 
through my veins ; and I mentally vowed that 
no man should ever have the arm of my wife 
within hisj if wife I ever had. I longed to press 
my lips on the sleeve on which her beautiful 
hand had rested. I thought of her as some bright 
vision ; and the melting tones of her voice still 
sounded in my ear. I felt something soft under 
my foot ; and, on looking, perceived that it was 
her bouquet, which had fallen as she entered 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 109 

her carriage. I snatched it up and placed it in 
my breast, as if I had found the most precious 
treasure; and was retreating to seek for my 
servant, when I overheard a link boy observe to 
another, 

" I say, Bill, that there fine gemman seems 
tarnation fond of poseys. Did you see how he 
cotched up that nosegay as the pale-faced lady 
let fall?" 

" Yes, I seed it fast enough," replied Bill ; 
" I suppose as how he's her sweetheart ; for them 
there quahty folks be mighty fond of love making; 
bekase as how, they have nothing else in the 
world to do." 

At this moment, the carriage of Mrs. Morti- 
mer was called, and I saw Mr. Vernon conduct 
her to it, and enter it as if he were its master. 
Then, one of the two tall footmen behind it, 
uttered an energetic " Home !" and I observed 
the knowing winks and smiles, and heard the 
ribald jests exchanged by the liveried gentry 
around, as the profligate pair were whirled off 



110 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

to the mansion of the husband she had betrayed 
and dishonoured. 

I entered my house a changed man; every 
feehng, every thought, having Lady Mary for 
its object. When my eyes fell on different 
articles of virtil in my chamber, given to me by 
other women, I turned from them with disgust, 
to kiss, again and again, the bouquet of withered 
flowers that she had touched; and I valued it, 
oh ! how much the more, when I recollected that 
she would not have given it to any man on earth, 
save to her unworthy husband. 

Were women but conscious of the estimation 
in which even the slightest favour is held, when 
she who accords it is known to be pure and vir- 
tuous, how cautious would they be in granting a 
thousand little frivolous cadeaux to which, though 
they attach no importance, others prefix ideas 
that lead to very injurious conclusions. Could 
they, too, but hear the conversations of their 
favourite beaux, at the clubs they frequent, how 
would they blush and tremble at the false, the 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. Ill 

often odious interpretations, given to actions to 
which, if fairly judged, youthful imprudence or 
levity could alone be attributed. 

But, to return to the antipodes of levity. Lady 
Mary, and her faded bouquet. Perhaps some 
of my readers will smile when I assert, that from 
that night I have never met the mingled odours 
of the rose, jasmine, and verbena, without their 
bringing the image of that lovely woman to my 
memory, as vividly as though I had seen her but 
a few hours before. How I loathed her hus- 
band for slighting her ! and yet, perhaps, I 
should have hated him still more had he evinced 
for her, at least in my presence, any marks of 
that passionate love which was now consuming 
my heart. 

A few days after my memorable interview 
with Lady Mary, having sauntered into the 
fashionable jeweller's of that day, to make a pur- 
chase, I saw some very splendid diamonds, which 
one of the shopmen was placing in a case. Ob- 
serving that they had caught my eye, he civillv 



112 THE CONFESSIONS OP 

laid the etui before me ; and called my attention 
to a very large sapphire, which formed the centre 
of one of the bracelets belonging to the parure^ 
and which, he said, he considered to be the most 
perfect stone that had ever passed through his 
hands. He added, that it had been sold at a 
very high price ; and in order to show me the 
stone in its transparent setting, he touched a 
secret spring, when the gold plate at the back 
flying open, discovered a small enamel miniature 
of Mr. Vernon ; the resemblance being so strik- 
ing as to leave no doubt of its identity. The man 
had only closed the etui when the original of the 
portrait entered, ordered the case to be placed 
in his curricle, and drove off. I could not resist 
the impulse that induced me to follow the route 
he had taken ; and I was only confirmed in the 
surmise I had formed as to the destination of the 
jewels, when I saw him stop at the door of Mrs. 
Mortimer, and send his curricle to the next 
street, to wait his return. 

The diamonds and sapphire of vast price, it 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 113 

was plain then, were for his unworthy mistress, 
. who, probably, only valued the miniature on ac- 
count of its setting, and only tolerated the donor 
for the sake of his gifts. How strange appears 
to us the passion for jewels inherent in women 
in all countries and times. The extent to which 
it was indulged in Rome, is proved by Julius 
Caesar having passed a law forbidding unmar- 
ried women to wear them. One would suppose 
that a similar prohibition existed in England, 
inferring from the impatience the generality of 
our young ladies evince to be married, and the 
pleasure they take, when this perilous deside- 
ratum has been attained, in displaying a pro- 
fusion of jewels on their persons. Nor are our 
matrons less addicted to this expensive passion, 
for were the Athenian ordination, by which an 
unfaithful wife was prevented from wearing 
jewels, carried into effect in our days, it would, 
I believe, be the ruin of jewellers ; but might 
be the saving of many a man's purse, if not his 
honour. And yet, who knows how far such a 



114 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

punishment might deter women from a breach 
of virtue ; vanity, their besetting sin, being thus 
instigated to preserve, what hitherto it had as- 
sisted to overthrow ; for, there is much more of 
vanity than passion, in nine-tenths of the liaisons 
that lead to a breach of conjugal fidelity. 

Three nights after the occurrence at the 
jeweller's shop, I encountered Mrs. Mortimer 
at a ball, at Lady Baskerville's ; sparkling in 
the very parure I had seen, and the well-known 
sapphire on her arm. Mr. Vernon, too, was 
there; and the lady seemed to treat him with 
more marked attention; the reward, as I thought, 
of the costly present he had made her. Lady 
Mary Vernon was also present, and looked, if 
possible, more beautiful than before. She was 
attired in a robe of white satin open in front, 
and falling in ample folds to her feet. The rich 
blonde lace that trimmed the dress, was clasped 
by black enamel ornaments, a la Sevigne; in the 
centre of each of which sparkled a large dia- 
mond. The pointed stomacher, which beauti- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 115 

fully defined her delicate waist, was confined by 
similar ornaments; and a necklace and ear-rings 
to match, displayed the exquisite fairness of her 
skin. She was with an elderly lady, of a very 
dignified mien, who seemed wholly engrossed in 
a conversation with her ; apparently urging her 
to do something, which Lady Mary dechned, as 
I could see her wave her head, and make a mo- 
tion that indicated repugnance. 

I passed behind the spot where they stood, 
and heard the elderly lady say, in Italian, " In- 
deed, you are wrong, thus to shrink from their 
presence, when yours would probably awaken 
them to the impropriety of their conduct, by 
drawing on them the censure of the spectators 
of it." 

" What, draw censure on my husband? no, 
not for worlds !" replied Lady Mary; " I cannot, 
indeed I cannot, bear to encounter them." 

And as she spoke, an increased paleness, and 
involuntary shudder, betrayed how much even 
the idea of adopting such a course affected her. 



116 TH£ CONFESSIONS OP 

I approached, and made my bow; was re- 
ceived with a less distant poUteness than I had 
anticipated, though still enough reserve and 
gravity remained, to check a much more pre- 
suming man than I had ever been. It was 
evident, that the respectful deference of my 
manner had influenced the old lady in my 
favour, for she whispered Lady Mary to pre- 
sent me to her. No sooner was my name pro- 
nounced, that she eagerly demanded if I was 
the son of Lady Olivia Lyster? and on my re- 
plying in the affirmative, she told me, that my 
mother had been one of her oldest and dearest 
friends, and that she felt highly gratified at 
making my acquaintance. I was elated at this 
lucky chance, which seemed to hold forth a 
hope of meeting Lady Mary more frequently; 
for I speedily discovered that Lady Delafield 
{my mother's friend) was her aunt, and that 
they frequently saw each other. 

Lady D. became quite cordial in her manner 
towards me ; asked a thousand questions about 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 117 

Lyster Park, where she had often been durinff 
my infancy ; and treated me, not as a new ac- 
quaintance, but as the son of an old and dear 
friend. Wliile replying to her interrogations, 
I thought only of her charming niece, who 
seemed totally abstracted, her beautiful eyes 
fixed on the door of the room where she knew 
her husband to be. Mr. Mortimer came up, 
and accosted Lady Mary with an air and man- 
ner, so totally devoid of any suspicion that his 
presence was not agreeable to her, that I felt 
for him, when I observ^ed the haughty coldness 
with which Lady Delafield returned his salu- 
tation. 

"Where is Mrs. Mortimer?" asked the un- 
conscious husband, " I expected to find her 
with you." 

The colour rose to the cheeks of Lady Mary 
at the question, and there was an evident em- 
barrassment in her manner, as she answered, 
that she had not seen her. 

"Not seen her!" repeated Mr. Mortimer; 



118 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

" how very odd ; for, she told me that she only 
came, because she promised to- meet you." 

" Very odd, indeed," said Lady Delafield, 
drily; " for, I venture to say that my niece was 
wholly ignorant of Mrs. Mortimer's intention of 
being here." 

Lady Mary pressed the arm of her aunt, and 
gave her an imploring look; while Mr. Mor- 
timer betrayed such evident symptoms of min- 
gled surprise and displeasure, as checked Lady 
Delafield's further observations. He looked 
from the aunt, to the niece ; and his face flushed 
as he observed the agitation and distress, too 
clearly pourtrayed in the countenance of the 
latter, to admit of his doubting that some pain- 
ful feelings were associated in her mind, with the 
mention of his wife. He muttered something, 
almost unintelligible, of his intention of seeking 
INIrs. Mortimer, and hurried into the next room. 
I saw terror impressed on the pallid face of 
Lady Mary ; she whispered a few words to her 
aunt, who turned to me, and requested that I 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 119 

would immediately seek ]\lr. Vemon, and tell 
him that she required his presence. I was about 
to say, that I did not know Mr. Vernon, but 
Lady Mary interrupted me by saying, " Do, 
pray go, and quickly, I entreat you to go;" 
forgetting, in her alarm and agitation, the self- 
control and dignity of manner, for which she 
was so remarkable. 

On entering the next room, I discovered 
Mrs. Mortimer dancing with Mr. Vernon; a 
circle was formed round the dancers to observe 
her. Her movements were such as I should 
never have tolerated in a wife, though they 
elicited general applause; and as I saw her 
floating through the mazy dance, I was re- 
minded of the opinion of Sallust, who, speaking 
of Sempronia, the mistress of Catiline, says, 
" She dances with more skill than becomes a 
virtuous woman." 

Mr. Vernon led his partner from the dance, to 
a sofa elevated at the end of the room, and so 
placed, that the persons seated on it could be 



120 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

seen from all sides of the apartment. His as- 
siduity was unremitting; he assisted to place 
her India shawl over her shoulders to preserve 
her from being chilled, and displayed all les 
petits soins that a lover employs for the object 
of his affections, attentions, which were repaid by 
languishing looks of tenderness, and sweet smiles. 
I marked the glances exchanged by the persons 
around them, in which were plainly expressed 
the malicious pleasure that a detected intrigue 
seldom fails to awaken. 

While I endeavoured to make my way through 
the crowd, to the place where they were seated, 
I caught a view of Mr. Mortimer; and never 
did I behold so fearful an expression as that 
which his countenance presented. Rage and 
jealousy strove for mastery, in the fiery glances 
which he bent on them; and which convinced 
me, that never before had he suspected either 
the fidelity of his wife, or the perfidy of his 
friend. From a state of happy security, he 
awoke at once to a conviction of their guilt ; and 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 121 

terrible were the pangs which that conviction 
brought him, if we might judge by its effects on 
his countenance. While he stood, eying the 
guilty pair, they, totally unconscious of his pre- 
sence, were exchanging looks of love, and whis- 
pers of tenderness ; thus, adding fuel to the fire 
that raged in the breast of the wronged and 
duped husband. 

Fearful of some public esclandre, that could 
not fail to wring the already tortured heart of 
Lady Maiy, I conquered my repugnance to 
address Mr. Vernon; and, approaching him, 
stated that Lady Delafield requested to see him 
immediately. The message seemed to annoy 
him and his companion ; they whispered, looked 
confused, and after a few minutes' consultation 
he left her, promising to return immediately. 

I mingled in the crowd, still remaining near 
enough to observe Mrs, Mortimer, and shortly 
after saw her husband walk up to her. She 
perceived him not until he was at her side; and, 
on recognizing him, started as if she had seen a 

G 



122 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

spectre, changed colour, and immediately at- 
tempted to envelope her person in the India 
shawl. But it resisted all her efforts to pass it 
over her stiffened sleeves; and her exertions 
only exposed still more the brilliant diamonds 
that encircled her arms. She was evidently 
struggling to acquire some portion of self-pos- 
session ; and, after the pause of a moment, 
turned to her husband, and observed, " Who 
ever should have thought of seeing you here ?" 

" Not yo?<, I am persuaded," replied he, his 
lips trembling with suppressed emotion. " It is 
fortunate, however, that I have come, as my un- 
expected presence gives me an opportunity of 
admiring the rare and costly jewels you wear, 
and which I now see for the first time." 

She became as pale as death, and then blushed 
a deep red. 

" Oh ! the fact is," said she, " I hired them 
for this night, as I was tired of always appearing 
in the same ornaments." 

I could observe that her husband believed the 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 123 

assertion ; for his features relaxed some portion 
of their rigid expression. She, too, perceived 
that he was the dupe of her falsehood, and, 
taking courage, she added, " I am so glad you 
are come, for I was wishing to go home, I feel 
tired and chilly." 

As she thus spoke, her evil stars led her to 
endeavour again to wrap the shawl around her ; 
when, in the effort to do so, one of the bracelets 
became unclasped and fell to the ground. In 
the fall, the secret spring flew open, discovering 
to the horrified gaze of her husband, who had 
stooped to take it up, the miniature of Mr. 
Vernon. 

" And this portrait, too, was doubtlessly hired 
for the night," said he, fixing his petrifying glance 
on her face — " Come, leave this scene directly, 
madam ; you and / have a fearful reckoning to 
settle, and this is no place for it." 

She seemed overcome by terror and confu- 
sion, and hesitated to obey his commands. He 
turned fiercely towards her, seized her arm, 

G 2 



124 THE CONFESSTONS OF 

drew it within his, and dragged, rather than led 
her, through the long suite of rooms ; I follow- 
ing to observe their moA-ements. When they 
reached the dra\ving-room, where I had left 
Lady Mary and her aunt, a bustle and con- 
fusion among the company impeded the pro- 
gress of Mr. Mortimer. Lady Mary Vernon 
had fainted; and, as is usual on such occasions, 
a circle had formed round her, increasing the 
heat and pressure, and consequently the illness 
for which they affected to feel such sympathy. 
Lady Delafield loudly entreated them to dis- 
perse, and, on their doing so, I beheld Lady 
Mary, as she reclined on an ottoman, supported 
by the Duchess of B., Lady Delafield holding 
to her nostrils one of the many Jlacojis offered 
by the surrounding groups of ladies. Lady 
Mary presented the appearance of death; her 
eyes were closed, their long dark lashes throw- 
ing a more ghastly shade over the pale cheeks 
beneath them : yet still, though bearing the 
semblance of death, her matchless beauty shone 



AN ELDERLY GENTELMAN. 125 

conspicuous, being not obliterated, but wearing 
a new character; a character that might have 
justified its being called the holiness of beauty, 
so calm, so unearthly, was its loveliness. 

My heart sank within me while I gazed on 
that marble face; and its striking resemblance 
to Louisa Sydney, as I last saw her, made me 
shudder. At this moment, Lady Delafield 
caught a view of Mrs. Mortimer, and gave her 
a look that must have spoken daggers to her, 
so plainly did it say, " See what you have 
done." 

The look was not lost on Mr. Mortimer; it 
seemed to increase his rage, for he pulled his 
terrified vdh along, and descended the stairs, 
down which her trembling limbs could hardly 
support her. They had only driven off a mo- 
ment, when Mr. Vernon returned from search- 
ing for his servant in the crowd. I narrowly 
examined his countenance, as he approached 
Lady Maiy, who was still in a state of insensi- 
bility; and never did I behold contrition and 



126 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

sorrow more clearly delineated, than in the look 
he fixed on her pale, but beautiful face. 

" This man is not hardened in guilt, nor in- 
sensible to its fearful effects on others," thought 
I, as I saw him stoop to raise her tenderly from 
the sofa. The movement recalled her to con- 
sciousness ; her lips moved, she opened her lan- 
guid eyes, and fixed them on the face of her 
husband, with an expression of such deep, such 
unutterable tenderness, which, whatever might 
be its effect on him, sank into my very soul ; 
and made me feel that I would sacrifice all I 
possessed, to have such a look fixed on me by 
those melting eyes. 

His affectionate assiduity seemed to restore 
her, and she repaid it by faint smiles. 

" Are you quite sure, dear aunt, that nothing 
dreadful has occurred?" asked Lady Mary, 
when Mr. Vernon had again left her, to see if 
the carriage was ready. 

" Quite sure, my dear," replied Lady Dela- 
field. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 127 

« Oh, what a relief ! I was so alarmed by the 
terrible expression of Mr. Mortimer's face, that 
the most fearful presentiment rushed on my 
mind, and I felt as though I had been dpng." 

" Hush, hush, my dear," said Lady Delafiela, 
"you were needlessly frightened. I am sorry 
that I suffered him to know the truth, as it has 
made you ill ; but he must be well accustomed to 
the subterfuges of his worthless wife, if, indeed, 
she thinks it necessary to use any with him." 

Mr. Vernon returned to support his wife to 
her carriage ; and I beheld them drive off, with 
feelings little in harmony with the scene of splen- 
did festivity around me, and more than ever in 
love with Lady Mary. 

How strange is the human heart ! The very 
tenderness I had seen her display towards an- 
other seemed to increase mine towards her. The 
freedom from all harshness, or reproach, with 
which she received his attentions, elevated her 
character in my estimation; and made me 



128 THE CONFESSIONS OP 

view her more as an angelic being, than as a 
woman. 

The next day, at an early hour, business 
having called me into the city, I was passing 
through Fleet Street, when I heard my name 
pronounced by a female voice, with an entreaty 
that I should enter the shop whence it proceeded. 
I hesitated as to whether I should comply with 
tha request or not, when the shopman presented 
himself at the door, and repeated it. On en- 
tering the shop, I beheld a very respectable 
looking female, in a state of great agitation, who 
immediately appealed to me, to satisfy the owner 
of the shop, as to her respectability. In this 
person I recognised a Mrs. Tisdeal, who had 
lived several years, as a sort of humble compa- 
nion, or upper femme de chambre, with my poor 
mother, and had been a great favourite of her's ; 
but of whom I had lost sight for a long time. 

" Oh ! sir," sobbed she, " you find me here 
charged with theft. I have been employed to 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 120 

dispose of some jewels of value : the owner 
wishes that her name should not be divulo-ed; 
and unless I disclose it, that she may certify it 
was by her desire I offered her diamonds for 
sale, the owner of this shop threatens to commit 
me to prison, on suspicion that I have obtained 
them dishonestly. You, Mr. Lyster, who have 
known me for so many years, will, I am sure, 
answer for my character; but let me not be 
forced to reveal the name I so much wish to 
conceal." 

" Look here, sir," said the jeweller, opening 
the case, and displacing its glittering contents : 
" these jewels are of too great value to be en- 
trusted to a sei'vant." 

I started wdth amazement, on recognising the 
magnificent parure worn by Lady Mary Vernon 
the night before, which, being the first I had 
ever seen set in black enamel, had made an im- 
pression on my memoiy. 

" Yes, sir," resumed the jeweller " these dia- 
monds are of extraordinary beauty, and appear- 

g3 



130 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

ances are very much against this person. ^Vhen 
I required a reference, and asked the ordinar)^ 
questions which a cautious and reputable buyer, 
under such circumstances, ought to ask, this 
woman betrayed evident symptoms of confusion, 
and dechned stating to whom the jewels belong, 
or her own place of residence." 

I assured the scrupulous shopkeeper, that T 
knew the female present perfectly well, and could 
answer for her honesty. 

" Why, that's all very well, sir," said he ; " but 
you'll excuse me if I state, that I know no more 
of you, than of this woman. The affair is, alto- 
gether, very suspicious — very suspicious indeed. 
You happen, most opportunely, to be passing my 
door, at the very moment I was going to send 
for the police, to take this person into custody 
on suspicion of robbery. She sees you, calls out 
to you directly, you come in, and without asking 
her a single question, as to how she came by the 
diamonds, offer to be answerable for her honesty. 
You'll excuse me, sir; but all this has a very 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN, 131 

odd appearance — a very odd appearance, indeed. 
There, John," turning to one of his shopmen; 
" go and call a couple of the pohce, for it 's my 
opinion we shall have huo persons to commit, 
instead of one." 

" Why, what the devil !" said I, getting angry ; 
" you surely cannot mean to suspect or commit 
rmr 

" You'U excuse me, sir," rephed the imper- 
turbable jeweller, "but I mean to do both, 
unless you can forthwith satisfy me of your own 
respectability. This affair looks very like a 
conspiracy, sir, very like indeed ; and your pop- 
ping by so opportunely leads me to think that 
you are nothing more or less than a confederate 
of this person." 

" WTiat ! suspect Mr. Lyster, of Lyster Park, 
one of the richest gentlemen in the county 
of Nottinghamshire !" exclaimed Mrs. Tisdeal, 
in mingled amazement and indignation. 

" And you. Ma'am," said the jeweller, sneer- 



132 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

ingly, " are probably one of the richest ladies in 
some other county. No, no, I am an old bird, 
and not to be caught with chaff, as the saying 
goes ; and so I won't take your character for this 
gentleman, nor his, for you." 

" Let me speak to you alone, for a few minutes," 
said Mrs. Tisdeal. 

" Ay, ay," said the jeweller, " lay your heads 
together, and make up a good story between you. 
See to the door, Thomas." 

" You will regret this conduct," said I, much 
excited by his insulting suspicions, and the gross 
vulgarity with which they were expressed. 

Having retired to the far corner of the shop 
with the agitated Mrs. Tisdeal, I told her in a 
low voice that I recognised the jewels, having 
seen them the night before, but that her secret 
was safe with me. 

" Oh ! sir," said she, " my lady has the most 
pressing occasion for a large sum of money — not 
for herself, dear angel lady — but for her hus- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 133 

band. He is to know nothing of the sale of the 
diamonds, for he would never consent to it, and 
is to be led to believe that the money comes from 
my lady's aunt. Oh, sir, if this jeweller was 
to discover whence I come, he would go to Mr. 
Vernon's, and all would be known; and the 
mortification would be so great to her Ladyship, 
that, rather than expose her to it, I would suffer 
any indignity to myself." 

" Well, I say, have you concocted your story ?" 
asked the jeweller, with an insolent sneer, suspi- 
cion ha^^ng rapidly grown into certainty. 

" What is the value of these diamonds ?" de- 
manded I. 

" The value ?" replied he ; " why, more than 
you'll ever come honestly by, I'm thinking." 

" I ask you what is their value ?" resumed I, 
making an effort (and it required one) to master 
my rapidly increasing wrath. 

" Well, then, their value is five thousand pounds, 
though, at the present time, with the scarcity of 



134 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

money that exists, I doubt if they would fetch 
more than four thousand five hundred." 

" Give me pen, ink, and paper," asked I ; a 
demand he more than half reluctantly complied 
with. 

While I was writing a few lines to my bankers, 
Messrs. Child and Co., John, his shopman, re- 
turned with two policemen. They eyed me with 
looks filled with suspicion ; and I overheard the 
sapient John remark, that " he was sure I was 
an old offender, for rogue was written in my 
face." 

I wrote to request my bankers to send any 
one of the clerks who knew me, with bank notes 
to the amount of five thousand pounds, to the 
shop of Mr. Thompson, No. 6, Fleet Street, 
with as little delay as possible ; and having pro- 
mised Thomas, the less suspicious shopman, a 
reward for his trouble, I dispatched him, with 
my note, to the bank. 

During his absence, the jeweller seemed 



AN ELDERLY GENTLE-MAX. 135 

puzzled what to think; poor Mrs. Tisdeal still 
trembled from the alarm she had undergone ; 
and the two policemen maintained a demeanour 
of official gravity. 

Thomas soon came back, out of breath from 
the speed he had made, and announced that Mr. 
Smith, the head clerk of the house, would soon 
wait on me. 

This intelligence seemed to occasion the jew- 
eller a considerable diminution of his self-com- 
placency, and caused him to assume a somewhat 
less disrespectful bearing towards me. Yet, he 
appeared disappointed at the probability that, 
after all, I should turn out to be neither a thief, 
nor the confederate of a thief: and, vexed and 
annoyed as I felt at the moment, I could not 
help observing then, as subsequently I have fre- 
quently remarked, that the generality of suspi- 
cious persons are more irritated than gratified, 
at discovering innocence in the individual whom 
they had prejudged to have been guilty. 

His countenance became perfectly ludicrous 



136 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

when, not the head clerk of the bank, but Mr» 
Child himself, entered the shop; and, shaking 
me cordially by the hand, told me that he was 
the bearer of the five thousand pounds, because 
he was induced to infer, from the manner of the 
bearer of my letter as well as its contents, that 
something extraordinary had occurred. 

While I explained to him the awkward pi'e- 
dicament in which the suspicions of Mr. Thomp- 
son had placed me, it was comical to obsene the 
countenance of that varlet. He kept bowing to 
the ground, repeating, 

" Indeed, sir, I'm sure, sir, I would not for 
fifty pounds that such a mistake had taken place. 
I hope, sir, you 'U excuse me ; I am quite con- 
founded, indeed, sir; I know not what to say. 
Pray, Mr. Child, speak a word for me ; indeed, 
I meant no offence ; but we jewellers are obliged 
to be so strict, so veiy particular, sir." 

" Yes," interrupted I, " ' and I happened so 
opportunely to be passing your door,' and ' looked 
so like an old offender' " — glancing at the now 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. lo7 

crest-fallen John the shopman ; who, as he had 
emulated his master in suspicion half an hour 
before, now emulated him in humility, and hung 
his head most sheepishly, at my thus repeating 
his recent obsen^ations. 

Mr. Child was really angry, and reprimanded 
the knave of diamonds; for, such he actually 
was, as he had been in more than one scrape for 
having bought stolen jewels, knowing, or at least 
having had cause to suspect, that they were dis- 
honestly obtained. He wished to re-establish his 
injured reputation in the present instance, by 
displaying a more than ordinary degree of pre- 
caution ; so, poor Mrs. Tisdeal and I were the 
victims to his new-born scruples. 

Mr. Child finding that I had no carriage with 
me, pressed me to let him send me his ; but I 
refused, and having procured a hackney coach, 
placed Mrs. Tisdeal in it, and seated myself by 
her side, ordered the coachman to drive to the 
comer of Grosvenor Square. - I gave her the 
five thousand pounds, making her believe that I 



138 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

was glad of an opportunity of purchasing so fine 
a set of diamonds, and that I considered them a 
bargain. 

During our drive, she told me that she had 
now been three years with Lady Mary Vernon ; 
Lady Delafield, having known her when with 
my mother, had recommended her to her niece, 
on the marriage of that lady. She added, that 
during the first two years her situation had been 
a very happy one ; but, that now — and here she 
paused. 

I told her that it was not a frivolous curiosity 
which led me to inquire why she no longer was 
happy in Lady Mary's establishment. 

" Alas ! sir, how can I feel happy, when I see 
my lady, who is an angel, if ever an angel ap- 
peared upon earth, wretched ; she, that used to 
be so buoyant and cheerful, whose dear, sweet 
laugh used to gladden my ears, and whose bright 
joyous looks were like sunshine to me. All is now 
changed ; my lady's voice is never heard except 
in accents so low and mournful that they make 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 139 

me sad; her bright looks are faded, and when 
she tries to smile, indeed, sir, it causes my heart 
to ache, her deep, melancholy eyes, and pale 
cheeks, seem in such marked contrast with the 
smile. She will sit for whole hours, sir, with 
her head leaning on her hand; and, though a 
book lies open before her, she never turns over 
a page. But, when she hears Mr. Vernon's step 
approaching, she starts up, and strives to assume 
a cheerful face to welcome him ; and he — oh ! 
sir, it angers me to see that he does not, or will 
not, notice the sad change that has come over 
her, she that used to be as fresh as a rose, and 
as blithe as a lark." 

" And what, my good Mrs. Tisdeal, do you 
think is the cause of all this?" 

" Indeed, sir, I fear that there is but too much 
cause; for, Mr. Vernon, who used to be the most 
attentive, nay, the most doting husband in the 
world, has now become careless, cold, and silent ; 
absenting himself continually from home, and 
when there, evidently impatient to quit it. My 



140 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

lady receives anonymous letters continually, sir ; 
I know they are anonymous, because, when she 
opens them, she colours, and throws them in 
the fire. I shall never forget the first that came : 
she was in her dressing-room, and I delivered it 
to her. Wliile she was reading it, I by chance 
looked in the large mirror near to which she was 
standing, and her appearance terrified me ; she 
was as pale as death, sir; her eyes seemed to 
grow larger, and her brow contracted as if she 
was suffering an intense agony. Her lips were 
compressed, and her hand trembled so violently 
that she could scarcely hold the letter. Oh ! 
how I execrated the heartless, the wicked person, 
that could thus rudely tear the bandage from 
her eyes, and plant a dagger in her heart ! 
Surely, sir, thei'e are few actions so vile, or so 
wicked, as the writing anonymous letters. I 
longed to throw myself at her feet, but I 
flared not interfere ; and though my heart ached 
for her, I stole out of the room as if I had not 
observed her agitation, and remained in the ante- 



AX ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 141 

chamber, fearful of withdrawing further, lest she 
might require my assistance. 

" She did not ring for hours, but when I en- 
tered, was quite calm, sir ; though I could disco- 
ver, by her blanched cheek and heavy eyes, what 
was passing within her mind. She has never been 
herself from that time; and each day has seen her 
^row paler and more melancholy. Last night, my 
lady returned from a ball to which Lady Dela- 
field had forced her to go. She came home at- 
tended by her aunt ; and Mr.A^ernon, who seemed 
most anxious and alarmed, watching over her, 
and holding her hand, just as he used formerly to 
do. Oh ! sir, it made me so happy ! But my 
lady's aunt kept hinting, and more than hinting, 
that all her illness was his doing; and this 
vexed him, and my lady too. Lady Delafield is 
an excellent lady, but she does not understand 
how much mischief may be done by reminding 
a husband of the consequences of conduct he 
wishes to forget. One sweet smile and kind 
word fi'om the wife he has injured, would have 



142 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

a better effect than all the lectures in the world ; 
for men, sir, are always proud and wilful when 
they have done wrong, and must be allowed 
to have the triumph of having come round to 
the right path themselves, without having been 
schooled into it, I heartily wished Lady Dela- 
field away ; and so, I am sure, did my lady and 
Mr. Vernon. When she had gone, Mr. Vernon 
scarcely v\'aited for the door to close after her, 
when he ran up and embraced my lady; and, 
indeed, sir, I saw the tears stream from both 
their eyes, though I left the chamber as quickly 
as I could. 

" In an hour after, a letter was brought by 
Mrs. Mortimer's footman, with directions that it 
should be delivered immediately, as it was of 
great consequence. My heart misgave me when 
Mr. Vernon's valet asked me to tell his master 
that he wanted to speak to him immediately — I 
refused; and, would you believe it, sir, the jack- 
anapes became quite pert and saucy, said it was 
as much as his place was worth to keep a note 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 143 

from Mrs. Mortimer waiting, and that if /would 
not deliver his message to his master, he should 
take it to the door of my lady's room himself. 
Could gentlemen but know, sir, how they debase 
themselves, even in the eyes of their own ser- 
vants, when they allow them to discover their 
vices, how careful would they be, if not to 
amend, at least to conceal them ; for, their me- 
nials must become either the censors, or assist- 
ants of them, and that they should be either, is 
most degrading to a master. I trembled when 
I took the message, though I tried to look as 
unconcerned as possible. The fact is, sir, all 
our servants had been for some time passing 
their jokes and remarks on Mr. Vernon's con- 
stant visits and letters to that lady ; and when 
her footman brought a note, he brought scandal 
and evil reports also ; consequently, I feared the 
letter he now bore, might break up the good 
understanding that I hoped was about to be re- 
established between my lady and her husband. 



144 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

When I delivered the message, Mr. Vernon 
grew as red as fire in the face, and my lady 
turned as pale as marble. He went outside the 
door, took the note from his servant, and with- 
out breaking the seal, gave it into my lady's 
hands. She looked up in his face— oh ! such a 
look of love and confidence — and said, ' No, 
dearest, you must read it, / cannot, ought not, 
it would be indelicate, unwomanly.' 

" I left the room, but before the door closed, 
I heard him exclaim, ' How like you, my own 
Mary, and how unlike—' I heard no more. 
Early this morning, my lady came to me, and 
placing the jewels, you have bought, sir, in my 
hands, desired me to dispose of them to the 
highest bidder, as she had immediate occasion 
for the money. She told me to tell her (in case 
Mr. Vernon was present) that Lady Delafield 
had sent a letter and parcel for her, that is, if I 
had disposed of the diamonds. I know it can- 
not be for herself that my lady requires the 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 145 

money ; for, she is more prudent than any lady 
I ever knew, and never incurs a debt ; so, it 
must be for Mr. Vernon." 

Various and contending were the emotions 
with which I listened to Mrs. Tisdeal's prolix 
detail; jealousy was, however, the predominant: 
and, shall I confess my unworthiness, I was more 
than once tempted to return the jewels and get 
back my money, sooner than it should serve as a 
new bond of kindness between Lady Mary and 
her weak-minded husband. But my better na- 
ture triumphed. There were moments in whicli 
I felt vexed at her so readily yielding him hei 
pardon, and accused her of weakness ; however , 
a little reflection showed her to me in all the 
purity and gentleness of a pitying angel rejoicinr 
over a repentant sinner, rather than • s an in- 
jured wife pardoning the errors of a r. claimed 
husband. Thus, the nobleness of her disposition 
made me more deeply enamoured of her, while 
it forbade every hope of my passion ever meet- 
ing the least return. 

H 



146 THE CONFESSIONS OP 

" I left home, sir," resumed Mrs. Tisdeal, " at 
nine o'clock, and called at three jewellers before 
I entered the shop where you rescued me. Oh, 
dear ! how late it is !" casting her eyes up at a 
watchmaker's door, over which a dial marked 
the hour of four. " How long my lady will have 
thought my absence !" 

' I had been so engrossed by the communica- 
tions Mrs. Tisdeal had been making, that I had 
not reflected on the impropriety of my being seen 
to drive up with her to Lady Mary's residence; 
to which we were now rapidly approaching, 
having entered Grosvenor Square. I had just 
resolved that I would endeavour to conceal my- 
self while Mrs. Tisdeal descended, when a hack- 
ney coach that preceded us, stopped at the very 
door to which we were proceeding. The blinds 
were up, but the step was in an instant let down, 
and Lord Percy, a friend of mine, jumped out, 
evidently in a state of agitation, and hastily en- 
tered the house, leaving the coach still waiting. 
Mrs. Tisdeal called our coachman to let her de- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 147 

scend; and he was in the act of assisting her 

o 

from the vehicle when Lord Percy returned from 
the hall, accompanied by half a dozen servants, 
opened the coach door, and, after two or three 
minutes' delay, I beheld them bearing Mr. 
Vernon, apparently, dead, or dying, in their 
arms. 

Horror struck at the sight, I jumped from my 
coach, and followed them into the hall ; when 
Percy recognising me, whispered, 

"This is a fearful business. Mortimer chal- 
lenged poor Vernon, who is, I fear, mortally 
wounded. Good God ! who is to break it to 
Lady Mary?" 

They bore him into the library. Servants were 
dispatched at every side for surgeons, and Mrs. 
Tisdeal promised to keep Lady Mary in her 
dressing-room, in ignorance of the fatal event, 
while I ran for Lady Delafield. I met her car- 
riage entering the Square, stopped it, and with 
all possible precaution told her what had oc- 

H 2 



148 THE CO*rFESSIOi?S 6^ 

Ciirred. She made me get into the chariot and 
accompany her to Lady Mary's, saying, that I 
might be useful to her in her affliction; and I 
was too glad to be near the object of my idola- 
tiy not to embrace eagerly the oifer. It was 
now that 1 felt for the first time the holy^ the 
purifying effects of real love. I would have 
given a limb, nay, my life, to have saved that of 
Mr. Vernon: ay, more, I would have supported 
the sight of her I so passionately, so madly loved, 
lavishing her caresses on him, sooner than know 
she was wretched. His existence became to me, 
from this moment, of vital importance, because 
on it I felt her happiness, her very being de- 
pended; and every selfish sentiment faded aWay 
before the thought of her sorrow and despair. 

Lady Del afield hurried up stairs as quick as 
her aged and trembling limbs could bear her, 
begijinar me to remain in the house until she saw 
me ao-ain. The servants showed me into a small 
ante-room that communicated with the library ; 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 149 

and thei'e, I could hear the stifled groans of the 
wounded sufferer, as the surgeons endeavoured 
to extract the ball from his side. 

" I feel I am dying," uttered Mr. Vernon, 
" let me see my wife." 

There seemed to be some hesitation on the 
part of the surgeons; but he again demanded 
her presence, adding, in a faint voice, 

" It is useless to torture me, life is ebbing fast, 
and all will soon be over." 

In a few minutes, I heard Lady Mary enter 
the room from a private staircase; when, the eja- 
culation of " Oh ! my poor Mary !" from Mr. 
Vernon, told how deep must have been that ex- 
pression of anguish on her countenance which 
thus caused him to loose, in his pity for her, all 
sense of his own sufferings. 

" Pray, madam, be composed," said one of 
the surgeons. 

" Think not of me," replied she, in accents 
that made me tremble; so profound, though 
subdued was the despair they denoted. 



150 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

" Leave us, leave us," said Mr. Vernon, " I 
have much to say ere yet my strength totally 
fails me." 

The surgeons left the library for an inner 
room ; and I then could hear the stifled sobs 
of the husband, mingled with the low, sweet 
voice of the wife. 

" You will be spared to me, my own love ; the 
Almighty is merciful," murmured Lady Mary. 

" No : Mary, my blessed Mary, I feel that my 
wound is mortal. I have deserved tliis punish- 
ment ; yes, I own that I have deserved it. How 
could I be so infatuated, so madly infatuated, as 
to yield to her seductions, and forget for a mo- 
ment you, who have ever been an angel to me?" 

"Think not of this fatal subject now, dearest" 
replied Lady Mary, " think only of our cordial, 
our happy reconciliation of last night ; when you 
abjured the only error of which you had to accuse 
yourself." 

"Yes, Mary, God be thanked! I waited not 
for a death-bed to repent ; for, I then fully de- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 151 

termined never to see that woman again ; and 
had life been spared me, this resolution would 
have been faithfully sustained. My folly, my 
guilt, have led to this fatal result; and I shall 
be torn from you, my own Mary, just when I 
had re-awakened to a sense of all I owe you, 
without the power of atoning for the ills I have 
inflicted. How precious appear now the days 
I have wasted ! Oh, Mary ! what would I not 
give for a few months, a few weeks even, of life 
to be spent with you. Her husband challenged 
me ; to refuse to meet him was impossible ; and 
fondly as I would now cling to existence, I would 
rather die by his hand, than that he should have 
fallen by mine. I was determined not to return 
his fire ; for, I repeat, I would not for worlds 
have his blood on my head. Will you forgive 
me my precious Mary, for talking of her ? But 
too well do I know your generous, your pitying 
heart, to doubt that you will pardon me. She 
is driven from her home, dishonoured, and an 
outcast; I am the cause of all the evil that has 



152 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

befallen her, and it weighs heavily on my mind. 
Promise me, that when I am gone, you will be- 
stow on her the means of existence." 

" Doubt it not, dearest, all, every thing shall 
be done ; but, y&u will be spared to my prayers. 
Oh ! do not say, do not think otherwise." 

" Alas ! my Mary, how can I deceive you? I 
feel that my hours are numbered : but let me 
conclude for ever the painful subject on which 
we were speaking. Even now, Mary, this 
wretched woman may be in want ; send to her, 
I entreat you, sufficient supply to screen her 
from pecuniary difficulties. My friend Spencer 
will lend me a few hundreds ; for, as I told you 
last night, I have squandered away such im- 
mense sums of late, that I have scarcely any 
money left at my banker's." 

" My aunt has placed a large sum at my dis- 
posal, dearest love, and I shall send it to this 
unhappy woman immediately." 

" Bless you, bless you, Mary ; I hiew you 
would cheerfully act as you are now doing.'* 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 153 

The surgeons now returned to the library, 
and, after a short consultation, they had their 
patient moved to his chamber, where an opiate 
was administered to him. !Soon after takinir 
this medicine he fell into a slumber ; and then, 
and not till dien, did his wretched wife betray 
the first symptom of the dreadful effect pro- 
duced on her frame by the terrible shock she 
had received, for she dropped from the chair into 
which she had sunk, in a deep swoon. I heard 
the whispered ejaculations of the surgeons as 
they assisted to bear her from the chamber, and 
my heart died within me as I caught their ob- 
servations indicating her danger ; while /, within 
a few paces of her, dared not approach her. 
Never was the humanizing power of sympathy 
more truly felt than by me at this moment; 1 
would have faced death, I do believe, in its most 
fearful shape, to have seen her relieved from the 
weight of misery that oppressed her; and her 
sufferings engrossed. every thought every feeling. 

Hours seemed comprised in the minutes that 

h3 



154 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

elapsed during her insensibility ; and never did 
a doting mother watch over an only child with 
more intense, more agonizing anxiety, than I 
experienced while listening for some sound to 
announce her return to consciousness. When 
she recovered, Lady Delafield came to me ; and, 
though rarely overpowered by her feelings, she 
was so struck with the expression of sorrow in my 
countenance, that she took my hand kindly, and 
thanked me for the interest I evinced in the afflic- 
tion of her family. The compliments she paid to 
my goodness of heart and disinterested kindness, 
were so unmerited, that I became confused. But 
even my evident embarrassment was considered 
by the excellent old lady as an additional proof 
of my goodness ; and she remarked how much I 
resembled my dear mother at this moment, and 
how truly she prized my sympathy. 

I hardly dared trust myself to inquire for Lady 
Mary ; but Lady Delafield informed me that her 
neice was now much better, and was on her 
knees praying for strength whence only it can be 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. J 55 

derived, to bear up against the trial that awaited 
her. On recovering from her swoon she had 
insisted on the surgeons informing her of the 
real state of her unfortunate husband. They 
wished to temporise with her; but she was in- 
flexible ; and they at length admitted, that though 
he might live a few days, nay, a few weeks, his 
death was inevitable, as the ball had entered a 
vital part, and could not be extracted. 

" Poor, dear soul, she bore this fatal informa- 
tion with wonderful fortitude," continued Lady 
Delafield. " After a few minutes' conversation 
with her attendant, Mrs. Tisdeal, she seemed in- 
spired with new energy, and imposed a task on 
me that I cannot, ought not, to perform ; and yet, 
she declared, that unless it be executed she can 
know no rest. Perhaps you, my dear Mr. Lyster, 
would be my substitute on this disagreeable 
errand ?" 

I instantly offered to do any thing she wished ; 
and she intrusted me with a small sealed packet 
to convey to Mrs. Mortimer, who was staying 



156 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

incognita at a villa near Fulham, and to deliver 
it into her own hands. I asked, and obtained 
a ready consent to return to Grosvenor Square 
as soon as I should have fulfilled my mission ; 
and again the old lady complimented me on my 
good nature. 

I proceeded to Fulham, and, a;fter some dif- 
ficulty succeeded in gaining admission to Mrs. 
Mortimer who received me with a mingled air 
of pride and shame. 

" I have waited on you madam," said I, " by 
the desire of Lady Del afield, to deliver this 
parcel." 

Her cheeks became suffused with a deep crim- 
son ; and with much agitation she tore open the 
envelope, from which dropped the five thousand 
pounds I had given to Mrs. Tisdeal, not three 
hours before. 

" What does this mean, sir?" asked she, haugh- 
tily : " there is not a line here," she continued, 
pointing to the envelope, *' to explain why, or 
from whom, this money was sent." 



AN ELDERLY GENTLE:MAX. 157 

" The parcel, madam, was confided by Lady 
Mary Vernon to her aunt, to deliver to you; 
but that lady feeling unequal to the task, in- 
trusted it to me." 

" Oh, then I am to conclude, sir," said she, 
imperiously, " that this money is sent me by the 
wife, as a bribe to induce me to forego my 
claims on the husband. But, she little knows 
me, if she supposes that, disgraced as I am, 
driven with ignominy from my home, owing to 
my ill-starred attachment to Mr. Vernon, I will 
now resign him for whom I have sacrificed so 
much. No, sir ! take back this money to Lady 
Mary. Mr. Vernon is too much a man of 
honor to abandon the woman he has ruined; 
and I" (here she burst into tears) "have paid 
too dearly for his affection, to relinquish my 
claim to it now, when I have nought left beside." 

" Madam, you must make up your mind to 
this sacrifice," replied L 

" Never, never, sir," interrupted she. 



158 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

" Alas, madam, it no longer depends on your 
will. The separation is inevitable." 

*« You do not mean to say that he is so weak, so 
vacillating, as to consent to it ?" demanded she, 
with anger flashing from her eyes. " If so, his 
conduct is shameful, and merits my contempt." 

" Mr. Vernon is at present, madam," resumed 
I, " entitled to the pity of all ; for, he is on the 
bed of death, to which his errors have untimely 
conducted him." 

" On the bed of death !" shrieked Mrs. Mor- 
timer ; " he who last night was in perfect 
health ? No you deceive me : it is not — it can- 
not be so." 

" He was mortally wounded in a duel this 
morning," said I. 

"And by my husband's hand," interrupted 
she. " Ay, reveal it all ; leave nothing of the 
dreadful tale untold." As she frantickly uttered 
these words, she fell from her chair in violent 
hysterics. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 159 

I rang for her attendant, and, from feelings of 
humanity, waited until the first violence of her 
emotions had subsided. While she continued 
sobbing and shrieking, her femme de chambre 
displayed the most extraordinary nonchalance : 
performing the services that the position of her 
mistress required, with a brusquerie, and an evi- 
dent want of good feeling, that shocked me. Some- 
thing in the countenance and whole air of this 
woman impressed me with a most unfavourable 
opinion of her, which her conduct towards Mrs. 
Mortimer served to confirm ; and I determined 
therefore not to leave that unhappy pei'son until 
she had recovered some degree of consciousness, 
not wishing to trust either her, or the bank notes, 
which I had picked up from the carpet, to the 
tender mercy of her servant. 

When Mrs. Mortimer had regained some 
portion of composure, she dismissed her femme 
de chamber from the room ; who left it, with such 
undisguised impertinence of manner, that I pitied 



160 THE CONFESSIONS GF 

the fallen and unhappy woman, who was help- 
lessly exposed to this insolence, 

" Are you sure, quite sure, that Mr. Vernon 
cannot recover?" asked Mrs. Mortimer. 

" The surgeons have so pronounced," replied L 

" And did Lady Mary know this fact, when 
she sent the money?" 

" Yes ; she had been informed that there was 
no hope." 

" Oh, God ! oh, God ! forgive me !" ex- 
claimed Mrs. Mortimer, bursting into a pa- 
roxysm of tears ; " and this— this is the woman 
I have so wronged, I have so tortured !" 

I felt myself relent towards her, as I witnessed 
the deep and salutary impression made on her 
by Lady Mary's goodness. I spolie kindly to 
her, and succeeded, though not without much 
difficulty, in inducing her to retain the bank 
notes; then, in the hope of affording an ad- 
ditional mitigation to her sorrow, promised to 
inform her daily of the state of Mr. Vernon. 



AN ELDERLY GEKTLEMAl^. 161 

*^ Oh, 1 am wretched and disgraced," sobbed 
she, while I used my fruitless endeavours to 
sooth her. " It seems strange and puerile to 
think of such a contemptible annoyance at this 
moment, weighed down as I am, by afflictions 
so appalling ; but my maid — she on whom I 
have literally lavished money and presents — 
has so grossly insulted me last night, and this 
morning, that I shrink from encountering, and 
have not courage to dismiss her." 

I promised immediately to take this office on 
myself, and to get my houstskeeper to send her a 
femme de chamhre, in a few hours. Her gratitude 
was extreme, and proved that she had still some 
ffood feelinfj left. 

Never did I witness such concentrated rage 
and malice as in Madame Claudine, for so she 
was named, when I informed her, in an outer 
room, that her lady had no longer occasion for 
her services. 

*' Not no occasion for my services," replied 
she, in broken English. " I should be very 



162 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

sorry to continue dem to her now, dat she is 
exposeCi and vat you call turn out, from de house 
of Mons. Mortimer. It was all vary well as 
long as Monsieur did please to shut his eyes, and 
open his purse. — But now it is toute autre chose, 
all one oder ting ; and so I did tell her, last night, 
when we vas turn out, chassee de la maison, before 
I have de time to finish my rober de whisk, in the 
steward's room, or eat one morsel of supper malgre 
Mons. Pergault de cook have prepare von salade 
d'Homar expres for me. And den ve comes to dis 
dismal, damp, leetle hole, vidout never no maitre 
dJhotel, nor domestique for to speak to, except 
de livery servant, vid whom afemme de chamhre 
de bonne maison, like to me, cannot change de 
vords. I vould not be surprise, if Mons. Henri, 
de valet de Mons. Mortimer, vas to break his 
vord of honour, and refuse to marry me, for 
coming off vid von who vill be the cause of 
having all de establishment sent avay ; von vicked 
voman who never care for de domestiques, and 
only tink of herself ! She never have told me 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 163 

her secrets, more be de shame for her, to try to 
deceive her femme de chambre ; but she tink to 
blind my eyes, because she blind Mons. Morti- 
mer's eyes long time. But I am not so fool ; for 
ve femmes de chambres see de lof affair at von 
grand distance, before de oder persons tink dere 
be any lof at all ; and den, ve vatch, and vatch, 
till ve do find out all, and I am glad, because 
she tink to deceive me. Ye femmes des chambres 
have as much right to de secrets of notres dames 
as to deir clothes, and ven de do keep von, or 
de oder from us, ve expose dem.'* 

I was so disgusted with the unblushing vice 
and effrontery of this vile woman, that I told 
her to be silent, in a tone so peremptory, as to 
check her loquacity; and from compassion to 
her guilty and unfortunate mistress, I remained 
in the house until she had left it, insuring her 
departure by a ready compliance with the ex- 
travagant, and probably dishonest claims for 
wages, and sundry articles, alleged to have been 
purchased for Mrs. Mortimer's use. 



164 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

I returned immediately to Grosvenor-square ; 
and found that Mr. Vernon seemed so much 
refreshed by the few hours' repose he had en- 
joyed, that his physicians thought it probable he 
might linger for some time. Lady Mary at- 
tended him unremittingly; and Lady Delafield 
told me, with tears in her eyes, that she had 
never witnessed anything so affecting as the 
efforts made by both husband and wife, to con- 
ceal from each other, the anguish they were en- 
during. All the passionate tenderness which 
Mr. Vernon had felt for Lady Mary, during 
the first months of their union, seemed to revive 
in its pristine force, now that that union was on 
the verge of being dissolved by death. His eyes 
seldom left her face; and hers dwelt on his, 
with an expression of unutterable love. The 
thoughts of both were of that fearful separation, 
which a few days, nay, a few hours, might see 
accomplished, when the grave would eternally 
divide them ; yet, neither trusted themselves to 
speak of what ceaselessly occupied the reflections 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEx^IAN. 165 

of both. Grief, the truest, the deepest, alone 
filled the heart of the wife ; for, she had per- 
petrated no crime against aflPection, either of 
omission or commission. But, he was tortured 
by remorse, and writhed in agony at the anti- 
cipation of that fearful separation, to which his 
own guilty passions were conducting him. Now 
that the film had fallen from his eyes, his career 
during the last few months appeared before him 
in all its enormity; and the levity of character 
which had led to his derelictions, having given 
place to sober reflection, he seemed to awake 
as if from a frightful dream, only to find him- 
self, while trembling on the verge of eternity, 
again in view of that happiness he had so ruth- 
lessly cast from his grasp. 

It was edifying, it was beautiful, to see Lady 
INIary watching, with untired and untiring love, 
through the tedious hours that rolled their 
course, by the couch of her husband; touch- 
ingly reading, with a voice tremulous from sup- 
pressed emotion, the sacred volume, to which 



166 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

we turn in affliction, and never in vain. She 
lifted his sinking heart from the abyss of despair 
to the prospect of a future state ; he listened as to 
the admonitions of an angel, and as this life 
faded from his view, he would talk to her of 
the life to come, of which, alas ! he had hitherto 
thought so seldom, when they would be once 
more united, never to part again. 

Grief and anxiety now began to make their 
ravages felt on the already weakened constitu- 
tion of Lady Mary. Each revolving day saw 
her become more pale and attenuated ; her fine 
form lost all its roundness, and a bright red 
spot on her cheek, told that fever was spread- 
ing through her veins. Her aunt, whom I saw 
daily, made me the confidant of all her fears, 
and they were of the most sombre cast. 

" I see it plainly, my dear Mr. Lyster," would 
she say, " my poor Mary is fading away every 
hour, and he, would you believe it, seems to re- 
gard her altered looks with complacency. Oh ! 
the selfishness of some people ! When in health, 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 167 

he slighted, nay, almost deserted her, for an- 
other ; and now, I believe, he would literally re- 
joice were she to die with him. Why he is as 
bad as the savage despots, who, when expiring, 
ordain the deaths of all their wives, favourite 
slaves, and animals, in order that they may meet 
their masters in their imaginary future world. It 
is too bad, much too bad ; and me, Mr. Lyster, 
what is to become of me, if I lose her ? Who 
is to watch by my sick couch, or to close my 
dying eyes ; and he the cause of all. Indeed, I 
can hardly command enough Christian charity 
to forgive him, even though I know he is on his 
death- bed." 

" His conduct has been most culpable, I ad- 
mit," replied I, " but I believe he has only been 
weak, and not wicked." 

" Don't try to palliate guilt with such subter- 
fuges, Mr. Lyster," said Lady Delafield. " The 
difference between weakness and wickedness is 
much less than people suppose ; and the conse- 
quences are nearly always the same. Weak men 



168 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

only want the temptation to become wicked; 
they can resist no seduction, refuse no enjoy- 
ment. They shrink from opposition, as children 
do from punishment ; and guilt ever finds them 
ready to yield to its first assaults. A strong 
minded man may stoop to temptation, and re- 
cover from it; becoming strengthened by the ex- 
perience he has acquired, as iron gains hardness 
by the fire that heats it. But a weak man is 
only rendered weaker by each ftiU, and, like 
melted lead, takes any form that any one chooses 
to give him. Lady Mary," continued the prolix 
old lady, " has sat up with Mr. Vernon every 
night; not all my entreaties can induce her to 
leave him, and it is only during the day that she 
will consent to repose for an hour or two in the 
chamber that joins his. While she sleeps, he 
writes, and writes such gloomy things. Why, it 
was only this morning that I found her almost 
suffocated with tears, perusing these lines, which 
I took away, when she left the room for a mo- 
ment, seeing how they agitated her. Read 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 169 

Mr. Lyster, and you will agree with me, that he 
must be indeed intensely selfish, thus to harrow 
up her feelings, ali'eady too much wounded. He 
should not have suffered her to see his gloomy 
production ; such conduct, I repeat, is wickedly 
selfish, and I hate selfish people. / never was 
selfish, Mr. Lyster, never; and yet the reward 
for my freedom from this besetting sin, will be, 
to be left to bear up against the infirmities of age 
alone, and to have my eyes closed by hireling 
hands. Oh ! it is too bad ! much too bad ! and 
I cannot bear selfish people." 

Poor old lady ! and this energetic profession 
of disinterestedness to me, while she was in the 
very act of lamenting the probability of her pri- 
vations in case of the loss of her niece, and only 
apprehending the miserable catastrophe in refer- 
ence to her personal share in its consequences. 

THE DYING HUSBAND TO HIS WIIE. 

Dearest ! I am going 

To the dreary grave, 
Not thy love, though mighty, 

Can avail to save ; 



170 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Ruthless Death has mark'd me 

Soon to be his prey; 
All my hours are number'd, 

Brief must be my stay. 
Yet, beloved ! oh, weep not. 

Every tear of thine 
Turns my soul from heaven. 

Making earth its shrine. 

Soon, this heart, now beating 

Warm with love for thee, 
All its throbbings ceasing. 

Food for worms shall be : 
Soon, this breast that pillow'd 

Tliy loved head in sleep. 
Shall forget its sighing — 

Thou wilt live and weep : 
And these eyes fast fading. 

Soon shall look their last ; 
Wilt thou gaze upon me 

When their light hath past? 

Ah 1 these lips so faultering, 
f.^ ' ' Silent soon shall be. 

Speak no accents tender, ^ 

Smile no more on thee: 
The ear that loved the music 

Of thy voice's tones, 
Soon shall be insensate 

To thy sighs and moans. 
Thou wilt call me vainly. 

In loud, bitter grief. 
And its sad outpouring 

Yield thee no relief. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. ] 7 I 

Yet, thou'lt stay beside me 

When life's spark has fled ; 
Thy fond heart will shrink not 

From my dreary bed. 
Words of love thou'lt falter, 

Ne'er to meet reply, 
Nor from corse so pallid 

^^'ilt thou turn thine eye. 
One dear kiss but give me. 

Ere I pass away, 
'Tis the last sad token 

Love from thee would pray. 

Oh ! yet grant one other : 

Let this ring of thine, 
Pledged before the altar 

In exchange for mine, 
Rest with me, the darkness 

Of my grave to share. 
Though the worm around it 

Kiss thy shining hair. 
Hush ! a cloud comes o'er me, 

Thee no more I see ; 
'Tis, oh God ! our parting — 
Blessings rest with thee ! 

Various were the wishes and hopes that passed 
through my mind during the lingering illness of 
Mr. Vernon. There were days when I longed, 
absolutely longed for his death ; because I con- 
sidered that each hour added to his sufFerinsr 

i2 



172 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

existence, abridged one from that of Lady Ma!y 
I pictured to myself that the first vehemence of 
her grief at his decease being subdued, resigna- 
tion would follow, and lead to the recovery of her 
shattered health. Time, the healer of even the 
deepest wounds of grief, would, I fondly ima- 
gined, cicatrize^ if not totally efface, hers. Fool 
that I was ! I knew not how a woman can love, 
or mourn ; and it was reserved for this pure and 
lovely creature to instruct me. At other times, 
when Lady Delafield has recounted to me the 
despair and anguish of her niece, as her hus- 
band's approaching dissolution seemed to draw- 
nearer, I have prayed, fervently prayed, that his 
life might be prolonged; even though it offered 
an impassable barrier between her I doted on, 
and my hopes. 

I had now become an luilitue at Grosvenor 
Square, where Lady Delafield had taken up her 
residence. She saw, however, but little of her 
niece, who never left her husband's chamber but 
when she sought her couch for an hour's slumber. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 173 

I felt an indescribable, though a melancholy, 
pleasure, in being thus almost an inmate in the 
house of her I loved. Lady Delafield clung to 
me with all the helplessness of age. I was the 
person to be consulted on all emergencies, and 
in whose patient ear all her griefs were to be 
poured. Frequently did she acknowledge her 
obligations to me, and say, that I was necessary 
to her very existence ; that, \\athout me, she could 
not have borne up against the troubles present 
and prospective, that menaced her; and that 
she considered me as one of her family. How 
has my foolish heart beat with vague hopes, at 
hearing such words ! They engendered the de- 
lusive idea, that, at some remote period, when 
inforaied by her aunt of my unceasing attentions, 
I might be permitted, as a friend, to console 
Lady IMary ; and from friendship to love, I 
fencied the distance not insuperable. 

Thus, unworthy as I was, my kindness to her 
aged relative, the friend of my dear mother, had 
its source only in selfishness. It was true, that 



174 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

I hardly dared imagine that I could ever become 
more than a friend to Lady Mary; but to be 
even this, would be to be blessed beyond all that 
I had ever yet experienced, and, as the verse 

says, 

" None without Hope e'er loved the brightest fair, 
For Love will hope, when Reason would despair. " 

So hope presented me indistinct, but delicious, 
visions, never, never to be realized. I loved to 
sit on the chairs, or recline on the sofa, which 
had been pressed by her ; all the objects in the 
rooms on which her eyes had ever rested, pos- 
sessed a charm for me : the very atmosphere of 
the apartment seemed impregnated with a fra- 
grance that breathed of her; and I was only 
tranquil when beneath her roof. I have felt 
abashed and humiliated when Lady Delafield 
heaped commendations on my domestic habits 
and sedentary tastes; and, above all, on the 
disinterested devotion of my time and comfort 
to her. 

The good old lady little imagined that I was 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 175 

the slave to an ungovernable and unhallowed 
passion, and that all my attentions to her pro- 
ceeded from selfish motives. She talked in- 
cessantly of her niece; a subject on which I 
could have listened for ever. She related a 
thousand incidents connected with her infancy 
and girlhood, all calculated to rivet still more 
closely the chain that bound me to her. How 
have I writhed in the pangs of jealousy, when 
she has dwelt, \vith prolixity, on the passionate 
attachment of Lady Mary to her husband ; and 
how have I endeavoured to lead her to revert to 
the period antecedent to her niece's knowledge 
of him. On one occasion — I shall never forget 
it — she observed to me, that she often thought 
I seemed formed for Lady Mary. " We pos- 
sessed," she said, " the same love of home and 
quiet." I felt the blood rush to my very temples. 
" And yet," continued she, " perhaps you might 
not have liked each other; for similarity of tastes, 
does not always beget affection. I remember., 



176 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

that when I asked Mary, the day after you were 
presented to me, if she did not think you good 
looking?" (how my heart throbbed), " She re- 
phed that she had not observed you sufficiently 
to judge." 

How did this speech wound me ! Never did 
vanity receive a more severe check. Lady Dela- 
field probably observed my mortification, for she 
resumed : 

" The second time we met you, Mary as- 
sented to my remark, that yours was a good 
countenance." 

Then, she had remarked me; and my appear- 
ance had not displeased her ! Here, was subject 
for joy; and Hope once more spread its wings, 
and soared into the future. 

Mr. Vernon had now lingered on for six weeks, 
six blessed weeks, as his admirable wife called 
them; for, during that period, she had taught 
him to look to another icorld, for that happiness 
promised to the repentant sinner. But the man- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 177 

date had gone forth ; death was not to be cheated 
of his prey; and Mr. Vernon expired in the arms 
of his wife, blessing her with his latest breath. 

Prepared, as we considered Lady Mary to be, 
for this calamity, she soon sank under it ; and a 
few weeks saw her borne to the grave, that so 
lately received the mortal remains of him she 
loved so well. 

Though years, long years, have elapsed since 
I saw her deposited in the tomb, my recollection 
of the appalling spectacle, is at this moment as 
vivid as though it had occurred but yesterday. 
What / suffered, those only can know, who, 
having centred all feelings, all hopes, in one 
passion, behold the object of it snatched for 
ever from their view. I mourned her long and 
deeply ; — but why dwell on this painful theme ? 
She died, unknowing that she left on earth a 
heart that would long bleed for her loss ; and I 
had not even the consolation of thinking that 
she would have pitied the attachment she had 
inspired. 

I 3 



173 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Shortly after her death, her aunt gave me 
the following verses, written by Lady Mary, 
a few days subsequent to the interment of her 
husband. 

THE MOURNER. 

I SAW thee when Death bover'd nigh, 

And set his seal upon thy brow; 
I heard thy struggling groan and sigh, 

Which e'en in mem'ry haunts me now. 

I saw the lips, all pale and chill, 

Where words of love were wont to dwell. 

And felt a pang my bosom thrill, 
That words can never, never tell. 

And when the fearful strife was o'er. 
When life had fled, and hope was gone, 

I gazed on thy dear face once more — 
That face which still I gaze upon. 

I thought how soon the cold, dark gra>'e 
Would hide thee from my tearful eye. 

And, frighted, shrank from life, to crave. 
In that chill tomb with thee to lie. 

I call'd thee by fond names of love, 

Names that weve wont to charm thine ear; 

But nought the ear of Death could move, , 

And heedless fell each burning tear. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 179 

Tears fell in streams upon thy brow, 
As my pale lips to thine were press'd; 

But, ah ! those lava showers had now 
No power to break thy marble rest 

Within the coffin's narrow bound 

Thy cold remains too soon were laid: 

Ah ! worse than death, was the harsh sound 
The closing of that coffin made. 

Why did I live beyond that hour 

When "all the life of life is fled?" 
Existence, fearful is thy power, 

Who lingerest still, when Hope is dead ! 

When I had perused them, I could not refrain 
from feeling, that it was better she had not been 
left to drag on an existence which the loss of 
him she had so fondly loved, must have for ever 
embittered : and I ceased to delude myself any 
longer with the hope, that a heart so devoted as 
hers had been, could ever have found consolation 
in a second attachment. 

Pity induced me to continue to poor Lady 
Delafield, the attentions that a selfish motive first 
led me to pay her. She survived her niece but 
a year; and, dying, bequeathed to me the por- 



180 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

trait now before me, which I have preserved 
with a rehgious care. When I have since heard 
some heartless coxcomb, or witless worldling, 
pronounce women to be incapable of a lasting 
attachment, I have turned from them with scorn, 
to think of Lady Mary Vernon; whose love 
neither neglect, unkindness, nor even death it- 
self could change, and who followed the object 
of her attachment to the grave from which she 
could not save him. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 181 



MY FOURTH LOVE. 



What! (I fancy I hear some indignant fair 
one say), can he again have loved? and has the 
pure flame, kindled by the beautiful and sainted 
Mary, been profaned by some unworthy suc- 
cessor to her place, in his heart ? 

Alas ! it was even so : the grief, I thought 
indestructible, passed away, like all other things 
in this sublunary world, fading day by dayj 
until nothing of it was left but a tender melan- 
choly, like the softened feeling that a summer's 
twilight produces on the mind: or, like the me- 
mory of our youth, when that joyous season of 
life has long departed. Lady Mary was not 
forgotten. Oh ! no ; but she was regarded by 
me as a vision, beautiful, evanescent, and indis- 



182 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

tinct, something to be recurred to in solitude 
and in prayer, but too pure, too sacred for this 
work-o'-day world. In a few months, I blush 
to say hmo feto, I again mingled with the busy 
crowd; the time-killers, who tremble at death, 
yet find that the frail and uncertain tenure by 
which existence is held, passes not rapidly 
enough, and therefore try to accelerate its speed 
by all the means in their power. I again fre- 
quented my old haunts, the clubs ; was a regular 
equestrian in Hyde Park, and looked in at most 
of the fashionable routs and balls of the season. 

Mothers, aunts, and married sisters, honoured 
me with no small portion of their attention. My 
fortune was magnified into more than double 
its actual amount, and I was looked on as that 
most coveted of all bipeds, a marrying man, a 
good parti, or prize, in the lottery of wedlock, 
which it behoved all prudent spinsters to endea- 
vour to secure. The lesson I had received from 
Arabella Wilton, had made a forcible impres- 
sion on my mind. I was now prone to suspect 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 183 

that it was my fortune^ and not myself, that at- 
tracted the attentions I received; and I turned 
with disgust from every unmarried woman who 
said a civil thing, or extended a gracious smile 
to me, viewing her as a designing speculatress, 
who was thinking only of pin-money, jewels, 
and all the et ceteras that my wealth could fur- 
nish. I hardly know which is the most objec- 
tionable character of the two, the man whose 
vanity misleads him into fancying that every 
woman who bestows upon him a kind word or 
smile is smitten with him ; or he, who suspects 
that his fortune gives him irresistible claims on 
the attention of the sex. Vanity is a primitive 
weakness; but suspicion is a failing acquired 
by that worldly wisdom, which few ever at- 
tained, except at the price of this mean vice. 

Having an intuitive fear of the interested mo- 
tives of unmarried women, I sought the society 
of those, who, if less interested, were not less in- 
teresting, — I mean the married. And here, " I 
could a tale unfold." — But no, let me forbear. 



184 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

and leave my bonnes fortunes to the imagination 
of my readers. 

At this period I was presented to Lady Elms- 
court, one of the reigning belles of the day, 
though as the French would say, un pen passte. 
The time which had elapsed since her diploma 
of beauty had been conferred upon her seemed 
to have set upon it the stamp of universal concur- 
rence. Nobody could question the authenticity 
of charms, acknowledged during twenty years; 
hence, her reputation for loveliness passed cur- 
rent, long after the attractions that had acquired 
it, had lost their lustre. 

My attention was drawn towards her, at the 
period to which I am now recurring, not merely 
by her beauty, though that might have excused 
the thraldom of wiser heads than mine, but by a 
certain air of sentiment that pervaded her coun- 
tenance ; and which, if it amounted not quite to 
melancholy, possessed all the softness and charm, 
which a gentle peiisiveness never fails to lend a 
handsome woman in the eyes of a man who has 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 185 

known a disappointment of the heart. Lady 
Elmscourt, however, was even then arrived at 
that age, when to guess the precise number of 
lustres she had numbered, becomes a difficult 
task; admirers always diminishing one, if not 
two, and the world in general, and friends in 
particular, adding an equal number. 

She insinuated, or implied, for what well- 
bred woman ever does more on such subjects, 
that she was thirty-three. This acknowledg- 
ment was made by references to epochs, when 
she was, as she said, quite a child; or to others, 
when she first came out. Her cheek had lost 
none of its bloom, perhaps it had increased, 
rather than diminished the brightness of its hue ; 
for it wore a certain fixed, though still a fine red, 
that never appears before maturity has for some 
years replaced the delicate and evanescent tints 
which belong only to youth. 

Her eyes were as brilliant, but less pellucid 
than formerly ; her hair as glossy, but much less 
profuse in its wa\7 tresses; and her rounded 



186 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

charms approached that dreaded degree of em- 
bonpoint, which indicates the motherly as well 
as the matronly character. Certain slight lines, 
so slight as to be almost imperceptible, around 
the eyes, and a protuberance of the skin beneath 
them, furnished the envious with proofs that, as 
they coarsely remarked, though she had le chair 
de poule, she yet was no chicken. But imposing 
as was all this evidence, it failed to convince me 
that she was other than a very beautiful and 
captivating woman, more especially in a well 
lighted ball-room, or in the softened shade of 
her own boudoir. It is only rendering justice 
to her taste to add, that she seldom allowed the 
garish sun to shine on her charms, or submitted 
herself, unveiled, to the dangerous ordeal of 
broad daylight. 

Blessed with an indulgent husband, a large 
fortune, and uninterrupted good health, what 
could be the cause of the apparent melancholy 
of Lady Elmscourt? This question I asked 
myself more than once; and its solution not 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 187 

only piqued my curiosity, but excited my in- 
terest. A little more discrimination on my part, 
might have easily led to a discovery of the source 
of her chagrin. But, I was never remarkable for 
being quick-sighted to the defects of a handsome 
woman ; and in this precise case was willing to 
invest with the ennobling halo of sentiment, a 
peculiarity which originated but in weakness of 
mind. Lady Elmscourt was mourning over her 
departed youth, and departing beauty ; the gra- 
dual desertion of which, few women are philo- 
sophical enough to behold with resignation or 
equanimity. Nor can we blame this regret, 
when we consider how much ice foster their 
vanity ; and encourage the culpable notion, that 
youth and the charm of person are their surest, 
if not best claims on our attachment. 

My acquaintance with Lady Elmscourt had 
ripened into intimacy ; each interview rendering 
me still more the slave to her waning charms. 
I looked on them with the same feelings with 
which we regard the setting sun— a deep ad- 



188 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

miration for the brilliant, but fading beauty, 
mingling with melancholy at the recollection, 
that its loveliness is fleeting away, and will soon 
be irrevocably lost. 

We talked sentiment, that rail-road to the 
heart; agreed on the insufficiency of the plea- 
sures of a frivolous, or to use what might be 
called its synonyme, a fashionable hfe, to fill up 
*' the void left aching in the heart." In all 
these conversations we were, of course, as in- 
comprehensible and diffuse as sentimentalists 
usually are ; retaining only the impression, that 
we were superior to the herd around us, and that 
it was this superiority which rendered us un- 
happy by unfitting us for a contact with them. 

Lady Elmscourt talked, as I thought, elo- 
quently, of the misery of uncongenial minds, 
misunderstood feelings, and crushed sympathies. 
No definite accusation against her liege lord 
was ever uttered, unless it were in the avowal, 
and it was made in bitterness of feeling, that he 
had no taste for amatory poetry; laughed, yes. 



AN- ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 189 

positively laughed, at Shenstone's charming pas- 
torals ; preferred Dryden and Pope, to the ex- 
quisite translations of the Persian Hafiz ; and 
had a detestation for French romances. I con- 
fess that in my heart I felt a warmer sympathy 
with the literar)'^ taste of the husband, than with 
that of the wife. But this dissimilarity of senti- 
ment I carefully concealed from her; leaving 
her, with the usual hypocrisy of my sex, to 
imagine, that I considered all who could differ 
with her in opinion, as mere senseless clods of 
earth, and herself a portion of its fine porcelain, 
fit only to pass into delicate hands. 

She talked of the misfortune of marrying, 
while yet a child; such, she more than insinuated, 
had been her fate ; and now (and here she looked 
unutterable things), while her heart retained all 
its freshness, the lover of her youth had dege- 
nerated into the husband. Life had lost all its 
illusions ; and she was — not happy. 

When a woman acknowledges to an admirer 
that she is not happy, there is but one course 



190 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

left for him to pursue, which is to swear that he 
is miserable, and that he loves madly, hope- 
lessly; taking most artful care that she shall 
infer from his looks and tones, as well as from 
his speech, that she is the object of this hopeless 
passion. 

Women like to inspire hopeless passions ; for, 
even the most mundane of the sweet sex, always 
retain some portion of the pristine romance of 
their characters ; just as flowers, though withered 
and faded, still retain some faint remnant of their 
native perfume. 

I had made some progress in a declaration of 
this kind; exaggerating the admiration I felt 
for her into a passion, worthy the hero of a 
French melodraine. During this rhapsody she 
looked half pleased, half ashamed; just as a 
woman, who is weak but not vicious, may be 
supposed to look, when she has by her own folly 
drawn on herself the insult I was now offering ; 
an insult which every woman authorizes, when 
she is so unthinking and indelicate, as to repose 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 191 

a questionable confidence in the breast of a 
stranger. And here let me warn my female 
readers, that such confidences are invariably 
considered as direct advances on their parts. 

I was in the midst of my passionate avowal of 
tenderness, when the door was suddenly opened, 
and in walked a very good-looking, gentlemanly, 
middle-aged man, with a most prepossessing 
countenance. By the by, I have often been 
struck by the extraordinary disparity of appear- 
ance between men of a certain age, and their 
better halves, who generally look like the elder 
daughters, or younger sisters of their liege lords, 
though they are nearly of the same age. The 
husband presents his bald front, from which the 
locks that once adorned it, have long receded, 
growing " fine by degrees, and beautifully less," 
until only a few lingering locks, of mingled hue, 
remain ; while the wife presents her head, shaded 
by glossy ringlets, or silken braids, as profuse, 
nay more so, than when she was indebted for 
such ornaments to nature, and not to her coiffeur. 



192 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

But to quit this digression, and resume my 
nan-ative. Lady Elmscourt seemed for a mo- 
ment embarrassed; and no wonder, for there 
is something peculiarly annoying to a well-bred 
woman, in being interrupted, in the midst of a 
love scene. Quickly, however, recovering her 
presence of mind, she presented me to the un- 
conscious intruder on her privacy, who icas no 
other than her husband. After the usual ci\'i- 
lities, he turned to her, and said : 

" I am come, my love, to ask a favour of you. 
The Duke of Ancaster has lent me his box at 
Covent Garden for this evening, and I wish to 
take Emily to the play. I know you dislike 
going; but will you let me be her chaperon ?" 

" WTiy, really," replied Lady Elmscourt, " I 
do not approve of her frequenting theatres — I 
think the practice of permitting young people to 
appear at such places, highly reprehensible." 

" But, my dear," said her lord, deprecatingly, 
" Emily is not quite so young as all that. WTiy, 
let me see, she will be " 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 193 

" Oh ! pray, say no more," interrupted Lady 
Elmscourt ; " if you have set your heart on 
taking her, and she desires to go, I cannot re- 
fuse my consent ; for I hate disappointing young 
people." 

" Why, my dear," rejoined her lord, " to hear 
you speak, one would imagine Emily to be a 
child. You forget how old she is ; and that, in 
a short time, she will be — • — " 

" Well, well," again interrupted Lady Elms- 
court, preventing him from finishing the sen- 
tence, " if you really intend her to go, you had 
better ring the bell, and have her told to hold 
herself in readiness." 

I took my leave, fancying, as I gave a parting 
glance to Lady Elmscourt, and marked the ex- 
pression of discontent which clouded her brow, 
that she looked at least ten years older than 
when I entered her boudoir. Vanity whispered 
that this discontent arose from her mortification 
at my hearing that she had a daughter who was, 
as Lord Elmscourt emphatically expressed it, no 

K 



194 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

longer a child. Still, however flattering might 
be the cause, its effects on her countenance served 
to disenchant me exceedingly: we men, being 
so egregiously selfish, that we are more disposed 
to find fault with, than to pity, the evils to 
which we ourselves give rise. I once heard an 
acquaintance of mine lament that his wife looked 
extremely ugly, when jealous; never reflecting 
that his conduct exposed her to the passion, and 
its unembeUishing transformation. 

When I met Lady Elmscourt at a soiree, the 
evening of the day alluded to, looking as bloom- 
ing as ever, her dark eyes sparkling with vivacity, 
and her rich red lips opening with continual 
smiles, I forgot that I had thought her un peu 
passee in the morning, and became more assidu- 
ous than ever. The general admiration she ex- 
cited among the men, enhanced the power of 
her attractions in my eyes, and perhaps really 
increased them ; for, a coquettish woman, and 
she certainly was of that genus, always looks 
more captivating when she sees that she is ad- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 195 

mired. Never had Lady Elmscourt been more 
fascinating and encouraging — perhaps the words 
might pass for s)nionymes — at least, in the vo- 
cabulary of a vain man. She smiled on me^ as 
I fancied, with peculiar sweetness ; but, I dare 
be sworn, that half a dozen of my contemporary 
coxcombs entertained the same impression of the 
smile which she bestowed on them. 

She asked me where I intended to pass the 
autumn ; a question which, with my usual fatuity, 
I considered to denote a more than common in- 
terest in my movements ; consequently, my reply 
was the expression of a wish, that wherever 
I might be, I trusted it would be at some 
place which would admit of my sometimes en- 
joying the happiness of her society. She looked 
rather embarrassed at this speech, but not dis- 
pleased; and I began to flatter myself on the 
easy conquest I had achieved. 

" Where do you pass the autumn ?" asked I, 
determined to pui*sue the course our conversa- 
tion had taken. 

k2 



196 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

" We go to Elmscourt Park in July, and shall 
be stationary there for some time," replied Lady 
Elmscourt. 

" Is not Elmscourt Park near Alnwick ?" de- 
manded I. 

" Yes, within a few miles ;" was the answer. 
" Then, I shall certainly accept an invitation 
in your neighbourhood, often pressed on me," 
said I, " and trust I may hope to see you." 

I threw into my looks and manner as much 
meaning as I could, while making this speech ; 
and she appeared, if not pleased, at least not 
offended, by its freedom. She wore a bouquet 
of flowers, which furnished me with an oppor- 
tunity of addressing to her one of the countless 
silly compliments for which flowers supply the 
theme ; and which are as fade as are generally 
the objects that suggest them. I declared my 
envy of the position of hers^ and my desire to 
possess them. 

" You are really too bad, Mr. Lyster," said 
she, " and I must not listen to you." 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 197 

Now, when a lady tells a gentleman that, " he 
is too bad," he is apt to construe her assertion 
into a sort of avowal, that he is not bad enough ; 
and, consequently, I was preparing to repeat 
some of the numberless platitudes which fashion- 
able men utter to frivolous women, when she 
broke from me, in affected alarm, and joined a 
group who were conversing at a little distance. 
I followed her, and caught her eyes, which 
avoided not the encounter of mine ; but met and 
sustained it with an earnest softness which I 
should be sorry to see my mfe, if I had one, 
exhibit to any man. 

^Vhen the soirte was over, I conducted her to 
her carriage ; her small hand shrank not from 
the pressure of mine ; nay, I thought, but it 
might be only fancy, that hers returned it, as 
she placed in it the coveted bouquet. Plow 
slight a circumstance can change the whole cur- 
rent of our thoughts and feelings ! As her car- 
riage drove away, I raised the flowers to rny 
lips; their odour brought back to memory the 



198 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

dropped bouquet of the lost, the lovely Lady 
Mary, and all the sensations which I that evening 
experienced. 

" She," thought I, " would not have given me 
her bouquet. Never could I have presumed to 
breath an unhallowed vow in her chaste ear. 
Her eye would never have met the gaze of mine 
with answering tenderness. No ! no ! Mary was 
a pure, a spotless, as well as a lovely woman !" 

And, as these thoughts rushed through my 
mind, I threw the bouquet from me with disdain ; 
for, its late owner had lost so much by a com- 
parison with the sainted Lady Mary, that her 
power over my imagination was at an end ; 
and I scorned myself for ha\ang yielded to her 
witchery. If women knew how much of their 
empire they lose by weak or guilty concessions, 
policy would supply the place of modesty ; and 
men would not so frequently be furnished with 
food for the encouragement of dishonourable 
hopes, and the gratification of inordinate vanity. 
A gay supper party at my club^ in the society 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 199 

of some six or eight young routs^ of fashionable 
notoriety, dispelled the melancholy which my 
reminiscences of Lady Mary had excited; and 
the frequent bumpers of champagne, aided by 
the libertine compliments lavished by my com- 
panions on the personal attractions of Lady 
Elmscourt, revived my admiration for her. Men 
are so weak as to be always influenced by the 
admiration of other men for a woman : and 
many an embryo passion that might never have 
been blown into a flame, and many a nearly ex- 
tinct one, have been rekindled by an accidental 
commetidation of her of whom we have hitheito 
either thought but slightly, or have ceased to 
think with pleasure. A sure proof, this, that 
vanity is, in most cases, the principal fascination 
in the love aflkirs of men. Had my passion for 
Lady Elmscourt been a sincere one, I could not 
have borne to have listened to the free, the liber- 
tine compliments, paid to her person ; but, as it 
was, they gratified my amour propre, and piqued 
me to persevere in my attentions to her. 



200 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

I commenced my route to her house on the 
next day, with an unoccupied heart ; but with a 
head filled with the flattering eulogiums which 
my gay companions had bestowed upon her 
beauty. They thought her a conquest worthy 
of contesting, and that she evidently encouraged 
my attentions ; consequently, every word or 
glance of hers, was now remembered " as proof 
as strong as holy writ," of her tendresse for me ; 
and, therefore, pour passer le temps, I was willing 
to devote to her the idle hours that had latterly 
hung heaA7 on my hands. To get rid of them, 
and excite the envy and jealousy of my com- 
panions, were desirable objects; objects which 
generally furnish the chief motives in the liaisons 
which men of fashion fontn. So, reflection ^zfe, 
as I have said, I bent my course towards Lady 
Elmscourt's, the next day, at the usual hour. 

This interview, after the flirtation of the pre- 
vious night, must, I felt, lead to a definite un- 
derstanding between us. I had gone too far to 
recede ; and her encouragement of my advances 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 201 

had been too decided, to leave her an excuse for 
repelhng me. All this I thought over, without 
a pulse beating quicker, or one illusion of love 
warming my heart. I reflected on my position, 
and its probable results, as calmly as if a liaison 
with a married woman was not a crime, in- 
volving the parties in danger, sin, and shame, 
and laying up sorrow and remorse for the 
future. 

This indifference, perhaps, partially arose from 
having witnessed the frequency of similar delin- 
quencies in the society in which I Hved ; and the 
feeling, or rather the utter want of all feehnffs, 
which the man of fashion always habitually ex- 
hibits in his liaisons. 

In passing through Grosvenor Square, my at- 
tention was excited by a shriek, if the most har- 
monious sound of alarm, that ever met my ears, 
might be called by so unmusical an appellation. 
I turned, and observed a young female endea- 
vouring to disengage herself from a large New- 
foundland dog, that jumped on her with more 

k3 



202 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

animation than violence, he evidently being in 
play. A matronly looking lady was using her 
efforts to force the dog away; but he pertina- 
ciously continued to jump on the young lady, 
to the discomfiture of her robe, as well as of her 
person. To run to her rescue, and drive her 
canine admirer away, was the work of a moment ; 
but her large bonnet became untied in the strug- 
gle, and fell from her head, leaving exposed to 
my ardent gaze, one of the loveliest faces I ever 
beheld. She might have served as a model for 
a Hebe ; youth and health lending all their 
charms to a countenance, marked by a perfect 
regularity of features, joined to a matchless com- 
plexion. Eyes blue, and, by her alarm, suffused 
with tears, convinced me, for the first time, of 
the truth of the old poetical simile, which com- 
pared such eyes to "violets bathed in dew;" lips 
like divided cherries, and cheeks that shamed 
the rose, with hair of chesnut brown, emu- 
lating the tendrils of the vine, in its wavy 
spiral curls, and the softness and gloss of the 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 203 

finest silk in its texture, with gently curved 
brows, and long eye-lashes, of the darkest hue, 
completed the picture of the lovely creature who 
stood before me. 

I could have gazed on her for ever, but I was 
recalled to a sense of propriety, by the stern look 
of the elderly lady ; who having coldly thanked 
me, and arranged the discomposed robe of the 
young beauty, led her off in another direction. 

I stood as if transfixed to the spot, gazing 
after them, half, ay, more than half, tempted to 
follow the route they had taken, but checked by 
the repelling looks of the matron. Who could 
they be ? I would have given hundreds to have 
discovered ; but, as I had left my groom and 
horses at the top of Brook Street, I had no 
means of tracing their abode, unless I chose to 
follow them myself. I was, however, so near 
the house of Lady Elmscourt, that I decided on 
entering, determined to ascertain if she knew 
any of her youthful neighbours, who answered 
to the description of my beautiful incognita. 



204 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

She received me with her most winning smiles, 
yet showing just as much feminine embarrass- 
ment, as was requisite to remind me that she 
had not forgotten my advances of the previous 
night, and, as I thought, to induce a repetition 
of them. Nothing forces a man to commit him- 
self so much, as a woman's betraying that she 
expects him so to do. I entered her house with 
every thought fixed on another, and totally ob- 
livious of the love speeches I had so recently 
addressed to her; but, her ostentatious consci- 
ousness of her recollection of them, brought 
them all vividly before me ; and, like a fool, 
I now resumed the same tone of tenderness. 
'Twere idle to repeat raj fade compliments, and 
protestations of attachment ; and her sentimental 
temporizing, which found expression in some 
such original and incoherent phrases as the fol- 
lowing: — " It was wrong, yes, she knew it was 
very wrong to listen to me ;" an opinion in which 
1 perfectly coincided. " Friends we might be, 
and she hoped we always should be ; honour 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 205 

and virtue did not prohibit this; but more than 
friends we never could be to each other. She 
had duties to perform, duties of a wife and a 
mother; and though she esteemed me" (ladies 
always esteem their admirers), « I must talk to 
her no more of love." 

Her repulses, if such they might be called, 
were so gentle, as to encourage rather than re- 
buke me; all that she said being only what 
every woman, similarly situated, thinks it con- 
venable to say on these occasions; occasions 
that had never occurred, had not their own 
levity and coquetry induced them ; for, no man, 
who is not a fool, will ever hazard a declaration 
of love to a married woman, who has not pre- 
viously given him encouragement. She, how- 
ever, who has listened to an avowal of illicit 
passion, even though she rejects it, has sullied 
the pristine purity of her mind; and never was 
there more truth than in the line — 

" He comes too near, who comes to be denied. " 
I was pouring forth my asservations of passion, 



206 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

when the door flew suddenly open, and my beau- 
tiful incognita stood before me, uttering — 

" Oh ! dear mother, pardon this abruptness, 
but I was so frightened, and I feared some one 
might alarm you by telling you of my panic." 

At this moment, her eyes fell on my face ; and 
a beautiful blush proved her recognition of me. 

" But this gentleman has doubtless informed 
you of all," continued she, " for he it was who 
rescued me from the dog." 

I would willingly have laid down my life for 
the kind look that accompanied this hurried 
speech, and the sweet blush that preceded it; 
for, I was already in love, yes, positively in love 
with this charming creature, to whose mother, 
five minutes before, I had been offering my vows. 
At this moment. Lord Elmscourt entered the 
salon, and having met in the ante room the 
dame de compagnie, who had witnessed the at- 
tack of the dog, she related the circumstance to 
him, attaching more importance to it than it 
deserved. He embraced his daughter, who 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 207 

having pointed me out to him as her deliverer, 
he was vehement in his expressions of thanks. 

Lady Elmscourt seemed embarrassed, and not 
unconscious of my evident admiration of her 
daughter, near to whose youthful charms hei-s 
sank into shade so completely, as to be wholly 
eclipsed. That she loved her was eiddent ,• but 
that she was anxious to keep her in the back 
gi'ound, was quite as apparent; and, to an uncon- 
cerned spectator, which /, however, was not, it 
would have been an amusing study to have ob- 
served, how much of the mother was forgotten 
in the pretensions of the handsome woman, jea- 
lous of a rival to her charms, even though that 
rival was found in her own child. 

" You had better retire to your room, my 
dear Emily," said Lady Elmscourt, "and repose 
yourself. You are still agitated from your recent 
alarm." 

" She must not, however, depart without 
thanking her champion," said her father. " Go, 
my love, and shake hands with Mr. Lyster," 



208 THE CONFESSIONS OE 

and he led her towards me, covered with 
blushes. 

She held out a hand — oh ! what a hand I 
small, plump, dhnpled, and fair, as ever met 
the light. Not the dull, dead white, produced 
by the constant use of almond paste, cold cream, 
and half a hundred other cosmetics; not that 
opaque white which marks the generality of fine 
ladies' hands, and indicates the want of circula- 
tion, arising from idleness. No, hers was so 

beautifully and delicately tinted with a pale pink, 
that it looked like the interior of a maiden blush 
rose. This exquisite little hand fluttered in 
mine, like a frightened bird in the grasp of a rude 
school-boy ; yet it lingered a moment there too, 
while she bestowed on me one eloquent glance of 
gratitude, that spoke more than words; though 
the?/ were not wanting, as resuming some por- 
tion of her native dignity, she gracefully and 
graciously uttered her thanks. Her father then 
led her to the door, and I seized my hat, and 
retreated; dreading to find myself, even for a 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. '209 

moment, alone with the mother, while every 
pulse of my heart was beating for the daughter. 

" I hope, Mr. Lyster," said Lord Elmscourt, 
" that you have no engagement for to-morrow, 
and that you will give us the pleasure of seeing 
you at dinner." 

Though I had an engagement, I hesitated 
not to accept his invitation, that I might again 
behold Lady Emily. I left the house as much 
in love as if I had never experienced the passion 
before ; and, vain fool that I was, ready as ever 
to believe, that the object of my passion was 
already disposed to share it. 

Love is, I think, like fever, one severe attack 
leaves the patient subject to relapses through 
youth; and each succeeding one renders him 
more weakened, and consequently, more exposed 
to future assaults. 

I thought of Emily every hour through the 
rest of the day, and naturally enough dreamt of 
her at night. I comited the time with impa- 
tience until I could present myself at Grosvenor 



210 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Square ; and at last ascended the stairs of her 
father's mansion, agitated by hope and fear, as 
each of these passions alternately suggested the 
chances for or against my seeing her. I found 
Lord Elmscourt in the drawing-room alone, and 
received a most cordial welcome from him. 
' " I have been endeavouring," said he, " to 
prevail on Lady Elmscourt to permit Emily to 
dine with us to-day, as we have only yourself 
and two of our country neighbours, who have 
known her since her birth ; but, my efforts have 
been unavailing. She will, however, join us at 
dessert, which she always does when we are en 
petite committee;" and he rubbed his hands joy- 
fully, as if in anticipation of the pleasure of 
seeing her. 

He seemed to have an instinctive feeling that 
I had taken a hvely interest in her; and that 
her presence would have been as agreeable to 
me as to him. Lady Elmscourt entered the 
room, attired with even more than usual care ; 
but, in spite of the elegance and studied effort 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 211 

of her toilette, it struck me that she looked more 
fame than I had ever observed her to look 
before. I remarked the strong resemblance 
between her and her lovely daughter ; a resem- 
blance so disadvantageous to her ladyship, that 
it at once reminded the beholder of that, which 
she evidently took much pains to make them 
forget, namely, her age. 

The two country neighbours were very similar 
to the generality of that genus. They ate con- 
siderably, and talked eternally of country affairs : 
of commons to be inclosed, packs of hounds to 
be given up, and other, to me, equally interest- 
ing topics. At last, one of them remarked 
how exceedingly well her ladyship was looking, 
" quite as well, indeed, as if she had not a grown 
daughter to bring out." 

This observation occasioned an increase of 
colour in the cheek of Lady Elmscourt; but, I 
scarcely need add, the blush contained more of 
anger than of pleasure. They were continually 
referring to circumstances that had formerly oc- 



212 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

curred; reminding Lady Elmscourt, that such, 
or such, an event, took place about seventeen 
years ago, just after the period of Lady Emily's 
birth. Then, one of them perfectly remembered 
the illumination in the village of Elmscourt at 
that epoch; while the other quite as vividly 
recollected, that, at the county ball the year 
before, he had had the honour of opening the 
ball with her ladyship. 

She was evidently discomposed at their mal- 
a-propos reminiscences; and suffered under the 
infliction to which her vanity and assumption 
of juvenility exposed her. But her tormentors 
seemed totally unconscious that she did not de- 
rive as much satisfaction as themselves, from 
their diverting recollections of the past. 

Dinner over, and the dessert placed on the 
table. Lord Elmscourt desired the groom of the 
chambers to inform Lady Emily that she was 
expected in the salle a manger. I felt my heart 
beat quicker at this message, and was conscious 
that I was exhibiting my discomposure, as I 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 213 

caught the eye of Lady Elmscourt fixed on me, 
with, as I thought, a scrutinizing glance. 

The servant quickly returned, saying that 
Lady Emily was not quite well, and had retired 
to bed. I fancied that I perceived a smile of 
malicious triumph on Lady Elmscourt's face, as 
she regarded me, noting, as I dare be sworn she 
did, an expression of deep disappointment on 
my countenance. Already a romance was com- 
posed in my imagination : Emily, the beauteous 
Emily, was its heroine, and my unworthy self, 
its hero. Tlie mother in love with me, and 
suspicious of her daughter, complicated, and 
gave interest to, the plot ; my beloved and I were 
to be exposed to all the machinations of jealousy; 
and this prevention of Lady Emily's presence 
at the dessert, was the first active step of the 
drama. 

" Did you know that Emily was ill, my dear?" 
asked the alarmed father. " It is very strange ; 
for I saw her a short time before I descended to 
the drawing-room, and she appeared in perfect 



214 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

health. I must really go and see what is the 
matter with her ; " and apologizing to us for his 
absence, he left the room. 

The country neighbours seized that oppor- 
tunity of discussing the probabihty of an ap- 
proaching dissolution of parliament, a proba- 
bility in those days as often anticipated by the 
persons who desired it, as in these. 

Lady Elmscourt, in a sotto voce, asked me if I 
did not admire Lady Emily ? 

The question embarrassed me, for I dared not 
say hoio much I admired her; and a cold assent 
would have appeared hypocritical. I was sure 
that Lady Elmscourt was narrowly examining 
my countenance during the interrogation; for, 
though I did not see that her eyes were on me, 
yet ^felt that they were; and this consciousness 
added to my confusion. 

I was relieved by the entrance of Lord Elms- 
court leading in triumph his lovely daughter, 
her eyes sparkling with animation, and her 
cheeks blooming with the roses of health ; and 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 215 

the glad smile that played round her lips, I took 
to be an unequivocal symptom of her pleasure 
at seeing me. I could not forbear stealing a 
look at her mother; and though it was but the 
glance of a moment, I discovered dissatisfaction, 
nay, more than that merely negative feeling, 
portrayed on her countenance; at least, such 
was my uncharitable conclusion. 

" Well, for once I have defeated the ma- 
noeuvres of Mrs. Villiers," said our host, rubbing 
his hands with an air of great satisfaction. " I 
was sure Emily was not ill; and equally sure 
that she was longing to be with us." 

Lady Elmscourt positively blushed, an irre- 
fragable proof, as my vanity whispered, that the 
manoeuvre of keeping Lady Emily from us, was 
hers, and not Mrs. Villiers'. 

" Emily, here are your old fi-iends, Sir John 
Belton and Mr. Thorold ; and your new friend, 
Mr. Lyster. They are each and all glad to see 
you, I can answer for it : Mr. Lyster especially, if, 
as I believe, it be true, that we always like those 



216 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

whom we have served. I am not casuist enough 
to know whether the obliged entertain the same 
feeling ; but, I think too well of my Emily to 
suspect her of ingratitude. So, I take for 
granted, that she is as glad to see Mr. Lyster, 
as he evidently is to see her." 

I could not resist stealing a look at Lady 
Emily at this observation, and was vain enough 
to be delighted at perceiving her cheeks suffused 
with blushes. Her eyes, too, were cast down 
with a pretty embarrassment, that lent her new 
charms, and called forth a remark from the 
obtuse Mr. Thorold, — " That he would lay a 
wager, there was no ingratitude in Lady Emily's 
heart towards Mr. Lyster." Having made this 
acute observation, he chuckled with that pecu- 
liar laugh, to which country gentlemen of a cer- 
tain age, and who rarely quit their own county, 
are prone. 

I pitied #e increased embarrassment of the 
beautiful girl, which this silly speech had oc- 
casioned ; and her mother, too, seemed to dislike 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 217 

the tone the conversation had taken; for her lynx 
eye had detected its effect on me. 

"We all expected that Lady Emily would 

have been presented at court this season," said 

Sir John Belton; "and Lady Belton and my 

daughters looked through all the papers to see 

her name, and the description of her dress." 

" I thought young ladies were always pre- 
sented when they had completed their seven- 
teenth year," interrupted Mr. Thorold, "and 
Lady Emily entered her eighteenth, in April. 

" Ah ! Lady Elmscourt, how old our children 
make us appear; but, 'weeds of grace, grow 
apace,' as the old verse says. Why, there is my 
eldest daughter, who is two months younger than 
Lady Emily, and slie has been a xcife these seven 
months; nay, more, will soon be a mother. Fancy 
that, my lady; every dog has his day, as the old 
saying is. I shall soon be a grandfather; and 
you, my lady, how will you like being a grand- 
mother, eh? And yet all this must happen 
very soon; for Lady Emily is not one who wid be 

L 



218 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

left long on your hands. Will she, Mr. Lyster ? 
Apropos" (he did not say of what), "Lord Bel- 
mont is expected home fi'om Italy, in August, is 
he not?" 

The lovely Emily was covered with blushes, 
but, whether at the mention of marriage in irene- 
ral, or Lord Belmont in particular, I could not 
discover. Her mother, however, relieved her by 
rising from table and leaving the room ; Lord 
Elmscourt making no effort to detain them, as he 
also was embarrassed by the blunt coarseness of 
his stupid, but well-meaning neighbour. I had 
a presentiment that Emily would not escape 
some unkindness from her mother; and this 
fear, mingled with a vague di'ead of Lord Bel- 
mont and the apropos, haunted me during the 
long hour and a half that elapsed before we were 
summoned to coffee, in the drawing-room, where 
Emily was — not. 

Lady Elmscourt assumed an air of dignified 
coldness towards me; for which 1 respected, and 
would have thanked her, had I not been per- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 219 

suaded that jealousy and dislike had usurped the 
softer, but more reprehensible feeling, she ap- 
peared to have entertained for me the previous 
day. How did I execrate the folly that urged 
me io feign a passion I never felt. All the enor- 
mity of my conduct stood exposed to my view. 
The immorality of seeking to form a liaison with 
a married woman, now, for the first time, ap- 
peared to me in its true colours, ineffably wicked 
and sinful; and I became shocked at my past 
conduct. All this renovation of my slumbering 
morality, and for which I was so ready to give 
myself credit, arose not from sober conviction 
of wrong, but from selfishness alone. It had 
sprung into life in a few hours, engendered by 
the captivation of Lady Emily; and I at pre- 
sent, consequently, considered her mother's 
former encouragement of my attentions, highly 
culpable. How severely I judged her now, who, 
only two days before, I professed to love, and 
really did admire ! 

Such is man ; ever selfish, ever solely regard- 

l2 



2"20 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

fill of his own gratification; glossing over the 
crimes that administer to his pleasures, and con- 
demning them with unmitigated severity when 
they have ceased to be desirable. 

I had such a conviction of Lady Elmscourt's 
lingering tendresse for me, that to continue my 
accustomed visits to her would be, impossible ; 
for, they must have led to an explanation of my 
altered sentiments, painful to me, and humiliating 
to her. To have assumed the manner of a mere 
acquaintance, after the impassioned vows I had 
made her, must have excited her anger; and to 
have persevered in even the semblance of attach- 
ment to her, I felt to be literally impracticable. 
Nothing remained for me, tlierefore, but to ab- 
sent myself from her house; only calling occa- 
sionally, when I knew she was not at home, in 
order that the sudden cessation of my visits might 
not o;ive room for observations. 

I sauntered through Grosvenor Square fre- 
quently, in the hope of meeting Lady Emily; 
but, alas ! in vain : — she never appeared. At 



i 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 'J'll 

length, I began to despair of seeing her again, 
when, one fine morning, wishing to try a horse 
I was about to purcliase, I rode into Hyde Park, 
at, for me, an unusually early hour; and while 
galloping up Constitution Hill, encountered 
Lady Emily and her father, on horseback. The 
good Earl made me many friendly reproaches 
for having absented myself from Grosvenor 
Square; and Emily looked down and blushed, 
while answering my inquiries about her health. 

How exquisitely lovely she appeared! her 
riding habit displaying the perfect symmetry of 
her form, and the breeze agitating the beautiful 
ringlets, which at one moment shaded her deli- 
cate cheeks, and the next floated on the air. 
Though a timid rider, she looked most gracefully 
on horseback; and I gazed on her with a delight, 
the domonstrations of which I felt it difficult to 
repress. 

" Emily only commenced riding the day be- 
fore yesterday," said her father, in answer to 



222 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

some remark of mine — " I thought she looked 
pale of late, for want of exercise." 

My heart beat quicker at this intelligence. 
Yes, it must be so; her paleness was connected 
with my absence; and, vain blockhead that I 
was! I set this down in my mind as a certain 
proof that I had already made a deep impression 
on her youthful heart. 

" Ever since the day you rescued her from her 
canine admirer," resumed Lord Elmscourt, "my 
wife has not permitted her to walk in the square, 
lest a similar accident might occur. There is 
nothing, after all, Mr. Lyster, like a mother's 
love; and Emily's mother is always uneasy when 
she is out of her sight." 

Poor, good-natured man, thought I; little 
does he imagine the real motive of this anxiety, 
which I penetrated at once, and, with my usual 
sagacity, set down to Lady Elmscourt's jealousy. 
Such quick perception does vanity bestow on its 
slaves ! One of the almost numberless advantages 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 223 

of goodness is, that it blinds its possessor to many 
of those faults in others which could not fail to lie 
detected by the morally defective. A conscious- 
ness of unworthiness renders people extremely 
quick-sighted in discerning the vices of their 
neighbours; as persons can easily discover in 
others the symptoms of those diseases beneath 
which they themselves have suffered. This free- 
dom from suspicion, which is one of the attributes 
of virtue, "is its own exceeding great reward;" 
and constituted in Lord Elmscourt a source of 
perpetual content, which the knowledge that 
grows of the tree of evil, might have for ever 
destroyed. 

"Lady Elmscourt," continued he, "will only 
permit Emily to ride before breakfast, as she 
dreads her being exposed to the encounter of all 
the bold equestrains who frequent the Park at a 
more fashionable hour; consequently, we finish 
our ride ere you fine gentlemen are thinking ot 
commencing your day." 

An elderly acquaintance now joined Lord 



•224 THE CONFESSIOKS OF 

Elmscourt; and this accession to our party gave 
me an opportunity of conversing with his beauti- 
ful daughter. To the bashful timidity of a child, 
arisinsr from the seclusion in which she had been, 
immured, she joined the good sense and refine- 
ment of a highly cultivated young woman; and 
this rare mixture of infantine bashfulness and 
maidenly dignity, added new lustre to her charms. 
If I loved her before hearing the justness of her 
remarks, or being acquainted with the propriety 
and delicacy of her sentiments, of wliich every 
word she uttered gave proof, how was my passion 
increased on discovering the superiority of her 
mind, and the fascination of her manners. 

But even these feelings, highly wrought as 
they were, were enhanced by the belief that she 
entertained for me a more than common interest; 
a belief that can render a woman, of even me- 
diocre pretensions, attractive in the eyes of all 
men. 

I rode with them until we arrived at the door 
of her father's mansion, and joyfully accepted 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. *2*25 

an invitation to dine with them, at an early hour 
on the following day, and afterwards accompany 
them to the theatre. 

'• Can you make up your mind to sit out play 
and farce?" asked Lord Elmscourt; "for Emily 
likes to see all the performances. We shall only 
be tliree in the box, for Lady Elmscourt rarely 
enters a theatre ; so, unless you are a regular 
play-going person, you will probably be bored 
by our long evening there." 

The next morning found me galloping round 
the Park, true as a needle to the pole; but the 
magnet that attracted me was not there; and, 
again, I immediately accounted for her absence, 
by attributing it to the jealousy of her mother. 

Punctual as lovers used to be forty years ago, 
I was at Grosvenor Square at the appointed 
hour. Lady Elmscourt received me with cold 
politeness; her lord, with friendly warmth; and 
Lady Emily with blushing kindness. I ven- 
tured to ask whether the latter had pursued 
her equestrian exercise in the morning; and de- 

l3 



226 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

tected, in the opposite mirror, a smile, which 
seemed to me pregnant with malice, on the fea- 
tures of Lady Elmscourt; while her lord replied, 

" Oh ! no, there is an end to our rides while 
we stay in London ; for Lady Elmscourt has 
taken to early rising, and drives out into the 
country with Emily, in an open carriage, before 
breakfast." 

" So, here," thought I, " is convincing proof 
of the justice of my suspicions!" And a feeling 
of anger was kindled in my breast at finding that 
the jealousy of the coquettish mother would pre- 
clude me from any opportunity of seeing her 
charming daughter. At the theatre, at least, 
however, I shall certainly have the pleasure of 
conversing with her, untrammeled by the pre- 
sence of this female Argus, whispered Hope. 
Judge, then, of my annoyance, gentle reader, 
when it was announced that this object of all my 
apprehensions, this destroyer of all my fondest 
desires and plans, intended to form one of the 
party. I am sure, my countenance betrayed my 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 2*27 

feelings to the wily mother. I wished her — I 
will not say where — anywhere, however, rather 
than in our presence, an ever vigilant and mali- 
cious spy on every word and look of mine. 

At the theatre. Lady Elmscourt manoeuvred 
so skilfully, that she placed herself between her 
daughter and me, so that I could neither look 
at, nor speak to her, without exposing myself 
to the observation of mamma. I sat in perfect 
purgatory; longing, yet not daring, to inter- 
change a word with the lovely girl, who evi- 
dently seemed to observe the alteration in my 
manner from what it had been the day before. 
How I hated, yes, positively hated. Lady Elms- 
court, for thus thwarting, my wishes ; and yet, 
this was the very woman in whose ear, only a 
few days before, I had breathed vows of love ! 
Such was my selfishness, that, though believing 
her still to entertain more than a strong predi- 
lection for me, I pitied not the mortification 
which my conduct was so calculated to inflict 
on her. I thonght not of her feelings, I thought 



"228 THE confessio:ns of 

only of my own ; nor blushed at my all-engrossing 
egotism. 

Having heard Lord Elmscourt make an allu- 
•sion to the portraits of his wife and daughter, 
just finishing by a celebrated artist of that day, 
I called, on the following morning, at the studio 
of the painter, and saw two of the most faultless 
resemblances I ever beheld. Having praised 
•them highly, as works of art, I with much diffi- 
culty persuaded the artist to make me copies of 
both. Heaven knows, I now felt little desire to 
possess that of Lady Elmscourt ! though ten 
days before, I should have considered it a most 
desirable acquisition ; but to prevent the sus- 
picions of the artist, I professed an equal desire 
to acquire both. Thus it was that the miniatures 
now before me became mine. 

Lord Elmscourt had taken quite a iancy to 
Tne. We never met in the street — for I dared 
not do more than occasionally leave my card at 
iiis dooT — -that he did not reproach me for the 
.iinfrequency of my visits, and invite me to dine 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. ^9 

with him. His invitations I had not self-com- 
mand enough to decline, as I was sure of seeing 
Lady Emily at the dessert ; who, as I have be- 
fore stated, invariably made her appearance with 
the fruit and flowers, whose freshness she rivalled. 
The ceremonious civility, but marked coldness 
of Lady Elmscourt, rendered, however, a seat 
at her table peculiarly disagreeable; particularly 
to a person who felt that he deserved her bad 
opinion. But what would I not have endured to 
have the happiness of seeing her lovely daughter ! 
on whom I doted with a passion, such as youth 
and beauty like hers, alone could have inspired. 
Nor was I without hope that she felt a decided 
preference for me ; for when did the vanity of 
man fail to whisper hope on such occasions. All 
the blushing timidity arising from youthful inex- 
perience, and the utter seclusion in which she 
had been brought up, I considered as in con - 
testible proof of an incipient passion for me, 
which it only required time and opportunity to 
cultivate into a strons; attachment. If, there- 



230 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

fore, I ever experienced a dread of not winning 
this charming creature, it arose in no doubt 
of her willingness to be mine, but in a fear that 
her mother would never consent to our union. 

My hopes of happiness were raised almost to 
certainty, when Lord Elmscourt gave me a press- 
ing invitation to visit them in the autumn, in 
the country. This I looked on as a decided 
proof of encouragement of my attentions to his 
daughter. I accepted it with joyful anticipa- 
tions, and longed for the moment that was to see 
me domiciled beneath the same roof with Lady 
Emily. I had now become accustomed to the 
cold ceremoniousness of the mistress of the man- 
sion ; and could hardly be said to enjoy exist- 
ence out of the presence of her lovely daughter. 

As the season drew to its close. Lord Elms- 
court and his family departed for their seat in 
Northumberland. I found it difficult to support 
this short separation from my soul's idol, and 
counted the hours until I was to rejoin her. 
The day before that fixed for my departure for 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 231 

Elmscourt Park, my horse in cantering over the 
pavement placed his foot on a loose stone, and 
came to the ground with such force as to cause 
me to sprain an ankle, and dislocate my wrist. 
Never did accident occur so imopportunely, and 
never was one borne with so little patience ! 

My anxiety and ill-humour, I am persuaded, 
considerably retarded my recovery ; but, at the 
end of five intolerably tedious weeks, I set out 
for Northumberland. On arriving at Elmscourt 
Park, my joy at the prospect of again beholding 
Lady Emily was indescribable. I fancied my- 
self not only a lover, but almost an accepted 
one ; for the kind letter written to me by Lord 
Elmscourt to renew his invitation, contained a 
passage that confirmed my vain hopes. 

" Pray come to us as soon as you are able," 
wrote the good natured earl ; " we are to have 
some very dear friends here soon, with whom 1 
am anxious to make you acquainted." 

What could this mean but that I was to be 
presented to those dear friends as the suitor ot 



232 THE CONFESSIONS aF 

his daughter. Yes, it must he so; and my spirits 
rose in proportion to the expectations this para- 
graph excited. 

The family had retired to dress for dinner 
when I arrived, so that my first meeting with 
them was in the hbrary ; where I found half 
a dozen guests assembled, and Lady Emily 
looking more lovely than ever. Dolt and idiot 
that I was, I fancied that in the evident pleasure 
she evinced in welcoming me to her natal home, 
there was mingled an embarrassment in her 
manner, that could only arise from a conscious 
preference for me. 

I was presented to the Marquess of Amble- 
side, and his son the Earl of Belmont, the most 
strikingly handsome young man I had ever 
seen; and had I not been assured by my vanity, 
that Lady Emily's reception of me forbade my 
entertaining a doubt of her partiality, I should 
have been alarmed by the presence of one who 
might have proved so dangerous a rival. 

Lady Elmscourt seemed to have quite reco- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLE:\IAN. 2G3 

vered her former amiability of manner ; and was 
looking so young and handsome, that even near 
her daughter she must have been admired by 
the most fastidious connoisseur in beauty. 

When dinner was announced, the Marquess 
of Ambleside conducted our hostess to the salle 
a manger. I waited, expecting to see Lord 
Belmont oflPer his arm to Lady Emily ; but, to 
my surprise, as well as delight, her father seized 
my hand, and desired me to lead her to dinner. 
Tliis I considered as an open acknowledgment 
of my position as an accredited suitor ; and I 
looked with something of triumph towards Lord 
Belmont, expecting to see him overwhelmed 
with mortification. But no symptom of any 
such feeling appeared ; and I wondered at his 
insensibility, where such a prize as Lady Emily 
was in question. 

Seated next to this lovely creature, and now 
considering myself in the light of an acknow- 
ledged lover, I devoted the whole of my atten- 
tion to her during dinner. I was in the highest 



•234 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

possible spirits, and my gaiety seemed conta- 
gious, as all the party partook in it. I saw, or 
fancied I saw, a malicious smile on the coun- 
tenance of Lady Elmscourt, as she observed the 
animation and self-complacency of my manner ; 
and, what a little piqued me, occasionally de- 
tected looks of intelligence interchanged by 
Lady Emily and Lord Belmont, indicative of 
the existence of a more familiar intercourse be- 
tween them, than I wished my future bride to 
have with any man save me. 

While I was meditating on the decorum, if 
not prudery, which I should exact from my fair 
neighbour when I should have a right to dictate 
to her, I was thunderstruck by hearing the 
Marquess of Ambleside, in a voice too clear 
and distinct to admit of a doubt of its correct- 
ness, ask Lady Belmont to drink wine with him. 
I gazed around to discover whether there was not 
some mistake, or to ascertain to whom this civility 
was addressed ; but, to my utter horror and dis- 
may, saw his lordship's cold formal eyes fixed on 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 235 

Lady Emily, who quietly assented to his pro- 
posal, totally unconscious of my state of mind ! 

I felt the blood recede from my heart, and 
mount to my temples. I feared I should fall 
from my chair, so sudden and overpowering was 
the shock I had received. But a glass of water 
revived me, and prevented any exhibition of 
what was passing in my breast.^ 

" Mr. Lyster, permit me to have the pleasure 
of drinking wine with you," said Lord Belmont ; 
" I know I am your debtor, for having rescued 
Lady Belmont from the boisterous attentions of a 
dog. Emily wrote me a full account of the affair ; 
and did ample justice, I assure you, to the prowess 
o^ her preux chevalier, on the occasion." 

How like a fool I felt at this moment ! nor 
did the arch glance, shot from the bright eyes 
of Lady Elmscourt, assist to re-assure me. 

When the ladies had left the room, and we 
had drawn our chairs socially together. Lord 
Elmscourt asked me if I was not surprised when 
I received his letter, announcing the marriage 



236 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

of his daughter, which had been celebrated a 
week before. This letter I missed, by having 
left London the day it must have arrived there. 
" The marriage was arranged two years ago," 
said Lord Elmscourt, " when the young people 
fell in love. We old folk thought them too 
young to be married ; an opinion to which Bel- 
mont was by no means disposed to assent. As, 
however, we were obstinate, he was obliged to 
submit ; and took the opportunity of his probation 
to make along tour on the Continent. He ex- 
acted a promise that Emily should not be pre- 
sented at court, or go into society, until his 
return ; a promise that her mother, as you may 
remember, rigidly enforced. Belmont only re- 
turned to claim his bride three weeks ago ; and 
a happier pair it would be impossible to find." 

Never did a man feel more wretched, or look 
more like a fool, than I did, through this inter- 
minable evening ! A thousand nameless little 
acts of tenderness were mutually exhibited by 
the bride and bridegroom; and on such occa- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 237 

sions Lady Elmscourt looked at me with a 
smilcj which seemed to say — Behold, vain fool, 
the proof of the error into which yonr egregious 
vanity has led you. 

The next day Sir John Belton arrived, to 
spend a short time at Elmscourt Park, when he 
renewed his acquaintance with me, with that 
cordiality common to the now nearly extindt 
race of country squires. Talking of our host 
and the family, he observed — 

" They are capital people ; I know few such ; 
and noio, that my lady is nearly cured of the 
only fault she ever had — " 

" And what may that be ?" interrupted I, 
expecting to hear something not creditable to 
her reputation. 

" Why, Lord bless you, have you not found 
it out? I thought you Londoners had been 
sharper. Well, then, if the truth nmst be told, 
mv lady's only fault was a desire to remain, or 
at least to be considered, young, and to be ad- 
mired. This led her to be rather too civil to 



238 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

every coxcomb who fancied himself her admirer, 
and obtained the reputation of a coquette for a 
woman who, in fact, never had an evil intention. 
A more affectionate wife or mother does not 
exist ; though she was addicted to sentimentality, 
and to a love of exciting admiration." 

I felt the blush of shame rise to my brow, at 
finding how totally duped I had been by my 
vanity. 

All the romance I had created in my imagi- 
nation, of a jealous mother and a persecuted 
daughter, enamoured of me, fell to the ground. 
Neither of them had ever possessed one particle 
of affection for me ; the first only encouraging 
my attentions, out of love for admiration ; and 
the second, only blushing and smiling, because 
blushes and smiles were as natural to her, as 
perfume is to the rose. 

Thus ended my fifth passion ; and I left Elms- 
court Park, a disappointed, a humiliated, but 
whether or not a corrected man, the future will 
disclose. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 239 



MY SIXTH LOVE. 



The lesson my vanity received at Elmscourt 
Park, rendered me cautious of again exposing 
myself to similar punishment. Well and wisely 
has it been said, that love soon dies when 
deprived of the nourishment of hope; but no 
writer has touched on the velocity with which the 
winged archer-boy sickens, when vanity has been 
wounded, nor how rapidly he ceases to remember 
a flame connected with associations mortifying 
to his amour jjropre. I hated to think that Lady 
Elmscourt was merely a weak, vain coquette, 
encouraging my admiration for the gratification 
of her vanity; repulsing my attentions more 
gently than they deserved to be repulsed, when 
they became too explicit for even her lax notions 



240 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

of propriety ; and not caring two straws about 
me individually. 

Yes, I hated to think her merely a vain co- 
quette, instead of a wicked woman, attached to 
me by an unholy passion, jealous of her own 
daughter, and manoeuvring to prevent my 
winnini; that daughter. To remember her was 
mortifying, and therefore I soon banished her 
from my mind. The Lady Emily quickly shared 
the same exile from my memory ; for, how could 
1 bear to recollect that the downcast looks, rosy 
blushes, and sweet embarrassment, I had so often 
marked with such self-complacency, were con- 
stitutional accessories to her beauty, and had not 
the slightest reference to me ; nay, that while I 
dreamt my presence caused them, she was think- 
ing only of another, and that other her be- 
trothed husband. 

I plunged into every gaiety which presented 
itself, to endeavour to mitigate the sense of 
humiliation which rankled in my mind. From 
this period I became more suspicious than ever 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 241 

of female attentions; turned with distaste from 
any approach to the sentimental in conversation; 
grew almost angry if a young lady cast down her 
eyes, or blushed, in my presence; though, for- 
tunately for my equanimity of temper, blushes 
were, even then, as seldom seen in good company, 
as now. 

Chance took me to Cheltenham, which was, 
at that period, a very different place to the 
luxurious town it is to-day. Wliile sauntering 
through the street, I there met an old gentleman 
whom I had occasionally encountered at the 
houses of several of our mutual friends; and we 
renew^ed our acquaintance with somewhat of that 
cordiality which Englishmen rarely experience; 
or, at least, rarely demonstrate, except when they 
come into contact in places with which they are 
not familiar. 

He asked me to dine with him the next day ; 
and I discovered we were inmates in the same 
caravanserai. On returning to mine inn, having 
left Sir Thomas Villiers, my old acquaintance, 

M 



242 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

in the news room, I encountered on the stairs 
two ladiesy who were descending. I drew aside 
to make room for them, taking off my hat at 
the same time; a pohteness which they acknow- 
ledged by slight courtesies, though they passed 
me instantly. I saw that one of them was ex- 
tremely handsome, and the other tolerably good 
looking. 

I retired to my chamber early that night, and, 
while undi'essing, heard female voices in the next 
room; which being divided from mine by a slight 
moveable panneled partition only, allowed me to 
hear every word of the following dialogue : — 

" No, you may say what you will, Eliza, but 
you cannot persuade me that it can be agreeable 
to marry a man old enough to be my father, who 
wears creaking boots, and a horrible wig. The 
very thought of it makes me ill." 

" But, really. Miss Villiers- ■' 

" Pray, don't Miss Villiers me. Dear Eliza, 
call me Caroline, Gary, as papa does ; any thing 
but Miss, it is so formal." 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 243 

" Well, then, dear Caroline, surely Sir Henry 
Moreton is not so very old; and he really is still 
a handsome man." 

" Whj'^, the very words you use, Eliza, prove 
he is no fit husband for me. Not so very old — 
humph ! and still a handsome man. Why may 
not I, a passable looking girl, (though I say it 
myself, who ought not to say it), with, heaven 
knows, how many thousands to my fortune, find 
a husband (and I am in no such hurry, eitlier) 
who is only half a dozen years older than myself? 
a disparity of years which would make him of 
the mature age of twenty-four, and neither too 
young to look after a wife, nor too old to have a 
sympathy in her pleasures." 

" But, perhaps he might not possess the large 
fortune of Sir Henry — his fine seat in the 
country, his grand mansion in town." 

" Pooh, pooh ! a fig for each, and all. How 
provoking it is of you, Eliza, not to remember 
that, having these agremens of my own already, 
by marrying Sir Henry, I only acquire duplicates 

m2 



244 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

of them; and who values duplicates? — incum- 
brances of which people always wish to get rid. If 
I dislike my husband, shall I be less miserable in 
a fine house than in a poor one ? Will his large 
fortune buy happiness ? No, no; the creaking 
shoes and the odious wig, would be as unbearable, 
nay, perhaps more so, encompassed by luxuries, 
than if I were compelled to pore upon them in 
some humble abode, where poverty might blunt 
fastidiousness." 

" But, as your papa has set his heart on the 

match " 

" And as my papa's daughter has set her heart 
against the match, what is to be done? I know 
papa only marries me to Sir Henry, to secure 
some one to play chess with him every night. 
Oh ! you may laugh, but, it is true nevertheless." 
" Why, how can you, dear Caroline, suspect 
so good a father as yours, of being so selfish as 
to sacrifice his only child for his own gratifica- 
tion?" 

" But lie does not see any sacrifice in the 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 245 

affair. My father has oudived even the memory 
ofycHithful feelings, and therefore has no sym- 
pathy with them. He thinks that riches and 
chess foi-m the happiness of Hfe, because they 
form his; and, consequendy, that he is securing 
mine, in giving my hand to Sir Henry. When 
I have spoken to him on this subject, he has 
only shaken his head and exclaimed, ' Ah ! Gary, 
you are a little fool, you know not what is for 
your good; when you are as old as I am, you 
will think as I do.' * But, sir,' I have replied, 
'before that period arrives, a great many years 
must elapse, and before the love of riches and 
chess comes, one has occasion for some other' — 
« Love, you would say,' he has rejoined, filling 
up the pause in my sentence; 'No, no, Gary, 
love is all moonshine and stuff, never stands a 
year's wear and tear. But money and chess 
are the summa bona of life ; one never gets tired 
of them.' And thus, probably, ends the conver- 
sation, of which this is a specimen. How, 
therefore, reason with papa, when he is sure to 



246 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

repeat over and over again, the same argument ? 
Besides, whenever I have said something pe- 
cuHarly incontrovertible, he grows angry, tells 
me not to be undutiful, and again very politely 
assures me that, 1 am a little fool." 

" I am certain, dear Caroline, that he loves 
you too well, to persist in forcing you into this 
marriage, as soon as he shall have discovered 
how exceedingly averse to it you are." 

" And I am certain, Eliza, that he loves his 
own enjoyments too well, not to persist; con- 
vinced as he is, that this marriage will secure 
them. He loves me just enough to desire to 
retain me always near him; and loves chess so 
inordinately, as to desire to retain Sir Henry 
Moreton (who affords him a victory every night) 
perpetually with him. This hopeful marriage 
accomplishes both these desirable ends; and, 
consequently, be assured, he will never consent 
to its being broken off. Heigh ho! what a 
wretched prospect! Now, if Sir Henry was 
like that handsome, gentlemanly man we met on 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 247 

the Stairs to-day — I wonder who he can be? 
Did you observe what beautiful hair he displayed 
when he took off his hat? He wore no wig, I 
can answer for it ; and his boots did not creak." 

I had been hitherto amused, rather than in- 
terested, by the dialogue, to which I could not 
avoid being a listener. But, at the mention of 
tlie " handsome, gentlemanly man," my at- 
tention became rivetted; and I instantly began 
to take a lively interest in the speaker, who 
had so denominated me ; for, me I was positive 
it must be. I immediately set down in my own 
mind that Caroline must be the lovely girl I had 
seen on the stairs, and Eliza, her companion- 
and, for once, I was not wrong in my con- 
jectures. 

" What a pretty name is Caroline," thougiit 
I; "and how I should like to be privileged to 
abridge it into Cary. She who bears it is vi- 
vacious and clever. How naive were her ob- 
servations on her father, and how just on other 
points. She is a charming person !" 



•248 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

And here, reader, for the sixth time, my heart 
became touched, ay, sensibly touched; and the 
wily god, Love, for the nonce, found an entrance 
to it, by the eai's. Man ! man ! wilt thou never 
be wise? Only two minutes before the mention 
of "the handsome, gentlemanly man," I had set 
down Caroline as a pert, flippant, self-conceited 
girl; but now, she appeared a prodigy of talent 
and vivacity, and I longed, ardently longed, to 
make her acquaintance. 

The voices in the next room died away by 
degrees, into monosyllables, ending in a kind 
good night. Then I, too, sought my pillow; 
my self-complacency increased, to dream of the 
charming Caroline, who had administered this 
soothing opiate. 

I passed up and down stairs next day much 
more frequently than my sorties from the house 
required; but, I met not her who occupied all 
my thoughts. The day appeared unusually long 
and I looked forward with dread to a dull, 
drowsy tite-d-tete dinner with Sir Thomas Vil- 




J>rd-irii T>ff i:. Xf 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 249 

liers. But, imagine my surprise, my joyful 
surprise, when, on entering his apartment, I 
discovered the two ladies I had seen the day 
before on the stairs, who were introduced to me 
as Miss Villiers, his daughter, and her friend, 
Miss Percy. Not a single blush, or the slightest 
symptom of embarrassment, marked Miss Vil- 
Hers' recognition of me, as she gracefully cour- 
tesied in return to my respectful salutation. 

" How strange," thought I, " that the intro- 
duction to ' the handsome, gendemanly looking 
man,' produces so little effect on her. But, she 
is too clever, I suppose, to be always blushing, 
like Lady Emily ; and yet I should have liked 
to have seen a little consciousness in her 
manner." 

Nothing could be more agreeable than the 
dinner, thanks to the animation and naive re- 
marks of Miss Villiers; for her friend was a 
well-bred, but rather taciturn, person, more 
given to enact a listener than a talker; and Sir 
Thomas's conversation had no merit savo that 

m3 



250 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

of serving as a foil to the wit of his lovely 
daughter. Miss Villiers was singularly beauti- 
ful; a beauty that consisted even more in ex- 
pression than in features, though hers were nearly 
faultless. Her eyes were of dark blue ; and 
might have been considered too dazzling, from 
their constant flashing (no other word can I find 
to convey their beaming vivacity), had they not 
been shaded by lashes whose length and jetty 
hue softened their lustre. Her nose was neither 
Roman nor Grecian, but, according to my taste, 
much prettier than either of those classical models; 
it was what the French call mignon^ and un peu 
retrousse. Her mouth was small, with full red 
lips, as like Suckling's description of those of his 
mistress, as if it had been written for them ; and 
her teeth, those indispensable requisites to beauty, 
were matchless. 

The only fault a hypercritical connoisseur in 
loveliness could have detected in this charming 
face, was, that the cheek bones were rather too 
high and prominent, hinting that their owner had 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN'. -Jj 1 

either Irish or Scots blood in her veins. But 
even this pecuHarity added to the piquancy of her 
countenance. Her hair was of the darkest sliade 
of brown, and her complexion of the most bril- 
liant and healthful tint. Never did I behold a 
face so captivating, nor so lavishly endowed with 
an endless variety of expression ! Now sparklinjr 
with archness, and in the following moment 
sofdy beaming with all the touching innocence 
and amiability of a gentle child. But, if a fault 
might have been discovered in her face, the most 
fastidious critic would have vainly looked for 
one in her figure, which was symmetry itself. 
Slight, yet beautifully round, every movement 
betrayed some new grace ! and her hands and 
feet (those infallible indications of high birth), 
were of such exquisite proportions that they 
would have redeemed almost any personal de- 
fect, had such existed. 

I know not whether my female readers aie 
aware of the high place we men accord to 
delicately formed hands and feet, among the in- 



252 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

dispensable requisites to beauty ; but few, if any 
men, can be found who will not admit, that no 
other charms can compensate for the want of 
them. 

To return, however, to the brilliant, the 
beautiful Caroline, whose fairy feet and hands 
led to this digression ; there she sat, wielding, 
like an enchantress, her power over us all. Her 
father tried to oppose the shield of his dull com- 
mon-places to the shafts of her playful wit, but, 
as I need scarcely add, was foiled in the effort; 
while Miss Percy and I yielded without a 
struffffle to her fascination. 

DO 

" Do you play chess, Mr. Lyster?" asked Sir 
Thomas. I replied in the negative, which drew 
forth a heavy sigh from him, and an ejaculation 
expressive of his impatience for the arrival of 
Sir Henry Moreton. Miss Villiers pouted her 
beautiful lips, and exchanged significant glances 
with Miss Percy. 

" I am quite at your service, sir," said the 
latter, moving towards the table on which the 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 233 

chess board stood ; while the poor girl's face 
wore an expression of resignation worthy of a 
martyr. 

" Well, well, Eliza, you are better than not 
having a partner at all," growled the baronet ; 
" though you do play so confoundedly ill, that 
there is no pleasure in conquering you. Now, 
Sir Henry Moreton is a first rate player, ay, a 
very first-rate player ; and it requires the exer- 
tion of all my skill and science to gain a victory 
over him, night after night, as I do." 

" How very odd it is," said Caroline, saucily, 
" that Lord Montagu, who is considered so good 
a chess player, declared that he thought Sir 
Henry a very mediocre performer." 

" I should like to have heard his lordship as- 
sert this," retorted the angry father; "for I should 
soon have proved to him the contrary. A very 
mediocre player, indeed ! Why, how can that 
be, when /, who have been playing chess these 
forty years, and practice makes perfect, they 
say, must play my best, ay, my very best, to 



254 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

conquer him ? Nevei' repeat such nonsense to 
me, Cary. I thought Lord Montagu had been 
a sensible man ; but, noio, I have a very poor 
opinion of him. Go to the pianoforte, and sing 
me one of my favourite songs to compose me ; 
for you have really ruffled my temper by re- 
peating to me Lord Montagu's silly, superficial 
judgment." 

Never did a voice more perfectly harmonize 
with a face, than did that of Caroline with hers. 
She sang admirably, and, what few women do, 
lost no portion of her beauty while singing. No 
ungraceful distortion of the features; no affected 
turnings up of the eyes, marred her fair coun- 
tenance; whose varied, but natural expression, 
eloquently evinced her sympathy with the senti- 
ments of her song. When she had finished, Sir 
Thomas appealed to me, if Caiy did not sing 
very well ? a question, in replying to which, I 
committed no outrage to the most scrupulous 
veracity in giving an unqualified affirmative. 

" Ay, ay, she owes that to me, entirely to me; 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 255 

I prevented her screaming, like a pea-hen, and 
opening her mouth to the extremity of her ears, 
as the Ladies MeUicent do; or turning up her eyes 
in imitation of a duck in thunder, hke the Misses 
Weston, whose singing is so much admired. 
* Gary,' said I, ' I won't have my eyes offended, 
while my ears are pleased.' — Didn't I, Carv? — 
And so, you see, if she sings well, she owes it all 
to me. — Why, bless me, ]Miss Percy, what can 
you be thinking of? Dear me, dear me, you 
are enough to make a parson swear. Oh ! how 
I wish Sir Henry Moreton were come ! I never 
shall have a comfortable game until he does." 

The evening passed away delightfully, not- 
withstanding the occasional grumbles and re- 
grets of the baronet; and I left him at eleven 
o'clock, (the hour at which parties noic assemble, 
being then that which was fixed for their termi- 
nation), more in love than I thought it possible 
I ever should be again, and, perhaps, as much 
so as I had ever been before; though the present 
passion partook not of the elevated chaiacter 



I 



256 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

which marked and dignified my attachment to 
Lady Mary Vernon. 

I anticipated with impatience tlie hearing 
myself again talked over, in her chamber, by the 
lovely Caroline. What would she say? had 
" the handsome gentlemanly man, with the 
beautiful hair," improved on acquaintance in 
her opinion ? I longed to know ; and again 
forgot the impropriety of seeking to become a 
listener, in my anxiety to learn her sentiments. 
As I was approaching the door of the sleeping 
room I had occupied the night before, I was met 
by the courtesying chamber maid, who told me 
that some company leaving departed, she had 
prepared a much better room for me at the 
other end of the house, to which all my things 
had been removed. 

" And why did you do so without my orders," 
said I, with much more acerbity, than gallantry 
ought to have permitted me to have used to one 
of the softer sex. 

" I beg your pardon, sir; I'm sure Fm very 



( 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 257 

sorry, sir, but mistress said you objected to that 
room, the day as you corned ; and that she pro- 
mised you this here the minute it was empty ; so 
now, sir, all your things are there." 

" Have them removed back again directly," 
said I, angrily ; though I perfectly remembered 
having found fault with the apartment the day of 
my arrival, and the landlady's having promised 
me another. 

" I'm sure, sir, I'm very sorry, but Miss 
Villiers' maid has got the room now, on pur- 
pose to be near her young missus ; and all the 
bandboxes and himperials belonging to the ladies 
■ere now there; so, sir, it's impossible to move 
your things back." 

I assented to the truth of this representation 
with a very bad grace, and took possession of 
my new and comfortable chamber ; deeply mor- 
tified with the change, which deprived me of 
hearing what the beautiful Caroline thought of 
me now that we were acquainted. 

I saw her every day, and each day became 



•258 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

more fascinated. Whether, however, her father 
perceived that I was smitten, or dreaded I should 
become so, I know not ; but he soon took an 
opportunity of informing me, that he was in 
daily expectation of the arrival of Sir Henry 
Moreton, who was shortly to be married to his 
daughter. 

Though I was prepared for this intelligence, 
the confirmation of it from his own lips gave me 
pain; for I had indulged hopes that the mar- 
riage was not irrevocably fixed. To leave the 
lovely Caroline a victim to a man she disliked, 
a man old enough to be her father, and with 
creaking boots, and a wig ? " No ! forbid it 
gallantry, forbid it love !" exclaimed I to myself, 
as I mentally determined to make her the offer 
of my heart and hand, and prove that "the 
handsome gentlemanly man" was not ungrateful. 

But, alas ! the tide of true love never did run 
smooth; while I was anticipating her bashful 
hearing of my suit, which was to be pleaded the 
very first opportunity, and her approval yielded 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 259 

witli coy yet sweet delay, Sir Henry Moreton 
arrived ; a week at least before he was expected, 
and to see her alone now became impossible. 
Sir Thomas Villiers prevented my usual evening 
visit, the day that his future son-in-law arrived, 
by telling me they had business to arrange, mar- 
riage settlements to look over, &c. &c. ; but the 
next day he hoped that I would dine with him. 
I spent a solitary evening, miserable at the 
thought of what the charming Caroline was 
undergoing; for, independent of her original 
girlish dislike to the creaking shoes and wig, I 
■was morally certain she had now to contend 
with an affection for " the handsome, gentle- 
manly man ;" whose attentions must have com- 
pleted the conquest which his appearance had 
awakened. Yes, if she wished, and I had heard 
the soft wish flow from her rosy lips, that Sir 
Henry Moreton resembled me, then surely my 
attentions, which had been unremitting ever 
since the hour I was presented to her, must 
have won her affections. I was miserable, and 



260 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

I felt she must be miserable also ; for, never 
would her young and sensitive heart lose the 
impression I had made on it. Of the enduring 
character of my own attachment I felt not quite 
so certain ; for, I had more experience in love. 
But no man doubts the depth or the durability 
of a passion he inspires; though all men are 
sceptical as to the extent or the sincerity of the 
attachments inspired by others of his own sex. 

I presented myself at tlie usual dinner hour 
next day, and was introduced in due form to Sir 
Henry Moreton. He was a tall good-looking 
man, of about fifty; and I was not in his com- 
pany five minutes before the creaking shoes and 
wig proved the accuracy of Caroline's descrip- 
tion ; though the latter was one of the most 
skilful imitations of what the newspaper puff 
• advertisements style " the greatest ornament, a 
fine head of hair." I have remarked that people 
who wear creaking shoes or boots, are precisely 
those who are the most addicted to locomotion. 
Sir Henry walked up and down the room per- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 261 

petually ; to lower the blind, to open a door, to 
close one, or to place a chair. In short, he was 
ever in a state of ceaseless restlessness, except 
when at table or at chess. 

Caroline's beautiful eyes were red and swollen 
with weeping ; and my passion for her was more 
than ever increased by this proof of her sensi- 
bility. When the ladies had withdrawn (and 
ardently did I long to accompany them). Sir 
Thomas announced to me, that the marriage of 
his daughter was to take place early in the 
ensuing week. 

" We shall all proceed to Moreton Hall," 
continued he, "where we shall remain some 
time." 

" And where," said Sir Henry, " I shall be 
glad to have the pleasure of seeing Mr. Lyster, 
whenever he can make it convenient to pay us a 
visit." 

They talked over their plans, scarcely making 
any reference to the future Lady Moreton, who 



262 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

was included in the we (how I detested the 
word!) with all the san^yrozc? imaginable. Sii 
Henry Moreton was a formal, dull sort of man, 
answering precisely to the term, prig. He seemed 
perfectly satisfied with himself on all points, and 
next to himself, evidently estimated Sir Thomas 
Villiers, whom he treated with that profound 
respect, which middle aged people affect towards 
those who are their seniors; a line of conduct 
which they imagine, gives them an air of juve- 
nility. His conversation was a tissue of truisms 
and common-place remarks, delivered with an 
air and an emphasis, clearly indicating that he 
himself considered them well worthy of at- 
tention. 

" And this," thought I, " is the companion 
with whom the lovely Caroline is to pass her 
life! Why, his looks alone are sufficient to 
dullify the liveliest mind; and his conversation 
to set asleep the most wakeful, such are its sopo- 
rific qualities." 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 263 

When we joined the ladies, the two baronets 
immediately sat down to chess, a proceeding 
which seemed a great relief to Caroline. 

** Now, Mr. Lyster, if you wish to see a game 
scientifically contested," said Sir Thomas, " you 
have a good opportunity; for, notwithstanding 
what a certain person, who shall be nameless, 
has been pleased to assert, relative to Sir Henry 
Moreton's being a mediocre player, I think you 
will admit that, on the contrary, he is a first- 
rate one." 

" I should be glad to know," replied Sir 
Henry, his dark cheek reddening, "who the 
individual is, who has so far betrayed his own 
ignorance of the game, as to pronounce so erro- 
neous an opinion ?" 

" That must be a secret," said Sir Thomas; 
"but the person, as you justly state, only 
betrayed his own want of knowledge of die 
game." 

" One who can for hours contest a game with 
Sir Thomas Villiers, can be no mediocr- player, 



264 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

let me tell the person, whoever he may be," 
resumed Sir Henry. 

" That's precisely what I said. Sir Henry. 
You remember, Mr. Lyster, these were nearly 
my words : and surely Sir Harry, who has now 
been a chess player these thirty years, must 
understand the game." 

" I beg your pardon, Sir Thomas," replied 
the oifended baronet, " you are under a mistake 
as to the number of years ; for, at the period to 
which you refer, I was but a child, and conse- 
quently could not have been a chess player." 

Caroline could not resist a smile, in which I 
joined, at this defence of his youth; but Sir 
Thomas, totally unmindful of the juvenile pre- 
tensions of his son-in-law elect, and only anxious 
to defend what he had once advanced, quaintly 
repeated — 

" Child, indeed ! why, surely, Sir Harry,' a 
man is no child at twenty ? and as you are now 
fifty, there was nothing very wrong on my part, 
in stating that you bad been thirty years a chess 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 2G5 

player. I have had ten years the start of you. 
which accounts for my superiority; but, I will 
lay a wager that you will beat any player of 
your own age in England, though you cannot 
beat me." 

Never was there a man more vexed at thi^ 
plain statement of his age, and in presence, too. 
of his future wife, who numbered barely eighteen 
summers, than Sir Henry. He grew red in the 
face, and made some false moves in the game, 
while his bride elect could not repress the smiles> 
that played round her beautiful mouth. 

"Sing us something, Gary, my love," said 
Sir Thomas, "I never can play well unless 1 
hear your voice. And you. Miss Percy, while 
Gary is singing, had you not better come antl 
look over our game? It will be a good lesson, 
and enable you to fill Sir Henry's place, in case 
of absence or illness, better than you have lately 
done< — Gary, sing me ' Old Robin Grey ;' that'b 
my favourite song. Don't you like ' Robin 
Grey,' Sir Henry?" 

N 



266 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

" I must always like whatever Miss Villiers 
may sing," replied Sir Henry; "but I confess 
* Robin Grey' is not a particular favourite of 
mine." 

" And why not, pray ?" asked the obtuse Sir 
Thomas. "I should like to know what fault 
you can find with either the music or words ? 
the first is melody itself, and the second con- 
tains a whole code of morals; yes. Sir Henry, 
and of the best morals. Why, what can be more 
dutiful, than a youthful creature who marries 
a rich old man to please her parents; and con- 
quers her love for a young man, because she 
remembers the old husband was good and kind 
to her. Now I like a moral in a song as well as 
in a story, and I maintain that this song has 
one." 

Even the quiet and silent Miss Percy seemed 
to feel the awkward parallel that might be drawn 
between the old husband of the song and the 
present candidate for the matrimonial state. 
Caroline sighed, and I echoed the sigh; while 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 2(57 

Sir Henry looked redder than ever, and played, 
as Sir Thomas observed aloud, unusually ill. 

" Come, Gary, give us the song," said her 
father, a command quickly obeyed, and never 
was song more admirably sung; though her 
voice occasionally trembled, and its plaintive 
tones drew an expression of pensive sympathy 
to the usually placid countenance of Miss 
Percy. 

I sought, but sought in vain, an opportunitv 
during the evening, of revealing my passion to 
the fair object of it. She continued seated at 
the pianoforte, which was so near the chess 
table, that I durst not hazard a word; and I 
left the room more in love than ever, and with 
less hope of the successful issue of my attach- 
ment. The next day, and the next, found 
Caroline with Sir Henry Moreton always at 
her side, or hovering so near her, that all pri- 
vate coversation with her was impossible. I 
therefore determined to pour out my whole soul 
in a letter to her, which I indited with all a 

n2 



268 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

lover's eloquence, and, as I noic think, but 
did not then, exaggeration. Yet, how have it 
dehvered to her? whom could I trust? Sir 
Thomas was one of those old-fashioned masters 
of a family, now nearly extinct, and even at the 
remote period of which I write, beginning to be 
very scarce, who ruled his house, hts child, his 
servants, and all that were his, with a despotic 
luuid; allowing them little freedom of thought, 
at least little freedom in the expression of it, 
and still less freedom of action, and even refusing 
his daughter the permission to peruse a letter 
until it had been previously passed through the 
ordeal of his inspection. 

All this rigid discipline I had casually disco- 
vered during my short acquaintance with the 
iamily; so how was I to evade this mental cordon 
mnataire, established by the old baronet? I had 
recourse to Miss Percy; her placidity and gen- 
tleness led me to hope that she would befriend 
an unhappy lover, and in a confidential note to 
her, explaining my passion for her friend, I 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. '2G9 

entreated her to deliver the letter that containeil 
an avowal on which my happiness depended. 

Miss Percy kept me not long in suspense; 
for, in half an hour from the period of its being 
despatched, the letter addressed to her friend 
was returned to me in an envelope, containing 
a note, stating that she "regretted I should 
have formed so erroneous an opinion of her 
character and principles, as to suppose that she 
would be the medium of a clandestine corre- 
spondence with the daughter of her benefactor, 
and the affianced wife of his friend." 

I had scarcely finished the perusal of her 
billet, when Sir Thomas Villiers entered my 
room. I concluded that ^liss Percy had be- 
trayed me to him, and that he came to accuse 
me. His first sentence confirmed my suspicion. 
" So, so ! you are a pretty fellow," said he. 
"Ay, it is all known," thought I; "but I 
must put the best face on it;" and accordingly 
drew up with what I meant should be a dig- 
nified attitude. 



270 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

"I say you are a pretty fellow," repeated Sir 
Thomas, "here," pointing to a large envelope 
on the table, "is the pacquet unopened, con- 
taining the London papers, which I received 
this morning, and which I scarcely gave myself 
time to glance over, before I sent them to you, 
with a note, stating that I had not quite perused 
them, and requesting you to return them as soon 
as possible. Ay, here they are, note and all, 
unopened. Why, what the devil can you be 
at? what have you been thinking of?" 

I made some blundering excuse, much re- 
lieved by finding my secret was still one to him ; 
and he told me he wanted my assistance in a 
little matter. " I have had my daughter's por- 
trait painted here," continued he, " by a very 
clever artist, who came to drink the waters. I 
intend it as a gift to her future husband, an 
agreeable surprise for the anniversary of his 
birth day, which takes place next month. I wish 
it to be set in a snuff-box, and not being learned 
or skilled in the taste of those sort of gim-cracks, 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. '27 \ 

I want you to select the pattern for me, and 
superintend the execution. Will you undei'take 
the commission, and don't mention a word about 
it to any one here ?" 

So saying, he handed me the portrait, which 
was so admirable a likeness of the fair original, 
that the sight of it occasioned me an emotion, 1 
found it difficult to conceal. 

" Well, you'll have it done, won't you ? there's 
a good fellow," continued he; "so now good 
bye, I must be off, for I have a thousand things 
to settle. Apropos of setding, we have arranged 
that Caroline is to be married the day after to- 
morrow, three days sooner than we intended; 
but. Sir Henry has got a letter from home, say- 
ing that a county meeting is to txike place, at 
which he wishes to be present, and so we ad- 
vance the ceremony, that we may all set oil" 
together to Moreton Hall." 

I know not how I looked, but I know how I 
felt, at this intelligence; and I wonder that he 
observed not my agitation. He did not remark 



272 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

it however, for he left the room, repeating his 
" good bye, my dear fellow, I must be gone, I 
have a thousand things to do, so good bye, good 
bye." 

I eagerly seized the portrait, pressed it to my 
lips again and again, and internally vowed that 
never should it leave my possession. 

"What," thought I, "shall the unfeehng 
clod for whom it was destined, he who expedites 
his marriajje with the loveliest and most fasci- 
nating of her sex, merely that he may attend a 
county meeting, shall he become the possessor 
of this treasure ? No ! forbid it love ! happy, 
happy man, the beautiful original will be his ! 
oh ! how unworthy is he of such a creature ; but 
this portrait never shall be his ! I will have a 
copy made of it ; a dull father, and duller hus- 
band's eyes will not detect the cheat ; and this, 
this shall be mine, when she is lost to me for 



ever 



?» 



I tore myself fi'om Cheltenham next day; I 
dared not trust myself to see Caroline again, nor 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. OJ;^ 

remain in the place when she was to approacli 
the altar, to vow to another, that affection which 
I still believed to be all my own. I fled, there- 
fore from my abode like a madman, passed 
through London, where I only remained long 
enough to have a copy of the beautiful miniature 
made, and confided to a jeweller for setting-. 
But ere I departed from the metropolis, I rend 
in the papers, a pompous account of the marriao-e 
of Miss Villiers, " only daughter and sole heiress 
of Sir Thomas Villiers, Bart., of Conway Castle, 
in Wales, to Sir Henry Moreton, Bart., of More- 
ton Hall, in Gloucestershire, and Willisden Park, 
in Berks." The papers added, in the usual news- 
paper phraseology, " That the hoppij couple set 
out immediately after the ceremony, for Moreton 
Hall, Avhere they were to spend the honey- 
moon." 

The conclusion of the paragraph maddened 
me. " Happy couple," I repeated, in a rage, 
throwing the paper from me, as I figured to 

n3 



274 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

myself the weeping, shrinking bride, wishing 
that the handsome, gentlemanly-looking man 
had been the substitute of him of the creaking 
boots and wig ! 

Never have I since read a similar newspaper 
announcement, and they occur nearly every day, 
without a bitter smile and doubt as to the reality 
of the happiness of the " happy couple ;" and, 
could all the motives and feelings that influence 
the greater number of these individuals be ana- 
lyzed, how few would be considered entitled to 
the appellation !" But this dark conviction, by 
the young and sanguine, — and when was youth 
otherwise than sanguine? — will, I know, be 
regarded as the jaundiced picture of an old 
bachelor. Well, be it so; yet a day will 
arrive, when the young will become old, and 
see objects through a less brilliant glass than 
they now employ ; and then, they will not con- 
sider the old bachelor's opinion to be so vei'y 
cynical. 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. -JT.j 

I pass over a lapse of ten years, employed in 
travelling through Italy, Germany, Russia, and 
Sweden. Time, the best friend the unhappy 
know, though the one they most frequently ac- 
cuse, had done for me that which he does for all, 
had healed the wounds of disappointed love: 
though a fond recollection of the beautiful Caro- 
line still lived in the heart where she had reijrned. 
I thought of her often ; fondly loved to gaze 
upon her portrait, and still figured her, to " my 
mind's eye," as fair, blooming, and sylph-like, 
as when I had left her ten years before. I never 
thought of her as a wife, or a mother : the idea 
would have been too painful ; and we all have a 
wonderful facility in banishing disagreeable ideas. 
No, Caroline, the spirituelle, playful Caroline, 
could not be the mother of boys and girls, to 
him of the squeaking boots and wig. There was 
something monstrous and disfrustincf in the no- 
tion ; and so, I never permitted myself to enter- 
tain it. 



276 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

Taking up an old English newspaper, one 
day , at an inn in Russia, I looked over the list 
of births, marriages, and deaths. The name of 
Sir Henry Moreton caught my eye ; and while 
my heart beat quickly, and my hand trembled, 
I read a detailed statement of the death of the 
chess-loving baronet. I looked anxiously at the 
date, and found the paper was above a year old. 
And so, Caroline, the lovely Caroline (my Caro- 
line she might note be), was free ! There was 
joy, there was intoxication in the thought ; and 
in a few hours, I was in my travelling carriage, 
on my route to England. 

I paused not, rested not, even for a day, until 
I reached London. Some one else might fore- 
stall my happiness. Beauty and talents like 
hers, could not fail to command admirers ; and 
I trembled lest I should be too late in the pro- 
posal I intended to make her. 

I ascertained that she was in town, and im- 
mediately called at her house, a stately mansion 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. '277 

in Hanover Square. On being sliown to tlie 
library, I found my old acquaintance, Miss 
Percy, wearing the same demure aspect, but not 
placid countenance, that I remembered at Chel- 
tenham. Alas ! time had dealt rudely with her 
complexion, and taken away all the roundness 
of her figure, which now presented angles little 
in harmony with feminine grace. Encircling her 
eyes were certain marks, known by the vulgar 
appellation of crow's feet; and, descending from 
her nostrils to her thin lips, were two muscles in 
such alto relievo, as to display the anatomy of 
the movements of her mouth. I was startled at 
beholding this change. 

" What !" thought I, " if Caroline should be 
as wofully altered as is her friend : if she, who 
was disposed to be rather too sylph-like, should, 
from the unhappiness of an ill-assorted union, 
have faded to a shadow, like the creature befoie 
me ! But no ; I will not allow myself to think 
such a cruel metamorphosis possible. She can. 



278 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

not have lost her beauty, and must be still the 
lovely, the fascinating Caroline." 

All this passed in my mind while Miss Percy 
was relating to me, that not only Sir Henry 
Moreton, but Sir Thomas Villiers, had " sought 
that bourne whence no traveller returns," having 
preceded his friend and son-in-law by a year. 
Miss Percy, put on what the French call a.Jigure 
d'occasion, a most lugubrious countenance, while 
announcing these sad events 

" Lady Moreton had suffered severely," con- 
tinued she ; " for never was their a happier 
wife." 

I could have beaten her for saying so, though 
I wholly doubted the fact ; for how could such 
a girl as Caroline be happy with the elderly 
gentleman with creaking boots and a wig? 

" Her ladyship is only now beginning to receive 
her friends," added Miss Percy, " and is at this 
moment engaged with her lawyer ; but she will 
be here in a short time." 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 279 

Almost while she uttered these words, a larcjc 
good-looking woman entered the room, with a 
high colour, and cheeks whose plumpness en- 
croaching considerably on the precincts of her 
eyes, caused them to appear much smaller than 
suited the proportion accorded to the lines of 
beauty . Her figure harmonized perfectly with 
her face ; and was one of those to wliom the 
epithet " a stout lady" is always applied. She 
approached me, while I stood in silent wonder, 
and in accents never forgotten, exclaimed, " Ah ! 
I see, Mr. Lyster, you do not recognise me." 

Ye gods ! it was Caroline that now stootl 
before me, the once beautiful Caroline ! But 
never had such a transformation taken place in 
mortal. I was almost petrified by the sight, and 
could scarcely command sufficient presence of 
mind to go through the common forms of polite- 
ness, by maintaining a conversation. 

" Come, Mr. Lyster, said Lady INIoreton, 
(again to call the stout lady before me, ' Caroline,' 



280 THE CONCESSIONS OF 

would be mockery), " come with me, that I may 
show you what you, I am sure, as an old friend, 
will have pleasure in seeing." 

" What can she mean ?" thought I, as I fol- 
lowed her through the ante room ; " but, after 
seeing herself, nothing can shock or surprize 
me." 

She opened the door of a large room, in 
the middle of which stood two rocking horses, 
mounted by a boy and girl, two chubby, rosy- 
faced children, bearing a strong resemblance to 
her ladyship ; not as she formerly looked, but as 
she at present appeared. Two other, and younger 
children were toddling about the room with their 
nurses, making no little noise; and at a table in 
the recess of the window, sat the two elder scions 
of the family stock, engaged at chess. 

" There, Mr. Lyster, are my two eldest sons," 
said Lady Moreton. " This is Sir Henry More- 
ton, and the other is Sir Thomas Villiers, to 
whom my poor father's boronetcy devolved. Are 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 281 

they not strikingly like their father and grand- 
father, Mr. Lyster?" 

Never were seen two more exti'aordinary re- 
semblances ! and the gravity of their counte- 
nances, and the strict attention they paid their 
game, completal all the features of this wonder- 
ful similarity. 

" They will play for whole hours together," 
continued Lady Moreton, pensively ; " and are 
never so happy as when thus employed. Nothing 
affords me a greater gratification than to watch 
them at such moments, Mr. Lyster; for their 
occupation brings back to me the memory of 

those dear, and lost to me for ever " and she 

wiped a tear, yes, positively, a real tear, from 
her eye. 

" Come, Henry, my dear, come and speak to 
this gentleman," resumed his mother with a 
tremulous voice. 

The boy approached me with measured steps, 
and a formal air; and his shoes creaked so 



282 THE CONFESSIONS OF 

exactly as those of his father used to do, that 
for a moment I looked at his hair, expecting to 
see that he also wore a wig, so precisely did he 
appear a minature Copy of the defunct Baronet. 

" It is strange," said Lady Moreton, " to 
what a degree he has all the little personal pe- 
culiarities of his poor dear father. I do not 
know, Mr. Lyster, whether you ever observed 
that my dear Sir Henry's shoes always creaked? 
At first, I had a distaste to the sound ; for I was 
as you may remember, a giddy, and perhaps an 
over fastidious girl, about trifles. But one soon 
learns to approve all the peculiarities of the 
father of one's children ; and I now have a plea- 
sure, though it is not devoid of melancholy, in 
hearing my boy's shoes creak like those of his 
father." 

The good natured mother was so perfectly in 
earnest, that, hang me, if I could smile at the 
bathos of this sentimentality ; though, I confess, 
I lamented that the young Sir Henry did not 



AN ELDEHLY GENTLEMAN. 283 

wear a wig, which would have perfected the 
abnost irrisistibly ludicrous resemblance. 

The mother kissed each and all of her progeny, 
with true maternal tenderness ; and I left her, 
perfectly cured of my old flame, and smiling at 
the illusion I had for ten years nourished, at the 
cost of sundry sighs and regrets. 

In ten days after my first visit, I called again 
at Hanover Square, in order that I might not 
appear uncivil to Lady Moreton ; for, I confess, 
all desire of beholding her, had quite subsided ; 
nay, the sight of her was disagreeable to me. 
Again, I found Miss Percy alone, who, with her 
demure face looking still more demure, and her 
formal manner still more formal, " hoped I had 
forgiven her for returning my letter at Chelten- 
ham ; but, her principles would not permit her 
to be the medium of a clandestine correspond- 
ence." 

« Oh, 1 quite forgive you, IVIiss Percy," said 
I, " though at the time it caused me much un- 



'SSi THE CONFESSIONS OF 

happiness, for I— (you will pardon me for saying 
it, as, after so great a lapse of time, it may be 
said without impropriety) I rather thought I 
was not disagreeable to Miss Villiers." 

" You certainly were not disagreeable to her," 
replied Miss Percy, " for I have frequently heard 
her say she thought you very good natured." 

" But, did she never say more than this. Miss 
Percy?" I retorted, quickly, driven off my 
guard ; " did she not once avow, ay, and to yoii. 
Miss Percy, when you were urging her to gratify 
her father by marrying Sir Henry, and she was 
objecting to his age, creaking shoes and wig — 
did she not then, I ask, confess that she wished 
/ was the substitute for Sir Henry?" 

" Never, by my sacred word of honor !" re- 
joined Miss Percy. 

" She might not have precisely named me, 
but she most clearly and distinctly meant me." 
I insisted. 

" I do remember, Mr. Lyster, her objecting 



AN ELDERLY GENTLE.MAX. 285 

to the age, the creaking shoes, and wig, yet 
never, never, making any alhision to you. But 
how you can have imagined this misconception, 
andj more strange still, how you can have known 
our private conversation astonishes me." 

" Who, then, was meant by the 'gentlemanly 
looking man' (I was ashamed to say handsome) 
you met on the stairs, who took off his hat, and 
whose hair called forth some flattering remark 
from your friend? /, Miss Percy, met Miss 
Villiers and you on the stairs that day ; / took 
off my hat, and therefore it was not preposterous 
to believe that / was the person meant." 

" Oh ! now you remind me of the circum- 
stances (though how you came to know them is 
a mystery to me), I do remember her alluding 
to a gentleman we met on the stairs, the same 
day we met you; lie was peculiarly good looking, 
and Miss Villiers often reverted to his appear- 
ance. We met this same gentleman in London 
the subsequent season, in society. Lady More- 



286 THE CONFESSIONS OF • 

ton recognised him; and I well recollect her 
saying to me, ' Eliza, marriage makes a strange 
difference in people's feelings. Do you remem- 
ber my wishing that gentleman had been the 
person chosen for my husband instead of Sir 
Henry; ay, and my admiration of his hair? 
Now, Eliza, I would not change mr/ husband for 
the handsomest man that nature ever formed ; 
and the wi^ of the father of my boy is more at- 
tractive to me than the finest head of hair in the 
world.' The gentleman was Lord Tyrconnell, 
Mr. Lyster ; I may tell you so now, as he is 
dead." 

Well did I recollect seeing Lord Tyrconnell 
pass through Cheltenham the very day to which 
she alluded. He was the handsomest man of 
his time, and his hair was remarkable for its 
luxuriance and beauty ; yet, I never suspected 
that the praises that sounded so sweet to my 
ears, from the lips of the fair Caroline, could 
apply to other than myself. Thus ended an- 



AN ELDERLY GENTLEMAN. 287 

Other illusion ; the destruction of which cost me 
perhaps as much mortification, as the change 
which, in defacing Lady Moreton's charms, had 
terminated my attachment to her. 

And now, gentle and courteous reader, having, 
by the recital of my youthful flames, beguiled 
some hours that might have been tedious to me, 
and, peradventure, transferred the infliction to 
you, I cannot close without offering my thanks 
for the patience that has conducted you to my 
last love. Vale, then, and take with you the 
good wishes of 

An Elderly Gentleman. 



THE END. 



^aJNTBD BY WILLIAM WILCCCKSON, ROLLS BUILDINGS, FETTBR LANK. 
