BY MRS. H. M. JONES, £9wneU

Authorial ef Oretna Green,—Wedding Ring,—British Officer, $c



"Oh! in thy truth secure, thy virtue bold,

Beware the poison in the cup of gold,—

The asp among the flowers. Thy heart beats high,

As bright, and brighter breaks the distant sky;

But every step is on enchanted ground,—

Danger thou lovest, and danger haunts tbee round."



Rogers.



aonUon:

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. JAQTJES k W. WRIGHT,

EASLE «FFICE, CROSS STRSET, NEWINST8N BOTTS.

Sold also by D.Jaques, Chelsea; and all other Booksellers.





V

FORGED NOTE.



CHAPTER THE FIRST.



It



"Death hath no terrors for the true in heart,

And pare in spirit. Yet, 'tis hard to part,—

To leave to the world's kindness those we lore,

For whom alone we wished to live; for whom we strove

To add a little to the pittance, meant to save

Them from the gripe of waut, when the dark grape

Should close our labours."



HE days of childhood are seldom fruitful in inci-^dent, or afford much matter of speculation, except j to the anxious parent, who sees, perhaps, in the dar2 ling of his heart, indications of superiority, which he * fondly hopes will lead to future greatness; rejoices — in the dawning traits of sensibility, which are, he conceives, sure pledges of his child's felicity,—or views, with trembling concern, the shooting of those infant seeds of tempestuous passion, which threaten, if not timely extirpated, to overrun the fruitful soil, and blight the harvest of his hopes for ever.

Such a parent, so fond, so proud, so tremblingly alive to all that could affect the future welfare of his





son, was Mr. Carleton, the father of the youth whose history will be faithfully recorded in these pages.

Mr. Carleton was a man who, though moving in an humble sphere of life, was universally respected for his superior attainments, the mild suavity of his manners, and the strict integrity of his principles. He had begun the world with the flattering prospect of being able, by a few years of application and industry, to realize a sum sufficient to render his latter years easy and independent; but unforeseen and unavoidable misfortunes and losses soon nipt these hopes in their bud, and the ingratitude of a friend (for whom he had become a surety to a large amount) completed Mr. Carletou's downfal.

He bore, however, this sad reverse of fortune with great equanimity; for himself, indeed, he had no cares or fears, but there was one dearer than himself, for whose sake he sometimes heaved a secret sigh, and for whom, while he endeavoured to reason and soothe her sinking spirits, the big tear would silently steal down bis cheeks, and prove that though he bore his misfortunes like a man, he still felt them like an affectionate and tender husband.

The weak frame and mind of Mrs. Carleton was not able to endure this sudden reverse of fortune; nurtured in indulgence and unused to exertion, she, unable to imitate the fortitude of her husband, sank beneath the blow, and, after lingering several months in a state of deep despondency, expired, after giving birth to a son, in whom, from that period, was centered all the unfortunate father's hopes, pleasures, and anxieties.

The first years of Julian Carleton's life were unmarked by any incident of importance, nor did his appearance or manners then indicate to the common observer any of those striking and original traits of genius, or his disposition betray any symptoms of those wild and headstrong passions, which marked his career in maturer life; but to the anxious eye of the father those seeds of good and evil were but too apparent: and while he assiduously cultivated the one, every method which parental tenderness could devise, was carefully employed to root out and destroy the other.





Julian was a silent, reserved, and somewhat melancholy boy,—but his silence to those who viewed him with attention might easily be discovered to proceed rather from intense observation on those around him, than any deficiency in capability to express himself with equal facility as other children of his age; and his generally reserved manners appeared to arise from a kind of instinctive pride, which taught him to set a higher value upon himself than the little circle in which he moved were disposed to think he had a right to demand.

To his father the youthful Julian was invariably affectionate and submissive; a word, a look, from the parent he idolized, was always sufficient to command or restrain him : but it was his father alone who possessed this influence over him; to those relatives of his mother who did condescend to notice the child of the attorney's clerk, (for' such was the station Mr. Carleton now held) Julian was imperious, haughty, and untractable, and though his father's commands were never disputed, it was very evident that none were obeyed with so much reluctance as those which





enforced his regular visit, at stated times, to the house . of his grandmother and uncle. -viWW7hy are you so unwilling, my child, to pay that love and respect which nature and duty requires you to shew towards your relatives V* demanded Mr. Carleton, one day, when he observed the cloud that overspread Julian's features, at being reminded of this expected tribute.

"1 cannot love those who do not love me," returned Julian warmly, "o* respect any body who does not deserve it."

"You cannot yet sufficiently discriminate as to the degree of affection which your relations bear towards you,' Julian," observed his father, "nor are you competent to judge of their claims to your Respect."

Julian blushed, hesitated; he felt that his father was right, yet he could not give up the prejudices which he bad formed against his purse-proud, selfish relatives: and Mr. Carleton, as he witnessed the painful struggles in his mind, at once admired and deplored the sensitive feelings of his proud and acutely observant boy.

"Yet, I must discourage this," he reflected, "for when I am gone, from whom can I expect protection for my hapless child, but from those relatives whom he so justly contemns, and how will these feelings embitter his lot in the state of dependance, to which he will, in all probability, be condemned."

Mr. Carleton did not indulge these gloomy forebodings without cause: he had long felt symptoms of decay, which his sedentary life and close attention to business contributed to hasten; and before Julian had reached his twelfth year, the indulgent, anxious father breathed his last sigh in the arms of his child, imploring Heaven to protect him, for whose sake alone he quitted the world with regret.





Julian's sorrows, at this event, was, as might have been naturally expecled, most acute; he had lost not only a father, but a kind and able instructor,—his only companion and his only friend! and he had just arrived at an age, to feel the value of all he was thus deprived of, and to contemplate, with feelings of painful anxiety, his own desolate situation. He thought of all his father had said on the subject of his future life: he tried to recollect all his admonitions: to be patient and forbearing: and to remember that his uncle would now supply the place of a parent to him, arid would therefore expect the submission of a son; and he resolved, however harsh and repulsive his uncle's conduct inight be, he would implicitly obey, and try to respect him.

Mr. Vincent (the brother of the late 'Irs. Carleton) was what the world would call a y.ery respectable man: that is to say, he had acquired a large fortune; lived in a very handsome house; paid his bills regularly, and never missed showing his well powderedhead and his diamond brooch and ring in his place at church on Sunday mornings. But Mr. Vincent at home, and Mr. Vincent abroad, were two very distinct beings: his two prevailing passions were pride and avarice. By the most penurious self-denial, he had risen, from a mere competency, to the possession of immense wealth; but though his pride induced him to make an ostentatious display of his great riches, the passion or accumulation still remained unextinguished: and his life, from the time he quitted business to become a man of consequence, was one perpetual struggle between his pride and his pocket. Still preserving all the petty attention to the most trifling details, (by which he had, at the outset of his life, contrived to wriggle himself into fortune's favours) and suspicious of being defrauded, in the most minute degree, by those around, at home he was a mean, overbearing tyrant, enacting the most implicit submission from his family and dependants, and enforcing the most rigid economy, or rather parsimony, in every domestic arrangement, to Counterbalance the prodigality of his outward show. To such a man the idea of being burthened with the care and expense of providing for a destitute orphan was dreadful, although that orphan was the Child of his only sister and of a man whom he (Mr. Vincent) once, when the latter was in the plenitude of his prosperity, was proud of calling his dearest friend.





It was in vain, however, that, foreseeing this dreadful consequence, he watched, with the utmost solicitude, the symptoms of rapid decline, which were but too evident in the altered form of the unfortunate Mr. Carleton. But though he ransacked his books to discover recipes, which appeared suitable to his relative's disorder, though he Once by a great effort of generosity gave the latter the benefit of change of air, by a month's residence at his country house at Highgate, and even went so far as to bring his own physician to visit the invalid, more than once, free of expence,—all this amiable solicitude availed nothing, and Mr. Carleton died.

Unsuspicious of the motives which prompted the attentions of Mr. Vincent, and always disposed to view every one with indulgence, the candid open-hearted Mr. Carleton gave the former credit for the assiduity with which he visited and advised him; believing that, although his brother-in-law was not remarkable for the urbanity or gentleness of his manners, his heart was still the seat of kindness and compassion. To his care, therefore, he solemnly confided his hapless boy; and Mr. Vincent, feeling that there was no way of escaping the burthen, dissembled his real feelings, and accepted the charge with so much apparent readiness and good will, that the father died happy in the conviction, that his child had at least one sincere friend.





The family of Mr. Vincent ponsisted of three children, when Julian took up his residence with them. The eldest was a son, three or four years older than the former; and the others, two daughters: Laura, the elder one, exactly the same age as her cousin Julian; and Marianne two years younger. Edward Vincent had just quitted school, to finish his education under the care of a private tutor at home: and he was very well pleased at finding that he was to have a companion in his studies and amusements, whom, from his age and situation, he should be able to make completely subservient to him; but Edward soon found that he had been too hasty in these anticipations,—and he had the mortification of discovering, that, notwithstanding Julian's youth and depend* ant station, he was as -independent in mind and action, and could be as haughty, upon occasion, as himself.

It cannot be imagined that two such fiery spirits could constantly be together without clashing; Julian

F.N. 1 B





resented, with violence, every thing which he considered an insult; and Edward, with all the overbearing pride of his father, possessed a share of malevolence and envy, which instigated him to i. thousand petty acts of hostility against his cousin, who, though less rich in the gifts of fortune, was infinitely more indebted to Nature for her endowments than the heir of Mr. Vincent. Time, however, rolled on, unmarked by any event of more importance to the youthful hero of our tale, than the constant warfare which raged between Edward Vincent's tyrannical and selfish arrogance and his own haughty, independent spirit, until the latter attained his seventeenth year.

At this period the two daughtersof Mr. Vincent, who had been hitherto at a fashionable boarding-school, and of whom, consequently, Julian had seen but little, except at the vacations, returned home,—their parents conceiving them completely accomplished, and thinking it high time to introduce them into company. It was nearly twelve months since Julian had seen them, (for their last vacation had been spent at the house of their grandmother, who had retired into the country) and he was surprised at the improvement which had taken place in both their persons.

Laura, the elder, was a fine tall girl, with locks whose jetty hue shamed the raven's wing, and whose eagle-eye, while it beamed with sense and animation, awed, by its sarcastic expression, those who were unacquainted with the lively good humour which corrected her strong propensity to ridicule, and quick conception of the ridiculous in the characters of her associates. Marianne, the younger, was as complete a contrast to her sister as it was possible to imagine.





Her form was rather diminutive, but- moulded with the most perfect symmetry; the glances of her dark blue eyes, shaded with long fringed eye-lashes, were restrained by timidity, and beamed with sweetness and sensibility; the transparent fairness of her cheek betrayed every quickly kindling.emotion, and her voice was harmony itself!

During the first day that they were together, Julian's eyes were constantly fixed in admiration of the beauty which every hour revealed more strikingly in the person of his little cousin, (as he had always been accustomed to call her) and Laura's lively raillery not •mfrequently brought a mutual blush into his cheeks, and those of the gentle Marianne.

Mr. Vincent and his son were both absent when the girls came home; the former having been recommended to try sea-bathing, for a complaint with which he had been long afflicted, and Edward had accompanied his father. A week passed away more happily than Julian had ever known since the death of his father; he was the constant companion of his two lovely cousins: and not a thought of past or future unhappiuess intruded, until on Laura's carelessly demanding when her father would return, Mrs. Vincent replied with a sigh,— , - .

"I expect he will be here to-morrow, my dear."

"To-morrow," repeated Julian starting, "can it be possible V

"I received a letter to that purport, yesterday," returned Mrs. Vincent, "but I did not like to break in upon your pleasures.''

"What a commentary," said Laura, in a law voice, turning her speaking eyes full upon Julian, "and uttered by my mother too!"





Mrs. Vincent caught the look, though not the words, and observed, while the colour mounted to her cheeks,—

"I mean that Julian Will be more employed when Mr. Vincent returns home: and cannot of course be so constantly with you as he is now."

There was an embarrassment in Mrs. Vincent's looks and manner that betrayed much more than her Words; and Julian's proud blood rose to his face, as he replied,-—

"I understand you, madam:—you mean that Mr. Vincent will not think his indigent nephew a proper companion for his daughters! but"

"A fig for what he thinks!" interrupted the warmhearted Laura, stretching her hand out to her cousin, who pressed it to his lips, "we will not consult him on the subject."

"Surely my father could not be so cruel!" sighed Marianne, turning away her head to conceal the tears that streamed down her cheeks at Julian's impassioned manner.

Mrs. Vincent made no reply, and universal gloom o'erclouded the faces of the before sprightly little group. In vain Laura tried to resume her vivacity, and rally away the solemnity, (as she styled it) of their looks; and in vain, Marianne, at her mother's request, accompanied her sister's harp with her silvery voice; the zest of their amusement was gone, for still Julian looked grave; and at an early hour they separated.

Mr. Vincent came on the morrow, and the first sentence he uttered to Julian but too fully confirmed the justice of the latter's interpretation of Mrs. Vincent's meaning on the preceding evening.





Julian was seated between his two fair cousins, reading aloud, when the door opened, and Mr. Vincent entered. Marianne turned pale; and Laura rising and endeavouring to assume a sprightly tone, exclaimed,—

"Dear papa, I did not know you were returned."

Mr. Vincent made no reply to this speech, but fixing his scowling eye on Julian, said in a harsh tone,—

"So, sir, it seems you can find no occupation, during my absence, but loitering away your time with my daughters; but I would have you recollect, sir, who and what you are; and I would have you consider, also, that it is quite time that you should be engaging in some pursuit, likely to procure a living, instead of spouting poetry and filling the heads of two silly girls with romantic nonsense."

"My cousin," said Laura with warmth, though trembling at her father's sternness, "is incapable of filling our heads (as you call it) with any sentiments, but such as will improve our hearts."

"Do not, my dear Laura, attempt any vindication of me," said Julian, proudly; and then turning to Mr. Vincent, he added, "It is not the first time, sir, that you have reproached me with my dependant situation, but it shall be the last."

"Stay; where are you going, Julian?" exclaimed Laura, as he rushed from the room. Julian paused a moment; but it was only to bestow a parting look on Marianne, who had sunk, sobbing with agitation, on a sofa; and wringing Laura's hand, (who had flown to stop him) he darted up stairs; and shutting himself in his own room, gave vent to the burst of indignant feelings that overpowered him. A flood of burning tears relieved the throbbing of his head and heart; and as he became more calm, the reflection naturally occurred, "Where shall I go? what shall 1 do to maintain myself?"





A few shillings (which had been given him by Mrs. Vincent) was all the money he had in his possession; and his stock of clothes was equally scanty; for Mr. Vincent (never very liberal) had not considered it necessary, as he said, to dress up a boy who had nothing to depend upon, as if he were on an equality with his (Mr. Vincent's) heir. Friends, he had none; for Mr. Vincent's policy had always kept him in the back ground, whenever any of those who had formerly known and respected his father, visited at Vincent house; for the master of this splendid mansion could not shut his eyes to the painful truth, that neither his son's appearance, manners, or attainments would bear the test of comparison with Julian Carleton.

The more he reflected, therefore, the more he felt his desolate situation; but still he was determined to quit the house of his unfeeling relative, and this determination was still more confirmed, when, about an hour after, Edward Vincent knocked at the door of his room, and said in an ironical tone,—

"If you have got over your heroics, Mr. Julian, my Father desires me to inform you. that you may come down to dinner."

"1 want no dinner," replied Julian scornfully, "nor would I eat another meal under your father's roof if I were perishing with hunger."





Edward burst into a laugh of derision.

"Well done!" he exclaimed; "that is right! Fasting and meditation are excellent remedies for a proud spirit; and many a lofty hero has been brought down by an empty stomach: so adieu, till supper time, when I dare say you will not be sorry to take your place at the bottom of the table; but you had better remember the old proverb—' He that will not when he may' You know the rest, I suppose."

"And I would advise you, sir, to remember that I am able to punish insolence," returned Julian, bursting out of the room with a look and gesture which made the cowardly Edward precipitately retreat down stairs, at the bottom of which, however, he stopped and knowing he was within reach of assistance, called out,—

"So, sir, I suppose you are to knock me down because I did not go on my knees to beseech your greatness to vouchsafe to eat your dinner."

Julian calmly re-entered his room and closed the door, nor could the voice of Mr. Vincent, loudly reprobating his insolence and temerity, provoke a single word of reply.

Iu a very short time Julian had packed up all his wardrobe in a small portmanteau, and uninterrupted by the appearance of any of the family, he descended the .staircase, and crossed the hall. At the moment he passed the door of the dining-room, the voice of Laura, loud in expostulation, met his ear; and involuntarily he lingered an instant, at the thought that he might never again behold the generous warmhearted girl who had so disinterestedly espoused his cause.





u And Marianne, too," he sighed, "I shall never see her lovely face again." At this moment the door opened, and Julian, fearful of being intercepted in his intent, hastily rushed out and closed the door of the inhospitable mansion, under whose roof he had passed so many hours of misery and degradation, for ever.



CHAPTER THE SECOND.

i



"Affliction may subdue the cheek, But not take in the mind."

WiMTEaVi Tale.



It was nearly dusk on one of the closing days of autumn, when Julian Carleton found himself entering London (his uncle's house was situated at Highgate,) without knowing where to go, or to whom to apply for counsel—

"The world was all before him Where to choose."

Julian had but seldom visited the metropolis, though resident at so short a distance. Since his father's death he had never been alone, and as he passed along, unconscious whither his steps tended, his head gre.v dizzy and confused with the glare of the lights, and the complication of noises which saluted his ear, and his heart sank with a more sickening sensation of wretchedness than he had yet felt, as he shrunk from the groups of busy people who passed him, unconscious of the misery which, more than the fatigue of walking a few miles with a burthen, which, though not very cumbrous, was more than lie had been accustomed to, rendered his steps unsteady, and his pacs uncertain.





More thau once he was saluted with—" Where the

d 1 are you pushing, youngster?" as involuntarily

he staggered against some of the passers by, but his spirit was too much subdued by the strangeness of his situation to prompt him to reply, and he continued to walk on, unheeding the remarks that were freely made upon his agitated appearance.

In Oxford Street, a crowd was collected, listening to an interesting dispute between a hackney-coachman and a gentleman whom he had just set down, and it was with considerable difficulty that Julian forced his way through them with his portmanteau on his shoulder, but just as he emerged from the throng, his awkwardly managed burthen came in contact with the hat of a well-dressed young man, and threw it into the kennel.

Julian turned to apologize for an accident which he was really sorry for; but he was prevented by a volley of brutal oaths, accompanied by a threat that if he did not ask pardon, he should lay where the hat did in a few minutes.

"I would have told you that I was sorry for what was completely unintentional, on my part," returned Julian, calmly, "had you behaved with any thing r. N. 1 c





like decency, but now I consider your violence as having completely balanced accounts between us."

A violent blow on the face, accompanied with an epithet too opprobrious to be repeated, was the reply to this speech. Julian's blood was instantly in a flame at this indignity, and throwing down his portmanteau, he, without a moment's delay, returned the blow he had received, with interest. In a moment the first cause of their assembling was forgotten; the hackney coachman and his opponent were left without a single auditor, and the eager throng crowded round Julian and his antagonist, each espousing the side that whim or inclination prompted, but all agreeing in one general object—that of promoting a regular set-to, as they called it, between the two angry youths.

Neither Julian's habits or feelings prompted him to be over eager in engaging in such a public exhibition of his pugilistic powers; but his opponent left him no alternative but submitting to be followed with insult, or endeavouring to punish his insolence. The young man threw off his coat, and Julian followed his example; several people would have dissuaded him from engaging with one who was so much his superior in age and strength, but their voices were drowned by vociferous shouts from others, of,—

"Let him alone, cant you!—He can beat him, I tell you!—I'll lay you two to one he beats him;" with numerous similar exclamations, intended to inspire the youthful hero, whose cause they had espoused, with courage and confidence.

Among other equally refined and polite accomplishments, Mr. Edward Vincent, junior, had studied, with great zeal, the science of the fist, or as the profeasor, under whose tuition he for some months daily practised, stiled it—the art of self-defence; and Julian, unwilling to let his cousin excel him in any acquisition, however trivial, had been very solicitous to profit by the instructions of this able tutor; while Edward, not from any wish to facilitate his cousiu's progress, but that he might have some one with whom he could assume the gloves at pleasure, was always ready to assist him by practice and explanation.





Julian, therefore, felt- confident in his own abilities, and irritated beyond endurance by the insulting language of his opponent, he engaged with him, with a full determination to punish his insolence. An immense mob was now assembled, and for some timq the chances of success seemed completely on the side of Julian's antagonist. In appearance, indeed, there was no comparison between the tall, light, elegant figure of the former, and the sturdy, thick-set person of his antagonist; but after a severe contest of nearly half an hour, victory declared for Julian, and the other gave up the contest.

"You are a brave fellow!" said a gentleman, dressed in the first style of fashion, who had been among the most zealous of Julian's encouragers, and now stepped forward to assist him in putting on his coat, and wiping off the blood and dirt from his face; "You are a brave fellow," he repeated, " and deserve to be encouraged. Where do you live?"

The recollection of his destitute situation struck forcibly on Julian's mind at this question: and turning away his head from the gaze of the people who were pressing around him, he replied, in a voice agitated by keen remembrance,—





"I live no where, I have no home!"

A buzz of curiosity ran through the crowd ; -some pressed nearer, to have a full look at the novice, who could be candid enough to make such a declaration: while others, who had been foremost in applauding his spirit and courage, shrunk away, fearful of this avowal proving but a prelude to an attack upon their purse.

"No home!" repeated the gentleman, whose question had elicited this reply, " Where are you going to then,—or how do you support yourself?"

Julian's pride rekindled at these questions, and he replied with reserve,—

"Excuse me, sir, as a stranger, you can feel but little interest in the solution of those questions."

The gentleman stood in silent astonishment at this reply; and Julian looking around him, in a calm tone said,—

"My portmanteau !—I gave it to some one.-'

No one answered this appeal, but each looked at his neighbour, as if to enquire if he had got it. Julian's pale cheek faded still paler, as in a tremulous voice he said,—

"It contains all I possess in the world; surely no one could be so cruel as to rob me of it."

Several voices now loudly reprobated his folly in intrusting it to a stranger; some few expressed their ineffectual pity for his loss,—while others, with superior sagacity, whispered their suspicions, that it was "a do" or, in plain English, an imposition: as they did not believe any body would be such a fool as to throw away their property in that way.

Julian heard not these conjectures: it was but too plain that be had lost his portmanteau, and this painful certainty absorbed all his thoughts.





Some investigation, as to the fate of his property, was now set on foot among the crowd by the gentleman, who had before appeared so particularly interested for him, but nothing satisfactory could be elicited: and at length the gentleman observed that it was gone, to all intents and purposes, therefore it was useless to remain there any longer; adding,—

"So come along with me, my lad, and we will have a little talk over this business, and see what can be done for you."

Julian almost mechanically followed the stranger, who, alone, of the vast concourse that had surrounded him, with expressions of the most intense interest, during the battle, now seemed to feel the smallest con* cern for his future fate. A few, indeed, followed at a distance, to see where the gentleman took him to; but the moment that was ascertained, they dispersed, the busy to attend to the occupations this rencontre had suspended, and the idle to seek some other gratification of the same refined species. The stranger, followed by Julian, entered a coffee-house, and ordered some warm negus, which was immediately brought.

"You ought to go to bed instantly," he observed "after the bout you've had. But I cant resist the curiosity, you have raised, to know a little more about you. In the name of all that is wonderful, who are you? and where did you come from? from the antipodes, I should think, by your simplicity, in being so easily done."

Julian felt half angry at this remark, and the freedom with which it was given; but gratitude for the stranger's attentions, subdued tbe feeling: and he replied, by a brief detail of the causes which had driven him out—a houseless wanderer. The gentleman heard him with great attention, and the epithets of " sneaking rascal" " cold-blooded dog," &c. which he, several times applied to Mr. Vincent, as Julian, with glowing cheeks dilated on the wrongs and indignities he had suffered, sufficiently evinced his detestation of oppression and tyranny.





"And so, then, you have no friend to apply to, nor, I suppose, any money to buy yourself friends?" he observed, when Julian had ended his narrative.

"Certainly, I have no friends, and my stock of money is but trifling," replied the latter, with a kind of reserve, which shrank from these questions, "but I have enough to pay for a lodging for to night, I believe." He hesitated, and as if actuated by a sudden recollection, he thrust his hand into -his waistcoatpocket. The gentleman watched him attentively; and observing that he did not proceed, but still kept his hand in his pocket, with an expression of dismay which could not be mistaken, burst into a loud laugh, exclaiming,—

"Done again, by Jove!"

Julian darted a look of keen resentment at the stranger, as he replied,—

"This may be sport to you, sir,—to me "bis

voice faltered, and unable to conclude, he turned away his head, to conceal the tears which, in defiance of his proud spirit, were swelling in his eyes.

"To you it is death, I suppose you mean to say, in the language of the frogs in the fable, which I remember learning when I was a youngster at school," observed the stranger; " but forgive my laughing, it was impossible to avoid it at your surprise at finding your friends had made free with your money: now to me, it is only wonderful that they had not also decamped with your clothes."





Julian made no reply, his thoughts were totally absorbed in contemplation of his destitute situation, and the transient emotion of anger which he had felt at the levity of his new acquaintance vanished with the expression of it.

"I know not what I shall do now!" he observed, in a melancholy tone.

"Pooh! never mind a few shillings," returned the stranger; " tbey could at best but have put off the evil day for a short time."

"Yes, but in that short time I might have procured

some employment," said Julian, " and now "he

paused, as if unwilling to proceed, and the gentleman exclaimed,—

"Well, to cut the matter short, you shall, if you like, come to my lodgings for to-night, and to-morrow we can see what can be done for you."

Julian's proud heart half recoiled from thus incurring obligations to a stranger,—yet he could not but feel grateful for his disinterested offer, and he felt it would be madness to refuse it, situated as he was; expressing, therefore, his thankfulness for the proposal, he accepted it, and having finished their glasses, they departed. At the door of a respectable looking

house in Street, Marylebone, the gentleman

stopped.

"It will not do for you to appear a stranger to me here," he observed, "for my landlady is a tiresome, suspicious old twaddler; therefore, remember? my name is Ryland,—Frank Ryland: and you are a cousin of mine just come to town."





Julian could not object to this arrangement, which was evidently intended for his benefit, yet he detested duplicity in any shape, and be felt that it did not increase his respect for his new friend, when the latter, on being admitted, desired a bed might be instantly prepared /or his cousin, who had met with an accident in coming up to London, by one of the Bristol coaches, which had been overturned, and had severely injured several of the passengers.

A long whisper to the lady of the house, who had listened with a very reserved and sour look to this detail, seemed to produce a wonderful effect in Julian's favour: and addressing herself to him with great courtesy, she apologized for not being able to accommodate him with any room but an upper one, all her principal apartments being occupied.

Julian was about to express his gratitude for any accommodation, but Mr. Ryland stopped him, by saying with a smile,—

"Pray, Mrs. Newman, dont trouble yourself about that j my cousin has been so used to plenty of light and air, that the nearer he is to the sky the better in this close town.''

Mrs. Newman curtseyed again, and said,— -" Would the young gentleman like a bason of broth or gruel to take before he went to bed t it might prevent his taking cold."

Mr. Ryland accepted her offer without consulting bis cousin, who, he whispered, was so bashful he could not speak for himself; and Julian and his companion were soon seated by a comfortable fire, while tho.refreshment, which the former began to feel would be very acceptable, !was preparing.





Julian felt by no means pleased with the deceptive means by which it was evident Ryland had secured the civilities of the landlady towards him; and he was still more vexed, when, having closed the parlour^door, and ascertained that no one was within hearing, Mr. Ryland, in a chuckling tone, congratulated himself on his stratagem.

"You must know," he continued, "that I am just now confoundedly out of cash, and the old girl has

begun to put on some d -d wry faces, because I

have not been quite regular in my payments for the last few months. Now I have got an uncle, you see, who is a banker in Somersetshire, and I've fed her up with the hopes that when he comes up to town all my debts would be paid. This morning she was cursed crusty, and told me plainly, if my uncle did not arrive before the end of the week, she should provide me a lodging I might not find quite so much to my taste as this one; so nothing could be luckier than your coming; for as I have told her you are the son of the banker, who means to follow you to town in the course of a fortnight, it has set all to rights again."

"But this deception" observed Julian, can last but a. short time, and then"

"Oh, make yourself easy about that," returned his companion, " I may have a run. of good luck before that comes, or at best, I can but give the old woman the go-by at last."

*" I do not understand you," said Julian in a doubtfill tone.

F. N. 2 D





"Well, then, I shan't trouble myself to explain," returned Ryland, with an air somewhat approaching to anger.

Julian remained silent: it was hard to reconcile the disinterested benevolence which Mr. Ryland had displayed towards him with a total want of principle: yet there appeared, to say the best of it, a certain looseness of living and acting, which by no means accorded with Julian's straight-forward integrity; 'Always be just before you are generous,' was an axiom which Mr. Carleton had assiduously implanted in the bosom of his son, and though he reproached himself for ingratitude, Julian felt that his new friend's conduct was by no means in conformity with this moral rule: his language, too, was often very inconsistent with the style of fashion in which he was attired: it was not only inelegant, but, in Julian's opinion, absolutely low and disgraceful; for Julian had yet to learn, that the abundance of technical phrases, or to use the comprehensive, modern definition,' flash terms' which loaded Mr. Ryland's conversation, were considered as indispensible to (again we must borrow) a 'modern Corinthian,' as the costume which distinguished him from the less polished or more unambitious part of his sex.

In Julian's mind, however, this apparent inconsistency gave rise to ideas not very favourable to his host's character, and he felt happy when Ryland, with apparent frankness, said,—

"Well, as you have given me your history, suppose I return the compliment,—it will beguile the time till old mother prudence brings the slop, and will teach you that while one is young, and strong, and good

/

/





looking, like you and I, there's no need to despair."

Julian readily assented to this proposition, and Mr. Ryland proceeded.



CHAPTER THE THIRD.



"Talk not of seventy years as age; in seven

I've seen more changes,



Than might suffice a moderate century through."

Byron.

"In some respects, my outset in life resembled yours, for*I lost both father and mother when I was a child, and I was left to the care of an uncle, (the gentleman whose son you have the honour to personate) but with this difference, that my dad left a tolerable share of the ready, to set me forward in life, with a d——d foolish proviso though, that I was not to touch till I came to years of discretion, which he chose

to fix at twenty-five, What the d 1 he thought I

was to do without money till then 1 don't know; but, however, so it was. It was a pity, with all his wisdom, (and I have heard he was very wise) that my father didn't know better; for it was only the means of leading me into worse mischief, than if I had had it all at once: for long before I reached that period I found a d d kind friend, who, at a rate of





about seventy per cent. accommodated me so readily, that instead of four thousand, I found, when I came into possession, that I had not above five hundred that I could call my own."

"But did not your uncle interfere, to prevent such a flagrant imposition upon your inexperience V observed Julian.

"Pshaw !—my uncle knew nothing about it," returned Ryland; "he thought he had done his duty in sending me to school, and from thence to college,—

intending to make a parson of me; a pretty d 1 of

a parson I should have been, by the bye: though I am d d sorry I was b lowed before I had taken orders and got the living, which his interest had secured the promise of for me; but, however, what's done cannot be undone; and so, to go back to my story, as I was saying, I was sent to college, and I hadn*t been there many weeks before I found there was nothing to be done without money: my uncle's only son was entered at the same time as myself; he was three years younger than me, but as prime an article as ever you met with,—up to every thing. He soon let me into his secrets, and I found he was raising money on the reversion of some property, which would be his, at the death of his mother; he introduced me to his friend, and, you may be sure, I eagerly caught at the same means of getting a present supply.

It is no use to enter into particulars, how we contrived to spend our money, and deceive the old man, who thought we were very diligently pursuing our studies, often when we were scampering up to London with our girls and our gigs in prime style; in short, we lived as jolly a life as we could desire, until Tom's resources began to fail, and his friend began to fight shy, in advancing me any more money. Tom was, at this time, deeply in debt to his tradesmen, and he'd





got a d d extravagant jilt to keep, who had no

care for any thing but to get the money out of his pocket; well, whether she persuaded him to it or not, or how it was, I don't know, for I had nothing to do with it, upon my soul; but so it was, that Tom was tempted to put his father's name to a draft for fifteen hundred upon the banker that the old man was concerned with in London. Tom's girl presented it for payment, and, as the d—1 would have it, who should be in the office but the old fellow himself, who had come up that very morning to town on some business. The consequence was, we were all Mowed, for the girl, to save herself, gave a full, true, and particular account of all our goings on. Well, the old man carried Tom off close prisoner to his own house, where he contrived to preach him into a reformation, as I suppose he calls it,—a canting hypocrite!—and he is now a partner in his father's concern, and I suppose making a pretty thing of it. Mind I should not blame him for that, but the worst of it was, that he impeached me as the prime mover of all the mischief: a mean sneaking rascal! had he had a spark of honour about him, he would have scorned to say a word about me, for he well knew that I would have bit my tongue off, before I would have betrayed him.

All his misdeeds were now laid to my account, and my uncltf wrote me a long sermonizing epistle, coneluding with exhorting me to turn from my wicked ways and repent. I was young then, and had not learnt the value of that maxim,





- " Assume a virtue if you have it not,"

So I scorned his offers, and in return he whistled me down the wind, a prey to fortune. Well, I thought myself a very happy dog as long as my money lasted, and indeed, for some time longer. I subsisted tolerably well on the reputation of my former responsibility, but this could not last for ever, and my creditors began to smell a rat. So one day, just as I was stepping out of my tandem in which I had been driving Louisa round Rotten Row, I was tapped on the shoulder, and the tandem did me its last piece of service by conveying me and the bailiff to Carey Street. There I staid as long as I had the wherewithal to pay for such genteel accommodations; and when I could raise no more, I was obliged to go to the Fleet. All this time, however, I flattered myself that some of my friends, for I had plenty that called themselves by that title, would come forward and assist me; but week after week passed away, .and I heard nothing of any of them, though I wrote, explaining my situation, to every soul that I could think of, who had been in the habit of helping me to spend my money. For the first few weeks Louisa visited me pretty constantly.

"Who was Louisa?" demanded Julian: " excuse me, but you mentioned her before, without explaining."

Ryland burst into a loud laugh as he replied. "Who was Louisa * upon my soul, you have asked me a question I cannot answer, for I never enquired into her birth, parentage, and education: all I can tell you is, that she was a fine girl, who condescended to do the honours of my table while I had one, and when I had no longer one, .asI was just about to tell you, left me, to look out. for another easy fool to fleece, as she had done me; and so, to return to my story, in a short time I had parted with my watch, rings, and nearly* all my wardrobe; in fact, all that would raise a guinea, and I began seriously to think of ending all my troubles with a noose, when a young sprig of fashion whom I had known at college, was introduced as a member of our society. His embarrassments were but temporary, and he had plenty of the ready. I did not let him into the secret, that I was quite done up, and so lie very readily accommodated me with the loan of twenty pounds on my note.





This wouldn't have lasted long, however, but, fortunately for me, his lordship was matWy infatuated with play; I had gained a pretty good smattering of most games,—and before he left us (which was in less than six weeks) he had contracted a fresh\debt to me, (for which, however, I could not take out a detainer) of seven hundred and fifty pounds. I acknowledge that when he quitted the prison I never entertained a hope of getting the money: but I had mistaken my man, for, though his lordship had compromised his tradesmen's bills for ten shillings in the pound, he was always scrupulously exact in paying his debts of honour. Accordingly, in a few days after be had quitted the Fleet, his lordship's homme d'affaires waited upon me with the money.





This was a precious windfall, but I did not make as good use of it as I might have done: for instead of waiting till I was freed by the regular course of law, (I mean the insolvent act) which Avould have kept all my money in my pocket, to begin again with, I compromised my debts (which did not amount to a thousand pounds) for three hundred: and the creditors (who neVer expected to get as many shillings) snapped at the offer.

I was now once more free of the world, and having had plenty of time to reflect, and see the error I had been guilty of, which was that of being too easily deceived, and too liberally sharing my good things with those

who didn't care a d n for me, I resolved to act

very differently for the future. Accordingly, I received the advances of some of my former friends, whov on my first appearance in public, would have renewed their particular intimacy, with great coldness, and turned a deaf ear to their pretended eager inquiries of wh^re I had hidden myself such a length of time, &c.

My triumph, however, did not last long: for I had been but oce week, ' one little week,' released from durance vile, when my ill fortune tempted me to visit a house, where I had before lost some hundreds. My late success with Lord H had given me confidence in my own skill, and the sneers of some of my former companions, who hinted at a reduction in my finances, goaded me on to stake larger sums than I otherwise should have done; from the moment of my sitting down, fortune declared herself against me: but this only increased my anxiety, without deterring m», and the consequence was, that I rose from the table worse than a beggar, for I was indebted several hundreds more than 1 was able to pay. i I can laugh now when I think of the mad projects that entered my brain as I walked home to my lodgings, but 1 will pass all that over; it is sufficient to say that I was now without a guinea in the world, and without credit too, for my recent emancipation from the Fleet had made every body shy of trusting me again.





To remain where I was, was impossible, and, accordingly, under the pretext of a hasty summons to the country, 1 quitted my lodgings, hired less expensive ones in an obscure part of the town, and there lived npon the personals which I had redeemed on my leaving the Fleet, until 1 was literally turned out of doors. Not being able to raise a six-pence, and fa-mine staring me in the face, I wrote several times to my uncle, but niy letters remained unanswered, and my application to two or three fashionable friends was equally unsuccessful. Every hope, therefore, seemed lost, but while there is life there is hope, as the doctors say. Passing through a narrow street in the neighbourhood of one of the inns of court early on the morning of the third day which I had spent literally in the streets without food or shelter, I espied a female face peeping at me through a shop window, of which I thought I had some knowledge. I turned back, looked again, and the smile and the nod which I was greeted with, confirmed the idea. Still 1 could not recollect: but it was no time for ceremony, for the very idea of somebody still owning me as an old acquaintance was a cordial, so I stepped in, and was

F.N. 2 K





saon reminded of some juvenile exploit* in which this fair damsel had borne a prominent part.

"We are both a good deal altered, Mr. George," she observed, with a sly glance at my Proton-black coat and 6/aeA>white trowsers. I really believe I blushed and she went on with an attempt at a sigb.

u I have been married, and have buried my husband, and I suppose you are married too."

I replied iu the negative, dexterously insinuating that 1 had never found any one worthy of occupying Ker place in my heart.

This was received as well as I could wish, and the widow appeared by no means averse to hear more on the same subject during our t£te-a-tete. However my eyes incessantly wandered to a snug little parlour behind the shop, through the glass-door of which I could perceive all the paraphernalia of the breakfast-table duly arranged, and only waiting my charmer's appearance. At last she took the hint, and, O rapturous sound! she invited me to breakfast, if I could eat my breakfast in such a poor little place, and at such an early hour.

You may be sure I did not let this opportunity slip of bettering my fortune. In less than a fortnight, I married the widow, and was master of the shop which I had entered with no other hope than getting a temporary supply for the cravings of nature.

I could not, however, bear the drudgery and humiliation of a shop, and my wife, proud of having married a gentleman, was as unwilling to lower my dignity as I was to stoop to such an employment. She therefore exerted all her influence among her friends and acquaintance to procure me a situation more suitable to my education and former habits. I confess to you I did not think my situation much bettered when I took possession of my post as clerk to a counsellor, at a salary of a hundred and fifty pounds a year; but the liberal treatment and the easy duty I was put upon, soon reconciled me to it; and I have now held the post more than two years, contriving to enjoy all the pleasures of life without neglecting my interest."





"But where is the lady?" enquired Julian.

"Oh, my wife!" returned Ryland, with somewhat of confusion in his looks, " she is at present in the country. In fact our tempers do not harmonize: she is too fond of playing first fiddle, and so she has been upon a visit to her friends in Somersetshire for these last six or eight months."

Julian was silent: this last fact had by no means increased his respect for his friend: and it was plain, through the whole recital, that Mr. Ryland's conduct had never been marked by any very striking traits of honour, generosity, or in fact any estimable quality. Julian, however, was glad to find that his companion held a situation which conferred on him respectability in the eyes of the world, and was not, as he had strongly suspected, a mere adventurer.

Supper was now introduced, and a conversation ensued, of which the subject was the adventures of the evening.

Mr. Ryland commended with rapture the spirit and judgment Julian had displayed, analyeing every movement, and commenting on all the turns of the battle in terms so technical and with so accurate a remembrance, that the latter soon discovered that his companion, if not a professor, was at least a very scientific amateur of the noble art of self-defence. i It was in vain that Julian attempted to bring some more rational and interesting subject on the tapis: Mr. Ryland had no ears for any thing else, and Julian was condemned to listen to a detail of all the prime battles which his friend had witnessed, given in terms so gross, and with details so shocking to humanity, that the latter was most heartily rejoiced when the landlady, announcing that his chamber was prepared, put a period to the narration, to him so disgusting.





CHAPTER THE FOURTH.



JULIAN did not find his bed a bed of roses: weary* harrassed, and every limb aching from his recent encounter, there was still too much inquietude in his thoughts, to sufter him to find that repose which exhausted nature required; the past, the present, and the future, alternately claimed his consideration: he reviewed his own conduct, and that of his harsh and arbitrary relative, Mr. Vincent,—he recalled the overbearing insolence of Edward Vincent, and he comforted himself, that if the step he had taken could not be justified by prudence, it would at least be applauded by all who had hearts to feel how bitter is the bread of dependence to a generous spirit, and how hard the task, for a superior mind to bear





"The insolence of office,

The proud man's contumely, and all the spurns

That patient merit of th' unworthy takes."



From this galling subject his thoughts wandered to his gentle cousins, Laura and Marianne; towards the former he felt his heart kindle with gratitude, respect, and admiration; but a feeling more indefinable, yet more fervent, thrilled through his heart, as his ardent fancy dwelt on the beautiful face and form of the gentle Marianne. The idea, that he had perhaps seen her for the last time, was insupportable: yet a solemn oath had passed his lips, that never should his foot cross.the threshold of Mr. Vincent's door, unless he had gained a sufficient independence, to place him on an equality with his proud relative, and prevent the possibility of being suspected of mercenary motives.

"And can I hope that such a day will ever come?" he despairingly ejaculated: "I who am, at this moment, obliged to the casual charity of a stranger even for a night's shelter, and to-morrow shall be again an outcast: for here I cannot stay, even for a few days,

dependant upon a man who evidently "He paused,

and again accused himself of ingratitude, but the truth would force its way; in spite of his obligations to him, Julian felt that Mr. Ryland was not a man whom he could respect, or wish to associate with Hour after hour was spent in fruitless meditation on the appalling prospect that presented itself to his view, and Juliaa arose feverish, unrefreshed, and with spirits proportionally depressed.





Mr. Ryland was already risen, and met his young friend with an air of such great cordiality, that the latter, as he replied to his friendly enquiries, almost repented that he had ever entertained an injurious thought of him.

"Well, and what do you mean to do with yourself to-day?" he enquired of Julian, as they were at breakfast.

"I wish I could answer that question," returned Julian in a despondent tone.

"Then you are determined not to return to your uncle's," observed Ryland.

"Return !—no, never!" replied Julian with vehemence, "I would starve—die—beg in the streets, before I would submit to his insolence!"

"Starve, die, beg in the streets!" reiterated his friend, " those are very energetic sounds, Carleton, but if you come to practise, you will find starving, begging, or even dying, are"

"Preferable to bearing the tyranny of that selfish, heartless wretch," interrupted Julian, impetuously; "better than depending for subsistence on one whose avarice grudged what his ostentation bestowed, and who seemed to consider the child of his only sister as a being of a different species, and not entitled to a thought or opinion of his own, because he did not possess a share of that wealth which only served to make his own vices more conspicuous and contemptible."

"Bravo, my hero!" exclaimed Ryland; "I admire your spirit, though I doubt if it will be of much service to you in the world, as you must enter it,—I mean to cut and carve your own fortune; but, to come down from our stilts a little, and talk of things, can you write a good legible hand, and pretty quick?"





Julian, with some surprise, replied in the affirmative.

"Then if you will go with me into the city," returned Ryland, "I think I can put you into something which will enable you to keep your head above water for the present, till you can get into something better."

Julian's heart bounded at even a remote prospect of being able to provide for himself by his own exertions, and grateful for Ryland's disinterested kindness, he expressed his readiness to submit entirely to his guidance.

With renovated hope, and with an alacrity which but a few hours before it would have seemed impossible any thing could have inspired his wearied and

relaxed frame, Julian accompanied bis friend to

Street, Chancery Lane, and was by him introduced into a small dark office, in which two young men, and one of more mature age, and superior appearance, were writing.

"Alders, I have brought you an assistant," said Mr. Ryland, on entering. "Are you busy? I shall take it as a favour, if you can employ him."

Mr. Alders looked with scrutinizing attention at the youth thus unceremoniously introduced to his notice, and replied,—

"Why really, Mr. Ryland, I cannot say that I have any particular occasion for any assistance at present, but to oblige you—"

"That's enough, my good fellow," interrupted Ryland. - " I have no time to spare, for I ought to be at chambers by this time; so you will set my young friend here to work: and, Carleton, a word in your ear, (and he pulled him aside) you can find the way, you know, to my lodgings, if I-do not call on you be* fore you are dismissed to-night; be sure you remember you are my cousin, and from Somersetshire. Tell the old woman to get you some supper, and leave the rest to me; only be careful you do not' let the cat out of the bag;'" and, with a friendly shake of the hand, he hurried away, and left Julian to all the strangeness of his new situation.





"Have you been accustomed to this employment, sir?" enquired Mr. Alders, with great courtesy.

Julian replied in the negative, adding, with a half smile,—

"Nor, in reality, do I even know what is the nature of the employment which my friend has so kindly introduced me to."

Mr. Alders appeared surprised, but he evinced every disposition to assist the novice, whose manners seemed to impress him with respect: and, after some preliminary explanations, Julian was seated at a desk, and commenced his first essay as a law-writer.

For the first hour or two, attention to business seemed to absorb the minds of Julian's companions, as well as his own: from time to time, Mr. Alders looked over Julian's shoulder, and assisted him with his instructions, in a tone of kindness that completely confirmed the impression which his first address had made upon the susceptible heart of our hero, who ever swayed rather by his feelings than his judgment, which would have taught him to be less hasty in his decisions, had already gifted his new patron with every virtue that can adorn and dignify mankind.





The diuner-hour came, and Julian's companions, all but Mr. Alders, left the office; Julian continued writing, he felt no want of dinner, nor did he reflect upon the light in which remaining would be considered,but he thought how desolate his situation appeared, compared with those around him. They had all homes to go to,—perhaps friends, anxious for their welfare and comfort; and it might be, the cheering smile of affection to sweeten their meal, and render the labour

which procured it comparatively light, while he .

The contrast was painful, and, almost unconsciously, he uttered a deep sigh.

Mr. Alders raised his head, and looked enquiringly at him, and Julian, half ashamed of the emotion he had betrayed, applied himself still more assiduously to his task.

"You have no friends, I suppose, at this part of the town, sir?" said Mr. Alders, at last breaking silence.

"I have not a friend in the world," replied Julian, in a despondent tone, " but Mr. Ryland."

"Indeed," returned Mr. Alders, with surprise; "pardon me, I do not wish to be impertinently curious, but are you related to Mr. Ryland?"

Julian replied in the negative, adding, in a tremulous voice,—

"My father was, perhaps, not unknown to you, sir, for I have heard you, more than once this morning, mention the name of the gentleman to whom he acted as principal clerk, for several years previous to his death; I mean Mr. of Inn.''

"Good God! are you the son of Mr. Carleton?" exclaimed Mr. Alders. "But how is this, that I see F N 2 F





you in these circumstances? Pardon me, (observing the crimsoned cheek of the youth) I understood that the son of the respected and lamented Mr. Carleton had been taken under the protection of his rich relation, Mr. Vincent; can it be possible that he has discarded you?"

Julian replied by a candid narration of the circumstances which had occasioned his flight from his uncle's, and introduced him to Mr. Rylaud, whose conduct towards him he warmly panegyrised.

Mr. Alders looked very grave, and forcibly expressed his regret that any thing should have arisen to deprive him (Julian) of the powerful protection of a relative, just at the critical moment when it was of most importance to him; but he concluded with such a cordial assurance that he would be happy to be of any service to the son of a man whom he so much respected as the fate Mr* Carleton, that Julian could not feel offended at expressions which seemed to attach something like blame to his hasty relinquishment of his uncle's protection.

Of Mr. Ryland's conduct Mr. Alders seemed cautiously to avoid speaking, yet Julian thought that there was an expression in his countenance, as he said,—

"I know very little of Mr. Ryland, beyond the mere intercourse of business,—that did not convey much of respect for that gentleman's character."

Julian, however, though he had been candid perhaps to a fault in his communications on the subject of his own affairs, had carefully refrained from giving the slightest hint of any thing which he disapproved of in Mr. Ryland's conduct, though he could not help feeling very uncomfortable, as night approached, at the idea of the deception which he must actively, as he had heretofore passively concurred in, should he be obliged to return to Ryland's lodgings without him.





Mr. Alders left the office early in the afternoon, and Julian saw him no more; the two young men, who remained, were far for prepossessing in their manners and appearance; and Julian saw, or fancied he saw, a disposition to amuse themselves at his expense, from some mal-a-propos questions and sly looks of intelligence which passed between them; this did not add to the comfort of his situation, and every succeeding hour seemed more tediously slow; yet he started when one of his companions announced that it was time to leave off. No Ryland had made his appearance, and he detested the thought of returning without him.

There was no alternative, however, for the office was closed, and with " lingering steps and slow," he set off

for Street, delaying, as much as possible, on

the road, by looking in at every shop window which presented any thing worth looking at: he contrived to make it as late as possible before he knocked at the door, but Ryland was not returned, and he was obliged to run the gauntlet of all the loquacious landlady's questions. She supposed he had been seeing a little of the sights of London. Julian replied,—no: he had been engaged jn some business all day, which had fully occupied his attention.

"Well, to be sure, business must always be attended before pleasure, and she supposed his was business of great consequence, to have brought him such a long way from home.

A mere affirmative was the only reply to this indirect question, but not at all disconcerted, she returned to the attack, by asking how long he meant to stay in town.





"I cannot tell exactly," replied Julian, with some hesitation, "it does not depend upon myself."

The inquisitive lady now seemed to think that his reserve proceeded from pride; and apologizing for the liberty she had taken, she begged to know what he would please to have for supper, for it was no use to think of waiting for Mr. Ryland, who probably would not be home for many hours—if at all.

Julian had eaten nothing since the morning, and then had made but a slight breakfast, and he had began, for the last two or three hours, to feel that however the mind may for a short time enable us to forget the claims of nature to repose and sustenance, she will eventually make herself heard and understood; he felt, indeed, strongly, that he wanted both food and rest,—but his heart recoiled from the imposition by which he was to procure it; but at length he recollected that should Ryland not meet with a run of good luck, (as he had expressed himself) and be able to discharge the sum for which he now stood indebted, he (Julian) could at least when he should be paid for his present employment, satisfy her for what he had.

Under this impression, therefore, he accepted Mrs. Newman's offer of getting him some supper, and having remained up till a late hour, in expectation of Ryland's return, he at length retired to bis little chamber, and somewhat relieved from his immediate anxieties, slept soundly, until he was awoke, at daylight, by bis friend Ryland, undiawing his curtain, with a face flushed with exultation.





CHAPTER THE FIFTH.



"Let me play the fool:

With mirth and laughter, let old wrinkles come;

And let my liver rather heat with wine

Than my heart cool with mortifying groans!

Why should a man, whose heart is warm within,

Sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster,

Sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice,

By being peevish?"



Shakspearb.

"HOLLO! rouse yourself up, my boy!" exclaimed Ryland, "and give me joy. Look here—and here!" unfolding a large roll of bank notes, and spreading them on the bed; while Julian, in astonishment, rubbed his eyes and stared about, scarcely able to convince himself that he was not still under the influence of a dream.

"Ar'n't I a lucky dog V demanded Ryland, who was evidently somewhat flustered with the juice of the grape, "and all mere chance too; for 1 was coming home quite down in the mouth, not having a shilling to help myself, when I met with a person who has owed me five pounds these six months, and I never expected to see five shillings of it: however, he hap





pened to be quite flush, so I put him in mind of his debt, and he handed it over in a minute.

"There is a tide in the affairs of men, Which taken at the flood leads on to fortune."

Somehow or other these lines popped into my head as soon as ever I fingered the cash, and I thought to myself—Well, if this is the crisis of my fortune, I wont baulk it. He (that is my friend) was going to a house where him and I have often been together, and I went off with him, and soon proved that I had just hit upon the very nick, for from the moment I sat down I commenced winning, and at last rose with as many hundreds as I had pounds when I began. I was devilish sorry to leave you without any money yesterday, but now you can take a couple of flimseys and pay me when you can afford it, that wont be while you are at old Alders, I'll be bound, for he'll cut you close enough."

Julian knew not how to apply the term flimseys: he would not have comprehended, but that Mr. Ryland accompanied it by pushing two one-pound notes into his hand, while he carelessly bundled up the others together and put them in his pocket: but he was still more puzzled by the strange mixture of thoughtlessness, extravagance, and generosity which appeared in the conduct of his friend,—he considered, too, that in his cooler moments Mr. Ryland might perhaps repent of this voluntary loan, and he therefore replied,—

"lam truly grateful for your proffered kindness, sir, but I cannot consent to take advantage of it at this moment: to-morrow we will talk of it."

"Pshaw! alway stake money when you can get it," returned Ryland, pushing back the hand which tendered him the notes; "keep it, I tell you, till I ask you for it, and if that happens before you





can afford to return it, call me a d d rascal—that's

all."

Thus pressed, Julian could no longer refuse to accept a sum which, totally unused to the possession of money, seemed, to him, almost inexhaustible, and Mr. Ryland, throwing himself into a large chair by the bedside, yawningly expressed a wish that it was breakfasttime.

Julian advised him to go to bed, and try to sleep for a couple of hours, but this he refused, adding,—

"I suppose you think I am drunk, you dog, but I am only a little on the high go; if I were to go to bed I should not be able to get up again in time for business: and as my governor says—Punctuality is the soul of business—so I like to be punctual, you know, if I had but a dish of coffee. By the bye, get up and dress yourself, and we'll go and get some coffee, and have a bit of a spree into the bargain."

Julian instantly complied, remarking, however, at the same time, that he was fearful they would not be able to get coffee so early, as it was scarcely six o'clock.

"Oh! I'll find out a shop, I'll warrant," replied Mr. Ryland, "so make haste and come along."

Julian was soon dressed, and Ryland, having first carefully deposited his money in an inside breastpocket, observing,—

As we're going among some queer company we cannot be too careful."

He then led the way to Street, Oxford Street,

as he had predicted, was a shop already open, and nearly filled with a motley assembly of both sexes<





Julian had never witnessed such a scene before, and he shrank back almost with affright from the villainous group of faces which were raised in scrutiny of the new comers as they proceeded to the only vacant seats in the room, from whence Ryland called loudly for toast and coffee.

"Good heavens! how did you ever become a visitor to such a place as this, for I suppose you have been here before V whispered Julian to his companion.

"Misery makes us acquainted with strange bedfellows," returned Ryland aloud.

"It does, indeed," exclaimed a pale, thin, diminutive, little man, who, though dressed in a suit which had once been black, and with linen whose original colour was scarcely discernible, still preserved an air of more respectability than those among whom he was seated. "It does, indeed; and who knows it better than-I ?—I

« Who am steeped in misery to the very lips."

"You had better steep your lips in a cup of hot coffee," observed Ryland, with a laugh that seemed to applaud his own wit.

"Ah! bat money I've none: . And my credit's all gone;

Then say how may that come to pass.

Well aday!

Said, or rather sang the little man, stretching out his hands with rather a theatrical air that completely destroyed the impression which his singularly plaintive tones had first made upon Julian.

"Well, never mind, you shall have a cup at my ex— pense," returned Ryland, " and then you know you can Say you got your breakfast for an old song, as the say* ing is.





There were plenty to laugh at this second bungling attempt to be witty, for Ryland's dashing appearance, and this piece of liberality, secured him many complacent listeners. The little man, however, did not join in the laugh: but starting into the middle of the room, with a low obeisance, exclaimed,—

"I humbly thank your highness, and do remain your most devoted-slave*" ':

"Is this man mad?" whispered Julian to Mr. Ryland.

"There is a method in his madness;" returned the latter," or to speak plainer,—though his wits aire a little shattered, he is, in reality, more knave than fool, although you will scarcely think so when I tell you that he has reduced himself from a respectable situation in life to his present state, by a life of continued profligacy and extravagance. An excellent voice, a happy knack of telling a story, and a retentive memory stored with anecdotes and quotations, which were generally well applied, made him, in his younger days, what is called, excellent company, and introduced him to the society of those with whom he could have no pretensions to vie in expence and style of living. But he was too ambitious to brook the idea of being considered as an inferior, and consequently he contracted debts which overwhelmed him, and he has been gradually sinking from bad to worse until he is become what you see him—an outcast from all respectable society, and dependant for a miserable existence on the mere casual bounty either of an old acquaintance or

T. N. 3» G





■ome one whom his singular appearance and manner* attract into observation of him; an opportunity which he neverfailsto take every advantage of in his power."

During this recital the object of it had been devouring the refreshment that was set before him with an avidity that pained the compassionate Julian, and afforded a subject of mirth to several who were watching him, rind calculating how much the Doctor's (as they called him) breakfast would cost his entertainer. Ryland returned to his employment of quizzing the object of his bounty, and uttering would-be witticisms at his expense; and Julian, after reflecting for some time on the inconsistency of his friend, who, while gravely moralizing on the folly of this poor being, was himself

"Running the giddy round w ith all his might,'5

which would, in all probability, eventually bring him to a level with the unfortunate whom he now censured— turned round to survey the rest of the group by whom he was surrounded.

There was nothing, however, either in their appearance or conversation to interest or amuse him, and Julian shrunk with disgust from the oaths and low ribaldry which met his ear on every side.

"How can you like to sit a moment in such aplace?" he enquired of Ryland, who seemed completely in his element, laughing, joking, and conversing with the greatest familiarity with every one around him.

Oh! it's nothing when you are used to it," returned Ryland, turning away and resuming the conversation which this remark had interrupted.

Julian expressed a hope that he should never be accustomed to such a disgusting scene, but Ryland did not pay any attention to this wish, and he was condemned to the mortification of sitting another half-hour while Mr. Ryland enjoyed the extreme gratification of fermenting a quarrel between two females, which vented itself in every opprobrious term their memory could supply, and which the bystanders seemed to indulge a hope might, by skilful management, be made to produce something more decidedly diverting, in the shape of a battle. Among those who were most strenuous in recommending, by sly insinuations, this mode of settling their differences, Mr. Ryland was by far the most conspicuous, and Julian beheld, with a sentiment almost amounting to abhorrence, the eagerness of delight with which his friend seemed to anticipate a scene which he, Julian, would have shrank from with horror and disgust.





The ladies, however, in spite of their inflammatory advisors, and the still more inflammable potions which at Mr. Ryland's expense, were from time to time administered to keep up their spirits, seemed determined to trust their mutual defence to their natural weapons only, the tongue; and at last Ryland, tired of the wordy war, and hopeless of its leading to a more definitive contest, consented to Julian's earnest request that he would return home.





CHAPTER THE SIXTH.



« There is written in ysnr brow honesty and constancy: if I read it not truly, mine ancient skill beguiles me; but in the boldness of my cuuning I will lay myself in hazard."

Shakspeare.

THE exhilirating effects of Mr. Ryland's midnight potations were now beginning to disappear, and by the time he had changed his clothes, and was ready to set out with Julian on their way to their different employments, headache, debility, nervous irritation, and all the numerous catalogue of ills which follow in the train of intemperance, had taken such complete possession of him that even his recent good fortune seemed scarcely remembered; and he replied to Julian's remarks with an air of despondency, and sometimes in a tone of peevishness that formed a most striking contrast with the jolly conviviality and noisy mirth which had so short a time before distinguished him as the gayest of the gay.

Not a word had been hinted by Ryland respecting his debt to Mrs. Newman, though she had been into his apartment to know if he would not breakfast before he went. Julian felt uncomfortable: he could not help thinking that the same means which had placed so much money at his companions disposal, might as speedily deprive him of it, and he thought, that he ought at least, for his own comforjt if not for justice' sake, to discharge a claim which had already pressed so heavily on him as to induce him to resort to deception to evade it even for a short time. Julian was anxious also, on his own account, that the necessity for this degrading deception should cease. Open, candid, and honourable in his disposition, it had been with the utmost reluctance that he had submitted to be made the instrument of imposition; and he felt that it was ungenerous in Ryland to .continue it one moment longer than absolute necessity compelled him. Yet, situated as he was, Julian could not say all this, and, in Ryland's present irritable state, he saw that he could not even hint it without calling forth a reply which, perhaps, with all the gratitude he felt towards his inconsiderate friend, Julian would have found hard to be borne.





Nearly the whole of their walk was spent in gloomy silence on Ryland's, and unpleasant reflection on Julian's part. In Chancery Lane Ryland would have left his companion with a cold " Good morning," but Julian felt too anxious to part thus, and in a hesitating tone, he said,—

"Am I to go home alone to-night, or shall I see you before."

"I don't know, indeed," returned Ryland; " I shall see about it. If I am no better I shall go home early and try to sleep away this infernal headache; if I am

better but I shall make no promise:" and he

walked slowly away.





Uneasy, vexed, and dispirited, Julian pursued his way to Mr. Alders' office, and resumed his employment; devoutly aspirating a wish that some fortunate chance might, without subjecting him to the imputation of ingratitude, free him from the unpleasant situation of being the companion of, and incurring continual obligations to a man whom he could neither respect or esteem.

The day's employment seemed even more irksome than that of the preceding one, and the manners of his associates still more revolting. Mr. Alders scarcely remained half an hour before he vanished for the remainder of the day, and Julian learnt with chagrin that having another concern to attend to, it was seldom he devoted much of his time to this one.

Immersed in melancholy reflections, our hero for a time lost all consciousness that he was the subject of observation and secret diversion to the companions of his toil, but, at length, he was recalled to recollection by a loud laugh from one, and raising his eyes he discovered that it was excited by the fidelity with which his companion was copying the absent look and mournful attitude which his (Julian's) feelings had occasioned him unconsciously to assume.

Julian's proud spirit instantly kindled at this imaginary insult, totally unused to that species of personal pleasantry which distinguishes the lower order of would-be wits, he c onsidered this as too marked a disrepect to be passed over in silence; with eyes darting fire, therefore, and looks that breathed defiance, he addressed the offender.

"I wish you, sir, distinctly fo understand that I am not of a disposition to submit to insolence."





"Sir—r!" uttered in a tone of pretended surprise, was all the reply Julian received to this address.

"You understand me I do not doubt," rejoined the latter, "and I shall expect that understanding will influence your conduct henceforward towards me."

The young man held down his head and appeared busily engaged with his writing as he in a muttering tone observed—that he should not trouble his head to understand people if they chose to talk nonsense.

Satisfied with having given a check to their impertinence, which seemed likely to have its due effect, Julian did not feel any inclination to prolong the contest, and an hour or two longer passed in sullen silence brought them nearly to the hour appointed for the close of their daily labours.

"Where are you, Carleton V exclaimed Mr. Ryland, rushing into the office totally freed from the indisposition which had, in the morning, so completely changed his manners and appearance. "Come," he continued in a gay tone, " throw these rusty old parchments to the d 1 and come along with me. I introduced you to a little low life this morning, so now we'll go a step or two higher. I've been dining with some prime ones at the Bedford, and I've promised to join them at DruryLane; there's a new piece comes out to night, andthere'll be nprecious row; so I thought you'd like to see some of the fun, and I let them go on while i ran here to fetch you."

Julian could not but feel and acknowledge the kindness of the intention though he did not much relish the idea of a precious row, or the promised introduction to the prime ones who formed Mr. Ryland's society. Ryland, however, did not allow him to hesitate, but, seizing his arm, hurried him out of the office) assuring him they had no time to lose, as it was now past seven o'clock.





"You don't look quite the thing, neither, for the boxes," observed Ryland, turning round to take a survey of his companion by the brilliant light of a shop

they were passing, " That coat looks d d shabby,

and as to your hat—I really believe it was made for Noah's grandfather."

Julian bit his lips, but his anger was disarmed, before he had time to reply, by Ryland's exclamation of—

"Stop, here's a shop will just do; you can be fitted here to a hair's breadth in two minutes."

"I cannot consent,—indeed I cannot "began

Julian, but he was stopped short by Ryland, who angrily replied,—

"Nonsense! hold your tongue, can't you ;—you will be able to pay me sometime or another, and its no use to think of coming among us in that antediluvian suit; so come along."

It was with no very pleasant feelings that Julian followed his friend into one of those accommodating shops where gentlemen are provided, at a moment's notice, with every thing essential to their maintaining that character—in appearance at least; yet the natural vanity of youth brightened his expressive features into a smile of self-approbation as he viewed in the mirror the transformation which a fashionable suit (" as good as new") had made in his appearance; an embroidered collar, a black silk cravat, and a hat in the very first taste, completed his equipment, and Ryland, having, as he declared, not a moment to spare or





he wauld not give half so much for them, paid the sum required, and hastened his protoge away, with half a dozen oaths, that they should be too late for the beg inning of the fun.



CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.



"Apprehend

Nothing but jollity."

"I see the play so lies

That I must bear a part."

Shaksteare.

WITH sensations so hurried and confused that he scarcely could define whether they partook most of pleasure or of pain, Julian accompanied his friend into a scene of enchantment, which, to him, possessed all the charms of novelty added to its sterling beauties.

"Good heavens! what a splendid house," he whispered to Ryland, as the latter led him into the saloon in search of his party who had promised to wait for him there till the piece began.

Ryland turned round with a look of surprise, as he exclaimed,—





"What, have you never beeR here before?" Julian replied in the negative, adding,— "Nor ever saw a play represented: for Mr. Vincent"

"Hush, here they are," observed Ryland, directing Julian's eye to a group of fashionable-looking young men, who were advancing towards them.

"Don't let them know" he whispered, "that this is your first appearance, or you will be quizzed without mercy."

A sort of general introduction now took place amidst

exclamations of—" Where the d 1 have you staid

so long, Ryland, we began to think you were off&c. but Julian felt by no means gratified at hearing the explanatory whisper tacked to Mr. Ryland's annunciation of—" My friend Mr. Carleton," of " Nephew of old Vincent, the rich merchant; you know him, worth an immense sum of money." More than once he was on the point of disclaiming any distinctions which could arise from his relationship to a man whom he despised; but natural timidity and a respect for Ryland's good, though mistaken, intentions, kept him silent, and he accompanied his new friends to die box they had chosen, where, in the novelty and splendour of the scene that presented itself, he soon forgot all his scruples and mortifications.

Contrary to Mr. Ryland's predictions, they were quite early enough, for they had been seated some minutes before the curtain drew up, and fixed Julian in breathless attention.

It was the first representation of a tragedy, founded on facts in the Roman history, with which Julian was

well acquainted, and he anticipated, with eager de

'•

v





light and expectation, the developement of incidents which he had often dwelt upon with pity and horror, and awaited, with ardent expectation, the appearance of those who should personate the heroes whose deeds and sentiments had so often kindled his youthful spirit into enthusiastic admiration ; but what was his astonishment—his consternation, when, at the close of a speech, which he considered fraught with poetic beauty, and delivered with a soul-breathing energy that thrilled through his heart and brought the eloquent blood into his cheeks, his ears were saluted by a loud discordant hiss from the whole of the party by whom he was surrounded.

In astonishment, he turned round to ascertain the cause of this disturbance, but the plaudits which this attempt at opposition had called forth from every part of the house, prevented the possibility of his making himself heard, and, when they ceased, his attention was arrested so forcibly by the grandeur of another scene, which was disclosed at that moment, that he forgot his question, and again became lost in admiration of the perfectness of dramatic illusion.

Not long, however, was he permitted to enjoy this entrancing pleasure; again, at the moment when the whole house was fixed in deep and breathless interest on the scene, and Julian's feelings were aroused to a pitch of excitement which converted rapture almost into pam, the serpent-like hiss, which had before roused the indignation of the whole house, was repeated with more energy and perseverance than before, and seconded by another group of gentlemen who had taken possession of an opposite box, apparently with the same view as the party with whom Julian found himself so unfortunately associated.





"What in the world can you find to disapprove?" demanded Julian, earnestly, of Ryland, when the tu*mult of indignation, which their opposition had excited, had, in some measure, subsided.

"Disapprove! I don't disapprove it at all," returned his friend, "I only want to have some fun, but you arn't up to it yet; you'll see what a glorious row we shall have presently."

A low "Go it my boys!" from the leader of their party, a youth, not older than Julian, and infinitely more insignificant in person and manners, was followed by another exertion of their sibilant powers, which was kept up with such perseverance,that the whole house, with the exception of their allies in the opposite box, (who sat laughing spectators of the scene of uproar) were unanimous in their demand for the expulsion of the offending parties.

This demand, far from quieting them, was but the signal for encreased annoyance, and the looks of defiance with which they surveyed all near who expressed their disapprobation of their conduct, plainly evinced a determination not to yield without a contest; but among all the spectators of this scene, perhaps, not one was more astonished and enraged than Julian: and, with a look and manner fully expressive of his feelings, he remonstrated to Ryland, on what he called— their ungenerous and indefensible conduct.

"I am sure" he continued with warmth, f you can have heard nothing yet to condemn either in the play or the actors, and surely it would be but ju*t and generous to wait until the whole plot is developed before you condemn.





"Nonsense!" returned Ryland, "I've never attended to a word of the play, nor don't know what its about. We only want a bit of a lark."

Julian's astonishment encreased and his disgust at beings so incapable of rational enjoyment, was proportionable,—but the uproar again commenced, and a party of gentlemen, who had just entered the next box, began to remonstrate in very warm terms on the disturbance which their senseless opposition created.

« We've as much right to express our disapprobation, as you have your applause," was the reply, delivered in the rudest manner possible.

"Not when your sentiments are in opposition to the whole house," returned one of the gentlemen, "even if they were your real sentiments; but the fact is, you merely oppose to create disturbance,"

"And pray who are you, that take upon yourself to judge of our conduct?" demanded Ryland fiercely of the last speaker.

To which, the gentleman replied in a tone of contempt,—

"One who would consider himself disgraced by hearing his name associated with George Ryland's, under any circumstances.

A blow from Ryland was the reply to this, and an uproar so tremendous ensued, that Julian, stunned and confounded, scarcely knew what passed, until the strong gripe of a man, who attempted to drag him out of the box, at the moment that his friend Ryland, was seized by another, roused him, and without waiting for any explanation of the cause of this attack, he instantly saluted his assaulter with a blow that made him stagger back some paces.





A general fight now ensued between Julian's party and those who had entered|the box; but at length, the former were all overpowered and dragged into the saloon, where a fresh contest ensued, Ryland's party being reinforced by two or three friends who had just entered, and for some time it seemed doubtful on which side victory would declare herself. At length, however, the strong arm of the law prevailed, and the whole party, Julian included, were conveyed to the watch-house, not, however, before the latter had, to his infinite mortification, discovered, among the numerous group of spectators, which his friends' violent conduct had collected around them, the persons of Mr. Vincent and his son, Edward,—whose expressive glances seemed to speak their satisfaction at this apparent proof of the unwortbiness of their relative.





CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.



"He cannot be a perfect man,

Not being tried and tutored in the world.

Experience is by industry achieved,

And perfected by the swift course of time."



Shakspeare.

BRUISED, beaten, and provoked almost to desperation, Julian felt by no means disposed to join in the mirth which his companions appeared to feel at this conclusion of their frolic; to them a night's confinement in a watch-house seemed by no means a novelty, nor did they appear to entertain the slightest uneasiness as to 4bat would be the ultimate result of their exploits; oh the contrary they indulged in continual noisy merriment, and seemed highly diverted at the woeful countenance of our novice, who did not attempt to conceal his dissatisfaction at their conduct, and the predicament they had brought him into.

Two or three hours passed in this manner, but, at length, their spirits began to flag, while their impatiently expressed wish that it were morning, evinced that they begah to feel some of the inconveniences of their folly, and a muttered curse or two from one of them, against playhouses and players was the signal for a discussion of their recent fracas, which ended in mutual upbraidings and general discontent.





"I confess that I cannot for the life of me discover what end you proposed to yourselves by this exploit," observed Julian, emboldened by the compunction which appeared generally to prevail; " You could not expect that your opinions could prevail, in opposition to the general sense of the audience; and why you should oppose a play, which appeared to me fraught with the noblest sentiments of morality and"

A loud burst of laughter from most of the party interrupted and disconcerted the animated harangue which Julian was about to deliver, and one of them, with a slap on his shoulder that made Julian start, exclaimed, "In the name of all that's comical, where did you study that fine speech, or how did such an exploded, old fashioned, quizzical word as that creep into your vocabulary?"

"Oh, Carleton has not been long caught," observed Mr. Ryland: he will know better bye and bye."

"Yes, there is no doubt of that," rejoined another of the party, who was distinguished by the name of Stuart, "There is no doubt of his improvement, if he is a pupil of your's, George."

Ryland laughed at what he seemed to consider as a compliment, but which the keen glance of Stuart's eye, as he turned it on Julian, fully convinced the latter was meant to convey the keenest satire.

From this moment, Stuart, detaching himself from the rest of the party, entered into earnest conversation with our hero; who, surprised and delighted, at finding





in him a young man of extensive information and refined sentiments, forgot all his chagrin at the circumstances which had introduced them to each other, and anticipated, with pleasure, the benefit and satisfaction which he should receive from bis future intercourse with one whose manners and liberal ideas, as far as he could judge from this conversation, were exactly such as he could have wished to meet with in a bosom friend.

"What unlucky chance has linked you with that thoughtless being V enquired Stuart, glancipg a look at Ryland, who was now stretched at full length upon a bench, endeavouring to lose, in sleep, the unpleasant sensations which were beginning to intrude on his present situation.

Julian started,—he had almost, in Stuart's intelligent conversation, forgotten not only his present but past cares and vexations, but this question abruptly recalled them all, and with some embarassment, he replied,—

"It would be too long a story, now, to recount the circumstances which occasioned my introduction to Mr. Ryland. I will, therefore, only say—that his conduct towards me has been such as to command my eternal gratitude."

u I hope you reckon his procuring you a night's lodging in this splendid habitation among the rest of his favours conferred on you," observed Stuart with a satirical smile.

"1 consider that as an error of judgment," returned Julian, not quite pleased with the manner of this remark; "and after experiencing such strong proofs, as I have, of the goodness of his heart, it would be ungenerous, in me, to animadvert on a mere deficiency of prudence, for which he is, as well as myself, suffering the penalty."





"1 admire your warmth in defence of your friend, Mr. Carleton," observed Stuart, "it does you honor; but amiable as is the sentiment of gratitude, which prompted it, let me advise you not to let it blind you to the real character of that man; I know him well, and know him to be a most dangerous companion for an inexperienced young man."

And yet, thought Julian, you do not appear many years older than myself, and this man, whom you so strongly reprobate, is evidently in habits of the closest intimacy with yon.

It is probable thai this remark would not have been confined to his own breast; but Julian's conversation with his new friend was, at this moment, interrupted by Ryland's jumping up from his uneasy couch, declaring, with a vehement execration, that he had been dreaming that he was in the infernal regions, and 'had half a dozen devils tearing him limb from limb.

"Well, you have only been there a little beforeyour time," observed one of his friends, " and I would as soon be there as stay many more hours in this cursed place."

"How much longer have we yet to stay f demanded Ryland.

Stuart looked at his watch.

"It is only seven now, and I suppose we shall not have the felicity of appearing before his worship (the imagistrate) before eleven."

"A magistrate !" exclaimed Julian, with a look of consternation, which created a burst of laughter among his associates, "must we, then, go before a magistrate?"





"It is even so, my good friend," replied Stuart, suppressing his inclination to risibility, " but do not alarm yourself, there is nothing so very tremendous in the affair,—such things happen every day."

"But the disgrabe!" said Julian, heedless of the mirth which his dismay excited.

"Oh, a mere bagatelle!" returned Stuart, " such occurrences are so frequent that no one thinks any thing about them."

Julian could not reconcile this logic to his feelings, nor could it at all remove the uneasiness he felt at the idea of appearing in such a novel character, but after a considerable pause, to the encreased amazement of his companions, he demanded if the magistrate would have it in his power to inflict any additional punishment for their folly.

"What, you think you have had enough, do you V replied Ryland, "Well, don't frighten yourself, Carleton; only carry that penitent face, and a suitable apology to Sir R—B—; and I'll answer for it you will be dismissed, with a gentle reprimand, on your promise not to do so any more."

"Apology !—reprimand!" exclaimed Julian, his face lighting up with,a blush of indignation, " what should I apologize for, who was guilty of no offence.

fto—but you have been guilty of what is oftentimes of more serious consequence than the actual commission of offence," observed Stuart, gravely, " I mean keeping bad company,—I fancy if Sir R— B—acts on this principle, you will find it no very easy matter to exculpate yourself from blame; for there are some of us here (and he glanced his eyes particularly at Ryland) whose faces are but too well known to his worship."





Julian's uneasiness increased with every word that was uttered by his companions; and though they all endeavoured to treat the matter lightly, and feigned to have no concern as to the result, it was very evident that he was not the only one who did not relish the idea of this public exposure of their folly.

At length the expected summons came, and Julian and his companions soon found themselves in the presence of the magistrate.

It was some minutes before Julian could summon resolution to look around him, so thoroughly did he feel ashamed of the situation he appeared in; but at length, roused by Stuart's whispers to take courage, and Ryland's angry remark that Carleton looked like a criminal awaiting his sentence, he exerted himself to regain his composure and appear at his ease. The firet glance, however, that he gave at the crowd of idle spectators who were assembled in the office, made him wish that he could shrink into nothing, for exactly opposite to him, with his brows bent till they almost hid the ferret-eyes that twinkled beneath them, stood Mr. Vincent, and, by his side, his son Edward, whose malignant stare fully proved that it was no friendly feelings that had brought them thus to witness their relative's disgrace.

Julian's cheek changed from red to pale, for he thought of Laura and of Marianne; and the first glow of resentment against the father and the unfeeling son was succeeded by shame and regret at the opinion which the daughters would form of him.





They have come here, no doubt, purposely to witness my degradation, and report it, with their usual malicious exultation to my cousins, he exclaimed to himself, as again he glanced towards his uncle and Edward ; but the contemptuous smile, with which the latter turned away his head, completely banished every feeling but the most bitter resentment from the mind of Julian; and when Edward again turned round, the steadfast look with which he was greeted, seemed effectually to disconcert, and for the short time they remained near each other, before Julian was called upon, neither Edward or his father seemed ambitious of encountering his piercing eye.

The offenders were now ranged in order before the presiding magistrate, and the accusers proceeded to ell their tale. Several box-keepers, &c., deposed to the riotous conduct of the gentlemen, previous to the entrance of the police officers, who were called in to suppress their tumultuous behaviour; and the latter strengthened the case by a copious detail of the violence with which their authority was resisted, and of which they displayed some striking evidence in sundry blows and bruises, which they had received in only doing their duty.

One, in particular, with his eye bandaged up, pointed at Julian as the person who had most barbarously assaulted him for only civilly insisting on his leaving the box.

"It is false;" exclaimed Julian, with vehemence, "it was you who assaulted me, by seizing me by the collar, and endeavouring to drag me from my seat, though I had taken no part in the disturbance, but had, on the contrary, endeavoured to dissuade my companions from offering any opposition to the play, which I was most anxious to attend to."





The man, however, insisted that Julian had been foremost in " kicking up a row," and Julian as strenuously denied it. It is seldom that truth fails of producing conviction; the magistrate seemed inclined to think that the officer had gone beyond the bounds of his duty, and he was on the point of dismissing the complaint, as far as it related to Mr. Carleton, with a friendly caution to be more circumspect in the choice of his companions for the future, when, to the inexpressible surprise and consternation of Julian, who could scarcely believe his eyes or ears, Mr. Vincent claimed a few moment's audience from Sir R— B—

"Proceed, sir, if it relates to the case now before lis," said the latter gentleman.

Mr. Vincent bowed an affirmative, hemmed, and turning his head to avoid Julian's keen glance, began—

"I feel myself, sir, called upon, by an imperative sense of justice to declare that the declaration this young man has made, that he was not actively engaged in the disturbance of last night, is totally

false."

Julian uttered an exclamation of anger and astonishment, but Mr. Vincent, without heeding it, proceeded :—

"I occupied a box with my son and daughters—" "I am glad tbey were present to judge for themselves," interrupted Julian.

The magistrate looked amazed; but, after a momeat's pause, he gravely desired Julian to refrain from comment, until the gentleman had concluded his statement.





Mr. Vincent bowed again, and again commenced:—

"My family occupied a box near that in which these young men had placed themselves : my attention was drawn to them from the noise they made on entering; and, from that period, I was an attentive observer of their proceedings: and I declare, upon my honour, that Mr. Carleton was not only the loudest in the vociferation by which they annoyed the audience, but appeared to me, to be completely the ringleader of the mischievous group. None of whom, besides himself, I have the honour to know."

"And none of whom, sir, are ambitious to be known to so honourable a man as you," exclaimed Stuart, with emphasis.

"Silence, sir," said the magistrate. "Allow me, sir," addressing Mr. Vincent, " to ask, what you know of this young man, (Mr. Carleton I mean,) previous to this time?"

Mr. Vincent bowed, and hemmed, and bowed again, as with well feigned reluctance he proceeded to state that the unfortunate young man was related to him, and, till within a short period, had been fostered in his house and placed on an equal footing with his own children: that he (Julian) had repaid his paternal solicitude by the basest ingratitude and insolence, and had, at length, in defiance of entreaty and remonstrance, quitted a home of respectability and comfort to lead an idle, dissolute life, among companions of his own stamp.

Julian's countenance, during this well delivered recital, had varied from red to pale with alternate indignation and contempt; and, at the conclusion, he was about to commence an animated reply, when he was stopped by the magistrate, who, sternly observing that Mr. Vincent's evidence gave a very different colour to.the case, added that he should not feel himself justified in suffering Mr. Carleton to depart without his producing securities for his future appearance, to answer the charge against him.





It was in vain that Julian attempted to remonstrate. Mr. Vincent's narration had all the effect he intended, and the former was imperiously silenced, while the magistrate proceeded to decide on the charge against the other delinquents; who, after receiving a severe reprimand—promising future good behaviour—and compensating the officers for their bruises, &c., were dismissed.

"What is it that is required of me?" demanded Julian of Ryland, who came up to him—congratulating himself on his good fortune in escaping so easily. The latter explained, and Julian's consternation encreased.

"Don't be down-hearted," exclaimed Ryland, "I will manage^ matters for you, and send some one to release you in an hour or two; but I must run off to

chambers first, or they will wonder what the d 4

has become of me.

Julian beheld his departure with astonishment: it seemed like a dream to him, that he, alone, of the party, was left to pay the penalty for conduct which he had not only not participated in, but reprobated and despised. It was so, however: for the whole of his companions had walked off without bestowing a thought on the novice, whom their folly had placed in





such an awkward predicament, and Julian, left to himself, had time to meditate, even to madness, on his situation. The prospect was gloomy enough, but the idea that Marianne Vincent would despise and condemn him, was the most insupportable sensation he experienced; and a thousand times did he execrate the momentum which he had beheld Ryland or his associates.

'* In heroics, as usual, Mr. Carleton!" exclaimed a voice, as Julian gave loud utterance to this wish: he looked up,—it was Stuart, and with him two strangers, whom, he said, were willing to give security for his (Julian's) appearance, when required. Julian was beginning to express his gratitude, but he was immediately stopped by Stuart, who, with a smile, said,—

"Nonsense; there is no obligation in the case. These people expect to be paid for their services."

"But I have not the means," uttered Julian, in confusion.

"Will you learn to hold your tongue?" replied Stuart, again smiling. "Oh Carleton, you are, indeed, a novice,—but leave me to settle this business."

Julian most willingly and gratefully assented; and though the idea that he was again incurring an obligation to a stranger, the joy of finding himself once more at liberty, and freed from the unpleasant people by whom he had been, for some hours, surrounded, more than counterbalanced every unpleasant sensation.

"And now what are you going to do with yourself for the remainder of the day?" demanded Stuart, " it is too late to think of work, and your nerves are not steady enough, if that were not the case. I think you had better come and chat with me an hour or two, and then get to bed, and make up- for your last night's vigils,"





Julian willingly agreed to the proposition. Any thing, he felt, was preferable to his own reflections. Besides he felt interested by and attached to his companion, whose unpretending manner of rendering him a service, had added to the favourable impression which his appearance and manners had before created.

The situation and outward appearance of Stuart's residence by no means corresponded with the fashionable and gentleman-like exterior of its occupier; but Julian was delighted with the proofs of a taste congenial to his own, which he discovered on entering the apartment. A large recess, filled with a selection of the-best authors, maps, globes, music, and the walls covered with elegant drawings, offered a never-failing fund of amusement, and Julian could not help feeling his surprise increase, that one so gifted with the taste and means to enjoy rational pleasure as his new friend, should ever condescend to become a companion and partaker in the noisy folly of Rylahd and his companions.

Hour after hour stole away unperceived. Julian was insensible of fatigue, for his admiration of the talent, the sentiments, and the manners of Stuart, increased with each succeeding minute. He opened his whole heart to him, spake, without reserve, of his obligations to Ryland,—and his regret that the latter's goodness of heart was sullied by want of principle, and his habitual extravagance and folly. Stuart acknowledged the justice of Julian's sensures, but seemed inclined to doubt the existence of th>. good qualities which the latter attributed to his. friflpd; yet he praised the warmth with which Julian defended him, and only in a serious tone cautioned him, nc£ tj» let his gratitude carry him too tax.





Stuart returned to a topic which was more pleasing to his companion,—one of which, indeed, he was never weary—Marianne Vincent.

"1 am more than half in love with your fair cousin," he observed.

"Which of them?" demanded Julian, with some confusion.

"Which!" and Stuart laughed, "Are you, then, unconscious that you have scarcely mentioned the name of the other? Marianne, alone, ha* been the theme of your song," J

"Then I havq been very ungrateful," said Julian, reddening " for Laura is equally amiable and excellent; in fact, in some respects. superior to her sister: she is more decided, more penetrating, but then she wants Marianne's tenderness and delicacy." He was proceeding, but the half-sarcastic smile which hovered on Stuart's lips prevented him, and the latter gaily replied,^

"Well, I hope kind fortune will give me some opportunity of seeing .these paragons of womankind, and judging for myself, as you appear yet so undecided op their mejrits."

Julian sighed, and Stuart commenced a rallying conversation, from which the former gleaned that his new friend's ideas on the subject of the tender passion were by no means so delicate or refined as he should have expected; but there was so much pleasantry in his bauterage, and so much humour in his satire, thai it was impossible to combat his opinions with severity.





They separated, and, for the first time, Julian be^ gan to reflect on the unpleasantness of returning again to Ryland's lodgings, where it was scarcely probable the latter had yet been to account for their absence on the preceding night. It was nearly ten o'clock, and he sauntered along in a melancholy mood, not anxious to get home until as late as possible. It was a dark night; but he paused upon Blackfriar's Bridge, over which his route lay, and stood, almost unconsciously, looking into the river. In a moment his attention was attracted by the light form of a female, who, with a rapid pace, descended the steps that led to the river, and before Julian could form a conjecture of her purpose, with a loud shriek, threw herself forward into the water. Not a moment's hesitation took place on the part of Julian. Tearing off his coat, and flinging it from him, he rushed down the steps, and before others, who had heard the shriek and the plunge, could reach the spotj he was in the water, and had seized hold of the unfortunate object of his solicitude with a firm grasp. The tide set strongly against him, but assistance was soon at hand, and but a few minutes elapsed ere he and his helpless burden were safely landed. Not a thought of self entered Julian's mind; his whole attention was absorbed by the unfortunate being whom he had thus providentially rescued from a premature death: and it was not until she was conveyed to a house, and had discovered signs of life, that he would attend to the humane suggestions of several of the bystanders, and recollect his own situation.





"You had better go home and get off your wet clothes," observed a medical gentleman, who was attending to the female, "get into bed, and take something warm."

Julian now looked round for his coat, but, in the hurry of the moment, it had been left where he had thrown it on the bridge; and a second time he had the mortification of hearing people wonder how any body could think of trusting to the honesty of strangers. "Was there any money in the pockets," asked one. Julian had the discretion to refrain from answering, lest it should increase their surprise at his rashness; but the fact was, that he, at that moment, remembered that all that Ryland had forced on his acceptance was in a small pocket-book in the breast of the coat. His situation now every moment became more irksome,— he knew not howrto walk home, and the suggestion that he had better have a bed in the tavern, (where he then was) was replied to, in his own mind, by—" How shall I pay for it?" While he was debating this point, however, with himself, a shivering fit seized him, and the doctor, observing that he must not suffer him to become the victim of his humanity, desired that a warm bed should be immediately prepared for the young man: adding in a low key, a few words, which had the effect of producing immediate compliance on the part of the landlady.

The potion, which the doctor administered with his own hand, soon had the effect of lulling Julian into temporary forgetfulness of his situation, but his slumbers were feverish and disturbed; and when, at a late hour the following morning, a servant threw back the curtains of his bed, she retreated, in alarm, at his wild* ness of look and hurried incoherent manner, as he gazed round the room, and demanded where he was, and how he came thither. The doctor was immediately summoned, and as speedily decided, that his patient was in a high fever, and that it was highly necessary his friends should be apprized of his situation.





"And how are we to find out his friends ?—or, suppose he has none, or, he should die before we are able to find them out?

All these question followed in a breath from the affrighted landlady.

The doctor thought he should be able to elicit some satisfactory answer, to the first interrogatory, from the patient; but he could get no other reply, when he made the experiment, than—

"I have no relatives, no friends:—they have all disowned—discarded me! I am a wretched, friendless being! Let me die! Why did you not let me die in the water i—I can hear it roaring in my ears —but it does not cool me! Oh, no;—my head is on fire!"

The doctor looked almost as grave as the landlady, and a long consultation ensued which ended with the former's promising to get the unhappy youth admitted into an hospital without further delay, and thus relieve the hostess from the evil which his inconsiderateness had brought upon her.

"I could find it in my heart to have him carried to my house, and nursed at my expence," said the goodnatured doctor, "but poor Mrs. I'*- is so nervous

and so alarmed at fever, that I dare not make the proposition."





The landlady was just like the doctor's lady, in that respect, she said; and then declared that her spirits had not half recovered the shock they had sustained the night before, at seeing the drowned woman brought into the house.

* She is not dead !* exclaimed Julian, starting up wildly," did I not save her V

"Ydu did, indeed!" uttered a pale, emaciated female, who, at that moment, glided into the room, and sunk On her knees at his bedside, ** You did, indeed, save -her. Oh! gracious God, restqre him, and do not add to my miseries the consciousness that I have been his destroyer."

Julian after gazing wildly a few moments at the stranger, sunk down exhausted; and the doctor, whom the first surprize had struck dumb, resumed all his professional importance; and in an audible whisper, reproved her for thus heedlessly agitating herself and the poor young man, who was likely to suffer so severely for his humanity.

* Myself?' Teturned the female, in an emphatic tone, "Oh! no such feelings; and she burst into a flood of tears, "such feelings as these, do me good;—-but, for him, I do, indeed, grieve—so young, so noble, so courageous,—perhaps the idol of his parents——"

H Parents!" exclaimed Julian with vehemence, "Parents! No, no, no,—-1 have none! I am an outcast a miserable wretch, whom no one cares for! Yes, yes, Marianne and Stuart, too,—aye, and Laura, she will not desert me!"

The doctor eagerly seized the opportunity, to try to lead his patient to some explanation, as to whom those names belonged, but Julian sunk again into stupor; and the landlady, recovering from th« surprise, and something like terror, (which had kept her hitherto silent) began a long, and not very gentle lecture on people's intruding themselves where they were not wanted, and creating a disturbance, with fine feelings and airs and graces, which neither did themselves nor any body else any good, for all she saw.





The female apologized. She had been told, by the chamber-maid, that the young man, who had saved her from drowning, was like to die; and the servant had also shewn her the chamber into which she had entered, without giving herself time to reflect; and actuated only by feelings of gratitude and anxiety 'for the safety of her deliverer.

The curled up nose of the landlady did not relax. She had been, during this speech, surveying, with accuracy, the threadbare and scanty habiliameuts of the unfortunate speaker, and, with a look of infinite contempt, she replied,—

"Well, ma'am, all this is mighty fine; and now, if you please, I will just ask you a civil question or two. How long do you mean to stay in my house, and who am I to look to for my money, for the trouble and expense you've been to me a'ready."

A bright glow suffused tbe-faded cheek of the stranger; and her sunken eye flashed lightning, as she exclaimed,—

"Heartless, inhuman woman!" but, suddenly recollecting herself, she added, in a calmer tone,—" Yet what right have I to expect other treatment .than this 1 I who"

"Indeed, ma'am, I think you have no right to complain," interrupted the landlady "you have had a good





bed, and the best of every tiling my bouse could afford"

The doctor drew her aside before she could finish the sentence, and, in a low voice, delivered some observations, which put a period to the conversation, and dissmissed the hostess. Gently requesting the unhappy female to be seated and compose herself, he now cautiously reverted to the unfortunate circumstance which had introduced her to his notice, and spoke of the necessity of revealing her situation in life, and letting her friends know her present circumstances: hinting, that unless some one came fqrward to be responsible for her future safety, he shduld not be warranted to let her depart, and that to remain there was equally impossible.

The flush of resentment faded into the wan hue of despair, as she listened to this harangue; and, in a low subdued tone of voice, she replied,—

"I am thankful for your kindness, sir, and acknowledge the justice of your remarks; but I have not a friend or relative who would acknowledge me; and \ am too sensible of and grateful for my last escape, to render any other security for my safety than my own amended feelings, necessary."

"Was it distress (I mean poverty) that impelled you?" said the doctor.

She cast down her eyes, and exclaimed,—

"Yes,—that, added to injury and insult, drove me to desperation." *

"And what prospects have you, then, now?" further asked he.

The tears trickled down her wan cheeks, as she replied,—





"None.—I must trust in God, who has thus graciously snatched me from death, to preserve me from perishing."

The doctor silently drew out his purse, and said,— "There is sufficient to preserve you from present distress; and if you will let me know where you are to be found, I will see what further can be done for





A burning blush of humiliation shone through the tear of gratitude, with which the unfortunate woman received this offering of humanity: the hand that was extended had never before been degraded by an alms, and it trembled with agitation.

"And what will become of my preserver?" she at length exclaimed, conquering her emotion. " Who will watch over him?"

"Leave that to me," interrupted the doctor: "I will see that proper care is taken of him."

She stood a few moments, gazing in silent agony upon the Unconscious Julian, and then starting, as from a reverie, hastily retreated to the door.

"But you have not told me yet where your residence is."

"I have no home," she replied with emotion, " but if you will tell me how to address you, I will write when I have found some place to shelter me."

The doctor gave her a card, and with an ardent expression of thankfulness, she departed.

Julian's disorder rapidly encreased, and before the humane doctor returned from having made arrangements for his admittance into an hospital, he was raving in all the frenzy of delirium. Several days had elapsed ere the slightest gleam of returning consciousness rewarded the cares of his attendants; and many more elapsed before he was sufficiently recovered to recollect all that had preceded his illness, and to take an interest in the passing scene. He gazed around him,—nothing but faces of pain and suffering met his eye, and no sounds, but those of complaint, his ear. It was some time before he could comprehend where he was,—and again he closed his eyes to reflect on bis strange situation;—they opened again on a gentler and more animated face then he had before beheld; it was that of a female, who, with looks of deep interest, was bending over his pillow.





"You are very kind," he replied, in answer to her solictious enpuiry," thus to interest yourself for an unfortunate being. It seems like a dream te me, that you have been continually hovering round me during this painful interval. I am afraid I have been very troublesome, though I have but confuted ideas of what has happened."

* Troublesome; oh, no!" replied the female, energetically clasping her hands, " not to me, at least: but you must not fatigue yourself with talking."

Julian gazed earnestly at her. He had not the most distant recollection of her person, yet the voice struck him as one whose tones were familiar to his ear : and why should she feel thus interested for him, unless she knew him?

She walked to the window opposite, as if oppressed by his earnest look ; and, as his eyes followed her tall slender form, the idea that she strongly resembled Laura Vincent occured to him.

She was some years older than Laura; and sorrow even more than tnfc J*ulv* i it cheek, and dimmed the lustre of her large dark eyes ; yet she still possessed considerable personal beauty; and intelligence and sensibility were delineated in every line of her expressive countenance.





"It is her strong resemblance to Laura that causes her face and form to seem familiar to me," thought he, as she again approached his bedside. She stooped over him, and whispered,—

"You recognise me, I perceive bat do not betray me;—I appear here as your sister." ...... ..

"Indeed I do not," returned Julian, in the same tone, "to whom am I indebted?" .!- -. - .i ,j -.--»-

"No, no, not indebted :" she returned emphatically, "it is I who can never repay the debt of gratitude I owe to you." - . -:;. ->

The truth rushed oh Julian's mind. It Was the female whom he had rescued from drowning; and his heart throbbed with pleasurable emotion at this confirmation, that he had not risked his life jh vain*

Youth, assisted by a naturally excellent constitution, soon enabled Julian to triumph over the weakness which was the necessary consequence of his violent disorder. His faithful nurse (who had taught him to distinguish her by the name of Mary) was unceasing in her attendance on him, whenever the regulations of the place would permit: and though their conversation was, from their situations, necessarily limited and constrained, he was every hour more surprised and delighted at the extensive information and superiority of understanding, which was gradually unfolded to his view.

Julian longed, ardently longed to hear by what sad circumstances such a woman could have been brought to such an extremity as that from which he had rescued her; and as his eye glanced over her humble attire, so little consonant with the loftiness of her carriage, and the refinement of her manners, a pang would sometimes seize him, at the thought that she was even now suffering all the anxieties and privations of poverty.





"If I were but well and strong," he thought,'''.' it should not be so." -...'; > --» - - .- ';.u I i. - - .- ,

But he knew not how his absence might affect his situation. Mr. Alders might decline employing him again. He wished much to communicate his present circumstances either to Ryland or his other friend, Stuart, but he knew not where to address either of them; for the former had, in all probability, before this

quitted his lodgings in Street, and^ though he

knew the situation of Stuart's residence, he had totally forgotten to remark the name of the street in which he lived. Nothing, therefore, remained but to wait with patience the period of his cavalescence.

At length that day arrived. He received his dismissal, and found himself in the street, leaning on Mary's arm,—weak, faint, and dizzy, and without a home to go to.

He had walked some paces before he could speak; but, at length, summoning resolution, he said,—

"Mary, where are you leading me?"

She turned her tearful eyes upon him, as she replied,— \ - "- '"

"To my home: it is a wretched one, but it is a shelter."

Julian's agitation increased j and he felt that any place that would afford him rest and shelter, would be desirable.





They proceeded in silence until they reached the door of a miserable looking house. Mary turned round, and with a look of deep dejection, said,— . "I am afraid you will find it a hard task to mount so many stairs; but you must take time, and lean on me."

Julian did find it a hard task; but the difficulty was at last surmounted; and he sat down to breathe and rest himself, in the little room which Mary called her own, without bestowing a thought on the poverty its appearance betrayed.

In a few minutes, however, he recovered his recollection. He looked round the wretched apartment, then at Mary, and then at himself. The charity of some one (he knew not whom) had furnished him with a coat in lieu of the one he had lost, but it was very ill suited to his person or other apparel; at any other time he would have. laughed at the appearance he made but in the despondency of the moment even that seemed a bitter aggravation of his distress.

"My friends will hardly know me again, Mary," he observed, trying to force a smile.

"You are indeed sadly changed," she returned, unconscious of his allusion; "but I am thankful to hear you make use of the term friends; for I have been fearful lest you were like myself—friendless." Her lip quivered as she pronounced this, though she endervoured to assume a tone of vivacity.

Julian seized the opportunity to enter into an explicit detail of his past life, up taT the very moment in which he had beheld her.





She listened with attention, and when he concluded, exclaimed,—

"Thank God! you have relieved my heart of a sad burden; and this explanation will, I trust, be the means of restoring one friend to both of us, whom a sad misfortune has, for the present, estranged. I would have risked my life on your innocence." -.!

"What do you mean?" enquired Julian, in astonishment.

She went on relating "that during the delirium which had attended his (Julian's) illness, he had raved of prisons and dungeons in a manner that had led those around him to suspect that he must have been a recent inhabitant of one ;—that he had, more than once, addressed his medical attendant by the name of a well known police magistrate ;—in short, the whole tenor of his exclamations had been such as to excite in the minds of those who heard him, the most unfavourable impressions, and had induced the gentleman (to whose humanity he was indebted for being admitted there, and all the subsequent care that had been taken of him) totally to withdraw the strong disposition he had felt to befriend him." i-- '»

"He certainly did not relax his attendance to your disorder," she continued, " but he no longer professed any anxiety for your future fate; and when he found that, in d^^iance of his remonstrances, I persisted in not leaving you to the care of hirelings, he ceased to show any interest towards me; and, at last, plainly told me, that my attachment to a profligate was no proof of the rectitude of my future intentions.

Julian's heart throbbed with indignation and agony By what strange fatality was it that he was ever to be misconstrued and suspected i But the transient emotion soon died away, and was succeeded by the hopeless despondency which his bodily weakness, joined to the gloom his prospects, inspired. "Where should he go V was a question he incessantly asked himself, during the time that Mary was preparing tea,—all the refreshment, she sighingly said, she had to offer him





Evening stole on them unperceived, and Julian was yet undecided how to act; and Mary's anxiety and thoaghtfulness appeared to increase; but at length, making a strong effort to overcome his weakness, the former arose, and impressively thanking his companion for all her kindness, bade her good night, and tottered towards the door.

Mary started up to prevent;—she represented to him the madness of his attempt; and the faintness which at that moment came over him, so powerfully seconded her, that he yielded to her entreaties, that he would life down for a short time on her humble pallet, while she went in search of a temporary lodging for hiin. :.-:- >

She departed. All was now silent, solitary, and indistinct around him; but his own mind was a chaos of. conflicting passions,—his whole life seemed to pass in review before him. Where were now the glittering prospects which, in the proud consciousness of superior talent, he had painted, as attending his efforts whenever maturity should emancipate him from the controul of his selfish and arbitrary relative? Where was the lovely, approving smile, which was to reward all his efforts, and be his stimulus to perseverance.

"Marianne would despise me, could she see my degraded situation," he exclaimed; the thought was





insupportable. but it soon was effaced by others equally painful, until at length, overcome with agitation and fatigue, he lost all remembrance of his sorrows in a deep slumber.

The first faint rays of morning were peeping through the dilapidated casement ere he was awakened by the noise of some one entering the room. It was some time before he could recollect where he was, and still longer before he could recognize in the person who was standing at his bedside, the features of his friend Stuart. Julian shut his eyes, opened them again, and gazed round at Mary,-(who was standing at a little distance,) as if he was doubtful whether to believe jhjs senses.

"It is me, indeed," replied Stuart, in a gay tone of voice, in reply to Julian's earnest interrogation; "but as to how I came here, &c. &c. we will postpone that long story till another time. I want some breakfast now, and I dare say it will not be unacceptable to you; so try if you are strong enough to get up, and leave this den of misery: Mary and I can help you dow» stairs, and there is a coach waiting at the door.

Julian's astonishment increased every instant. He could not understand how Stuart and Mary could be so perfectly known to «ach other as they appeared, since he had repeatedly mentioned the former's.name in the conversations which Mary and him had held, -without her betraying the slightest marks of recognition of such a person. There was a something, too, of embarrassment and perplexity in the latter's manner, when she approached to tender her assistance to the invalid; and when, as he leant on their arms, he energetically exclaimed,—





"Thank God! I have too such friends!"

She averted her head, and uttered a sigh so deep, that it nearly resembled a groan. Stuart, on the contrary, was all gaiety: he reproached Julian for not having let him know his situation; and then, in a tone of more levity than Julian approved, added,—

"But I suppose you were so well pleased with your fair nurse here, that you very soon forgot you had other friends."

"No, indeed," replied Julian, "though I acknowledge myself under obligations which my whole heart can never repay, yet I never forgot either you or any other, whom I had cause to think my friend. I have talked frequently of you to Mary. Why she concealed her knowledge of you from me—1 am at a loss to—"

u Oh, it is some years since Mary and I were playfellows, some hundred miles from here," replied Stuart, interrupting him, "and she knew not of my being in London: in fact, she had reason to think I was no longer in the land of the living, and therefore did not dream it was her old friend you were talking of."

"And how then did you meet now?" demanded Julian.

u By mere accident, not worth relating," returned Stuart: "we had both got wonderful stories to tell each other, and not the least wonderful was the part you bore in her eventful tale." Mary sighed heavily again. "I had scarcely patience to hear her out, and so, and so—here we are at the door of my apartments."

The coach stopped—Julian was assisted out, and soon found himself seated on a couch, in an elegant room, where every preparation evinced that he wns an expected guest.





You have changed your residence," he observed, looking round him with surprise at the splendid furniture.

Stuart replied in the affirmative, with an air of indifference, which prevented any further remark on the part of his companion; and Mary, at the request of the former, seated herself at the breakfast table.

Stuart was all vivacity; and it was some time before Julian discovered, that his spirits arose not from gaiete de cceur, but were the effects of some artificial stimulus. Mary's manner, however, of dissuading him (Stuart) from taking brandy in his tea, convinced him that be was not mistaken; and the peevish, not to say surly manner, in which the fermer replied to her entreaties, at once pained and surprised Julian.

He turned his intelligent eye on Mary's countenance, and almost started at the expression of indignation and contempt which it presented. She turned av/ay her head in silent confusion, as zhe encountered Julian's eyes; but in a few moments resumed her usual pensive look.

Julian felt uneasy, without being able to define the cause of his uneasiness. He knew nothing of Mary's history; for delicacy had forbidden him to revert to the occasion of their introduction to each other; and Mary had been studiously silent on the events of her past life. Butthere wasasomething both in her manner, and Stuart's, which indicated a much more recent acquaintance with each other than their alleged childish intimacy; and why, unless something dishonourable was connected with it,—why endeavour to conceal this? He recalled to his memory isvity with which Stuart had spoken of females in their former conversations, and he shuddered to think that it was possible that the latter had been the cause of plunging Mary into the state of wretchedness in which he (Julian) had found her. Yet if that were the case, how could Mary again have renewed her acquaintance with him, or by what rhetoric be induced to smother the feelmg of her wrongs? Julian started from the reverie into which he had fallen, for he caught Stuart's piercing eye fixed upon him, with a look which seemed to penetrate his every thought; yet there was something so open and amiable in the smile with which he exclaimed,—"Come, clear that cloudy brow, Julian, and do not wrong your friends or yourself by useless retrospection!" that Julian would have dismissed all his suspicious as groundless, had he not, at the same moment, observed the glance of secret intelligence which passed between his friend and Mary. He strove, however, to forget all in his gratitude for the kindness and attention with which he was treated; but it gave an air of reserve and thoughtfulness to his manner, which Stuart more than once reproached him for; and he felt an absolute relief when the latter declared that he must leave him for a few hours to attend to business.





"You will find amusement enough, I dare say," he added, pointing to a recess filled with books, "and for any thing you want you have only to ring the bell and give your orders. I shall see you otf," (and he turned to Mary with a significant look) "before I go."

"Where is Mary going?" said Julian, in a tone of disappointment.





"Ob, she will return! do not fear," replied Stuart, with a look which called a blush up to Julian's cheek, and prevented his asking another question.

They went,—-and Julian was left alone to meditate oa the strange events which had occurred to him in so short a period, and the still stranger characters to whom chance had associated him. Admiring, to enthusiasm, the talents, the manners, and accomplishments of Stuart, and acknowledging, with gratitude, Mary's devoted attention to himself,—^her fervent sense of the obligation he had been enabled to confer on her and the elegance and fascination of her manners, still there was something dissatisfactory in his connexion with themt which he in vain endeavoured to account fcr. He reproached himself with ingratitude to friends Bo warmly interested for him; but it was in vain that he tried to banish the wish that he was again seated at Mr. Alder's desk, and freed from the heavy burthen of obligation which now oppressed him.

Stuart returned to a late dinner, alone;—and Julian, dreading to elicit some sarcastic remark from his friend, forbore to ask what had become of Mary. Stuart was more silent and thoughtful than in the morning, but his kindness and attention to his guest was undiminished, and Julian's confidence in him seemed to revive with every sentence he spoke.

As soon as the cloth was removed, Stuart led the way to the subject nearest Julian's heart, by observing that ''he had met Ryland that morning, and would have brought him home to dinner, but he pleaded an indispensible prior engagement. He has, however, engaged to be here to-morrow morning, to congratulate you on jour resurrection, as he calls it."





Julian anxiously enquired whether Ryland had mentioned Mr. Alder,—or whether Stuart knew if the situation which he (Julian) had held with that gentleman, was filled up;—and he was evidently disappointed when the latter replied, that he had reason to think it was.

"I should think my clothes would fit you, Carleton," observed Stuart, after a few moment's silence.

Julian glanced his eye over his faded habiliments; and, while a blush of mortification crimsoned his cheek, he faintly replied in the affirmative.

"1 have promised your company to tea this evening, if you think it will not fatigue you too much," returned Stuart: "so we must try to beautify you a little, yon know. What say you V

Julian knew not what to say: he was grateful for his kindness, but he had already incurred so many obligations.

Stuart stopped him short in his attempt to express these feelings, by requesting him to follow to an adjoining bed-room; where, having produced all that was necessary, he left him to equip himself.

Julian was soon ready; and Stuart, when he returned, congratulated him, with a smile, on the improvement in his appearance, adding,—

"You will inevitably confirm the conquest you have made, Carleton."

"Who, then, are we going to see?" demanded Julian, his heart throbbing with agitation. With the idea of love, there could be only one name connected in Julian's mipd,—and he turned away with chagrin and disappointment, when Stuart replied,—





* Oh, then you have subdued more hearts than the romantic Mary Hamilton's!"

"1 cannot jest on such subjects!" said Julian, gravely, "and I should be wretched, indeed, if I thought you in earnest."

"And I am never in earnest on such subjects," returned his companion: "but who were you thinking of, or could expect to see this evening, that you discovered so much disappointment at hearing it was Mary, to whom I alluded ?"

"Nobody. I do not know what I thought," replied Julian, in confusion; "only I have met with such strange occurrences, that T thought it possible"

He stopped abruptly, conscious that he was betraying his secret still more with every attempt to extricate himself.

"You thought that your good genius had conducted the lovely Marianne Vincent within the circle of my spells," said Stuart laughing; "but my power does not yet extend so far:—though do not despair, I have achieved greater wonders than that. But, alas! poor Mary! her case is desperate, I am afraid, if your constancy has been able to withstand all the blandishments and temptations she has, no doubt—"

"You wrong her," interrupted Julian, hastily, "and put a construction on her actions, which they, nor she* T am certain, would admit." <

Stuart smiled, and shook his head. A servant announced that a coach was in waiting, and Julian, happy to put a period to the conversation, thankfully accepted the proffered assistance of the latter to descend the stairs.

The distance they bad to go was trifling; yet every moment seemed an age to Julian :—he was impatient to know whither he was going, and he longed to hear, from the lips of Mary, {of whom alone, he could ask it) some explanation of the doubts which still haunted him, relative to her former connexion with Stuart.





The coach stopped at the door of a house in

Street, and the door was opened instantly. An elegantly dressed female stood in the hall awaiting their approach; she extended her hand to Julian—but it was not till she spoke thatthe recognized Mary.

Scarcely, indeed, could he believe it was her whon. he had seen but a few hours before, haggard, pale, and pensive,—her person clothed in the habiliments of poverty,—her features bearing, what then appeared the- indehble impression of past and present sorrows, and her very voice, conveying, iu its plaintive tones, the feeling of deep affliction which had 'blighted the spring time of her youth.' Now she was gay, sparkling, and animated :—her dress calculated to shew to the greatest advantage the beauties of a form always attractive and commanding. Art had been resorted to to supply the bloom which care had faded from her cheek; and pleasure at the change in her situation, and consciousness of her still remaining charms, had given additional lustre to her brilliant dark eyes. Illfated, thoughtless woman !—but we will not anticipate.

"Happiness is a great restorative," observed Stuart gazing earnestly at Mary, " I never saw you look much handsomer than you do now, and even when I stole round the box hedge, and caught you listening to the gypsies' predictions, that you should ride in your carriage, and be a great lady :—Was not that it Mary?"





Mary'* eyes, which had at first sparkled at his complement, were now fixed on him with a lpok in which sorrow and resentment were blended; but it Yanisbed,as apparently disregarding it,Stuart launched forth into some rather extravagant encomiums of her dress, and theH turning to Julian, he said,—

"And here is another renovation; though, now I look again at that woe-begone countenance, I am afraid I have overrated my power. What is the matter with you, Carleton V

Roused by this interrogation, Julian exerted himself to appear more at ease:—the conversation became animated and entertaining :—no one ever possessed more strikingly the power of interesting and fixing the attention of his hearers than Stuart; and Mary combined with pleasing and impressive manners, the advantages resulting from an excellent education, and much intercourse with the world. Julian listened, and again dismissed his doubts. It was impossible beings so amiable, so enlightened, so liberal-minded, could be deceptive! an3 why should they descend to attempt to deceive? That Mary had been unfortunate and imprudent, she had herself acknowledged:—that she was the victim of>iolent passions, her rash attempt to destroy herself, and almost immediate repentance of her intention, were sufficient proofs: but that she could be the deliberate rotary of vice—a practised, unprincipled deceiver—oh! it was impossible!

Alas! how little did he then know the inconsistencies of frail mortality:—how little did he surmise, that the best principles may be corrupted,—the most amiable sentiments perverted by the baneful influence of example—the enervating poison of luxury and dissipation.





Julian returned home, at an early hour, with his friend, and retired to rest with his head full of the specious arguments and brilliant sallies of his recent companions,—his heart glowing with exultation and vanity, that he had been considered worthy of being the selected, distinguished friend of such superior minds. -'





I



CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.

*' O woman's love! at times it may

Seem cold or clouded, but it burnt

With true uudeviating ray,



Nor ever from its idol turns.

Its sunshine is a smile—a frown

Tlie heavy cloud that weighs it down j

A tear its weapon is—beware

"Of womun's tear—there's danger there!



Its sweetest place on which to rest,

A constant and confiding breast:

lis joy, t* meet—its death to part—

Its sepulchre, a broken heart."



Several days passed away; Julian saw little of Stuart, except at breakfast, and in answer to his enquiries after Ryland, be learned, that sudden business had called him out of town. Julian's health and strength were rapidly returning, but Stuart turned a deaf ear to the latter's hints of seeking some employment, and no longer remaining an idle dependant on his friend's generosity. Julian was pained, though grateful, that Stuart would not bear this; but, at length, the subject was compromised, by the former's agreeing to defer all like intentions or plans, till Ryland returned to town.

Hitherto, Julian hadbeen confined solely to the society of Stuart and Mary Hamilton: and his walks had been merely from the residence of the one to the other





but Mary began, as she said, to be tired of the recluse life she led; and, at her request, Julian, one morning, consented to accompany her to the park. It was beautiful spring weather, and all the fashionable idlers in town seemed to have concentrated in the place Julian and his companion had chosen for their walk. Mary's fine, commanding figure and face, set off, to the utmost advantage, by a dashing Scotch cap and feathers, and a rich satin pelisse, attracted universal attention. The ladies surveyed her with critical attention, and the gentlemen, after buzzing their admiration in pretty audible tones, generally finished, by surveying her companion with looks, in which curiosity and apparent surprise were blended. Julian felt his situation grow rather uneasy, particularly when he saw his companion returji the salutation of two gentlemen, whose manners were, in his opinion^ feny thing but respectful; and when on his asking her if she had many acquaintances in London, she replied,—.

* Oh, no: those are friends of Stuart's whom he introduced to'me a few days ago."

It did not encrease the pleasantness of his reflections. Mary, however, did not seem to observe the abstraction and reserve of his manner: she was in high spirits, and it was impossible for Julian not to be sometimes diverted witii hex lively remarks and quick perception of the ridiculous, in the various groups they passed.

He was laughing heartily at one of her sallies, when she suddenly exclaimed,—

< " Now, here are two really beautiful girls coming; 1 know not which to admire the most. That little one is a perfect model of feminine beauty, and the tall one is grace and symmetry itself.*





Julian did not speak; she looked in his face for an approval of her sentiments—and beheld it almost convulsed with agitation, his lips were colourless, his cheek pale, and the arm which she held trembled to such an excess, that she feared he would fall.

"Oh, God! You are ill, Julian! What shall I do?" she uttered, in an accent of distress. The ladies whom she had been speaking of, were close to her, and as her quick eye darted round, as if in search of assistance, she was struck with a similar change in the countenance of her who appeared the younger, while the eyes of the elder were fixed on Julian with an expression of angerand contempt. The party passed on, Julian gasped for breath, and Mary hurried him on, saying, in a low voice,—

"Recollect yourself, Carleton, and do not let them have the triumph of seeing how much they have it in their power to wound your feelings."

"Triumph !" repeated Julian, w Marianne and Laura triumph over me? Oh, no! you do not know them. They may pity and despise, but never triumph."

"I was speaking of the gentlemen who accompanied them," returned Mary, coldly, " in whose looks there certainly was not much of pity; nor, indeed, can I exactly see the necessity of any one's feeling that sensation toward yow at present, unless, indeed, it be atseeing you possess so little fortitude or presence of mind."

"1 did not observe any gentlemen !" said Julian, taking no notice of the conclusion of her speech, which, indeed, he knew not, in the confusion of the moment, how to reply to, " I did not observe any gentlemen, but I suppose they were Mr, Vincent and his son."

"Very probably," was Mary's laconic reply, delivered in a tone which shewed her by no means pleased at what had passed, and in a few minutes she proposed returning home: and glad to be released from a situation which was growing, every moment, more irksome, he merely conducted her to the door of her residence, and there bade her good morning.





Very unexpectedly he found Stuart at home, and with him Ryland and two others, whom Julian soon recognized as having been of their party the memora« ble play night. They were all in high spirits, and spoke of Julian's late adventures and consequent disappearance, in a tone'of -familiarity and raillery, with which he was by no means delighted. He was, in fact, both pained and astonished at the want of delicacy and

feeling, which was evident in Stuart's having made his situation and Mary Hamilton's known to those to whom they were both strangers; but he, in some measure excused it when he discovered that Stuart had, as was too often the case, drank so freely as to be incapable of serious reflection. Julian had not seen him since the preceding morning, and he soon discovered that the whole party had not been in bed, and not many hours returned from some nocturnal revel, Ah early dinner was ordered, and Julian was soon rallied out of his silence, and abstemiousness The image of his recent mortification—Marianne's pallid cheek—and Laura's look of scorn, became more indistinct with every glass he swallowed, and his thoughtless companions had soon the satisfaction of seeing him in a complete state of uproarious felicity.

It wanted but little persuasion now to induce him to accompany the whole party whom Stuart invited to go with him to Miss Hamilton's lodgings. Julian had almost forgotten the unfavourable impression with which he had that morning left her, but he was soon reminded by her cool reception of him, that her recollection of what had passed, had not so soon evaporated.





Ever averse to giving pain, and disposed at the present moment to look upon every thing in a favourable light, he devoted his whole attention to efface the feeling' of resentment which was visible in her manner; and though his apologies were rather awkward than explanatory- Mary was too much disposed to be reconciled to him, not to appear perfectly satisfied. Flattered by her particular attentions, which were more evident from the coolness with which she treated the remainder of the party, and viewing every attraction through the exaggerated medium of his heated imagination, Julian began to fancy that he had hitherto been very ungratefully blind to her superior charms. Mary was nothing loth to receive his amende honorable; and Stuart seemed by no means displeased at the understanding which was established between them; and the evening passed off very gaily. Julian awoke the following morning, his head aching and confused, but with a sufficient recollection of the professions he had made to Mary, and the delight with which she had received them, not to feel very miserable and ashamed of bis folly. Marianne's sylph-like modest form floated on his imagination ; he recalled her delicate unobtrusive manners to his mind, and turned with a sensation almost amounting to disgust, from the contrast which Mary Hamilton's shewy appearance and decided air presented. Not long, however, was he allowed to ruminate in solitude over these ideas; Stuart reminded him that they had promised to break





fast with Mary, and attend her to an exhibition o some sort. Julian's appearance and manners presented little of the happy and favoured lover, 'but Mary seemed determined to consider him as such; and when Stuart, pretending to recollect some indispensible prior engagement, left them together, she contrived, so insensibly, to interest him in an ^apparent Confidential communication of her present situation, and entered so delicately into the unpleasantness of his own, that he no longer found his situation irksome, or drew comparisons to Mary's disadvantage.

She told him that Stuart's father and her own had been closely connected by the ties of friendship, until the imprudence and extravagance of the former ended in his ruin, and he at last terminated his distresses by suicide.

"His son," she continued, "was left an helpless orphan, without a friend in the world but my father who continued to treat him as his own child; and Charles Stuart received an education—but I need not enlarge on that head; you see what he is: it is sufficient to say that all the advantages he possesses, he owes to my father's kindness and liberality. Unhappily for me, my father died before he had time to realize sufficient to leave me (who was his only child) a competency to support me in the style in which [ had been brought up. Since that period," she continued, in an agitated tone, " I have led a life of vicissitude and wretchedness, which it is painful to dwell on; till, on the night I left you, I accidentally met with Stuart, whom I had never heard of for years, as from my change of residence and obscure situation, he had been, he says, unable to discover my retreat. Let that be as it will, I





am indebted to him for my present comforts; how long they will last—" She stopped in apparent confusion, and Julian observed, rather in a tone of enquiry, that he trusted Stuart's situation was sufficiently permanent to ensure the continuance of what, after her father's paternal care, it was certainly his duty to attend to.

A look of bitter feeling convulsed Mary's expressive features for a moment, but it passed quickly away, as she replied,—

"He has been fortunate lately, and certainly at the present moment, I have no right to complain." But she added in a quicker tone, u Time will shew."

Julian returned home with his mind completely satisfied by this explanation, as far as related to Mary's conduct, who, he felt convinced, had been unfortunate, but not criminal; but he was by no means equally at rest as to Stuart; there was a lurking sarcasm in Mary's manner, when she spoke of him,—an apparently almost unconscious expression of resentment and contempt, which stole over her countenance when Julian, in lamenting his own unpleasant situation, alluded to the generosity and delicacy of his friend in conferring obligations, thatconvinced him the latter's conduct had not always been unexceptionable, and that, although she supprssed it in her brief narration, Mary had had serious cause to complain of his (Stuart's) conduct towards her.

The day hung heavily on Julian's hands; Ryland had promised to call to give him some intelligence or advice as to procuring a situation, but he did not keep his word; and after various ineffectual attempts to amuse himself with a book, he took up his hat, and almost unconsciously wandered again to the residence of Mary Hamilton.





She was out, the servant said; and with more of disappointment than he liked to acknowledge to himself, or than such a trifle warranted, he retraced his steps. Where could Mary be gone? she had not mentioned such an intention, and with whom could she be, for he knew not that she had a single female acquaintance? These questions recurred perpetually to him, as he slowly stroled along the street. A heavy slap on the shoulder roused him. It was Ryland ; who, with one of the last night's party, had been following him, unperceived, to see, as they elegantly phrased it, "what he was up to with such a long phiz?"

Julian replied, with an air of assumed vivacity, that he was up to nothing; but was going soberly and sedately home, to finish reading a book, in which be was much interested. -'.*

"And pray what mighty important business tempted you to leave it unfmished ?" enquired Ryland, with a sly look.

The colour mounted into Julian's cheek: he was aware, by the manner the question was put, that they had seen him turn from Miss Hamilton's door, and he stammered out in much confusion,—

"Ob, I was tired and had the head-ache, and thought a turn in the air would do me good."

Ryland laughed unmercifully at the blush his remark had occasioned; and Julian, too conscious of the inuendoes he continued to throw out, would willingly have made his escape. Ryland, however, insisted on his accompanying him to see a lady, whom he bad promised, he said, to call on."





"I want your opinion of my taste, Carleton," he continued, "but mind, no attempts at cutting me out, for I understand you are a dangerous fellow among the girls. I don't think though I have any thing to fear, for Kate don't like sighing, sentimental swains, she isn't one of your romantic ones, like somebody you and I know."

"Is it Mrs. Ryland you are speaking of?" asked Julian, with an air of the most naive simplicity.

Ryland and his companion both laughed, and the latter replied,—

"It is one of the Mrs. Ryiand's, undoubtedly; how manyare there my boy?" addressing himself to his friend.

"Oh, curse me, if I can tell how many have been honoured with that title," returned Ryland ;" but you are mistaken in the present instance; Kate does not honour me so far; she does not like aliases, she says, and so keeps her own denomination. She is plain Kate Turner."

"Or rather handsome Kate Turner," said the friend, " for she is certainly as fine a girl as you'll meet within a mile or two."

"None of your exceptions ! exclaimed Ryland," I know you think a certain lady, up in Marylebone, handsomer,—but I will not allow it."

"Well, we'll take your friend Carleton, to see them both, and have his opinion," was the reply.

Julian listened with astonishment: though he had seen many instances of Ryiand's levity, yet, as a married man, and one who acknowledged he owed his present situation to his wife, he did not think he would have been so totally devoid of principle, or even common decency as thus openly, to have avowed his licentiousness; and he was almost equally surprised that the other, who was a mere youth, seemed quite as unrestrained on the subject. Conscious, however, that he should only be the ridicule of his companions, should they penetrate his sentiments, he observed, in a tone as gay as their own, that it was placing him in rather a dangerous situation, to make him the arbiter of the ladies' charms, as he should inevitably incur everlasting disgrace with one of them.





"Oh, we won't tell them," replied Ryland, " for I know my Kate would scratch your eyes out, if she thought you considered any one handsomer; and Soph's a bit of a devil isn*t she Crawford?"

Crawford laughed, as he replied, that Sophy did not want for spirit.

"She has given you some striking proofs of it, has'nt she ?" returned his friend.

"Oh, no, by George! she knows 1 will be master," said Crawford, smiling, " so we've never come to a battle yet."

Their arrival at the house which contained Kyland's fair one, put a period to the conversation, and the latter gentleman gave a sly look of enquiry in Julian's face as he introduced him and Miss Turner to each other."

Julian was, indeed, surprised: he had never seen a woman who could bear a comparison with her: she was rather below the middle size, but her -delicate figure was symmetry itself, and her white neck and arms, which were plentifully exposed, looked as if they had been hewn out of the most spotless ,Parian marble.— her dark eyes beamed with vivacity, and the raven locks that clustered round her forehead, and hung in thick curls on her neck, increased, by their contrast, the brilliancy of her complexion; but she spoke, and Julian started with astonishment—the harsh, coarse voice grated on his ear, and the still coarser manners made him shrink from her with a sensation nearly approaching disgust. She was offended with Ryland, for not having kept an engagement to take her to the play the preceding evening; and her reproaches were conveyed in language, so devoid of all delicacy, or even common decorum, that Julian's admiration of her beauty soon vanished; but the quarrel was soon made up, and with the most perfect nonchalance she turned round to look full in Julian's face, observing, that she wanted to see him, for she had heard a deal of talk about his having jumped into the water after some foolish cretur that went to drownd herself.





Julian blushed,—but it was more on her account than his own ; and Ryland drew her aside, apparently to prevent her saying more on the subject.

In a few minutes Stuart entered the room: he appeared surprised at finding Julian there, but, after an explanation from Ryland, said, with a look full of sarcastic meaning, that he was glad to find him in such good company.

Ryland retorted in an undertone, but in a manner that sufficiently evinced he both understood and resented his meaning; and Julian reflected, with astonishment, on the incongruity of Stuart's conduct, in constantly associating with one whom he not only despised, but took every opportunity of showing that he did so. Ryland's conduct, too, was equally inexplicable; but that there was some secret tie existing between them, from their frequent secret conferences, and the perfect knowledge of each other's affairs, was very evident.





Even immediately after their present sparring, Stuart retired with him to the other end of the room, evi dently to make a confidential communication, which had the effect of greatly increasing Ryland's always rather exuberant spirits; and his friend Crawford catching the contagion, they made the room ring with their bursts of laughter and vociferated jokes; with which, though neither very humorous nor very delicate, Miss Turner appeared highly delighted.

The first step to vice, is to be ashamed of being virtuous. A few short weeks were gone, since Julian would have shrank with disgust from jests which were levelled at the most refined feelings of the human heart and tended to bring into contempt all that he had been taught to revere and cherish; but he saw Stuart, if he did not actually applaud, laugh at and encourage this species of ribaldry; and he felt ashamed of appearing wiser or better then one whom he considered so much his superior. He soon ceased to blush or to be disgusted, and once or twice even attempted to heighten, by little delicate satirical touches, the coarse sketches with which Ryland illustrated his sentiments on love, marriage, religion, &c. &c.; and the approving smile of Stuart, and the loud plaudits of the others repaid him for thissacrifice of his feelings and principles.

They returned home at what Julian thought a late hour from Miss Turner's, and he was surprised when Ryiand proposed looking in at a house he named, for a few minutes, before they went home.

"Oh, there is nobody there," returned Stuart, " nor will there be, till after the races.''





"Well, but we may as well give Carleton a taste of life, now weare out: be has been buried long enough," was the reply.

Stuart assented, and they proceeded to a house in Street,

Julian had imagined they were going to a tavern; he was surprised, therefore, when they stopped at the door of a house, the front of which was almost entirely darkened. The caution with which they were admitted—the scrutinizing looks and whispered interrogations of the porter—the massey iron doors and barricadoes, through which the party passed, all increased Julian's astonishment. A sensation almost of fear prevented his asking a single question: Jbut they reached the top of the staircase—the door was opened and the mystery was over: Julian instantly comprehended that he was in a gaming-house. The room into which they were introduced, was furnished with the utmost splendour; and the brilliancy of the lights and the animation altogether of the scene, formed a striking contrast with the silence and mystery which reigned without. Julian's appearance as a stranger, seemed to excite universal attention among those not engaged in play ; of which description, however, there were very few, compared to those engaged in the fascinating pursuit. The rest of the party appeared well known to all, and were greeted in the most familiar terms by some.

Ryland and Crawford almost immediately took their seats at a table, Stuart remained talking to a foreigner of fashionable appearance, to whom he had advanced on their first entrance, and Julian was left to make his own observation on the scene, and on the actors in it, around him.





Of the game he comprehended nothing: but the countenances of the players soon pointed out to him who were the winners and who the loosers. He placed himself near a young man who, with bis lips firmly compressed together, his cheek fevered with agitation, and his eyes beaming with almost supernatural brightness, seemed as if his very existence depended on the cards he held; while his adversary, with a countenance of impenetrable hardness, appeared totally indifferent either to the issue of the contest, or the emotion of his opponent.

Julian continued to look on with the most intense interest: he saw a lurking smile of triumph gathering round the lips of the elder; while the bosom of the other heaved with convulsive throbs—the crimson of his cheek had faded into a most deadly hue—his eyes glared—his whole frame trembled, and a stifled groan burst at intervals upon the ear of the attentive Julian. A few minutes, and all was decided The young man threw himself back in his chair—his clenched hands were held to his throbbing temples—and, in a voice almost choaked with emotion, he exclaimed—

"All, all lost! ruined !—Oh God! character, friends even life itself sacrificed!"

"He cannot, surely he can never take the money!" exclaimed the agitated Julian aloud, and turning to the successful gamester.

The man raised his eyes to^Julian with a look of surprise mixed with derision, and cooly went on counting the heap of gold and notes which he had





swept to bis side of the table. Several of the byestanders crowded round him to congratulate, and discuss the merits of the game; while the unfortunate loser remained in a state of stupor, unnoticed, except by the compassionate Julian ; who, fearing for his senses, at length, ventured to say, in the gentlest accents,—

"Forgive my intrusion, sir, but I hope and trust your loss is not so irreparable as your present disappointment would represent."

The young man started, as if from a dream, and in a'tone of frenzy, exclaimed,—

"Irreparable! 1 tell you I am utterly undone! The money was not my own—I was intrusted with it by my employers! Exposure is inevitable! Death, death, alone, can expiate my folly—and my mother, my poor mother! what will become of her V He burst into a passion of tears,—and Julian, sensible they would relieve, did not interrupt him.

The cold-blooded wretch who had won the money now reached across the table, and reminded his unfortunate opponent that there was a deficiency of five pounds in the money deposited.

„ Here!" replied the other, in the accent of desperation, drawing his watch from his packet, and throwing it on the table: "Here—take all!—are you now satisfied?"

"You will redeem this, of course," replied the other, having examined it with calculating coolness.'

"[Monster!" muttered Julian, between his shut teeth; buf Stuart, who had been attentively watching him, seized bis arm, and drew him to the other end of the room.





"Do not let your mistaken feelings get the better of your prudence, Carleton," he observed, with a look of some asperity.

"Mistaken !" repeated Julian, with surprise: " Can feelings of abhorrence and disgust at such mercenary unfeeling selfishness, and pity for the unhappy victim of imprudence, be blameable?"

"Tush! you know nothing about it," returned Stuart, " Had he who has lost been fortunate, would he not have pocketed the money, think you ? why else did he play? As to his present distress, if it is true, does he not deserve all he suffers? Besides, I would venture to predict, that if he could regain all he has lost, you would, tormorrow evening, find him here, running the risk of losing it all again."

"Strange infatuation!" exclaimed Julian.

Stuart made no reply, but by a smile, the meaning of which was unfathomable; and sitting down to a table, he offered to be Julian's instructor in the art and mysteries of a science of which he seemed to have so little knowledge.

And of which I do not wish to know more, was the reply that Julian's heart would have suggested; but conscious he should only draw on himself the ridicule of his friend, be suppressed his thoughts, and became the pupil of one than whom none could be better adapted to initiate the novice.

The unfortunate young man for whom he had felt such deep commisseration had left the room; but Julian was somewhat disconcerted at seeing the successful gamester seat himself close to Stuart, with whom he entered in a conversation that proved they were on terms of familiar intimacy.





It was morning when they reached home; but the scenes of the preceding day had made so deep an impression on Julian's mind, that he found it impossible to sleep. It was evident to him that all his companions were regular visitants at the bouse they had introduced him to, and he felt but too much inclined to suspect that it was to this pursuit Stuart was indebted for the means of making the appearance he had so recently assumed. The more he reflected, the more uneasy he became at the idea of his being connected with such people; yet he knew not how to release himself. Ryland, ,it was true, had held out hopes of procuring him a similar situation to the one he had filled at Mr. Alders'; but should he succeed, it would be impossible, from common decency or gratitude, to shun the soeiety of those to whom he was so deeply indebted; and, independent of these feelings for self, he regretted, deeply regretted, that one so superior, so formed to excite admiration, and esteem as Stuart, should so debase his talents, and degrade his character, as to make a trade out of the vices or follies of his fellow-creatures. As to Ryland, or the rest of his associates, except so far as related to the former's conduct towards him (Julian) he had never been able to discern any thing, either in their manners, sentiments, or principles, that could command respect or esteem.

The day was far advanced before Julian, uneasy and unrefreshed, quitted his pillow; weary, languid, and dissatisfied with himself and all around him, he seated himself at the solitary breakfast table. Stuart had not risen; and Julian almost felt his absence a relief in his present state of mind. Determined to shake off the ascendency which he felt but too conscious Stuart was gaining over him, yet dreading to appear presumptuous and ungrateful, he knew not how to act; though his heart reproached him, as be cast his eye on the profusion and splendour with which he was surrounded, for ever consenting to partake of luxuries drawn from such a source. From Stuart his thoughts unconsciously reverted to Mary Hamilton. It was but too evident that Mary was acquainted with the nature of Stuart's resources; possibly (and indeed there was sufficient in her manner, when speaking of him, to warrant the supposition) was aware of other traits in his character, equally abhorrent and disgraceful.





"I will quit this house, if I beg in the streets!" exclaimed Julian, unconscious that he was giving utterance to his thoughts aloud. He turned, and beheld Stuart standing behind him, and regarding him with a look of the most intense curiosity. - "Are you conferring with your familiar, Carleton V he demanded, endeavouring to assume a tone of indifference* "or are you soliloquising on your unhappy fate?"

* Jlot exactly either," returned Julian, in some confusion, yet anxious to say something which might pave the way to an avowal of his uneasiness at the inactive and dependent life he was leading.

"My head aches confoundedly," observed Stuart, seating himself at the breakfast-table, without taking notice of Julian's reply; and the latter, deterred by his (Stuart's) manner, attempted in vain to resume the subject.

The same irresolution and fear of offending induced Julian to concede to his companion's proposition of visiting Miss Hamilton in the course of the morning; though he but a few hours before, in reflectmg' on the inconsistencies of her conduct with her professions, and the mystery which, in spite of her apparently candid explanation, it was too plain her connection with Stuart was involved—he had come to a determination of avoiding her society as much as possible, and not suffering himself to be blinded by her fascinations; or entangled by her flattering proofs of exclusive attachment. But he went-—and all these prudent resolutions were forgotten in Mary's society. Julian thought that he had never seen her look so lovely as while expressing her regret that she had been out when he called the preceding day; nor had he ever been more struck with the superiority and refinement of her manners, than in now contrasting them with the vulgar illiterate female to whom he had been introduced by Ryland.





Stuart, as usual, contrived to leave them together; and it was not till Mary accidentally demanded of Julian, how he had spent the preceding evening, that any recollections of his previous suspicions and prudential resolutions entered the mind of the latter; but the question recalled his doubts and fears, and with a manner totally changed from his previous vivacity, he replied,—

"Not at all to my satisfaction, then; and still less so upon reflection, now."

Mary changed countenance, yet did not offer to make a single enquiry; and Julian, though embarrassed at her manner, proceeded to relate his introduction to the gaming-house, and his fears that Stuart and his companions were but too conversant with a vice which he had been taught to hold in utter detestation.

f





Mary became more and more 'agitated, at every word he uttered; yet still she did not offer an attempt at reply or vindication: she did not even affect surprise; and Julian plainly discovered that she was withheld from expressing her sentiments by some secret motive. Could it be gratitude towards Stuart? No; for she had frequently spoken of his conduct towards her with rather the air of one who conceived she was receiving no more than she had a right to expect and demand, than as considering herself under obligation to him. Her silence, therefore, was inexplicable; and Julian, at once pained and surprised, was not sorry to change the topic of conversation.

Day after day glided past, and found Julian inactive, irresolute, and unhappy. Stuart's kindness towards him remained undiminished, though it became every hour more apparent that his circumstances and situation were by no means correspondent with the style in which he lived. Julian had frequently the pain and mortification of being an unwilling witness to the expedients to which his friend was obliged to have recourse to evade the payment of bills, which were» continually presented; yet if he ventured the slightest hint at his feelings on the subject, Stuart drew back with such an air of offended pride, and spoke in such positive terms of his embarrassments being merely temporary, that Julian was irresistibly compelled to silence. To Mary Hamilton, however, he could now impart his fears; and he learnt with sorrow from her that they were but too well founded. She was thrown off her guard by her apprehensions for herself, and expressly avowed that she knew Stuart had no resources but his skill at the gaming table.





* He has been very fortunate lately," she observed, "which has enabled him to live as he has done; but I fancy it is nearly at an end, and I—" She turned away, unable to proceed from agitation ; and Julian felt himself powerless to oflfer any consolation He returned home: Stuart's haggard looks but too forcibly confirmed Mary's supposition; and Julian at once pitying and condemning, would have given worlds to have been able to have relieved the anxiety and care which was so visibly depicted on his countenance.

Contrary to his usual practice, Stuart remained at home the whole day. Julian at first was unable to account for this; but the anxiety with which his companion Jistened to every knock at the door, and his more than once jumping up to lock the door of the room in which they were sitting, on hearing a strange voice below stairs, at length in part revealed the secret. Julian uttered a heavy sigh as the conviction struck into his mind, and Stuart, turning his penetrating eye full on him, instantly interpreted his meaning.

"Why so melancholy?" he sang, immediately assuming a tone of levity, which his looks forcibly contradicted.

Julian knew not how to reply; and he turned to conceal his agitation.

"It must come to it at last," said Stuart, in a graver tone, and as if speaking to himself. "Carleton," continued he, "I am grieved on your account, more than my own, to say that I shall be under the necessity of retreating into the country for a short time. I have lately met with some heavy losses, aud just at a time too when I greatly wanted ready money; but my embarrassment," (raising his tone) "is merely tempory; and, should it be otherwise, I do not fear to look adversity in the face. It will be only meeting an old acquaintance; who, though I have contrived to shun her for some time, is determined to assert her claim." He paused—and Julian, in a faltering tone, replied— "I hope you will still be able to avoid her advances."





"Oh, 1 by no means despair," returned Stuart, " but, as I before said, I am heartily sorry that I cannot serve

you to the extent I wish. I had formed plans"

He hesitated—and then added, "But this unlucky circumstance has spoiled all. There is another person, too, who will be exposed perhaps to some unpleasant embarrassments. I mean Mary Hamilton: I need not ask you to befriend her, if it should lay in youv power, and I should not speedily return."

Humiliated by a sense of his total inability to repay the obligations already incurred, and grateful for the good intentions which his friend had entertained towards him, Julian could scarcely command words to express his feelings; and Stuart, in spite of his habitual equanimity and self-command, was visibly affected by the emotion his young friend betrayed. He wrung the hand which was proferred him, and hastily exclaimed,—

"No! none of this, Carleton —I do not deserve

all this. You know not "He paused—and as if

recollecting himself, he added, "You have infected me, I believe, with your romantic feelings: I was going to make a fool of myself—and to answer no purpose either; but come, let us descend to sober common places. I shall be obliged to leave you to-morrow morning; and, as I can no other way benefit you, would fain assist you with my advice, and the know





ledge 1 have of the ways and means which are available in yoHr situation." *

"To-morrow morning!" exclaimed Julian, in surprise, " so soon as that?"

"So the fates ordain," replied his friend, carelessly, "unless, indeed, a more cruel destiny awaits me, and I should be arrested in my course, and conveyed away to durance vile."

Julian expressed his hopes that that would not be the case; and then demanded if his friend Ryland was acquainted with his intention.

"Friend!" retorted Stuart, with emphasis: "yes,

it is to his folly that I am indebted But it is too

long a story to enter upon now: I am only to blame for connecting myself with such a blundering ass! but he is suffering for it, that is one comfort; and will suffer more, I hope, a half-witted obstinate blockhead I" . ..

Julian was surprised at the warmth with which this was uttered: he had never seen Stuart so completely thrown off his guard; and though he could not at all comprehend how Ryland had accelerated the present crisis of his friend's affairs, he was convinced that it was no ordinary provocation that could have excited this sally of passion in the temperate minded Stuart.

Stuart recollected himself, and proceeded to advise with Julian as to the means the latter should pursue to procure some suitable employment. Among other expedients, he suggested the insertion of an advertisement in one of the daily papers, and also gave him the address of a person who might forward his views; but with a strong charge not to mention his (Stuart's) name, but to introduce himself as the Sob of the late Mr. Carleton, whom he had heard mention his name.





Julian did not altogether like this. Averse to every thing like deceit or hypocrisy, his heart recoiled from thus making his revered father's name subservient to his purpose; and be mentally resolved that nothing but the most urgent necessity should induce him to adopt this part of Stuart's instructions.

The night was far spent before they retired to their respective beds, to take a short repose ; for Stuart was to depart early in the morning, and Julian of course intended to see him off. The latter, however, was unable to close his eyes: his own forlorn situation— the strange inconsistency which Stuart's conduct displayed—the mystery which he still preserved as to his connection with Ryland—and, above all, the shock which it would be his (Julian's) hard task to perform of informing Miss Hamilton of this sudden termination of her hopes and fears—combined to keep him waking. He heard for some time movements in the house, and the voice of Stuart giving orders to his servant respecting the preparations for their journey; but at length all was hushed to silence, and he sank into an uneasy slumber.





CHAPTER THE NIJTTH.



"My heart can weep, when from my downcast eye

I chase the tear and stem the rising sigh:

Deep buried there I close the rankling dart,

And smile the most when heaviest is my heart.

On this I act—whatever pangs surround,

Tis magnanimity to hide the wound.



I never yet could ask, howe'er forlorn,

For vulgar pity raix'd with vulgar scorn."



H.K. White.

THE sun was shining brightly into Julian's room when he awoke; and, fearful that he bad slept over the appointed time,be hastened down stairs. All, however, was deserted: the books were removed from the recesses, (except a few which Stuart bad the preceding evening requested Julian's acceptance of) and every thing looked in confusion. Julian rang the bell; and the maid servant, who came at the summons, stated that her master had not been in bed at all, though she could not tell what time he left, as she slept at the top of the house.

"He has behaved very shabby to me," she added, in an angry tone, "for he promised to pay me my quarter's wages in the morning—-but he's gone, and I've never seen the colour of his money yet, and I »up~ pose never sha'n't."





"Well, but are you not to remain here till he returns?" enquired Julian, deeply mortified at this proof of his friend's injustice.

"Remain here, indeed!" replied the girl, pertly. "I should have to remain here long enough, I fancy, if I was to wait for him: but I fancy we shall soon be told another story; for I expect the man that owns the house and furniture will be here pretty quickly, and I'll warrant he'd soon show us the outside of the door, though he may think himself well off, to get his things back again, with only the loss of his three month's rent. I should never expect to see mortal thing left, after letting it to such a swindler."

Julian felt angry, yet he knew not how to reply to this tirade; and the girl having thus vented her indignation, enquired in a more civil tone, if he did not choose some breakfast.

Julian replied in the negative; and taking out a few shillings (nearly all he possessed, for he had resolutely resisted Stuart's offer, though delicately couched as a loan, of furnishing him with four or five pounds to provide for present necessities) he put them into her hand, with.an apology for the inadequacy of the gift to the trouble he had occasioned her. She appeared surprised, and having pocketed the money, said—

"I hope, sir, you ar'n't offended at what I said about master; but indeed if you knew how he has took the people in, and how I've been abused about his bills, (as if I had any thing to do with it) you wou'dn't wonder at my being provoked; and then. its a very hard thing to lose the bit o' money that I've been toiling and moiling for, up early and down late, ever since I've been in his sarvice—let alone that, I've got no character, and perhaps shall never get another decent place as long as I lire."





Julian assured her, and with truth, that he was very sorry for her; and she then demanded if she should call him a coach, or get a porter to carry his trunk.

"For, indeed," she added, in an important whisper, "I wou'dn't advise you Mr. Carleton, to stop here till old Greville, the landlord, comes, for he'll only be sancy."

"My trunk!" repeated Julian, in surprise, not unmixed with mortification, at being thus forcibly reminded of the little necessity he had for such an article.

"Yes, sir, I see you've packed it ready," and she glanced her eyes upon a small portmanteau, which stood in a corner of the room.

Julian mechanically advanced towards it, and saw his own name on the card which tvas fastened to it. The kind and delicate feeling which had prompted this on the part of Stuart, brought tears into his eyes.

And can such a man as this be the unprincipled being his actions would make him appear, he thought to himself, as he stood silently gazing at the portmanteau. Oh, no! let me rather suppose that he is the victim of unforeseen circumstances—his heart cannot be vitiated.

"I would carry it myself for you, sir," said the loquacious maid-servant, imagining that his silence proceeded from irresolution as to how it should be conveyed,—" but I dar'n't leave the house till old Greville comes, because for why, it's in my care now, and if any thing should be lost, you know."

Julian replied that he had not the slightest intention of troubling her farther, as he could easily carry the portmanteau the short distance he had to go."





"Oh, then you have taken a lodging," said the inquisitive girl.

A blush crimsoned Julian's cheeks, as he replied in the affirmative; and hastily taking up the portmanteau, he was leaving the room, when the books Stuart had given him struck his eye.

"I will call again for those books," he observed.

"You had better take them with you, sir," replied the girl, " for perhaps old Greville will be for stopping them, just out of spite, for they ar'n't worth his while otherwise."

Julian hesitated: he did not like the idea of taking them at all, after this speech; but the officious servant had already found a string to bind them together, and thus render them easily portable. He had already claimed them as his own, and it would appear strange that he should now abandon his right to them. The parcel was tied, and with that in one hand, and the portmanteau in the other, Julian found himself once more in the street without a home.

Undecided how to act, he walked on at random, until he began to find his burthen rather troublesome; and while stopping in a retired street, to shift hands, he observed a bill with "lodgings for single men" on the shutter of a poor looking but clean house opposite.

This will suit my fortunes, he thought, as he crossed the street, and knocked at the door.

The terms were very moderate, at least so he thought, and the old woman who answered him, very civil; and a few minutes he was in possession of a room, meanly furnished, bat clean and neat enough to content his moderate wishes.





He sat some time ruminating on the strange vicissitudes he had already encountered, and the probability that he should hare still greater difficulties to undergo. From himself his thoughts wandered to Mary Hamilton, who was yet in ignorance that the blow she had dreaded was already struck.

It was too early yet to go to her; and to relieve, in some measure, the anxious thoughts that oppressed him, Julian commenced unpacking the portmanteau, of whose contents he was as yet ignorant. A few changes of wearing apparel, a flute, (of which instrument Julian was rather an amateur than a scientific performer) an inkstand, and some beautiful drawings of Stuart's own execution, appeared to be all it contained, but on replacing the clothes, a small pocketbook fell on the ground, and Julian eagerly opening it, discovered, as he expected, a letter addressed to himself, and enveloping two five pound bank notes. The letter contained only these words—

Carleton,

Give one of the enclosed notes to Mary Hamilton, and tell her to think as charitably of me as she can —the other is your own. I do not believe there exists another human being who could ex cite in me the feelings with which I now bid you adieu; yet there have been moments in which I have almost hated you, for being

what you are. Probably when we meet again

Yes, I know well what an intercourse with the world may do, even with such a heart as your's. It has made me a demon—no, I have still some good feelings left, or I should never have written this letter. I am half tempted now to destroy it; yet it cannot give you a worse impression of me than you will receive from some other quarters. I know not why I should care for your good opinion, and I know also that I do not deserve it, yet 1 do not wish you altogether to despise me. Man.is the slave of circumstances: had I been fortunate, I should have been virtuous. Now I only retaliate upon the world for the injustice with which 1 have been treated. Adieu."





Julian read this letter with mingled emotions; yet sorrow that such a mind should have sank into ruin; predominated, and he felt, that though he could not but condemn, it was impossible to despise the man, who acted so disinterestedly towards himself.

The striking of a neighbouring church clock roused him from the reverie into which he had fallen, and reminded him that it was Miss Hamilton's hour of rising.

Anxious to get over the unpleasant task enjoined him, he immediately set out for her residence, and found her, as he expected, at breakfast.

"Ah! my dear friend, this is kind," she exclaimed, extending her hand with a smile, but it vanished instantly at sight of Julian's answering look; and she added, " though I see how it is—you are a messenger of ill news—Stuart is arrested."

"Not quite so bad as that," returned Julian, seating himself: "he is gone into the country to avoid it."

"And without even seeing me first," observed Mary, a flush of anger succeeding to the look of consternation she first wore—" mean rascal!"

"Do not be so hasty," replied Julian, hurt and surprised at her vehemence. "I am charged from him to say that nothing but unavoidable necessity would





have induced him to have left town without visiting you; I am likewise commissioned to give you this."

He presented the note, which he had from motives of delicacy sealed up in a blank cover. She opened it with eagerness, but at sight of the sum it contained, threw it angrily on the table.

"I repeat my words," she exclaimed, * he is a mean, selfish rascal! what is that paltry sum to me 1 Fool that I was to be again deceived by his plausible tongue!"

Julian felt that it was impossible that he could fully appreciate the causes Mary had for the anger she displayed, but it certainly did not place her in a very amiable light to him. He knew that she had added greatly to Stuart's embarrassments by the expensive style in which she had lived; and he also believed that the paltry sum she so much despised had been parted. with at considerable inconvenience to his friend.

Anxious for her sake, as well as his friend's, to tranquillize her angry feelings, Julian now produced Stuart's letter, and, folding down all but the words relative to herself, gravely said he hoped she would attend to the injunction it contained.

She burst into tears as she took it from him, andx exclaimed, with emphasis—

"Carleton, you know not the wretch whose cause you espouse: he has robbed me of fortune* fame, of integrity, and he now leaves me, without a scruple of remorse or feeling for the situation he has reduced me to."

Julian was inexpressibly shocked at this avowal, but he knew not how to offer consolation; and while Mary vented her emotions in loud sobs, he hid his face with his hands, and silently gave way to the tears which pity, consternation, and sorrow forced from his eyes. The fascinating manners and brilliant accomplishments of Mary Hamilton, united with the unconcealed attachment she displayed towards him, had, in fact, made a deep impression on Julian's heart; and though he sometimes heaved a sigh as Marianne Vincent, with all her modest unpresuming attractions, rose to his memory—yet he had frequently, while listening to Mary's syren voice, or attending to her animated conversation, regretted that fortune had put it out of his power to place her in a situation adequate to her merits. The suspicions which he had once indulged as te her former intimacy with Stuart had gradually vanished before their apparently unreserved communications on the subject; and all that looked like boldness or levity in Mary's manner, had become either too familiar to be noticed, or was attributed to the thoughtless openness of her disposition. The present avowal, therefore, was one he was totally unprepared for, and while it wounded him deeply on his part, it occasioned not less painful sensations thus to discover the baseness of Stuart's character. He recollected the pains which the latter had unceasingly taken to impress on his (Julian's) mind the certainty that Mary was enthusiastically attached to him, and the encouragement he had given to him to declare, as he had once done in a fit of romantic gratitude, that if it were in his power to support her, he would not hesitate to make her his wife. All this passed in review through his mind, and he acknowledged that Stuart was indeed, as Mary had styled him—a wretch. Making a strong effort to recover from the agitation





"which had overcome him, Julian now arose, and approaching the still weeping Mary, said—

"In the course of a few hours, Mary, I will see you again, but I feel now not exactly fit for conversation; as you will, no doubt, have some arrangements to make in which I may be of service to you, I shall not delay a moment longer than I can help seeing you again."

"Say yon do not despise, that you pity me," exclaimed Mary, raising her humid eyes to his face.

"Pity you !" he returned, raising her hand ardently to his lips—* Oh, Mary! pity is a cold word for the feelings you have excited in my bosom! I could, to vindicate your wrongs, to revenge you upon the base wretch who has—^-and yet who am I speaking of? the man to whom I owe every thing, my very existence!"

He paused, overcome with emotion—and Mary's tears redoubled at every sentence he uttered, until he forcibly terminated a scene so painful to both, by rushing from the room.

For some minutes after gaining the street, Julian walked on reckless of all around him; his cheek glowing with indignation, and hi* full heart throbbing with a variety of sensations, in which, however, pity for the unfortunate and imprudent Mary was the most predominant. Gradually his head became less dizzy, his thoughts more collected, and some portion of anger at the studied system of deception which Mary had contributed to mingle with his other feelings. He recalled to. himself the apparent openness and candour with which she had been accustomed to speak of her juvenile acquaintance with Stuart; he recollected how explicitly she had declared that she had no personal motive for the dislike and contempt which was sometimes betrayed in her manner towards the former, bat that it arose from her knowledge of circumstances she was not at liberty to explain. There was too much of cool deliberate deception in this for Julian's frank and candid mind, not to revolt at it. Vanity indeed might have suggested, that the motive excused the means which Mary had adopted to secure his good opinion,— but wounded pride whispered that, perhaps, all was equally deceptive, and that the attachment she had so unequivocally evinced towards himself, was only assumed to answer some purpose he could not comprehend. A resolution never to see her again, followed this supposition; but her helpless, deserted situation, the bitter tears of humiliation and distress, which he had so recently seen her shed, and the awful situation from which he had once rescued her, all rushed on his remembrance, and the resolve was cancelled. At length, he thought, as he slowly retraced his steps, after a long and fatiguing ramble, without aim or destination,—" At least, she can no longer deceive mey— all her syren wiles—her fascinations will now be powerless. She will feel that I know her real character, and that to her misfortunes, alone, she will owVany further interest I may evince in her fate."





Alas! how frail are the resolutions of youth, when opposed to habit and inclination. A few short hours, and Julian was again seated by the fascinating Mary,— sympathizing in all her sorrows—forgetting her errors, and hearing, with mixed emotions of pity and indignation, the recital of her wrongs and Stuart's villainy.

He had been, she said, the playmate of her infancy— the chosen companion of her youth, and the man whom her parents, from her earliest years, had destined to be the partner of her future life. "Alas !" she continued, "my poor father, my gentle, affectionate mother, how litle did you think—as you watched with approving smiles the infant buds of that affection which you so fondly cherished—how little did you foresee that you were rearing a plant whose malignant odour would destroy all that came within its baneful influence! Long before I was conscious of the nature of my attachment, the wily object of it had discovered my parents' intentions towards us. He was a portionless orphan, committed to my father's benevolence by his most intimate friend;—I was an only child—the sole heiress of my father's wealth, and with other attractions sufficient to render it not improbable that I might form a much more eligible connexion than with the child of my parents bounty. There were not wanting officious friends to hint this both to my mother and to myself: my father's disposition was too reserved and decisive, to admit of any one's advice,—and on our parts, my mother's and my own, the mercenary suggestion was treated with contempt. Riches cannot ensure happiness, said my mother, on one of these occasions.-rThe bounty of Providence has enabled your father to place his children (for as a child he has ever considered this youth) in a state of competence, if not affluence; and if they are desirous of encreasing their store, Stuart has enterprise, industry, and prudence, sufficient to make his success in the profession for which he has been educated, scarcely doubtful. I mention all this," continued Mary, " to shew you how complete was the ascendancy this arch hypocrite had gained over my unsuspecting parents, to whom he appeared all that the fondest heart could wish. The time rapidly approached, which was to unite our fate, when an alteration became apparent in my dear father which filled us all with consternation and alarm. His health, his temper, and even his understanding became visibly impaised; he scarcely associated with his family—absented himself night after night, and would neither speak or suffer us to speak to him. My poor mother was wretched, and our uneasiness was not, you may be sure, lessened, when Stuart revealed to us that my father had engaged in some extensive commercial speculation, which threatened to terminate less favourable than could be wished. This sufficiently explained my dear father's melancholy; but Stuart still held out hopes that his losses were still retrievable, and I, with all sanguine elasticity of youth, was soon persuaded that it was only a temporary cloud which obscured our happiness. I need scarcely tell you that our nuptials were indefinitely delayed—they ceased, indeed, to be spoken of, except by Stuart, who, in private, incessantly complained of the delay as cruel and unreasonable; he spoke of a private marriage, yet took care to enumerate the obstacles that rendered such a proceeding difficult, if not impracticable. I was young,





imprudent, and tenderly attached, and he was a

villain! I need say no more."

She covered her face to conceal her agitation, and then resumed,—

"Three miserable months passed away: my father sometimes appeared to shake off' the gloom that oppressed him, and at such moments my mother again, in our private conversations, revived the subject of my marriage,—but Stuart no longer talked of it as an event of course, but as one that he rather wished, than hoped would happen speedily. He hinted that my father's concerns were so intricate that some time must necessarily elapse before they could be finally settled, and therefore we could only wait with patience.





My mind was now torn with a thousand distracting fears. I fancied that Stuart's manners were gradually becoming more cool; and to add to my distress, I was in a situation which rendered it necessary that our marriage should immediately take place, With the most distracting sensations 1 listened to the cold-blooded unfeeling expedients which Stuart suggested to conceal my error from my already distressed parents. Marriage, he declared, at present, was out of the question: it would only be entailing perpetual misery on both of us, for he could no longer conceal the painful truth that my father's affairs were desperate, and I must be aware that he, (Stuart,) was now totally without the means of providing adequately for himself much less for a wife and family. My father, at this moment, opened the door, and hastily called Stuart. It was fortunate he did so, for had the wretch remained longer in my sight, I think the consequences would have been fatal; but the presence of my father recalled to my recollection the necessity of exertion, and I retired to my chamber there to vent, in secret, the bitter tears of agony which his baseness, more than even my own wretched situation excited. I had been so often indisposed of late, that my remaining confined to my room the remainder of that day excited no suspicion. My mother's attention was occupied with my poor father, who was more than usually restless and agitated; and I thus avoided meeting Stuart until I was more collected. It was





dinner time the next day when we met; I shuddered as he took my hand, but his manner was more affectionate than it had been for some time, and he took the first opportunity of whispering me that matters were likely to turn out much better than at first appeared, and that he trusted a few days would enable him to remove the chief cause of my uneasiness, and unite our fate for ever. He reproached me for not appearing rejoiced at this welcome news. I was rejoiced, but his cruel coldness and inhumanity were fresh in my recollection, and I began to feel that a union with him though it might save my reputation, would not of certainty, secure me unalloyed happiness. I could scarcely believe, too, when I looked at my father's pale woe-worn countenance, that any favourable change could have taken place. Yet his manner towards both my mother and me, was more kind and solicitous than they had been for some months, and he bade us good night on retiring early to his room (as had always been his custom) with peculiar tenderness. 'You have had a long conversation this morning, Stuart,' observed my mother, as soon as the door was closed, ' and from your manner, I judge, a satisfactory one.' * I hope and trust that you, madam, will at least, not be displeased with what has been done,' replied Stuart. 'In the first place I must premise that from the extent of Mr. Hamilton's losses a failure is inevitable. It remained with him, however, to secure his family from feeling too heavily, the consequences of this step, which can be no longer delayed. Nothing but a too rigid sense of honour has hitherto prevented his agreeing to the arrangements which have been laid before him ; but affection has finally triumph





ed, and he has to^Aay placed in rny Hands ample

riieans'

The report of a pistol," continued Mary, in a low broken voice, " interrupted him. My mother aHd I Idoked at each other in silent Consternation, aiiH Stuart rushed hastily from the room. 1 clasped my mother's death-cold hand in mine, but in a moment the screams of a servant who had beeii the companion 6t thy' father's infancy, and grown grey in his service, roused us btith from the dreadful stupor which had rendered uS motionless, and the next minute beheld my mother clasping, in convulsive agbiiies, the bleeding corpse of her husband, while I was taken from the Wretched scene in a state of insensibility. A short trine restored me to consciousness, but it was only io increased misery% the shock i had received brought 6ri pangs which terminated hi a premature birth, arid for some days my lift was' in imminent danger. My mother, like a pale and breathless spectre, glided about thy' bed, btit her looks spoke ho reproach; and but that I 6rice heard her utter the name of my father, in a tone of suppressed agofay,- and then add, as if with rapture,—' $ut, thank Cfo»d, he was spared this blow,' I should' rio^ nave known' that she was fully acquainted with thi ca»tise of my illness. I did not see StuaVt- durmg my Confinement, and I dare not, from conscious shame, ask intelligence of him from those around me. It ca-me, however, too soon;—I had observed that my mother's resignation, Or rather, I might say, hopelessness of manner had4 been for several days succeeded by a feverish restlessness and agitation; something seemed pVessmg on her mind which she was anxious yet feared to reveal, aind at length, as if collecting her whole strength for the trial, she abruptly demanded if I recollected the conversation with—she faltered, as she pronounced Stuart,—which was so fatally interrupted. I replied in the affirmative, without daring to look up. '-'And did you not, from that, conclude,' she added, 'that your unfortunate father had entrusted him with sufficient property to secure us from want?' 'I am sure of it,' I eagerly replied, recalling to my recollection what he had previously whispered, 'Have you any proof, my child 4' demanded my mother, anxiously. • No proof, dear mother, but his own word,' exclaimed I,' But what necessity can there be for proof?—where is Stuart ?—what does he say ?— surely—surely, he cannot—oh, no—he cannot be so base!' 'There is no baseness that he is not capable of!' returned my mother, in a desponding tone; 'he declares that the sum alluded to was only five hundred pounds, and I dare not dispute it, lest he should, as he has hinted, give up even that poor pittance to the creditors.' All the extent of his villainy now broke upon me, but it was not until the final settlement of my father's affairs; when there appeared a palpable deficiency of three thousand pounds, that we could judge of the sum he had defrauded us of;—this was the money, without doubt, that he had prevailed on my unfortunate father to entrust to him, and, in so doing, had added the keen sense of dishonour to his other afflictions. It was this, perhaps, that had driven him to the





last rash action of his life, and now But it is useless

to dwell on this revolting theme; it is sufficient to say, that my mother rejected, with scorn, all Stuart's hypocritical offers of friendly assistance; and, with the sum he was pleased to assign us, we retired to obscure lodgings, to mourn over the total wreck of our happiness, and devise means to encrease our scanty income; but it was soon evident that my mother would not long require human assistance; her health rapidly decayed, and scarcely twelve months had passed, when she was laid in the same grave with my other unfortunate parent. While she lived 1 saw nothing of Stuart, but a few weeks only had elapsed after her death, when I received a letter from him, imploring me to grant him an interview, and declaring that his affection for me was still unabated,—that nothing but my mother's cruel suspicions and accusations had hitherto prevented-his giving me the most satisfactory proofs of his still being all that he had ever professed to be,—but from me he hoped to meet with more impartiality." 'At least,' he continued, 'grant me a hearing, and if 1 do not then produce the most satisfactory evidence that 1 have been cruelly wronged, and you deceived in your suspicions of me, inflict upon me the greatest punishment—that of banishing me for ever from your sight.' Alas! I was weak enough to grant this interview! I was alone in the world, desolate, dejected, and?*%hat was still worse, in defiance of reason—of prudence, and that resentment which Stuart's supposed desertion had occasioned, I still loved him. He was aware of his power, and he pleaded his own cause with so much plausibility, that I was, or fancied I Avas, convinced that he was still all my youthful fancy had painted him. My recent misfortunes were forgotten, and I waited, with anxiety, the period which respect for my recent loss only, as he said, delayed—that was to put an end to all my cares and fears, in making me his wife. Need I say "Mary arose, and paced the room in great agitation—" Need I say—that again I was deceived and miserable? For some time, indeed, the villain kept on the mask; he still talked of marriage, bat his pretext, for delaying it, became too frivolous even for my credulity j and reproaches and mutual recriminations soon banished all remains of affection on his part, while mine gradually yielded before a thorough conviction of his baseness. At length, his visits, which had for some time been " few and far between," wholly ceased, and I beheld myself once more thrown on the wide world, without a friend or adviser,—reduced to almost absolute destitution, and with the additional misery of knowing that I had forfeited all claims to compassion by my imprudence and folly. It is useless," she continued with great agitation and confusion, " for me to harrow up your feelings or my own, by a repetition of the various scenes of misery I was plunged into,—until, at length, bereft of all hope and overwhelmed with shame and sorrow, I was driven to that fatal step, from the consequences of which you rescued me!





I had seen Situart many times in the interval from his desertion of me to that sad night—but my pride and indignation would never suffer me to acceptjhis proffered pecuniary assistance;—when, however, I. .saw yo» nearly expiring, without my being able to procure you necessary assistance, my gratitude triumphed over all selfish considerations. I sought him in one of his, well-known haunts, and—you know the consequence;?,"

Julian had listened to this detail with various sensations; that Stuart had, acted with villainous^dupli-. city and cold hearted selfishness could no longer be doubted; but there were evident proofs that Mary's. conduct Lad bees worse than imprudent—and his heart still revolted at the artful manner in which sh« had constantly eluded his inquiries respecting her former intimacy with Stuart. Impressed with these feelings, his manners became more thoughtful and reserved; while Mary, as reflection superceded the resentment she bad at first felt, began to repent that she had been so hasty and unreserved i». her communications to him.





Some hflurs were passed in. mutual constraint and embarassmeat; and, at length, Julian was aboufatq bid her adieu for the night, when, after, a preparatory rap at the door, Crawford (one of Stuart's associates) entered, in a state little qualifying him for the society of a lady.

"So here's the d——J to pay, I find," he exclaimed, staggering up to Mary, who shrank in evident terror and confusion at his approach, "Byland's A/own at the office, and the beaks are after him and Stuart in every direction. I do n«t,know what to do, myself-"

He. stopped, at that: moment only perceiving Julian was present, and them hi a low tone of voice, further added,—

"Hey—what I didn't see—but all's right, I rather suppose?"

Julian, did not comprehend the meaning of this interrogation, for such, from the tone it was delivered in the last sentence, appeared to be; but Mary seemed more enlightened on the, subject, and replied to it in a' whisper—and for some time a conversation, of which Julian. only caught a few disjointed sentences, was carried on. He wouldihaye. left the room, but Mary?s "Bray don't go yet* Carhjton," spoke so impressively ber fear of being left alone with Crawford, that he could not resist her entreaty, though he felt each succeeding moment more astonished at the apparently confidential communication which was passing between them. Crawford was evidently not pleased : and Mary appeared to be remonstrating against something which he wished to do,—and, from the looks which, from time to time, he cast towards Julian, it appeared the latter was, somehow, a party concerned. Julian returned those looks, which appeared to border on impertinence, with a steady, calm look of inquiry, which though not intended to provoke, at least said,—I will not be insulted with impunity—and Mary began to appear as anxious that he should go, as she had before been to detain him; but Julian would neither see her signs nor take her hints,—his pride had taken alarm at Crawford's contemptuous manner, and he was determined, if possible, to understand his meaning. But Crawford still spoke no other language than that of the eyes, while Mary, in evident alarm, whispered,—





"If you have any regard for me, Carleton, you will leave me: you see the state this man is in, and that he is desirous of provoking a quarrel wtih you."

"But why, Mary? why V impetuously demanded Julian, " he must have some motive."

"None, but the petulence and contradictory spirit of intoxication," interrupted Mary, eagerly, " he fancies you despise him, and—"

"He is perfectly right," replied Julian, contemptuously, and glancing a look at the subject of their discussion: but his anger was immediately converted into a strong disposition to laugh, for all Crawford's significant looks were fading into perfect vacuity of feature and gesture, and after two or three preparatory nods, he very deliberately stretched himself on the sopha, and in a few minutes was snoring' loudly.





Mary's cheeks again resumed their colour as she said—

"Thank goodness Sir John Brute is quieted for some time, at least."

"1 know no reason why you should be alarmed," said Julian, somewhat angrily.

Mary appeared confused, but she pleaded her fears lest he (Julian) should get entangled in a broil with one whom she had reasons for wishing to keep upon friendly terms with; and Julian, though far from satisfied, yielded to her request, to leave her to manage her troublosome guest, whom she said she should speedily awaken, and send off in a hackney-coach to his lodgings.





CHAPTER THE TENTH.



"Pleasures are ever in our hands or eyes,

And when in act they cease, in prospect rise;

All spread their charms, but charm not all alike—

On different senses different objects strike:

Hence diff'rent passions more or less inflame,

As strong or weak the organs of the frame:

And hence one master-passion in the breast,

Like Aaron's serpent, swallows up the rest."



Pope.



IT was late when Julian entered the humble apartment which was now his home, and as he gazed around upon its scanty furniture and threadbare accommodations, the desponding thought that in a short time even such a shelter as this might be denied him, and that he was now indebted for it to the equivocal charity of a man, M-ho, in every other action of his life, seemed to have merited only contempt and censure—added to the melancholy which already oppressed him. The books which Stuart's taste had selected for him offered the means. of beguiling an hour or two, for he felt it impossible tosleep—but he soon found it equally impossible to read: his thoughts wandered from the past to the future—his own fate seemed but a secondary consider





ation—it was Mary,the unfortunate, imprudent Mary,who engrossed his cases, and for whose sake he lamented his own destitute situation. Reflection, however, did nothing towards relieving his distress; unfriended and unknown, he knew not how to take a single step towards extricating himself or assisting her who was of more importance than even himself:—and, wearied and harrassed, he at length threw himself on the bed, and sank into an uneasy slumber, from which he was soon roused by a loud noise, as if of contention, at the door of his room.

"I tell ye, ye cannot enter,—there is a youth who has taken possession of that which was thine apartment. Verily, I trust he will not profane it with such «vil doings as thou didst do—making it the temple of Belial, and disturbing the serious ledgers in my habitation with thy vile mummery and profane stage plays."

This was uttered in a loud nasal tone; and Julian, starting up, listened for the answer.

"'Peace mine host of the garter!'" vociferated a voige, in return, " Peace, I say, and—* I will a tale unfold, shall make each particular hair to stand an end like quills upon the fretful porcupine—' I have been"

"I will not hear thy abominations," replied the landlord, " pollute not mine ears with thy wickedness, but get thee out of my house, thou child of Satan."

"So then you deny me free ingress and egress into my own apartment," returned the other: "well then, my own right arm must do me justice—and for the caitiff vile, who has usurped my place"

A crash, which sent in the pannel of the door, prevented Julian's hearing the remainder of this rodomontade. The landlord and landlady, who had now joined the fray, vociferated loudly for help; and the assailant, making his way through the aperture, accosted Julian with—"What—ho! who have we here." The entrance of the landlord with a light enabled Ju1 ian to see the person who thus addressed him:—he was a little dapper fellow, scarcely exceeding four feet ten inches in height, and with a face whose rubicund appearance bore ample testimony of his attachment to the jolly god of wine, to whom, indeed, he appeared to have been very recently paying libations. His somewhat antiquated finery was bespattered with mud, and wet with the rain which, for the last two honDS, had been falling plentifully; and the bundle, which was suspended at the end of a knotted stick over his shoulder, bespoke him recently returned from a jaurney. At sight of Julian (who, not having taken off his clothes, had risen, and was now standing in the middle of the room) he appeared surprised, and, with much courtesy, expressed his fears that he was an unwelcome intruder.





"But the truth is, sir," he continued, " I will a plain, unvarnished tale deliver of all"

"Ye shall not utter your vanities here, I tell ye," exclaimed the landlord, a tall puritanical looking man, whose cadaverous features and slender form were strongly contrasted with his jolly, convivial-looking antagonist—" Are ye not ashamed to have disturbed the peaceful slumbers of the youth. Give me the key which thou tookest away with thee—pay me that which thou owest, and depart in peace and repent thy evil ways."





"Sweet sir, I obey. Be patient for to-night,'' replied the little man, "only for to-night grant me the shelter of your hospitable roof, and to-ntorroW—ye«, to-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow »

"I will settle this, if you please," interrupted Julian, addressing the landlord. "As I appear to have beeu the means of ejecting this gentleman from his apartment, I will share it with him for the remainder of this night, and afterwards you must decide which of w» shall retain it."

The landlord was beginning a solemn sententious reply, which would evidently have ended in a rejection of this accommodating proposal, but Julian, with a manndt at once placid and decisive, put an end to the content, by deliberately wishing the former good night, at the same time advancing to close the door on him. There was something in Julian's commanding manner which admitted hot of appeal, and the discomfited landlord retired, uttering a pious ejaculation for the amendment of his unwelcome guest.

Whether it was a feeling of the same l^ind as tha.t which silenced the landlord, or whether thus left alone, the new comer felt abashed at his own intrusion, did not appear; but certain it was, that the moment the door was closed, the latter seemed to have lost all the undaunted assurance which had distinguished him; and turning to Julian, he, with some confusion, attempted to apologize for his intrusion.

"But the real truth is," he continued, "that I have just returned from a tour: and not having given up this apartment, I naturally supposed myself' secure of ray night's lodging, and, therefore, I neglected to procuije another until it was too late an hour."





Julian, good-humouredly, desired him not to trouble himself to apologize.

"I feel no inclination for sleep," he added, " and, therefore, the bed is quite at your service."

"And I have great need of

*f Tired nature's sweet restorer—balmy sleep!"

said the stranger, with a pompous enunciation, " Yet still he flies the wretch's pillow,

"And tight* on lids unsullied with a tear."

Julian could not restrain a smile at the manner in which this was given; and the stranger, pulling off" his coat and waistcoat, continued,—

"Off, off, vile ladings."

Have you any taste for theatricals?" he abruptly demanded, turning to Julian.

"For theatrical representations?" said Julian in an enquiring tone; "Yes, a decided one. I consider the stage"

"All the world's a stage,

And all the men and women merely players,"

interrupted his companion; "but have you ever brushed the sides,—ever smelt the lamps?"

"I do. not understand you," returned Julian.

"Oh! then, you are not one of us, I see!—replied the little man. " Well, never mind: your turn may come. I was two long years ' booing and booing' and

< wriggling and wriggling' as Sir Pertinax says

Did you ever see in ' Sir Pertinax'?"

"No. I have seen very few plays," said Julian.

"He can't play it at all—can't play it, I assure you," returned the stranger: " he hasn't the true Scotch accent. Now, there's , at the other house, plays it





delightfully; you'd swear he'd lived all his life on lang kail and water brose, he has it so at his tongue's end, that you can't understand above one word out of ten."

rt I don't know how to reconcile your assertion," said Julian, "How can he play it well, if it is not intelligible?"

"Ah! I see you know nothing about it, my dear fellow—absolutely nothing," observed his companion, with a smile of self-conceit. "I don't suppose you even know any of the great stars of our hemisphere."

"You are quite right," returned Julian, "nor do I even perfectly comprehend the terms."

"Fie! what the ignorance is—as Sir Hugh says," replied the stranger, jumping into bed with great nonchalance.

Julian felt no inclination to prolong the conversation; and in a few minutes his companion gave a loud demonstration, that he had not invoked ' tired nature's sweet restorer' in vain.

Julian beguiled the lingering hours till morning, alternately reading and reflecting on the singular events which had thrown him into his present situation. The stranger snored away the night most complacently, and Julian almost envied him the total cessation of care, which he enjoyed.

The bright rays of the morning sun darting through the unclosed shutters upon his face, at length roused his singular guest; and starting up in the bed, with action suited to his words, he exclaimed,—

"Angels and ministers of grace defend me!

Art thou a spirit of light or goblin damned^

Bringcst thou airs from heaven or—'





What is it? I've fergot the rest: by the bye, I've a most villainous trick of forgetting—and yet there's one thing I can never forget, and yet am always trying to do so."

"And what is that V said Julian, seeing that he was expected to make the enquiry.

"My appetite !" returned his companion, with great gravity. "Oh! you cannot conceive what a benefit it would be to me, if I could ward off the attacks of that monster, hunger! but, ho! though I've been glutted with honours in my late campaign—though plaudits have rung in my ears whenever I made my appearance, and compliments have rattled about me as thick as hail-stones, still my insatiable stomach refused to be comforted without more substantial food, and I was obliged to fly the field,

"With all my blushing honours thick about me."

I reflected that ' a living dog is better than a dead lion,'—so, from enacting the Richards, and the Hamlets, and the Othellos, in Mr. 's travelling company, I am compelled to return to my old employment—yes,

"Farewell, a long farewell to all my greatness."

I may truly say

"Othello's occupation's gone."

"And what is your old employment, then ¥" enquired Julian.

"I cannot speak it without a blush;- but,

"Oh! that a noble heart should be so degraded,"

I am," taking hold of his chin with his hand, with a significant action, " I am an operator—vulgo, barber!"

It was impossible to resist a hearty laugh at the comic expression of distress which the aspiring genius threw into his features, as he made this disclosure, but he bore Julian's mirth very patiently; and, when the latter had resumed the command of his risible muscles, observed, as he began. to dress himself,—





"Some are born great; some .achieve greatness; others, again, have greatness thrust upon them;—It is my misfortune, not my fault, that neither of these lots have been mine, yet I have a heart superior to my humble lot, though afterall—

"What's in a name?

That which we call a rose, by any other name

Would smeU.as sweat."



"You seem to be very intimately acquainted with the works of our great bard," observed Julian, who was anxious to compensate, by this compliment, for the involuntary mirth which his companion's comictragic manner and looks had excited.

"Intimate, sir!" exclaimed the stage-struck hero, "he is my most familiar friend, my meat, my. drink, my—my every thing! Oh, Willie! divine Willie! but language is to* weak to express my admiration of the sweet Swan of Avon!"

The speaker was now equipped, and Julian looked, with a mxture of pity and surprise, at the threadbare habiliments and lean gaunt figure, which but too plainly declared that he had indeed suffered from the attacks of the pale fiend, Poverty.

"Do you breakfast at home?" said the stranger, with apparent nonchalance.

Julian replied in the affirmative, adding an invitation to him, to stay and partake his meal.

It was evident this was a very welcome invitation, and it was accepted, without any demur, by the barber who continued to amuse Julian, until a late hour, by his apt quotations, shrewd observations, and humourous anecdotes.





All the reverses of his busy life, the singular characters he had encountered, and the laughable expedients to which he had at times been driven, particularly during his late provincial tour, were brought forward, and poverty seemed divested of half its terrors by the gaiete de cceur with which he bore it.

The ill success of his theatrical attempts he attributed to his unlucky destiny:—a term by which he constantly explained the failure of all his schemes, though it was evidently the case—that they had been formed by imprudence, and prosecuted by folly, or where they had existed a rational chance of success, had been constantly neglected or deserted for some other mad project.

"Well," he exclaimed-, when he had concluded, "destiny rules all, and she has condemned me, 1 suppose, still to grovel on and toil for bread; so I must now go, and see if I can persuade some Samaritan to take me in, and feed, lodge, and clothe me, in return for my services ;—and so farewell. If I should not be successful, will you give a poor d—1 a night's lodging again? fori am really worn down so low, that I question if they would even take me in at the workhouse,

"Where strong compulsion plucks the scraps from pride." Julian replied in the affirmative; and, with a theatrical air, the hero made his exit.





CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.



*' On his dark face a scorching clime

And toil had done the work of time,

Roughened the brow, the temples bared,

And sable hairs with Silver shared;

Yet left—what age alone could tame,

The lip of pride, the eye of flame."



Walter Scott.

The amusing gallantry of his companion had for a while banished from Julian's mind the recollection of his own cares and anxieties, and when left in solitude, they involuntarily rushed into his memory; the example of this gay-hearted operator on chins (as he had called himself) was not totally useless.

/Compared with his, thought Julian, my situation would appear desirable; let me not then, suffer fears (which may never be realized) to damp my exertions, and paralyse my efforts to attain some respectable means of support."

One idea hung heavy on Julian's mind :—Mary, the thoughtless, imprudent—the guilty Mary! what would be her fate i He was convinced that she would never be contented with the frugal pittance which he could hope to share with her. Mary had no domestic habits; she was calculated to shine and dazzle in a crowd, but not to enliven the humble fireside, or soothe the hour of care or suffering; but it was not only these considerations that dwelt heavily on his thoughts:—he felt the guilt, the immorality of the connexion he had formed,—and he reflected, with anguish, on the recollection of Marianne; he had forfeited all claims to her esteem, to her affection; she had, perhaps, learned to despise him, to hold him in abhorrence,—and his cheeks glowed, as he thought of the triumph with which Edward Vincent would hear and recount his degradation. Again his thoughts returned to Mary—there was a mystery in her conduct which augured no good: he could not account for her frequent absence from home, for she had no acquaintances with whom she could spend so many hours; and uneasy and restless, he at length took the way to her lodgings.





Mary was at home, and alone, and she seemed pleased to see him, though a look of uneasiness and perturbation dwelt on her lovely face, and traces of tears were visible on her cheeks.

Julian forgot all his remorse, his anxiety for himself, and his half formed resolutions to break the spell that entwined his fate with hers. He could not see her unhappy without partaking of her sorrow, and he could not rest until she had entrusted him with the cause of her uneasiness.

"What can I tell you, my dear friend," she mournfully observed, " but that my imprudence is equal to my misfortunes; that I am surrounded with embarrassments, from which I know not how to extricate

myself; and that "She burst into a flood of

tears.





Julian could not press her to finish what gave her such pain to utter, but he endeavoured to soothe her, by speaking of his own hopes,—and of his wish and determination to contribute all in his power to her comfort, he was sure she could not doubt.

There was something of impatience almost approaching to contempt in Mary's expression of thankfulness for his intentions, and Julian felt mortified at the quickness with which she passed over the sanguine expectations which he expressed, but he tried to believe that he was mistaken; and, willing to divert her from the sombre thoughts that obscured her striking countenance, related to her the history of his last night's adventure, and the singular character of his guest: repeating, also, some of the most striking and characteristic of the anecdotes he had heard from him.

Mary's heart was ever open to impressions of mirth, and the time slipped insensibly away, until a loud knock at the street-door made her jump hastily from her seat.

"Good heavens! what a figure I am!" she exclaimed, running to the glass and surveying herself," what shall I do ?—and that stupid girl won't have the sense to deny me, I dare say."

"Do you, then, expect company i" said Julian, in surprise.

* No,—oh, no.—nobody particular, certainly not," replied Mary, colouring with confusion, and seeming, for the first time, to recollect how singular her conduct must appear. "I do not expect any body; but one don't like to be caught in dishabille, you know."

Julian saw that this was an evasion, but he had no time for remark;—a step hastily ascended the staircase; Mary fixed her eyes on the door with a look of anxiety,—but it was only the maid servant, who delivered a letter directed to Miss Hamilton, which, she said a footman had just left at the door.





Mary seemed to breathe more freely, though she avoided Julian's looks as much as possible, and, with an air of indifference, she threw the epistle into her work-box, but, in so doing, the coronetted seal unfortunately was displayed; and Julian, with a mixture of surprise and resentment, observed,—

"Your correspondence lies among the nobility, I perceive."

Mary tried to smile, as she replied by the simpJe mouosyllable—Yes; but it was only an effort, and her eye sank beneath Julian's piercing glance.

"I suppose so humble an individual as myself has no right to express surprise at your sudden exaltation V he observed, in a sarcastic tone.

"I do not question your right to make any observations you please," returned Mary, scarcely able to suppress the tears ^ hich rushed into her eyes, " but spare me, Julian—on this subject I can give you no explanation."

"I seek none," returned Julian, with coolness, " I wish not to pry into your secrets."

Mary's tears now flowed unreservedly; but Julian, though his heart ached at her distress, was, nevertheless, so convinced that the cause of her embarrassment was disgraceful to her, that he could not bring himself to attempt to console her; and at length finding she still remained silent, he took his hat and coolly wished her good morning.





"You will return, Julian," said Mary, looking at him with consternation.

"No, Mary," replied Julian, his voice faltering' with agitation, " 1 shall not return. It is evident that my presence will only be a source of embarrassment to you, and to myself of parin and disgrace."

Mary's tears were dried up in a moment, and anger sparkled in her bright eyes.

"Disgrace, sir!" exclaimed Mary, "do you mean to say that"

"I mean not to enter into any explanation, Mary," returned Julian, "unless you act with candour. Tell me who the writer of that letter is,—what the purport of it is,—and"

"I will not submit to be catechised," said Mary, endeavouring to veil, under assumed haughtiness, the confusion she felt.

"Nor I to be made a dupe," returned Julian, angrily. "You will ever have my earnest wishes and prayers for your felicity; but I will candidly tell you, Mary, that I fear you are in the wrong road to secure it."

"1 am the best judge of my own conduct," said Mary; but Julian was already out of hearing, afraid to trust himself longer, lest he should be unable to keep firm to his purpose.

"Mistaken, jnfatuated woman!" he mentally ejaculated, as he hastily bent his steps to his own lodging; "to what a dreadful gulph of ruin and destruction are you hastening!"

The thought was inexpressibly painful; but Julian felt convinced that his remonstrances would avail nothing, and he felt rejoiced that he had had courage to persevere in bidding adieu to her for ever.





Every moment of reflection strengthened this feeling; though the more he thought of Mary's situation, the many amiable qualities she did possess, and the faults by which all those virtues -nj^re obscured, his sorrow and commisseration were increased..

Absorbed in these mournful feelings, he passed unheedingly along the streets, until his attention was arrested by hearing his own name pronounced in an accent of surprise. He looked up and beheld a man whom he immediately recognized as having been th« gardener of Mr. Vincent.

"Master Julian," repeated the man, "how glad I am to see you, sir;—how many times have I said to my wife, that I wondered what could have become of you since you left that stingy old- 4yrant's house. Ah! Mr. Julian, many a wet eye did your going occasion! I've seen that pretty, delicate creature, Miss Marianne, sit for hours in the little arbour, (which you and I made together) and lean her head on her white hand, and sigh, till it would have made your heart ache to hear her, and then Miss Laura would come and try to cheer her spirits; and often, when I've been at work close by, I've stole to the back of it, and I could hear\ them talking of yoti, and once I heard Miss Marianne say,—

'If I could but kpow where he is, and that he is not suffering poverty and want, I should be satisfied ; but till then, Laura, I must be most wretched and miserable.'

I told my wife of it when I got home; and I said, says I,—I wouldn't mind walking twenty miles, if I could find Mr. Julian out, and ease her poor little





"Yon are very good, James," returned Julian, whose cheek glowed with pleasure and delight, at thus hearing of his beloved Marianne," and how are my cousins? and do they still retain their interest for me?"

"Ah! Mr. Julian, I've got a deal to tell you, sir," replied the man, "but thlfr is not a place. Do yon live far from here, sir?"

Julian blushed as he replied in the negative, and invited James to accompany him; but a moment's reflection dissipated the sensation which caused this blush.

Why should I feel ashamed of poverty? he thought, as he walked by the side of James, who seemed to survey him with great curiosity.

They reached the humble habitation, and Julian who knew James was no enemy to a glass of ale, requested his landlady to send for some.

"And now, James," he observed, as soon as they were seated, "tell me all that you have heard that regards me ;—I do not wish to pry into the secrets of Mr. Vincent's family: but what concerns me I shall be glad to hear."

To which, the honest fellow replied,—

"Well, sir, then I will tell you. A very little while after I heard Miss Marianne say what I told you, Master and Master Edward came home with a long story, that they had seen yon sent to goal. John, the footman, told me that they (that is the father and son) seemed quite delighted at what they had to tell, and they looked at one another two or three times—so, at last, the old one said,—

'Edward and I were at Bow Street this morning, and, among the gentry who were brought np for examination, I thought I discovered a face which was known to me.'





I don't know what mistress said, or whether she said any tiling,—but presently he said,—

'I dare say, now, you could not guess who it was;— well, I will save you the trouble. What think you of our high-spirited nephew, Mr. Julian Carleton?"

John said my mistress turned as pale as death, and Miss Marianne looked worse than her, that neither of them could speak: but Miss Laura fired up like lightning, and said,—

'The joke is too serious, sir, though we all know Julian too well, for it to deceive us for a moment.'

'You are very clever, miss,' said master, 'but what I have said is truth. I saw him, myself, committed to prison; the fittest place for such vagabonds.'

'Julian a vagabond!' said Miss Laura, crying with passion; but poor Miss Marianne fell, like a dead thing, on the floor, and her mother hung over her, screaming, and wringing her hands;—there was such an outcry! Miss Laura raved like a mad thing; and master scolded; and Mr. Edward he bounced about, muttering words that John didn't quite understand, but, however, he knew that they was meant against you; but, however, to make short of my story, poor Miss Marianne was carried to bed, and a doctor sent for: and he said that he wouldn't answer for her life if something wasn't done to relieve her mind. So master went up to her bedside, and he told her that she needn't alarm herself, for that you, sir, was only brought up for kicking up a row at the playhouse, and was not in prison.

Poor thing! she could hardly be brought to believe





it; but Iter father said he would take his oath that.it was true: and he tcld her a long rigmarole about your being in a situation that would support you very well, if you behave yourself; and then she took comfort, and began to mend, but it was a long time before she got. well, and master was crosser to her than ever; so at last, mistress persuaded him to let her go on a visit to her aunt, down in the country, and that brought her quite round, though she always looks so melancholy, it would make you sorry to see her; but what I wanted most to tell you, Mr. Julian,.is, that on one day, a post shay drove up to the door, and, as John was gone to town, on an errand, I opened the door, and a gentleman, that looked as if he came from foreign parts, (for his face was as brown as a berry) asked for Mr. Vincent; I showed him into the front parlour, and I asked him what name I should tell master, and he said,

'Tell Mr. Vincent, Mr. Carleton wishes to see him.'

'Carleton, Carleton,' says I to myself, as I went along the passage, 'why that's young Mr. Julian's name. 1 suppose its some relation come from abroad.'

So I went into master's little back room, (where he was writing,) and told him that Mr. Carleton wanted him.

* Mr. Carleton!' he thundered out. 'What Mr. Carleton?' staring at me.

'I don't know, sir,' says 1,1 but he looks like a gentleman from foreign parts.'

He turned as white as a sheet in a moment, and his teeth chattered in his head.





* What did he say, James ?—Who did he ask for ?— Did you tell him I was at home V

'Yes, sir; I had no orders,' says I, 'and when he he asked for you'

* Fool! dolt! idiot !'—he cried out; and then recollecting himself, he said,—

* Go to him, with my compliments, and tell him that I am very particularly engaged at present, but will come to him as soon as I am at liberty.

Well, I went with the message, and the gentleman seemed quite struck, and I heard him say,—

'This is a curious reception!" and then turning to me, he said,—

'Is Julian Carleton at home?'

'At home, sir V says I, for I was quite startled like at his manner.

'Yes, at home, sir! don't you understand me V says he, raising his voice.

* Mr. Julian don't live here, sir,' says I.

'Not live here!' he replied, * where does he live ?— Is not this Mr. Vincent's house V

'Yes, sir,' says I, * but Mr. Julian has gone away this long time.'

'Gone away!—what does the fellow mean?' said the gentleman,' but I beg pardon, my good friend; I am so impatient to know—How long will your master be did you say?

'Only a few minutes, sir,' said I, glad to get out of the parlour, for his eyes seemed to strike fire, and he looked as if he could eat me; but, however, he had a kind heart after all, for he slipped a crown piece into my hand, as I went out, and told me to go and drink his health, and so I did,and willagain; so here's to him, Mr. Julian," and James filled up his glass, and drank Mr. Carleton's health with great cordiality.





Julian's anxiety and impatience were raised to the highest pitch, but he knew well that he could not be more anxious to obtain information, than the garrulous James was to impart all he had learned; and he, therefore, restrained himself from asking any questions merely saying,—

"My father had a brother, who, through some domestic dissentions, went abroad, I believe to India, some years since* but I always understood he was dead."

"You may take your oath that this was the man," replied James, " but I hav'n't told you all yet. Well, tha gentleman walked about the room,and still master did not come; he had locked himself in his little room, 1 suppose to get time to consider what he should say ^ at last, the parlour bell rung, as if it would come down. I was almost afraid to answer it; but, at last, I went in.

* Tell Mr. Vincent I must see him instantly!' exclaimed Mr, Carleton,' I cannot submit to have my feelings tortured in this manner.'

I bowed—but I knew better than to carry master such a message; so I only said through the keyhole, for he wouldn't open the door of the little room,-—

'The gentleman says that he must see you instantly, sir.'

• I'm a coming—I'm a coming, James,' said he^ opening the door, and peeping out.

I wish you had but have seen him, Mr. Julian, you would have had your revenge of him, for all his illtreatment, for he shook and trembled like a leaf, but, at last, summoning up all his courage, he gare a loud hem, and saying, in a voice loud enough to be heard in the parlour,





'Mr. Carleton, Mr. Carleton, it cannot be,—you must be mistaken, it cannot be my friend Mr. Carleton.'

You may be sure I stared, but I did'nt say a word, and into the parlour he marched.

I just heard him say, 'Good God! can it be possible,' and then the door was shut, and I could not hear any more, but bye-and-bye the storm began, I heard the gentleman's voice rising, and master persuading and coaxing, so mild and so gentle.

I can't remember half that the gentleman said, because he spoke so fast and in such a passion, but I know he called my master a villain, and then he cried out, ' Tell me but where the boy is, and I'll forgive every thing,' So at last my mistress heard the noise, and she came to me to the hall, and asked me what was the matter, and when I told her she turned as white as master had done.

So, thinks I, there has been some fine roguish tricks among you, but she never said a word, but away she went trembling and shaking up to her room again.

Well, in a minute after she was gone, I heard the gentleman open the parlour door. 'Why don't you bring forward your family and your servants to prove all this? let me see them immediately.'

The bell was rung, and in I went. 'Tell your mistress and Mr. Edward to come here.'

'Stop' said the gentleman, Ml want to ask you « few questions.'





Lord, how I did tremble! but I thought, thinks I5 I'll tell the truth,—they can't hang me for that.

* How long have you lived with Mr. Vincent V says the gentleman.

1 told him, Going on for five years.

'Then you know Julian Carleton well?'

'Yes, sir,'

'And what did you know of his conduct?' says he.

I told him that you seemed to be a very civil goodhearted young gentleman, and I never saw any harm of you.:

Master grinded his teeth at me.

'Did you not know that he had formed a connexion with thieves, had attempted to rob his uncle, and seduce his cousin V said the gentleman.

'No, indeed, sir,' said I.

'Then why did he leave this house?' said he, fixing bis eyes as if he'd look me through.

I told him I did not know, I had heard that Master Edward and him had a quarrel, but that was all I knew about it.

'This fellow, I suppose, is one of his drunken companions,' said master, , I did not suspect that I had a servant capable of such bare-faced falsehoods. He knows that every word he has uttered is a lie.'

'No, sir, I scorns a lie as much as you do,' says I, i and as to drunkenness, I like a pot of ale as well as anybody, but I never drinks at no one's expense, and as to Master Julian'— .

• We don't want any more of your impertinence,' says master, interrupting me, 'so get you out of the





'No, no,' cried the gentleman, speaking boldly, * what was you going to say of Julian V

'Why, sir, that I don't think he knew what the taste of ale was, for I am sure he got none in the house, and he scarcely ever went out, and when he did, he was kept too bare to treat himself or anybody else. To speak the truth, and shame the devil,' says I, • I never changed a word with him except when he came to help me a bit in the garden, and then he was as good-humoured and as gentle as a lamb, though he'd got a spirit too and could take his own part, but a worm will turn if it's trod upon, and I believe if all was to be told, he'd enough to rouse him.'

* Have you any more such witnesses?' said the gentleman, looking at master.

"And will you take the testimony of a fellow like this?" cried master,

• Until it is contradicted by something more than your bare word,' said the gentleman. So as I was going out of the room, he called me back, and he pulled out his purse, and, says he—

'Here, my good fellow, I dare say Mr. Vincent will find out that he has no farther occasion for your ser'vices, so here's something to support you till you get another place.'

'1 took it in course, Mr. Julian, but when I went to thank him, be said so quick and passionate-like, 'There, there, go away, I do not want thanks; only let it be an encouragement to you always to speak the truth when you're called upon. So I made the best of my way out without looking at the bank-note that he'd put in my hand, and if you'll believe me, I was struck all of a heap when I got into the hall and thought of examining it, to find it was a ten-pound one.





He must be as rich as a Jew, you know, Mr. Julian, to give away ten pounds just for nothing, as one may say,—but to go on with my story.

After I went out of the parlour, I heard them go at it again, tooth and nail, as the saying is. Master plucked up a bit of spirit, and I heard him say, He would'nt be insulted in his own house. So the strange gentleman said,—

'Your house! how have you become the owner of such a house, while the child of your sister is perhaps wandering without a roof to shelter him V

Mistress now came down stairs again, and I saw she had been crying, and she said,—

'Is not the gentleman gone yet, James V So I said, 'No, Ma'am,' and just at that moment we heard master cry out, 'O Lord ! help, help!' So we both ran into the parlour, and the gentleman, that is, Mr. Carleton, was holding master by the collar, and shaking him just as a bull-dog would shake a little cowardly cur.

Mistress screamed out, and he let go in a minute.

'You are indebted to your wife's presence,' said he to master, ' or I would shake your worthless soul from out your body, if you still persist in refusing to give me some clue to discover the poor boy to whom you have been such a worthless guardian; but you, Madam, will, I hope, be more considerate, and satisfy my anxiety.'

Master sat down in a chair trembling and blowing, and looking as if he'd been under Jack Ketch's hands, and just got a reprieve; and mistress began to cryagain, and look at her husband to know what she should say.





* I have only one simple question to put to you, Madam,' said Mr. Carleton. 'Can you tell me how or where I can find Julian Carleton V

'I cannot indeed, sir/ cried my mistress, ' he left us clandestinely, and I have never heard of him since.'

'And why did he leave you clandestinely,' said the gentleman, with fury in his eyes.

'I do not know, sir, he was very proud and highspirited, and would not bear the slightest reproof from his uncle—and—and'—Mistress stammered and cried so, that Mr. Carleton seemed to pity her, and he said,

'I will not ask you any more questions, my good woman. This is a strange contradiction to your account of the lad's low habits and manners sir, but even had he been all you represent, it was your duty to have attempted to reclaim him; but T am wasting time on such a worthless being: you shall hear from me in another way,' and he darted out of the room, and into the chaise, like a shot out of a gun.

All master's courage came back again in a moment; he raved, and stormed, and swore like a madman, and vowed he'd make Mr. Carleton pay handsomely for his behaviour; so, at last, he fixed his eye upon me, and recollected what I had done: so up he came, doubling his fist in my face, and abusing me for a lying, treacherous villain; but 1 told him to keep off', for if he struck me, 1 should certainly try which was the best man of the two.

Mistress cried out to me to get out of his way, till





his passion was over: but I wouldn't stir a step, for I knew I was in the right.

* Get out of my house, you rascal!' says he, putting up his foot, as if he'd kick me.

'Pay me my wages, and I'll go,' says I, * for 1 dont wish to stay with you, but I wont be turned out like a dog.'

So to make short of my story, I went away the very same night; but he tried to coax me over before I went, and wanted me to promise that I wouldn't mention any thing of what I'd heard to nobody.

I told him I wasn't given to tattling, nor fending and proving, but if I ever met with Mr. Julian, I should certainly tell him: because one good turn deserves another, and the young gentleman had always been very civil and obliging to me,—and when I was sick, and hardly able to work, had laboured many a good hour for me in the garden. The old man looked as black as thunder, but he did not say a word, but paid me my wages, and off I came."

"Then neither Marianne nor Laura were present when this occurred V said Julian, who had heard this relation with surprise, not unmingled with hope and expectation.

"Oh, no: they were both away," returned James; "but about a month or two after, they came home; I had got a place then at Mr. Stevens, at the Grange: so, I used to see them walking sometimes, and they always spoke to me very kindly; and one day I took courage, and asked them if ever they'd heard any thing of Mr. Julian yet.

Miss Marianne turned as pale as death, and couldn't speak a word, but her sister said,—





i



'No, James, we have not. I wish we could hear of him.'

'I heard as how his uncle had advertised him, Miss/ says I.

'Advertised him! What, my father? oh no, James; I'm sure that's a mistake,' said Miss Laura, again. .

'No, I dont mean Mr. Vincent, Miss,' said I, * his other uncle, Mr. Carleton: at least, I suppose it was his uncle, that came and kicked up that row with master when you were in the country.'

Lord bless you, Mr. Julian, they had not heard a word of it, and didn't know there was such a person, living, as Mr. Carleton; so I told them all about it, just as I've told you, and they were in such a taking J Poor Miss Marianne cried and sobbed, and Miss Laura almost stamped with passion and impatience, to think that she couldn't find you out, and tell you all about it; nor they did not know where to look for Mr. Carleton either, poor things!

'If we could but find him out and write to him,' said Miss Laura,' and tell him that all was false that had been said of poor Julian.'

'And yet we must so expose my father,' said Miss Marianne, crying bitterly.

, 'Then he should not deserve it!' cried her sister.

'Well, at last, they were obliged to go, and I didn't see them again for a long time, and then they were both very sorrowful, and Miss Laura told me, they had seen you, but you were in such company they could not speak to you; and Miss Marianne cried all the while Miss Laura was talking of you, and saying that she was afraid you had got connected with people that





-would be your ruin, at last. And then she told me that she had heard Mr. Carleton was gone abroad again; and she was afraid you would never be the better for his fortune: for he had said he would leave it all to -some charities.

Julian's expressive countenance strongly betrayed his emotions at the latter part of James' information; but he repressed their expression, and merely asked his talkative, but well meaning companion, how long it was since he had seen the young ladies.

James replied that he had seen -them about a month before, but he could not speak to them, for there was an elderly gentleman with them.

"And they do say, in the neighbourhood, Mr. Julian—but, perhaps, I ought not to tell you, for it will only vex you, and make you uneasy, and do no good neither."

Julian's anxiety was, of course, increased by this observation; and he entreated James not to keep him in suspense, let the subject be what it would.

"Well, then, sir, it is lalked all over the neighbourhood, that the elderly gentleman is courting Miss Marianne, but the poor thing can't bear the sight of him: and they say her father behaves most cruel to her, and has threatened to turn her out of doors if she refuses to marry the old man, who has got heaps of money, and can keep her a carriage and servants, and a fine house, and every thing! But what is all the riches in the world, compared to true love? as I said to my wife,—' Poor Miss Marianne,' says I,' she'd be happier in a cottage, with Mr. Julian, living upon bread and water, than with an old fellow that she can't like, even if he were to give her gold and diamonds to eat."





The glow, that surprise and contending passions (at hearing the friendly James' recital) had kindled in Julian's cheek, faded into the most deadly paleness, at this conclusion.

Marianne the wife of another!—Marianne sacrificed to the withering embrace of an aged dotard—to whom her youth—her innocent gaiety—her very loveliness would but render her an object of suspicion. The thought was insupportable! and Julian's brain seemed dizzy, as, even at a distance, he contemplated the possibility of such an event.

He pressed his hands to his forehead, while his eyes were fixed on James with a look of wildness, which completely terrified the honest gardener.

"Dont, pray dont take on so, Mr. Julian," he exclaimed, " after all, it may never happen. They can't force any body to marry against their will in England; and if Miss Marianne's heart is as true to you as your's is to her, all the coaxing and persuading in the world wont get her consent to have another.

"But she thinks me unworthy, depraved—she knows not how ardently my heart is devoted to her," said Julian; '- I never even told her that I loved her other than 1 loved her sister Laura. Yet, she must have seen and felt that I adored her!—but what avails the love of a forlorn outcast? I have no wealth—no splendid house to offer her. How could I ask her to renounce the luxuries and splendour of an alliance with the object of her parent's choice, to share my poverty and wretchedness."





"If you could but find out that rich Mr. Carleton," said James, half crying at Julian's passionate appeal, "I know if he could but see you, Mr. Julian, it would be all right. You would get his money, and old master would be glad to give you Miss Marianne, to make all straight between you; for it's as plain as the nose on my face, that he's been cheating you through thick and thin of the money this Mr. Carleton had sent for your education, and so forth."

Julian paid but little attention to this exordium: his whole thoughts were occupied with the image of Marianne: he fancied her lovely blue eyes swimming in tears, and suing to him for protection from her hated lot. Yet perhaps she would despise me—would spurn me with contempt, even should fortune enable me to offer her the devotion of a heart which as long as it beats with life will be devoted to her.

"I wonder, Mr. Julian," resumed James, who had bees in vain looking earnestly in Julian's face for a reply to his remarks,—" I wonder if it would be of any use if you were to go to old Vincent, and tell him that you have heard of Mr. Carleton's arrival from India, and try and get out of him if he knows where he is now; and perhaps, too, you might hear something of Miss Marianne, or you might get to see her: there's no knowing."

Julian's heart beat tumultuously at the thoughts of seeing Marianne, but his spirit revolted from the idea of an interview with his tyrannic and insolent uncle.

"I have sworn never to enter his house until I have attained sufficient independence to prevent a possibility of the motives of my visit being suspected to arise from mercenary views," exclaimed Julian.





James did not appear quite to comprehend tins reasoning, but he seemed disappointed, and after a few moments' reflection, he observed,

"Well, Mr. Julian, I wout pretend to advise you that know so much better than me; but you might, you know, contrive to see Mr. Vincent without going to the house. He is in town, you know, almost every day, and it could do no harm, you know, if it does no good."

Julian could not confute this decisive argument, and at length James, by perseverance, wrung from him a promise that he would, in the course of a few days, endeavour to see Mr. Vincent.

"I am afraid I sha'n't be able to come to town again soon," observed James, " for Mr. Stevens, that I live with now, is a very religious man, and he wont take any excuse for our being away from church of a Sunday, and I'm out to-day upon leave because I've got a brother going to sea, and 1 wanted to see him first, but when I got to the India House, I found he'd been gone ever since the day before yesterday; but if you wouldn't mind taking a walk over to Highgate, and just rest yourself at my little place, I should like dearly to know how you came on; a nd perhaps," he added in a lower tone, "you might catch a look at Miss Marianne and her sister, for they always go by my door to church of a Sunday morning."

Julian could not hesitate to accept an invitation given from so kind a motive, even had there not been this additional inducement to visit James' humble dwelling; and after drinking another glass of ale to the success of his (Julian's) intended appeal to his uncle, the friendly gardener departed.





CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.



"Oh Memory! thou soul of joy and pain!

Thou actor of our passions o'er again!

Why dost thou aggravate the wretch's woe?

Why add continuous smart to every blow ?—

Few are my joys—alas! how soon forgot!

On that kind quarter thou invadest me not:

While sharp and numberless my sorrows fall,

Yet thou repeat'st and multipliest them all."



Savage.

FOR some time after James' departure, Julian's mind was too much agitated with the information he had received, to be able to reflect calmly, or form any deliberate plans for the future. One painful idea predominated over every other: Marianne—the lovely timid, innocent Marianne! pledging her faith at the altar, to one whom it was impossible she could ever love.

"The disparity of his years," thought Julian, not without some sort of satisfaction, "will be a sufficient bar to her ever transferring to him the affection which, I feel convinced was mine; and, in the midst of splendour and indulgence, she will be miserable. Yes, i





Marianne, it is not me alone will suffer, if yon are seduced or terrified into this hateful alliance."

The thought, too, of Laura—her firm mind and high spirit would, he knew, if it were her case, enable her to resist alike threats or cajolements, to induce her to act contrary to her judgment or feelings.

"Would that she could instil into her sister's mind some portion of what her father used to denominate obstinacy," exclaimed Julian: "how often have 1 in secret applauded the courageous girl, who, though tears would force themselves into her eyes at her father's injustice, would still firmly maintain her ground; while Marianne's tears and tremblings, her father's violence, and her mother's entreaties, were all insufficient to shake her adherence to what she knew to be right and just; and yet so strange and inconsistent is the human heart, one imploring helpless look of Marianne's lovely eyes made more impression on me than all Laura's heroism."

Oh if this proposed marriage is indeed contrary to her inclinations, as it is scarcely possible for me to doubt, how will my Marianne suffer from the tyrannical temper of her father—and that overbearing fellow* Edward, too, she will have to bear his insults and petty provocations."

Julian's passion mounted to his cheek as he recollected the indignities to which he had been exposed, though never tamely submitted to, from the unfeeling narrow-minded Edward Vincent. How often, when quite a child, had he become the champion of Marianne against the oppressive injustice of her brother! Now she would have no one to defend her but the intrepid Laura, and she, poor girl, with all her spirit,





would be very unequal to contend with Edward's brutality, when seconded, as he undoubtedly is in this case, and indeed most others, by his father."

Absorbed in these melancholy reflections, Julian had scarcely recollected his own situation, or the events of the morning which had given him so much pain; but at last the remembrance of Mary, her errors, her imprudence, and the probable fate that awaited her, rushed into his mind, and while he rejoiced that he had broken the spell which threatened to destroy every prospect of his advancement, while it debased his mind, and would undoubtedly have gradually undermined his principles, he still mourned over the wreck of a being whose prospects had once indicated so different a fate, and who, in the midst of all her faults and follies, still possessed the germs of good and great qualities, which, iu a more genial clime, would have exalted their possessor above her sex in general, as much as her errors now sunk her beneath the estimable part of them. And what was he to whose sinister arts—to whose selfish passion, she owed her ruin i The thought was inexpressibly painful, but Julian could not conceal from himself that Stuart was a villain: to him (Julian) he had been friendly, generous, and disinterested, but there was no other part of his conduct which offered one redeeming trait to balance the blackness, the meaness and hypocrisy of his actions.

Julian's reflections were interrupted by the entrance of his landlady: who, apparently thinking that there was something strange in her lodger's remaining so long quiet in his room, came to know if he didn't want any thing.





Julian started from his reverie.

"What is the hour V he demanded.

"Past five, sir. I was thinking that you would want some dinner, and if you like a steak or a chop or any thing of that sort, 1 can soon step and fetch it for you, and I've got a nice clear fire."

For the first time, Julian looked attentively at the speaker, whose particularly civil manners struck him as something uncommon. Her voice and looks seemed familiar to his ear, though he could not recal where he had seen her; but after civilly declining her offer, alledging that he had no inclination, but would be glad of a cup of tea when she made her's, she was about to leave the room, when Julian, looking earnestly at her, said,—

"Excuse me, but I cannot help thinking that I have not only seen, but been well acquainted with you somewhere, yet I cannot recal where. Did you ever know any one of the name of Carleton?"

The woman burst into tears.

"Oh, yes! I did know them indeed, and I know you too, the dear child that I nursed and loved as if you were my own; 1 thought the moment I saw you, that you had the very look and features of my dear mistress, yet I was not willing to believe that you could be brought down so low as to take shelter in this poor place."

Julian could scarcely suppress the tears which would have shamed his manhood at this address.

"My kind nurse," he exclaimed, taking her hand, "how ungrateful must my memory be, which could not retain the impression Qf features so beloved and esteemed; but you are altered too as well as me," he continued, seating himself by her side, and I had always been led to believe you were settled in America: .this must plead my excuse for not recognizing you immediately, though the moment I heard you speak I was convinced the tones of your voice were familiar to my ear."





"Ah! I am altered too, my dear child," returned the affectionate nurse, "and I have seen bitter sorrow as well as yourself, though I was fitter to bear it than you. Oh, my poor mistress! little did she think, when she used to say to me,—' Susan, I hope my child will live to repay all your fondness and care, and make your old days as happy as you have strove to make me!' little did either she or I think in what circumstances that dear boy and I should meet, for the first time, after such a long parting."

Susan's tears flowed faster than ever, but Julian tried to divert her attention from the subject which caused them, by enquiring what had induced her to return from America, where he thought she had been happily settled.

"Ah! my dear child!" while a glow of resentment kindled in her cheek, " ' all is not gold that glitters,' a thousand and a thousand times did I repent that I left my own native country! My husband was a sober, industrious man, and for the first two or three months I was tolerably happy, though every thing seemed strange and uncomfortable like about me; but I thought to myself that I should get used to it in time, and though I didn't like many of Thomas's ways, and his little mean tricks to save or to get money, yet I considered they all have their faults, one way or other, and I ought to be thankful he's not a drunkard, a«I many of bis neighbours are, nor a spendthrift, and if he is too near and saving now, why he'll be better when we get forwarder in the world, but to my sorrow, I soon found the more he got the more he wanted; and then he was never contented,—work early and late, live as frugal and as hard as ever I would, still he grumbled and pinched more and more, till flesh and blood could bear it no longer: so at last I told him plainly that I had not come to a foreign land to be starved to death. He showed himself then for a brute, as he is; and from that time, if I ventured to grumble, blows and oaths were all that I got. At last some preachers came among us, and he turned religious, and I was in hopes that would make him behave better to me, but • what's bred in the bone will never go out of the flesh,' as the old saying is: he left off beating me to be sure, because he would have got turned out of his society, as he calls it, if he'd been known to do so; but there's a thousand ways for a husband to make a woman's life miserable, without lifting his hand against her.





Well, at last, as if to punish him for his miserly ways, our wooden house was struck with lightning and burnt down to the ground, and all our crops with it. They made a collection among them—that is, the society—but they were very poor themselves, and the most they could raise was enough to send us home again to our friends here in London.

My brother put us into this house and gave us some furniture, and got my husband into a place that brings him in a hundred a year, and we could live happy enough but for his wretched temper, and his meanness; and to add to it, because he can't make me as gloomy and miserable as himself, he takes it in his head to be jealous of every body that speaks or looks at me, and then he fills the house with his canting hypocritical set, and is always trying to persuade me that I am a miserable sinner, and in the road to destruction, though I'm sure I never harmed man, woman, or child, but have always done my duty by every body; while he thinks himself a saint, and makes sure of going to heaven, though he's—But I wont say any more about him, except that I dont think he's any more sure of going to heaven than I am."





Julian could scarcely refrain from smiling at this conclusion of Susan's pitiful story, but he restrained the impulse, and expressed his sorrow that she had been so unfortunate in her choice of a companion.

"You said you should like a cup of tea, my dear child, said Susan, recollecting herself; "if you will come down stairs, we will have it comfortably together ^ for my tyrant does not come home till seven o'clock."

Julian would willingly have declined this kindness from which his pride revolted,—not that he disdained the society of the friend of his early years, but from the character she had given of her husband, he felt unwilling to come in contact with him, or be subject to the suspicions which it was not improbable the knowledge of his (Julian's) destitute situation might create in the breast of so narrow-minded a being.

Susan, however, would not hear a denial, and he ao <*>rdingly followed her to the clean little apartment which she reserved for her own use, where she had still remaining some testimonials of her dear mistress' (as she still called the deceased Mrs. Carleton) kindness and liberality,—the silver tea-spoons had been her gift, and the tea-pot rug, which she brought out from among her other treasures, had been the work of her own dear hands, and she descanted upon her good qualities, and the love she had shewn for her child, until Julian's tears flowed for the loss of his tender and gentle mother as freshly as they had done when he had followed her to her premature grave.





Susan recollected herself;—she felt that she was very wrong, she said, to indulge grief for one who was now an angel in heaven, and far happier than any thing on earth could make her; and she began to bustle about to get the tea ready, and drive, as she said, uneasy thoughts out of both their heads.

The tea was protracted so long by Susan's numerous enquiries and animadversions on Mr. Vincent's cruelty, that the hour for her husband's return arrived unmarked either by her or Julian. They were still deeply interested in conversation, when the door was suddenly opened, and the long lean face of the unamiablc spouse of the warm-hearted Susan appeared.

She started up in evident alarm.

"This is my young master, Thomas; the child of Mrs. Carleton, who was so kind and good a mistress to me."

"Good!" returned the fanatic, bending his beetle brows into a still deeper scowl, " you know not what you are talking of, woman. We are all vile, miserable sinners—the very best of us poor crawling worms! and dare you apply the word good to a creature of dust and ashes?"

"My mistress was a good woman !" returned Susan, half angry and half frightened at the portentious signs of anger which she beheld in her husband's looks, and his side glances at the tea equipage which was still standing, and which Susan, scarcely knowing what she was about, began hastily to remove.





"Silence, woman!" vociferated the husband, "and . attend to your duty, instead of uttering folly."

"Will you have some tea V' enquired the alarmed wife in a humble tone.

"Tea! no; how do you think I am to afford such luxuries? No, no; a glass of wholesome spring water will refresh me sufficiently. Tea is for the rich and the idle, who think more of pampering their poor idle bodies, than taking t are of their blessed souls."

Susan glanced a look at Julian, which seemed to say,—I told you how it is; and the latter, disgusted with the canting hypocrisy of the unfeeling old man, arose to go, at the same time, unobserved by Susan, placing half a crown on the table at which her husband was sitting, and whose eyes were instantly caught by the precious metal.

"Wont you please to sit a bit longer, sir?" he whined out, losing all the ferocity of his manner, as he slid the money into his pocket.

Susan turned round in astonishment; and Julian, civilly declining the offer, retreated to his own room, from whence he soon heard the voices of his host and and hostess in loud contention.

Poor Susan! he thought to himself, you are indeed ill matched with such a cold unfeeling being.

The storm rose higher and higher, and Julian, feeling himself uncomfortable at even hearing at a distance a contention of which he was the probable cause, determined to leave the house for a short time, until peace was restored.

He was descending the stairs, when a loud scream reached his ear, and attending only to the impulse of the moment, he rushed into the little parlour, where he beheld the object of his anxiety prostrate on the floor, and her pious husband holding her down with fury in his eyes and attitude.





Without a moment's delay, Julian flew at the hoary ruffian, who did not appear to have noticed his entrance, and seizing him by the collar, dragged htm from the object of his unmanly attack.

Exasperated at being thus exposed, (for it appeared he thought that Julian had gone out instead of returning to his own apartment) the old man now transferred all his rage to the champion of poor Susan—he loaded him with abuse and accusing him of being a paramour of his wife's, whom he designated by the most opprobrious epithet, though the force of habit so far prevailed that he interlarded his declamation with texts of scripture, which he quoted as declaratory of the vengeance which would fall upon their guilty heads.

Provoked beyond all endurance by his scandalous aspersions, Julian now recriminated, with the utmost severity, on the false and malicious husband, while Susan, pale and silent, sat crying bitterly, without attempting to defend herself from a change which she felt so utterly groundless.

The old man put his hand to his head. He had received a blow in the struggle, though Julian was utterly unconscious how, but the blood was streaming from it; and, as if struck with some sudden thoughts he immediately rushed out of the house, darting a malignant glance at Julian, and then at his wife.





"Where can he be gone?" exclaimed Susan, looking, in astonishment, at her defender.

Julian replied that it could be of little consequence where such a worthless being was gone; and Susan, with apparent affright, observed that she was sure that he had got some plan in his head, or he would never have left them together.

Julian would have rallied her on her fears, but they were too forcible, and grounded on too thorough a knowledge of ber husband's disposition, to be easily pacified."

"I know he means miscLief," she replied, to all Julian's arguments, "I am sure of it. Do go, my dear child, and leave me to face him by myself. I am more fearful on your account than any thing else."

Though disdaining the idea of running out of the way for such a contemptible being, Julian, to quiet his maternal friend's fears, at length consented to retire to his own room: and for nearly an hour, the uninterrupted silence that prevailed assured him that his ungracious host had not returned.

At last he heard the sound of his host's voice and that of Susan raised in loud and apparently tearful remonstrance, while the sound of heavy footsteps ascending the stairs, increased Julian's surprise at this unexpected renewal of a contest, which, he would have expected, the hypocritical husband would have been anxious to conceal.

The steps approached—Julian's room door was thrown open, and two men (jvhose appearance sufficiently proclaimed their avocation) advanced, and accosted him as their prisoner.





Julian arose in surprise.

"Prisoner!" he repeated, " for what? what hare I done ?—You must be mistaken in the person."

"No, no," exclaimed the vindictive landlord, stepping forward, "there is no mistake; it is you they want. I will see whether 1 am to be assaulted and nearly killed in my own apartment, by a vile adulteress and her*"

"Wretch !" interrupted the indignant Julian, " cease your infamous calumnies. You are unworthy of the name of husband to the unfortunate woman, whom I rescued from your violence"

"Come, come, young man: we dont want to listen to all this flummery," interrupted one of the police officers, " you must make your story good in another place; so put on your hat, and come along. We shall see whether your fine words or the old man's broken head will go the farthest."

Julian cast a look of disdain at the speaker, and the other man observing it, exclaimed,—

"None of your black looks, if you please; but come along at once, or we shall make you go, in a way you wont like, young fellow."

Convinced that resistance would be folly, Julian yielded silently to his fate, and followed the myrmidons of the law down stairs: but his resolution almost deserted him, when, glancing his eye into the little parlour as he passed, he beheld Susan lying pale and apparently senseless in the arms of a female, who, it appeared, had accidentally discovered her situation.

"See," exclaimed the hypocritical husband, "see what her fears for the partner of her crime has done I she could see her husband felled to the earth without





shedding a tear,—but "￼

Julian hurried away, lest his indignation should again surmount his reason; and one of the men, observing that it was pretty plain to he seen how the eat jumped, seized Julian roughly by the arm, and dragged him on towards the office.

Exasperated at the manner in which he was»treated, and at the gaping conjectures of the idlers, who, recognizing the officers, followed to stare and wonder what such a smart young man could have done to get himself intoa scrape, Julian endeavoured to shake off the grasp with which-he was held—but this only increased the violence of the unfeeling beings who had him in charge;—the other instantly seized him by the collar, and in this disgraceful manner, with the staff of office frequently lifted over his head to enforce obedience, the irritated Julian was forced into the presence of the magistrate, and his canting accuser proceeded to detail his grievances. ,

Julian heard him, with mingled indignation and astonishment, relate a long tale of his wife's extravagance and misconduct, which, he said, had brought him to the verge of ruin; and she had now, he said, arrived at the utmost pitch of wickedness and depravity, by introducing the yoiing man at the bar into his house, and setting him onio ill-treat and abuse him.

"I found them}»your worship," he continued, " this very evening feasting together at my expence, for the youth hath no visible and honest means of getting a livelihood, and when I gently remonstrated with them upon their transgressions, they replied with buffetings and abuse. The prisoner even threatened my life, and I verily believe, that if he is not prevented by the strong arm of justice, I shall fall a sacrifice to their wickedness."





The magistrate bent a stern look on Julian, who, with mingled surprise and resentment, had listened to this hypocritical detail.

"What have you to say, young man, in reply to this?" be demanded, in a voice as repulsive as his looks.

Julian's proud heart swelled at the injustice with which he considered himself treated; and, in a haughty tone, he replied,—

"I have only to say, sir, that the whole of that man's tale is false. I am incapable of acting as he has represented."

"Who are you, sir? and what is your occupation?" demanded the magistrate.

"My name is Julian Carleton: and my occupation -" he blushed deeply, and then added, "At

present I have none, but am in search of some employment or situation."

"Julian Carleton!—I have heard that name before, and I think I have seen you here before—am 1 right?"

"You certainly have, sir," replied Julian, not without some confusion.

"I thought so," returned the magistrate, looking still more austere, "and pray how» are you living at the present moment t for, if 1 recollect right, you had contrived to get yourself discarded by your friends, the last time you made your appearance here."

"Excuse me, sir, / discarded those who called themselves my friends, but who never acted as such."

"I am afraid you never took any pains to deserve their friendship," observed the magistrate, " but you have not answered my question :—how are you supporting yourself?"





"I do not see that that has any thing to do with the present question," returned Julian.

The magistrate shook his head.

"I am sorry, young man, to see you in this situation, but it is too evident that this man's accusation against you is founded in truth. I must, therefore, require you to find good and sufficient security, that you keep the peace towards him."

Julian bowed proudly without uttering a word, and withdrew, in the custody of the officers, to consider what was to be done.

It was some time before his indignant feelings subsided sufficiently to allow him to contemplate in its full force the situation in which he was placed, but when hour after hour crept away and he became more calm, all the horrors that awaited him rushed into his imagination, without a ray of hope to cheer bim, or enable him to bear with patience the aspersions which had been so unjustly cast upon him.

Alone in the world, without a friend or relative to whom he could apply, who would espouse the cause of one who stood in so equivocal a light as he did, allowing that the serious charges against him of seduction and violence were disbelieved?

Julian felt his case was hopeless, and with a despairing heart, though retaining a composure of features which defied the investigation of the casual spectator, he awaited the termination of the period which was allowed him to endeavour to procure sureties for his future conduct.





Every minute seemed double its usual length, as he paced backwards and forwards in the dark room iu which he was confined, yet he startled and felt the appointed period was come too soon when the door was unlocked, and one of the officers entered.

Well, my fine fellow, there's no one came forward for you so I suppose you must go to quod."

"To where?" demanded Julian, with surprise.

"Oh, I dare say you dontknow what that is! Well, I must introduce you—they'll make you so welcome that you wont be able to get away for a month or two," continued the officer.

Julian turned away with disdain from this unfeeling ridicule.

"I am ready to attend you, sir, whenever you please," he observed.

"Why yes, I suppose you are, and if you wasn't it would be all the same, we dont stand upon ceremonies, so toddle, my tight one, for I've got a few more gentry to attend to, as well as you, and I've got no time to spare, I can tell you."

Julian obeyed in silence: but his consternation and horror exceeded all bounds when in the outer room he beheld five or six miserable beings of both sexes linked together, two and two, by their right hands, while a rope passing through the middle of them connected the whole party, and thus rendered their escape impossible.

"Come, my lad," observed the officer, to a wretched looking boy, who appeared not more than thirteen or fourteen years old, and who was as yet unshackled; "come, you and this gentleman (with a sneer) must march together."

Julian shrunk back, and the horror he felt forcibly depicted in his countenance.





"Good God!" he exclaimed, " am I to be exposed to this indignity? Cannot you let me walk by myself? I will give you my word of honor I will not attempt to leave you."

The man burst into a loud contemptuous laugh.

"Your word of honour! well done! that's a good 'un! and pray what should I get by your word of honour, if [ accepted it ¥'

"Give him a few shillings," whispered the boy to whom Julian was about to be linked: "that will go farther than honour here."

Julian drew out a handful of silver, and slipped it into the man's hand, who, with a half surly air, dropped it carelessly into his pocket.

"I must accommodate you with my arm, I suppose," he observed, " as you dont like the other plau; though its nothing when you're used to it, as the old woman said, when she skinned the eels."

Julian shrunk with unfeigned disgust from this inhuman pleasantry, which, however, created a loud laugh, even where he least expected it—among the poor creatures whose situation had given rise to the bungling attempt at wit.

In a few minutes the whole cavalcade moved off among the innumerable remarks of the crowd who were collected around the office doors. Julian's heart revolted from taking the proffered arm of his conductor, but there was no alternative; and with his cheeks glowing with shame, and his eyes bent on the ground, Julian proceeded on his way, thankful that the veil of night rendered his disgrace less apparent than it would have been in the broad glare of sun





CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.



"I long to lay this painful head

And aching heart beneath the soil,

To slumber in that dreamless bed



From all my toil.

For misery stole me at my birth,

And cast me helpless on the world—

I perish!—Oh, my mother earth,



Take home thy child!

On thy dear lap these limbs reclined,

Shall gently moulder into thee:

Nor leave one wretched trace behind

Resembling me."

Montgomery.

'IT was quite late when Julian and his companions arrived at the prison, and his heart sank still lower as the massy gate closed behind them. It seemed like the exclusion of all hope—the fatal barrier which shut out every prospect of redeeming his ruined prospects. While he was at liberty, and.his character remained unimpeached, he might still indulge hopes of retrieving his fallen fortunes, but now, who would trust the inhabitant of a jail ?—who but would regard him, if not with contempt, at least with suspicion and mis* trust?

Julian's heart beat high within his bosom.





* V B&vti not disserved it," he prbudty ejaculated», as he threwhitiiselfon the miserable bed tb which- he >vas conducted" by the turnkey, anil gave way' tb a- flood of burning tears: '< I haVe not dfeseYved»it,—atid^Haf, at least, is a consolation! Thrive- rieVet injUrtd a' human being-, andyet I am hunted frctti! society,—coride-nihed, —suspected,—insulted!"

The retrdspect was' too: painful;- rind he in Vaih-endeavoured to stifle the cbbakirig sdbs- that burst from his' overcharged heart.

"Who the d 1 hav«*wegdt! tfefe, wWniiig- like' a

girl that has-spoiled her' best gbwttl or lost her sweetheart?" exrclaitned a Voice, c*li/se to Julian's ear', Who started up in astonishment.

Cduld it be pdssible'*—yet- the- accerits were so familiar to his ear, that-he could ndt be mistaken,—it was the Vdice-of Rylarid!»

Juliah paused stfrtfe* moments in doubtfuf suspense, and-almost unable' tb articulate, from surprise and a * variety of emotions:

"RylaUd»!" he'at length; with difficulty, uttered; "Hyland, is it-yon Thear?"

"Who calls that wretcUed thing that wa^ Ryland f* exclaimed' tHe" lkttet, springing up from the bed on wfoichhe Wsfs extended, bythestfde of Julian.

'* It-is Mm-!" etdifimed the* latter. "Oh, Ryland! is it here we meet^"

"What-!—Who—who is it?" ejaculated Ryland,1 "Speak,—it cannot, surely it cannot be Carleton! and ytet, unless my ears' deceive' me—— Curse this dark place! a man cannot-see his friends from his foes. But is it CarletdnTtell nie' Quickly."

"It is, indeed," returned Julian, in a despondii/g tone; "but what has brought you here? Are you, too, like me, a victim of falsehood and oppression?"





"Oh, a trifle—a mere trifle! I expect to be released to-morrow," said Ryland, with an assumed gaiety of manner, through which, however, a more calm observer than Julian, would have discovered a very different feeling. "But what, in the name of all that is wonderful, has popped you in here?" he demanded, "Speak low though, for if we wake some of these birds that are roosting about us, they will, perhaps, give us a tune that wont be very agreeable.

Julian attended to this intimation while he was giving the detail of his accidental meeting with his affectionate nurse, and even while he related the scene which had ensued between him and the puritanical ruler of her fate; but when he came to the remarks of the magistrate, who, deceived by the plausibility of the wretch's manner, had not only condemned him to incarceration, but had wounded his feelings, by assuming that he was a worthless and depraved character, his caution forsook him, and he raised his voice in proportion to his indignation, until a loud execration from some one near him, made him start.

"What the d 1 are you kicking up this row for,

disturbing people out o' their sleep V continued the speaker, in a voice which Julian fancied he recognized, yet could not recal to whom it belonged; he was soon, however, put out of suspense by Ryland, who whispered,—

"It is Crawford, but dont speak to him, or we shall be bored to death with his nonsense."

Julian felt no disposition to break through this injunction; and, after a few more half-grumbled complaints of the disturbance he had endured, Crawford again sank into the arms of Morpheus.





A whispered conversation was now for some time continued between Ryland and Julian, in the course of which, the latter demanded if his companion had heard from Stuart.

"No," replied Ryland, very eooly, "nor do I wisfi toTiear. He is a selfish, good-for-nothing rascal, who dont care what becomes of a friend in distress, so he can take care of himself."

Julian's heart could not respond to this condemnation of one whose conduct had been so much the reverse to him; yet he was afraid to attempt a vindication of him, lest, as in the case of Mary Hamilton, he should call forth additional proofs of the unworthiness of one whom, individually, he had so much reason to respect and esteem.

"What's become of your flower, Mary?" demanded Ryland, abruptly.

Julian felt his cheeks glow, though the veil of night concealed it, as he replied, with some hesitation,—

"If you mean to designate Miss Hamilton by that appellation, as I suppose,- I can only say that the term is very wrongly applied. I have no other sentiments towards her than the natural interest, which the circumstances, which introduced her to me, inspired » added to which, I have every reason to feel grateful to her, for the unwearied attention she paid to me, when I was deserted by all the world."

"Oh, yes; I know your's was a very sentimental connexion," returned Ryland with a sneer; "but I dont want to extort a confession from you: besides, you have not replied to my question. Crawford told me she had got the jPuke of —— in tow, so 1 suppose she is dashing away .in high style. J}y the bye, if that is the case. Carleton, why dont you send to her? she coujd get you released, of course, in a twinkling."





"I know nothjng of what you mention," returned Julian, while the explanation of all Mary's reserve and confusion rushed upon his mind. When} saw Mary last, she was living in;the ,same apartments,. and without aoy more indications of splendour or dash (as you call it) than before; but if ,it is so, do you think I could have tjje meanness to owe my liberty to such an interference? No! 1 would sooner linger for sver in this ,Ioathsome place."

"Well whistled,," returned Ryland, " Was ever suoh u,9pse,nse uttered by aiie^sonable being ?—but you'll know better, .Carleton, in a short time, you may depend On it. What, 1 suppose the fact is, you've left Mary, in a lit of jealousy-—-"

"I beg you will not draw any such inferences," jnr tcrrupted Juljau, hastily; "jealously cannot exist without love.: and it is impossible for me ever to feel that pass^on for Mary Jiam.ilton."

"WelJ, b^utyou c onfess you left her in a vciff" replied Rylapd> v

"I confess no such thing," returned Julian ; " I .cerr tainly felt hurt and vexed at some indications of imprudence and dupUc'tyj which I discovered in JMary's conduct, and as she ,either could not or would not explain what I pointed out, I left her, with ^ resolution not to visit her again, until 1 could do so without violating my feelings of rectitude and decorum."

Ryland burst into a suppressed titter » and Julian, who felt vexed and angry at his manner, endeavoured tfi .dismiss ithe subject, by inquiring how Crawford came tto be an inmate pf their enviable habitation.





"Oh, we both got into a lark together," returned Ryland, and in a manner which showed evidently that he didnat wi#h to.enter into the subject.

"And hpjwjang have you been here?" demanded Julian.

"I should say a twelvemonth, rf I were to calculate by the tediousness of the time," replied his companion; but I believe, according to general computation, we have been here a week." "A week! and only for a frolic ?"—exclaimed Julian, in surprise.

"Yes; and you are likely to stay a mouth, I suppose, .aod for no frolic at aJl;" returned Ryland, dryly,

Julian felt that he had not deserved this unfeeling sarcasm,: for his exclamation had been prompted by real surprise, and not, as Ryland had probably supposed, by any latent suspicion that the former's statement was nojt ,cqrrect^ but k&' made no reply, and Ryland complaining that he was tired and sleepy, the conversation dropped.;

Julian, however, in vain, courted repose; hisjnind was distracted with. a thousand cqnt^nding sensatipnp. Could it be possible that he was a prisoner, without having committed a crime, and the companions, whom he had so lately seen figuring in the gayest scenes, and apparently as reckless of the approaching evil ashe himself had been, now suffering tQe same degrading punishment? He raised himself on bis elbow, and endeavoured, through the obscurity, jt© trace ,the outlines of the beings who surrounded him, but all was indistinct: and ardently did he wish for the morning light to dispel the gloom, and show him the real condition of the place which, even in idea, was so insupportable.





At length, a faint glimmering through the grated bars, announced the wished-for morn, and Julian, with surprise, discovered that there were two others besides Crawford and Ryland in the room. They were all sleeping soundly, and Crawford's broad, unmeaning face looked as if a care had never wrinkled its smooth surface.

"Why should I feel the pressure of my fate more than these men?" thought Julian, " I am as innocent of offence, perhaps more so, than they, and yet I cannot sleep, while they seem to rest as soundly on their hard pillows, as if they were extended on a bed of down."

"Ryland's lips moved at this moment; and a heavy groan followed by a half uttered execration, betrayed how wrong had been Julian's estimation of the serenity of his companion's feelings. In a moment after, he (Ryland) started up, and, with a wild look, exclaimed,

"Are they come 1—What, so soon !—It cannot yet be time!"

"Who ?—what do you mean V demanded Julian, surprised at his looks, his quivering lip and pale countenance betraying the strongest terror.

-' Carleton," ejaculated Ryland, staring at him, for a moment, with stupid surprise, and then suddenly recollecting himself, he added,—

"Psha; its only a dream, after all; I recollect now well enough where we are. Well, how have you liked your night's lodging, my lad?"





"How can you ask me?" returned Julian, casting a look of despair round the miserable and comfortless abode.

"Oh, you are so fantastical and refined!" replied Ryland, with a laugh; " Now you see I can make myself comfortable any where."

"Comfort!" repeated Julian, sighing heavily, " yet I do not think you felt very comfortable just now."

"Oh, that was an imaginary evil" returned Ryland, "and they are often much harder to bear than real ones. I was infected by the tales of some of the inmates of this delectable place, which I had been listening to yesterday evening, and I was actually dreaming that I was going to cut capers in the air; in plain terms, Jack Ketch was about to give me a taste of his office; and when I was roused by some noise, I concluded' that the time was come, and the sheriff and his attendants were at the door to demand me."

Julian shuddered :—there was something even in the careless levity which Ryland assumed as he made this recital, which was revolting to his (Julian's) feelings. It was unnatural, he thought, and forced, for his cheek was ghastly pale, and his eye still glared with the look of terror, which the visions of his sleep had inspired.

Their companions now began to rouse from their heavy slumbers, and Crawford, after staring at Julian for some minutes, exclaimed,—

"Why, what the d 1 have they nabbed you, too>

Carleton?"

"Carleton has got into a scrape with his landlord," observed Ryland, hastily, giving Crawford a significant look. "The old fellow got jealous of him, and so sent him here to keep him out of the way of his





Oh! is that all," returned Crawford,- " I' thought that——"

Ryland gave him another look, and he stopped short in the conjecture he was about to give utterance to.

"What's o'clock V inquired one of the mert'who were strangers to Julian.

"Time to turn out," was the reply.

Julian looked with astonishment at the vestments in which Ryland and his friend were arraying themselves.—Instead of the fashionable and gay attire in which he had last seen them, they were now elbathed like mechanics in their working dressjand, never very gentleman-like in their persons, they now appeared as if they had never belonged to a superior class than their dress now proclaimed thenu

Julian could not suppress the thought which rose involuntarily to his mind, that they appeared noW much more in their proper sphere than they had been when apeing the manners of men of fashion, and vieing with them in extravagance and dissipation, but this did not remove his surprise at the transformation, and he could not avoid giving utterance to his thoughts.

Ryland smiled, though he could not help showing some signs of confusion, as he replied,—

"Oh, it's alLa spree; you shall know the rights of of it when it's all over; but it's too long a story to tell now."

The look of sly intelligence, which passed/between the others present, did not escape Julian, who, convinced there was something not very creditable concealed under this pretended trifling, felt more Uneasy and confused tha«. Ryland himself, and was heartily-rejoiced when the. room^door was unlocked^ and» they





were left at liberty to walk into the yard appropriated for their exercise, and mix with the unfortunate inhabitants of the mansion of misery.

In vain, however, did he gaze around,—no sympathetic eye met his despondent glances; every countenance was cold, repellant, or disgusting from its expression ofribaldry, so inconsistent with the wretched situation of its possessor.

The language which met his ear was as little calculated to soothe his feelings, as the looks of his companions. Oaths, the most horrible that could be devised— blasphemies, so unnatural that the imagination shrinks from them with horror, were uttered as familiar terms of conversation, and the most sacred feelings of the heart, as well as the commonest sympathies of human nature, all made subjects of derision, or treated as things heard of, but never seen to exist.

Poor Julian! in vain he looked round for relief; — and was he to be condemned to this society of demons? (for such, to him, appeared the miserable, debased be- ings, by whom he was surrounded) —He shrank from the salutations of one or two, who, observing that he was a stranger, would have gratified their curiosity and beguiled away a few minutes of their tedious time, by listening to the causes of his (Julian's) coming among them.

Ryland and his companions were conversing together as they paced up and down, and Julian, feeling no inclination to intrude upon their councils, stood for near an hour immoveable, his mind almost stupified with the scene around him.

His thoughts, at last, reverted to the scenes of bis childhood, when, under the care of his tender parent, he had often heaved a sympathizing sigh for the wretched prisoner, whom his fancy had pictured, fevered with confinement, wasting his cheerless days and sleepless nights, in vain wishing for those blessings of which his crimes had bereaved him. How often had he wished for power to unbar the massy gates, and to say to the repentant prisoner, in the language of scripture,- "G9 and sin no more:" but, alas! how were his views of human nature changed, and how bitterly did he feel that,





"With the baseless hopes of youth

Its generous warmth is gone;

Cold, calculating cares succeed,

The timid thought, the weary deed,



The dull realities of truth;

Back on the past he turns his eye,

Remembering, with an envious sigh,



The happy dreams of youth."

"Will you have some breakfast, Carleton, exclaimed Ryland, clapping him on the shoulder.

Julian had, for some time, felt that the pressing calls of hunger were not to be deadened by the most acute pangs of the mind, and he yielded to Ryland's solicitation with no great reluctance.

The meal was not very elegant or refined, and at any other time Julian would have laughed at the expedients which. were adopted to supply the deficiences of necessary utensils, but his spirits were now too depressed to suffer him to participate even in the reallyhumorous remarks which were elicited from some of the bystanders, who, not unfrequently, had in view thehope of being rewarded by a cup of tea or a slice of bread and butter, (luxuries which few could boast of enjoying) for their bon mots.





The turnkey, a surly-looking and still surlier speaking man, entered before they had concluded.

"Come stow this, young men!" he exclaimed, " you, Ryland,and Crawford, are wanted;—so come along."

They were about to follow him, when Julian darted to the door.

"Shall I see you again?" he exclaimed.

"Yes, yes, to be sure," returned Ryland, "to be sure: I'll come and see you as soon as I get discharged."

"What, is that one of your pals?" demanded the turnkey, looking with a scrutinizing eye at Julian, who shrank back half ashamed of his acquaintances, and yet feeling as if the deprivation of their society was leaving him still more destitute.

Julian could not hear Ryland's reply, nor, though pretty well familiarized, of late, to the unmeaning nonsense, or to use their own denomination—slang, which his companions were in the habit of substituting for plain English, did he exactly comprehend the term pals; he feared, from the jailor's looks, that something disgraceful was couched under this mysterious term, and as soon as the door was closed, he turned to one of the men who had slept in the room where he had passed the night, and, in a low voice, said,—

"What did that man mean? What is a pal?"

The man burst into a loud fit of laughter, and looking earnestly at Julian, in a tone of inquiry said,—

"Pray how long have you been caught?" The colour mounted to Julian's proud cheek: he felt that he was an object of derision, and that was sufficient to raise his proud spirit, instead of reflecting that his ignorance on such subjects was creditable to him, and that the ridicule of such people ought to be considered an honour, rather than a disgrace.





He turned away vexed and irritated, and resolved never to expose himself to such a rebuff again.

The day passed away in silence, and in listless wretchedness on the part of Julian:—he could take no share,—be even turned away with loathing from the means by which his fellow prisoners whiled away their tedious hours; and night to him brought no relief: he dreaded being shut up m darkness and silence, though, to him, conscience brought no reproaches, while, to many of his companions, what a picture must their minds present?

Alas! Julian had yet to learn that familiarity with vice deadens the feelings of remorse, and stifles the whispering of that " still small voice," which in our first approaches to error incessantly cries out " beware!"

Day after day passed in the same hopeless monotony. Ryland came not, nor did a single friendly voice assure Julian that he was not quite forgotten. Others, however depraved and guilty, had their friends, Who from time to time, enquired of their welfare, and supplied them with some little comforts which otherwise they would have been unable to procure. He, alone was friendless and deserted, and it was this thought which preyed tin his mind much heavier than the privations he suffered. Yet, to be debarred of liberty— to subsist on a pittance which was scarcely sufficient to support human nature,—and to be confounded in the general maSs wkh the ignorant aud the guilty





beings with whom he was surrounded, were no slight mflrctions, and in the beautiful language of the poet, he could have exclaimed,

"Such punishments are due

To natures deepliest stained with sin:—

Such griefs w ith such men well agree,

But wherefore, wherefore fall on me?

To be beloved is all I need,

And whom I love, I love indeed."



The! first week or two of Julian's imprisonment was rendered still more unbearable by the taunts and practical jokes which his reserve and unrelaxing melancholy made him the subject of to his indiscriminating and insensible companions. A tittle experience, however, told him, that his fiery resentment of these indignities only increased the evil, and that the best way to blunt the offensive weapons that were continually levelled at him, was to appear not to feel their wounds. He therefore bore all with inflexible patience, and, at. last, his persecutors finding it impossible to raise a laugh any longer at the lion struggling in the toils, deserted him for newer and more profitable game.

The consciousness of innocence,—the proud feeling of superiority (not over his present companions, for there no comparison could exist,) but over those who stood much fairer in the world's estimation,—none of the resources of his powerful and intelligent mind could support Julian under his present distress and degradation ; his feverish impatience of restraint increased with every hour, and he called upon death as the welcome herald of liberty.

In vain, he tried to shrink into himself,—to dwell on the soothing images of the friends of his infancy, or to picture to himself the tears which Marianne, his still beloved Marianne would shed, could she know all that he so unjustly suffered, could she read his heart, and see bow indelibly her image was engraven there; from such dreams he was constantly roused by the fierce





"Sense of intolerable wrong.

* » • » /



Thirst of revenge, the powerless will

Still baffled, and yet burning still,"



Which nothing could extinguish, and which rendered him insensible even to the whispers of hope which sometimes told him that his imprisonment could last but a little while, and that he might still live to triumph over his oppressors.





CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.



u Would'st thou, presumptuous as thou art,

O'er nature play the tyrant's part,

And with the hand compel the heart?

Oh! rather, rather, hope to bind

The ocean-wave—the mountaiu-wind,

Or fix thy foot upon the ground,

To ttop the planet rolling- round."



Rogers.

THE grief which Marianne Vincent had felt at the departure of Julian had defied all controul or restraint. The idea that he was turned out upon the merciless world without a friend or a home, haunted her imagination incessantly, and it was in vain that the more sanguine and heroic Laura commended his spirit, and * insisted that talents and recommendations, such as he possessed, could not fail to ensure him friends and eventually independence; the timid Marianne listened without being convinced ;—a thousand dreadful dangers that might befal him crowded into her mind, and prevented her enjoying a moment's repose: but a few days only passed before her most terrible apprehensions were worse than realized.





Mr. Vincent and his son returned from town, and related, as James the gardener had told Julian, the circumstances, with every addition that malignity could devise, of Julian's appearance at Bow Street.

The consequences had nearly proved fatal to Marianne, who was conveyed to bed in a state of distraction, and for some weeks was considered in the greatest danger of losing her senses, if not her life.

Mr. Vincent was alarmed,—his conscience reproached him with being the murderer of his own child ; and his wife's tears, and Laura's pale cheeks and silent glances were daggers to his heart. He would have given the world to have recalled all that he had uttered, but Marianne was deaf to his assurances, and in all her wild distempered ravings, the name of Julian, his sufferings, and the injustice he had been treated with were constantly alluded to.

Her father dreaded the impression that would be given of his conduct to the attendants whom her disorder made absolutely necessary. He had hitherto preserved a fair character with the world, and though he had never distinguished himself for humanity, he had contrived never to give any very glaring proofs of his want of it: but what would be said of him if it were known that he had driven his nephew out an outcast and a wanderer, and condemned his own child to hopeless wretchedness, if not to death.

Every means, therefore, that he could devise, were practised to give ease to Marianne's mind, and eventually succeeded. Youth, and an excellent constitution, triumphed over her bodily disorder, and her father's unusual kindness, aided by his assurances that J ulian was doing well, and that he would watch over and





protect him, if necessary, restored, in part, tranquillity to her blind.

Still, however, she was far from- happy, and-Edward, who had seen, with jealousy, the influence she had obtained over his father's mind-, often»contrived to increase her depression and raise a thousand fears in- her mind, by mysterious hints respecting: Julian, of whose motions he pretended to be accurately informed.

The real fact, however, was,—that from the periodfoj Julian's rescue of Mary Hamilton, Mr. Vincent had totally lost sight of his nephew, and' had more than once been inclined to adopt Mr. Aiders' suggestion^ (<*h: , whom he had called, to make enquiries respecting-him) that he had been induced, by some means, to quit England. - »-- -»

A short time, however, revealed the fallacy of these conjectures; Edward having accidentally met Julian, Mary, and Stuart in the street, *oon aftet* the former had taken up his residence with StUart, and»followed-them, unperceived, to Mary's lodgingsj Where, from inquiriesin the neighbourhood, he learned-thatf she bore a very» doubtful character, and that the two young gentlemen' he had seen enter, were frequent visitors; but the youngest' (Julian) appeared3 to be the favoured lriver, as!he' was her constant attendant' in'all her excursions^ and* indeed almost lived: atf the house.*' .

Edward returned home exulting in this demonstra^



tion of Julian's^ unworthiness; but though be*16rigfed' to communicate all he had learned to his sisters,- the fear ofexciting his father's anger withheld Him: and he contented himself with mentioning at table, in the presence of the whole family, thatI He had' met JtfHarri ih





company with a very beautiful woman, with whom he seemed to be on very good terms. . .

Marianne turned pale and trembled, but pride assisted her to conceal her emotions: and it was not till she was alone with Laura that she uttered a single remark on the subject.

Laura felt angry, yet she hardly knew why, with Julian. He had certainly never made any particular professions of attachment to Marianne any more than to herself; yet he could not be insensible to Marianne's attachment to him, she thought: and, in the fervor of her affection for her sister, she conceived it impossible that any one could be indifferent to her. . She had been accustomed to speak of Julian's love towards Marianne as certain and undeniable, and the idea that he could transfer that love to another had never occurred to her mind.

Edward's insinuations, therefore, had fallen like a thunderbolt upon her astonished mind. She would have doubted the truth of his assertion, if it had been possible, but he was so positive and so circumstantial, describing even the dress that the lady (whose charms he extolled to the skies) wore, that Laura could not disbelieve him, especially as both his rather and himself had always prudently appeared blind to the nature of her attachment to Julian, and had affected to consider her anxiety no more than the result of her affection for him as a relative, and the natural sensibility of her feelings. . .

"I have no right to reproach him!" whispered Ma-* rianne, as she wept on her sister's neck in undissembled agony, "but yet I thought"





She stopped: and natural bashfulness and diffidence arrested the confession she was about to make.

"And so did I think so," returned Laura, who could anticipate all she would have said.

"I could hare pledged my life Oh his constancy," she continued, "but if Edward is to be believed—— Well, he will repeut it—I am sure he will," and she burst into a fit of passionate tears.

"He shall never know what he has made me suffer," observed Marianne, " and I will, from this moment, try to forget him," and her tears redoubling, " 1 hope he will be happy with the elegant woman (as Edward calls her) whose charms have made him forget poor Marianne! so from this time, Laura, we will never talk of him; perhaps, indeed,—who can tell—But it may be a crime to think of him, for he may be the husband of another."

Laura could not refute this supposition, though her heart obstinately refused to credit it, but she felt that it would not be acting right, to encourage her sister in hopes which might prove illusory, and she, thereforet agreed with Marianne, that, from henceforth, Julian should be as little thought and spoken of as possible.

The resolution was easily formed, but, unfortunately, not as easily adhered to: Julian's name would insensibly creep into their conferences, and Marianne's heavy sighs and palid looks betrayed that he was, if possible, still more than ever the chief subject of her thoughts.

"Alas! how easily do we admit

The thing we wiBh were true."



In spite of all her prudent determinations to forget Jhe faithless object of her affections, Marianne still could not help secretly indulging- a hope which she dared not own, even to Laura; but this hope vanished when, as before related, the sisters encountered Julian and his striking companion.





Marianne was the first who perceived him, but she was unable to articulate a word.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Laura, " can this be Julian ?—yes, it is him, indeed! and is that the woman for whose sake"

"Hush, hush !" articulated Marianne with difficulty "he will hear you."

Laura could not conceal her indignation, for she immediately recognized in Mary a female whom she had some few nights before beheld figuring in one of the boxes at Drury Lane Theatre, which Laura had visited with a family, with whom she and Marianne were making a temporary stay in London.

Marianne, on that occasion, had staid at home, from slight indisposition, and Laura, whose attention had been fixed by Mary's conspicuous appearance, and the noisy gaiety of the party whom she was with, had little suspected she was gazing at the supposed object of Julian's choice.

"What a beautiful woman that is," she observed to a young man, who was of her party, " but how extremely hold and free in her manners. Is she a woman of rank?"

The youpg man smiled. , "Of very doubtful rank, I believe: though she is upon very familiar terms, it appears, with some of our most exalted characters. That gentleman, who is paying her such particular attention, is a nobleman, and I have observed some very intelligent looks passingbetween a still more exalted character, who is incog in the opposite box, and her.





Laura blushed,—she was sorry she had been so inquisitive; and though she could not avoid stealing a look, now and then, at the beautiful face and form, which she sighed to think concealed a depraved and licentious heart, she said no more on the subject.

The moment she beheld Mary Hamilton, she recognized that face and form; and indignation and resentment that such a woman should have superseded her delicate and modest Marianne in Julian's affection, prevailed over every other feeling. ». v

She darted a look at Julian, which conveyed most forcibly these feelings, but Julian scarcely saw her. It was Marianne on whom his ardent and impassioned gaze was fixed; and Laura, who fancied at that moment, that his daring to look at her sister was an insult, dragged the trembling and almost fainting Marianne away.

"Oh, Laura I" exclaimed the latter, the moment she regained the power of speech, " Oh! Laura, what a beautiful woman she is! I cannot wonder that he should despise me—" and the tears filled her lovely blue eyes as she timidly raised them, to seek in Laura's a confirmation of her opinion.

"Beautiful I" repeated Laura, with scorn; "yes, she certainly possesses personal attractions,—but what are they—ought they to be to a virtuous mind ?—She

is Oh! Marianne, I tremble now more than ever for

Julian, while I cannot help despising and condemning his conduct; for that woman is, I am sorry to say, one whom he ought to fly from as a pest, instead of thus flaunting; with ber iu open day, and proclaiming his shame, and her own."





"Good heavens, Laura! how have you learnt this? Have you ever seen her before V enquired Marianne.

Laura replied in the affirmative; " I have seen her before, Marianne; and I heard sufficient of her character to warrant what I have said; but little did I then think that her attractions could have had the power to tempt Julian to swerve from his faith and duty."

Marianne was silent; her heart was in a state of confusion that scarcely allowed her to reflect on what her sister then related of the conversation which had passed relative to the lady in question, at the theatre. One only idea was predominant in Marianne's mind,—it was the superior grace and beauty of her rival, and she returned home with Laura in the most desponding and melancholy mood possible.

The family with whom the sisters were resident was that of an opulent merchant; and the two sons were lively gay young men, who, wrthout entering too deeply into the follies or dissipation of fashionable life, were still perfectly au j'uit in its manners, and acquainted with all the current topics of the day.

Laura had often been amused by the anecdotes, or the characteristic traits which they recited of some of the most distinguished members of the world of ton, and between Alfred Huntly and her a perfect intelligence subsisted, without either being conscious of entertaining for the other more than mere friendship. In the principal points of their character there was a striking resemblance. Alfred, like Laura, was high spirited, lively, and strongly disposed to satire, and





like her, also, possessing sufficient good humour and feeling to prevent his propensity to ridicule from trespassing on the bounds of propriety, or pursuing its object too far.

Alfred was young and handsome too, and it could scarcely be supposed that Laura and him could associate under the same roof, for some weeks, without being drawn towards each other by the similarity of their dispositions. To him Laura had often spoken of her cousin Julian,—had painted, in glowing terms, his talents, his virtues, and his accomplishments, and with him, had deplored the hardships of his (Julian's) fate.

Alfred Huntly at first felt some trifling sensations of uneasiness at the warmth with which Laura spoke of this highly-gifted relative, and half jesting and half in earnest,he hinted, that Julian possessed, at least, one acquisition which, in the opinion of many, would counterbalance all the evils he endured. "What is that?" demanded Laura, with earnestness.

"The affection of Laura Vincent," returned Alfred, with quickness, and with a look which to any one more vain, or less a novice in the affairs of the heart than Laura, would have immediately betrayed his feelings; but if she did not suspect the motives which influenced him, he was more enlightened as to the cause of the blush which suffused her cheek; and the extreme earnestness which she betrayed in endeavouring to convince him that her regard for Julian was only that of a near relative, convinced of his worth, and sympathizing in his misfortunes.

"I was led to make the remark I did" returned Alfred, "from observing that the praises of Julian Carleton are always confined to your lips;—I never hear Marianne breathe his name, or even second yon when you speak of him." Laura smiled.—





"So, then, with all your boasted knowledge of female hearts, you are such a novice as to draw that conclusion, are you t Go along with you; I will never trust your penetration again."

Alfred immediately comprehended the mistake under which he had for some time laboured.

"And is it even so, poor Marianne?" he exclaimed. "This, then, is the hidden cause of all her sighs and melancholy! I confess I have always suspected- that the tender passion had some concern in it; but I had no idea that Julian was the favoured lover.

Laura charged him to be secret, and Alfred, who was delighted to share her confidence, religiously observed her injunctions, though he often, with her, lamented, that Marianne's melancholy seemed to increase rather than be removed by the intelligence of Julian's supposed faithlessness and desertion.

"If she possessed a particle of my spirit," observed Laura, her fine black eyes sparkling with resentment, "her pride would teach her to forget him."

"Is it so easy, then, to dismiss a long-cherished passion, Laura?" said Alfred, looking expressively at her; "to me it seems impossible that any thing could efface real love."

"Indeed," returned Laura, blushing; "then$ for once, you and I differ,—though probably you may be in the right;—and I dare say are experienced in. the subject you speak of, while I—-—

"While you," interrupted Alfred, taking her hand, and pressing it fervently within his own, " while you,





Laura, do not say that you are quite a stranger to

the passion you speak of so irreverently, or you will convict me, not only of ignorance, but presumption; for there have been moments when I have dared to hope that our experience in la belle passion commenced at the same time."

"A very modest declaration, truly!" replied Laura, forcing a laugh, while the trembling of the fair haud, which she only half pretended to withdraw from his grasp, and the eloquent blood which mountad into her cheeks, betrayed that she was not displeased at Alfred's declaration; " very modest and humble, indeed !—I fancy 1 am in love with you, Laura Vincent, and I know you are in love with me, so its no use to deny it. Is not that what your fine speech amounts to?"

"No, no, Laura! do not be too severe upon me," returned Alfred, with some confusion; " I am not so vain or so presumptuous as you represent me. That I love you, is certain,—would I were as sure that you returned my affection."

"Which, of course, you expect me to acknowledge I do," said Laura, smiling archly; " but take care, for if you do avow yourself my humble servant, 1 shall be a very tyrant to you. I shall enact, at least, a seven years' service, as Joseph bestowed for Rachel, and then—and then, perhaps, if you behave very—very well, I shall condescend to smile upon you, and give you hopes that in another seven years"—

"I will not part from you now," returned Alfred, still grasping her hand, " until you give me both the smile, and fix a much earlier period than seven years, to make me happy."

Laura struggled, in vain, to get free; Alfred was not unconscious of his influence, and he would not release her until she acknowledged that she would not be inexorable, if their mutual friends did not object to his a .dresses.





Neither Mr. Vincent, or the friends of Alfred Huntley, could form any reasonable objection to a match, which was, in every respect eligible, and Alfred was, therefore, a privileged lover at the period when Laura and Marianne had encountered Julian and Mary Hamilton in the park.

Alfred observed the uneasiness and embarrassment which Laura's countenance betrayed on the return of the sisters from their walk; and on Marianne's pleading indisposition as an excuse for confining herself to her. chamber the remainder of the day, he instantly guessed ihat some unpleasant rencontre had happened with Julian Carleton.

He took the first opportunity, of mentioning his suspicions *to Laupa, who, without hesitation, related the discovery she had made respecting the object of Julian's attachment, adding, that she wished she had it in' her power to ascertain whether Julian was aware of the character of his associate, or was the dupe of her art.

It was Alfred from whom Laura bad heard the character of Miss Hamilton, and he readily promised that he would use every exertion in his powe.r to satisfy her.

"I think my best way will be, to get introduced to the lady," be observed, with a sly look at Laura; " I have a slight acquaintance with a young man who. visits her—Will you give me. leave,, Laura?"

"You are a good-for-nothing wretch," returned. Laura, blushing and; smiling," and I do upfccar^what you do, so that you set my mind at rest, w*th rqgard to Julian."





"And you will promise, then, not to he jealous," said Alfred, "nor pout, as you did yesterday, when I claimed the forfeit from little Fanny Townsend?"

Laura denied the charge;—she. had not pouted, she said, or if she had, it was not at his kissing that little awkward dumpling: but her saucy, exulting looks had vexed her.

"For you know," continued Laura, " that you passed me by Without insisting on the forfeit; but when it came to hor turn, you. thought it worth while to claim your rjgbl m spite of all her pretended resistance, and it gave her such consequence in her own idea, that she gave me two or three impertinent looks^ and, at last had the conscience to whisper, that she hoped I was not offended, for she really could not helper. Alfred's acting so foolishly, I could haye slapped the ]\tt\$ conceited creature's face, but I only laughed at her, and told her I begged she would not makfe herself uneasy on Mr* Alfred's account, or mine either."

Alfred laughedw—

"And so I did not extort fhe forfeit, Laura ?—Well, I will take it POWi and you my tell Fanny J)ympling (a» yoti cali hef) that I only delayed *ny claim that I might extort interest."

"Yes, and I'll tell her that you shall not get either the debt or the interest," said Laura, darting to the door; bat Alfred was too quick for her, and he did not release her until she had acknowledged that she had been piqued, and ridiculously so, at his romps with Fanny Townsend, and that she would fry never to bp so again.





Alfred soon found means of gaining all the information he wished respecting Julian; he learned the means by which the latter had first become acquainted with Miss Hamilton,—her preservation from death,—and Julian's consequent danger; and he learned, in addition, that the latter was so warmly attached as to intend marrying her as soon as he could get into a regular situation; but it was very doubtful, his informant added, whether Miss Hamilton would be content to resign her liberty for such humble prospects.

"infatuated young man!" exclaimed Laura, after hearing this account; " It has been his pity for her, and interest in her fate, that has first created the feelings which he mistakes for love; for I do not even now believe that he can really love her as he does our dear Marianne.

Alfred smiled, and Laura felt half offended at the incredulity which that smile conveyed; but he soon removed her anger by the sympathy he expressed for the gentle Marianne, and his assurances that he would, if possible, undeceive Julian, and convince him of the madness and folly of his conduct, without letting him know to whom he owed bis interference.

Matters were in this position, when Marianne and Laura received a mandate to return home, Mr. Vincent considering that their visit had already been extended to an unreasonable length, but the expected invitation for the younger part of the Huntley family, (whom Laura had thought would certainly return with them to Highgate) did not arrive,—Mr. Vincent's note to his daughter, merely saying, that Mrs. Vincent and himself hoped soon to have the pleasure of seeing her (Laura's) friends at Highgate.





There had been, among the numerous visitors at Mr. Huntley's, during the time that Laura and Marianne had been there, a staid, elderly tradesman, who had retired from business with a large fortune.

Mr. Stanfield was a widower, and had lately lost an only daughter ; and Marianne, whose gentle and feeling heart sympathized with every thing that bore the stamp of distress or sorrow, and whose spirits were very unequal to the gaiety and mirth of her young companions, often endeavoured to beguile him of his grief, and, at the same time, indulge her own melancholy, by listening to his lamentations and his eulogies of his dear Sarah, who was just such another, he said, as herself,—so mild,—and kind,—and prudent,— and steady. - -»

There were some traits of selfishness, and an exclusive consideration of his own comforts and pleasures, which were insensibly betrayed in Mr. Stanfield's conversation, somewhat detracting from the interest bis situation inspired in Marianne's mind, added to which, his language and ideas were very often, indeed, absolutely vulgar: and Marianne began, at last, to feel that her pity and sympathy had carried her too far, and to shrink from his excessive familiarity and whispered condolence.

Her sister, Laura, and her friends, Jane and Emma Huntley, in their youthful gaiety, often rallied Marianne on the subject of Mr. Stanfield's exclusive attentions, and predicted that he would make her a formal offer of the vacant place in his heart and house.

On the morning that Laura and Marianne were {o leave town, Mr. Stanfield called on his friend, Mr. Huntley, and hearing that the visitants ware going, he advanced to Marianne, and, in a low expressive whisper, informed her he should not take a formal farewell of her, as he should have the pleasure of seeing her at her father's house on the following day.





"Sir!" said Marianne, with astonishment, and scarcely comprehending what he meant, as she knew that he was not even personally known to Mr. Vincent.

"Hush, hush, my dear! I dont wish those giggling girls and boys (the Huntleys) to know any thing about it;—but you will hear all about it when you get home."

Marianne felt confused and uneasy, but she did not; mention her suspicions, that Mr. Stanfield meant to make himself rediculous and her uncomfortable, even to Laura, on their way home: and the sight of the green fields and the flowers, and all the delights from which she had been so excluded, and which harmonized with hergentle and romantic disposition so much better than the noisy gaieties of the town, soon drove the tiresome, prosing old gentleman quite out of her head.

Mr. Vincent received them with a much greater show of kindness than he usually displayed, and asked a number of questions respecting the manner in which they had passed their time, and the company they had associated with.

Laura, as usual, gave a lively description of what she had seen, and the people she had associated with, few of whom escaped a satirical touch of her pencil; and Mr. Vincent, after smiling very graciously, said, interrupting his lady, who was abouttoread herdaughter a lecture on her talent for ridicule.

"Well, but Laura, how comes it that you do not mention a Mr. Stanfield, who, I understand, was very often of your parties.





"Oh, I forgot Mr. Stanfield," replied the smilingLaura, "and indeed there's no pleasure in talking about him, if I had remembered him; for one cannot help pitying a poor, helpless old man, left albumin the decline of life, and everlastingly moaning after the blessings he has outlived, even if he is ever so. disagreeable; for you know he cant help hi* want of understanding and other recommendations, any more than he can his other misfortunes."

"I did not discoverthe defects you speak of, Laura," said Mr Vincent, very gravely, "in the conversation which I had with Mr. Stanfield yesterday; n or do I believe they exist, except in your imagination, which is much too lively on such subjects:—your sister, Marianne, will not, I am sure, coincide with you in thinking Mr. Stanfield what you have represented him."

Marianne blushed, and then turned pale; she dreaded to hear the sequel -of this prelude, while Laura, scarcely comprehending what she heard, and yet terrified to find it true, exclaimed, with impatience,—

"Mr. Stanfield here, sir!—what could he come here for?—and what has my sister's opinion to do with hjm i—She is but a child, and he is an old man, older than you, I should think."

"I request you will be less liberal of your conjectures," observed Mr, Vincent, austerely, "and not attempt to influence your sister, whose good sense will, I trust, induce her to see the gentleman we are speaking of in a very different light to that in which your childish levity would place him. I will speak plainly at once,—Mr. Stanfield, has proposed himself as a huaband to your sister, and, in the most liberal manner, offered to settle his whole fortune on her. He assures me that she has distinguished him, during the time they have associated together, with particular favour; and I expect her future conduct will be answerable to the expectations she has led him to form.





Laura walked to the piano-forte, (asher father, after delivering this speech with all possible emphasis, retired) and began playing and singing,

"An old man would be wooing

A damsel fair and young,

But she, when be was suing,

For ever laughed and sung," &c.—



but the sight of Marianne's pale face and alarmed looks stopped her in a moment, and, in a tone of indignation, she exclaimed,—

"Marianne, surely you are not such a little fool as to believe your father in earnest! No, no, he cannot be so barbarous as to meditate seriously such an outrage ; and if he did, would you.—could you, for a moment, hesitate in defying his power, and resisting, to the utmost, such an unnatural extension of a parent's rights i I would discard you from my heart and affection, and never own you again as my sister."

"Laura, Laura!" exclaimed the alarmed mother, who was present, "do not be so violent,—you will enrage your father, if he hears you; and, after all, what good can it do, if he has (which I much fear) set his mind upon this match"

"What good!" exclaimed the indignant Laura, "forgive me, madam, but it is this doctrine of nonresistance that has made my father the unreasonable tyrant of his family. Have you not a right to be consulted in the disposal of your child 1—are you not her





patent, also? and is not her interest as near and dear toyou,asto him?—and can you, then, stand tamely by, and see her likely to be sacrificed, if she has not the spirit to resist the unreasonable, selfish wishes of an old dotard % Surely, surely, for once, it would not be to* much to expect you to sacrifice your love of ease and quiet, and make a decisive stand against the man who would condemn your child to a living death."

Mrs. Vincent appeared petrified:—she had been so long accustomed to pay implicit deference to her lordly husband's will, that the very idea of direct opposition to it, alarmed her. She would willingly have combined with her children in any scheme to undermine and defeat his tyrannical mandates, but from Laura's bold defiance and animated contempt she shrank with terror, as flat rebellion to sovereign authority; and, while she mingled her tears with Marianne's, she dared not even promise to attempt to act with the decision which Laura required of her.

Far the remainder of the day Mr. Vincent and his son were absent; and Laura endeavoured, by every argument in her power, to prevail on her weak-minded mother to exert the right which nature and reason alike bestowed on her, and oppose the sacrifice of her child.





CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.



"Come, live with me and be my love!

And we will all the pleasures prove,

That Tallies, groves, and hills, and fields,

Woods or steepy mountains yield:



Marlowe.

THE dreaded hour arrived too soon for the unhappy Marianne, who trembled at the idea of incurring the resentment of her father by her opposition to his wishes; while, to the impetuous and high-spirited Laura, every hour seemed an age, until (as she flattered herself) the final blow would be given, to his ambitious and unfeeling schemes. !

Mr. Stanfield came, as they expected; and, at any other time, Laura would have laughed at the folly and vanity which was conspicuous in his curious appearance. x

He had laid aside his mourning suit, as incompatible with his acknowledged views, and was attired with all the frivolity and attention to triflles which can only be pardonable in extreme youth, and is then generally .symptomatica! of emptiness within.





Laura glanced her eyes over him f»om the silk stockings, which were drawn with so much precision o^er his shrunk shanks, to the close fitting peruque d la Titus, which, except that its raven locks corresponded so very poorly with a pair of bushy grey eyebrows, looked almost " as natural as life."

The old gentleman looked a little disconcerted at Laura's satirical eye, which, with a mixture of archness and contempt, glanced over his unusual array; but be summoned top all his courage, and, with a bow whieh he intended to be very elegant and polite, he hoped she was quite well, and in as good spirits as usual.

"Oh, yes, sir!" returned Laura; " nor is there much fear of my losing my usual spirits, while I have so much matter of mirth before me!"

Mr. Stanfield bowed again, with an air of any thing but satisfaction. He had more than once been a witness of Laura's propensity to ridicule the ridiculous-, and^ as he had a sort of consciousness that he was in the present instance within the pale of those whom he considered fair game, he felt not quite comfortable under her scrutinizing glances and equivocal remarks.

He turned, therefore, to Marianne, who, conscious her father's eyes were upon her, sat trembling, and pale as the lily, which was so just an emblem of her delicate and retiriug gentleness.

"I am sorry to say, my dear Miss Marianne," he observed, throwing as much tenderness into his manner as possible," I am sorry to say, that yon do not appear so chearful as usual.

"If you are really sorry, sir," interrupted Laura, before Marianne could frame a reply, " you wall do what you can to restore my sister's chearfulniss."





"I am sure, Miss Laura, if it is in my power," returned Mr. Stanfield, glancing round at Mr- Vincent, as if imploring him to espouse his cause—" If it was in my power to restore Miss Marianne's——"

"Laura!" said Mr. Vincent, in a commanding tone, "I wish to speak with you."

Laura crossed the room to her father with a firm step and an undaunted air.

"I suspect that you are not treating Mr. Stanfield with proper respect ;" he observed, in a low tone.

"Indeed, sir, you are mistaken," replied the undaunted Laura; "for I have treated him just as he deserves: and I am sure nothing can be more reasonable than that."

"How dare you thus trifle with my commands returned Mr. Vincent. "I can read your insolent spirit in every look!—but, mark me, Laura, either you resolve to fall into my views for your sister's establishment, or you shall leave the house till she complies with my wishes and her own interest. I will send you to your aunt, and you shall not see Marianne till she is the wife of Mr. Stanfield."

Poor Laura was completely thunderstruck: this was a blow which she was not prepared for;—and, for a few moments, she was totally unable to collect her thoughts to reply.

She would have expostulated; but Mr. Vincent had but one reply to all she could utter:—

"Either you obey me, or you do not You know

the alternative."

Laura turned away with an air of consternation, which increased Marianne's uneasiness. She could neither understand or seply to her antiquated admirer: and when Laura approached, she regarded her with a look which betrayed that she felt her (Marianne's) case hopeless.





Laura turned away her head, and big tears, in spite of all her fortitude, rolled down her cheeks; but she soon regained her composure, and in reply to Marianne's whispered enquiry of what her father had been saying apparently so angrily, she said,—.

"He has only been taking a little extra pains, my dear, to convince me of his paternal tenderness."

The dinner seemed unusually long and tedious. Mrs. Vincent's politeness to her guest was, evidently, strained and formal; Laura's looks, for she did not condescend to speak, any thing but polite; Marianne seemed as if she had not recovered from the effects of some stunning blow which had benumbed all her faculties; while the unhappy, ridiculous old man, who was the primary cause of all the h\ confusion, sat looking as if he hardly knew whether to be pleas.ed or angry.

Laura had made up her mind that she must submit to banishment, rather than dissemble her feelings; but Marianne's tears and earnest prayers that she would not desert her, the moment they were left alone, and the former related what had been the substance of her father's angry remarks, prevailed,—and Laura was obliged to compromise, by agreeing with Marianne that she would not interfere or give her any advice on the subject, if her father would be contented with this negative submission to his will.

Laura's determination was scarcely formed, before it was put to a test: for Mrs. Vincent, entering the dressing room to which they had retired, informed them, that it was their father's desire that Marianne should go down into the drawing room, alone.





Both the sisters immediately comprehended the motive of this command; and Mrs. Vincent's confusion, and hesitating tone, betrayed that she was also acquainted with it.

Laura's first impulse was to persuade her sister to be firm and decisive in this interview, and to positively assure the silly old man that no inducements on earth could alter her positive determination not to listen to his proposals; but she recollected that this would be infringing on her father's commands, and would, perhaps, induce him instantly to put his threat in execution.

She, therefore, turned away in silence from Marianne's imploring and distressed look; and the latter, bursting into tears, threw her arms around her mother's neck} beseeching her to have pity on her, and endeavour to prevail on her father to dismiss the odious suitor, whose very name was hateful to her.

Mrs. Vincent's tears were always ready to deplore evils which she had not resolution, or strength of mind, to oppose; and, after vainly lamenting Mr. Vincent's harsh disposition, which terrified her from interfering, she persuaded Marianne, (who, unfortunately, but too much resembled her in disposition) at least, to comply with her father's commands se far as to see Mr. Stanfield, and hear what he had to say.

Laura bit her lips with suppressed anger at her mother's weakness, but she stood resolutely, looking through the window, with her back to her sister; and the latter, after a few moment's hesitation, without speaking a word, quitted the room, followed by her mother, who did not wish to hear the remarks which she knew her conduct would excite in the bosom of her eldest. daughter.





The moment they were gone, Laura gave way to the tears of sorrow and vexation, which, in their presence she had restrained.

She was still weeping when Marianne returned ; but she hastily dried up her tears and looked curiously in her sister's face, who, though evidently sorrowful and agitated, did not look so utterly despairing as when she had left the room.

"I suppose I may relate to you, my dear Laura," she observed, "what has passed between Mr. Stanfield and me, without infringing on the rule of conduct which we intend to observe."

Laura replied in the affirmative; and Marianne proceeded :—

"Mr. Stanfield began, by informing me, that he had always, from the first of our acquaintance, considered me as a very prudent and amiable young woman, and one who would make an excellent wife; that he was very lonely and uncomfortable himself, now that he had lost his daughter; and that he should be very happy if I thought I could make myself so with him,—to give me the title of his wife.

I summoned up all my courage to reply to him. I told him that I wassorry he had not mentioned his intentions to me instead of applying to my father, as it would have saved him much trouble, and me a great deal of unnecessary pain; for that however unwilling I felt to act in opposition to my father-s commands, I certainly could never consent to sacrifice my happiness in an union which was decidedly revolting to my feeling.





He looked mortified and angry, and replied, that he should have considered it not acting properly, if he had made his proposals to me before they would be acceptable to my family; that my father had assured him that my affections were disengaged; and, finally, that he could not conceive what objection I could have to a marriage which, he hinted, I should find more advantageous than he had even represented to my father.

I was provoked," continued Marianne, " at his blind vanity; and I, therefore, hesitated less than I should otherwise have done to wound his feelings, and immediately said,—

'My age, sir, is little more than eighteen years: I will not presume to guess at your's, but I cannot be wrong in saying, it more than doubles mine, as the daughter, whose loss you lament, was (you have told me yourself) some years older than myself. I am apt to think that you greatly mislead yourself in thinking that you could be happy with one whose habits and feelings differ so greatly as mine must from yours; but, for myself, I must decidedly assure you that it i9 an insurmountable objection.

He muttered something about my having deceived him, and encouraged his attentions; and I, in return, assured him, that had I had the least suspicion of his motives, I should have acted very differently.

"You are very positive, Miss Marianne," he observed, " I think if you were to give a little time for consideration, you would see the matter in a very different light. It is not every day, Miss Marianne, that you will meet with a man who is willing to settle all his property upon you, and will keep you a carriage, and servants, and a town house, and a country house—





M He would have proceeded, I interrupted kim-r-*' ,-. ..... ......

'AH l;he inducements, sir, you can offer, wjftl, J assure you, have no weight with me,—my wishes and desires are too limitted to allow such considerations to influence me in the smallest degree.'

• Ah! you're very young, Miss Marianne, very young, indeed, and you dont know the value of what you reject: but your father knows your interest better than you do, and I shall trust to his influence and authority to induce you to listen to an offer which you'll be sure to repent refusing.'"

"This threat, my dear {.aura, (for such I could not but consider it) roused all my spirit; and I represented, in such strong terms, the cruelty and folly of his conduct, that the old man seemed almost alarmed, and, I believe, began to think that he had mistaken my character: and that instead of being the mild, complying being his fancy had painted me, I was a complete termagant in disguise.

I wish I had had but spirit and resolution to keep up the character, for I think it would have frightened him out of of his matrimonial projects; but, unfortunately, as usual, my resentment evaporated in tears, and though he protested again and again that he could not bear to see a woman cry, yet it emboldened him to renew his persecution; and, at last, in order to avoid his having recourse to his threat of requesting my father's interference, I was obliged to compromise, and consent that he should continue to visit here, and trust to time to reconcile me to his addresses : at the same time promising that he would not press the subject, until I should give him leave. I need not say, Laura, that that will be never; but if I can but gain time, something may fortunately occur to rid me of his odious proposals."





Laura did not approve of this temporizing »—she would have wished her sister to have acted with decision, and dismissed her antiquated suitor at once,— but she recollected her stipulation, and was silent.

From this period Mr. Stanneld was a regular visitor, and Marianne, though wearied to death with his tiresome assiduity, was compelled to submit, rather than hazard an appeal to her father.

Matters Were in this position, when, through the medium of James the gardener, they became acquainted with the visit of Mr. Carleton to their father, which had been kept a profound secret.

Scarcely could Laura suppress the expression of her resentment when she returned home, but Marianne's representations that she would be more likely to injure Julian than benefit him, prevailed, and she was obliged to trust to chance for the probability of leting Julian know of the arrival of his uncle, and the prospect of his providing handsomely for him.

It was not long, however, before even this vague hope vanished; for Laura overheard her father telling Mrs. Vincent, in a tone of exultation, that that troublesome fellow, old Carleton, had been obliged to go abroad again, the climate of England having been pronounced unfavorable to his health.

Laura heard this information with dismay;—for though no longer esteeming Julian as she had done, she yet felt sufficient interest for him, to be greatly hurt that he should miss so favorable an opportunity of bettering his fortune.

''





It was not long after this that James, the gardener, met Julian, and informed him of what had passed: and on the following day Laura and Marianne accidentally passed the honest gardener's cottage, who immediately related to them his recent interview with the object of their solicitude. \ .'/

Marianne melted into tears, and Laura's eyes sparkled with pleasure, as they listened to James' circumstantial narrative of all he had said, and Julian had said,—and how the latter had looked, and sighed,— and how distracted he had seemed, when he, James, had told him that it was talked that Miss Marianne was going to be married.

"Oh! why did you say that, James?" exclaimed Marianne. I am not 1 never meant; and now 1 am

sure I am more than ever "She paused and blushed, conscious that she was betraying too much; and Laura immediately added,—

i* But we shall see him, you say, on Sunday, James; and then we shall be able to explain to him ourselves all that has happened." .

Marianne's heart throbbed tumultuously at the idea that she should once again see Julian, and hear from his own lips an explanation of all that bad appeared mysterious in his conduct;—hear, too, probably, what only his eyes had hitherto uttered, that she was the •xclusive object of his affection.

He had said so to James—he had avowed that his whole soul was devoted to-her, and it was not probable that he would conceal from her, what he had so openly revealed to another.

The hours seemed double their usual length, until Sunday arrived, both to Laura and Marianne; but tire wished-for time at length arrived; and the sisters, with beating hearts, commenced their usual walk.





"It will not be proper," observed Marianne, in an enquiring tone, "for us to call at the cottage, Laura; but they will be sure to be watching for us, and—"

"And if they are not," replied the frank-hearted Laura," I assure you I shall go in. Do you suppose that I am going to stand on such punctilios with Julian, whom I have always considered as my brother, and loved—aye, ten times as much as i ever did Edward."

Marianne blushed deeply.—

"Edward is certainly not a very affectionate disposition," she observed, " and, therefore, one cannot feel any great tenderness towards him; but still he is our brother, and one ought to love him better than Julian."

Laura looked at her with surprise.—

"Well, Marianne, I should not have expected to hear that from you," she observed; " but pray how comes it that you do not practise what you preach V

Marianne held down her head; she was conscious of the injustice of the feeling which had prompted her speech—and she was rejoiced that Laura had not discovered it; for the remainder of the walk, therefore, she continued silent, though, as they approached the cottage, she trembled so violently, that Laura forgot all her anger against her, and entreated her to summon up courage, and not expose her feelings to those around.

James was standing at his door, awaiting their approach; but the first glimpse of his countenance bespoke disappointment: and Laura immediately, in a petulant tone, exclaimed,—





"So, after all his fine speeches, he has not thought it worth while to come so far to see us."

"We know not what may have happened, Laura, to prevent him," observed Marianne, though she could not suppress her tears at this cruel disappointment.

James was sure, he said, that something very extraordinary had prevented Mr. Julian's coming; indeed, he was afraid that he had fretted himself ill: and, if he did not hear from him, he should certainly either go or send to his lodgings in the course of a few days, let it cost what it would.

Laura eagerly seconded this proposition; and, having deposited, unseen, on the table, all the contents of her purse, (which was never very liberally supplied) Marianne and herself proceeded to church, though she felt but little in a frame of mind for devotion, since her thoughts were wandering to Julian, and conjecturing what could have become of him, or had happened, to prevent his keeping his appointment.





CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH.



"'Tii liberty alone, that gives the flow

Of fleeting life its lustre and perfume,—

And we are weeds without it."



Cowper,

We left Julian sunk in the lowest depths of despair, —every hope, every motive for exertion had deserted him; and from morn till night his hours were passed in apparent listless apathy, abstracted from all around him, and silently enduring' all the taunts and insults of the beings, who, unable to comprehend or sympathize in his feelings, considered him as a fair object for their unfeeling and senseless ribaldry.

The turnkey, who had noticed him so particularly as the companion of Ryland and Crawford, sometimes fixed his eyes on him with a look of curiosity, and at last addressed him,—

"You dont look much improved by your idle life here, young man:" he observed, I'm afraid you dont keep a very grand table."





"That is the least of,my regret," returned Julian, sighing' deeply.

"Have you no friends who could help you," enquired the man. ;-

"None whom 1 would trouble," returned Julian, colouring at the thoughts that rushed into his mind.

"Well, but that's very foolish, for if you dont get somebody to speak for you at the sessions, you'll stand a poor chance."

"I am quite indifferent what becomes of me," replied Julian, in a despondent tone,—f* I have only one wish, and that is to die."

- u Psha!—that's all botheration," returned the turnkey; " a young fellow, like you, indeed, talk of dying :—but I suppose you were never locked up before."

Julian proudly replied in the negative.

"And yet I doubt if it will be the last time, if you have much conversation with them two chaps that were here when you first came, and seemed to be old acquaintances of your's. They're been carrying on a roaring trade a long while, but they'll get nabbed at last, you may depend upon it. I dont know how they managed it this time, for I thought they were book'd sure enough, but howsomever the pitcher goes often to the well, and comes back at last broken."

"I do not understand you," replied Julian," I know nothing of those young men, but that they are dissipated and extravagant,—but you, probably, know more of them than I do."

"I don't expect you to own to any thing more," returned the man, with a significant leer; however, as you seem to be but new to this sort of work, I would advise you to keep your neck out of the haker, if you can." i





Julia* was thunderstruck at this expression, but the turnkey waited not to give any explanation, and he was left to form his own conjectures as to the meaning ofii

Though doubtful as to their deserving, to the full extent, the insinuations of the jailor, Julian no longer felt sorry that Ryland had forgotten or neglected his promise of visiting him.

I had better remain here for ever, he reflected, than owe my liberty to the interference of men, whose acquaintance, if this man's insinuations are to [be believed, reflects nothing but infamy and disgrace.

Another week passed heavily and gloomily away, —Julian's heart sank still lower at the prospect which awaited him; his bodily strength, too, yielded to the agitation of his mind, and the difference of his mode of life; and, though he uttered no complaint, his countenance too plainly betrayed the excess of his sufferings.

It was some time before his illness was observed, and then there was ilittle of kindness or sympathy in the attention that was shewn him; but in a day or two it was discovered necessary to remove him into the part of the prison appointed for the sick.

Julian felt quite indifferent to the change;—he was weary of life, and, had he consulted his own feelings only, he would have taken no means to prolong a wretched existence; but he was too weak and debilitated to oppose the means which were adopted for his recovery.





The medical man who was summoned to his assistance seemed to regard him with particular interest." u "Your name and features both appear known to me," he observed, " yet I cannot recal where I have seen you before." .; i' , . . :i - ., . i. - . o. .. Julian scarcely raised his languid eye as he replied,—r ." I know- not, sir.; but 1 think you are mistaken, I am known but to very few, for my short life has been chiefly passed in retirement. Would I were now far from a world which has treated me with the greatest injustice and cruelty." . -». >.i --!..i .;./

"So young and so despondent;" observed the gen* tleman, " pardon me, I do not wish to hurt your feelings, but on what charge are you confined here;" - , Julian smiled, but it was a smile of bitterness, as he replied,— ; . . . , „..t ; / . :. .. - -"mm i i-..

"In this place I shall not be credited when I (declare,—on a charge as groundless and unprovoked as if it were preferred at this moment against yourself: —but I fear you will not have patience to listen to my story." ... ...... - -. ...i i' t :- -v r.#.» !.:... i»\ms!

"Yes, yes, pray proceed I" exclaimed the gentlemam". ,.. .. . a ... * ,i .. . --- 'v-ii.

Julian did proceed, as well as his weakness would let him, to relate his accidental rencontre with Susan, and the consequences it had drawn upon him; and his auditor, after testifying strong marks of indignation afcjhe hypocritical and merciless conduct of his prosecutor, said, " But have you no friends who would become your sureties, and liberate you from thisplace."

Julian merely replied in the negative:—he did not wish to enter further into detail than was necessary to vindicatjfJiim from the charge under which he was suffering; but his benevolent auditor was not to be so easily satisfied, and again he returned to the attack,—





"I cannot divest myself of the idea that I have seen you before," he observed, still looking earnestly at him; "and now 1 recollect, are you not a relative of Mr. Vincent, of"

"Yes, yes," interrupted Julian, peevishly, and immediately recognizing the person of the speaker, as one whom Mr. Vincent, had called in, in his medical capacity, some time before he had quitted them.

"Good heavens! does your uncle know your situation V enquired the stranger.

"No !" replied Julian; "and let me intreat you, if you have the smallest compassion for me, that you will not let him know it. I would consent to be imprisoned for life rather than submit to any obligation from a man to whose injustice and inhumanity I owe every evil I have suffered."

* I have no great respect for Mr. Vincent myself," returned the gentleman, " for I consider him an ostentatious overbearing man, whose pride is only equalled by his meanness; but it is his duty to see that justice is done you, and if you are incapable of providing for yourself, it is also his duty to see that you are properly taken care of. There is, therefore, no obligation in the case; nevertheless, if it is your wish to remain here, I will certainly not interfere, though I am very sorry to see a young man of your educJMp and talents in such a melancholy situation." :'«/^

Julian sighed deeply as he replied, that it wasf^ certainly his wish to conceal his present misfortune from Mr. Vincent; and he then, with tremulous anxiety, demanded, if Mr. Austin (which wa^p^.name





of the surgeon) had beard any thing of, or seen, Mr. Vincent's daughters lately.

Mr. Austin replied in the negative. He was no longer Mr. Vincent's medical attendant he said, for he could not submit to the insolent airs of superiority which that gentleman assumed, and was now too, entirely removed from that neighbourhood and connection.

"But I can see them," he continued, observing Julian's look of disappointment, "for I still visit several families in the neighbourhood of their residence, and more than one where they occasionally call. If therefore, you consider it would be beneficial to you, I will let them know your present situation."

Julian's palid cheek was crimsoned, as he impetuously replied,—

"No, no, no !—sooner let me die unnoticed and unknown, than be thus degraded in their eyes!—'Tis true, I suffer innocently;—but the inhabitant of a prison!—Oh, no !—Marianne would shrink from the contamination of my presence, should I ever live to see ber!"

Mr. Austin was convinced of what he had before suspected, that the fever, under which his patient was suffering, had deranged his reasoning powers; and he, therefore, made no reply to this rhapsody, but inwardly resolving that he would, without further delay, try itfiat effect a candid relation of all he had learned would have on the hearts of Mr. Vincent's daughters. He recommended Julian to keep himself as quiet as possible,—and, having ordered what he thought necessary, left him, with a promise of seeing him early on the fi5%»wing day.





It was so long since Julian had heard the voice of sympathy, or met with a being with whom he could converse, that he felt grieved at seeing the benevolent Mr* Austin depart, and for some time he lay buried in the train of thought which his interview with the former had suggested.

The change of situation and diet, and the freedom from the annoyances which he had suffered, in being exposed to the ribaldry and insolence of the unthinking wretches, with whom he had been obliged to associate, might have been expected to have operated favorably on Julian's mind and disorder, but, for some days, the very reverse seemed to be the case, and the kind-hearted Mr. Austin, fearful of adding to the fevered agitation of his mind, forbore to mention the subject which was uppermost in his thoughts,—his recent interview with those whose names were generally the theme of J ulian's delirious ravings. At length however, the violence of the disorder was subdued: but Julian sank into a state of mental and bodily weakness, which seemed to defy the skill and attention of his anxious attendant, who, at length, judged it necessary to endeavour to rouse him by any means that might act as a stimulus. He, therefore, without any prelude, on one of his visits, observed, that he had seen the Misses Vincent the day before, and that they were most anxious on his (Julian's) account.

Julian's faded eye was immediately lit up with more of energy and intelligence than he had for a long time evinced, and he said, with a deep sigh,—

"Marianne! does she stili care forme?—but 1 do not doubt it; for she would pity the most worthless being that ever existed, if they were suffering."





"But Marianne's pity for you is promptedbyamuch warmer feeling," returned Mr. Austin, " or I am greatly mistaken in my judgment of symptoms. I am sure I should. be the vainest fellow alive, could I natter myself.that I possessed so warm an interest in such a fair bosom."

Julian looked anxiously in the good doctor's face, and the latter proceeded :—

"You would not attend to me before, or I would have told you that I had seen your cousins the very day after 1 first beheld you here, and that, though I broke as cautiously as possible to them your situation, they were both of them in agonies.

Laura would have immediately flown to her rather, and on her knees entreated him to release you from prison, but I represented to her that in the state you were in it would be dangerous to remove you, and that I was sure it would be fatal to you, were you to discover that Mr. Vincent was the person to whom you owed your relief."

Julian testified, by a faint movement of his head, his concurrence in this assurance of Mr. Austin's, and the latter proceeded.

"Marianne, though she said less than her sister, was, if possible, more affected by my intelligence; and indeed, for some time, I almost blamed myself for having made the communication, for her silence and dreadful paleness, were more alarming than faintings, hysterics, or all the usual methods by which ladies generally express their grief.

'Can Avb not see him, Mr. Austin V said the warmhearted Laura, (whom, by the bye, if I were a single man, and a few years younger, I should fall desperately in love with,) ' Can we not see him ?—It would, I know, be a great consolation to him to be assured, from our own lips, how sincerely we feel for him. Indeed Marianne and I have both been miserable ever since James the gardener went to London, and the wretch who put Julian in prison told him that he was gone no one knew whither: and we have had a thousand terrible thoughts, sometimes we imagined he had gone out of the kingdom, and at others we have been terrified lest he should have been driven by despair to end his own existence.





Thank God he is alive, and however wretched his situation, it is not irreparable. If he recovers his health, his ardent spirit will soon surmount the difficulties of his circumstances. I am certain—I am sure, that Julian Carleton was never born to linger in obscurity.'

I could have kissed the sweet enthusiast," continued Mr. Austin, " but my attention was diverted from her by the voice of her timid sister, who, for the first time, was able to articulate a sentence.

'She enquired if you ever spoke of your friends ?— If you were treated with kindness by the people who attended you ?—and how long I thought it probable your illness would l»st?'

To her first questions, I replied, of course, in the affirmative; and to the last that it was impossible for me to fix - any precise period, but that it depended greatly on yourself, for if you did not rouse yourself, and shake off the enervating lassitude of body and mind, which was the chief obstacle of your regaining your perfect health, all my efforts and attentions, were thrown away."





Julian's change of countenance evinced that this hint was not lost upon him and warmly pressing his friendly admonisher's hand, he promised that he would henceforth be more attentive to his advice.

"I have .still something left to live for!" he exclaimed, while tears of gratitude swelled in his eyes, "With such friends as Laura Vincent and yourself* I cannot consider myself deserted and unhappy!"

"Zounds!" exclaimed Mr. Austin, "what has Marianne Vincent done, that she is to be excluded from the compact;—but I see how it is,—you cannot class Marianne under the cold name of friend. Well, I admire your candour, and I advise you, by all means, to prove your gratitude for her affection, by striving to get well as fast as you can; for if you will but set a resolution to be well, your cure is more than half effected."

Julian soon proved the truth of this assurance. No. longer brooding over his misfortunes as irreparable, and considering himself as proscribed and abandoned by the whole world, he pondered on the (he hoped) prophetic words of his sanguine friend, Laura, and considered his present sufferings but as a heavy cloud, * which would pass away and be succeeded by sunshine. There were some moments, it was true, when desponding and anxious thoughts would intrude, when he would say to himself,—

"What right have I to expect that my releasement from here will be the termination of my sorrows. Without a home to go to, or the means of subsistence for

more than a few weeks "But these doubts and

fears were speedily banished by a recurrence to his friend, Mr. Austin's often expressed assurance, that something would arise to befriend his efforts to support himself independently, and that, as far as his (Mr. Austin's) support and recommendation would go, he might rely on the assistance of, at least, one disinterested frieild.





CHATTER THE SEVENTEENTH.



One,-who, with a mighty air,

Makes flourishes of trumpets;

In asking you to eat a pear,



Or pressing you to crumpets j

Then throws a farthing to a beggar,

Because he looks so monstrous eager.



Or one who with a tongue so meek,

As if it could not stir;

Will flatter you,till you are sick,



In hopes you'll flatter her.

Leigh Hunt.



THE period which was to decide whether Julian was to triumph over the malice and villainy of his hypocritical prosecutor, or to be still further the victim of his falsehood and duplicity, arrived.

Julian was still very weak, and bearing in his appearance evident proofs of the effect of his confinement and illness, and all Mr. Austin's interest was exerted to render the forms of law (with which he was obliged to comply) as bearable as possible to him.

Scarcely, however, could Julian raise his head to meet the gaze of the crowd with which he was surrounded, wheu he took his scat among' those whose crimes or misfortunes had subjected to the same ordeal.





The friendly surgeon staid by him as long as possible; and it was owing to his whispered suggestions, that Julian raised his eyes,s and, after a moment's reflection, looked prbudly around him.

"That will do now!" said Mr. Austin, " 1 see you have recovered yourself,—so adieu for the present;—I shall have my eyes fixed upon you, recollect; though I think you dont want that inducement to exert yourself"

Julian did exert himself; and he soon became perfectly indifferent to the stare of the assembled crowd; but he started, when, on casually glancinghis eyesever his immediate companions, he discovered the weH known hypocritical features of his prosecutor, Susan's unfeeling deceptive husband.

The man averted his face from Julian's indignant gaze; and the latter, after a few moments' reflection was struck with the apparent incongruity of his prosecutor's being seated among, and in the place particularly appointed for, the prisoners.

There was no one near, however, to whom he could express his surprise, or ask for an explanation of thi s apparently, mysterious circumstance; and, concluding, at length, that the man must have intruded himself unobserved, in order more effectually to glut his malice, by a sight of his (Julian's) degradation, the latter turned contemptuously from him; nor did he condescend to bestow a single glance on the being whom he considered unworthy of even his contempt, until the name of' Thomas Wildred,' loudly called upon by the court, caught his ear.

This was the old man's nanie; and Julian, suppose "11. 2 I





ing that he should be next named, hastily and haughtily arose, as his prosecutor stepped forward, with his head declining, and, apparently, his whole frame tottering, to the bar.

"Sit down, sir!" whispered one of the officers of the court, to whose attention Mr. Austin had particularly recommended Julian, "Sit down," he repeated, laying his hand on his shoulder, " you are not wanted yet." Julian did sit down, overwhelmed with surprise . at all he heard and saw; but his astonishment increased, when, in a few minutes, he distinctly beard the prisoner at the bar, Thomas Wildred, charged with a fraud upon his employers, one of whom, in the course of his evidence, detailed the grossest system of deception and hypocrisy on the part of the prisoner, whose strict practice of all the outward forms of religion, and apparent sanctity of life, had induced them to place unlimited confidence in him.

He had been the monitor and instructor of the whole family; and Julian scarcely knew which deserved the most contempt, the hypocrisy of the culprit, or the gross credulity and fanaticism of his prosecutor, who talked of having considered Thomas a shining light of grace, and one who would bring down a blessing upon his house, and had let him rob him so palpably and daringly before his face, that it was evident that none but the most daring, as well as unprincfpled wretch could have attempted.

Julian was fixed in earnest attention to the proceedings, not without an occasionally agitated recollection of the effect this exposure would have upon his own case, when Mr. Austin gently touched his shoulder, and whispered,—





"I am glad to see you are so interested. This is much such another fellow, I think, as your canting prosecutor."

"It is himself;—the very same," returned Julian, eagerly. - .

"I was thinking you were drawing the comparison," replied Mr. Austin, " when I first beheld you so attentive."

"You mistake me, my dear sir!" said Julian; " I do not mean that he resembles, but that he is the identical man,—the Thomas Wildred, whose malice placed me in this situation."

"What, now—what!" exclaimed Mr. Austin, " this fellow? but are you sure, quite sure, my dear lad?"

"Yes, quite certain," returned Julian: "I saw him long before he was called upon, but 1 thought"

Mr: Austin did not wait to hear Julian's conjecture, but hastily pushed his way through the crowd, and in a few moments Julian beheld him in earnest conversation with one of the counsellors who surrounded the table.

In a very short time Mr. Wildred's trial concluded. The jury, without a moment's hesitation, pronounced him guilty, and he was sentenced to a long period of imprisonment.

Julian saw him taken from the bar, and conducted away by the officers who surrounded him, but-he sedulously avoided looking at the fallen being, whom his heart would not suffer him to triumph over: and when Mr. Austin, in an exulting tone, whispered,—

"Thank God, he has at last met with his deserts," Julian's reply was,—





"I hope k wilt be the means of restoring him to the paths of sincerity and troth."

"Restore him to a halter! for that is the path he will tread, and quickly too, or I am deceived in his countenance," returned Mr. Austin, warmly.

A loud command of silence lecalled his recollection; and Julian waited impatiently to hear the sound of his own name.

Inn few minutes Julian Carleton was called upon, and he stepped firmly and quickly forward, his cheek glowing and his heart throbbing, but without a trace of the weakness he had so recently felt.

Thomas Wildred was now called upon to substantiate his charge, but no one appeared to answer to that name; and the counsellor to whom Julian had observed Mr. Austin speaking, rising, informed the court that the man who had been recently convicted of the grossest hypocrisy and dishonesty, was the person to whose false accusation his client (Mr. Carleton) owed several weeks' painful imprisonment, and the degradation of appearing at that bar.

Every eye was now turned in pity on the glowing countenance of the victim to the old man's treachery and malice; and Julian felt himself once more clear from the stigma which had been attached to his name, and at liberty.

He bowed respectfully to the court when informed that there no longer existed any charge against him; and, taking the arm of his friend, Mr. Austin, hurried out into the open air, the refreshing influence of which soon restored his scattered senses, and convinced him of the joyous truth that he was indeed at liberty, and freed from all tb*» consequences which he had apprehended from the determined malignancy of the man who had oppressed him.





"Well, how do you find yourself now V de manded Mr. Austin, who had been smilingly watching his animated countenance; "strong enough, do you think, to walk to Highgate, and announce your deliverance from the snares of the Philistines to some of your friends?

"I do not know," returned Julian; '* I am almost afraid that even my longing desire to see my cousins would scarcely support me so far."

"Well we must try what my magical powers will do to bring them within our circle," replied. Mr. Austin, significantly. . .

Julian's heart beat:—he could scarcely believe it possible that he should see Marianne and Laura; 'yet Mr. Austin's manner would have led him to think that was intended; and,-in silence, he proceeded with his

companion to a neat house in place, Penton

ville.

"Has your mistress any company?" demanded Mr. Austin of the servant.

"Only the two young ladies that you left with her," was the reply.

Julian could scarcely reach the top of the stairs, wbichhis companion ascended, motioning him to follow; and before he had time to recollect himself he was in the presence of Laura and Marianne, the former of -whom sprang forward to meet him, while Marianne, uttering a faint ejaculation of thankfulness, sank down on the sopha, completely overcome with the violence of her emotion.

Julian hastily returned the kind salutation of his

i





cousin Laura;—lie rushed forward, and passionately strained the weeping Marianne to his heart.

"Oh, Julian, how ill you look!—and you have suffered-1—"Marianne paused, unable to finish the sentence.

"All my sufferings are repaid by the happiness of this minute," murmured Julian, gazing enraptured on her lovely speaking face, which declining beneath his ardent looks, sunk on his shoulder.

Laura approached, and Julian, recalled to recollection by her utterance of " Marianne!" in an expostulating tone, gently disengaged himself from the trembling girl, and consigned her to her sister's care; while, with glowing cheeks, he apologized for his apparent rudeness to the lady present, whom Mr. Austin introduced as his wife, and whose presence Julian had before scarcely noticed.

Mrs. Austin was a well-looking,middle-aged woman, whoafFected a great dealof urbanity and good humour, but whose countenance and tone of voice were by no means prepossessing, for there was a look of shrewd and conscious sagacity in the former, which, however useful, is by no means amiable in a female, while the sharp and discordant tone, in which her observations were uttered,' confirmed the opinion which her physiognomy created of the sharpness of her character.

It was very evident that curiosity had been Mrs. Austin's predominant motive in assisting the views of her husband in regard to Julian and his cousins, and she received the apologies of the former with a look which evinced that she considered them quite proper and necessary, while Julian, feeling not quite comfortable and satisfied under her penetrating looks, silently reflected on his unpleasant situation.





Laura entered into conversation with Julian; and expressed her happiness at his escape from the malice of his foe, the particulars of which Mr. Austin related. She spoke also of her sorrow that he could not get any intelligence of his uncle Carleton, of whose intentions towards him there could not exist a doubt.

Julian felt grateful for the kindness and affection which was visible in every word Laura uttered; yet his [proud heart ached at appearing an object of pity and protection, and he slurred over her enquiries as to what were his views and intentions for the future, as a matter he had as yet scarcely considered.

Laura seemed to comprehend his motives, and her feeling heart sympathized in his mortification, though she still felt anxious on the subject which he avoided.

Mr. Austin drew her aside, and Laura heard, with pleasure, that he meant to make Julian an offer of initiating him into his own profession, and trusting to his future gratitude for a recompence.

She could not doubt Julian's willingness to accede to this plan, which appeared to her most eligible; and while she warmly eulogized Mr. Austin's kindness and humanity, she was not sparing of her encomiums on Julian, who, she predicted, would do honour to his patronage, and repay, to the full extent, every favor.

Abashed by Mrs. Austin's earnest observation, Julian and Marianne exchanged but a few words, though their stolen glances spoke a language sufficiently intelligible; but there was one subject on which Julian was longing to be enlightened, and which weighed heavily on his heart, as he gazed on her tearful eyes, the silken lids of which drooped beneath his glance, while deep sighs continually heaved her fair bosom, and betrayed thoughts that crept in (o poison the happiness of the present hour*





Was it true vvhat James had lolil him,—that her father wished to force her into an union with one whose disparity of years forbade her to think of him with any sensation but disgust and aversion ?—Julian longed to learn the particulars from jitr own lips, but Mrs. Austin's keen eyes were on him, and he was condemned still to bear the pangs of incertitude.

"I fear," observed Laura, at length, looking at her watch, "that we are already trespassing on the time which is allotted us. Marianne, my dear, we shall scarcely have time to reach Mr. Huntly's early enough for dinner.''

Marianne arose, without daring to lift her eyes t* Julian, whose agitation, if possible, exceeded Iter's.

"We must part, then, my dear girls," he observed, taking a hand of each, and endeavouring to assume a serene air, " we must part, probably not to meet again for a long period. It is impossible for words to express the gratitude I feel for the interest you have taken in my fate. I have only to say, that let that fate be what it may, I will never disgrace your friendship. I have been unfortunate, perhaps imprudent, but I have never voluntarily deserved other than kind thoughts from the fair and dear companions of my childhood."

"I believe it," said Laura, warmly, and returning the affectionate pressure of his hand; " but Julian, though it is possible we may be prevented meeting you again speedily, remember that we shall expect to hear of your welfare ;—you know the means, (and she looked significantly at Julian) by which a letter will





reach us some time, if not immediately, and, therefore, can have no excuse for leaving us in ignorance.of your situation, from time to time."

Julian's eyes evinced the pleasure he felt at this arrangement, for he immediately comprehended that Laura alluded to James, the gardener; and a thought, that through his agency, he might be able sometimes to see, as well as write to, his lovely relatives, seemed' to remove half the pains of parting.

"God bless you, Julian!" added Laura, and turning to Mr. and Mrs. Austin, she gra^fully thanked them for their kindness and indulgence, which she hoped, she said, one day to be able to prove her recollection of, more powerfully than by words."

This hint did not appear to be lost on Mrs. Austin, who began a very ceremonious profession of the happiness she felt at being able to oblige two such amiable young ladies; and Julian, profiting by her attentfon being thus engaged, seized the opportunity to whisper to Marianne,—

"And will Marianne suffer me to depart, without any proof that she, too, still retains the affection which she once encouraged the unfortunate Julian to believe was his?" ^ c.

"I do,—1 have ever felt for you, Julian, the sincerest affection," murmured the blushing girl; "Laura knows how I have suffered ;—and when 1 thought that you had forgotten me,—oh, Julian! I should have been glad to have known that you were happy, but I could have wished to have died."

Julian pressed the fair hand he held passionately to his lips, as he replied, with ardour,—





"Forget you!—Oh, Marianne! when I forget you, my heart must have ceased to beat for ever."

"Come, my dear, dear girl!" exclaimed Laura, taking Marianne's arm, " we shall get into disgrace,— we shall indeed, if we stay gossiping any longer;" and nodding an adieu to Julian, with a look which entreated him not to prolong the scene of parting, which Marianne already felt too forcibly, she hurried the latter from the room; and, in a few moments, Julian saw them hastening towards a hackney coach which was waiting at the end of the street for them.

"Well, my dear," observed Mr. Austin, turning to his wife, "I think I could now eat my dinner with a tolerable appetite, if it were ready."

"Dear me, I'm sure I thought you had dined!—I did not understand that you would come home to dinner, much less bring any one with you, Mr. Austin," replied the lady, "therefore I am totally unprovided. "There's the cold beef to be sure, in the house, and if you like that, the cloth shall be laid in a minute."

Mr. Austin uttered an impatient, psha! and then turning round to Julian, observed,—

"I dont think cold beef will suit your palate any more than mine; so we'll go and see if we cant get some dinner elsewhere."

Julian felt aukwardly situated;—he saw that Mr. Austin expected hhn to accept his proposal, and, at the same time he comprehended, from Mrs. Austin's anxious looks, that he should incur her displeasure if he did so;—after a moment's hesitation, therefore, he replied,—

"I have really been too happy, sir, for the last hour or two, to think of eating or drinking: nor does my appetite seem much keener now."





"And yet," observed Mrs. Austin, " I suppose you have not had too much"

"Let us have the beef," interrupted the worthy doc tor, "I would rather have beef than tongue!" and he looked expressively at his wife, who returned him a not very unequivocal look of defiance.

The cloth was laid, and Julian and his host seated themselves at the table.

The beef was coarse and tough; the bread stale and dry; and the ale (as Mrs. Austin called it) weak and muddy; yet she descanted, all the while they were eating, on the high price she gave for every article of provision; and Julian, who naturally felt this a prohibition to be too free in making use of what was placed before him, was heartily rejoiced when Mr. Austin's appetite was satisfied, and they arose from the table.

"You have had a fine specimen," observed the latter, when his lady had quitted the room, "of our fare; but the fact is that Mrs. Austin, though a pretty good wife in the main, is a great deal too fond of what she calls economy, but which I christen by another name. Sometimes I give up to her for the sake of peace and quietness, as I have done to day; but, in general, 1 manage to counteract her saving schemes, and often, I believe, run into extravagances which I should not think of, were it not that her meanness provokes me to it."

Julian felt sorry that so worthy and kind-hearted a man should have any drawback on his domestic comforts, and that this was a considerable one, he was convinced both from his own observation and Mr. Austin'* manner; but tbe latter soon interrupted hie reflections.





V I suppose, Mr. Carleton, you have as yet formed no plan for the future."

Julian replied in the negative.

"Well, then, I have a proposal to make to you," said Mr. Austin;" but, first,—would you have any objection to the medical profession?"

Julian replied that it was a subject he had never given a moment's consideration to; but he certainly should feel no aversion, were there not so many obstacles in the way.

"None but what I think I can remove," observed Mr. Austin. "I have long had it in contemplation to take a pupil, and I never saw any one I should like better than yourself. I am, thank God, sufficiently easy in my circumstances, to render the ready money of no consequence, and will, therefore, readily wait till you get forward in the world for payment; but as there is another person in the world who looks sharp after money concerns, and whom, for your sake, I wish to satisfy, we must have a regular agreement: suppose we say fifty pounds a year for three years.

"But, my dear sir, if I should be unfortunate, and unable to repay"

"We will trust to that," interrupted Mr. Austin*; "all 1 have to add is, that I beg you will be as reserved and cautious as possible with Mrs. A , and

especially do not let her draw from you any intelligence as to money matters. 1 have represented you >as having a small independence, and, for your own sake as well as mine, you must confirm this. Leave. to me the means of satisfying her as to payments; for cunning as she is, she is not able to fathom all my mystifications."





Julian could scarcely repress a smile at the air of self-gratulation with which Mr. Austin boasted of being able to deceive his wife; but the lady entered, and a significant look from his patron restrained the expressions of gratitude the former was on the point of uttering.

Fearing that Mrs. Austin would consider his further stay intrusive, Julian arose to take leave, but his friend prevented him.

"Where are you going, Carleton?" he observed; "I know you are unprovided with lodgings, and as the room which will be your's is vacant, you may as well take possession of it at once. I believe we per. fectly understand each other, and our agreement can all be regularly concluded to-morrow, and then, too, you can send for your clothes and books, for I suppose your late landlord's wife has taken care of them, without the old fellow appropriated them to himself, which, it appears, he was very capable of doing."

Julian expressed his fear that he was giving extraordinary trouble, but Mr. Austin would not hear a word on the subject; and his lady, after a few demurring looks, observed, "That it would make no difference whether he took possession of the apartment at once, or in a day or two."

"But I have a few words to say to you, Mr. Austin," and she drew her husband on one side, and whispered something in his ear, to which he passionately replied,—

"Zounds, woman! do mind your own business, and leave me to mine."





. "Well, well, Mr. Austin, I only spoke you know, —but you always fly oft" in a passion if I do but open my lips."

"I wish there was a padlock upon them, and I kept the key;" muttered Mr. Austin, * I'll warrant it should not be unlocked often."

Mrs. Austin was commencing a very elaborate reply, but Mr. Austin cut it short by asking Julian to accompany him to the surgery.

"That woman is the plague of my life," he observed, as soon as they were out of hearing.

Julian smiled at his testy manner; and the doctor immediately commenced a long lecture on the folly of getting married young.

■ I was a young fellow like yourself," he observed, "when I met with Mrs. Austin. She was the daughter of the gentleman by whom I was initiated into the mysteries of the pestle and mortar; and all my friends bored me to death about my conquest over Miss Kitty's heart. My father hinted that it would be no bad speculation to make sure of the daughter and the reversion to the old man's business at the same time; my mother admired Miss Kitty's economy, (curse economy, I say!—I am sick of the word) and her management of her father's house;—my aunt thought her very pretty and modest, and my uncle said she had a nice sharp pair of black eyes. In short, I was completely worried and teazed into falling in love with Miss Kitty, who certainly was not wanting in encouragement. I confess I had my qualms and my doubts when I sometimes heard her at table expatiating upon the long haggle she had had with the butcher to get the leg of lamb a halfpenny a pound cheaper than any one





else; and I thought she looked any thing but pretty when, with a slouched bonnet, her petticoats tucked up, and exalted in pattens, she would sally forth of a rainy day to buy bargains."

'For you know, (she would observe, with an air of sagacity) the trades-people are glad to take any thing you'll offer, this weather.'

"But the value of a prudent economical wife was so dunned in my ears, and she was so good tempered and affable, (in my hearing, at least) that I suffered my father to make proposals to the old gentleman, and was led like a lamb to the slaughter, in the bloom of my youth, and have been a miserable devil ever since."

Julian could not suppress his laughter at the seriocomic tone in which this was delivered; but the doctor, shaking his head, exclaimed,—

"Aye, aye, you laugh, Carleton! but I can assure you it's no laughing matter, and I'm afraid you'll find it so before many weeks are over your head; however, there are trials and troubles attending every station in life, and you must try and preserve your patience, if possible."

Julian thought it would not require much patience to sustain such trifling evils as these, and he returned with his friend to the drawing room, where Mrs. Austin was plying her needle with as much industry and perseverance as if her subsistence were to be gained by it.

Again the subject of his clothes, and other valuables, as Mfs. Austin expressed herself, which had been left at his late lodgings, was introduced by the lady, who urged the necessity of immediately enquiring about them.





"You forget it seems, that Mr. Carleton is an invalid,-' said Mr. Austin, " who requires rest and refreshment. He knows, perfectly well, I dare say, how to act, without our dictating to him;—so do pray put away that eternal patchwork, and let us have tea."

"Tea, already! why you have scarce swallowed your dinner. I do declare, Mr. Austin, you are a most unreasonable man !* exclaimed the obedient wife, colouring with anger; "but indeed you must wait a little, for Betty is gone into Holborn to fetch some articles for the house, and you cannot have it till she comes back."

"So you persist then in sending three or four miles for your commodities to save two-pence," observed Mr. Austin, angrily, " though we are everlastingly put to the inconvenience of being obliged to wait two or three hours longer than usual for our meals, because Betty is not able to get home under the load which would be too heavy for a cart-horse."

A long and angry discussion followed this petulant remark; during which, Mrs. Austin displayed quite sufficiently her economizing propensities to warrant all that her husband had said of her, while she dexterously endeavoured to enlist Julian on her side by the grossest flattery, appealing to his judgment, his good sense, and his superior knowledge, for a confirmation of all she alleged in her defence, of the impositions of servants and trades-people,—the necessity of keeping a sharp look out after such kind of people,—and the blessing a man ought to consider a wife, who never for any consideration, either of pleasure or any thing else, would neglect every opportunity of advancing his interest and fortune.





Julian felt all this very tiresome and misplaced; he felt, too, that he should be placed in a very aukward situation between these contending powers; and when, at length, Mrs. Austin, having, as it appeared, exhausted her whole stock of arguments, quitted the room, (to prevent the threatened infliction of summary vengeance on her patchwork, which Mr. Austin declared was the most ridiculous and inelegant occupation a lady could adopt to waste the time, which might otherwise be well employed,) Julian, to avoid a repetition of his friend's complaints, affected to be inclined to sleep; and requesting Mr. Austin's indulgence, reclined his head on the arm of the sopha, and, shutting his eyes, soon forgot all the petty broil he had been listening to, in reflecting on all that had passed in his recent interview with his adored Marianne.





CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.



"And hopes, and fears that kindle hope,

Ad undistinguishaMe throng;

And gentle wishes long subdued, -



Subdued and cherished long.

She wept with pity and delight,



She blush'd with love and virgin shame:

And, like the murmur of a dream,

I heard her breathe my name."



Wadswoeth.

JULIAN was now comparitively free from care and anxiety as to his future life; and Mr. Austin, whose kind heart had long wanted some one on whom to repose that confidence, and with whom to share those feelings which had been so long frozen in their cement by the coldness and apathy of the woman whom he had made the partner of his bosom, was unremitting in his kindness aud attention to his promising pupil: yet Julian was far from happy! the study of the profession he had embraced was not-consonant to his inclinations, his heart revolted from the details of the distressing and degrading ills which " flesh is heir to," and his thoughts were too much occupied in compassionating the wretched sufferers who came under his inspection, to permit his contemplating the decisive means which superior knowledge and less sensibility would have adopted for their relief.





: "Pooh, pooh! you must dismiss from your thoughts all these womanish tendernesses," observed Mr. Austin, when Julian shudderingly spoke of operations, which as yet he had only read of, and earnestly hoped he might never see performed; "you will never rise to any eminence if you do not. Why, now, there is Mr.

and Sir , do you think they ever bestow a

thought on the pains they make their patients suffer? no, to be sure, they consider them as so many machines, on which their own skill and knowledge is to be exemplified, and yet you see they are at the very head of the profession."

Julian, however, soon discovered that Mr. Austin could easier preach than practice on this, as well as some other points; and the aversion of the former to his new avocations, encreased with every hour that he studied.

Other, and more provoking, because more petty, causes of discontent, too, assailed him.—Julian found Mrs. Austin's parsimony and termagant propensities more oppressive and Jiarrassing than his Imagination could have formed an idea of.

Every meal was the signal for a lecture on economy, and a lamentation over the inordinate expenses of housekeeping, or else they were entertained with a detail of the vast savings that were to be made by visiting the different markets, instead of dealing regularly with butchers, cheesemongers, &c., and these remarks always elicited from Mr. Austin's testy nature some provoking strictures on meanness, &c. accompanied with suitable annimadversions on stale fish and vegetables, tough poultry, white beef, and red veal, &c., all which, he declared, wfere tl}e rewards of her cheap bargains, and were enough to make people sick, if they did not absolutely poison them.





Julian could not but see that there was too much truth in these remarks on the quality of the provisions which were so sparingly set before them, and it was most painful to him to be constantly referred to, to vouch for the excellence of what he sometimes almost turned from with disgust.

For a long time his professed ignorance of all that related to the science of good eating, and his declared contentment with the plainest diet, kept him in tolerable favor with the lady hostess, who professed only surprise that a young man, brought up in such a good house as Mr. Vincent's, should not know better, and was inclined to applaud his temperance to the skies, as a proof of extreme good sense; but this would not always avail, nor did Mr. Austin appear quite satisfied with his young friend's caution:—he had hoped to gain in Julian a powerful ally, who would assist him in trying to shame his lady into a more liberal mode of providing for her household, and he was sometimes a little testy at the cautious neutrality which the latter preserved between them.

An hour or two of private conversation, in which Julian was a patient listener to all his friend's lamentations, or a walk with him into the fields, after the business of the day was concluded, never failed to restore Mr. Austin's good humour; but neither walks, nor all the indulgencies which Mr. Austin's wish of conciliatory procured her, could still the indefatigable spirit of reform which kept Mrs. Austin's vigilant eye employed, and her inexhaustible tongue iu motion, from the hour she left her bed, until she returned to it again; and even there, according to Mr. Austin's account, her labours did not cease, for frequently, in the dead of the night, he said, she would start up at some imaginary sound, and terrify herself with the idea that she was being robbed by thieves, foreign or domestics.





The hint which Laura had given Julian respecting writing to them, was of course anxiously adopted, and within the first month of his residence at Mr. Austin's, he had both written and received a reply through the medium of James, the gardener, whom he had taken the first opportunity of visiting, though he was disappointed of that which had been the secret spur of his early visit, the idea of catching a glimpse of his lovely cousins.

James was rejoiced to see his favourite, Mr. Julian, of whose safety, he said, he had been informed by Miss Laura, who had just popped her head in to speak to his wife and him, as she lingered purposely behind Miss Marianne and the old gentleman.

"What old gentleman i" demanded Julian, with a voice of trepidation.

"The—the old gentleman—Mr. Stanfield I think his name is; him that they say,—You know who I mean, Mr. Julian," stammered James, who seemed afraid to speak plainly on a subject which had before excited so much emotion in his auditor's bosom.

Julian sunk upon a chair, and remained for some minutes silent.

"And does this man, this Mr. Stanfield, always accompany my—my cousins?" he added, after a long pause.

"Oh, no, sir—oh, no, Mr. Julian," returned James, eagerly, "he is not often with them, and I'm sure I dont believe if they had their way would ever be with them, for Miss Marianne looks as piteous and as miserable as can be, when he is stuck at her elbow; but I suppose she is obliged to put up with it, for fear of her father."





This last supposition, though Julian confessed its probability, was not very satisfactory to his feelings. He trembled, lest the fear which could induce the gentle and timid Marianne to submit to addresses, which must be so revolting to her feelings, should lead her to a still more degrading sacrifice; and in the letter which he left for James to deliver when he should see an opportunity, and which he addressed to both his cousins, he unequivocally stated all his fears and suspicions on this head,—

"I make no formal professions of love, my dear Marianne," he continued, addressing himself more particularly to the latter, "I feel you do not need them to convince you that my heart is ardently devoted to you, and that to see you in the arms of another would be the heaviest misfortune that could befal me; but when to this is added the misery of knowing that you will be rendered eternally wretched by the same means when I feel that it is condemning you to a living death, to unite your fate with one whose feelings can never assimulate with yours, and to whom the very charms, which have excited his desires to secure you to himself, will be causes for suspicion and distrust hereafter. Oh, Marianne! when 1 reflect what will be your fate, divesting myself of all selfish consideration, I am distracted at the thought.

Write to me, then, oh, Marianne! assure me that you will not suffer your father's violence to terrify you into a compliance with hiswishes: set my mindatrest,by dismissing, for ever, that man who is now permitted to be the companion of your walks, and breathe his odious, fulsome declarations of love in your ear!—I cannot fear his influence, Marianne,—but 1 do fear his perseverance, added to your father's commands, may force you to what I am convinced your heart must abhor!"





Of what regarded his situation Julian spoke very guardedly, and with reserve;—he could not say that he was happy or contented, nor could he speak with pleasure of a profession from which his heart revolted, but he bestowed unlimited praise on Mr. Austin, whose kindness and attention to his interest and comfort, he said, could never be forgotten as long as memory remained.

It was Laura who wrote in reply, and Julian felt disappointed, on glancing his eye throughout the letter, to find not one word addressed to him by Marianne's own hand.

It was a short epistle, and professed to have been written in great baste and fear, as their father had become so suspicious, that they were continually liable to interruption.

Laura related briefly, but clearly, the motives which had induced her sister to bear with the presence of Mr. Stanfield, though she unequivocally assured him, on every opportunity, that her sentiments never could undergo any change.

"But," continued Laura, " your letter has done that which I wished, but dare not attempt to persuade; it has brought Marianne to a determination to rid herself at once of this detestable and foolish old man.





She desires me to assure you that she will act with decision, and that neither her father's threats nor persuasions shall influence her. I hope she will. If any one has power to nerve her mind, it is you ;—therefore, dear Julian, live in hope."

Julian did live in hope, but they were such distant ones, that they were sometimes almost lost in the crowd of difficulties and dangers that opposed his happiness; but youth is sanguine, and there were moments when he dreamed of bliss, and formed plans for futurity, in which Marianne was a participator;— it was such moments as these that enabled him to bear, with calmness, others of an opposite complexion. It was such plans that incited him to strive with the disgust and dislike with which he beheld the profession which he had embraced, and on his success in which depended all his hopes.





CHAPTER THE NINETEENTH



a Pure nature had leave in her actions to speak,

The spirit of youth gave the blush to her cheek;

And her looks uninstructed, her thoughts would impart*

For her eyes only flashed, from the warmth of her heart."



Sheridan.

The information which Mr. Austin had conveyed to Laura and her sister, at the time of his discovery of Julian in the prison, had excited in both of them the liveliest sensations of regret and sorrow. The kind-hearted Doctor, as he was familiarly called, had, through the assistance of a friend who was upon visiting terms with the Vincent's, contrived to get an interview with them, under pretext of pleading in behalf of a former dependant of the family, who was reduced to great distress, and whom, Mr. Vincent entertained some resentment against.

Nobody liked old Vincent, though his money, his house, and his pretensions, procured him some outward marks of respeet, and Mr. Austin's friend immediately credited the story of his neighbour's obduracy, which made a clandestine application to his daughters necessary.





Sufficient of this tale was true to satisfy Mr. Austin's conscience, though he took care not to say that the object of his solicitude, was the handsome youth, whose sudden disappearance from the family, combiued with Marianne's illness immediately after, and the whispers which the servants had spread in the neighbourhood, had excited much conversation at the time, and had caused many a fair bosom to heave with compassion for the unfortunate lovers; and regard, with indignation and dislike, the tyrannical purse-proud Mr. Vincent.

The terms on which Laura now was with the Huntly family, and the probability of her marriage with Alfred, which was only delayed till the arrival from the Indies of a relative, from whom he had great expectations, and without whose consent his father did not think it would be prudent to act, occasioned the sisters to enjoy much more liberty than they had formerly done. On a pretext, therefore, of visiting their friends, they contrived to be in town on the eventful day, which was to decide Julian's fate, and were thus enabled, personally to convince him, that they still retained towards him, all the affection they had ever evinced.

Marianne returned home with her sister, agitated and distressed; but more confirmed in her attachment to Julian than ever. .

The improvement, which a free intercourse with the world had made in his address, the dignity of his commanding figure, and the expression of his striking features, which not even sickness could cloud; all were dwelt upon with rapture by the enamoured girl, who turned with tenfold disgust, from the officious attentions of her antiquated admirer, when next he approached her.





But, (bough Laura's precautions, and prudent forbearance, prevented the secret of their interview with Julian transpiring; Edward Vincent's malicious eyes, soon discovered that there was some secret between his sisters, which he was excluded from participating in; and he immediately set his imagination to work, to discover what it could relate to.

Though far from pitying Marianne for being the object of Mr. Stanfield's persecuting addresses, and, indeed, considering it a match that was very desirable; both to her and her family, Edward's fondness for satire had found ample food in the numerous foibles, which his would-be relative betrayed.

Mr. Stanfield's youthful dress and propensities, his anxiety to be thought a man of gallantry, his fatigueing egotisms, and his stories of " when I stood for Sheriff," which phrase was constantly affixed to any anecdote which occured to him as appropriate, and which were often as incongruous as his own wrinkled visage and juvenile attire; all these afforded sufficient scope for Edward's satirical humour, and Laura and him had formed a sort of fellowship in ridiculing the silly and conceited old man, and famishing him with opportunities, to make himself still more conspicuously ridiculous.

It was in vain, however, that Laura on these occasions, ventured to try to interest her brother in Marianne's favour: he shrank from the slightest concession, that she must inevitably be miserable with such a man, and declared, that she would be a fool if she could not rule such an old blockhead, and make him do as she pleased.





Laura was too well acquainted with her brother's selfish, unfeeling, disposition, to hope any relaxation from this decree; and though she secretly abhorred his want of principle, which could thus glory in making conspicuous the folly of one, whom he expected soon to become the husband of his sister: she could not help enjoying cordially, the light in which he often contrived, even in the presence of Mr. Vincent, to display the conceit and ignorance of the man, whom the latter considered such a desirable alliance.

Taking advantage, therefore, of the kind of intelligence which subsisted between them; Edward attempted by various manouevres, todiscover what it was that so frequently gave rise to such long conversations, which were always broken off when he approached, and which gave to Marianne's countenance an animation, and a lustre to her eyes which he never witnessed on any other occasion: Laura, however, was too guarded to let the secret escape, and she warned Marianne to be careful; but Edward's mean art, in secretly approaching the arbour where they were sitting, prevailed, and he distinctly understood that they had seen Julian Carleton, and expected to see him again speedily. Resolved, however, to gain some more decisive proof than a mere conversation, which they might deny, or give a different meaning to; he resolved to keep a watchful eye over his sisters' motions.

It was not long before he discovered their frequent visits to James's Cottage, but in vain he peeped, and pryed, and set his emissaries to work; he could not find out what was the mystery connected with these visits, though he was convinced that hig enemy Julian was at the bottom of it; and at length finding that, unassisted, he could not detect them, he resolved to communicate to his father, the extent of his discoveries.





Mr. Vincent's rage was inexpressible, when he heard that his daughters maintained a correspondence with one, whom he would willingly have exterminated from the face of the earth; but he dissembled his feelings,- and determined to do so, unlil he should be enabled precisely to' discover where Julian was, and what was the motives of this secret intercourse. It was just at this period that Marianne received Julian's letter, and came to a determination in consequence, to act with decision respecting his hated rival.

Mr. Vincent had long suspected, that his daughter's apparent patient acquiescence with his will, was only assumed; and he now-determined to put her immediately to the test, without betraying his knowledge of her intercourse with Julian; and accordingly, sending for her into his private room, he commenced the subject by asking her if she had seen Mr. Stanfield that morning.

"No papa," replied the trembling Marianne, wbo foresaw that the decisive moment was at hand.

"He has been here, has he not?" returned her father, bending his beetle brows on her, with a scrutinizing look.

"Yes sir, but I did not see him. Indeed you must forgive me, my dear father; but really I can no longer dissemble my dislike of Mr. Stanfield,—I can never reconcile myself to receive his addresses.

"Folly, childish folly!" exclaimed Mr. Vincent, with a contemptuous sneer; "you know not what you are talking about, and I should be as childish as you to listen to you. I desire therefore, I may hear no more such nonsense, but prepare yourself to become the wife of this respectable man M-hom you despise, and that immediately too: remember, either you marry him this day month, (I will not allow you one moment longer,) or I will turn you into the street a beggar, to seek your vagabond coadjutor, Julian Carleton.





Marianne started, and the tears that had started into her eyes, rolled unlreeded down her cheeks, as she exclaimed: "Julian Carleton! what of him, sir?"

"I leave that to your own conscience," returned Mr. Vincent, "only this I warn you, that I am aware of your secret meetings, I know the motive that prompts your disobedience, and I again repeat, you shall marry the man I have chosen, or I will eternally discard you. You may starve in the streets if you disobey me."

"Then my doom is fixed," said Marianne, in a voice choaked with contending emotions; "for I will never be the wife of Mr. Stanfield. Nay, my father, do not be so violent with me; I would sacrifice my life to serve you, but I cannot conquer the disgust, the hatred I feel, at the thoughts of that man as my husband. I cannot,—I would,—I must die first.

"Die then!" returned Mr. Vincent, bursting front her. "One month remember,—one month I give you! till you have resolved to obey me, let me never see your face."

Marianne walked calmly up stairs, her lips and cheeks pale as death. Laura was waiting for her, and in terror demanded what had happened.

"It is all over Laura," she returned, trying to smile; but the effort was too much, and throwing her— self into her sister's arms, she went into strong hysterics.





Mrs. Vincent rushed into the room, and in terror lamented over her darling child, who was killed, she said, by her father's violence.

"And her mother's want of resolution!" said Laura, as she held the struggling girl in her arms, and calmly directed the efforts of the female servants to restore her.

"What can I do, Oh Laura! how am I able to remedy the evil? Your father, you well know, pays no more regard to my arguments or persuasions, nor as much as to yours."

"I acknowledge it is now too late to remedy the evil, as you say, Madam," replied Laura; "but I cannot help feeling, that if you had, long ago, asserted your authority, it would have been better for yourself, as well as your children."

Mrs. Vincent sighed heavily, and remained silent until Marianne opening her eyes, and fixing them on her mother exclaimed,—" Mother, dear mother!—save me, save me!—I cannot marry him, indeed I cannot! Go to my father, pray go and intercede with him for me."

Mrs. Vincent wept, and wavered, and wept again; and Marianne, seeing that she had nothing to hope from her mother, was again relapsing into the agonies, from which she had just recovered; when Laura, indignantly raised her, and exclaimed,—" For shame! for shame, Marianne! rouse yourself. You see you have no dependence on any one but yourself, and is this the way in which you prove your determination to assert your rights. Well may your father tyrannize, when he finds such weakness opposed to his arbitrary commands."





Mr. Vincent burst into the room, foaming with fury. "And you, Madam, with your great strength and resolution, what will you do, or what would you adrise your sister to do, that .will have any effect on my determination?"

"I would convince you, Sir, that your power could not extend over my mind!" returned Laura firmly, "I would tell you, that there are bounds set to a parent's authority, as well as a daughter's duty; and that I should be as criminal in yielding, as you in extorting, such a sacrifice of feeling and principle, as you demanding of my sister."

"And now, having suffered you to conclude your lecture," said iier father, with a malignant sneer, "I will take care to prevent your repeating it. We will see, if even your heroic spirit cannot be humbled: so walk to your room if you please, and remain there till you either resolve to submit; or I can otherwise dispose of you."

Marianne with a look of alarm, clung to her sister's arm; but Mr.. Vincent seizing Laura' with violence, dragged her from her.

"You. might have spared yourself this trouble, Sir!" observed Laura with calmness. "I knew it would be useless for me to attempt to oppose your physical force; but in trying to bend my mind, it will perhaps save you some trouble, to recollect that I am yonr daughter, and inherit a sufficient portion of your spirit, to render it an impracticable task."

Mr. Vincent made no reply, though his lips quiver





ed with rage; and merely saying, with emphasis,— "Marianne, remember Laura! quitted the room."

Mr. Vincent followed to the door of her own apartment, which he locked upon her, observing, that he would take care she should not quit it till she knew her duty better than to incite her sister to act against his authority and her own interest.

Poor Laura's heroism supported her until her father was completely out of hearing; and then, throwing herself on the bed, she gave way to a violent flood of tears, stifling them in the pillow, lest Marianne (whose room adjoined) should come up there, and hear her.

She will sink directly, and forget all her resolution, thought Laura, if she finds I am so weak as to be agitated by this paltry revenge of my father's. On my own account I care nothing, for I know he cannot keep me here long; but 1 dread what he may effect with my poor Marianne, now she has no longer me to encourage and direct her. I will still, however, do all 1 can to convince her that I am not to be intimidated, and to induce her to follow my example.

Laura's tears were quickly dried; and, jumping up, she began to move about the room with alacrity, opening and shutting her drawers, and occasionally murmuring a tune, to convince Marianne, if she should come within hearing of her indifference and contempt of the mode of punishment her father had adopted.

Marianne had at first seen, with dismay, her sister separated from her; but Marianne, though timid and gentle, was not deficient in good sense or intelligence, and a few moment's reflection convinced her of the absurdity of her father's conduct, and of the folly she should be guilty of, were she to suffer it, even in appearance, to make any serious impression on her. When, therefore, her father returned into the room, she received him with a look of calmness that astonished him, and beginning to fear that violence would not, effect the object he had in view, he determined to try what persuasion would do.





Seating himself, therefore, by Marianne, he said, with assumed mildness,—

"All this is very painful to me, Marianne, perhaps more so than to either you or Laura; for tyrant as it appears you consider me, I have too much affection for my children, to desire to see them unhappy. It is the certainty that I should be securing your happiness by uniting you with a worthy man, that induces me to persevere in the present instance.

You are young, Marianne, and incapable of judging of your own interest, added to which, your mother's ridiculous indulgence," and he glanced a look of reproach at Mrs. Vincent, "allowed you to imbibe the pernicious sentiments which that artful, ungrateful youth, your cousin Julian, instilled into your mind, to poison your happiness, and induce you to look upon your father as your worst enemy, instead of your best friend."

"Indeed, indeed, you wrong him, sir," interrupted Marianne, eagerly, and emboldened to speak by her father's unusual gentleness of manner;" never, she continued, did Julian breathe a word against my father, nor even utter a sentiment which the purest mind could hesitate to avow in the face of the whole world."

Mr. Vincent bit his lips with rage; scarcely could he restrain the venom which swelled in his heart at this eulogium on his nephew, whose very name seemed to inflict a thousand rankling wounds, and whose very existence he would have destroyed, were it possible for wishes to have effected it.





Determined, however, to persevere till he should ascertain how far kindness might operate on Marianne's affectionate nature, he suppressed the expression of his feelings, and merely observing, with a compassionate shake of his head, that it appeared her cousin (laying great emphasis on the word) had succeeded, but too well in deceiving her as to his real character; he again reverted to the subject, which, as he said, was nearest to his heart,—the advantages and happiness which would await her, in an union with Mr. Stanfield.

Marianne shed tears in abundance. It hurt her more to refuse any thing to her father, when urged so kindly, and with such an apparent conviction, that he was promoting her good; but the image of Julian was fresh in her memory,—she contrasted it with the hateful, formal, ignorant old man, whom her father in vain, tried to exalt in her imagination, by applying to . him the terms, worthy and respectable; and she remained firm in her determination.

"I cannot temporize, my dear father," she firmly observed, " It will be useless, worse than useless, for Mr. Stanfield to continue his persecutions, for such I must consider addresses, which he knows are revolting to me. I never can, I never will, listen to him; and he will only expose himself to mortification, if he presists any longer."

Mr. Vincent could no longer constrain his rage, and rising from the chair on which he had been sitting, he dashed her with violence to the other end of the room, uttering the most dreadful imprecations on her, for her disobedience.





Marianne would not scream, for she knew Laura must hear; and the thoughts, the terror she would suffer restrained her from her own ; but she arose, and gasping for breath, returned to her own room, as softly as possible, resolving to remain there ; unless her father expressly commanded her to the contrary.

She could hear Laura, who still preserved her assumed stoicism; though she had heard her father's violence as he descended the stairs^ and she longed to speak to her, if it was only one word, to tell her that she was still firm in her determination, and would remain so till death ;—but, she could not command her voice to speak, without betraying the agitation she was suffering, and she was also terrified least her father should overhear her, and be provoked to still greater violence.

Gradually Laura became silent; she began to think that no one was within hearing, and therefore there was no farther necessity to put a constraint on her feelings ; but, she saw with pleasure from her window which looked upon the lawn, her father's horse brought from the stables, and, in a few minutes, with a countenance in which were fully pourtrayed all the bad passions which his disappointment had raised, he appeared, and after given some directions to his servant, galloped off.

Mrs. Vincent whose anxio; *^for her daughter, had only been restrained by the tear of provoking her tyrannical husband, now hastily ascended the stairs, and entered Marianne's room.

Laura distinctly heard their voices, as the mother, in a compassionate tone, hoped Marianne had received no material hurt in her fall?" and the latter replied, *' that she was only slightly bruised on he arm )*' but she could not distinguish what they said, and her impatience was raised to its utmost height, by knowing that her sister, must have been a considerable time in the next room, without attempting to let her know of her (Marianne's) vicinity.





"She has yielded, I know she has!" she indignantly exclaimed, as she hastily paced the room, her cheeks glowing with passion and sorrow, " She has been terrified into giving her consent to her own wretchedness for life! Foolish, timid girl, and her unnatural father is gone to acquaint his friend of the change. Yethedidnot look satisfied either—he appeared boiling with rage and fury; I know not what to think, but I will know,"—and she knocked loudly against the wainscot that separated the two rooms.

"My dear Laura," exclaimed her mother's voice, ** I have not got the key of your room. Martha has it, with strict orders not to trust it out of her own hands, but if you wantany thing I will send her up to you.''

"I want nothing, mother, but to hear from Marianne's own lips that she is not foolishly frightened at this bluster of my father's, or his farce of locking me up, which she must know cannot last long. Alfred will be here either this evening or to-morrow, and if my father does not then release me, I will take care that I will let him know my situation, and expose Mr. Vincent's tyranny and cruelty to the whole world. But tell Marianne to speak to me, mother, for I want to hear from herself that her firmness and determination isnot shakes —if I thought, indeed, she was so weak,—" ,

"No, no, I am not, Laura, indeed!" interrupted Marianne; "you need not fear me! but oh, Laura! my dear, dear sister, how I wish I could relieve you from your confinement."





"I am very comfortable," replied the rejoiced Laura, "and very happy, so long as you do not relax. Remember Julian, my dear girl, and think that you will sign his death warrant if you suffer yourself to be terrified or harassed into accepting that old monster."

"I will die myself, first," returned Marianne, with emphasis.

"Huzza!" exclaimed Laura, "then we shall conquer, I know we shall! so pray send me some dinner as soon as convenient, for I am very hungry."

"Laura has such a spirit," said Mrs. Vincent, as they descended the stairs together, "yet I am afraid" she paused, and Marianne earnestly replied,—

"Fear nothing, my dear mother. I know that it is not your wish that I should be made wretched by marrying this hateful man; and be assured that Laura herself could not be more determined than I am, to resist to the utmost all force or persuasions on the subject."

Mrs. Vincent sighed. She foresaw, she said, endless trouble and sorrow from her father's determination and morose temper, when disappointed of any favourite object.

"And as to Julian, my dear child," she observed, "what Laura says of him is absolute nonsense; because what probability is there that Julian ever will be in a situation to provide for you, even if he still retains his childish partialities; which, among so many chan ges and new connections, it is scarcely probable he should. It is, therefore, very ridiculous, to introduce his name into the question at all."





"1 do not see why Julian should not succeed as well as many others, who have attained the highest honours without half his recommendations," observed Marianne, rather resentfully ; "besides, there is a chance yet, that he may become known to his uncle, (Mr- Carleton,) and"—she paused, conscious that she was betraying more knowledge than she meant to do, on this subject.

Mrs. Vincent reddened, but she did not make an at' tempt at replying to this observation; conscious, that her own conduct would not bear the eye of scrutiny, and that her husband's had been such; as to make it impossible, not to regard him with contempt.

Marianne but too well comprehended the cause of her mother's silence; and while she blushed for the weakness that had made it necessary, she refrained from adding a word which would appear like reproach to the parent, whom, if she could not always respect, she had ever tenderly loved.





CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH.



"Hither turn

Thy graceful footsteps! Hither, gentle maid,

Incline thy polish'd forehead : let thy eyes

Effuse the wildncss of their azure down;

And may the fanning breezes waft aside

Thy radiant locks, disclosing as it bends,

With airy softness from the marble neck,

The cheek fair blooming, and the rosy lip,

Where winning smiles, and pleasures, sweet as love,

With sanctity and wisdom lemp'ring, blend

Their soft allurement."

Akenside.

JULIAN'S disappointment at not seeing Laura or Marianne encreased with every hour; his last letter still remained unanswered ;—and James, to his enquiries, replied, with a long face, that he was afraid something uncommon had happened, for he could not see any thing of the young ladies, not even in the garden, where he had watched and peeped till he was afraid of going any more, because old Vincent had seen him one day, and had called to him to know what he wanted there.

"I dont think, by the bye, that he knew me," added James, "for I turned my back and made off the moment I saw him come in sight, not for my own sake'





for 1 dont valuenorfear him, but I thought it would make him suspicious, and hinder the young ladies from being able to call a$ our poor house."

Julian acknowledged the prudence of this caution; hut he could not get fid of the idea that it might be possible he could himself see the objects of his solicitude if he were to visit the spot which James had pointed out, and from which the whole of his uncle's garden, being on the declivity of the hill, was distinctly seen. He knew the little arbour which was constantly Marianne and Laura's seat in fine weather, and where, in the absence of their father, he had spent many happy hours; forgetting in the gratification of the moment, all that had conspired to make him unhappy in past time, and uneasy for the futvire. Bidding James, therefore, adieu for the present, and promising to call again speedily, with a beating heart, he ascended the narrow path which led to the desired spot, and once more looked down upon the place, which had so often been the scene of his mortifications, and had sometimes witnessed his transient, and short lived pleasures.

The house was concealed from him by a thick grove of trees ; but his eyes glanced eagerly over the grounds, which were blooming in all the pride of summer.

Julian could see the woodbine, which he had himself trained, to mingle its slender ringlets with the jasmine, that formed the bower which was Marianne's favourite seat. The rose trees which they had planted and tended together, were loaded with flowers, and all looked lovely; yet, still, Marianne was not there; nor was there a single indication that the garden had been lately visited. All was silent and solitary, and he began to think that the family must have left the house, probably for an excursion to some watering-place, which Mr. Vinoatit had sometimes, when in good humour, promised to indulge his daughters with: or Laura and her sister might be gone to visit their auut, Mrs. Vincent's sister, with whom they sometimes spent a month or two.





If that was the case, it was cruel and thoughtless not to reply to his letter, and inform him of their intention. Vexed and disappointed, he was on the point of quitting his station and returning homewards; when he beheld Mr. Vincent coming up one of the walks with an elderly gentleman, whom he instantly conjectured, to be the rival whom he had so much dreaded.

Conscious he could not retreat, without their seeing him, Julian threw himself on the grass, behind the hedge, intending to retire the moment they should turn in an opposite direction; but tbey came close up to the hedge which concealed him; and, as it appeared, seated themselves on a bench which was placed there.

Julian's heart beat so violently, that, though he could distinctly hear their voices, he could not, for some minutes, comprehend the subject of their conversation.

Disdaining the idea of listening, he would have given the world to have been able to quif his concealment: but he dreaded a discovery of his vicinity, as much on account of the insults which he knew he - should meet with from Mr- Vincent, without being able from his years and the relationship he bore to him, to resent them; as, that it would excite suspicions, which would effectually prevent a renewal of that intercourse with Marianne and Laura, which he hoped was now only temporarily interrupted.





Actuated by these fears therefore, he was condemned to remain passive in his concealment; from whence he soon discovered, (to his surprise,) that he was the subject of the consultation, which Mr. Vincent and his companion were holding, on the other side of the hedge.

"I acknowledge," observed Mr. Vincent, "that I was rather fearful, while he was residing in my house, that he was endeavouring to ensnare her; aud though she must have been mad, and worse than mad, to encourage the addresses of one, whom she knew was little better than a beggar,—a dependant on my charity, even for the very bread he ate; yet, I knew how far a girl's romantic disposition might carry her, and I therefore intended to get rid of him, and had actually made arrangements, to place him out as an apprentice to a working business; which, I thought, would be the best means of mortifying his proud spirit, and teaching him to have a more humble opinion of himself: when he saved me all farther trouble, by taking himself off; and has been, (or at least was, when last I heard of him,) leading the life of a vagabond, connected with a set of sharpers, -and living entirely by his wits. I delare to you, I never took up a paper, for a long while, but I expected to see his name in the Old Bailey list; aud have often wished I could hear he was safely dead and buried, to prevent the disgrace, which I knew he would, some time or ofher, bring upon the family.

For a long time, however, I have heard nothing of him, and I began to hope that my wish was accomplished: even now, I can scarcely believe it possible that you are right, and that the young man, whom you represent as the pupil and protege of Mr. Austin, is my unworthy nephew."





"You may rely on my information," returned the other, "Austin is now attending a friend of mine, to whom he has introduced this young man, as Mr. Carleton, mentioning, at the same time, that he was a nephew of your's. My friend knew of my intention to marry your daughter, and,,as he wished to learn something of the family, he did not say a word then; but tried to pick out all he could of Austin, who is a good natured fool, that loves dearly to chatter about other people's affairs as well as his own; so by dint of maneuvering and spelling, he at last picked out that Mr. Julian Carleton was violently in love with his youngest Cousin, Miss Marianne, and that there was no love lost,—and that they were always writing to one another, and sometimes met by stealth; and Austin said, only, that he was afraid there was no money settled upon the girl, and, her father was such an old brute, there was nothing to be hoped for, from his generosity, or else he should persuade his young pupil to run away with her, and marry her at once; particularly, as there was some old fool, (meaning me of course,) that tormented the poor thing to death, and was seconded by her father, who, wanted her above all things to marry him. So now," continued the old man, "I leave you to judge, whether there isn't something, serious enough, to make me think what I'm about!"

Mr. Vincent uttered a half suppressed execration.

"I do not believe," he, at length, observed, "I will not believe, without ocular demonstration, that, Marianne has ever given the smallest encouragement to the fellow. I know he is capable of any deceit to favour his plans; and I am very certain, that, he has only invented this, in order, to get this Austin to patronage him.





"Wil I you give me leave to ask Miss Marianne a few questions on the subject, as soon as she is well enough to see me? which will, I hope, be soon, as I saw her at the window, as I came up the wood, though she shrank back when she saw me.

"Certainly,—yes, to be sure,—certainly," replied Mr. Vincent, in a tone of trepidation, which sufficiently betrayed, to Julian; that, he despaired of his companions reaping any satisfaction, from an explanation with Marianne,

"But, I know beforehand," he continued, " that it is only an invention of that vagabond's, who is as artful as satan himself. And, so, he really has wormed himself into the house of that foolish fellow, Austin; well, I would advise him to keep a sharp look out, for if he dont find his way to the bottom of his patron's purse, it will not be his fault."

Julian's heart was ready to burst with indignation; scarcely could he refrain from starting up, and confronting, to bis face, the unfeeling wretch, who thus, maliciously slandered the being, whose independaut spirit he had tried in vain to crush, and whose just and upright principles, l>ad been ever a tacit reproach to his own timeserving circuitous modes of acting; but, he stifled the rage that devoured him, and remained hidden in his covert.

"The conversation that ensued, was chiefly composed of complaints, on the part of Mr. Stanfield, of the difficulties he met with in prosecuting his addresses to Miss Marianne, as he invariably styled her.

It was now a fortnight, he said, since he had been able to set eyes on her,—he was told she was ill, but he believed it was only a sham illness to avoid him. Where was Miss Laura, was sbe ill too, not that he wanted to see her, for she never treated him with any respect at all; but, often, looked at him as if she could cut his throat: but, it looked strange, that he had called seven times, and could never see any body but Mrs. Vincent, who, to be sure, to give her her due, was always civil enough, though, he believed, if the truth was known, she had no liking for him in her heart, any more than her daughters.





To all this, Mr. Vincent replied by assurances, how highly he esteemed his good friend, and, that he was sure, Mrs. Vincent was quite of his opinion; as to Laura, she was a headstrong, stubborn, girl, whose whole delight was teazing her friends, by acting in direct opposition to their wishes.

"Aye! and I am very much afraid Miss Marianne takes after her sister," returned Mr. Stanfield, in a disconsolate tone. "She often treats me so, that I wonder, afterwards, how I could bear it; particularly, as, after all, she's got nothing so much to pride herself upon over me."

A repetition, of all he had said before, of his great respect, &c., followed from Mr. Vincent, and Julian ardently hoped their conference was drawing to a close, when he heard the latter say,—" I forgot to ask you, my dear sir, before, but, pray where does this Austin live now, for I should like to give him a little information, as to the sort of character he has taken under his protection, though men, who are such fools, deserve to suffer for their folly; yet, I should be sorry to hear, that that vagabond had succeeded in his artful designs.

Julian was not sorry to hear Mr. Stanfield reply, that, he did not exactly know; it was, somewhere, in





the neighbourhood of Pentonville, but he would ask hfs friend, who had related the circumstance to him.

This will give me time, at least, to guard myself, and Mr. Austin, from tbeir machinations, thought Julian, (as he slowly raised himself from the ground, as their voices died away in the distance,) and retired, without casting a look at the garden, for there was no chance, he felt convinced, of seeing Marianne; who, it was evident, if she were not reallyso ill, as to be obliged to keep her chamber, confined herself there to avoid the importunities of her disagreeable suitor.

This was some consolation for all that he had heard to excite his anger and astonishment; and Julian, in dwelling on the idea of Marianne still faithful to her attachment tojiim, and, perhaps, at that very moment as anxious to assure him of it as he was to behold her, strove to forget every sensation of an opposite nature.

He had reached the high road, and was sauntering thoughtfully along, when a horse, galloping furiously towards him, roused him from his reverie, and in a few moments he discovered that the rider was Edward Vincent, who had lost all command over the animal, and was in evident danger of being thrown from his seat,—the creature, just as he came close to Julian, - *. beginning to rear and plunge in a manner which was likely to have unhorsed a much more skilful rider than Edward appeared to be.

Julian did not hesitate a-moment: not a thought of their former animosity, or a recollection of his own personal danger intruded to check his exertions; and darting forward, he caught the horse's bridle, though too late to save hisrider from being thrown to the ground.

Two or three people now came in sight, and to one





of them he committed the care of the animal, (who, as if conscious of the mischief he had done, was now perfectly quiet) while he raised the insensible Edward in his arms.

The flushed face, and the strong smell of spirits, (which his heated breath emitted) convinced Julian of what his first appearance indeed indicated,—that Edward was in a state of intoxication; and, convinced that this did but render assistance more immediately necessary, Julian requested some of the bystanders to lend him their aid in removing the unfortunate young man to the nearest house, which was but a short distance.

He was accordingly raised in their arms, and, as gently as possible, conveyed thither without his testifying the slightest recollection or knowledge of what had happened.

Julian's medical knowledge was sufficient to point out that there was no time to be lost in doing something for his relief: and, accordingly, while, by his direction, messengers were dispatched to Mr. Vincent and to the nearest surgeon, he produced his lancets, and bled him.

The good effects of this were immediately visible; —Edward opened his eyes—looked about him,—and though still stupified apparently as much from the liquor he had drank, as the consequences of his fall, he appeared to recognize Julian, and answered tolerably coherent to his enquiries of where he felt himself hurt.

Julian examined the shoulder which he complained of, and was convinced that it was dislocated; but he was too diffident of his own skill to attempt the opera





297



tion which he knew to be necessary, and, in a few minutes, the arrival of the surgeon, (who entered the room at the same moment with Mr. Vincent) relieved him from all apprehension.

- In his natural anxiety for his son, Mr. Vincent did not appear to recognize Julian; but when the surgeon spoke of the necessity of bleeding, and Julian replied that he had already done that, he (Mr. Vincent) raised his eyes to him, and started!

"Are you of the profession, sir?" demanded the surgeon, as, at Julian's indication, he proceeded to examine the dislocated arm.

'' A student only," returned Julian, colouring at \, the look with which his uncle was regarding him, and

at the recollection of all he had so recently heard from his lips. .

, "You are very correct, sir;—the shoulder is dislo

cated,—and I shall be much benefitted by your assistance," observed the surgeon.

Julian bowed; and if, in giving his assistance, during the succeeding operation, he was somewhat more technical in his terms, and more important in his manner, than he would otherwise have been, it was excusable, for Mr. Vincent's eye was fixed on him with malicious earnestness; and Julian felt, that every display of the knowledge he had acquired, was a thorn in his heart.

"Did you see the accident, sir?" enquired the surgeon.

Julian related, as simply and as unostentatiously as possible, all that had happened.

Mr. Vincent felt himself called upon, by the commendations of the surgeon, and his observations on

:





the danger he (Julian) had incurred, to offer something like thanks to the latter, but it was with a very ungracious air that he said,—

"I feel myself very much indebted, sir, for your intentions, though they were. unfortunately, so unsuccessful." ,

Julian merely bowed in return, and continued to busy himself with the bandages which he was preparing, while the surgeon, after staring for a moment at Mr. Vincent, turned round, and, by a significant shrug of his shoulders, expressed his sense of this equivocal gratitude.

Edward bore the operation of setting his shoulder with great impatience. Naturally violent and headstrong, and rendered still more so by the effects of inebriation, he would scarcely submit to the necessary restraints or directions of his attendants, and uttered the most violent imprecations at the pain they put him to, which was unnoticed, until looking full at Julian, who was holding his extended arm, he (Edward) exclaimed,—

"You are torturing me more than there is any occasion for, I am sure. Why don't you get some proper assistance, if you can't accomplish it?"

Julian's first impulse was, to drop the arm he held; but, a moment's consideration withheld him, and, merely bestowing a contemptuous look on the ungenerous Edward, he continued, calmly, to perform what was required of him; and, having seen him placed in the carriage, which Mr. Vincent had sent for to convey his son home, he very coolly, wished them both good evening.

"Do you often visit this neighbourhood, Mr. Carleton?" enquired old Vincent, as he stood with his foot on the step of the carriage.





"No, sir," returned Julian, blushing, but still retaining his self-possession, "I have not much leisure for country excursions."

"Will you favour me with your address? I am under considerable obligations to you, and it may be in my power to return them."

"I do not consider, merely doing my duty towards a fellow creature, sir, an act requiring any acknowledgments," returned Julian, coldly.

"Are you going to keep me here till I faint with pain," exclaimed Edward, in a voice which did not appear at all to be approaching to faintness. "If he wants to be paid for his services, let him send in his bill, (as, it seems, be sets up for a doctor,) and we will pay him his demand :—as to his catching the horse by the bridle, that's no such great obligation, after frightening him first, by darting out of the hedge."

"Mean, ungrateful, being ["exclaimed Julian, " but, I might have known, that neither gratitude or justice could reside in that cankered bosom. Your falsehood I despise, as much as I despise you, but for the satisfaction of others, I can prove, that you had lost all command over the animal you rode, long before you came in sight of me; and that more than one person was running after you, anticipating some accident from your situation."

"Aye, let you alone for making out a d—d good story!" returned the brutal Edward, "you were always a famous hand at it, but they don't pass upon me."

Mr. Vincent entered the carriage, and Julian, disgusted, and irritated beyond expression, walked hastily away, regardless of his uncle's reiterated request that he would let him have his address.





The vexation, surprise, and anger, which Julian felt at this last proof of Edward Vincent's utter unworthiness, and want of the common feelings of decency and gratitude, for a time prevented his dwelling upon the other disappointments which he bad met with, or recalling the slander and opprobrious epithets, which he had heard so freely bestowed on himself, by the equally unjust and ungenerous, though more cautious and deceptive father; but, gradually, all that had passed recurred to his mind, and though he did not repent of what he had done, he regretted that it had not fallen to the lot of some one else, to have rendered the ungrateful Edward the same service.

Wearied, heated, and harrassed, by his contending thoughts, Julian entered the room where the family usually sat, and found Mrs. Austin with the tea equipage before her, which, it appeared, she was on the point of sending away.

"I will thank you for a cup of tea, if you please, Madam," he observed, seating himself on the sofa.

"Dear me, Mr. Carleton, you are covered with dust, and that sofa-cover was put clean on this morning!" returned the lady, in a fidgetty tone.

Julian rose, and took a chair; and Mrs. Austin continued:— .~)

"As to tea, I reaHy thought you would tea, as well as dine, out; and only that I've been waiting for Mr. Austin, (who promised to come home,) I should have sent the things away long ago; and now the water in the urn is quite cold, so its no use to put fresh tea in the pot: but if you like a cup such as it is, of course I'll pour it out."





Julian assented. He was so accustomed to these paltry methods of saving, that it made but little impression on him, though, at the present moment, a good cup of tea would have been a great refreshment; and Mrs. Austin proceeded to band him the warm water, which, with a slight admixture of milk and sugar, she dignified with the name of tea. As she was handing it to him, however, the sight of a sprinkling of blood, which had stained his light waistcoat from Edward's vein, caused her to start, and, with evident surprise, she enquired what he had been doing, since he dressed himself, to occasion that appearance.

"I have been performing an operation," returned Julian, smiling.

"Dear me, Mr. Carleton, without calling in Mr. Austin! that is very odd; but 1 suppose," she added, recollecting herself, " it has been one of your gratuitous"

"You are quite right, madam," interrupted Julian, angrily; had it not been so, I should not have appropriated it to myself,"

"Oh dear,—I'm sure I did not mean that," returned Mrs. Austin, with some confusion; but at this moment Mr. Austin entered, and, with an affectation of jocularity, she informed him that his pupil had been performing some formidable operation, and had made his appearance at her tea-table almost as slovenly as he himself sometimes did.

Mr. Austin rubbed his hands,—his usual method of expressing pleasure at any circumstance.

"Well, I am very glad, very glad, indeed," he observed, " that you had so good an opportunity of shewing that you are not wasting your time or disgracing your friends; and I hope that this will be the means of setting all to rights between you," and he looked enquiringly at Julian, who shook his head.





"Why they can never be so ungrateful," rejoined Mr. Austin, " as not to notice what you did, particularly when you so magnanimously looked over all that had passed."

"I will leave you to judge what I have to expect from their gratitude," observed Julian, and then proceeded to relate the behaviour of Edward Vincent, whom the good doctor repeatedly branded with the epithets of " ungrateful rascal, cold-hearted dog," and a number of others, equally significant of his detestation of such behaviour.

"Yes, but if the young gentleman had drank too much, there should be great allowances made," observed Mrs. Austin, who seemed to think that Julian had acted much too independently, and sacrificed too lightly the chance of reconciliation with his rich uncle. "Besides, you know," she continued, "Mr. Edward Vincent is an only son, and, of course, has been much indulged, and, therefore, it cannot be expected that he should humble; whereas, people that have their bread to get must submit to many things that are not very pleasant, particularly from their superiors."

"In which class, madam, you certainly cannot mean to place Edward Vincent," returned Julian, angrily, "at least not as relative to me, nor, indeed, do I know one human being, at the present moment, so degraded, as to be ranked as an inferior to the heir of Mr. Vincent.





Mrs. Austin coolly replied, that whatever he might think on the subject, the world would not join him, for it would always pay respect to people of property.

"And I would venture to say now," she continued, "that if you were to make the experiment on the people who saw the quarrel between you and young Mr. Vincent, that you would find he would be treated with respect and deference, while you would be neglected."

"Then they would deserve to be kicked for their pains!" exclaimed Mr. Austin, angrily; "but you judge the world by yourself, and it is not half so bad or so foolish as you would make it out."

Mrs. Austin made no reply to this compliment, but it was very evident that she considered Julian to have acted wrong, and that a reconciliation with his rich uncle, was a point to which all feelings of pride and independence should have yielded.





CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIRST.



"Ah! could she view her only child betrayed,

And let submission o'er her love prevail!



Alas! she might not!—her relentless lord

Had sealed her lips, and chid her streaming tear;

So aDguish in her breast concealed its hoard,

And all the mother sank in dumb despair."



Jerninoham.

We left Marianne firm in her determination to persist in refusing to receive Mr. Stanfield's addresses; and Laura equally heroic in her resolution to support her, though she felt her confinement very irksome, and was longing to breathe the fresh air and fragrance of the garden; in fact, to be any where but precisely Where she was.

Martha, to whom the key of her room was entrusted, was a cross, deaf, obstinate old woman, who had been in the family some years, and had contrived to continue, notwithstanding the constant change of other servants, by a rigid obedience to her master's will, let it be ever so unreasonable, or so opposite to the wishes and inclinations of his family.

From her, therefore, it was useless to expect any indulgence; but there was a young girl, Martha's niece, 'whom she had lately introduced into the house





hold, who, often assisting in outwitting the-old woman, and was the general friend and confidant of the other servants, in their schemes and manoeuvreing to cheatold Patty, as she usually called her; and to her Marianne resolved to apply for assistance, particularly, as she knew the girl was warmly attached to Laura.

Anne was accordingly sent for into the parlour, under pretence of giving her some needle-work; and Marianne demanded if she knew where Martha kept the key of Miss Laura's bed-room.

Anne had been in town the whole day, (by permission,) to lay out her quarter's wages, and she had not, as yet, heard any thing of the disturbances, that had happened in her' absence; she therefore replied, with astonishment, that she did not know her aunt had got the key.

Marianne explained,—and Anne, indignant at the treatment of her dear Miss»Laura, declared she would get the key from the old woman some way or other.

"Though, perhaps," she added," the best way will be to try if none of the keys of the other doors will fit the lock."

Laura was soon surprised at hearing about a dozen different keys tried in the lock; but at length it yielded, and Anne, just popping in her head, exclaimed,—

"Thank goodness we've got the plaguy door open at last. So I'll go and send Miss Marianne up to you, and Master and his debberty, as he calls old Patty, may go to old nick together."

Laura could not help laughing at the exultation of the warm hearted girl, to whom she had often been indebted, for defeating her father's petty tyranny, before this instance of her ingenuity; and, in a few moments, Marianne entered the room, and throwing herselfinto her sister's arms, lamented, with tears, that she should be the cause of Laura's suffering under her father's displeasure.





"Oh! this is a mere trifle," returned Laura, "and I should not for one moment regret it, only from my fear that you will suffer yourself to be intimidated, when I am no longer by your side to take your part; besides, you know, I cannot be shut up for ever; Alfred will be here to-morrow, and my father is too anxious to keep up the connexion with the Huntly family, to deny his seeing me; and, you may rely upon it, 1 shall make no secret to him of the treatment I have received."

"Oh Laura, how I wish you were married!" exclaimed Marianne, "I should then have a home to fly to from this persecution, for I know Alfred is so kind hearted, he would espouse my cause."

"I should not be sorry at all myself, my dear girl," returned Laura, " for I am heartily sick of these everlasting contests, and should be very happy to have a peaceful home of my own, I can assure you; but where is mamma,—and how caine you here ?] for I expected my father had set his old spy Martha, to watch that we did not And out some means of communication."

Marianne replied, that she was indebted to Anne for gaining an entrance, and that the latter was now engaged in keeping Martha from discovering that they were together.

"The cunning girl," she continued, "knows that nothing can more effectually do this than engaging Martha in a quarrel, which she said she would contrive to do, by shewing her how extravagant she had been in laying out her wages; and for this purpose, she carried off my new black feathers, intending to display them before her aunt, as part of her purchases, which she knew, she said, would set old Patty raving for an hour, and prevent her thinking of any thing else."





Laura smiled, and promised to reward Anne's ingenuity; and again enquired where their mother was.

"Mamma is in the parlour," returned Marianne, "frightened to death, as usual, lest we should be found out; and has been, for this last half hour, trying to persuade me that it would be better to become miserable for life with Mr. Stanfield, than to enrage my father still more, and make the house the scene of discord."

"That is just like my mother," observed Laura, sorrowfully; " all future, and really serious considerations, are overlooked, and to be sacrificed to her love of quiet, and present ease, and her habit of submitting to my father's tyranny; but you will die first, I hope, Marianne, before you will yield. Remember, it all depends on your resolution, and if you were to be so weak, I would never pity, or even speak to you again. You might be as wretched as you would, with that hateful, detestable, old man; but neither I, nor Alfred, nor any body indeed, would have the smallest compassion for you."

"I shall never want it, Laura," replied Marianne, firmly, "for I am so determined, that death itself, as you say, would not change my resolution, never, even for one moment to encourage the idea, that I will become the wife of Mr. Stanfield."

"That's a dear good girl!" exclaimed Laura, warmly embracing her, " and now my father may do big worst."





"For locks, bolts, bars, I defy you."

"Don't sing, Laura! for fear Martha should hear you," observed Marianne, " though 1 believe there is not much fear, for 1 can hear her voice now in the kitchen, raving about ruin, destruction, feathers, and frippery, unbecoming honest sarvants; and, I fancy, I see Anne's arch look, all the while, enjoying the mischief, and fomenting the storm by defending her right to wear what she likes."

"Well then, my dear girl, take the opportunity which may not again be afforded us, of fetching me my writing desk.—No, stay, that may excite my father's notice and he may take it away again; so bring me only a good supply of paper, pens, and ink, that if my imprisonment should last long, I may not be without the means of communication; and bring me some books, and my work-bag, for I must have some employment to beguile the time."

Marianne hastened to comply with her sister's request, though her heart sank at the idea that Laura might be separated from her, even for a few days, and she had scarcely fulfilled all her sister's commissions, when the voice of Martha, ascending the stairs, was heard, and hastily locking Laura's door, Marianne retreated into her room, just as Anne, followed by her aunt, reached it.

"Take the feathers Miss Mariannne," whispered Anne, throwing them into her room, "Old Patty has vowed to tear them to gibbets if she can get hold of them,—here she comes."

Anne ran on to her own room, and the old woman, muttering anathemas against forward brazen-faced hussies, followed; while Marianne, having put away the obnoxious ornaments, returned to her mother, whom she found with the tea equipage before her.





In a few minutes Martha, with evident signs^of the passion she had been in still remaining in her wrinkled face, entered the room.

"I want some tea, if you please, Ma'am, for that young lady up stairs."

"You might as well let my sister have her tea with us, Martha," observed Marianne, merely to try her.

"No, Miss;—I shall obey Master's orders!" returned the sour old woman. "I'm sure there's enough to do to manage the girls now-a-days. I wish I could lock up that saucy, pert hussey, Anne, till she came to her senses."

"What has Anne been doing ?" enquired Mrs. Vincent, who was not sorry to see the old woman teazed, in return for her tormenting adherence to all her master's tyrannical orders.

Martha related the affair of the feathers, with many bitter taunts and predictions of the ruin girls brought themselves to, by despising the advice and opinions of their elders, which lasted till she was dismissed with the tea for Laura; Marianne observing, to increase her mortification, that Martha seemed excellently qualified for the character of turnkey.

Mr. Vincent did not return home till late;—and Edward, as was indeed, of late, frequently the case, was absent the whole day and night. Marianne, therefore, by means of her secret key, enjoyed several hours uninterrupted intercourse with her sister, Martha





being deceived, by supposing that they had both retired to bed at an early hour.

The following morning brought with it a repetition of all Mr. Vincent's arguments and threats, on the old subject. Marianne pleaded (and not without reason,) a violent head-ache, as an excuse for not appearing at the breakfast table; but this was not sufficient to satisfy Mr. Vincent, who insisted on seeing her, and then, in despite of her pallid looks, and trembling frame, informed her that he had seen Mr. Stanfield, and had finally settled with him, that the marriage should take place on that day month.

"I shall give your mother orders, therefore," he continued, without noticing her attempt to speak, "to make a proper provision, as to clothes, &c.; as I wish you, of course, to make an appearance suitable to my daughter, and here is a bank note for twenty pounds, which you will expend as you like, in any ornaments."

"I cannot take it, sir, for that purpose V replied Marianne, firmly. "I am immoveable in my resolu* tion, never to become the wife of that man."

Mr. Vincent's eyes flashed fire.

"Then you know my determination!" be returned. "T will spurn you from my door, to beg or starve, if you do not obey me. I give you yet the month to consider, but not one day longer."

Marianne sat down very calmly; and Mr. Vincent, after surveying her, for a moment, with a mixture of rage and astonishment, which deprived him of the power of uttering another word, left the room.

The whole day passed away without Marianne's daring to enter Laura's room, so closely was she watched by her father and his coadjutor, Edward.





Alfred Huntly came not, and poor Laura found the day very long, and her confinement, very irksome and painful.

"Tell my father," she observed to Martha, when the latter brought her tea, "that I am perfectly ill, with being shut up here this warm day;—and that unless he wishes to have an expensive doctor's bill to pay, and a fever in the house, he will let me have air and exercise."

This was what Mr. Vincent wanted; and he immediately repaired to her room; and, in a very calm and gentle tone, began to remonstrate with her upon her obstinacy, which, as he assured her, was only injuring herself, and could do no good, to the cause she had espoused, as Marianne must, in the end, consent to what was so much for her benefit.

"Never, with my consent, sir!" replied Laura. " I will not deceive you:—if she will listen to my earnest entreaties, she will rather submit to death, than the alternative of a marriage with a man she abhors!"

Mr. Vincent's calmness and gentleness vanished in a moment; and he loaded the undaunted Laura with the most approbrious abuse;—concluding with vowing that she should remain in her room till her sister was married ,—and that she should not even see Alfred Huntly or any of his family, till she retracted her determination to oppose his will.

"We shall see, sir," returned Laura; but she was prevented finishing the sentence, by the door being slammed on her, and the key again turned by her enraged father.

It cannot be denied that Laura's heroism was insufficient to sustain her under the unexpected blow, that she should not be permitted to see Alfred Huntly. Knowing that her father was almost equally anxious for her marriage with Alfred, as he was to see her sister united to old Stanfield, she had made herself certain that he would not throw any obstacles in the way of her interviews with the former; and had, accordingly, looked anxiously forward to his arrival, as the signal for her release. It was some time, therefore, before she could conquer the sensations which Mr. Vincent's declaration had excited, and a declaration which she could not doubt his intention to carry into effect; as she felt convinced that he had already prevented Alfred's intended visit that day, though how, she could not form an idea.





The sound of Marianne's step and voice, on the stairs, however, recalled her to recollection; and she hastily dried her tears, and prepared to meet her sister with becoming resolution.

Marianne was equally determined nofc^o appear depressed or failing in determination; and the two sisters mutually assisted each other in their resolution of opposing their father's tyrannical attempts.

Two days passed over;—Mr. Stanneld came again and again, but Marianne, in spite of threats and menaces, even of personal violence, remained firm in her refusal to see him.

At length, tired of his office of jailor, and finding that he could not make the slightest impression on the unyielding mind of Laura, Mr. Vincent deputed Martha to release her without any conditions, which he found it useless to attempt to impose; and Marianne had once more the satisfaction of enjoying her sister's society and counsel, without any restraint.





It was at this period, and while they were still under the strict surveillance of Martha, who acted with as much vigilance as their father could desire, that the accident befel Edward Vincent; and the first person who acquainted them with it was Anne, who had seen him brought in from the carriage, and had heard the abuse which Edward, with his usual malice, continued to lavish upon Julian, with the more spite, because in this instance, probably the only one in his life, old Vincent seemed inclined to espouse the cause of justice, and vindicate the youth whose name was so ungratefully aspersed by his malignant son.

Anne heard the name of Julian as connected with the accident, of which she knew nothing more than that Mr. Edward was almost killed, and, with all the love of exaggeration, which generally appertains to a warm imagination, coupled with extreme ignorance, she flew up stairs, and with breathless anxiety, informed Laura and Marianne that Mr. Edward was* brought home dying, and that Mr. Julian, that they so often talked about, was the person who had killed him, and would be sure to be hung.

Laura uttered. a scream of horror; and Marianne, after looking steadfastly, (as if scarcely comprehending what she heard,) at the incautious narrator, fell upon the floor, without a symptom of life.

Terrified at what she had done, Anuc now screamed louder than Laura had just done before; aud while the latter, in an agony of grief, knelt down beside her sister, almost praying that she might never recover to a consciousness of the dreadful suffering which must henceforth be her lot; Anne ran about the room in a state of distraction, exclaiming,—that she had killed her dear young lady! and wishing she had never been born, rather than she should have seen such a day.





Mrs. Vincent, whose health had been much shattered by the continual dissension and unhappmess of the family, and by the little prospect she could discern of their termination, was sleeping, on the sofa, in her own room, when the reiterated screams from her daughter's bed-room aroused her; and, paleand trembling, she flew to the place, where she beheld Marianne apparently dead, and Laura, looking the image of despair, by her side.

"What is the matter V exclaimed the alarmed mother; but at this moment the voice of Mr. Vincent behind her, (that voice, which was always attended to, before any other earthly consideration,) made her start, and turning she beheld Edward, paie and ghastly, supported by his father and the surgeon, who were assisting him to his own room. ,

Marianne, at this moment, opened her eyes, and stared wildly round her; and the mother flew to her son, who, though he often treated her with brutal disrespect, was still the object of her maternal fondness.

"Edward—my child!"—she exclaimed, with breathless affright; "What has happened?—You are hurt— Oh tell me, tell me what!"—

Marianne's eyes had taken the same direction as her mother's; and she now rose, with frantic vehemence, and threw herself at her brother's feel.

"Edward, forgive me, oh; forgive me, I have been the cause, I know the unhappy, wretched cause of it all, but forgive me, pray do, and him too. Oh! he is kind and gentle, but he has been driven to distraction, I know he has! But you will not prosecute him, Edward;—father, dear father, plead for me !—say but that you will save Julian, and I will do all you wish me, I will indeed!" ...





"What does the fool mean?" exclaimed Edward, looking with surprise from the still kneeling Marianne to Laura, whose looks betrayed the deepest despair." ,

"Hush!" interrupted Mr. Vincent, who immediately comprehended that she had, by some means, imbibed the idea that Julian was the cause of her brother's situation, and saw the advantage that might be made of it.

"Hush!" he repeated, "let me understand Marianne rightly."

"You had better get me into my room first," muttered the selfish Edward; but Mr. Vincent took no notice, while, with a significant look at the surgeon and his son, he said, addressing Marianne;— ....

"You are very justly alarmed for the safety of your cousin, Julian Carleton, Marianne, who is now in custody on this serious charge, and you offer to make any sacrifice for his safety."

Marianne bowed her head, she could not speak, and Laura uttered a deep groan.

"Will you then, promise solemnly, in the presence of this gentleman, to become the wife of Mr. Stanfield, if I agree to liberate Julian, and exonerate him from all future harm." ,

"I will promise, most solemnly!" returned Marianne, in a hollow voice.

Laura rushed frantically forward. "No, no, no, Marianne, do not—do not!" She sank on the floor, in strong hysterics, exhausted with the ronflict of her feelings. .





Mr. Vincent paid no attention to ber situation, but consigning his son to the care of bis mother, he hastily snatched pen and paper from the stand, and wrote a few words.

Marianne took the pen, but in vain she attempted to guide it, her whole frame shook so, that ber father was obliged to support ber in his arms.

"Let me help you;—only your name, no more;" and, with his own hand, he guided bers, to sign her name at the bottom of the promise thus fraudulently extorted.

The surgeon ventured a few words of remonstrance, but Mr. Vincent silenced him, by assuring bim that he would explain all hereafter to his satisfaction.

Edward was now taken away; Marianne and Laura left to the care of Anne and Martha; the former bitterly lamenting the catastrophe of which she had been, in part, the cause.

"Oh Miss Marianne! help me to take your sister up off the ground, she has hurt ber poor head, and the blood is running."

Marianne sat still on the chair, on which her father bad placed her, until the sight of her sister's blood, flowing from a wound in the temple, roused her affectionate spirit; and throwing herself at Laura's side, she gave way to loud lamentations at the state to which she was reduced.

Mrs. Vincent re-entered the room; she had been repulsed by Edward, who, with his characteristic insensibility, had declared, that he did not want a parcel of puling, whining, women about bim; and she now came to render what assistance she could to her daughters.

"My poor children!" she exclaimed, as she raised Laura from the ground, and despatched Anne to request the surgeon would step in and look at her. "My poor children," she repeated, "when shall I see you restored to happiness!"





"Never mother, never!" repeated Marianne, with solemnity, " never, till I'm laid at rest in my grave."

Laura recovered her recollection. "You have not Marianne!" was her first exclamation, "tell me that you have not promised. Julian would disdain a life purchased on such terms: besides, 'tis all a deception, 1 know it is,—I saw my father's look at that man, (looking full at the surgeon,) and I read in it directly, that it was all a cheat."

The surgeon felt offended at the epithet that man, applied to him with so little deference and respect, and all his compassion vanished.

"A deception, madam!" he angrily exclaimed, "is a fracture of your brother's arm, and various other severe hurts and bruises, a deception! 1 rather suspect, he finds it a painful reality; but allow me, madam, to apply this to your temple, it will stop the bleeding."

Laura submitted without another word. . »

The surgeon's manner M-as too warm and sincere, to allow her doubting the reality of the injuries her brother had received, and she looked at Marianne with despair.

"Is my father gone V enquired the latter, in a trembling voice.

"Gone where, my dear child?" returned Mrs. Vincent.

"To set him at liberty!" replied Marianne, clasping her hands at the thoughts that crowded into her mind.





"There is no necessity for Mr. Vincent's going, madam," observed the surgeon. "I am charged with all that is to be done."

"Oh, then, pray go this moment!" exclaimed Laura, with eagerness; " 1 shall do very well—there is nothing the matter with me. Do, pray do, go!" and she pushed him away with impatience.

The doctor was still more offended ;—he had never been treated with so little ceremony in his life;—and to think of driving him off without even offering him any refreshment, after such a job too as he had met with. \

This was an offence of the most serious hue in the eyes of the doctor, and he determined to be revenged for it ; he, therefore, while he was putting up his instruments, addressed himself to Mrs. Vincent:—

"This is a sad affair, madam,—a shocking affair, madam ; and if young Mr. Vincent had not had assistance ready at hand, would, most probably, have terminated fatally. Pray is this young man, this Carleton, related to your family V

Mrs. Vincent mournfully replied in the affirmative, adding,

"Would to God I had never seen his face."

"You have reason to wish so indeed, madam, great reason !—(My scissors if you please) great reason, indeed! and yet, from his countenance, one would never think he was such a desperate fellow."

Laura darted a look of contempt at him, which was not unobserved; and he added,—

"For my part, I should act much more decidedly with him than Mr. Vincent appears inclined to do. I Should"





"You were not, I believe, consulted on the subject, sir," observed Laura, haughtily; "and advice given unasked, is seldom much respected;—yours, at the present moment, is peculiarly unwelcome.

The surgeon made a half bow,—shuffled up the remainder of his instruments, and quite disconcerted, made a precipitate retreat, followed by Mrs. Vincent.

Marianne threw herself into her sister's arms, and gave way to the tears which relieved her heart; while Laura, straining her passionately to her bosom, lost all her firmness, and with bitterness, execrated the cruelty of the parent who had thus taken advantage of her feelings, to consummate the sacrifice of his child's happiness for ever. ￼





CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SECOND.



"And she was lost—and yet I breathed,

Bat not the breath of human life;

A serpent round my heart was wreathed,



And stung my er'ry thought to strife.

Alike all time,—abhorred oil place,

Shudd'ring I shrank from Nature's face."



Bviioh.

FROM the contemplation of the accident which had befallen Edward Vincent and its consequences, Julian's mind, after a few hours, naturally reverted to the conversation he had overheard between Mr. Vincent and his friend Mr. Stanfield; and though his heart swelled with indignation at the unjust aspersions which the former had cast on his character, and he felt the most supreme contempt for the whining, selfish, doting old man, who seemed to think every thing was to give way to the gratification of his wishes, yet his chief sensation was pleasure and exultation at the certainty that Marianne still kept her determination of refusing the addresses of this hateful being; and he blessed Laura too, for the spirit and resolution which it was evident, she displayed, in refusing even to see or countenance, with her presence, the unwelcome intruder.





Not liking to avow the means by which he became possessed of the information, though it was unavoidable on bis part, Julian hesitated whether he should acquaint his friend (Mr. Austin) with the attack, which, he had reason to expect, would be made upon bia character, with a view of injuring him in his (Mr. Austin's) esteem.

He was also restrained by another motive. Mr. Vincent had appeared fully sensible of his son's ingratitude and injustice, and desirous, in some measure, to compensate for it; and Julian hoped, that this feeling might operate to restrain the former from any more acts of hostility towards him.

Alas ! Julian had yet to learn, that the very circumstance that his uncle felt how deeply he had been wronged, not only in this, but more important transactions, was sufficient to confirm, in his breast, the most deadly hate towards his innocent victim.

Anxious to learn, if possible, some farther intelligence of Edward, and the still more immediate object of his anxiety, his beloved Marianne, Julian bent his steps, as usual, on the Sunday following, (the only day on which he could reckon with certainty on seeing his friend) to James's cottage.

Limited, as were of necessity, his finances, he had always contrived to render his visits rather beneficial than burthensome, and had thus secured himself a welcome, whenever he chose to call, from the wife of the honest gardener; who, rather more attentive to the main'chance, as she expressed herself, than her warmhearted husband, saw no reason why people should be troubled so much with other people's affairs, if they were to get nothing by it, and therefore, without any demurs, always appropriated to herself the gratuity which Julian contrived to bestow, without offending the feelings of her more scrupulous husband.





On the present occasion, however, Julian was surprised at observing a very visible coldness in her look and manner, and she answered his enquiries, by declaring she knew nothing at all about the matter;—she had enough to do at home, without troubling her head with her neighbours; and people that did do so, generally got themselves into trouble, one way or other, in the end.

"I hope you have not suffered any uneasiness on my account/' observed Julian, surprised at this reception, "where is James V

James was gone to church, she replied, and she wished he would pay a little attention to what he heard there; and that would teach him to mind his own work, and not meddle or make with other people;—but James was a poor fool, that would never know what was best for him.

Julian was astonished at this language from a woman, who had always been rather disagreeable, from the profuseness and obtrusive character of her civility, that any deficiency of that desirable quality; but not considering it worth while to endeavour to extract from her the cause of this change, he continued silently playing with the dog, which, unlike his mistress, testified his pleasure at seeing his old friend.

Two or three peevish exclamations, of, "Be quiet Juno, can't you, and dont be so troublesome!" at length silenced the dog, and stretched him at Julian's feet, who continued to preserve his temper and his reserve towards his ungracious hostess, and await patiently her husband's return.





James came at last, and though his reception of Julian was very different to bis wife's, the latter could instantly discover that something not very pleasant had happened, and he immediately communicated his suspicion, adding, with a glance at the wife,—

"I'm afraid, though I know not why, James, that I am, for the first time, an unwelcome visitor?"

James warmly declared, that if his house was a palace instead of the poor place it was, he should think it honoured by a visit from Mr. Julian.

"But indeed," he added, " I am almost sorry to see you here now on your own account, for Mr. Vincent vows, the first time he catches you in the neighbourhood, he'll have you taken up; and indeed, I have heard that there is a warrant out against you, for assaulting that precious son of his father, Ned Vincent.

Julian started up in astonishment, and James proceeded :—

"I know you've given him nothing but his deserts, let you have done what you will, and I should have been very glad to hear it, only for your own sake, because I know might often overcomes right, and I'm afraid that will be the case now."

"It never can be possible that they would act so infamously," observed Julian.

"James shook his head, and his wife, who had listened hitherto in silence, added,—

"I can tell you this, Mr. Carleton, that Mr. Vincent called here himself one day this week, and he said be understood that we were in the habit of sheltering and harbouring you here, and he told me how that you had been almost the death of his son, and that if he found you were harboured here again he would take us up as your 'complices, and would get Jem turned out of bis place without a character, which would be very hard upon poor people like us, who have got nothing else to depend upon."





"I will not stay one moment to place you in peril, my kind friend," observed Julian, taking up his hat and turning to James.

"Me !—I dont care that (snapping his fingers) fbr old Vincent! my character will defy him; and I dont know what the devil has come over my wife, to talk in such a manner. She used to hate old Vincent as bad as I do, but she's altered her mind this last two or three days. I suspect" and he looked very significantly at her, "that he has found some way of recommending himself to her that I'm not up to."

The wife coloured as she replied, that she liked him no better than she had always done; but she thought they ought to look to themselves before a stranger.

Julian replied, that she was quite right, and that he would take care that neither she nor her husband should be injured by their adherence.

"Therefore, thanking you for all past favours," he added with a smile, "I will bid you adieu!"

James followed him oat.

"Mr. Carleton !—sir!" but Julian, whose heart was swelling at the fatality which seemed to pursue him, and deprive him even of his most humble friends, affected not to hear him, until he added,—

"I've something to tell you about Miss Marianne," —when he instantly stopped.

"I'm sorry to say," rejoined James, "that it is no good news, but, bad or good, I think its right you should know it."





Julian stood still in breathless expectation, and James, switching the rose bush (by which they were standing all the time) to conceal his agitation, rejoined,—

"Mr. Vincent himself told my wife that both his daughters are to be married almost directly, and I've since heard from good authority, (by Anne the girl that lives there, old Martha's niece) that next Saturday week is fixed for Miss Marianne's wedding with the old fellow,—I forget his name; and that the poor thing was brought to consent by the stories her father and brother told of your throwing him off his horse, and trying to kill him,—and she begged on her knees that they would let you go, for she fancied that they had laid hold of you; and so, when her father saw that, he told her he would not prosecute you if she would swear to marry the man he wanted. So she did swear, and afterwards she signed a paper that she would keep her oath, and ever since the house has been all busy preparing for the wedding; and there have been lots of fine clothes bought,—and Miss Laura is to be married at the same time if her sweetheart's uncle comes home before; but Anne told the woman that told me, that the two young ladies did nothing but cry and bewail ever since, and Miss Marianne will not look at the clothes, nor any of the fine things the old man has bought for her, and only prays she may die before the time comes."

Julian had stood like a statue while the friendly gardener had given this recital; but his rage and despair soon broke into words, and he declared he would go that moment, force his way into Mr. Vincent's house, and vindicate himself to those to whom he had been so unjustly calumniated.





"I will see Marianne if the whole world opposes me!" he exclaimed with vehemence, "T will see her and tell her, that her vile ungrateful brother owes his life to my prompt assistance; that I exposed my own to save him! I will make the surgeon come forward to vindicate me, and the people who beheld the manner in which he was riding, and who followed him to try to prevent the accident which I witnessed."

James seemed thunderstruck at this explanation.

"Then you did not strike him after all?" he exclaimed.

Julian indignantly repelled the idea; and James, lifting up his hands and eyes, exclaimed,—

"The Lord have mercy upon/ me! Was there ever such wickedness heard of before V

Julian, however, was hurrying away without further explanation, but James entreated him, so pitifully, to listen to reason, and not go to act rashly and inwoke himself and the poor young ladies in worse trouble, that he could not refuse to listen to him; and he proceeded to point out all the consequences, which a rash attempt to force his way into the presence of Marianne would inevitably produce.

"But, if you will only be patient," continued James, * and listen to me, I will try what can be done towards getting a letter delivered to her. Anne, that I told you of, is very fond of a gossip, and she often runs over to the old woman that I told you told me all this about them; so, if you'll write the letter, I'll try my best, and sound Anne whether she can be trusted to give it to Miss Marianne or her sister."





Julian, at length, consented to try this expedient; and he re-entered the cottage, to write the letter, without regarding or even thinking of the discontented looks which the mistress of it, from time to time, darted at both him and her husband.

James contrived to send her out of the Vay, just as the letter was concluded.

"I dont want her to know that I am going to be concerned in it," he observed, as he carefully wrapped it in a piece of paper, and deposited it in his pocket, "for she will lead me such a life."

Julian was grieved that he should be the cause of domestic dissention; and he readily adopted his friend's plan to deceive her, viz. folding a sheet of blank paper, and directing and sealing it, as if it were the original letter.

"Here she comes," observed James; "there now, let it lay there, and take care to let her see you put it in your pocket, and say you will get some boy to carry it."

Julian punctually followed James's directions; and his wife, with evident pleasure, saw him depart, carrying with him, as she supposed, the formidable letter, which had begun to excite a fear in her breast, that her husband was again going to involve himself in trouble, where he had no concern.

"How shall I know whether you succeed V demanded Julian, in a low voice, as James accompanied him to the wicket that led into the high road.

"I don't suppose it can be done immediately," returned James, " for Anne can't often steal out; but if you'll meet me in a day or two,at the Norfolk arms, as I come home to dinner, you can know what I have done.





Julian agreed, and with an aching heart, he returned home.

The idea that Marianne had consented to marry the object of her aversion, and that to save Aim, as she supposed, occupied every thought, and rendered him almost insensible to the fraud and falsehood by which her consent had been extorted. Yet there were moments, when his sense of the injustice and cruelty with which he was treated, by him to whom his father had confided the protection of his youth, and the care of his future fortunes, goaded him almost to madness, and he felt tempted to sacrifice every prudential consideration, to his desire to vindicate himself from the unfounded aspersions of his cold-hearted, unfeeling relative.

No one but the servant was at home when he reached Mr. Austin's residence, and he retired to his own room to meditate on the intelligence he had received.

In a short time, however, he heard the voice of Mr. Austin below, and glad of any relief from his own unpleasant reflections, Julian descended to the parlour, where he found Mr. and Mrs. Austin, as usual, in loud contention, as it appeared, on something which had occurred during the visit they had been making, and he was on the point of turning from the door, rather than be a witness of a squabble, which in his present state of mind, would have been particularly revolting to his feelings, when his own name, pronounced in a loud and angry tone, by Mrs. Austin, met his ear, and surprised at the circumstance, he without hesitation opened the door and entered.

Mrs. Austin started and coloured violently, and her husband with evident confusion, exclaimed,—





"Carleton !—why I did not know you were returned! But what's the matter ?—you look ill and unhappy. Sit down, and we'll have a glass of grog together."

Mrs. Austin commenced some of her usual remonstrances on the imprudence and inefficacy of drinking more grog, when he had already had enough out of doors.

"Fetch me the rum-bottle and some water, Betty!" exclaimed Mr. Austin to the servant, without noticing his wife's remark ;—hut Mrs. Austin was not disposed to yield so quietly, and from remonstrances she proceeded to invectives, in which Julian was more than indirectly pointed at. For some time he disregarded all her inuendoes and insulting looks; but, at length, on her reproaching her husband with wasting his time and his money, in keeping creatures who would cut his throat if they could get any thing by it, Julian's resentment rose beyond concealment, and, with cheeks glowing with honest pride, he arose, and, in a firm tone, demanded what part of his conduct had been such as to warrant her assertion.

"Oh, sir, I am not to be frightened out of what I know to be right!" returned Mrs. Austin: "I am very well acquainted with your character,—and I am not to be blinded by the pretence of your fifty pounds a year! Where are you to get it, I should like to know; and if there is no chance of your paying if, what use can you be to my husband, to make up for—"

"Curse that eternal chatter!" exclaimed Mr. Austin, starting up in a violent rage; "the woman is mad, I really believe. Will you hold your tongue, or must I put a gag in your mouth V





"No, I wont hold my tongue, Mr. Austin! I will speak, when I see you being made the dupe of an artful, designing fellow, who has sneaked into your house and by-and-bye, will turn you out of it;—mind, I prophesy it! for he is worning himself into your patients'confidence; and only this afternoon I heard Miss Partington declaring, that he was one of the cleverest, most attentive young men in the world, and she thought that Mr. Austin would do very wisely to take him into partnership."

"Well, and if I chose to do so," replied Mr. Austin, coolly, " I should not consult you, I assure you, madam."

Mrs. Austin's rage knew no bounds; and in vain did Julian attempt a vindication of himself;—he could not even make himself heard; and at length, at Mr. Austin's signal, he quitted the room with him, leaving her to vent her rage alone.

"Do not let that foolish woman's nonsense vex you," observed Mr. Austin, after some moments of aukward silence on both sides.

Julian replied that he was more hurt on his (Mr. Austin's) account, than his own;—he had so long been the object of malice and misrepresentation that he had almost ceased to feel hurt or surprised, but that he was seriously grieved to become the object of domestic dissension. "And, in fact," he continued, trying to suppress the emotions that swelled in his bosom, "I feel that neither honor or gratitude will allow me to remain, to be the means of injuring your domestic quiet."

"Psha! psha!" returned Mr. Austin, " dont talk nonsense, my dear boy. You well know that she must always have some subject for the exercise of her delightful talents in the art of teasing; and although I am very sorry she has fastened her claws upon you, we must try to bear it as well as we can. I cannot think what the deuce they've got into their heads, but I verily believe the Mitchell's (whom I've attended for two years past, and they never visited her, or even took the least notice of her,) sent to invite her to tea this afternoon, merely to have an opportunity of filling her head with this stuff about you. They have tried it with me before, but they found 1 would not listen to it."





Julian immediately guessed that this was the friend of Mr. Stanfield, whom he had heard him mention as having communicated to him the circumstances of his (Julian's) residence in Mr. Austin's family: without any reserve, therefore, he related to the latter, the conversation which he had been so unwillingly an auditor of; and the good doctor could not suppress his indignation, and honest resentment of such unparalleled baseness, while he freely allowed that he had been very greatly to blame in having been so unreserved in his statements to Mr. Mitchell.

"But to tell you the truth, Carleton," he continued, I thought I saw a kind of shyness on Mitchell's part, to admit of your visits; and as it was a case I wished you very much to see the progress of, and I imagined his reluctance arose from your being a fine, handsome, young felloiv, and his having two giddy girls that want husbands, and have 10,000/. a piece to buy them, I imagined I should remove all obstacles by relating your history, and the attachment that existed between you and your pretty cousin. However, I am most sincerely sorry, as it has turned out"





Julian interrupted his patron's expressions of sorrow, by declaring that he was not at all sorry he had so good an opportunity of proving that he had not exaggerated the implacable disposition of Mr. Vincent towards himself.

"It would be no use telling that headstrong woman all this, though," observed Mr. Austin, with a despondent sigh, "for now she has got it into her head that there is no money forthcoming, she would not listen to an angel, if he was to come down from heaven on purpose."

Julian felt grieved and hurt beyond expression, for he knew that his generous friend foresaw an endless series of matrimonial bickerings and contentions; and however the latter might affect to despise, and bear with equanimity, these inflictions, he (Julian) knew that he dreaded them, and often had recourse to expedients and stratagems to prevent his feeling the effects of his wife's virulent temper.

In the present instance, however, Mr. Austin would not hear a word on the subject from Julian'; declaring, that he would soon let her know that he would be master of his own house, and do as he pleased; and having extended their walk to a length which brought it to the hour when Mrs. Austin usually retired to rest, they returned home; and Julian immediately went to his chamber, without hazarding a repetition of the recent disturbance.

For the following day or two, Mrs. Austin remained silent and sulky, though endeavouring, by every means in her power, to thwart and provoke her husband, who bore her conduct with great patience, only winking and laughing at Julian when her head was turned another way, and making as light as possible of the vexations which she obliged him to suffer and submit to.





Julian's mind was too much occupied with the situation of his beloved Marianne, to admit of his dwelling upon his present disagreeable situation, as much as he would at any other time. All Mrs. Austin's petty insults, therefore, were either disregarded or overlooked with contempt; and after bridling his impatience, to hear how affairs were proceeding in Mr. Vincent's family, for three days, in order to give James time to execute his commission, he sat out on the morning of the fourth, to meet his trusty friend, the gardener, as the latter had directed.

He arrived at the house James had pointed out nearly two hours before the time, that he could reasonably expect to see James, and while endeavouring to beguile the time over a newspaper, (to which, however, he found it impossible to fix his attention) a man entered, and wiping his forehead, as if fatigued with his walk, desired that a pint of porter might be brought him, adding,—

"And d'ye hear, mine host of the garter, put a toast in it, and a little nutmeg."

Julian instantly recognized in the speaker his ci-devant companion, the stage-struck barber, of whom he had heard nothing since his departure from the hypocrite Wildred's lodgings; but considering that he would only be an incumbrance when James should arrive, he did not wish to make himself known, and, therefore, sat still in the dark corner in which he had seated himself, bending his head determinately over the paper, as if entirely occupied with its contents.





The pint of porter was brought, and, after drinking part of its contents, the hero seemed sufficiently refreshed to look about him; and, accordingly, rising with a bow, intended to be very graceful, he requested to know if there was any news of importance

"I have not yet discovered any thing sir, returned Julian," still keeping bis eyes fixed on the paper.

The penetrating little barber, however, was not to be so easily evaded; and, after having for a moment contemplated Julian in silence, he exclaimed, with emphasis,—

"Sure, I should know that face and form,—the voice too !—it must, it must be him,—my benefactor!"

Julian raised his head and smiled, but he had some difficulty in avoiding theembrace with which (according to stage etiquette) the heroic barber would have greeted him.

"Do not think me ungrateful,'' said the latter, reseating himself, " I have more thau once enquired after you ; but 1 found you had quitted that sorry habitation."

James entered; and Julian, without waiting the conclusion of this explanation, started up to meet him.

"Excuse me; I have business of importance," he exclaimed passing his companion, who seemed astonished at his impetuosity, so unlike the calm collected manner which he had before seen him preserve.

James retired with Julian to another room; and in reply to the eager interrogations of the latter, said, that be had seen Anne, and had found that she was a staunch friend to the young ladies, and hated her old master (in her own language,) worse than poison.

"But the letter!" exclaimed Julian, impatiently, "did she deliver it."





"Yes !" replied James, " and I've got an answer to it here," and be drew an old pocket-book from his pocket, in which, carefully enveloped in a piece qf paper, was deposited the important letter.

Julian could scarcely restrain his impatience, at the methodical slowness with which James proceeded to unfold it; but at last it was Fairly in bis possession, and with an anxious eye he ran over the contents, which, at the first glance, conveyed a disappointment, for it was Laura's hand-writing, and not Marianne's, that met his view.

After expressing the happiness which his letter bad given her and Marianne, she continued,—

"But it is entirely on your account Julian, that we rejoice that you do not stand in peril of my father's revenge. To us, the belief, the mere apprehension that you did so, has been productive of the most serious consequences; your letter announces that you are already acquainted with the effect of the deception, that was practised ;—Marianne has solemnly promised to become the wife of this detested man, Stanfield. Every preparation is going forward for this hated event, and, I have not the power to rescue her. It is in vain that I have represented to her that a promise extorted under such circumstances is not, ought not to be considered binding; her mind and resolutions have sunk under the conflicts she has endured, and she cannot be roused into an assertion of her rights.

"Tell Julian he must forget that such an unhappy being as Marianne Vincent ever existed," was the only reply I could get just now to my enquiry of what I should say to you, and yet I cannot help thinking that she will recede when this dreaded affair comes to the crisis. I cannot believe that she will ever have courage to pronounce the fatal words that will bind her to irrevocable misery! It is a vague hope, but it is one that nothing can banish from my mind, that this ill-assorted union will yet be crushed. Marianne will not hear me— she has resigned herself entirely to despairand wretchedness, and her only hope, she says, is, that death may snatch her from the misery whichotherwiseisherportion.





I wish, earnestly wish, Julian, that you could see her, for I know your influence is unbounded over her-mind, but I fear it is utterly impracticable, for we are watched incessantly by either my father or his spies, Edward and Martha.

Edward is fast recovering, and it is with the greatest difficulty that I keep my temper within bounds, when he alludes to the pretended source of his accident.

Your informant was right as to the time fixed for the intended marriage,—I say intended, for 1 trust and hope it will never be effected. Butas regards myself, you are wrong ; for it is impossible a defmite period can be fixed for what depends upon the favour of the winds and waves. Alfred Huntly's relative has not yet arrived, therefore, I am still as unsettled as ever; I wish it were otherwise, for 1 should then have an asylum to offer my poor Marianne, in the event of her acting as I should wish to persuade her to do.

1 am writing now in uncertainty, my dear Julian, whether this will ever reach you; for Martha is so suspicious of Anne, that she will hardly let her come near us. 1 fear it will be impossible for us to see you, as my father has sworn that we shall not leave the house till the appointed time, and Martha keeps the keys in her possession at night, even if I could persuade Mari





anne to venture, which I much fear would be impossible; yet if you could,—I do not know what to advise or suggest, Julian; and as Anne has just given me the signal that she is going out, and can take this letter, I have only time to add, that

1 am ever your's, truly, Laura Vincent."

Julian read this letter with emotions of mingled dispair and resentment against Marianne, whose weak resignation to her father's despotic will, he considered as a proof that the affection she bore to him was comparatively cold and feeble.

Yet it was to save me, as she believed, that she consented to doom herself to misery, he reflected;—how then could he accuse her of indifference?

James, who had been anxiously watching his countenance, now observed that he was afraid the letter did not contain much good news, and indeed he was afraid it could not, from what Anne had told him ; for she said that her mistress had been to town and bought such beautiful wedding clothes for both the young ladies, and the old man had brought an elegant set of jewels for Miss Marianne, who had been obliged to accept them because her father was standing by when he offered them; and Anne had heard old Stan field tell her master that the carriage was nearly finished, and the liveries made.

"And the foolish girl," continued James, "seemed inclined to think it would be almost a pity so many fine things should be provided in vain, and could not help talking of how beautiful Miss Marianne would look in her wedding clothes, sitting in her own carriage; and was quite startled, when I said that if she was Miss Marianne's real friend, she would sooner see her in her shroud and carried in a hearse to church.''





Julian continued to walk up and down the room in a state of perturbation which would not allow him the use of words, and James in vain endeavoured to console him, by expressing hopes that something might yet arise to prevent the marriage.

"For indeed, Mr. Julian," he continued, "Anne says that Miss Marianne is as much set against it as ever, and does nothing but cry and moan from morning till night. So now try and write another bit of a note, to persuade her to keep up her spirits. It's never too late for her to say ' No !' even at the church door ; or, for the matter of that, if the parson had begun the ceremony it would not be too late, if she had but the mind to stop it."

Julian acquiesced in the idea of writing another note, and the materials being provided, he immediately commenced an animated, though, from the agitated state of his mind, a somewhat incoherent expostulation on her intended submission to a mandate, which must render both him and herself eternally miserable.

"And that too," he continued, "Marianne, from a false principle of duty. What obligation can there or ought there to be, to observe a promise extorted by an infamous deception ? The law itself makes void and null every obligation contracted from fear or fraud. Why then should you so strenuously adhere to a promise, wbich I am well convinced you would never have made, but for the gross falsehoods employed to deceive you? Reflect then, Marianne, ere you consign me to despair, and yourself to wretchedness. My very existence depends on your resisting this attempt to enslave you! Remember that it is in your power to save, or to condemn to despair and destruction, the wretched Julian f"





"That odd man in the tap room says as how he wants to speak to you, sir," said the boy who waited on the customers, popping in his head, just as Julian had finished writing.

"With me!" exclaimed Julian, starting up in surprise, and forgetting at the moment who the odd man was.

"I only want to bid you a long and last adieu"! replied the barber, who had followed close at the boy's heels, to learn the success of his message.

"Oh, I beg your pardon !—walk in Mr. ,—I

have forgotten your name; so you must excuse me."

"' My name is Norval!'" replied the hero of the sock and buskin, throwing himself into a theatrical attitude.—" But excuse me,—in plain and simple truth, my name is Stanfield, Dick Stanfield, though 1 have a few other noms de guerre."

"Stanfield!" exclaimed Julian in surprise, "how singular!"

Yes, it is not a very common name; I don't know that I ever heard it beyond our own family, and there are not many left of them, for

"I'm all the brothers of my father's house,

And all the daughters too!"



"Ybu have some relations of that name then, sir?" observed James, with curiosity in his looks.

"Yes, I have an uncle, or, rather should I say, I had; for from henceforth I discard him:—he is not my flesh'and blood, though he was my father's brother: but his heart is stone,—he is a petrifaction,—no bowels of compassion !—and this creature is going to be married too! and that to a beautiful young girl!— he will have heirs, he says, and cut me out of all hope."





"Iv'e been just now to the house where she lives: —I thought to tell a few stories that would spoil the match, if they had the feelings of human nature; but her father is a worse old wretch than him, if possible. I verily believe a she-wolf whelped him. He had the impudence to call me a vagabond! and threaten me with a constable ;—but I'll be revenged some time or another."

All this had been delivered with such rapidity and vociferation, that Julian found it impossible to interrupt him; but at the conclusion, James observed,—

"So then you have been to Mr. Vincent's, sir?

"Yes,—but how did you know who I meant?"

James explained; and he heard, with various grotesque exclamations of astonishment, that Julian stood in the same degree of relationship to Mr. Vincent, that he himself did to Mr. Stanfield; and was equally interested, to prevent the match, as himself.

"And cannot then, think you, two such fellows as you and I, defeat two old fools like old Vincent and my precious uncle?''

"I wish to goodness you could hit on something, for poor Mr. Julian is almost distracted." said James.

"I tell you what,—I have had thoughts of suing for a commission of lunacy against him," returned the barber, " but he's so devilish cunning that I can get no proofs against him, for as to this present one, his marrying a girl young enough to be his grand-daughter, that's too common now a-days to excite any sarprise; but seriously,—I will put my invention to the rack, but I will discover some way of putting a stop to, or at least, delaying this marriage ; and to delay it for a month or two would be gaining time, and that's something, when a man is seveniy years of age."





"Seventy!" exclaimed Julian, "can it be possible that Mr. Stanfield is seventy, and Marianne is only about eighteen?"

"It is quite possible," returned his companion, "and moreover, it is true.—But how do you mean to proceed?"

Julian acquainted him with the means of communication which still was open between him and Marianne; and the barber immediately exclaimed,—

"Zounds ! why do you not persuade her to run off with you, and so make sure of her,—I cannot see any impediment; for if she is really in love with you, and worth having, she wont mind scaling a wall, or jumping out of a window or so."

"But how am I to support her?" demanded Julian, who am myself, almost, now a dependant on- others. I could not bear to see her distressed, probably wanting the common necessaries of life. Oh, no! I must be selfish indeed, if I could subject her to this!"

"And do you think then, that old Vincent has really so little affection for his daughter?"

"Affection!" interrupted James, "you might as well have expected it in a flint stone!"

James' dinner hour was over;—and having deposited the letter, and promised to forward it, if possible, the same night, he reluctantly departed.





CHAPTER TWENTY-THIRD.



"His floating robe around him folding,

Slow sweeps he through the columned aisle 5

With dread beheld,—with gloom beholding,

The rites that sanctify the pile.



Byron.

From the moment Laura discovered, by means of Julian's letter, the gross deception that had been practised to extort from Marianne her consent to wed Mr. Stanfield, the whole of the former's eloquence had been exerted, to induce her sister to revoke a promise, thus fraudulently obtained; but in vain she argued, persuaded, and threatened. Marianne's spirits had entirely yielded under the recent shocks she had sustained, and she could see no alternative but passively submitting to the fate she no longer had courage to oppose.

In the mean time they were both kept close prisoners, not even Alfred Huntly being allowed to see Laura except in the presence of her father, or Edward, who seemed to glory in this opportunity of mortifying his sister.





Mr. Stanfield, indeed, was a constant visitor, and Laura, not unfrequently, found means of revenging upon him the resentment and indignation with which she beheld his, and her father's selfish insensibility to Marianne's despairing looks, and desponding manners.

Often, indeed, was Laura obliged to leave the room, after having given vent to one of these sallies of indignation, to hide the tears, which flowed from a consciousness of their inutility; and, not unfrequently, she drew upon herself the most violent reproaches from her father, to whom Mr. Stanfield, with the littleness of mind that marked all his actions, never failed to represent her conduct in the strongest light.

In the midst, however, of all these contentions, reproaches, and aversions, the preparations for the marriage proceeded without interruption ; Mrs. Vincent, at her husband's desire, taking upon herself to purchase whatever she conceived requisite for the situation Marianne was about to enter into.

But it was in vain that she tried to attract Marianne's attention, or arouse her vanity, by a display of satins, muslins, and laces. The unhappy girl viewed them with indifference, or turned from them with aversion; while Laura, when applied to for her opinion, significantly observed,--that"Fetters would not be rendered less heavy, or oppressive, by being gilded !" and Mrs. Vincent, blushing at being thus reproved for having in the moment of feminine weakness and vanity, forgotten, or at least, disregarded for the moment, the unhappiness of her favourite child, hastilv removed the gewgaws, which she had, but a few moments before, considered of so much importance.

The arrival of Julian's second letter, which, from the difficulties thrown io the way by Mr. Vincent's vigilance, was not delivered until within three days of that appointed for the marriage, revived, in all their pristine violence, Marianne's feelings, which she had believed were subdued; but which had been only for a short time' stifled, from her utter hopelessness and despondency.





A hundred times she read over his animated expostulations, and wept over the lively picture, which he had drawn of his despair; and Laura, beheld with satisfaction the change, which, she hoped, predicted a more decided exertion of her own free will; but though Marianne, no longer opposed Laura's arguments, as to the folly of adhering to her promise, she shrank from the task of declaring the alteration in her sentiments to her father, and, from the dread of his violence, continued to protract, from hour to hour, the important declaration which she had yet resolved to make.

Laura, in vain represented, that this was a mode of proceeding that her father and Mr. Stanfield, would have a just right to complain of. Marianne, replied, that she knew nothing could increase the rage with which her determination would be received, aud she had therefore resolved, as the most decisive method of preventing all future persecution, to conceal her intentions to the last possible moment, and then firmly avow, that neither force nor persuasion should compel her to an union with a man, whom she despised and abhorred.

The natural candour, and aversion to all concealment, which was one of Laura's chief characteristics, rendered her very averse to this mode of procedure,





"That depends on my father, and Mr. Stanfield," replied Marianne, in a calm tone. "The earlier the hour they have fixed, the sooner it will be decided.

"My father desired me to be prepared by nine o'clock," observed Laura, " and it is now nearly eight."

"Then it is time to think of dressing," replied Marianne, with great coolness, rising and beginning to prepare for her toilette.

Laura viewed her with astonishment,—not unmixed with terror.

"You surely will not carry on the farce so far, Marianne!" she exclaimed, in a fearful tone.

"Farce!" repeated Marianne, "would not tragedy have been a more appropriate term? but quiet your fears, Laura, and depend on me, I will not deceive you!"

Mrs. Vincent entered, and, with a faultering voice, enquired, if she could assist Marianne in dressing.

Laura turned half angrily away; but Marianne's eyes filled with tears, as she replied,—

"No, thank you, my dear mother! if you will send Anne to me, she can do all I require."

Never very penetrating, or acute, Mrs. Vincent was completely deceived, by her daughter's assumed serenity. She imagined, the certainty that opposition would be worse than useless, had induced Marianne, to lay it entirely aside, and submit, with resignation and cheerfulness, to what was now inevitable.

Elated at this unexpected event, Mrs. Vincent's tone and manner instantly changed; and, all alacrity, she busied herself in selecting the dress and ornaments, which she had purchased for her daughter, expressly for this occasion.





#

Marianne, however, who seemed to dread her mother's presence, and particularly the deception, under which she was evidently labouring, persisted in declining her assistance: and, at length, reminded her, that her own dress required some attention.

"Though, I suppose," she added, "you do not accompany us to church." This was the first time that Marianne had ever, in her mother's presence, directly spoken of the event, that was to take place so speedily; and Laura's astonishment increased.

".Are you not going to begin your preparations, Laura?" enquired Marianne, affecting not to notice the latter's anxious and perturbed look. Come, I see I must actually drive you away;" and she took hold of her sister, and, with gentle force, pushed her out of the room.

The moment the door was shut, the most dreadful idea took possession of Laura's mind ;—she believed that Marianne's agitation had disordered her understanding,—and that she contemplated some dreadful deed, as the termination of her sorrows! She tried the door—it was locked; and, almost frantic with agitation, she hastily called on Marianne to admit her.

No answer was given; and Laura screamed violently for assistance. In a moment Mrs. Vincent was at her side, enquiring, anxiously, >vLat was the matter; while her husband, followed by Mr. Stanfield, also, hastily ascended the stairs.

"Open the door,—pray open it!"

"Break it open!" exclaimed Laura, exerting her utmost strength, as she spoke, to force it.

Mr. Vincent, seemed instantly to comprehend the subject of her terror; and turning pale as death, he ejaculated, "the Lord forbid!" as he pushed forward, and assisted, with all his force, her efforts, to gain an entrance.





The door, however, resisted their united exertions; and it was not till the footman came to their assistance, with a wedge, that an entrance could be effected.

Laura was the first in the room; her eyes glanced wildly round; and at length, she discovered Marianne, laying senseless on the ground, by the side of the bed.

"It is all over!" she exclaimed, flying to her sister, and raising her in her arms; but no appearance of the violence she had dreaded was visible, and in a few moments, Marianne, gave evident indications, that the functions of life were only suspended, and not destroyed.

Laura raised her head, and beheld Mr. Stanfield, bending over her, evidently much alarmed.

"Ah! this is your work!" she exclaimed, with asperity, addressing herself to him, "you have completed it, at last, and she has escaped you for ever."

Marianne, sighed deeply, at this moment, and Mrs. Vincent, suggested the propriety of her being left to the care of the females only.

Mr. Stanfield, and Mr Vincent, retired; the first looking very grave and melancholy, and the latter muttering execrations against the weakness and folly of women, who, he said, were born to be the torment and destruction of mankind.

In a minute, Marianne opened her eyes, and, looking wildly around, enquired what had happened.

"You have been ill, my dear child," returned her mother, "but, I trust, you are now much better.

"Oh, Yes!—I recollect," returned Marianne, sigh





ing deeply, and glancing her eyes over the bridal finery, which still lay displayed on the bed, "I was seized with a giddiness in my head, as I began to dress. Laura, why are you in tears,—I am quite well now 1"

Laura was still trembling, from the effect of her recent fears: but Marianne's calmness seemed to be undiminished, as she recovered, from the effect of her sudden indisposition.

"Doesmy father know that 1 have been ill, Mamma?" she enquired.

"Yes, my dear child, he has been present some part of the time, and appeared greatly concerned."

Marianne arose, and attempted again, to commence dressing; while Laura, determined to make another trial of her father's humanity, flew down stairs, into the room, where he and his friend were sitting.

"Is she recovered ?" demanded Mr. Vincent.

Laura, replied in the affirmative, and her father, in very angry terms, commented on the disturbance and terror she had occasioned.

"And after all," he continued, "for a mere fainting fit, which might happen to any one, at this time of the year, when the weather is so warm. And what is the reason, Laura, that you are not dressed,—how long are we to have to wait for you?"

"Surely, surely, sir, you would not be so inhuman as to insist on my sister's keeping her promise, after the state you have seen her reduced to!" exclaimed Laura, indignantly, "and you, (turning to Mr. Stanfield,) can you affect to love her, and thus persist in driving her to desperation!"

"Silence!" interrupted Mr. Vincent, rudely seizing her arm, "silence, this moment, and prepare yourself,



I





and her, to accompany me,—or I will drag her there by force!"

Laura fell on her kness, her haughty spirit quite subdued by the fear that Marianne would be compelled to yield to the fate that threatened her; but Mr. Vincent was impregnable to either tears or reproaches, and roused into an agony of passion, Laura at length left the room, predicting that they would both have reason to repent their inhumanity, ere long.

Marianne, in the mean time, had nearly finished dressing, with her mother's assistance; and she testified the greatest surprise, when Laura, her cheeks glowing with passion, and her eyes swollen with tears, re-entered the chamber, still in dishabille.

"Surely, surely, Laura, you will not refuse me the sanction of your presence!" she exclaimed, looking

earnestly at her. "If you do not," She paused,

apparently, unable to finish the sentence which her feelings dictated.

"Do, Laura, pray get on your clothes! You know that all this is useless, and does but provoke your father," added Mrs. Vincent.

Laura yielded, though she made some bitter remarks on the inconsistency of her tear-swollen eyes, and agitated countenance, with the dress which was provided for her; and, more than once, she passionately tore off the ornaments with which her mother would have decorated her.

At length they were both equipped; and Marianne* whose wax-like delicacy of complexion suppressed her animated features, had never appeared to greater advantage than attired in the rich white satin spencer and bonnet, which, with an elegant white veil, and fine India muslin dress, her mother had provided for her. Laura was dressed exactly similar; but she by no means appeared to the same advantage, for her fine eyes were obscured by the tears she had shed, and her dark locks hung in wild disorder, while her whole appearance betrayed the utmost inattention and indifference.





Anne announced that the carriage was waiting; and Marianne, though gasping for breath, and looking as if her features were fixed in all the rigidity of death, was the first to comply with the summons.

Mr. Stanfield stood ready to receive her, but she evaded his offered hand, and was seated in the carriage before Laura had reached the door.

It was some distance from Mr. Vincent's house to the church: but not a word was exchanged, by either party, during the ride.

Laura held Marianne's cold hand, in hers, the whole time; but it appeared insensible to the pressure of affection, with which she repeatedly endeavoured to convey her sympathy to her beloved sister.

The carriage stopt at the door of the sacred edifice, around which a number of people, who had by some means gained intimation of the expected wedding, were collected; and the whispers of contempt, pity, and surprise, were very audible, as the antiquated bridegroom descended, followed by his intended fatherin-law.

Marianne stept forward; but she shrank back for a moment, as the buzz of" Poor young creature!—Poor thing!—What a shame!—She looks as if she would sooner go to her grave!" and various similar exclamations, circulated around.





"My dear, dear, girl! why would you persist in suffering this to proceed so far V whispered Laura, who feared, every moment, her sister would faint.

Marianne passed her hand across her forehead, as if to recall her recollection, and then hastily descended, while Mr. Vincent, by his frowns and pompous looks, appeared desirous to awe the surrounding crowd to silence.

No one, however, seemed disposed to be frightened at his tremendous looks; and the party entered the church, followed by loud, and unequivocal, symptoms of disapprobation.'

The clergyman was waiting at the altar, and several people, who had gained admittance previously to their arrival, were scattered up and down the back aisles.

Laura's eyes glanced anxiously round ;—a presentiment, that Julian would be there, had darted into her mind, more than once, during their ride; and it was now confirmed,—for leaning against a pew, with his eyes intently fixed on Marianne, his lips compressed together, and his features expressing the most intense agitation, she beheld the object of her thoughts.

Marianne, however, did not perceive him, and Laura, who still trembled, lest her sister's resolution should fail her at the critical moment, was on the point of pointing him out to her, in hopes the consciousness of his presence would give her additional energy to act as she intended;—when she was arrested, and astonished, by Marianne's exclaiming to the clergyman, who was commencing the appointed ceremony,—

« Stop, sir!"

Julian rushed forward; and, though without observing him, Marianne continued:—





"I feel it would be an insult to you, sir, and a mockery of the solemn ceremony, which you have been called upon to perform, were I to suffer you to proceed any further!

I here solemnly and publicly declare, that 1 will never become the wife of that detested man!" looking at Mr. Stanfield.

Mr. Vincent advanced; his lips quivering with rage,—

"Your promise !—Did you not solemnly pledge your word?" he uttered, in almost unintelligible -accents.

"I did so," returned Marianne, firmly; " but under what impressions,—I was imposed upon, and deceived!"

Mr. Vincent would again have interrupted her: but the clergyman, who regarded her now animated countenance with great astonishment and evident interest, interfered.

He expressed his surprise, that Mr. Vincent should attempt to force his daughter into a measure, which Tvas evidently so abhorrent to her feelings;—he reminded him of the sacred nature of the matrimonial state, which was profaned by being entered into rashly, —unadvisedly,—or, from worldly motives of interest. But Mr. Vincent evidently regarded bis arguments with contempt; and Mr. Stanfield, wiping the cold drops from his forehead, complained bitterly of having been made a fool of.

The clergyman regarded him with a look of pity mingled with the most extreme contempt;—and Mr. Vincent once more demanded, in a voice hoarse with passion, whether Marianne, would fulfil her engagement? "Never! never,"returned Marianne, lifting upherlovely blue eyes, with solemnity. In the face of Heaven, I declare that no power on earth shall oblige me to an union with one whom my heart revolts from with abhorrence, for his cruelty and selfishness, which has obliged me to this public exposure.





Convinced that there was no other method of putting a final stop to his persecution, and convince my father of my firm resolution, I have adopted this measure, how repugnant to my feelings and inclinations, I need not say; and now, my dear father,"

Mr. Vincent rushed towards the door: and Marianne, exhausted with the effort she had made, and terrified for the effects, of it would have sunk into her sister's arms,—but that Julian, who, breathless with suspense and agitation, had advanced nearer and nearer, interposed, and clasping her passionately to his heart, exclaimed,—

"Matchless, heroic girl!—Oh, Marianne! would to Heaven, that ijt were in my power to shield you in these arms, from all the evils that threaten you.

The clergyman had turned away to disrobe himself —Mr. Vincent was^already at the church; door—no one therefore, witnessed Julian's passionate apostrophe, or the corresponding action, but Mr. Stanfield, who appearing petrified with astonishment, stood gazing at the now animated and elegant youth, whose commanding form and expressive features were so strongly contrasted with his own shrunk limbs and stature, and his wrinkled, care-worn physiognomy.

Mr. Vincent's furious appearance and manner, as he called on the coachman to draw up, had now proclaimed to those assembled without, that some unexpected event had happened; and fired with curiosity





they all pressed forward, and, in defiance- of the authority of the sexton and his assistant, forced their way into the church, Mr. Vincent retreating before them, until he came in full view of Julian, who was still supporting Marianne in his arms, while Laura, bewildered with all she had endured, and still apprehended, and yet exulting in the spirit and firmness Marianne had displayed, was unable to offer any assistance to her sister, who quite exhausted with the excitement she had suffered, appeared almost insensible to what was passing around her.

Had a serpent suddenly started up in his path, and, with extended jaws, threatened him with destruction, Mr. Vincent could not have started more, or looked more horrified at the unexpected sight.

His recollection, however, quickly returned; and darting forward, he seized his daughter, and would have dragged her away, but for the interposition of a singular looking little figure, who, extending his arms in a theatrical position, darted between them.

At sight of this second apparition, Mr. Stanfield (who had hitherto seemed motionless with consternation) recovered his voice.

"You here, too, villain-!" he exclaimed. "How dare you show yourself in this/ place?"

"Come to offer my congratulations, dear nunky, like a dutiful nephew, as I am, you know."

The clergyman returned: and while-he appeared to view Julian and his companion with surprise, he politely suggested that they had better all retire to the i vestry-room, until those whom curiosity had drawn together, were dispersed.

"Lean on me, Marianne! my beloved Marianne!"





whispered Julian, as tremblingly she glanced at her father, and clung still closer to Julian's arm.

"Are you a relative of Mr. Vincent's?" said the clergyman, in a low voice, and approaching close to Julian.

"Yes, sir. His sister's son!" returned the latter.

"And that young man?" enquired the clergyman, looking at the triumphant little barber, whose countenance betrayed the interest he took in what was passing.

"I have the honor to be that venerable gentleman's nephew," replied the latter, pointing to Mr. Stanfield.

"Oh, then, of course, you are all interested in this affair," observed the clergyman, making way for them to pass into the vestry room.

Julian's looks declared how deeply he was interested, as he gazed with rapture on the lovely face which was turned to him as if for protection.

The storm, which respect for the sacred place they were in, and the restraint imposed by the presence of so many strangers, had hitherto suppressed, now broke forth, and Mr. Vincent loaded both Julian and Marianne with invectives, and threatened them both with his eternal hatred and vengeance.

In vain did the mild and beneficent minister endeavour to appease him, and represent the cruelty and impiety he was guilty of, in thus endeavouring to force his child's inclinations. Mr. Vincent was mad with rage; and he at last declared, that as she had chosen that vagabond (pointing to Julian) for a protector, she might remain and starve with him! for that she should never cross the threshold of his door again, but as the wife of Mr. Stanfield.





"You must be a bold fellow, nunky," observed the little barber, whom we shall henceforth designate by his right name,—Mr. Richard Stanfield. "You must be a bold fellow, nunky, if you were to take her now, after seeing what a fine, spirited fellow you have got for a rival. Why, he'd break through stone walls, and scale mountains, higher than the Alps, to reach his love."

Mr. Stanfield muttered some unintelligible threats of vengeance, through his closed teeth, at the daring fellow, who had dared thus to sport with his dignity; and then addressing Mr. Vincent, observed, that, as he supposed it was quite useless for him to remain, he should bid him adieu, adding,—

"As, of course, Mr. Vincent, it would not be very pleasant for us all to go together, I will, if you like, send my servant for your own carriage, and go home, by myself, in mine."

"Wont you give me a lift, dear nunky," demanded the incorrigible Richard. "Do now, take me with - you to town. Consider, I am, as yet, the heir presumptive of the house of Stanfield; and do not let me degrade my dignity, by tramping it on foot."

Mr, Stanfield shook his cane; but the moment Richard, who seemed to have as little respect for his cane as himself, shewed an inclination to approach him, he retreated behind Laura, who, inher enjoyment of his mortification, had almost forgotten the difficulties and sorrows that yet awaited her, and, with evident signs of bodily fear, shuffled out of the room,

"Why so! being gone,—

Richard's himself again!"

exclaimed the incorrigible nephew, gazing after him, "but I forgot,—I must see the new carriage;—I wonder what coat of arms he has mounted!" and out he ran, regardless of the surprise his eccentric manners excited.





Mr. Vincent renewed his reproaches of Julian, which Stanfiejd's address had interrupted, accusing him of every crime which could render him odious, and dangerous to society.

Julian repelled his accusations with temper and dignity; but, when he repeatedly reproached him with having been left a beggar, dependant on his (Mr. Vincent's) charity, the former, fixing his expressive eyes full on his uncle's face, observed,—

"I am surprised that you should forget, sir, that you have received from my uncle Carleton, more than sufficient funds, to defray the expences of my support and education, had it been on a much more liberal scale"

"Who told you so?—how dare you make such an assertion !" interrupted Mr. Vincent, turning pale, and betraying evident signs of consternation.

"I have it from the best authority, sir!" returned Julian, " from the assertions of Mr. Carleton himself."

Mr. Vincent muttered some unintelligible remarks, in which, the words falsehood and malice, were the only words that could be comprehended; and then, turning to the clergyman, he requested a few moments' private conversation.

As they retired, for this purpose, Richard Stanfield re-entered the room, and, with evident triumph, informed Julian, that the old man had been pursued to his flashy carriage by the laughter and contempt of the crowd, who had been unmerciful in their comments on his disappointment.





Julian, however, was too iutently occupied in.endeavouring to sooth and reassure the drooping Marianne; who, terrified, almost, at what she had done, and dreading her father's future violence, clung to him, who yamly regretted bis inability to protect her from all the storms of life.

"Your sister has acted like a heroine, Miss Vincent," observed Richard, advancing to Laura, whose sarcastic look, as she had regarded the imbecile Mr. Stanfield, smarting under his disappointment and mortification, had particularly attracted his attention, " but, to tell you a little bit of a secret," he continued, "I had formed a plan to put a stop, at least, for the present, to the old man's project, even if Miss Marianne's courage had failed."

"Indeed!" replied Laura, "I wish, then, you had carried your plan into execution,—for it would have saved all the suspense and uneasiness, which I am now suffering from the apprehension of my father's severity. Had the obstacle arisen from any other quarter, he could not, in decency, have revenged his disappointment on my sister."

"Yes, Madam! but I was anticipated in my scheme by your sister's declaration," observed Richard.—" It was my intention, at the proper part of the ceremony, when the minister adjures those who have any objections to the parties present entering into the holy state of matrimony,—I should then have stepped forward, and have protested against it, on the grounds that he has still a wife living, which J verily believe to be the Case, as I have heard my father say that his first wife went out of her senses, and was confined in a madhouse; and that he married another, soon after the physicians had declared her incurable, and he found there was no danger of her ever coming forward to molest him."





Laura, in astonishment, expressed her surprise, at his villainy, adding,—

"With all my contempt for him, I did not believe him capable of acting in this manner."

"Ah, madam,'' returned Richard, " were it a proper time and place, ' 1 could a tale unfold,' which would astonish you, that there could exist a being so lost to all feelings of humanity and generosity as this same uncle of mine."

Mr. Vincent and the clergyman returned; the former's looks not much softened by the conference he bad held, and the latter appearing hurt and uneasy.

He drew close to Julian, and in a low voice, said,—

"I should be sorry to hurt your feelings, Mr. Carleton, but it would, perhaps, be better, for your cousin's sake, as well as your own, that you should now retire, and leave her to the care of her sister."

Julian darted a look of anguish at Marianne, as he bowed to this suggestion, and then whispering,

"God protect and bless you, my dear girl!" hepressed her hand to his lips, and affectionately bidding adieu to Laura, rushed out of the room, followed by his companion, Richard Stanfield.

Those who had witnessed the transaction within the church, as well as those without, were all awaiting the appearance of the parties concerned; and (be moment Julian appeared, a loud shout of exultation was raised, in which James the gardener, whose anxiety and interest





"Rare compound of oddity, frolic and fun!

Who relish'd a joke and rejoic'd in a pun;

Whose temper was generous, open, sincere,

A stranger to flattery, a stranger to fear,

Who scatter'd around wit and humour at will;

Whose daily bom mots half a column might All."



Goldsmith.

Julian felt from the moment that he had discovered the connexion between his companion and Mr. Stanfield senior, that it would probably, as the former observed, conduce to both their interests, to unite their counsels to defeat their common enemy. He, therefore, when James left them, as we related, together-at the public house, in the neighbourhood of Mr. Vincent's habitation, enquired of the communicative hair-dresser, 16. 2 z





how he was situated, and with what views he had come there that day.

Richard replied, with his usual serio-comic expression of feature and voice, that he was once more a denizen of the world, without home or occupation. . .

"I had," he continued, "just before I saw you, made up my mind to travel. My free and unconfined spirit loathes the petty details of servile occupation. Trade, with all its disadvantages may be bearable to those who have some ties to whom it enables them to impart happiness and ease,

"But me, not destin'd such delights to share,

My prime of life in wandering spent and care;

Impell'd with steps unceasing to pursue

Some fleeting good, that mocks me with the view;

That, like the circle bounding earth and skies,

Allures from far, yet, as I follow, flies;

My fortune leads to traverse realms alone,

And find no spot of all the world my own."



Julian was sensibly struck with the pathos and real feeling with which his companion repeated these beautiful lines, and he observed,—

"I am surprised, Mr. Stanfield, with the talents you possess, that you have not been enabled to strike into a path more congenial to your ideas."

Richard's eyes sparkled with pleasure at this compliment, and in reply, he quoted the well known and expressive line ottrohnson,

"Slow rises worth, by poverty depressed."

"When you consider my origin, Mr. Carleton, and the obstacles which have been thrown in the way of my ambition, you will not be surprised that I am still in the same situation in which so many superior geniuses, have pined away their lives,





"And dropt into the grave, unpitied and unknown." -..:

My father was a tradesman in humble circumstances, and I was the youngest of nine children, all bora alive and christened, as my poor mother used to say, with a sort of exultation. Not one of them, however, attained to man's estate but myself, but the frequency of births, christenings, and burials, contributed to keep my father in poverty, and prevent his having any means of giving me a better education than the parishschool afforded, but I was quick and docile, and moreover possessed an inherent love of literature, so that I not only pretty well escaped the flagellations and other corporal means* by which our ruler generally found it necessary to convey a portion of his own learning and knowledge to the understanding of his pupils; but I likewise so fully imbibed all that he had to impart, that it was even rumoured through the school, that Dick Stanfield could beat master, at round hand or text, and could read and spell him out and out again.

Under these circumstances, the master considered it expedient to get rid of one, who might, speedily9 prove rather troublesome to his importance, afnd reputation, for superior learning; and, accordingly, at thirteen, I was pointed out as quite qualified to be instructed in any art or mystery, the professors of which wanted a strong boy, and the five pounds, which the parish allowed, as the apprentice fee.

I believe the poor fellow who took me, had much more need of the latter, than the incumbrance with which it was loaded. However, to do him justice, he taught me all he knew in the way of business, and we shared our crust together, (and literally, it was seldom more than a crust) in perfect fellowship and amity. He was of a literary turn, too, and our scanty meals were generally sweetened by the perusal of some ragged dog's-eared volume, which he would borrow from one or other of his acquaintances. But this life of learned ease, for such it certainly was, as we had a plentiful dearth of employment, in the way of business, Was suddenly terminated, in the third year of my apprenticeship, by an unlucky accident; for my master* absorbed in the fate of a favourite hero, unfortunately forgot to extinguish the snuff of candle, which was burning under his nose when he fell asleep, and the consequence was, he and I were both obliged to jump out of the window to save our being burnt, and all the stock in trade fell a prey to the flames, and reduced my poor master to the workhouse, for he wastooold, and too idle, to encounter the hardships of working for his living.





My next master was a striking contrast to this poor, harmless, inoffensive being,—he was a bustling, swearing, tippling fellow, who was never satisfied with the exertions of those in his employ, and here I was badly fed, and badly treated: buffetted about from morning till night, and reviled, in every phrase of reproach that the English language can supply ; yet, even here, my mind found opportunities of improvement My master was hair-dresser, or, as he stiled himself, perruquier to one of the theatres, and as I got expert and handy in the business, I not unfrequently supplied his place, when he was engaged over his pot, or bad made too free with it to render his company desirable.

Here I became familiar with those heroes, whom 1 had before only gazed on at a distance. I drew in the mighty inspiration of genius at every breath, and 1 also became convinced that my own talents were not so despicable as, in my reverence for the great names tbat are worshipped in the world, I had been led to think.





No man is, they say, a hero to bis valet de chambre; so it cannot be surprising that I could find nothing extraordinary in my stage heroes, as I became more intimately acquainted with them. I must confess I was, at first, very much mortified to see the creatures of my imagination, the demigods of my fancy, sink down to a level with ordinary men; but in proportion, as they were abased, 1 felt myself exalted; until, at last, I scorned to be employed in menial offices, by the men with whom I felt myself equal in all that constitutes, or ought to constitute, distinctions between man and man.

Full of these high ambitious thoughts, I could not attend to my business, nor brook my master's insolence ;—but eloped one morning with half a crown in my pocket, which had been given me by a customer, a few days before, in reward for the entertainment I afforded him, by my tragic looks and attitudes, while employed in his service. This half-crown, a single shirt, and a few odd tattered,volumes of plays, tied up in a handkerchief, and suspended over my shoulder at the end of a stick, formed all my riches; but I comforted myself with the recollection of many great men, who had begun the world with no greater prospects than myself: and without a fear for the future, I trudged off' in search of fame and fortune. How the jade has served me, you have been pretty well acquainted; for I have at sundry times, I believe, related nearly all the adventures of my theatrical life."

"But you have not mentioned your uncle, all this time," observed Julian.—u Did you never attempt to interest him in your favour?"





"True; I forgot my uncle,—though it was no breach of gratitude; for the only favour, I ever remember receiving from him, was a flogging at the parish school; which favour he procured me, by complaining to my master that 1 insulted him at his own door, and beset him so that he could not go out of his own house, without fear of me and my saucy companions.

The fact was this,—my poor father was ill, and unable to work: and, at my mother's desire, I wentto the great Mr. Stanfield, to represent our pitiable situation.

I could have borne a refusal, (for that, from all the representations of my father and mother, I had been prepared to expect) but when he proceeded to call my father an idle, lazy fellow, who was unwilling to work for a living, and deserved to suffer, I could not hear it with patience, and I accordingly told Mr. Stanfield a few truths, which, it appeared, from my age and his opinion of my humility, he was not prepared to expect.

The consequence was, as I have related, that my poor flesh suffered for the error of my heart, if, indeed, it was an error; and I assure you, my gratitude was proportioned to the favour, and 1 have never let slip an opportunity of testifying it. I have, indeed, been his plague by night, and his torment by day: for I have taken care that he should never forget that I was in existence, and also that I am heir to a pretty little freehold, which he came unexpectedly into possession of, two or three years after the death of my parents, and which he cannot deprive me of, unless he should have heirs male, direct; which, if I can prevent, he shall not." ,





Julian joined heartily in the hope, that his companion would be able to defeat the old man's intentions ;—and the subject of the impending marriage, was then resumed.

"It was my intention," observed Richard, M as I had failed in gaining a hearing from Mr. Vincent; who, as soon as he found what subject I came on, refused to listen to another word,—and even threatened me if 1 did not instantly leave his house,—it was my intention, I say, to have gone down to an old friend and fellow comedian, who has, I understand, started a company of his own, about thirty miles from London, under the expectation, that he would give me an engagement; but, under these circumstances, I shall certainly defer my project until the day,

"Big with the fate of Cacar and of Rome,"

is passed.

Julian expressed his gratitude ; and Richard proposed to return to town with him,—observing, that he could get a job for a week or so, till the affair was concluded, and then start off.

They returned to London, and Julian felt most forcibly his poverty, and the restraint of his situation, when his companion demanded, where he should call upon him; adding,—

"As for myself, it is impossible to say where I may take up my quarters: and, therefore, you must appoint the rendezvous." ..---..-.-i-- »

Julian replied, by briefly stating the unpleasantness of his situation, and requesting his companion to appoint some place, where he would meet him.

A public house was, therefore, named, and an hour appointed; and Julian bent his steps towards home,— his whole thoughts occupied by the important event that was pending.





It had not occurred to Julian, to mention his intended absence to Mr. Austin : and there was something of displeasure mingled with a tone of surprise, with which Mr> Austin remarked, that he had been wondering, all day, what could hare become of him.

Julian, who knew that be bad an enemy to dread in Mrs. Austin, thought it prudenttoavoidsayinganythiag about the real cause of his absence;—he, therefore, merely replied, that he had unexpectedly met a friend, whom he had not seen for a long time, whicb had detained him beyond his intention.

"A very elegant one, too," observed Mrs. Austin, with a sneer, "if it was the gentleman whom I saw shaking you so cordially by the hand, at the end of the street, just now!"

Julian blushed; for he was aware that poor Richard's appearance was not very prepossessing in his present attire ;—but, angry and vexed at Mrs. Austin's impertinence, he replied, that the real worth of a man could be but poorly estimated by his outside appearance.

"No! certainly, certainly," said Mr. Austin, interfering; but yet, my dear lad, one must pay some deference to the opinion of the world, in the choice of our companions. I do not say we should treat with contempt a man of merit, because he has not a good coat on his back; but, at the same time, I would not choose to make him the companion of my walks, because others would, perhaps, judge differently of him."

Julian listened to this lecture with some degree of impatience; but he suppressed the expression of what





he felt; and merely remarking that he would, at some future opportunity, explain who the person was, whose appearance had given rise to these observations, he retired to his own room.

At breakfast, the next morning, Mr. Austin was out. He had been called up by a patient, whom he was still with, and Julian had to endure, during the short time he remained with Mrs. Austin at ihe breakfasttable, all that lady's sarcastic and illiberal remarks.

"You are not going out for the day, again, 1 presume, Mr. Carleton?" she, at length, observed, as Julian was retiring; " because I think, if you have so many engagements, it would be better to attend to them altogether: and let Mr. Austin get somebody, who will be of some assistance to him in his business."

"Mr. Austin will act as he thinks proper, madam, in that, as well as every other respect!" replied Julian, haughtily.

* Yes, sir, I suppose he will," returned the lady, angrily; " but if Mr. Austin cant see his own interest his friends must point it out; and, to come to the plain fact, Mr. Carleton, either you orl must leave this house. I will not stay here, to be brow-beat and insulted, and treated as if I was nobody!"

"You may spare your animadversions, madam," returned Julian very composedly; "the knowledge, that you wish me to quit your house is quite sufficient. I shall act accordingly."

"Yes, I dare say you will, sir!" retorted Mrs. Austin, with a sneer, "you will do as yeu have done before; talk very fine sentiment, and persuade that foolish man, (my husband) that the moon's made of green cheese, if it will answer your purpose; but you can't impose upon me,—I know all your manoeuvres; and I tell you, as I've told you before, that I won't put up with them!"





Julian walked calmly out of the room :—he felt that it would be degrading himself to enter into a contest with one so illiberal and prejudiced; and, with all the rash impetuosity that characterized him, he resolved; that she should never again have an opportunity of repeating her insults.

Conscious that he should be unable to conceal from Mr. Austin's friendly observation, the agitation of his mind; and fearful that he should not have resolution to withstand his arguments and solicitations, Julian decided, that it would be the best plan to carry his intentions into execution at once, before his friend rer turned;—and, accordingly, having thrown together his books and clothes into his portmanteau, he carried it down into the hall: and having told the servant that he should send for it in a few hours, left the house, without mentioning a word of his views or intentions.

The maid servant followed him to the door.

"My master will be so sorry and vexed, Mr. Carleton. What shall I tell him?"

"Tell him that he has my sincere thanks for his kindness, and my everlasting wishes for his happiness!" and he hurried away, almost overcome to tears, by the excess of his feelings.

A still farther trial, however, awaited him. At the corner of the street he met Mr. Austin, hastening home to take some rest and refreshment, after some hours fatiguing exertion.

"Carleton! where are you hurrying to so early? I 4iope I am not wanted, for I am most confoundedly tired."





"No my dear sir, 1 am going on my own private business at present," returned Julian, trying to force a smile.

"Something has disconcerted you, Carleton!—I can read it in your looks. I had hoped that I had your confidence sufficiently, to render this reserve unneces>sary; but you have found other friends."

"I shall never find any more respected and revered than you, sir," returned Julian, warmly. "But excuse me, if I decline now entering into explanations, which will be painful to both of us. When next we meet, you will, I trust acknowledge, that you have done me injustice, if you have ever suspected me of feeling towards you other than the most sincere respect, and the warmest gratitude."

"When next we meet I" reiterated Mr. Austin, with a look of astonishment; but Julian hastily broke from him, and hurried on, without waiting to hear another word;—and before Mr. Austin could have recovered from his astonishment, he was out of sight.

Somewhat recovered from his first agitation,—Julian began to consider where he should go to, or how he should proceed: and, at length, he determined to visit his friend, Richard Stanfield, and take his advice;— considering that, as he knew much more of the world, and had been more accustomed to its vicissitudes than himself, he might be able to suggest something which might be of service to him.

Richard was, as usual, seated over a pot of ale, when Julian entered; but he immediately relinquished his favourite enjoyment, on receiving' a hint from Julian. that he had something of importance to communicate.





He listened, with evident interest and approval, to Julian's recapitulation of the motives which had induced him to leave Mr. Austin's so suddenly; and, at the conclusion, shaking him heartily by the hand, he exclaimed,—

"You are a lad after my own heart! I admire your spirit. I would have acted the same myself in the same circumstances; but now tell me, my dear fellow, have you any where to go?"

Julian, not without some slight hesitation, acknowledged that be had not.

"And not very strong here, I suppose," continued Richard, touching his pockets, with a significant look.

"I am certainly not overburdened with money," returned Julian, colouring, "still I have sufficient for present exigencies,—and when that is gone, I can raise a trifle more."

"Poob, pooh! that is not what I asked you f exclaimed Richard. "All I wished was, to ascertain whether it would Tiot be advisable for you to live as retired and as cheaply as possible, until you could meet with something to do: and if that is the case, I can suit you to a hair, as we say."

"I am much obliged to you," returned Julian, "and assure you, that I shall gladly be guided by you,—for I am but a poor creature to be left to myself."

"Well then; I will tell you, without further prologue, that there is a bed disengaged in the same room in which I sleep; and^ that, I think we may manage very well together, for I am an excellent purveyor, and can make a shilling go as far as some folks can half a crown: so, if you like, we will settle matters with the landlady at once. 1 will fetch your trunk myself, and you can take possession of your dormitory, and do as you please; either read, go to sleep, or amuse yourself in any way you like."





Julian gratefully accepted this proposition, though he demurred to Richard's taking upon himself the office of porter: but the good natured fellow overruled all his objections; observing, that it was only an appearance in a new character, and adding, with his usual aptness for quotation,—

"And one man, in his time, plays many parts."

Julian smiled; and Richard, having taken Mr. Austin's direction, went off immediately to fulfil his commission.

"You will be-careful, my kind friend, not to let any persuasions of Mr. Austin's, induce you to let him draw from you where, or how, I am at present situated," observed Julian.

Richard promised that he would strictly avoid giving the slightest hint; and Julian retired to their mutual habitation, to await his. return.

Puffing and blowing under his burthen, Richard, at length, arrived: and Julian, with anxiety, demanded if he had seen Mr. Austin; and what he had said.

"Yes, 1 have seen him," replied Richard, "and have got myself affronted for my pains."

"I am very sorry for that," observed Julian, "and I wish you had listened to me, and have let some one else fetch the portmanteau; for, you know, I told you that I feared, if you saw Mrs. Austin, she would behave rudely to you."

"But it is not of Mrs., but Mr. Austin, that I have to complain!" returned Richard. "He has called me every thing but a gentleman ; and that's a title, I lay as little claim to as the rest of the pretty little epithets he bestowed upon me."





"Explain my dear fellow; do explain what you mean," said Julian, in surprise.

"Well, then, to proceed methodically:—I knocked at the door, and delivered your order, that the trunk should be given me. The maid said she must call her master, and in a minute, out bounced the doctor, in a furious passion."

'Who sent you here?' he demanded, surveying me from head to foot, as if he would look quite through me, clothes and all.

'Mr. Carleton, sir,' I replied, 'as, I suppose, that paper,' looking at the order which he held in his hand, must have informed you.

'And pray where is Mr. Carleton?' he enquired.

iThat, sir, I am not at liberty to tell,' I replied. 'I have been expressly ordered, not to reply to any questions of that sort; so I hope you will not ask any.'

'And pray have you been his adviser to this rash proceeding V he next demanded.

* Mr. Carleton, sir, is quite competent to act for himself, without my advice;—nor do I think that any one has a right to call him to account for his conduct.'

'You do not think! and pray who are you that thus set yourself up for an arbitrator!' said Mr. Austin, angrily.

'I am a man, sir,—that is title sufficient for me; and one who will never disgrace the confidence, which Mr. Carleton has honoured me with.'





'Oh, then, you acknowledge yourself his confidant. Pray are you one of the firm of Ryland and Co?'

'I do not know any such person,' said I; and as to confidant'

'Oh! perhaps there is another name at the head of the concern now;—but I dare say you know who 1 mean. Such gentry as you are not particular as to names,—a few alias's, more or less, are but trifles.'

'I never assumed a name for any dishonourable purpose,' said I, 'nor ever disgraced one I did assume.'

'Well you are the most impudent fellow I ever saw,' said Mr. Austin. 'Then you acknowledge you have passed by names you had no right to.'

'In my profession, sir, it is not thought any thing uncommon)'

'No, I believe you, indeed !' interrupted Mr. Austin. 'But pray has Mr. Julian Carleton become one of your fraternity?'

'No, sir, I do not know that he has any such intentions; but I am not empowered to speak of his future prospects,' I replied.

'And yet, I can venture to foretel the termination of them,' said Mr. Austin, 'if he follows your counsels, which it appears his determination to do; I can, and will tell him, that they will end in a halter: as to you, I only wish I had it in my power to give you your deserts, for seducing, from the protection of his real friends, a young man, whose talents and accomplishments would make him an ornament to any station, and whom your cursed arts will degrade and ruin. Rash, infatuated young man! But where is he, scoundrel? I insist on your letting me see him!'

"I was on the point of replying very warmly to this; but I considered that it was his friendship for you that had led him into error; and I, therefore, began to expostulate with him: but, in proportion as I was calm he became more violent; and he vented his rage in the most unaccountable terms. He accused me of being a thief and a swindler, and declared, that I should not have your property, but that you should come for it yourself.





Flesh and blood could not bear, with patience, his false accusations; and I really believe we should have come to blows, but that his wife came out, and interfered between us.

I could have told him that he should vent his displeasure on her, instead of me,—for that she had been the means of driving you away; but I was afraid you would be angry if I did, and so I let her get him into the parlour again; and the maid, who seemed to have had a hint from her mistress, hoisted the portmanteau (which was standing in the hall) upon my shoulders, and dismissed me."

Julian heard this detail with vexation and sorrow. Though grateful for Mr. Austin's friendship, (which had undoubtedly prompted the warmth with which he had spoken) he could not but feel hurt and angry at the suspicions, which it is evident, his departure had occasioned; and it was with difficulty he restrained himself from going immediately to him, and proving to him how erroneously he had interpreted his (Julian's) departure, and Richard's unconscious admissions, which had, unfortunately, confirmed all Mr. Austin's previous suspicions.

Certain, however, that he should not only encounter considerable difficulty, in evading Mr. Austin's





persuasions to return, but should also be the means of encreasing the uneasiness which already existed between the latter and his ill-matched partner, Julian determined to leave to future time to undeceive his kindhearted friend? and he accordingly prevailed on Richard, to forget the mortifications he had met with in his good-natured errand, and enter upon the subject which was nearest his heart,—the marriage, which every hour was bringing nearer to a decision.: - --,-,. t-r ^

Fearful that Julian might be discovered;- and that his impetuosity might involve him in some contest with either old Vincent or his son, Richard prevailed on him to remain at home, while he daily trudged to Highgate, to reconnoitre and learn all he could of the proceedings in Mr. Vincent's family.

Julian heard, with dismay, that the preparations for the wedding were uninterruptedly proceeding; but his mind was somewhat relieved by Laura's letter, which desired him not to be alarmed, even should he hear that Marianne was actually in the church with her intended bridegroom, as she had solemnly declared that she would never become his wife.

Richard now proposed his plan, which Julian agreed should be resorted to, in case of absolute necessity, though he still hoped Marianne would exert sufficient firmness, to render any-interference unnecessary.

By a bribe, judiciously applied, Richard secured admittance to the church before the marriage cavalcade made its appearance; and Julian, with a throbbing heart and trembling limbs, beheld his beloved and ever lovely Marianne enter the church, followed by the man whose support she disdained to accept. "

The scene that followed has already been described; but language is too weak to paint the feelings, with which Julian listened to the sweet voice which he had never before heard but in gentle and timid tones, and which now seemed to raise itself into sublimity, as she pronounced her decided rejection of. the despicable being, who, regardless of her avowed repugnance and dislike, would have extorted from her a cold consent to what her heart abhorred, and would have condemned her to misery, to gratify a passion as unfeeling as it was selfish and revolting.





CHAPTER TWENTY-FIFTH.

"Ah me! for aught that ever I could read,—

Could ever hear by tale or history,

Tin- course of true love never did run smooth i

But either it was different in blood,—

Or else misgrafted in respect of years,—

Or else it stood upon the choice of friends:

Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,

War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it."



Shaksfeake.

Marianne for some time after Julian's departure remained unconscious of the storm that was still impending over her, and regardless of all that was passing around her.

At length, however, the harsh voice of her father, summoning her to follow him,roused her into recollection; and clinging to Laura's arm, with a look that said "We are not then yet parted!" she prepared to obey him, but her strength was unequal to the effort; and the clergyman, who observed her inability, kindly offered the assistance of his arm, to conduct her to the carriage.





The concourse of people, who had been drawn together by the singular events which had taken place, had encreased, rather than diminished, since the departure of Julian; and the moment Mr. Vincent made his appearance, he was saluted by the most contemptuous revilings and hisses, while a loud huzza, as Marianne, with difficulty, ascended the steps> bespoke the general exultation at her conduct.

"So! this is fine,—this is delightful !'' observed Mr. Vincent, in accents almost unintelligible with passion, as the carriage rolled on, and the sounds of the shouts died away on his ear, " but your confederate shall suffer for this!" and he turned to the two trembling girls, with fury in his looks. "I will prosecute him, with the utmost vengeance of the law! I will prove that he has assembled a mob, to insult and intimidate me !—I will bring witnesses, that he created a riot even at the church door !—and when I have laid bim by the heels in prison, I will turn you out to console him, you vile, base, treacherous Wretch."

Marianne shrank from the uplifted hand, which her father menaced her with, as he uttered these threats; but Laura, who felt their emptiness, and contemned them as much as she did the unmanly violence of his actions, calmly observed,—

"Here are people passing, sir! and it will not increase the prejudice in your favour, if it should be told that you are actually menacing my sister with personal violence, at a moment when she is sinking under the effect of the agitation she has undergone."

Mr. Vincent turned hastily towards the side at which Laura was sitting; but his countenance instantly changed, as he encountered the piercing eye of a gentleman, who, with a servant behind him, was riding leisurely along the road, and whose first glance of apparently mere curiosity, was converted into a stern look of contempt, as bis eye rested on the heated and agitated countenance of Mr. Vincent.





Laura, who immediately conceived that this was one of the neighbouring gentry, who had heard of the recent occurrences in her family, and, consequently, regarded her father with the feelings which she, in the artlessness of her heart, imagined every one must experience, at hearing of such cruelty: felt, at the moment, only exultation, that his conduct should be thus pointedly reprobated; but this sentiment was soon superseded by surprise,' and a sensation of, something like fear, on observing the effect which this transient interview had had upon her father: who, turning pale as death, shrunk into the corner of the carriage,—and seemingly forgetful of his late violence, and the causes that had occasioned it, uttered not a word, until he reached his own door. , .. !.:,..:-( ..

Here, however, the sight of a crowd of expectant faces, among whom the family of the Huntly's, whom he had invited to partake the bridal festivities, were the most conspicuous, recalled to his recollections all his recent mortifications; and, turning to Marianne, he desired her, in an imperious tone, to go to her own room, and remain there till he decided how to dispose of her.

Laura would have followed her sister; but her father, with a frown, forbade it, and desired her to join the company, while he himself retired with Edward, who came forward to meet them.





"Where is Mr. Stanfield, Laura?" demanded Mrs. Vincent, as she advanced to her daughter.

"Indeed I do not know, my dear mother, without he is gone to look for another wife," returned Laura, smiling. .. -- - ;

"Then your sister is not married, after all!" exclaimed Caroline Huntly, who had followed. "Well, I do not wonder she could not bring herself to say the awful words, ' till death do us part,' with such an old fright. I am sure we were all astonished, when we received the invitation; and Alfred said then, he would lay his life, there would be no wedding, after all." ,\

"And yet," whispered Alfred, who had got close to Laura's elbow, "if Mr. Vincent, would but listen to me, the company should not be disappointed. What says Laura,—could she not take the part of the bride, as the play bills say, at this short notice? I will answer for acquitting myself, to the satisfaction of the spectators, in the character of the bridegroom; for I have been rehearsing it, morning, noon, and night, these three months."

-.- Laura smiled and sighed in the same breath :— the smile was given to Alfred,—but the sigh was Marianne's^

Mrs. Vincent was sent for out of the room; and the girls, no longer restrained by her presence, crowded round Laura, to enquire into the particulars of what had happened; while the elder ones of the party held a consultation, whether it would not be proper to retire, without obliging their host or hostess, to the unpleasant necessity of a formal explanation.

Before the debate was concluded, however, and before Laura had half answered the questions of her young companions, Mrs. Vincent re-entered the room: and, after apologizing for Mr. Vincent's absence, who, she said, was too indisposed to appear, requested them to accompany her down stairs, where an excellent dejeune was prepared for them. .





"Have you seen Marianne, mamma?" enquired Laura, as they descended the stairs.

Mrs. Vincent replied in the negative; and Laura slipped away to her sister's chamber.

Marianne had already stripped off all her bridal finery: and to Laura's enquiries she replied, that she felt better and happier than she had done for some months; adding,— -

"Do not let me detain you, my dear girl, from those who, I know, are anxious for your company. I saw Alfred's face, at the window, as I came in."

"But you have eaten nothing to day, my dear Marianne; and I cannot leave you till I know that you have something."

"Anne will bring me up some tea," replied Marianne, " and I do not want any thing more; therefore, pray go, or you will only increase my father's violence."

Laura unwillingly complied with her request, and rejoined the party in the breakfast room, who, though they seemed inclined to do justice to the good things set before them, appeared all restrained and silent, by the strangeness of the circumstances under which they were assembled.

Alfred Huntly exerted himself, by every mark of attachment and attention to Laura, to tranquillize her feelings: and, at his request, his father undertook to endeavour to persuade Mr. Vincent, to suffer his daughters to return with them, (the Huntly's) and remain in town, for a few weeks, till the present tumultuous feelings, on both sides, should subside.





Mr. Vincent, however, with whom, after some demur, Mr. Huntly succeeded in gaining an interview, positively refused to allow Marianne to leave the house, alledging, that it would only facilitate her intercourse with the wretch, who was the instigator of all her disobedience:—as to Laura, he left her at liberty to follow her own inclinations; he rather, indeed, wished she should go, he said; and, in fact, he wished that he was rid of her and her sister, altogether.

Mr. Huntly, who was a good-natured, easy man, tried to reconcile him to what, as he said, was now irremediable, without, however, taking Marianne's part, for he had a family of daughters himself; and, he acknowledged, had Mr. Stanfield chosen one of them, he should have been very angry, if she had stood in her own light so much as to refuse him.

Mr. Vincent, however, was inconsolable; and his friend, at length left him, to report to Laura, the permission he had gained, for her departure with him and his family.

Laura, however, resolutely declined all entreaties that she would accept the proposal made her. She would not leave her sister, she said, on any account, under the present circumstances; and she scolded Alfred for his selfishness, in looking disappointed at her persisting in her refusal.

Alfred acknowledged he was disappointed; and the more so, because he considered that her remaining at home, would not be the means of conciliating her father:—and in this sentiment, Mrs. Vincent joined very impressively, adding,—





"You well know, Laura, that your warmth of temper often aggravates, instead of healing, the breaches between your father and sister: and I would venture to say, that, in the present instance, Marianne's mild' ness, and conciliating disposition, will bring about a reconciliation; whereas, if you stay, and suffer yow feelings (as you always do) to get the better of yourreason, there will be no end to the contentions and disturbances in the family."

"A very pretty prospect, truly, for me! I Kttle thought what a termagant spirit I am about to engage," whispered Alfred, who saw the tears ready to start from Laura's eyes, at her mother's remarks.

"Will you consent to be guided by your sister's own decision and wishes?" resumed Mrs. Vincent, "I do not mean that I will point out to her the advantages, that I think will result from your absence: but merely state, that your father has given you permission to go, and that you do not mean to aocept it."

Laura acceded to this proposition; and, with her mother, immediately proceeded to Marianne's chamber. .

"My dear mother, you are not angry with your poor girl!" exclaimed Marianne, throwing her arms around her mother's neck. .

Mrs. Vincent, in vain, tried to preserve the appearance of resentment, which she had thought it necessary to assume; and, for some moments, she mingled her tears with her daughter's.

At length, however, she recollected the purport of her visit,—and she mentioned, that Laura had been





invited to accompany Mr. Huntly and hiis family totown, but that she had refused, from her unwillingness to leave her, (Marianne.)

As Mrs. Vincent had foreseen, Marianne instantly expressed her anxiety, that Laura should accept the invitation, enforcing her wish by the same arguments which her mother had used, that Laura's presence would tend rather to retard, than forward a reconciliation between herself and her father.

Laura, therefore, was at length obliged to yield a reluctant consent; and after embracing her sister, and shedding many tears, (which the generous and heroic Marianne reproved as useless and unnecessary) she returned to the company, to whom Mrs. Vincent had already announced the change in Laura's intentions.

In as short a time as possible, therefore, the whole party quitted the house: and Marianne with a palpitating heart, heard the carriages roll from the door, one of which she knew, contained the only friend to whom she could communicate all her feelings, and who would truly sympathize in all her sorrows.

The day passed away without any communication between her father and the trembling Marianne, who dreaded every footstep she heard, was coming to summons her to his presence.

Night, however, came on, without her having received the unwelcome mandate. From Anne she learned that her father seemed very low and ill,—and that Mrs. Vincent and him had been talking together almost all day, and that Mr. Edward had gone with the rest to town, but she believed was to return the next morning; and somewhat relieved from the vague fears and terrors which her inexperience of th world, and her dread of her father's violence had suggested, Marianne retired to rest, and the heavy burden which had so long oppressed her spirits, being removed, enjoyed more calm repose than she had done for some weeks.





It was late the following morning before she awoke, and, to her great surprise, she learned from Anne, that her father had set out, at break of day, by the coach to Liverpool, which passed the gate, and that, from what her aunt Martha had dropped, she believed the whole family were to follow him immediately- - .

It was in vain that Marianne tried to assign a reason for this hasty proceeding: but rejoiced to hear that her father was absent, she descended, with alacrity, to the breakfast-room, where she found het mother alone, sitting in an attitude of deep and mournful reflection, from which she started at the sight of Marianne, and with somewhat of reproach in her looks observed,—

"I see you are already acquainted with your father's absence, Marianne."

Marianne replied in the affirmative, adding,—

"Can you be surprised or angry, my dear mother, that I am rejoiced at being freed from the fear of meeting his reproaches at the present moment V

"We are going to make a tour for some months," observed Mrs. Vincent, without replying to Marianne's appeal, " therefore you will prepare as soon as possible."

"Does not Laura go with us?" demanded Marianne, in alarm at the thoughts of being so long separated from her sister.

"Yes, of tourse !" replied Mrs. Vincent,"! have sent to her this morning, and I shall call for her this evening; for I must go to town on some business."





"And Edward?" rejoined Marianne.

"Edward will follow us. He will remain in town for the present, to transact something that your father has left unfinished."

Marianne was rejoiced to hear this, for she dreaded Edward's sarcasms and insolence almost as much as her father's reproaches; amd she began to make the necessary preparations for their journey with an alacrity which was only interrupted by her uneasiness, respecting Julian, to whom she knew not how to communicate the strange alterations that had taken place, and the uncertainty she was in, as to their destination.

"How surprised every body will be, when thay find us gone, Miss Marianne!" observed Anne, as she was assisting to pack up. --

Marianne made no reply; and Anne, after a long pause, proceeded:—

"I saw the young man that comes with Mr. Julian to James the gardener's cottage, last night, as I was crossing from the post-office, but I did not dare speak to him, because Martha was out too, and I was afraid she might catch me." -

Marianne sighed deeply.—

"I wish," she at last observed, " I wish, Anne, you could contrive some means of letting James know that we are going into the country."

"If you would write a bit of a letter, I could leave it at the little shop where James sometimes comes," replied Anne.

Marianne hesitated ;—she knew not how to address Julian: if Laura had been there, it could have been done very well, but now she hesitated;— but Anne's persuasions prevailed, and she, at length, penned a few explanatory lines, which Anne undertook to deliver.





Mrs. Vincent returned alone, late in the evening, the . Huntly's having persuaded her to suffer Laura to remain with them, as the long expected relative (for whose consent alone, they waited to make her one of the family) had arrived at Falmouth, and was expected every hour.

Though disappointed of Laura's society, Marianne rejoiced sincerely in the prospect of her sister's happiness being soon confirmed, and she heard with pleasure, that Alfred had promised, as soon as the nuptial knot was tied, to join them (Mr. Vincent and family with Laura, and remain for two or three weeks with them.

"We shall be obliged now to defer our journey for another day," observed Mrs. Vincent, " for your brother was absent on an excursion to Richmond, and had not returned when I left, and it is absolutely necessary that I should see him before we go."

Marianne was not sorry for this delay, as she considered it advisable to keep out of sight of her father as long as possible, but her quiet and comfort all vanished with the sight of Edward, who arrived early the following morning, in consequence of his mother's message, and immediately began in his usual overbearing and unfeeling manner, to reproach her for the pretty exposure which, he said, her folly and obstinacy had occasioned.

Mrs. Vincent interfered, telling Edward that she had something to communicate which required hi^ immediate attention; and Marianne, rejoiced at this reprieve, took the opportunity of escaping to her own room, from whence, with pleasure, she, in a few hours, beheld Edward depart towards London again.





Every preparation was now completed, and they were about to retire to rest early, intending to start as soon as it should be light in the morning, when they were astonished by the sound of a horn at the gate, which they knew announced the arrival of some person by one of the night-coaches, which passed the house; and before the servant had unbarred the gate, the voice of Laura announced who was the unseasonable visitor.

Mrs. Vincent and Marianne received her wkh surprise, and a single glance at her pale cheek and tearswollen eyes, betrayed to them that something unusual had disturbed her.

"Thank God, you are not gone, my dear mother and sister!" she exclaimed, "I was terrified after I set out, lest I might be too late, and then I knew not what I should have done."

"What has happened, my dear child?" enquired Mrs. Vincent, anxiously.

"Only what, if 1 had not been foolish, I might have anticipated," returned Laura, trying to speak very calmly. "The rich relation does not view me with the eyes of his nephew; he has formed other plans for him, and as Mr. Huntly very plainly told me that his affairs will not allow him to provide for Alfred, independent of his brother-in-law, and as Alfred seemed determined to forget his own interest, and uphold his first intentions, I thought it advisable to withdraw, and not let my presence prejudice their final decision. -'





"My poor, dear Laura J" exclaimed Marianne, unable to suppress her tears at this sad reverse of her sister's prospects, "my poor sister V she repeated, fondly embracing her.

Laura made a strong effort to suppress her tears.

"We are both destined to be old maids, Marianne," she observed, with a forced smile, " so never mind, we must comfort one another as well as we can."

"I dread the effect this will^have upon your father's temper J" observed Mrs. Vincent, in a tone of regret, "he has had so many disappointments lately, that I shall tremble to communicate this to him."

"You had better leave the task to me, my dear madam," returned Laura, who felt very little concerned for the effect it might have on one, who, she considered, fully merited every mortification he could possibly meet with, and whose violence she despised too much to fear.

Mrs. Vincent looked grave, for she read the contempt which Laura felt but too plainly, in the manner in which the latter gave herself to be the herald of her own disappointment.

"I hope, Laura, you have not acted too hastily ip this affair!" she observed, " I know your proud spirit is very apt to take fire, where no offence is intended."

"You would not have wished me, madam, to stay till 1 was affronted," replied Laura, her cheek glowing at the idea; " but I will relate every thing that has passed, and that will, I trust, obviate all future remarks as to the propriety of my conduct."

Mrs. Vincent apologized; she had never meant, she said; to call the propriety of Laura's conduct in question ; she was only afraid, that she (Laura) was a littla too apt to be particularly tenacious of her dignity.





Laura smiled, and without any comment, proceeded :—

"Mr. Barnard, the rich uncle, is a sour, stern looking man, as bilious and lean, as you can conceive of one, who has passed forty years of his life in a tropical climate, scraping together half a million of money, for so much he is said to be worth. The very sight of his avant couriers, (a black and a white servant) who threw the whole house into disorder, in preparing for the reception of their master, was sufficient to prejudice me against him;—there was so much attention to personal accommodation, such fiddle J'addle, and I heard it so often repeated, 'Massa will not like dot, he will swear like de devil,' from the black slave, and 'Oh dear, that will never do for my master,' with an air of contempt, from the white one; that it was very plain, we must not expect to find the anxiously looked-for visitor all urbanity and complaisance.

'My brother was always rather harsh and high in his notions,' observed Mrs. Huntly, seeing me smile, almost involuntarily, at these little indications of selfishness. * And his having lived so long among people that have been ready to fly at his look, and tremble at his frown, has not, I dare say, improved his temper; but we must look over trifles, where there is so much depending on pleasing him,'

The great man came at last, and, after bearing, rather than meeting, his sister's greetings, and returning Mr. Huntly's good humoured congratulations, upon being once more safe on British ground, by a stately nod of his head, he seated himself, or rather laid himself at full length, on a sofa, and proceeded to take a survey of the rest of the family.





'This is my eldest daughter, Caroline, this Georgina, &c. &c.,' said Mrs. Huntly, leading the girls up to the stately puppet, who nodded his head with an air of great condescension. Alfred and his brother were next introduced: and to the former, he did condescend to address a few words, expressive of satisfaction, at all he had heard of his (Alfred's) acquirements and disposition.

His eyes then, almost mechanically, turned to me. I felt my time was come; and, therefore, walked forward, in obedience to Mrs. Huntly's signal.

'This young lady, my dear brother, I have not yet the satisfaction to call my daughter; but'

She stopped short, struck with the portentous frown which bent his beetle brows at this hint, and with some confusion, added,—

• She is the daughter of a very particular friend of our's, Mr' Vincent.'

He made me a very ceremonious bow, and -then turned to Alfred, who, poor fellow, was turning alternately pale and red, with sorrow and indignation, at the reception which I had met with, and the disposition to submit to this mighty brother, which was so evident in his mother's hesitation, and the conclusion of her speech.

For my own part, I was heartily rejoiced when we (the girls and myself) received a hint that we might retire to dress; for I was sick of the ostentation, and air of protection and patronage, which the new comer assumed: and I was quite of the lively Georgina's opinion, who observed, that there seemed to be about as much life and feeling in her uncle, as in one of the China images he had brought with him.





My toilette, you know, is soon made, and as I felt there was but little chance of my captivating the old nabob by my personal charms, I, perhaps, took less pains fhan usual: be that as it will, however, I was dressed long before the girls, and tired of hearing their conjectures about 'uncle, and his intentions,' 1 stole down to the little library which Alfred has furnished* lately, with some new and good publications, and, ta* king one from the shelf, sat down to endeavour to for* get the Uneasiness, which I will not deny I felt, at the sudden damp which was thrown upon our prospects.

While 1 was thus employed, Alfred entered, with a face of care, such as i had never before seen him wean He started at seeing me, and taking my hand, said:—

'Laura, my dear girl, I am more wretched than words can describe, at the prospect which this day has opened to me. This unfeeling being, whom I blush to call my relative, has, it appears, formed plans for me, which our intended union clashes with; and he has peremptorily declared, that nothing shall induce him to yield his consent to it. I have just parted with him in violent anger.'

At this moment Mr. Huntly, who had followed his son, to induce him to return and soften what he had said, entered, and a scene ensued, which I was not sufficiently collected to repeat circumstantially; but it ended with Mr. Huntly'savowing,thathisaffairs were so embarrassed that he was ruined, unless he could make a friend of his brother-in-law:—and he then appealed to me, whether I could be so much the enemy of his family, or of Alfred himself, as to insist upon the fulfilment of his promise to me.

'Besides, my dear Miss Vincent, you know, they were but conditional promises, though, God knows, I never dreamt of opposition,—and thought it was but a compliment we were paying Mr.Barnard, in delaying the performance of the ceremony till his arrival. I wish,





indeed, now'

I interrupted Mr. Hjmtly's regrets, by declaring that I would not be any bar fo the advancement of his interest, and that I, from that moment, renounced all right to their consideration, in the formation of their future plans.

Poor Alfred was quite in despair, and accused me of having as little regard to his feelings, as his father and the rest of them;—but I was immoveable, and I bore all his reproaches with composure, though I will not be hypocritical ei.ough to deny that I felt them very severely.

At length we were summoned to dinner; and here again, we had a repetition of all the pompous airs, and consequential looks, of the nabob, who found fault with every thing he tasted, and seemed to consider it quite beneath his dignity to think of any one else, or suppose their gratification was a subject worth attending to. The poor girls looked sufficiently dismal. Mrs. Huntly seemed quite at a loss how to act, or what to *ay, and wretchedly disappointed that all her efforts to receive her brother handsomely, and provide an entertainment worthy of him, had failed.

I believe, after all, that the grumbling, discontented Mr. Barnard, though he declared he could find nothing fit to eat, ate nearly as much as all of us put together* for even Mr. Huntly, had lost his accustomed appetite, in his fears of losing the favour of the great man. When we were about to quit the table, Mr. Barnard requested his sister to stay.





%i And you, Miss what's your name, if you

please,' looking at me, and nodding his empty head with great solemnity,'1 have something to say, which I wish you to hear.'

'Excuse me, sir,' I replied, 'I beg leave expressly to state, that I am no way concerned in your family arrangements, and therefore, beg leave to decline being present at any discussions in which I cannot possibly feel any interest.'

He absolutely started, and opened his ugly eyes to their widest extent, as I calmly walked out of the room.

Mrs. Huntly did not join us till tea was brought in, and then, her eyes were swollen with crying; but the gentlemen followed so quickly, that she had no time to enter into any explanation.

Alfred did not make his appearance at all; and both Mr. and Mrs. Huntly seemed embarrassed, how to behave to me, between their natural feelings, and their fear of offending Mr. Barnard, who seemed to watch them narrowly, and evidently, was highly offended at my independent manners.

, He scowled at me from time to time; as, regardless of his awful presence, I chattered and laughed, with a gaiety which was very foreign to my heart,. but which I was determined to preserve in his presence, at least, that he should not have the gratification (and a gratification it evidently would have been) to see me mortified and miserable.

A grand display of the talents of the girls followed the removal of the tea-table; but nothing could rouse the apathetic nabob, into any thing like pleasure or admiration. I could have kicked him, if I had been a man, for the yawning indifference with which he listened to Georgina's sweet voice, and Caroline's scientific execution on the piano-forte. I never heard either of them more delightful; but it was all thrown away upon the Goth, who seemed scarcely able to keep his eyes open.





All this time I sat unnoticed; but, at last, Mrs. Hunjjy, who had evidently sat in misery, in a faultering voice, requested me to join in a trio with her daughters:—I complied with her request, without the smallest hesitation, I believe, much to her surprise, and little to her satisfaction.

When we had concluded, I curtsied to her, and said:—

'If you have no farther commands for me, madam, I will now wish you good evening.'

Every one's eyes were turned on me with snrprise; but, as Mrs, Huntly did not seem to know how to answer me, I pretended to take it for granted that I was dismissed, and curtsied out of the room, with all the composure possible.

Before I could change my dress, however, I had all the girls after me, crying and entreating me at least to stay till the morning, and have the carriage to convey me home; but I was resolute in accepting only the favour of a servant, to accompany me to the coach, which I knew started about this hour from AIdersgate street: and thus bade adieu to the Quntly's, and matrimony for ever!" .

"Then you did not see Alfred at all!" observed Marianne, in a compassionate tone,

"No," returned Laura, "thank goodness, I was •pared that, or, perhaps, I should not have been able to act quite so promptly; though I flatter myself, I should have been quite as decided; and now, my dear mother, I hope that you are prepared to start early in the morning, that I may not be exposed to any solicitations, or be obliged to hear any apologies from those whom I must wish and try to forget for ever."





Mrs. Vincent replied in the affirmative; yet she wished, she said, that Laura had not been quite so hasty, and taken a little more pains to recommend herself to Mr. Barnard, who might not be so impenetrable as he appeared.

Laura smiled disdainfully.—

"You would have had me, perhaps, my dear mother, imitate the Huntly's; but be assured that my system was quite as likely to make an impression on him as theirs; for it was evident that be despised their at-tempts to ingratiate themselves with him, and thought only of his own comfort and gratification, without the least regard to any other human being."

Still, however, Mrs. Vincent was discontented, though it was chiefly from the fear of what Mr. Vincent would say on the subject; and Marianne, while she acknowledged that her sister had acted with perfect propriety, in her heart deplored that she had not relaxed a little, and have rather borne, for a few days longer, with the arrogance of him, who it appeared, was to be the arbiter of her fate, than have thus, by her precipitate departure, rendered a relaxation of his high and mighty decrees irrevocable. Poor Alfred too! most sincerely she commiserated his feelings, when he should find Laura gone, and every hope of her eventually gaining the favour of his arbitrary relative, frustrated,





CHAPTER TWENTY-SIXTH.



"What if thine heaven be overcast,

The dark appearance will not last,

Expect a brighter sky."



Cowper.

We left Julian contending with a variety of emotions, the most prominent of which, perhaps, was, at that moment, anguish, at being obliged to leave his beloved Marianne to suffer all the fury that he could plainly see was pent up in the bosom of Mr. Vincent; only in consideration of the presence of the clergyman, and the hypocritical reverence, which he (Mr. Vincent) professed for all "outward and visible" forms of holiness, which would not allow him to profane the place in which they were assembled.;

Fearing to excite resentment against James, should they be publicly seen to take refuge in his humble abode, from the gazing eyes of curiosity, Julian and his companion resolved, on leaving the church, to return immediately to their lodging; and, during their hasty walk, all the wondrous events and exploits of the morning, of course, formed the theme of their conversation.





Richard's thoughts were chiefly occupied by the recollection of the silly figure the old man had appeared in his wedding finery,—and his looks of wild astonishment, when his intended bride had commenced her animated appeal to the clergyman; while Julian dwelt with rapture on Marianne's firmness and heroism; and recalled, with all a lover's fondness, the look with which she bad beheld him, (Julian) when he rushed forward to her assistance.

The beauty of her form and features, thus set off' by a splendid and elegant dress, and the bright beaming eloquence of her lovely eyes, as she had raised them to his for approbation of what she had achieved, all were recalled, with transport, to Julian's fond imagination; and all the evils which threatened him, and the little probability that he should ever become the husband of her,

"Whom his soul doated on,"

were forgotten in the fond dreams and ecstacy of the moment.

"There is a fine woman in that carriage !" observed Richard Stanfield, suddenly breaking in one of Julian's reveries, "and she looked at you as if she recognized an old friend I thought, until the coronet on the carriage convinced me I was mistaken; as, I suppose, your connexions have not laid in quite so high a sphere,"

Julian cast an indifferent glance at the carriage, which had passed them too far, for him to see its occupant, and, without making any remark, was proceeding, when it suddenly drew up, and the footman alighting, approached the coach door, from which Julian beheld a female head obtruded, though it Was now too far off, to distinguish the features. - *,





Richard uttered some conjecture, which Julian paid but little attention to, for he was surprised to observe that the footman was hastening towards them.

"Is your name Carleton, sir?" he enquired, addressing Julian, who replied in the affirmative, while Richard stood aghast with surprise.

"My mistress wishes to see you, sir," added the servant, surveying him very particularly from head to foot, and then glancing at his companion.

Julian's colour rose;—there was an impertinent smile, he thought, on the man's face, which he con* eluded arose from poor Stahfield's grotesque appearance, (he having equipped himself in a suit of Julian's clothes, which hung on him rather as if they had been thrown at random on a peg, than as if they were in* tended for use and ornament;) but merely requesting that his companion would wait for him, he followed the messenger to the side of the carriage, where, as he had conjectured, he beheld, glittering in all the pride of dress and splendour, Mary Hamilton.

She shrunk back, abashed from Julian's cold look, and composed inquiry after her health: and it was evident she had expected a very different greeting.

"I am very well," she replied, in a hesitating tone ^ "in health ;—but where have you hidden yourself? 1 have, in vain, tried every means to discover you."

"Had you, then, any particular motive for wishing to see me?" returned Julian, without relaxing from the reserve he assumed.

Mary seemed disconcerted ;—she cast a reproachful look at him, and with considerable agitation, murmured,





"Particular motive /—Think you then, Carleton, that 1 can ever be indifferent to, or uninterested in, the fate of him to whom I owe my existence? could I feel other than miserable, at the manner and circumstances under which you quitted me? Oh, Julian! do not judge me too harshly:—I have acted imprudently I know, and I can bear the contempt which my conduct excites; but I cannot bear your coldness and indifference :"—and she threw herself back in the carriage, to hide the tears which she could not controul.

Julian's heart was softened; but he suppressed the expression of his emotions, conscious that the saucy eyes of the servant, who was standing at a short distance, were upon him; and, in a low tone, he observed,—

"It is now too late, Mary, to regret what has passed, yet do net charge me with indifference. 1 can never be indifferent to the fate of Mary Hamilton, though I may condemn her conduct."

"What could I do, Julian *" she replied, in a dejected tone, " 1 was involved in debt, without a prospect of relief;—from Stuart I had no longer a hope; and to have revealed my true situation to you, would only have been adding to the cares and anxieties you were already suffering, without making one step towards freeing myself."

"This explanation is unnecessary and imprudent, Mary," returned Julian, glancing at the servant, who stood at a little distance, with evident symptoms of curiosity in his countenance.

"1 know it is imprudent!" she hastily replied, " and I know, too well, that nothing can restore to me your esteem:—yet, Julian pity me5 I have not a single friend, not one person who can sympathize in my feelings,—uo one in whom I can confide; in short, Julian, I am miserable!"—She paused, overcome with emotion; and Julian* sincerely pitying her, refrained from adding to her distress by any reflection on the cause of it.





"Shall I see you again, Julian V she at length demanded, looking with anxiety in his face.

"How can I promise that, Mary?" he returned, "I cannot visit yon, of course, in your present circumstances; and as to my own situation, it is so unsettled that it would be useless to give you a direction to a place, which to-morrow, even, I may quit."

"But if you do, you can let me know where you go to," observed Mary. "Stop! I will give you my address," and she tore a leaf out of her pocket-book, and

wrote with a pencil, No. , Baker Street. "Will

you write to me, Julian ?. Promise that you will; and tell me what has passed since I left you. I have been more wretched on your account than my own."

Julian could not deny a request thus flatteringly urged. Mary could have no interested views now, in professing her attachment to him; she could no longer, he thought, hope to inspire him with affection, nor take advantage of his prepossession in her favour; and, much as he despised her unprincipled conduct, it was impossible not to be flattered by the avowed attachment pf one, whose beauty and manners were now set off by all the advantages of dress and splendour.

He gave the desired promise, and Mary then suffered him to bid her adieu,

Richard surveyed Julian with looks, in which, surprise and anxiety were strongly blended.

"You are a lucky follow, Mr. Carleton," he at length, remarked, "to be the favoured of two of th& most beautiful women I ever beheld: but,—





"Things base and rile, holding no quantity, Love can transpose to form arid digrffty: Love looks ndt with tlXc eyes, bat with the ni-md; , Therefore is winged Cupid painted

'- And therefore is love siid -to be a child',

Beeaase, in choice, he is so oft beguiled."

Julian smiled.—

"I am certainly obliged by your compliment," he observed; "but, as I know you are apt, in the indulgence of. yo«r fondness for yonr favourite bard, to think little as to the justice of your applications of his aphorisms, and more especially as I am humble enough to acknowledge I have no claim to the honour with which you would load me, we will let it pass."

"But, my dear friend, is the lady, to whom you were speaking, the owner of that carriage?" demanded his inquisitive companion.

"That is a question I am unable to answer," returned Julian, colouring.

"You wont trust me, I perceive," returned his friend, evidently piqued. "Well, it is no matter,— you may, perhaps, want my assistance again,. and then"

"And then you will give it," returned Julian good humouredly. "Come, come, Stanfield, do not be so captious,—I assure you 1 spoke truth, when I said I was unable to answer your question. It is some time .since I have seen the lady in question, and I cannot exactly say how she is situated; though I have bat too much reason to fear, that she is but the temporary owner of the carriage which so much excited your curiosity."





Richard was satisfied with this explanation.— "But," he demanded,withalook which again brought the colour into Julian's face, " is Marianne acquainted with this lad y, or, at least, does she know of your acquaintance with her?"

"Yes, she knows that a singular circumstance rendered me of service to Miss Hamilton, and she knows also, that her gratitude is unbounded."

"Gratitude!" repeated Richard, significantly. "Well, I wish I could inspire such a woman with gratitude; for in female hearts it is like pity—t near a kin to love!'"

Julian made no reply :—it was a subject he did not wish to pursue, and he quickened his steps towards home, ruminating on the strange events which a few hours had brought forth.

"Well," observed Richard, as he seated himself, "and now this important business is concluded, I suppose both you and I must begin to look about us and descend to every day affairs. We cannot live upon love for ever, and I believe you have had but little sustenance besides, for some days past."

Julian smiled, while he sighed.—

"Whatever I might do, I cannot suppose so light a diet would content you; besides, 1 did not understand you had ever tried it You are not in love, are you V

"I will answer you in the words of Shakespeare," returned Richard :—

"' I cannot tell,—I think not,—I will not be sworn, but love may transform me to an oyster: but I'll take my oath of it, till he has made an oyster of me, he shall never make me such a fool. One woman is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet I am well; another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all graces be in one woman, one woman shall not come in my grace. Rich she shall be, that's certain; wise, or I'll none; virtuous, or I'll never cheapen her; fair, or I'll never look on her; mild, or come not near me; noble, or not for an angel; of good discourse, an excellent musician, and her hair shall be of what colour it please God.' But, to be serious, Carleton, what do you intend to do?"





"Seriously I know not how to answer you," returned Julian," though I feel the necessity of resolving on something, as much as you do." . .

"I shall be very sorry to part with you," observed

Richard, thoughtfully; "yet "he paused, and

Julian, not without some emotion, replied,-^

"I shall have the most reason to lament our separation, for I have been infinitely indebted both to your kindness and activity, and when you are gone, I am sure I know not one human being in whom I can confide, or to whom I can breathe my complaints."

Richard was seized with an affection of his eyes, which obliged him to turn away and look through the window; and when he recovered, he proceeded :—

"I have a letter here," (producing one from his pocket) "which I received a week ago, though I would not mention it, because I knew it was of no use till this wedding affair was over. You will see that it is too advantageous for me to refuse,—though, if my staying could be of any service to you, I would give it up with all my heart."

Julian took the letter, and unable to reply to his eccentric companion's disinterested avowal, which evidently sprang from his heart, proceeded to read the contents.





It was as follows :—

\

"Dear Sir,

"Received yours of the 25th, have to acquaint you that I have a vacancy in your line, and have no doubt of your abilities, from your friend's (Mr. Orlando St. Clair's) recommendation. If you can contribute a wig or two, (one for Roman parts and a low Comedy scratch) will be of essential benefit, as there is at present but one in the company, and that's worn very bare. Respecting wardrobe, hope you have a change of linen, as some disgrace has fallen on some of the company already in that respect, and the audience have smoked the expedient of paper .collars, &c. &c. As to terms, I divide into thirty shares, five of which are appropriated to purchase properties; ten are mine; and two and a half is the property of the chief tragedy actor, which line, 1 understand, you take, though your friend (Mr. Orlando St. Clair) assures me you will have no objection to make yourself useful in a general way, and can play Harlequin, make wigs, or paint scenes with any one in England.

"We are going to break up our quarters here, which have been extremely profitable, none of the company having shared less than a pound a week, and intend

opening a campaign at B , as soon as the house can

be fitted up;—if, therefore, you can make-it convenient to meet us there, and will study the character of Shylock, for the opening play; Sylvester Daggerwood, for the interlude; and Caleb Quotem, for the farce, I shall be very glad to receive you: and, till then, remain





Your very obedient humble servant,

Timothy Alphonso Lamp.

"N. B. Am in want of a lady in the sentimental line, having but one at present, who was, last night, obliged to play both Cora and Elvira, and, having but one dress, finds it awkward, though she came off with great eclat."

Julian could not suppress a smile, as he returned this curious epistle to his friend; but though he could not foresee any thing very flattering in the offer of the manager, he would not utter a word to discourage the sanguine hero, lest it should be supposed he was influenced by selfish motives.

"Now, 1 do really think there might be an opening for you," observed Richard, " for your wardrobe would secure you an engagement for the walking gentlemen; but, then, perhaps, you would not like that cast."

"I do not think I have any talents that way," returned Julian, who shrank from the idea of exhibiting in such a company as that under the management of Mr. Timothy Alphonso Lamp. "But do not concern yourself about me, my dear friend," he added, with assumed sprightliness, " I shall get into some way of providing for myself in a short time, you may depend upon it."

"I hope you will,—I earnestly hope you will," returned Richard; but 1 tell you what, if, when I go down to B , 1 find any advantageous opportunity, I will write, and if jtou have met with- nothing better, you know,—"





"I will accept your offer," rejoined Julian, who felt too grateful for the anxiety which his friend displayed, to depreciate his proposal by a single remark.

"Then to-morrow, at break of day.—

"Sweet Valentine adieu!

Think on thy Proteus, when thou, baply, seest

Some rare note-worthy object in thy travel :—

Wish me partaker in thy happiness,

When thou dost meet good hap, and in thy danger,

(If ever danger do environ thee)

Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers,

For I will be thy beadsman."



"And how do you go? I mean, by what conveyance?" enquired Julian.

"Can a man, possessing such an understanding as this," exclaimed Richard, pointing to his legs, "be at any loss for a conveyance? why, man, I shall walk it with pleasure in two days."

"But will that be quite consistent with the dignities you are going to assume ?" said Julian.

"Psha! leave me to manage that. Do you see these V (producing a pair of old rusty spurs,) when I come near a town I cut a switch from the hedge, buckle on my spurs, and the first house I enter, take care to tell them I have just sent back the horse which my friend, squire so and so, or my lord what d'ye call him, had lent me, mentioning any body's name that I know lives far enough off, to prevent detection; and then hope that the boy will take care of the animal, and not spend the half-crown I had given him, in





drink, on the road. This gives a great idea of my generosity, as well as my dignity."

Julian laughed heartily at the serious air With which he repeated this stratagem; and Richard, delighted at an opportunity of diverting him from the gloom and melancholy which reflection hever failed to produce, related a variety of humourous expedients* which he had had recourse to, to support his dignity, as he said; and some of which had threatened, by their miscarrying, to eclipse it for ever; but he had generally come off' triumphant in the end,

Julian's mind, however, was still dwelling upon the scenes of the morning, and a thought of Mary Hamilton would pot unfrequently intrude. He almost repented that he had promised to wrjte to her, for he foresaw that it might be the source of much uneasiness to both ; and he too sincerely pitied, while he condemned her, not to feel anxious for her welfare.

In the evening, Richard left him for a short time, and Julian seized the opportunity of adding to the slender wardrobe of the latter, which he had already tied up ready for the morning, two or three articles* which he thought would be serviceable to him.

During the time they had been together. Richard had, more than once, raised sufficient to defray their expences, by parting with some of Julian's books, but that resource was now nearly exhausted; and Julian, as he deposited in Richard's bundle, the half of what remained in his pocket, intending to give him the rest at the moment of parting, without noticing the deposit he had already made, felt a sensation of terror at the idea of what would become of him, should he fail in procuring a situation





Richaqd returned:—he had been to hid adieu to some acquaintances, who had treated him liberally with his favourite beverage: and the effects of his libations -were so risible, that Julian feigned sleep, to avoid his noisy jol lit y.

* Poor fel—low f" hickupped Richard, standing seesawing over the bed on which Julian (without taking his clothes off) had thrown himself, " poor fel—low! it wo*Id be a pity to wake him, he so seldom has a sound nap. Thus it is

1 "To be in love,

Where scorn is bought with groans, coy looks,

With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights—"



I cant go on :—this swimming in my head takes away all my mem—mem—memory—" and down he dropped on the bed, where Julian soon found, by his snoring, that he should be relieved from any further trouble, for that night at least.

Julian, however, found it impossible to follow his example, and at an early hour, he arose, and Richard starting up, exclaimed,—

"What's o'clock? Is my hour come already?"

"No, but you will have some breakfast before you go;" returned Julian," I suspect your head must ache."

Richard acknowledged that his head felt the effects of his last night's merriment: and, with rather a despondent manner, he arose,.and began to make preparations for the morning's meal. :.

Julian in vain tried to raise his spirits, by speaking of the prospects which were open to him;—poor Richard was completely depressed, and when he slung his bundle over his shoulder, he grasped Julian's hand, without power to speak.





"Come, come, cheer up !—remember your old proverb,' Faint heart never won a fair I,ady !' " exclaimed Julian, as he pressed his purse (containing all his little store) into his warm-hqarted companion's hand.

"No!" exclaimed Richard, throwing it upon the table, " no, I'll be hanged if I do!—What, me take the trifle, whiqh yon have no prospect .of replacing no, never!" .

"And what prospect have you of subsisting till you reach your destination V observed Julian; " and when you get there, you will, probably, be a day or two before you receive any money."

"Well, and if I am, I can do as well without, and better than you."

Julian would not acknowledge $his: and Richard was, at last, prevailed on to accept, what he considered, half the contents of the purse, but which, in reality, made him master of the whole; and, with grief too natural to be feigned, he at last commenced his journey, and Julian was once more left alone in the world, to carve his fortune.

Considering every hour as bringing him still nearer to the state he dreaded of actual destitution, he resolved to lose no time in brooding over either past or present evils; and though his mind was still dwelling on Marianne, and divided with a thousand distracting cares and anxieties, he tried to bury them all in oblivion, and accordingly sallied out to two or three places, which Richard had suggested were likely to afl-drd him an opportunity of finding employment.

He was uniformly unsuccessful, however; and depressed by the haughty manner in which he had been treated by some, and the inquisitive curiosity of others, he was returning to his lodgings,- when he was roused from his reverie by a loud cry of "mad bull!" and, in a moment, an infuriated animal, goaded and driven to madness by the wretched and inhuman beings who were pursuing it, ran at a well-dressed female, who was just turning the corner of the street, and, but for Julian's presence of mind in striking it across the face with the umbrella he held in his hand, would, in all probability, have seriously, if not fatally, wounded her* Uttering a scream of terror, the lady threw herself into Julian's arms, who immediately conveyed her into a shop, (the door of which was, fortunately, open) close to them: and the baffled animal turned upon the crowd, who were following him, and put them all to the route.





In a few minutes the lady revived; and Julian was surprised at recognizing in her one of Mr. Austin's patients, by whom he had himself been always very favourably received, and who was now most profuse jn her expressions of gratitude.

Julian would have retreated from her as soon as he beheld Miss Poppletou (for that was the lady's name) sufficiently recovered, to render his farther attendance unnecessary, but she would not hear of his leaving her until he had conducted her to the friend's house, whither she was proceeding when the accident happened, which rendered his interference necessary.

Common politeness would not suffer him to refuse this request, though he foresaw that it would expose him to a number of unpleasant interrogations, &c. as, from the intimacy which had long subsisted between Miss Poppleton and Mr. Austin's family, he could not doubt that she was acquainted with all the circumstances of his sudden departure, though, from her peculiarly friendly manners, it did not appear that she was influenced by any prejudice against him.





Miss Poppleton was a lady, who might, some years before, have renounced her claim to that title, without having incurred any censure for her ambition of a more matronly one: but though all the world called Miss Poppleton an old woman, she could not bring herself to think they were right; and she continued to preserve with her virgin title, all her youthful propensities.

Possessing an active, petite figure, she totally disregarded the indications of asthma or rheumatism: and though she would sometimes be seized with a cough, which threatened suffocation, would boast of dancing from sun-set to sun-rise, and vied with the plumpest and the youngest of her acquaintance, in the shortness of her petticoats, and the exposure of her neck and shoulders. Yet, even these follies did not prevent her being respected by those who knew her most intimately: for she was kind, charitable, and humane; and, moreover, possessed the power of indulging her feelings, having (though rather late in life) inherited with another sister, a large fortune.

Such was the lady who now leaned upon Julian's arm, with an air of satisfaction and conscious security, as they proceeded to her friend's house; and Julian found great difficulty to conceal his propensity to smile, as, in lisping accents, she uttered her gratitude, and talked of the eternal friendship she should feel towards him.

At length they reached the door, and Julian would have made his escape, but Miss Poppleton would not hear of it. She must have him tell her sister all the particulars of her escape,— and she must know what he was doing,—and where he was,—and why he had left Mr. Austin.





All these were subjects which Julian wished to avoid, but it was impossible to evade Miss Poppleton's importunities ;—she would take no denial, and, almost by force, he was constrained to enter the parlour, where Miss Bridget Poppleton and her friend Mrs. Smith were seated, in deep chat. -

The wonderful escape she had had, and Julian's still more wonderful gallantry, and the danger he had run to save her, were all rspeated with so much exaggeration, that the hero of the tale blushed up to the eyes with confusion.

Mrs. Smith viewed him with no small share of curiosity; and Miss Bridget's naturally Vinegar aspect became still sourer, though she condescended to express her thanks for his attention to her sister in "good set terms."

"Well, and so, Mr. Carleton, you have left Mr. Austin," observed Miss Poppleton, regardless of her sister's looks; "and pray where are you now ?—I hope in a comfortable situation; for I am sure everyone must wish you well."

Julian bowed in return for this kindness: and the chatty lady proceeded :—

"I was quite sorry when I heard, from Mr. Austin that you had quitted him so suddenly. But I suppose you had your reasons for it.—rMrs. Austin is not exactly a very pleasant temper, and I dare say you had something better in view."

Another silent bow was the reply to this observation; but it was impossible to get off so well with the next enquiry.





"And pray where do you live now, Mr. Carleton?" said Miss Poppleton.

"I—I am not at present in a regular situation, madam?" stammered Julian.

"So I imagined," said Miss Bridget, with a significant glance at her friend Mrs. Smith.

"Mr. Austin is quite unhappy at your leaving him » I hope you will alldw me to try and make up matters between you," observed Miss Poppletoii, "I'm sure there needs only the interference of a mutual friend—''

"Jemima!" interrupted Mffe-s Bridget, in a remonstrative tone.

* Well I repeat it," said her sister,—a mutual friendDo you think I shall ever regard Mr. Carleton otherwise than as a friend, after the exposure of his life to save mine ¥' T?

% You are always so enthusiastic, my dear," observed Mrs. Smith, who, though rather a junior of the Misses Poppleton,foundheradvantage in assuming to treatthem as young single ladies, to whom her advice and countenance was often necessary. "You are always so enthusiastic and so warm in your feelings, that it really betrays you often into modes of speaking, that might, by ill-natured people, be wrongly interpreted. Friendship between a young gentleman and a lady is very dubious; it often betrays them into errors, because the world in general will only give one name to an intimacy between the sexes, and that is, love."

Miss Poppleton (or as Mrs. Smith affected, with an air of protection to call her, Jemima,) hung down her head with the prettiest look of confusion imaginable; while Julian, who sat upon thorns, again arose, and made an attempt at a retreat.





'< Yon shall not,—positively you shall not go yet!' exclaimed Miss Jemima, springing from her seat. " My sister and I are at home here, and as you have no paricular duties to attend to, by your own confession, I shall insist upon your dining with us."

Mrs. Smith seconded this invitation with great warmth, in spite of some very significant looks from Miss Bridget, who seemed by no means to enter into the feelings of her sister and her friend.

Julian felt as if he was in purgatory, as he listened to the chit-chat of Miss Jemima, and the broad inuendoes of her friend Mrs. Smith, who seemed to have no ideas but upon the subjects of love and matrimony, and who considered herself privileged by her matronly character, to say things which she would have reprehended as improper in her young friends, the Poppletons. Miss Bridget, in the mean time, sat quite aloof from the rest of the party, watching, with malicious looks, the progress of her sister's folly, and Julian's confusion, which was at length not unpleasantly interrupted, by the announcement of dinner.

Mrs. Smith was as much au fait in the science of good-eating, and all the mysteries of carving, selecting, &c. as she was, or pretended to be in affairs of the heart; and Miss Bridget's coldness and dissatisfaction seemed to give way before the fascinations of the turkey poults, which she declared were the most beautiful she ever saw, and the sauce she protested to be inimitable, Mrs. Smith, indeed, seemed perfectly to understand the art of ingratiating herself with both sisters; for while she plied Miss Bridget so unremittingly with





f:

good things and choice bite, that she had neither eyes nor leisure to observe any thing else, she very significantly desired Jemima to take care of Mr. Carleton, adding,—

"As to you, my dear, I know your appetites are

so delicate, that you could live upon love 1 beg

your pardon, air,—I meant. A little more sauce, my dear Miss Bridget?" (observing the latter raising her eyes from her plate at this speech,) " let me recommend you to taste this harico blanc—-John, a plate quick!"

Miss Bridget forgot the unwelcome interaiption of her enjoyment in the contents of the fresh plate; and Jemima proceeded, without fear of observation, to ogle and sigh, and load Julian's plate with delicacies, while her own remained untasted; and when the latter, obliged by common courtesy to make some return to her manifold attentions, observed, that she ate nothing herself, she replied,—

"Ab, Mr. Carleton! do you, then, think I can so easily forget the events of this morning? Oh, no ! they are engraven on my heart in characters, which can never be effaced. You, perhaps, may think lightly of

my feelings, but "she suddenly paused, as if

afraid of saying too much, and, then, in a low tone, added,— .i,, ... . . ;

"Would that it were in my power to requite the in. estimable obligation you have conferred on me."

Julian uttered some common place reply to this florid declaration. Though possessing but little vanity, and unwilling to believe that a woman, old enough to be his mother, and totally destitute of personal charms, could suppose herself capable of inspiring a tender passion, yet it was impossible for him to shot his eyes to her advances, nor could he forget how often he had been rallied for his insensibility to Miss Jemima's penchant, by Mr. Austin, who had always affirmed that he (Julian) might have the foolish old maid and her fortune, whenever he pleased.





With this consciousness, therefore, Julian imagined that it would be wrong and dishonourable in him, to give the slightest encouragement to feelings, which, even had his heart been entirely disengaged, he could never have thought of without disgust, he endeavoured to repress Miss Jemima's warmth, by the most studied and ceremonious manners, addressing himself as often as he could, without direct rudeness to Mrs. Smith, and alluding, whenever he had an opportunity to his own youth and inexperience of the world, which would not allow of his dissenting from their opinions on various subjects.

Miss Jemima, however, took especial care that she would have neither taste, liking, or opinion of her own, and thus seemed to put herself on a level with Julian, who more than once, wished himself a hundred miles off, when he encountered the sly and significant looks of Mrs. 'Smith.

Dinner, which in Julian's opinion, had extended an intolerable time, was at length concluded, and the party adjourned to the drawing room, and Julian began to congratulate himself that his penanee would soon be ended; but just at the moment, that, having sat, what he considered a decent interval, he was about to plead an engagement for the evening, and take his leave, Miss Bridget, who had sat nodding in her chair, evidently overcome with her indulgeuce in the pleasures of the table, fell suddenly on the carpet, and raising' her, Julian discovered that she was seized with apoplexy. . ,





All the little skill that he had acquired from the instructions of Mr. Austin, (with whom he had once before attended on the same lady, in a similar attack) was now employed to restore her, though he earnestly entreated the ladies to send for more efficient advice.

Before, however, Mrs. Smith's medical attendant (who was sent for) could arrive, Miss Bridget had recovered her speech and senses.

Again the romantic Jemima, whose tender feelings towards Julian had been suspended during the immediate danger of her sister, gave utterance to a flood of gratitude to the preserver of her sister's life as well as her own; and Julian was again overwhelmed with attentions and professions, while, on the plea of considering bis attendance still necessary, he was obliged to remain, till a late hour, a prisoner to his persecutress, for such he considered the gentle Jemima, with all her tender looks and soft speeches.

When, however, he, at last, succeeded in gaining his liberty, he was obliged to promise to be with them as early as possible in the morning, and, with abundance of charges to take care of himself interspersed with enquiries of how far he had to go, which he eluded, by answering them, in general terms, "But a short distance."

When he reached home, the people of the house, not prepared for his absence, had retired to rest, and after knocking for some time in vain, hegaveup the attempt of rousing them in despair, and concluded that he must walk about the streets until morning. It was a fine, clear and warm night, and he did not feel any great hardship in traversing the well lighted and paved streets, though he shrank with horror and pity from the frequent scenes of wretchedness and vice which met his eyes.





As the morning approached, the pedestrians dropped oft", until (except a few poor lost creatures, who wef probably, without a home to go to, or, here and there, two or three choice spirits, who having staid late over their bottle, had some difficulty in finding the way to their lodgings,) scarcely a soul was to be seen, besides the guardians of the night, uttering their drowsy announcements of the flight of time.

At the corner of a street, however, Julian's ears were saluted by the sound of several voices in loud contention; and led by curiosity, he advanced towards the scene of action, when, to his infinite surprise, he recognized, in the loudest and foremost of the brawl, the voice and person of Ryland.

Unnoticed, and unwilling to be recognized by one who stood in such a doubtful light, Julian drew back, though he was induced by curiosity to remain near enough to hear what passed, and discover the subject of contention, which he found, as usual, arose from his ci-devant companion, Mr. Ryland, being in a state of intoxication, and having insulted some one who was casually passing him.

"I'll bet you five to one I lick you, now, if you'll turn out!" was the first elegant phrase, which Julian distinctly understood from him.

The stranger replied, that he did not want to fight, though he would not be insulted; and the watchman, who had just come up, declared, that he would have no fighting at all. If they fought, it should he in the watch-house.





The stranger walked on, not seeming to relish this threat, but Ryland continued to utter terms of general defiance, which, when he found none of the idlers, who had collected around him, were inclined to notice, he transferred more particularly to the watchman, abusing him by every opprobrious epithet he could think of, while the guardian of the public peace retaliated in kind, and at length, determined to avenge himself by something more than mere words, he seized the insolent defier of his authority by the collar, and swore he should go and cool himself in the watch-house.

Poor Ryland, in spite of all his hectoring and swaggering, did not seem to relish this idea: and he struggled violently to release himself, while the Charley (as he had, more than once, contemptuously called him) finding that his opponent, with all his bragging, was not in a condition to offer any stout resistance, became still more determined, and Julian stood irresolute how to act, until he saw the watchman inclined to use more violence than was warrantable. Gratitude for Ryland's former kindness then prevailed over every other consideration, and hastily stepping forward, he remonstrated with the man, who replied, that his prisoner had brought it all on himself, for he had been willing to let him go, if he would have behaved civilly.

This Julian could not deny; but he tried to prevail on the irritated watchman to forego his charge, at the same time slipping into his hand a shilling, which immediately had the desired effect, and Julian passing Ryland's-arm through his own, hastily drew him away lest he should render all he had done null and void, by renewing the contention.





Ryland had, till then, scarcely seemed to comprehend to whom he was indebted for this interference in his favour, but stopping suddenly under a lamp, and staring him full in the face, he, at last, exclaimed,—

"Carleton ! can it be possible ! Why, where the deuce have you hid yourself all this time? I have been searching for you for these three months."

"Indeed !" returned Julian. "Well, we have met well at last."

"Why, yes," returned Ryland; "you came up at the nick of time, for if you had not, I suppose I should have sung in a cage till to-morrow morning. But

where are you going? I"

"To see you home j'» returned Julian, "so pray let me know where you live, that we may steer our course as straight as possible."

"Live ! I live any where—every where!" exclaimed Ryland, " perhaps you mean, where do I die, for I'm sure I die every hour, by inches, when I am at home." I do not understand you," observed Julian. "You dont! why, then, get married as fast. as you can, my lad, and then you'll know what I mean. I've got a wife, Carleton. Aye, you may stare, but it is true."

"Indeed!" returned Julian. What, then, is your former wife dead?"

"It is she, herself, simpleton, that I am talking about. She has found me out, claimed me, body and goods, for her lawful property, and she leads me such a life. A toad under a harrow, is in paradise, compared to me."





"If that is the case, how came you out, and in this situation, at this time of the night?" enquired Julian.

"Why, it is as well to be hung for a sheep as a lamb," returned Ryland, "I met two or three of our old companions, and they kept me out so late, that I knew what a storm would be raised about my ears, as soon as I got home, so I thought I might as well make a night of it."

Julian now learned that he resided in a street in Piccadilly; and, accordingly, he persuaded him to let him accompany him home, though, as they approached near to it, Ryland's fears of the reception he should meet with, were evidently very strong, and he would not suffer Julian to leave him till the door was opened.

"So, sir, you are come at last, are you!" exclaimed the female, who, with fury in her eyes, and passion quivering on her lip, stood ready to receive him. This is your reformation, is it? and you've got into your old company too, I suppose, though you've had such a narrow squeak for it before j but, mind me, I'll ferret out your haunts, and blow you all together, if you should swing with the rest, I will, you ungrateful villain ! Here am I toiling and moiling to keep a comfortable home over your head, and you're a going on at your old rate; but you wont bring any of your fellows here, I can assure you! I'll keep my neck out of the halter, if you thrust your's in."

Julian forcibly loosed himself from Ryland's grasp.

"Let me go, Mr. Ryland !" he exclaimed, " I know not what is the error your wife labours under with regard to me, but I cannot tamely stand to be insulted. You will, I trust, convince her that I have not in any way deserved this abuse, nor am of the description of persons, whom, it appears, you have been connected with, and whom I heartily join with her, in advising you for the future to avoid."





Mrs. Ryland commenced an apology, but Julian did not wait to hear it; and darting down an opposite street, was soon out of the hearing of the contending parties, though their voices were both raised to a most dissonant key the moment he quitted them.

By this time, Julian rightly guessed his landlord would be risen; and tired and discomposed, he threw himself upon his bed, and slept, till the noise and bustle, that surrounded him, convinced him that it was past the time at which he had promised to visit his over-kind friend Miss Poppleton, and her sister.

As soon, therefore, as he had breakfasted, he hastened to perform his promise, though he could not help uttering a fervent ejaculation, as he raised the knocker, that this visit might be the last.

Miss Jemima was waiting to receive him, and would have detained him with athousand tender enquiries, but his affected impatience to see his patient prevailed, as she could not reasonably oppose it; and he was introduced into Miss Bridget's chamber, who expressed herself with much greater urbanity towards him than she had hitherto shewn, and when he took leave of her insisted of his accepting a bank note, for the service and attention he had rendered her.

Julian would at first have peremptorily refused this mark of her gratitude, but a moment's consideration told him that he could not be degraded by accepting what would have been required by any one else for similar services; his only care, therefore, now was, to get rid





of Miss Jemima's gratitude 4 ami {Heading that he Was under the necessity of immediately v foiling a fritehd who was seriously ill, be declined again entering the drawing-room.

"You must not suppose, my dear Mr. Oarteton, that the trifle you hold in your hand was intended by my sister as a full gratification for all the services you have rendered us," observed Miss Jemima. "I do not tiaean to offend you, or hurt your feelings, I'm sure; if I did so, 1 should Wound myself," and she affected to feel the prettiest confusion, and looked as if she could not meet Iris eyes, while she proceeded :->-* ** We all -know, Mr. Cufieton, that nothing is' to be done without money, and if I had no particular reason tofeel interested f-ot you, 1 should be sorry to See a young gentleman, of your talents and abilities, lost to the world, merely for the Want of a little of that of which I have considerably more than I have any occasion lot. If, therefore, four or five hundred pounds would assist you in getting into the practice of a profession, which I am sure you would do honour to, and winch I think, with our connexions and interest, and your Own abilities, you Would be sure to succeed in, 1 should be Very happy to assist you."

She paused for an answer; and Julian, who bad been unable, from surprise, and the volubility with which she spoke, to interrupt her, after respectfully expressing his gratitude for her disinterested offer, assured her, that were there no other impediments to her generous views, he knew too little of the profession of medicine, to venture to put himself forward as a practitioner.

Miss Jemima was unwilling to believe this; but Julian's arguments and assurances were too forcibleand conclusive to be disputed. ,





Determined, however, not to be baulked of her wish to render him some essential service, she now proposed that he should enter himself as a student at one of the hospitals, as delicately as possible hinting that she would secure to him the means of defraying all expeuces; but Julian, however flattering this proposal might be, could not, for a moment, submit to the idea of incurring such an obligation.

There was something, too, in the manner of Miss Jemima, which, though unwilling to acknowledge to himself, rendered Julian uneasy and uncomfortable; there was much more in the languish of her eye, and the tender tones of her voice than her words conveyed, and Julian felt but too forcibly, that should he consent to accept of her generosity, she would exact returns, which neither his feelings or his conscience would allow of. He could never take advantage of, or Hatter the foibles of a silly old woman, and he felt it almost wrong to suffer her, for one moment, to delude herself with the idea, that it was possible she could ever inspire him with a passion, which, it was but too evident, she wished him to understand she felt.

But to evade her present solicitations was his first eare; and he, therefore, assuring her that he would give her proposal his serious consideration, and let her know the result of it, at last succeeded in gaining he door; and congratulating himself on his eseape, resolved that he would not again expose himself to such mortification, nor afford Miss Jemima an opporuiaty of again rendering herself ridiculous.





CHAPTER TWENTY-SIXTH.



Ask,—What is human life?—the sage replies,

With disappointment tow'ring in his eyes,—

A painful passage o'er a restless flood;

A vain pursuit of fugitive false good;

A scene of fancied bliss and heart-felt care,

Closing at last in darkness and despair."



COWPER.

At the appointed hour, on the morning following Laura's secession from Mr. Huntly's, the family of Mr.Vincent departed from their residence at Highgate.

Marianne felt her courage fail at the thought of so soon meeting her father, whose severity she had, more than ever, reason to fear; and Laura, though she tried to appear indifferent and heroic, was evidently scarcely able to command her feelings,' at the recollection that, in all probability, this separation would be decisive of her und Alfred's fate. While she remained near, it seemed as if there still existed a hope, that the obstacles which so cruelly threatened their happiness, might, by some lucky chance, be removed, but her absence, she conceived, would at once strengthen Mr. Barnard's hands, and, in all probability, damp Alfred's ardor to overcome his uncle's objections. He would perhaps, thinkher cruel and unfeeling,and that thought, more than her own sufferings, drew tears into her eyes, and caused tier bosom to heave with suppressed sighs.





The whole party were, indeed, melancholy; for Mrs. Vincent had some hidden causes for sorrow, independent of her fears, that this double disappointment in disposing of his daughters, would encrease her husband's general severity.

Marianne threw herself. back in the carnage as they passed the cottage of James the gardener ; from the recollection of Julian, and all he would feel, at being thus thrown at suqh.au immeasurable distance from her.

Mrs. Vincent, however, immersed i» bee own gloomy reflections, seemed not to observe her tears, or hear the sobs, which, in spite of all her endeavours, broke from her gentle bosom; and Laura, who though very little calculated at, the present moment to inspire fortitude or preach patience to her sister, still suppressed her own feelings, to whisper comfort to the afflicted Marianne, endeavoured to prevent her mother's noticing the eucreased agitation of the latter, by speaking of the probability of their speedy return and the places they should visit.

"I know not, my dear child, what are your father's ultimate intentions," returned Mrs. Vincent, " but of this I am certain that we shall return no more hither; and that it is more than probable we shall not settle again in the neighbourhood of London."

Marianne's pale cheek became still paler; and Laura uttered an exclamation of astonishment at this sudden information.





jKji.j-jun xai* M.a»mnhk. 4Jtf)

** Going to leave this neighbourhood altogether if* she repeated. "Good heavens 1 want cafli be uW metiee of this sudden resolution? what, then, wilt be done withi the house. and furniture?"

"Your brother remains, in London till they are disposed of," returned) Mrs, Vincent ; " and> indeed, 1 MB net sure that your father is not now iu the metro potto; We are going te» Liverpool, where he has takeny L believe, a house, (oca short time:. but it ie. by. net means certain that we sxhail meet him, therei,"

Laura was bewildered with. astoaiehment.. What could be the meaning oft all this precipitancy aadi mystery, sbe Vmw at ai loss tax understand;. hut it could he no trivial eausey she- wasmuer,. tiiat could induce ben father thus to break up his establishment>. and dispose of-m plane, which he had spared, neither trouble nor expeaceto beautify, and where he had ofteni expressed) hie intention af ending his days For the first timey a suspicion that her father's affairs were not in so flourisbing-a state as they had appeared^ and that' seme more powerful motive» tha« a regard for her and: Mb> riann»'s interest, had influenced him. in his wish. to promote their respective marriages, darted into her mind. Sne knew that he had been concerned^-to a large amount, with Mr. Huntly in. some recent speculative projects ;—the latter had avowed that he was ruuieti, and it appeared hut' toe probable-that Mr Viacent was. implicated in his later

For die first time, Laura felt the deepest sorrow. and* pity for her father, and she earnestly/ hoped that he might be (as her. mother surmised) in London, that she might be spared the triai o*-«ornmwneufcH>g to him the failure oft what was, in alii probability^ the only hope he had of retrieving his affairs, her marriage with the heir of Mr. Barnard.





Marianne's thoughts were,in the mean time, occupied but by one subject; she should never see Julian again, she believed, and in that conviction every other cause for sorrow or regret, was overlooked or forgotten.

For several miles an uninterrupted silence prevailed. Each was buried in their own melancholy reflections; and the deep sighs which, from time to time, betrayed the feelings of the sensitive Marianne, were not u ufrequently re-echoed both by her mother and the compassionate Laura ; who, independent of her own personal causes for regret and sorrow, felt the deepest commiseration, for the but too evident distress of her beloved sister.

Mrs. Vincent, however, immersed in her own sorrows, seemed to take but little notice of the agitation of her daughters; while her fears that she had left undone any of the various commissions that her husband had charged her with, induced her, from time to time, to interrupt the silence that prevailed, by some question to Anne, who occupied a corner in the carriage, and who seemed like her young mistresses, completely overwhelmed with theunexpectedintelligence that they should return no more to Uighgate.

Anne had left behind her a humble adorer, who had expressed himself in very despairing terms at the prospect of a separation for a few months ; how much more then, would he lament when he found she was gone for ever; but Anne comforted herself that she was neither daughter nor apprentice to Mr. Vincent, but free to leave him whenever she thought proper, and could better her situation, and that she was determined to attempt to do immediately that she reached their present destination. , ■ ~.





Laura, whose thoughts were divided between the changes that threatened her own family, and the effects her absence would create in Mr. Huntly's, now began to see that she had acted with too much precipitation in quitting the latter, without any explanation to Alfred, whom she now felt would have reason to accuse her of indifference to his feelings, if not of absolute cruelty and insensibility. ,

Full of this idea, therefore, she resolved, when they stopped.for the night, to write him a farewell letter, and explain to him at once, with firmness and with candour, her motives lor acting as she had done.

Mrs. Vincent, to whom she explained her motives in thus addressing him, of course did not offer any objection; and Laura, having thus unburdened her full heart, and taken an eternal farewell of him, whom she had once fondly looked upon as destined to be the partner of her fate in this world, and her happy companion into the blissful realms of the one to come, now endeavoured to turn her whole thoughts to comfort and reassure her drooping sister. .

Every mile of their melancholy journey, however, encreased Marianne's despair; for they bore her still farther from him in whom her every thought and hope was centered, and they brought her nearer to the parent whom she beheld as the bane of her happiness and the destroyer and oppressor of him, whose interest was dearer to Iter than her own.

Mrs Vincent's health, never very excellent, evidently suilered most materially from the effects of her agitation and the fatigue of travelling; and when, on the third -evening of their journey, they reached Lmrpool, she was so weak and exhausted, that it was frecessary to carry her from tne carriage into Uieapartments pre Tided for their reception.





Mr. Vincent did not appear; and Laura learnt from the -servant that he had been gone two days, though she knew not whither; but, as Laura was prepared for his absence, this did not trouble her; in tact she felt rather rejoiced; and Mrs. Vincent by no means seemed dissatisfied; but observed, with her usual naiveli, that it would give her time to recruit her health and spirits.

Marianne was silent;—it did not seem that any thing could have power to create a pleasurable sensation in her bosom; yet it was impossible not to perceive -that she felt greatly relieved at not Meeting her father's austere frown and bitter reproaches ; and without a single comment on the comparative meanness of the home their father had provided fur tliem, or offering a conjecture on his future intentions, she seemed to yield to her fate, and to feel but little anxiety, except as regarded the safety of her mother, for whose indisposition she evinced the tenderest commiseration, and over whom, for nearly three weeks, during which time Mr. Vincent still remained absent, she watched with the most anxious solicitude.

Mrs. Vincent, however, regained her usual state of health; and Laura, relieved from the close attendance which she had shared with her sister at the bed-side of their mother, prevailed on Marianne to accompany her in two or three excursions to view the place which they, as yet, had seen nothing of.

Sick at heart, however, and pining lor their own elegant retirement, which was so poorly exchanged





for narrow and confined apartments in this great mercantile city, Marianne viewed, with apathy, the monuments of grandeur, or the vast indications of wealth and commerce, which this noble place afforded; The sightofthe numerous vessels, loadingor unloading their various freights, and pouring into this great mart all the riches of the distant world, greatly interested Laura, and she stood lost in the novelty and splendour of the scene, when her eye was suddenly caught by a person, who, at the distance he was standing, strongly resembled her father.

He was talking earnestly to a sailor, and seemed from time to time to cast an anxious glance at a vessel, which was receiving her cargo at a little distance.

The more she gazed, the stronger the resemblance became in her eyes; and, at length, she pointed him out to Marianne, who, with a start of astonishment, exclaimed,—

"It is my father,—I am sure it is! Good heavens! what can he be doing here, and talking to a man of that description/'

Laura hesitated to reply :—a thought, indeed, at that nroment, darted into her mind, which seemed but too probable; but she forbore to communicate her suspicions to Marianne, who was watching her father, with evident agitation.

"Ought we not to approach, and speak to him, Laura V she at length observed; "he may perhaps accuse us of disrespect, if we do not.''

"Stop till he is disengaged," returned Laura, "and then, if he does not appear to see us, we will go to him."

At that moment, the man whom Mr. Vincent had been conversing- with, moved away, and all Laura's Suspicions were confirmed, when she beheld her father fellow him, and ascend the side of the vessel.





In a few moments he disappeared, and Marianne turning a timid look on her sister, as if afraid of meeting in her countenance, a confirmation of her fears, exclaimed.—

** What can this mean, Laura? Why does my father avoid his family,—and what business can he have on board that vessel V

"We shall know too soon, I fear, my dear girl," returned Laara, in a trembling voice.

"Then you think my father means to go abroad,—I know you do, Laura L" replied Marianne.

"Hush-! he is returning: he must pass us, and we shall probably hear," returned Laura.

Mr. Vincent did, in fact, approach; and though he started when he saw his daughters, he soon recovered himself, and enquired after their mother, whom, it appeared, he had not yet visited.

Laura looked attentively at her father, and, with sorrow, beheld the effects, which a few days only, of intense anxiety had had upon his countenance: but her compassion was soon lessened,. when, with all his usual austerity, he observed, addressing Laura:—

"You have, 1 find, made a pretty piece of business with the Huntly's. I assure you, had I been at home when you returned in that hasty manner, I would not have opened my doors to you."

"Then 1 must have found a shelter elsewhere, sir 1" . returned Laura, "for 1 would never have entered Mr. Huntly's house again, to be treated with scorn and neglect."





"Well, the punishment of your folly will fall upon yourself •" replied her father, "You have thrown away your last chance I believe; for I question if, where we are going, you will find any gentleman romantic enough to marry girls with no other recommendations than their persons, and that will henceforth, I suspect, be precisely thesituation you will stand in."

"Where are we going then, sir?" enquired Laura, overlooking the last part of her father's speech, in her anxiety to discover whether her suspicions were rightly founded. ,

"You will know that in proper time," he re~ turned.

Marianne and Laura exchanged looks, which but too forcibly expressed their conviction that all hope was over; and, unable to articulate another sentence, they followed their father in silence.

At the door, Laura remembered that her mother's weak state of health required that she should not be exposed to surprises, or, in fact, the slightest emotion; and, turning to her father, therefore she observed,—

"1 had better announce to mamma that you are arrived, sir, as her spirits are easily ruffled." '.

"There is no necessity for your caution," returned Mr. Vincent, coldly. "Your brother, who came with me, has already, I dare say, prepared her to see me, and to hasten the necessary preparations for our departure."

Laura acquiesced in silence, and immediately retired with her sister to their own room; where, while she preached patience and resignation to the trembling Marianne, she mingled her tears with hers, alike for her own and her sister's sorrows.





For several hours they remained undisturbed, except by Anne, who, in a passion of tears and lamentations, came to inform them that her aunt, Martha, had come with her master; and she had learnt from her, that they were all going beyond sea as soon as the wind proved fair,

"I told her I would'nt be kidnapped away from my own country in that manner; but would go home again directly;" continued the poor girl, crying bitterly, "but she bullied and blustered till I was quite frightened, and she swears I shall go to the parish if 1 do, for master wont pay me a farthing of wages, because I'm hired by the year, and I must give notice;—and she'll take away all my clothes because she bought 'em all with her own money; and so she did, I can't contradict that: but I know I shall never live if I go on that frightful sea, and all among the blacks and the cannibals. Oh! I little thought, when poor William used to tell me about foreign parts, where he'd been with his master, that ever I should go to such horrid places; but I shall die before I get there, I know I shall, for I never could abide the water."

Laura attempted to comfort the poor girl in vain:— Anne had a deeper cause for grief than the mere fear of the perils of the sea; and she wept incessantly, till her aunt's shill voice, chiding her idleness and inattention, when she was wanted so many ways, occasioned a hasty cessation from her tears; and comforting herself, that if she was drowned, old Martha would go to the bottom too, she hastened away to obey her tyrants multifarious orders.

Iu a short time after Auue's departure, Martha summoned Laura to attend her father, who had something to communicate.





"I sent for you," observed Mr. Vincent, as she entered the room, " to desire that you and your sister will hold yourselves in readiness to leave this place at a moment's notice. You have already, I dare say, surmised that I am about to quit this country;—I am indeed!" and his countenance clouded still more as he spoke." I have no alternative!—the termination of your connexion with the Huntly's put the finishing stroke to my prospects here; and I must now try to retrieve, in another country, my losses in this. You now, I hope, see the injury your sister's mad folly, in refusing Stan field has done her and yourself, to say nothing of the rest of her family; but you may tell her this, from me, that her marriage would have saved her father from disgrace and ruin; and if that reflection can make her happy, she is welcome to it! Had she become the wife of that rich old fool, she would have had influence enough to have prevailed on him to prop my sinking credit with his own, and I should have been saved; now she will feel, as well as me, the effects of what she has done. As toyou,youhaveacted with much more precipitation and decision than you ought to iiave clone ; but I do not absolutely aver that you could have wrought any material change in old Barnard's plans for his nephew, as I find it is his wish to unite him to a natural daughter of his own, the mulatto girl, that you recollect being at Huntly's at holiday time, and whom they all supposed to belong to a friend of Barnard's, whose name she bore."

Laura was transfixed with astonishment at this intelligence, so unfeelingly delivered.





She did, indeed, well remember the mulatto girl, as Mr. Vincent called her, who had always been supposed to be the daughter of a deceased friend of Mr. Barnard's, and had passed by the name of Jefferson, both at school and in Mr. Huntly's family.

Proud, imperious, and overbearing, Miss Jefferson had been the general object of dislike to all the junior branches of the family; but Alfred had never concealed a complete aversion to her, and always looked upon her presence as destructive of all their domestic happiness.

Charlotte Jefferson was nearly three years older than Laura, and a more complete contrast in appearance or manners could not exist.

Laura Vincent was tall, slender, and light in her person, with a countenance intelligible and open as the day, her manners animated and playful, with a peculiar air of elegance and ease, which few, bred in retirement and restrained as she had ever been by her father's morose temper, could have attained to. Laura was, in short, the life and soul of every party she entered into, and her quick discernment and native good sense made her always looked up to with deferenco, and treated with respect, even by those who had the advantage of infinitely more years and experience of the world than she could boast of.

Charlotte Jefferson, on the contrary, was a short, thick girl, remarkably awkward in person, and with a countenance which partook much more of the features of her African mother, than her European father; her lips were thick, her nose flat and her dark eyes expressive of nought but a mixtureof haughtiness and cunning, and her smile (when shedid condescend to smile) was so





contrary to the expression of pleasure or good-humour, that Alfred had once in Laura's hearing declared, that when Charlotte Jefierson smiled, it reminded him of the idea of a daemon grinning over some luckless human soul which he had seized.

And could this he the woman who was destined to be the partner of Alfred's heart and home! Laura shuddered at the bare idea; but to herfather she uttered not one single word by way of comment; and when he again reminded her that she must conclude her preparations for their voyage as soon as possible, she only bowed her head in token of acquiescence, and left the room.

"My dear, dear Laura!" exclaimed Marianne, flying to her, as she slowly re-entered the room, where she had left the latter. "My poor sister, what has happened, you are pale and cold as death?"

Laura gave a convulsive shudder, and sunk on her sister's shoulder, where she, for some moments, gave way to tears that relieved the oppression, which, but a moment before, seemed to have benumbed all her faculties.

Convinced that something unusual must have occurred, thus to have overcome the spirits of her heroical sister, who had been employed, at the very moment her father sent for her, in enforcing the necessity of resignation; and had ever given a striking example of fortitude, in her conduct; Marianne waited, with agonized impatience, until Laura recovered her speech, and then, again, with terror in her looks, enquired what new calamity had, or was likely, to befal them.

"Nothing!—it is nothing that immediately concerns us, that has made me so silly," returned Laura; "but I was so surprised, I may say shocked, at my father's intelligence. Alfred Huntly is destined by his uncle, to marry that compound of every thing that is hateful in woman, Charlotte Jefferson, or Charlotte Barnard, rather let me call her; for it appears that the old fellow is her father instead of her guardian."





"Good heavens! can it be possible?" exclaimed Marianne;—"but he will never consent; I cannot believe that Alfred will ever agree to sacrifice every feeling and principle, at the shrine of interest. He always detested that girl; and I well recollect once, when his name was paired with her's, in some game we were playing, he whispered;—

"I hope this farce will soon be over, for my very nature seems to recoil from an union with that daughof Erebus, even in jest."

Laura burst into an immoderate fit of laughter, in which, it was plain, however, mirth had but little share; and Marianne, more alarmed by it than her sister's tears, endeavoured to check it by the softest persuasions.

"I must laugh!" said Laura, with the tears still streaming down her pale cheeks. "I cannot but laugh at the thoughts of Alfred's awkward looks and secret contortions, when he first broaches the subject of love to his elegant wowski, as he used to call her. I recollect once hearing him say to my brother Edward, when we were playing at forfeits, and Edward had been obliged to kiss Miss Jefferson,—

"Well, how do you feel your stomach after the dose. It would have been tartar emetic to me." . "Fancy them, therefore, going to church together,





Marianne, to be made one flesh: such an ignorant self-willed clod of earth as that, to be incorporated with Alfred Huntly."

-" I can fancy no such thing!" returned Marianne, "for I cannot, nor will not believe it possible, unless I were to see it. I would as soon believe that I shall yet marry him, whom my very tongue revolts from naming."

"Ah, but, Marianne! suppose that you had been convinced that your father's credit and fortune depended on your marrying him :—suppose that your mother had, with tears, implored you to save her and your whole family from inevitable poverty and ruin, by making him your husband who could snatch as all from the gulph into which your father's misfortunes or imprudence was about to precipitate us :—suppose, I say, that you had been thoroughly convinced that it remained with you to rescue or consign your parents, me, and your brother, to ruin,—think you you would have had the heart to refuse?"

"Oh, no, no!" exclaimed Marianne, bursting into tears, at the picture, Laura had drawn, without, however, suspecting its near resemblance to the truth. "No, Laura, I could not have borne it! I would have married him, and, if I could, have died immediately that I had seen my parents happy."

"This, then, is the trial which Alfred has to encounter!" continued Laura, in a subdued tone, which sufficiently betrayed how deeply her heart sympathised in the feelings which she so well could estimate, " I cannot expect, nay, I should almost despise him, could he remain obdurate to his parents' solicitations. How can he look upon them sinking into the vale of years ?— how can he turn his back upon the group of helpless, lovely girls, who, must How look up to him for protection and subsistence, and refuse their prayers?





No !—Alfred's doom is sealed; and from henceforth I must strive to forget him, or remember him only as the husband of Charlotte Jefferson. Good heavens! what an union of incongruities, as opposite as the elements of fire and water!"

Marianne was silent; for she could not oppose a single argument to her sister's conclusion. She knew that Alfred Huntly was most affectionately attached to his mother and sisters; she had sometimes thought that he carried his partiality to them almost to a fault; but the principle was so amiable, that it had rather heightened than lessened the regard she had for him, and she felt that, as Laura had said, it was almost impossible that he could come out unhurt from such an ordeal.

From this train of thought, however, she was soon roused by Laura herself, who, starting suddenly from her seat, exclaimed,—

"Mercy on me! this projected wedding has, I believe, scared away the little sense I had left. I had forgotten to tell you, my dear Marianne, the purpose for which my father wanted me, was to hasten our preparations for departure, as he says we shall be summoned on board, the moment the wind veers to the desired point; and as we know not how soon that may be, we must not lose a moment in preparing for it."

"And do we, then, really quit England, and for ever?" exclaimed Marianne, turning pale.

"Heaven forbid!" returned Laura, "for though I have now but little inducement to wish to remain here, I still trust that both you and I shall, at some future day, return under happier auspices than we now quit





"Our dear native isle, Heaven's fav'rite on earth."

Marianne shook her head with a despondent look: and Laura, whose heart swelling with agony, forcibly contradicted the hopes her tongue uttered, attempted, by assumed earnestness, in packing up her and Marianne's clothes, and arranging what it would be most advisable to wear on their voyage, &c. &c., endeavoured to conceal the feelings which her own hopeless situation, and her sympathy in her sister's blighted prospects, excited.





CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SEVENTH



"IT is an ill wind that blows nobody good,'' says the ancient proverb; and so said, or rather thought, for he had nobody to say so to, Julian Carleton, as he examined the bank-note, which Miss Bridget Poppleton had, with so much cordiality, pressed upon his acceptance.

It was a note of five pounds value, and Julian considered that with such an inexhaustible sum in his possession, he ought no longer to feel any kind of anxiety about what might be his future lot; for surely, before he could get rid of five pounds, he must get into some way of replacing it.



-" If single ladies play the fool,



(Unless within the period intervenient,

A well-timed wedding makes the scandal cool)

I dont know how they ever can get over it,

Unless they manage never to discover it."





Byron.





He returned home; and his first resolution was to seek for lodgings more respectable, and better suited to his ideas, than the noise and bustle of a public house.

This was the work of some hours; but at length, it was accomplished: and that night Julian slept in more peace, or at least, with less anxiety and uneasiness than he had done for some time; and the following morning he arose with recruited spirits as well as purse, resolving, once more, to hazard a visit to his friend, James, and endeavour, if possible, to learn some intelligence of his beloved Marianne, whose image, as he had last seen her, was ever present to his thoughts.

It was as yet too early, however, to commence his solitary walk, as he knew that he should not have a chance of seeing James before the usual dinner hour. His promise to Mary Hamilton darted into his mind, and, though he would willingly have avoided all intercourse with her, under existing circumstances, yet he felt that his word was pledged and must therefore, remain inviolable.

I may as well write at once, he considered, as he opened the little writing desk, which had been the gift of Stuart.

His thoughts wandered to the latter, and from him to Ryland, whilst all the, but too, intelligible hints of the termagant wife of the latter rose into his mind afresh. He tried to think it possible that Stuart could not be oue of the companions whom she had alluded to with such opprobrious epithets, but there were too many "damning proofs" which rose fresh in his memory; and, with a shudder at the thoughts this discovery gave rise to, and a sensation of thankfulness that he had escaped from a connexion which might not only have hazarded bis existence, but have entailed everlasting infamy on bis character, he took up the pen and prepared to address the unfortunate Mary.





Could she, too, be in the secret of their nefarious plans, was a question that suggested itself with startling force, at the moment that he was about to put pen to paper.

He recalled all the indications which had so often rendered him uneasy, of a secret understanding be' tween, not only her and Stuart, but some of the companions of the latter.

He remembered the scene in which Crawford had figured so conspicuously on the morning of Stuart's disappearance, and when Mary had testified so much fear of the former betraying too much in the moment of intoxication ; and, the more he reflected, the more he was convinced that Mary was deeply implicated in their disgraceful secrets.

He threw the pen away.—

"And ought I, then, under these circumstances, voluntarily to renew the slightest approaches to a connexion which I have so much reason to regret I ever formed?"

Again the recollection of his solemn promise that he would write to her,—the remembrance of her tears and her pathetic declaration that she was miserable, even in the midst of splendor, and destitute of one friend who could sympathize in her feelings, pressed on his memory, and urged him to disregard the monitions of prudence.

u I will write to her!" he exclaimed, resuming the pen, " but I will point out to her the impossibility of my friendship being of service to her, and the imprudence of her hazarding, merely for a temporary gratification of her feelings, those advantages in which she can now alone seek for a compensation for all she has forfeited. I cannot snatch her from the fate she voluntarily embraced, and I will not, therefore, embitter it by reproaches, or magnify either its disadvantages, or those blessings she has for ever lost.





Fortunate, indeed, has it been for me, that she made this election! had she remained what she once was, or at least appeared to me to be, what might not have been my fate! Reason, prudence, even the pure love which I had ever felt for my gentle, modest Marianne, all might have been—nay, why should I seek to disguise it from myself, all were insufficient to preserve me from being dazzled by her charms. But the spell is now over, and, though I would still hazard much to serve her, I can no longer feel that interest for her, which was so near urging me to the brink of destruction."

Once more Julian dipped his pen in the ink, and endeavouring to banish from his mind all memory of the past, strove only to address Mary in such terms as might convince her that he still was concerned for her welfare, though he felt the impossibility of his, at present, contributing to it.

"I have written to you, Mary," he continued," because I felt the necessity of redeeming the pledge I made to you, rather than that I indulge any hope of either soothing your mind or promoting your happiness. For your own sake rather than mine, 1 suggest that it will be better to let our correspondence drop here. If fortune should ever befriend me, and I should be enabled to place you in a situation more consonant to your wishes, and, I trust, your principles, than that in which you profess yourself so unhappy, believe me, you will need no advocate in the bosom of





, Julian Carleton."

Relieved from this unpleasant task, Julian now commenced his expedition to Highgate, with a heart alternately agitated by hope and fear, as to the object of his journey."

He dared not go immediately to James's cottage, lest he should bring upon the latter the resentment of bis wife, who had bitterly professed the most violent hostility to his (James's) interfering in matters which, as she said, did not at all concern him; and he, therefore, walked on in the direction which he knew the latter must come from his work to dinner.

Every moment seemed an hour, till he descried James plodding along the road, and seemingly buried deep in thought.

"How are you, my good fellow?" exclaimed Julian, as he came close up to him (James,) without being perceived.

James started.—

"Lord bless me, Mr. Julian, if you wasn't the very person I was thinking of. I suppose you have heard," and he stopt short, and looked earnestly in Julian's face.

"I have heard nothing," returned the latter, "but I am most anxious to hear, though I fear you have nothing very pleasant to communicate.

"Why no,—I'm afraid you will not think it very





pleasant," replied James; "The old man and all the family are gone off; but there's a letter at home, from Miss Marianne, that will tell you all about it."

"A letter for me !—Marianne gone!" repeated Julian. ,

"Yes, they are all off," said James, with a look of concern. "Anne told the old woman, that she gave the letter to for me, that they were coming back in three months; but I heard last night, that the house and grounds are to be sold, or are sold: for there's a strong man come down, and took possession. Indeed, it's whispered about, that old Vincent has been stockjobbing, and lost more than he can pay."

Julian was thunderstruck.—Marianne gone, perhaps, for ever!—probably reduced to poverty;—the thought was agony, and he could scarcely command his voice, to reply to the questions which James now thought fit to put to him.

"You may as well come home with me, Mr. Julian," observed the latter, after standing some time silent; "my wife will be glad to see you now they cant do her any harm or good : for she was always your friend, though she was so mortal afraid of old Vincent."

Julian knew he had that in his pocket which would secure him a welcome from the mistress of the cottasre. and he, therefore, without hesitation, accepted James's invitation.

The sight of half-a-crown, which he slipped into her hand, to furnish some addition to their bread and cheese dinner, immediately clothed her face in smiles: and Julian was allowed to peruse, without interruption, the hasty note, which conveyed at once Marianne's regret for the separation, which, she then trusted, would be only temporary; and her assurances that neither time nor place could ever change the sentiments which she should ever retain towards him, who, she hoped, would look forward, like her, with earnest hope and expectation, to the moment which should rejoin them, she earnestly prayed, under happier auspices than they had parted.





Unconscious of James's observation, Julian pressed the beloved signature to his lips, and bedewed with tears the artless expressions of tenderness with which Marianne had sought to alleviate the pain, which, she was aware, he would feel at her absence.

"I cant learn," observed James, "the rights of all that has happened; but its certain they're entirely gone from here, for old Martha (who was left behind) only staid till the man that is there, came from London; and then she packed herself, and all the plate and china, into a coach, and set off. But I should think it would be no harm, Mr. Julian, if you were to step up to the house: the man cant know you, that's there, and perhaps he may be able to give you some hint which way they're gone, and what it is all for."

After a few moments' reflection, Julian determined to adopt James's suggestion; and, with a throbbing heart, he entered the lawn which led up to his uncle's house. .:

How well he remembered the tumultuous feelings which had agitated his bosom the last time his feet had trodden that path, and how many eventful moments of his life had passed since that time.

Every thing appeared in confusion as he approached. The window blinds and curtains had all been removed; and through the open windows Julian belield two or three men busied in removing the furniture. His heart sank within him.—It was but too evident, indeed, that the objects of his anxiety were gone to return no more. »





A respectable looking man answered his enquiry after Mr. Vincent's family.

"They are all gone, sir,—gone into the country,— went the day before yesterday; and we are preparing for a sale of the effects. But Mr. Edward Vincent is in town, sir, and if you wish to see him, I can give you his address."

Julian acquiesced, merely to have an opportunity of prolonging the conversation.

"This was rather a sudden resolution, was it not ¥' he observed, while the man was writing, with a pencil, the place where Mr. Edward Vincent might, he said, be heard of.

"Why yes, sir," he returned, "It was rather so; but such things do happen suddenly in general. Its a pity when people are well off they cant be content to keep so. Mr. Vincent was a very substantial man; but errors in judgment will happen: however, he has acted very wisely for himself, for he has secured the principal part of his property so that his creditors cannot get at it."

Julian felt that it would be hard to reconcile this kind of wisdom with honesty; but he could not help indulging a feelingof satisfaction that Marianne would, in all probability, be secured from feeling the stings of poverty; aud he next enquired if it was known what part of the country the family had retired to.

"Oh, no!" replied the man, " that. would not answer at all; but I believe it is thought they are gone to France, as the old gentleman was traced to tin? French ambassador's for passports."





Julian's heart sank lower and lower:—probably before this time, the sea divided Marianne and himself, and he was doomed never more to behold her. Scarcely able to thank the man for his information, he turned away from the parlour door at which he had been standing', when his eye was caught by a pair of screens which a man was carelessly throwing aside, and which he immediately recognized as having been painted by Marianne.

"Are these to be sold ?—Will you sell them to me?" he eagerly exclaimed.

The men looked surprised; for the screens were faded and dirty, and they could not conceive what value a young man like Julian could attach to such ^insignificant things.

"They arc not worth much," said he who appeared the principal; " but if you have a particular fancy for them, you shall have them, sir." ,

Julian seized the screens, and put his hand in his pocket.

"Really I hardly know how to set a price on them, but as you seem to value them, of course a shilling or two is no object."

Julian threw down five or six shillings, and hurried away with his prize, without speaking another word.

"1 think I can fathom the meaning of this;" observed the man as he pocketed the money; " but be it as it will, he makes good the old saying, * fools and their money are soon parted.'"

Julian hurried, on his return, to the cottage; his mind harrassed with a variety of conflicting passions' but the most predominant was the fear that he should never again behold her, without whom life would lose all its charms.





Deprived of the hope, however distant, of becoming the happy partner of Marianne Vincent, he should no longer have any motive for exertion, beyond the preservation of a joyless existence. Splendor and affluence, even if it were to be placed within his reach, would be worthless, unless he could share it with her; but from these thoughts his mind wandered to the perils and troubles which his beloved was doomed to encounter; and laying aside all selfish regrets, he wept with agony over the misfortunes which had so changed her prospects, and would, in all probability, render the tyranny under which she had always suffered, more severe and unbearable than ever.

James, who read in his countenance the realization of all his fears, attempted, in vain, to console him ; and after giving a strict charge with the former, to leave no means untried to discover Mr. Vincent's ultimate retreat, Julian returned to his solitary lodging, to mourn in despair over the unexpected termination of all his visions of love and Marianne.

Amidst the various corroding reflections, which now harrassed his mind, the remembrance of Miss Poppleton and her offers had been totally banished; and three days elapsed before he recollected that, in common gratitude and decency, he ought to enquire after the health of Miss Bridget, even at the risk of offending the gentle Jemima, by an explicit avowal of his determination not to accept of any further obligations from her.

From Mrs. Smith, however, (who alone appeared to receive bim) he learnt, with pleasure, that the Misses Poppleton had returned to their own house at Penton* ville, and that Miss Bridget was greatly recovered from her indisposition, which relief she mainly attributed to his (Mr. Carleton's) immediate and judicious assistance.





Julian professed himself happy in having been enabled to render any service to Miss Poppletou, and would have taken his leave, but Mrs. Smith was not inclined to let him off so easily.

"I am going over to Pentonville this morning, Mr. Carleton," she observed, "and I know one, at least, of the party (I leave you to guess which) is very anxious to see you; perhaps you will have no objection to accompany me."

Julian pleaded a prior engagement, though his hesitation and confused manner contradicted the assertion.

"Well, then, if you will not do me the favour of escorting me thither," observed Mrs. Smith," you must fix what time you will call there, for 1 know Jemima would be dreadfully disappointed, if she were not to see you. She has been wretched for these last three days, at not seeing or hearing from you."

Julian passed over this last assertion; and only replied that it would not be possible for him to fix any precise period, but that he would certainly call on the ladies in a day or two.

Mrs. Smith fixed her large bold eyes on his face with a significant stare.

"Are you wilfully blind, Mr. Carleton, or do you really not see that there is one lady to whom this indifference and delay will be death?" I should have thought a fine young man like you would have had experience enough in ladies' hearts, to have discovered the impression you had made, without an interpreter."





Julian was covered with confusion: he knew not how to reply to this direct attack; and, trying to assume a smile, he, at length, replied,—

"You are diverting yourself at my expence, madam, it appears; but you must forgive my saying that, if you really have any serious meaning, I wish to remain in ignorance on a subject which can only tend to create uneasiness and dissatisfaction on every side, if it goes farther. I hope and trust, however, that you are only jesting, and that I may reckon Upon preserving Miss Poppleton's friendship, without any hazard of my motives being misinterpreted."

"Are you really serious, Mr. Carleton? is your heart so impenetrable that Jemima's golden charms can make no impression on you V said Mrs. Smith, with a satirical smile.

"I acknowledge the fact," returned Julian, emboldened by her manner. "Neither my heart nor my principles would suffer me to take advantage of such a prepossession, if, indeed, it did exist."

"If!" repeated Mrs. Smith, " you are not such a novice as not to see that Jemima is desperately in love with you. Nay, do not start and blush; it is better you should hear this from me than her, for you will be prepared with your answer when your time comes, and it will come you may rely on it. Now I should be sorry to do any thing that was wrong towards you, but I cannot help thinking, that to a young man without fortune, and just entering into the world, a thousand a year is a thing not to be hastily rejected, even if there are some trifling encumbrances, not quite consonant with the inclinations."





"Ten thousand a year could not tempt me to be guilty of deceit or perjury, and I must practise both, were I to take advantage of Miss Poppleton's weakness," returned Julian, with warmth.

"I admire your candour, Mr. Carleton," observed Mrs. Smith, surveying his glowing countenance with evident admiration, "and I perfectly agree with you that it would be a dear purchase. My friend, Jemima Poppleton, is a good and kind-hearted woman, but this ridiculous tendency to love and romance obscures all her good qualities; and 1 fear she will some time or another, (that is, if she does not break her heart at your cruelty) meet with some one who will be less scrupulous than yourself, and will teach her to repent her folly."

Julian heard this remark in silence; for, though he could not but acknowledge its justice, he recollected how evidently and artfully Mrs. Smith had encouraged the folly she now affected to condemn in her dear friend.

"I will trouble you to assure your friends of my earnest wishes for their welfare: and, under all the circumstances, 1 think it will be better to give up my intention of visiting them, or, at least, to postpone it," he observed, after a considerable pause.

"Oh—no, no! that will never do!" replied Mrs. Smith, with quickness. "Jemima will immediately suspect that something has occurred between us, and I should lose her friendship for ever, if she were to think that I approved your determination. No! you must visit her once more, and, for mercy's sake, do not





give her any reason to think that we hare had any communication on this subject."

Julian shrank from the idea of making another visit under such embarrassing feelings; but Mrs. Smith would hear of no denial; and promising that he would call on the same evening, that he might have a speedy opportunity of terminating all doubt on the subject, he departed.

The evening seemed to come too soon for his wishes ;. and, with reluctant steps, he bent his way to Pentonville, where, the moment he rang the bell, Jemima's eyes, over the parlour blind, welcomed his coming and reproved his long delay.

Contrary to his wishes and expectations, she Was alone; Mrs. Smith, the accommodating Mrs. Smith, having retired to the chamber of the invalid, (for so Miss Bridget still, it seemed, continued) the moment she heard of his approach.

The consciousness of the feelings with which he was beheld by the too sensitive Jemima, gave an awkwardness and embarrassment to his address, which the latter interpreted in a manner much more consonant to her wishes, and by the most studiously tender address and looks, she endeavoured to place him more at ease, and inspire him with courage, to take advantage of the opportunity thus purposely afforded him, of declaring his sentiments.

Julian, however, still continued to talk of indifferent subjects; and Miss Jemima, at last, led the way to that which was uppermost in her own mind, by alluding to their last conversation on his future prospects..

Julian modestly, but firmly, thanked her for the kind interest she had expressed for him; but, at the time, begged leave to decline her proposal.





"I have been thinking, indeed," observed Jemima, casting down her eyes, and swinging her reticule backwards and forwards, with an air of great confusion, "I have been thinking, indeed, since I saw you last, that there are great objections to the plan I suggested. The world is very apt (as my friend Mrs. Smith the other day observed) to be very illiberal in their conjectures, and an unmarried female cannot be too cautious of her reputation. Yet I am so interested for

you, Mr. Carleton indeed, unless I can contribute

to your happiness, I shall never again enjoy any peace or comfort. I am a few years older than you, it is true, but I am not the less capable of feeling your merits. Need I say any more, dear Mr. Carleton, than I should consider myself most happy in being able to promote your felicity."

Julian's confusion now infinitely exceeded that of the fair speaker's, who raised her eyes from the carpet, and sought earnestly in his, a reply, correspondent to her wishes; but Julian was still vainly trying to frame a reply, which might at once decidedly put a period to the hopes, which, it was but too evident, Jemima entertained, without, however, mortifying her feelings more than was necessary.

"The world would, I dare say, condemn this hasty avowal, Mr. Carleton," continued the enamoured spinster, "but I have so perfect a confidence in your honour"

Julian interrupted her, to assure her that she mightrely, without tear, on his respect and gratitude, for the favour she conferred on him, by her good opinion.





"But," he continued, " forgive me, madam, when I tell you, that, unhappily, I am incapable of feeling any other sentiments than respect and gratitude. Long before I had the pleasure of seeing Miss Poppleton, my affections were irrevocably devoted to one, who, though she is probably lost to me for ever, still continues to absorb my every thought. Under these circumstances, you will not, I hope, accuse me of ingratitude or a proper appreciation of your kindness, when I say that I can never accept of any other favors than those you have already bestowed upon me." ,

"Happy woman! whoever she is!" exclaimed Miss Jemima, "who is the object of your heart's election, and for whom the poor Jemima is slighted and despised! Yet, oh! Carleton, if your heart is dead to love, at least refuse me not your pity and esteem. Let me be your friend,—it is all I ask. Share my fortune with me, and let me have the satisfaction of seeing you happy, though I am doomed to irrevocable wretchedness and despair."

Julian could scarcely suppress a smile at this rhapsody, which was delivered with all the romantic enthusiasm of a girl of fifteen; but he replied to it with proper decorum, and assured the disconsolate damsel, that he should ever regard her with esteem and gratitude.

Anxious to escape an interview with Mrs. Smith, whose penetrating looks would, he knew, discover, in an instant, the interesting nature of the conversation which had passed, Julian would now have taken his leave, but at the moment he rose for that purpose, the former lady entered the room, and with evident consternation fti her looks, announced that Miss Bridget was suffering under a third attack of her alarming malady.





Julian could scarcely suppress an exclamation of impatience at this intelligence, which, he foresaw, would be the means of detaining him, and, in fact, prevent the final retreat which he meditated.

Without making any remark, however, he followed the two ladies to the bedchamber of the invalid, whom he quickly discovered to be in a state which left but little hopes of her recovery.

Unwilling, however, to take upon himself the responsibility of deciding on her fate, he earnestly entreated that some other medical advice might instantly be sent for; and, in the mean time, he attempted, though without success, to open a vein; and, while he was thus employed, Mr. Austin entered.

- Carlton!" he exclaimed, with surprise, "You here!"

"Yes sir; but will most willingly resign my patient to you," returned Julian, trying to speak with composure, but feeling not a little disconcerted at the surprise, not unmixed with resentment, with which his quondam friend and preceptor evidently regarded him.

Mr. Austin made no further observation, but proceeded to make the necessary examination. It was, however, too late; the spark of life was extinct, and though for some time the good doctor, and his ready assistant, Julian, persevered in their efforts to re-allume it, it was with a total hopelessness of success.

Mrs. Smith had prevailed on the now really afflicted Jemima to retire from the room; and she was therefore not present when Mr. Austin gave up the attempt in despair, of restoring her sister.





"My poor friend!" exclaimed Mrs. Smith, "Who will announce to her this termination of her hopes? 1 dare not attempt the task, for I know my feelings will not allow me to do it with calmness. Perhaps Mr. Carleton, you will undertake the mournful office. She will, probably, listen to you more readily than to any one else."

Julian, struck with disgust, from this affectation of sensibility, for such he was convinced, from all his observations, this was, and with much earnestness declared his unfitness for the task she imposed.

* Mr. Austin," he continued, " who, from his long acquaintance with the family, must be much better qualified than myself, will, perhaps, undertake to communicate the mournful intelligence."

Mr. Austin, who had been listening to this colloquy, with a most satirical expression of countenance, now in a very decided tone,observed, "that he must beg leave to decline ;—his services were ended, he presumed, and he would now quit the field to Mr. Carleton.".

"Do not speak in that manner, of me, my once kind friend!" exclaimed Julian," I do not deserve it at your hands. My being here, was, as I could easily convince you, purely the effect of accident; and if I have carried into effect the knowledge I derived from your precepts, it was not from presumption, but a conviction of the necessity of prompt assistance."

Mr. Austin's heart seemed somewhat softened by this candid appeal, and in a tone that shewed how deeply bis feelings were wounded, he observed,—





"Why is it, Carleton, that our interests are divided?"

"Not from any fault or inclination of mine," returned Julian, hastily.

A servant entered, to enquire from Miss Jemima, whether there was any change in her sister's disorder; and again the subject which had been, for a moment, suspended by matter of more importance to both their feelings; was renewed.

"You had better go, Carleton!" observed Mr. Austin, with a significant look, " it is plain that this lady (Mrs. Smith) considers that you have more influence with Miss Jemima than any one else."

Julian's looks betrayed his vexation, but to prolong the contention, he felt, was only affording opportunities for similar inuendoes, and he therefore followed the servant to her mistress, who was sitting in a disconsolate attitude, waiting her return.

"Is there no hope, dear Carleton!" she exclaimed, starting from her chair.

Julian's countenance replied in the negative; and gently reseating her, he communicated, as cautiously as possible, that her sister was no more.

All Jemima's predominant follies mingled so strongly with her real feelings, on receiving this information, that Julian felt contempt for her weakness almost supersede the compassion which her sorrow would naturally have excited in his bosom; but the manner in which she threw herself into his arms, and the studied eflect which she gave to every word and action in lamenting her loss; and the emphasis with which she addressed himself, as now her only comforter and friend, induced him involuntarily to recoil from her with a sensation of disgust, for her manners but too unequivocally betrayed that other ideas beside grief for her sister, influenced her every action.





Mr. Austin and Mrs. Smith now entered together; and the latter darted a significant look at Julian, who hastily released himself from supporting the afflicted lady; and the doctor, having, with his usual shortness and pithiness, expressed his condolence with Miss Jemima on her loss, observed "that as his presence could no longer be of any service, he would take his leave."

Julian arose at the same moment.

"Do not let me hurry you away, Mr. Carleton," said the doctor, with great coldness; " The ladies will, probably, need your services."

Julian coloured at the tone' this was delivered in; and Miss Jemima, removing her handkerchief from her eyes, exclaimed,—

"Surely you will not desert me at this minute, when I so much need the assistance of all my friends."

Fain would Julian have renounced all claim to this title, but Mrs. Smith added her remonstrances, at his intention of going, and Julian was obliged to promise that he would return immediately: he only wished, he said, to have a few minutes conversation with Mr. Austin, if that gentleman would allow him to walk home with him.

Mr. Austin acquiesced in silence, and they left the house together.

"You are angry with me, my dear sir," he observed, as soon as they were in the street, "and I have too sincere a respect for you not to feel very unhappy under your censure."

"Why did you incur it then!" said Mr. Austin, shortly. "If you were determined to sell your liberty for this foolish woman's pelf, why did you not say so at once; you knew very well that I should not oppose it, for you was aware it was my constant wish to promote your interest;—why then act with so much duplicity V





Julian had, in vain, attempted to interrupt this speech; but when Mr. Austin paused for an answer, he assured him that he was totally wrong in assigning any such causes for his (Julian's) having quitted him, or in supposing that he entertained any such views as he now attributed to him.

He then proceeded to narrate the causes which had led to his present appearance at the house of Miss Poppleton, concluding with aspirating a hearty wish that he had never beheld the latter, whose folly was to him as revolting as it was ridiculous.

"Psha! take the old girl and her money!" said Mr. Austin, in his usual half-jesting, half-serious tone.

Julian smiled, and shook his head; and Mr. Austin resuming his seriousness and distant manner, proceeded

"And pray, then, as it was not Miss Jemima's fortune that tempted you from the path in which you were going on so smoothly, may I enquire what was the inducement, and how are you at present situated?"

Julian hesitated. To have avowed that Mrs. Austin's continual insults had driven him from the bouse of his kind patron would, he was convinced, be inflicting a severe wound outhe feelings of the latter, and renew the domestic discord which, he hoped, his (Julian's) absence had mollified, if not obliterated. On the other hand, to avow that he was at the present mo





ment destitute of any certaia Means of support, would inevitably draw from Mr. Austin a proposal to return, which he could not bring himself to accept, and which to refuse would, he knew, only increase the anger, it was evident, the latter already felt towards him. However unpleasant, therefor*, to him to preserve even the semblance of mystery, Julian determined that no inducements should tempt him to assign the real motives of his conduct; and he, therefore, with as much calmness as he could assume, said,—

"Excuse me, my dear sir;—I had very sufficient reasons for my conduct, and such as, were 1 at liberty to assign them, would, I am sure, satisfy you: but as that is not (he case, let me leave you to add to yonr other favours that of judging of me with lenity, and believing that nothing could more sensibly pain me, than the imputation of ingratitude towards one to whom I am tinder such signal obligations as yourself!"

Mr. Austin looked very dissatisfied.—

"I do not relish mysteries," he observed. * If all is fair and honest, there can be no need of concealment.—But I will tell you plainly, Mr. Garleton, that I know more of your motives and connexions than you think for. I am sorry for you, very sorry j and if it were in my power to withdraw you from 4he course you have adopted, I would yet do it at any sacrifiee4"

"You wrong me* sir!" replied Julian, indignantly, "I have no connections of the sort you all ode to I-^-" butatthis moment his cheek turned pale, and his tongue faltered, for approaching them with a smile of recognition, he beheld the man of all others whom lie most wished to avoid,—Ryland..- . .

"How are you, my bey V exclaimed the latfer> seizing; Julian by the arm, as he was about to pass him with a silent bow. "Come, dont look so coldly upon me, though you were somewhat roughly handled, by Mrs. Ryland, the other night! you know I could not help it; and she's been very sorry for it herself ever since. Indeed she made me promise to bring you home with me, that she might apologize."





w Is your name Ryland V demanded Mr. Austin, looking him full in the face.

Ryland hesitated a moment, and then replied in the affirmative; and Mr. Austin, darting a contemptuous look at Julian, turned short on his heel, and walked off, without uttering a word.

"A very pretty behaved civil sort of a gentleman that," observed Ryland, staring after him, " Pray who may he be f or what was there in my name that frightened him away?"

Julian made a confused reply. Never could any thing have happened more mal-apropos than Ryland's appearance at this moment; and he felt that Mr. Austin's good opinion of him, and reliance on his veracity were gone for ever.

For some moments they continued to walk on in silence, but at length Ryland began to interrogate Julian as to his present residence and occupation; and with a deep sigh the latter replied, that occupation he had none, and the residence he was sow in he had inhabited but a few days, and knew not how soon be might leave."

"You have learned to be very close, I perceive;" observed Ryland in an angry tone. "The time has been that I should not have received such an answer from Mr. Carleton!"





Julian could hare replied, that the time bad been when he conceived Mr. Ryland to have merited a very different one, but the recollection of bis obligations withheld him; and he framed a reply, which, though it was any thing but satisfactory, Ryland affected to be appeased with; and, after some desultory conversation, in the course of which Ryland informed Julian that he had heard Stuart was in London, and had be-come independent, by the bequest of a distant relative, they parted, Ryland having repeated his invitation to Julian, to visit him and his wife, who, he said, was very anxious to repair the error she had fallen into.





CHAPTER THE TWENTY-EIGHTH. ♦

"There vM no earthward struggle of the hear.t,

No shuddering terror, no reluctant sigh!

Silently—silently the spoiler came, . .- --



As sleep steals o'er the senses. .

They who beheld her dying, fear not death."



AVMFM.

A Few hours only elapsed from Mr. Vincent's annunciation to his daug hters of his purpose of quitting, for ever, the land of his birth, ere they were summoned on board, the wind having changed to the desired point, and the vessel being all ready to sail out of the harbour.

Convinced that there was now, indeed, no hope of avoiding this dreaded voyage, Marianne gave way to the most violent despair; and more dead than alive, she was carried to the boat which waited to convey them to the vessel; while Laura, though her own heart was wrung with agony, eudeavoured, by the most soothing attentions and mild persuasions, to inspire both her mother and sister with resignation, and induce them to meet the difficulties that awaited them with a determination to conquer them, rather than weakly sink beneath them.





Mrs. Vincent's sorrows were rather excited by her fears of the perils of the sea, than any regret for the land or the friends she was on the point of quitting for ever. -. . --- - . .

, "I shall never live to see land again!" she continually exclaimed, whenever Mr. Vincent's temporary absence left her at liberty to utter her lamentations; and in these lamentations she was seconded by Anne, who, in despite of her habitual submission to her aunt Martha, and her fear of Mr. Vincent, persisted in deploring her wretched fate, in being thus, as she expressed herself, "kidnapped away from her own country." - -

, It was nearly dark when they were set on board; and Laura felt her spirits sink at the idea that in a few hours, they should, in all probability, have lost sight, for ever, of the land that contained the chosen of her heart; while Marianne but the more forcibly reminded her of all she had lost, by continually repeating the name of Julian, and bewailing, with floods of tears, that she should never, never see him again.

The vessel got under weigh ;—all around was bustle and confusion;—and then, and not till then, Laura learned, with astonishment, that Edward Vincent was not to be the companion of their voyage: but was about to return in the boat, which had brought them on board.

A ray of hope that their exile was not intended to last for ever, darted into her mind, at this intelligence; but it speedily vanished, when, having, with his characteristic indifference, wished them (his mother and sisters) a pleasant voyage, he added,—

"I suppose, before 1 rejoin you, the girls will have got Yankee husbands: and have quite forgotten Old England!"





"How long, then, do yon intend remaining in England?" faltered Laura, in vain attempting to conceal, under a mask of indifference, the feelings this speech more forcibly than ever revived.

"Two or three years, probably!"—returned Edward; "Quite long enough," he continued, with a malicious smile, "to drive all love-sick fancies out of ladies'heads, and teach them to know which side their bread is buttered."

Laura did not reply to this insulting observation but by a look, which plainly spoke her sense of it; and in a few minutes her brother descended the ship's side, and, without uttering one affectionate expression, to qualify the kindness of his last remark, departed.

Both Marianne and Mrs. Vincent chose to retire immediately to their respective births, (as the confined little places, which were appointed for them to sleep in, were denominated) and Laura was left «lone in the cabin,—her father remaining on deck, in conversation with two gentlemen, who Laura conjectured were, like themselves, passengers to the new world, which was henceforth to be her dwelling-place, and the boundary of all her hopes and desires.

Left thus in solitude, Laura gave vent to the feelings which she had, in the presence of her mother and sister, successfully struggled to suppress; and she was still weeping when the sound of several voices, descending into the cabin, aroused her: and she hastily dried her tears, and endeavoured to meet her father and the strangers with composure. But what was her surprise, when she discovered the former to be pale and trembling; and in those who accompanied him, beheld, not the two gentlemen who had been cursorily introduced to her as the intended companions of their voyage, but two roHgh-looking men, whose manners and appearance bespoke them to be in a very different station.





The captain of the vessel and his principal officers, with the two passengers, all followed: and a scene of confused disputation ensued, which Laura, for some time, in vain, endeavoured to understand, though she but too well comprehended that the appearance of these men was unwelcome and unexpected by her father.

At length, however, it was announced to Laura, that they were all to be re-landed; and, then, with terror and grief, she learned, that the men, whose appearance had caused this unexpected revolution in their affairs, were police officers, and that her father was their prisoner.

But a few minutes before, and she would have thought that any circumstance which placed her feet once more on British ground must be desirable; but now, filial affection prevailed over every other feeling, and gladly would she have relinquished England and all its inhabitants, to have saved her father from the shame and distress which awaited him.

Mr. Vincent, however, checked the effusion of her terror and grief, by reminding her, that she must soften the intelligence to her mother, and prepare her and Marianne instantly to accompany him a-shore.

Laura hastened, therefore, to fulfil her mission ; and Mrs. Vincent, without testifying any great surprise at her information, which, she said, her mind had anticipated, immediately arose, and, as she had not taken off her clothes, hastened to the cabin; while Marianne, scarcely able to believe it possible that they should be again restored to her native land, seemed almost to overlook the circumstances under which they were destined to revisit the scenes, which but a few moments before, she believed she had quitted for ever.





When, however, she beheld the pale and agitated countenance of her father, and saw the rude familiarity with which he was treated by the men who held him in custody, all selfish feelings vanished, and gladly would she have sacrificed all her new-born hopes to have seen her father once more free, and restored to that respectability which she now feared he had forfeited for ever.;

Shrinking from every eye, under the consciousness of merited disgrace, the unhappy Mr. Vincent beheld the preparations for his departure in gloomy silence; but when Marianne, her heart penetrated with the deepest commiseration, would have attempted to console him, his natural violence broke forth, and, in the bitterest terms that language could supply, he reproached her with being the cause of all he now endured.

"But for your cursed obstinacy and blindness !" he exclaimed," I might have retrieved all my misfortunes, but you will share the punishment, that is the only satisfaction I have; and then you will see the difference of being obliged to work for your living, instead of having every comfort and even luxury of life at your command, as you would have had, if you had married Stanfield.

Had Marianne dared to breathe the real sentiments





of her heart, she would have told her father that she should consider the lowest depths of poverty preferable to riches enjoyed on such terms; but the terrible idea that she might have saved her father this disgrace, and her whole family all that they would now have to endure from the' wreck of their fortune^ quite overwhelmed her, and sobbing with agony, she retreated from her father, and threw herself on her mother's neck, entreating her to forgive her.

"If I had known, my dear, dear mother, how much depended on that hated marriage, I should, indeed I should have sacrificed my own feelings."

"All this is too late now, Marianne!" replied-Mrs. Vincent, in a tone of reproach; " We must not think of what you would have done V

The boat was now ready that was to convey them to shore; and Laura could not help observing with what alacrity her mother, as well as Marianne, descended into it, compared with the reluctance and difficulty with which they had previously entered it, when it was to convey them from the place in which all their wishes and desires were centered.

Without resting longer than was necessary to procure a conveyance, the two officers departed with Mr. Vincent, leaving the family to follow at greater leisure; and, in a few hours, Laura and Marianne found themselves once more on the road to the metropolis, instead of cutting the waves of the ocean, and feeling that every stroke of the keel removed them farther from those they loved.

On the second day! of their journey, Mrs. Vincent, whose agitation seemed to increase with reflection,, bonne alarmingly ill; and by the time they reached. London, (being obliged, for the last fifty miles of their journey, to travel as slowly as possible) she was evidently in a situation which left but little hopes of her recovery.





A public inn, Laura felt, was the most unfit place in the world for her mother to go to in her present situation, but no other accommodation was provided for them, and the sisters, with anguish, compared their present state with what it had been within only a few weeks. Destitute of a single friend, to assist them with counsel, or direct their inexperience,—their father (as they had but too much reason to fear) immured in a prison, there was no one to whom they could turn their eyes, but their brother Edward ; and to him, as soon as their mother was placed in bed, and medical assistance procured, Laura despatched a note, requesting him to come immediately to their assistance.

It was not, however, till late on the following morning that Edward came; and in the mean time, Mrs. Vincent's fever had encreased to such a height, that she was delirious, and knew him not when he approached the bedside, by which Laura and Marianne had passed the night in tears.

"I am afraid," observed Edward, with more feeling in his manner than his sisters had ever before seen him evince, " I am afraid that this noisy place does not suit you at all, mother. Do you think, if I were to get you a private lodging, you could bear to be removed V

u If you could take me on shore," returned his mother, " I should be well; but 1 shall die, if I stay on board this ship; and the noise of the waves roaring distracts my poor head."





Laura, in vain, endeavoured to undeceive her mother. She shook her head mournfully.

"Promise that if I die I shall be buried on land;—I should not wish to be thrown overboard."

Marianne burst into tears; and Edward, after reproving her weakness, assured his mother that all her wishes should be complied with.

Mrs. Vincent laid down her head with an air of perfect contentment; and Edward left the room to ascertain whether his mother could be removed with safety to a more commodious lodging.

He was, however, assured by the physician who just then called, that the attempt would most probably prove fatal and recommending to Laura not to leave her mother, a caution which, as she assured him, was quite superfluous, Edward was on the point of leaving them, when Laura stopped him to enquire if he had seen his father.

"Certainly I have, be returned. I was with him when your note came last night, which was the reason I could not come sooner."

"And where is he now?" enquired Laura, with anxiety.

"He is at a sponging house," returned Edward, and will be obliged to pay all he owes before he will get free again."

"But if he had that in his power," replied Laura, in surprise, " there could have been no necessity for his leaving England."

"Pooh! you know nothing about it!" returned her brother. "If he could have carried off his property with him, 1 suspect you, and all of us, would have found it somewhat more advantageous than letting his creditors get hold of three parts of it, as will now be the case. Besides, if he could have got clear off, he Would hare avoided old Carleton's sueing him; and now I suppose he must stand a suit, or refund the money."





"What money!—Old Carleton!" exclaimed Laura, breathless with anxiety and surprise.

Edward looked at her with incredulity.

"Oh! I suppose you pretend you know nothing of that affair!" he observed, with a sneer, " But you dont impose upon me, I assure you. It's a likely story that in all your correspondence with Mr. Julian, you did not hear what he was so ready to reproach yo«r father with, when he had the audacity to shew himself at church."

Laura could have still pleaded ignorance as to particulars, though now, connecting Julian's speech with her brother's information, she readily gueseed that the elder Mr. Carleton had commenced some legal method of recovering the money which, it appeared, he had advanced for his nephew's support and education. But as she knew it would be useless to declare how little she had hitherto learnt on the subject, she dissembled her surprise; and though, with some confusion, expressed her sorrow that her father should have involved himself in such difficulties.

Edward did not condescend to reply; but desiring her to let him know if any material alteration took place in her mother, departed.

For several days Mrs. Vincent lingered, in a very doubtful state, but at length the symptoms of approaching dissolution became but too apparent to her affiieted daughters; and with grief and terror, Laura and Marianne beheld themselves on the point of being bereaved of the only parent who regarded them with tenderness and affection; and whose mild manners and indulgent fondness, had ever been their only resource from the severity and harshness of their father's temper.





From Edward,- who resembled his father too nearly to offer them any solid consolation, they learned, that the latter could not possibly hope to obtain his liberty for a week or two; there was, therefore no chance that he would see Mrs. Vincent, while she was living; and Laura trembled lest, if her mother regained her perfect recollection, her last moments should be embittered by this circumstance.

But this fear was not realized, for Mrs. Vincent sank into eternal sleep, without having, even for a moment, recognized the children, for whose welfare she had ever proved herself so anxious; and who, now, watching, with streaming eyes, by her bedside, in vain tried to discover in her glazed eyes some trait that she recognized their attentions.

The passing from time into eternity, in her worn-out frame, was so imperceptible, that Laura and Marianne still bent anxiously over the remains of what had once been their mother, for some minutes, without discovering that the spirit had fled for ever.





CHAPTER THE TWENTY-NINTH.



"She was no model of true patience,

Nor much disposed to wait in word or de ed;

She liked quick answers in all conversations,



And when she saw him stumbling like a steed

In his replies, she puzzled him for fresh ones:



And as his speech grew still more broken-knee'd,

Her check began to flush, her eyes to sparkle,

And her proud brow's blue veins to swell and darkle."



Byron.

For some hours, Julian wavered in his mind whether he should again visit Miss Poppleton, and endeavour to gain another interview with Mr. Austin, for the purpose of vindicating himself to him, or whether he should at once drop a connexion which had hitherto been productive of so much mortification and anxiety. The idea that his absence might, perhaps, be construed by his once kind friend, into a tacit admission of guilt, at length prevailed; and having endeavoured to banish all traces of the recent agitation and vexation he had felt from his countenance, he once more took the road to Pentonville.

The servant who answered his enquiries, replied, that Miss Poppleton could see no company; but Julian, whorecollected how pathetically she had implored hint not to desert her at this trying moment, naturally conceiving this to be a general order, which was not intended to include him, requested that the man would carry in his name.





"I beg your pardon, sir returned the servant, " I was particularly ordered, for the future, to say—' Not at home!' whenever you called."

The blood rushed into Julian's cheeks at this explanation; and he was about to turn hastily away, without a single observation, when he recollected to ask if Mr. Austin was with Miss Poppleton.

"No, sir; he has been gone about half an hour," was the reply.

Julian turned irresolutely away, his feelings deeply wounded at the but too evident impression which his former friend had conceived to his prejudice.

His first impulse was to go immediately to Mr. Austin's, and force him to hear his defence and explanation of the circumstances which had misled him ; but the dread lest Mr. Austin's prejudice should induce him to disbelieve him, and that then his own impetuosity of temper might get the better of that respect and gratitude which he felt were still due to his disinterested friend, withheld him; and he resolved to trust to time, or some happier opportunity, to replace him in Mr. Austin's esteem.

On his arrival at home, he beheld a hackney coach standing at the door, and the landlady, on his entrance, informed him that a young lady, who seemed very anxious to see him, was now in his room, writing a note.

Julian's heart beat violently at this information.— No other lady than Marianne Vincent could possibly enter his imagination; and almarst resolving that it must be her, he rather flew than ran up the two flights of stairs, at the top of which his chamber was situated.





Seated at the table, with her head leaning on her hand, and apparently lost in a deep reverie, he beheld, indeed, a lady, but tbe first glance told him it was not Marianne's sylph-like form. She turned at hearing his footsteps, and he beheld the features of Mary Hamilton.

"Mary! is it you?" he exclaimed in a tone of disappointment, which she immediately comprehended.

She started up.

"Is this my reception!" she exclaimed, " when I have been so anxious to see you, Julian ?—but you expected some one else," and she looked at him with an enquiring look.

"I had no right to expect to see any one else," returned Julian, evasively; "but I was not prepared to expect a visit from you; you cannot wonder, therefore, that I am surprised."

Mary sat down again, and a silence of some moments ensued, until it was broken by Julian's observing that she looked much paler and thinner than when he had last seen her.

"That is not surprising," observed Mary, in a despondent tone; "indeed it is scarcely possible that I should look well, while my mind is so harassed."

"Has any thing recently happened to render you so unhappy V enquired Julian, in a compassionate tone.

Mary looked reproachfully at him. "How can you ask me such a question, Julian?" she observed.'" Think you that one so lost, abandoned,





and despised by all whose good 'opinion I value, as myself, can. be otherwise than unhappy. Oh! if you knew how I despise the man by whose temporary passion I am supported in splendor, from which he would not hesitate to abandon me to the depths of poverty, should any other object start up to ensnare his fancy, or should his present liking become satiated. Oh! if you could feel how degraded I am in my own estimation, in submitting to be the mere toy of his idle hours, a being incapable of affection, and insensible to every feeling, but that of self-gratification. Oh! Julian!" and she threw herself upon his neck, "that I had but preferred poverty with you; you would then have esteemed and loved me! and now you, like all the world, look upon me with contempt."

Julian felt the danger of her blandishments. A beautiful woman, thus avowing her sorrow at being deprived of his affection, was a far more seductive object than Miss Poppleton, with all her thousands: but he thought of Marianne Vincent, and he ceased to think of Mary Hamilton, but as an object of pity, not unmixed with contempt..

He attempted, however, to console her, and assured her that he most sincerely sympathized in her feelings, and would, were it in his power, instantly remove her from the situation which she so feelingly regretted.

"But, as it is, Mary," he continued, "the truest wisdom will be to bear with patience, evils which you

cannot remedy; to leave the "Julian paused for

an expression, the least calculated to wound her feelings, and then proceeded,—" the person, under whose protection you have placed yourself, without any certainty of support, indeed with the sure prospect of poverty before your eyes, would, in all probability, be only to plunge yourself still deeper into misery and despair." Marianne interrupted him.—





"Yes, Julian; but if I could leave him with a sufficient sum in my hands, to support me for some months, —if I could renounce him for the society and protection of one who would bury the recollection of my errors in oblivion, and assist me in regaining my own esteem, and enabling me to adopt some honourable means of supporting myself,—if I could do this, Julian,"— she hesitated; and Julian, confused, pained, and affected, knew not how to reply. He felt that the future happiness and welfare of his life was at stake, and to have given any encouragement to Mary's scheme, would have been to have pledged himself to what he felt determined never to perform,—to become her companion and protector. Independent of the bar which his affection for Marianne presented, Julian too deeply felt the immorality of such a connexion, seriously, for one moment, to entertain the idea; and Mary's penetrating eye instantly discovered in his silence and embarrassment, the ill success of her proposal.

A flush of anger crimsoned her pale cheek, while her eyes, filled with tears, and in a voice almost inarticulate with emotion, she exclaimed,—*

"Spare yourself and me any remarks, Carleton! I see that I am doomed to misery and destruction. Fool that I was to expect that I should be treated with any thing but contempt!"

"No Mary, not contempt!" interrupted Julian, w Heaven knows I am far from feeling contempt for you; but the sacrifice of my future prospects; my principles,—"





He paused; and Mary with a proud look of disdain replied,

"You need say no more, Mr. Carleton. Never shall it be a reproach on my conscience that I injured your prospects or contaminated your principles. Farewell, when next we meet you will, perhaps, judge me better."

Julian would have detained her. He felt unhappy at thus parting with her, in her present state of mind. He recalled to his memory the disinterested tenderness with which she had watched over him in the long illness which had followed his first introduction to her, and the warm gratitude which she had constantly displayed for the service he had rendered her; and his heart yearned with pity at her errors, and compassion for her misfortunes. But Mary was gone, with her usual impetuosity. She had flown down the stairs, and before Julian could utter an expression calculated to allay her irritated feelings, she was in the coach which was still waiting for her; and in a moment after Julian beheld it drive rapidly down the street, as if doubting her own resolution to maintain her resentment she essayed to get out »f his reach as fast as possible.

Julian reflected upon this interview with sensations of sorrow, uneasiness, and regret. He feared that he had been too premature in checking Mary's wishes to quit a life, which, by her own avowal, offered nothing to compensate her for the sacrifice of her peace of mind and reputation. As a friend he might have assisted her purpose, without trespassing on the bounds of morality and prudence.





How many females supported themselves in respectability with less talents than Mary possessed; and for the future propriety of her conduct, the remorse and misery she now felt would be the surest pledge.

For the first time Julian accused himself of selfishness; and could Mary have that moment presented herself before him, he would have probably gone into the opposite extreme of his former prudence and caution. Fortunately she was gone, and a few hours' serious reflection convinced him, that if Mary was really serious in her intentions, and so ardently bent on releasing herself from her present galling servitude, she would be able to effect it without obliging him to take an active part in it.

Several days passed away without any circumstance happening to break the tedious monotony of Julian's life. Once indeed he walked to Highgate, but all there was a blank. Mr. Vincent's late residence was shut up, the furniture had been all sold, and nobody thought or talked any more about them.

James had not been able to pick up the slightest intelligence of the family, and almost despairing that he should ever again behold his adored Marianne, Julian returned weary and melancholy to his solitary room. For the following two or three weeks, he scarcely left his home, except to read the daily papers, in hopes of meeting'an offer of a situation which might suit him. He was one day thus engaged in a 4-ofTee room, when he was insensibly attracted to listen to a conversation in the next box to him, by hearing the name of Stuart uttered several times, with particular emphasis.





"Why should he shun me then i" said one of the speakers; " if it had not been for me at the time Ryland made—" .t

The conclusion of the speech was lost, but more than ever convinced that it was his quondam friend Stuart to whom they referred, Julian waited with impatience to see who they were, though, as he did not wish to be recognized by any of the party, he did not rise, or by any movement make known his vicinity.- . i.

"Well, I never found him act so, and I cant help still thinking, that you are mistaken," observed one of the strangers in reply to the other, "besides it is not above a month ago since I met the girl that used to live with him."

"What, Miss JHamilton f" interrupted the other. ,

"Yes, and she told me that Stuart was still in America." .

"It is all false, he has never been there, I tell you; but do you think I don't know Stuart when I see him. I tell you that I watched him home from

the play, and housed him in Street,—either seven

0t eight was the number. I wouldn't speak to him then, because he had a female and her mother apparently with him: and as I thought my shabby coat might do harm, if he was upon a good scent, I deferred making myself known till the, next morning; but when I went there, a fine livery servant told me no such person lived there; and when I would take no denial, but would see his master, he threatened to send for a constable, and get me walked off to Bridewell for a vagabond.





"Hush! dont get into a passion!" rejoined his companion, " perhaps he has got something in view, that we may all be the better for. Did the female, you speak of, go home with him?"

"Yes, to be sure, or else I should have spoken to him then; I jumped up behind their hackney coach, and went all the way with them."

"If I thought he was playing his own game, without us, I would do for him!" returned the first speaker; "but I'll go upon sure grounds, for I'll watch till I see whether he really lives where you say, and then if he dont do the thing that's right, he shall hear from us."

His companion assented; and Julian then heard them speak of Ryland as "a pitiful rascal, who would never do himself any good.

Happy to be relieved from the fear of being known by his former companions, (for such Julian, at length, recognized them to be, both of them having been constant visitors at Stuart's, during the time, he, Julian was resident there) it was with pleasure, that he saw them depart; and, full of meditation and conjecture on what he had heard, he returned home.

It was evident that Stuart was in the power of these men, and would probably fall a victim to their malice, should he not realize their expectations, or continue, as it was now evident he wished to do, to avoid renewing his former connexion with them.

To what could Julian attribute this desire, but that his powerful mind had at length broken the spell which the temptations of pleasure, and the seductions of vice had cast over it, and was desirous to atone for his past errors by the future correctness of his conduct. Perhaps he was on the point of forming an honourable union with the female in question. He might be already married, and now the peace and futnre happiness of a respectable woman, would, perhaps, be sacrificed to these unprincipled fellows desire of revenge because they could not again seduce their former companion within the vortex which had threatened to overwhelm him.





All these thoughts passed with rapidity through Julian's mind. He recollected, with enthusiasm, all Stuart's amiable traits; his own obligations to him; and all those talents and accomplishments, which, properly directed, might render him an ornament and a blessing to society.

"And shall all these be sacrificed for such worthless, selfish wretches as those, whom I this day overheard!" he exclaimed, with the deepest regret. u Would to heaven it were in my power to avert the evil. What if I were to see him, and relate what I have learned."

Without giving himself time to reflect, Julian took his hat, and set off immediately to Street.

There, however, as he might, (had he reflected on what he had heard from his coffee-house companions, have reasonably conjectured, he was told that no such person was known there.

"It's a strange thing," observed the servant who answered him, in a saucy tone, " that there have been no less than three persons after this Stuart to this house to day."

Julian immediately conjectured that one of these enquirers was the person whom he had so recently heard avow bis intention of finding Stuart out-- and not willing to give up his object, he observed, in a conciliating tone,





"It is indeed strange that such enquiries should be made, unless Mr. Stuart has recently quitted this house, which probably is the case."

The servant replied in the negative. It was a lady who kept the house, and he had lived with her more than three years.

"And have you no gentleman in the house?" demanded Julian.

"Only my mistress's son-in law ; and his name is not Stuart, but Buckingham," replied the servant.

This was sufficient for Julian, who had not the least doubt that Buckingham and Stuart were one and the same person; and apologizing to the servant for the trouble he had given him, he immediately returned home, from whence he dispatched the following note:

"Sir,

If you have any recollection of the name of Julian Carleton, and put any faith in his friendship and gratitude toward you, you will, as soon as possible, call

at street, he having a communication of great

importance to make to you. If you do not recognize the name, the writer can only beg you will pardon the mistake."

Having sent off this note by a porter, Julian awaited with anxiety the answer, but some hours elapsed without his hearing any tidings of the fate of it; but at length the woman of the house tapped at his door to inform himthat agentleman was enquiring for him below.





As Julian anticipated, he beheld* anxiously awaiting his appearance, his old friend, Stuart, who saluted him with considerable agitation, and immediately accepted his invitation to retire to his own room.

"I was right, then, in my address to you V observed Julian, as soon as they were alone.

Stuart replied in the affirmative.—

"Though," he observed, " I am surprised how you acquired your information."

Julian commenced the detail of all he had heard, and all he apprehended; and Stuart, though he tried to appear unconcerned, was evidently much alarmed at the information he had received.

He expressed his thanks for the trouble Julian had taken; and then enquired what he (Julian) was now doing, and how he had fared since they last met.

Julian briefly related his adventures, and concluded with saying, what, indeed, was not strictly the truth, but which he wished Stuart to believe, lest he might renew otfers of assistance, which he had predetermined not to accept, that he had a situation in view, which, if nothing better presented itself, he should take.

Stuart professed his pleasure at hearing this.

"I am on the point," he observed, " of leaving town with my wife and her mother; but if there is any thing I can do for you previously, you know you may command my services."

"You are married, then, observed Julian, who did not doubt but this intention of leaving town arose from the intelligence he had just communicated.

Stuart replied that he had been married nearly three months, but he entered into no explanation; and JuHan almost started, when he suddenly enquired if he knew what had become of Mary Hamilton.





AU Stuart's villainy towards the unfortunate woman, igfrom he how named with so much indifference, rushed instantly into Julian's mind; and he replied, with great coolness, that she was well when he saw her a short time before.

Stuart looked, in spite of his usual command of countenance, somewhat abashed at the sudden alteration in Julian's manner; and he said no more on the subject, nor did he enter into any explanation of the threats which bis ci-devant companions had held out towards him.

Julian mentioned that he had recently seen Ryland, and Stuart, with much apparent frankness, warned him from renewing his connexion with the former.

"He is a pitiful,sneaking fellow:" he observed, " one who would not hesitate to sacrifice his dearest friend to draw his head out of a snare. Besides, he has not a particle of sense or prudence, and is always committing some confounded blunder or another, and getting himself and every body else into mischief.

Julian thanked him for the caution; but it was in a manner that made Stuart feel he had said too much, and, after some more trivial remarks, he bade Julian adieu, observing again, that Ire felt infinitely indebted to him for his friendly information.

"I must have been very ungrateful," returned Julian, " if I had acted otherwise towards you, to 'whom I have been, and still remain, under such great obligations."

"You will lay me under a very considerable one," replied Stuart, " if you will never mention that you have known me by any other name than that of Buckingham, should chance bring us together again.5'





Julian gave tbe required promise, and they parted.

What an incomprehensible being, (thought Julian) is this man; who can thus, while I know him to be acting with every species of guile and baseness, so far command my respect, that I am constrained to treat him as if I were utterly unconscious of bis real character: and am as fearful of hurting his feelings, by hinting my suspicions, as if there could be a- doubt of his deserving them.

The thought, however, that he had accomplished^ his purpose, without renewing any connexion with a man, whom he felt he ought to be most anxious to avoid, gave him great satisfaction; for though Stuart had cautiously avoided saying any thing of his present feelings or situation, Julian was, with all his usual candour and sanguine disposition, inclined to believe that his former friend's principles and conduct had become completely reformed, and that his anxious desire to avoid his profligate companions, was the result of amended sentiments. With the pleasing consciousness therefore, of having rendered an essential service to one, whom, individually, he had every reason to regard with partiality, Julian retired to rest,—but sleep visited not his pillow, for his mind wandered to his Marianne, and the perils to which she was, probably exposed, and the distress which she undoubtedly felt, at being thus, in all probability, torn for ever from the land of her birth, conspired, with his own disappointed views, to banish the repose he courted.





CHAPTER THE TWENTY-EIGHTH.



"——— We are on the earth, Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief."

» Shakespeare.

Before the time appointed for the removal of Mrs. Vincent's remains to their last home, Laura and Marianne had the only satisfaction, which, in their present distress, could have visited their bosoms, in the return of their father, who regained his liberty upon giving up property sufficient to pay his debts, a few days after their mother's decease.

Somewhat softened by the anxieties and sorrow he had of late suffered, Mr. Vincent beheld the lifeless remains of her whom he had, when living, never properly valued, with considerable emotion; and when he turned his eyes on the pale countenances and streaming eyes of the two poor girls, who incessantly bewailed the loss of their indulgent parent, his lips quivered, and in a faltering voice, he exclaimed,—





"My poor children, you must have suffered a great deal! but you must not give way to excessive sorrow. —We cannot recal your poor mother; and it is a consolation that she is removed from a world of trouble and suffering, which she was little calculated to struggle with. . ,

Laura affectionately pressed the hand which he had extended to her at the beginning of this speech; and Marianne, whose affectionate heart expanded with rapture at this propitious alteration in her father's manner, threw herself into his arms, and pressed her pale lips to his cheek, which her tears bedewed. -,

Mr. Vincent gently released himself from her embrace, and at this moment, Edward entered.

"All this weeping and waifing is very useless," he observed, with a frown, " and it would be much better I think, to be reflecting a little more on the circumstances in which you are placed, then be thus constantly spending your time in regrets, that are worse than unavailing!" i .

Laura replaced the lid of the coffin, which she had removed for her father.

"When I understand the circumstances, Edward, in which we are placed," she mildly replied, " be assured I shall exert myself to the utmost; till then—"

"We can do nothing," observed Mr. Vincent, "until after the funeral; then we must begin to look about us."

Marianne's tears redoubled; and Laura, fearful of again exciting Edward's brutal remarks, drew her away, and left her father and brother to the conversa* tion which they seemed, more than ever, anxious to hold in private.





It was plain that Edward felt very dissatisfied at something that had taken place ; and Laura more than once overheard him speaking to his father, in a tone of the greatest disrespect, and apparently reproaching the latter for having acted rashly and imprudently.

At last, to her great satisfaction, he departed; and Mr. Vincent, after some minutes of evidently gloomy reflection, rejoined his daughters: but though seemingly anxious to enter into some explanation of the present state of his affairs, he, in vain, made the attempt to introduce the subject, his habitual reserve and harshness of manners rendering it impossible for either Laura or Marianne to reply to him with confidence and familiarity; and, occupied with their recent subject of grief, they thought little of what might prove the future hardships of their lot.

The remains of Mrs. Vincent were, at the appointed time, committed to the earth; and Laura and Marianne, after the first natural paroxysms of grief, began to think seriously of their situation.

They were not long in suspense, however, for Mr. Vincent eagerly seized the first hint Laura gave of the unpleasantness of still remaining at an inn, to enter into some explanation of his future intentions.

"It is not only unpleasant," he returned, "but it is an expence which I can now little afford; and must therefore, be remedied as soon as possible. I have now, Laura, so trifling an income, that it will scarcely supply our necessary wants; you must, therefore, set about curtailing all expences that can be done without. I have already given the two men-servants their discharge; Martha, too, must go, as the girl Anne, will be the least expensive to keep: but that I leave you to do, as henceforth yon must be the mistress (and 1 hope a trusty one) of our little household." .





Laura, in vain endeavoured. to suppress some natural tears which this remark excited; but she promised with sincerity, that she would exert herself to deserve her father's confidence.

"You will discharge Martha, atonce," said Mr.Vincent, taking his hat. "I am now going to see if every thing is completed, that we may remove to-morrow from this ruinous place."

Though feeling no great prepossession for old Martha, Laura felt the first duty of her new office not a very pleasant one, for Martha had been many years in the family, and Laura could not help thinking that there was something of cruelty and ingratitude in thus suddenly turning her off in the decline of life, and keeping a young girl who was better able to make her way in the world, merely because there was a few pounds difference in their wages.

As feelingly and gently, therefore, as she could, she imparted to Martha her father's determination.

Martha seemed at first thunderstruck, when she heard she was to go, but when Laura added, that Mr. Vincent meant to retain Anne, she burst into a violent passion, deelaring that the girl should not stay, and uttering so many disrespectful comments on her master, that Laura, forgetting all her pity for her, became highly indignant at the liberties she took with her father's name, though she could not but with pain acknowledge that Martha's accusations of selfishness and meanness against the man whom she had so faithfully served, were but too well founded.





"But I'll be even with him!" concluded Martha, "If I dont, say my name's not what it is. I know he's trying to come over Mr. Carle ton to give Up persecuting him, and is trying to persuade him that his nephy Julian is this that and t'other; but I know where the uncle lives, and I'll go to him, and tell all I know about master's usage of the boy, hardly letting him have a pair of shoes to his feet, and grudging him even the bit of victuals he eat." »

Laura was surprised at this observation from one who had ever appeared Julian's greatest enemy, but she had yet to learn how materially self-interest alters the views of those who are influenced entirely by it.

Wishing, however, to learn how far Martha's knowledge extended, she endeavoured to enter into conversation with her on the subject; but the old woman's naturally malignant disposition prevented her gratifying even her desire of threatening her master; and, with a malicious smile, she replied,—

"Oh yes, Miss! I dare say you would like very well to hear all that I have got to tell about your cousin Julian; but what I mean to do I shall do without consulting you about it."

"Take care you do not say of do more than you have a right, Martha!" returned Laura ; " and so good morning to you."

In a few minutes Anne made her appearance, to say, with a smiling face, that her aunt had, upon better consideration, resolved that she (Anne) might stay in Mr. Vincent's service, at least till she Couldjret some





tiling better for her : and on the following day they all removed to a small house, which, furnished with the utmost frugality, and standing in a narrow con» fined street, presented a striking contrast to the handsome airy dwelling and extensive yiews, which they had hitherto called their home.

Laura's active habits and strong constituted mind prevented her giving way to the feelings which assailed poor Marianne at this their first glimpse of the privations of poverty.

For the first two or three days she was indefatigable in assisting Anne to arrange every thing to the best advantage; and their frugal meals were rendered as cheerful and inviting as possible by the neatness with which they were set out; but Marianne, whose firmness was quite overcome by the various sorrows she had undergone, still viewed all around her with the most despondent sensations. .

"What a contrast!" she exclaimed, when they retired for the night, and she seated herself on the side of the little tent bed, which, with one chair and a table, nearly filled up the small bed-room which Laura and her were to share in common.

"A contrast!'' replied Laura, somewhat chidingly. . "You regret, perhaps, that you are not in Mr. Stanfield's chamber, with his beds 'every bit down, and his sheets as fine as camberic' that he talked about so edify ingly."

"Oh, no, no!" returned Marianne; " how can yc<u think so, Laura?"

"I shall think so," returned her sister, " if I hear any more repinings."

Marianne promised (and she kept her word) that she woftld no longer be -ftngrateful for (he blessings. she s|ill enjoyed ; and ,the effects of her resolution were soon visible in the return of bloom to her cheek and lustre to her eye, though her bosom still heaved with sighs at the uncertainty to which she was doomed respecting Julian, and the little probability that their mutual hopes and wishes should ever be realized.





Two months glided on; Edward, who had, previously to Mr. Vincent's attempt to leave England, been articled to a solicitor, was their only visitor: and from him only they occasionally learnt some intelligence of their former friends and acquaintances.

Poor Laura's heart sometimes beat tumultuously, as *he mentioned having seen or heard of some of the Huntly family ; but not even to Marianne did the name of Alfred ever pass her lips, so studiously did she endeavour to banish from her memory die feelings she had onoe entertained towards him.

Edward, who seemed to take a malicious pleasure in torturing her feelings, once mentioned that he had seen Alfred and his intended bride at one of the theatres. . -' .'

"I used to think that girl very ugly," he continued "but she did not look so last night. She has fine eyes, and fine teeth, and, if it was not for her tawny skin, might pass very well. It seems, however, she has plenty of that which will make the ugliest handsome, for she had as many diamonds on as would make any man's fortune."

Laura sighed, though she made an effort to suppress it; and Edward, after expressing his envy of Alfred, and his wish that he could exchange situations with him, dropt the subject.





For the first few weeks after his wife'* death, Mr.. Vincent's conduct (though not distinguished by any. very particular marks of tenderness) bad been such as to leave his daughters no reason to complain; but at the end of that time his absences began to be very frequent and long, and he sometimes returned in a state which left no doubt of the attractions which drew him from home.

On these occasions all th« natural fierceness of his temper broke out without restraint; and Marianne, her obstinacy and blindness, which had reduced him to poverty and distress, were his constant themes, until sometimes he worked himself up almost to madness, and Laura was obliged to drag Marianne away, lest he should commit some serious violence upon her.

Every week, indeed, every day, witnessed the frightful increase of this evil; and, in proportion as their father became alienated from his home, his inattention to their comforts became more and more apparent, until, at length, he frequently left them, for days tog-ether, destitute even of common necessaries.

In addition to this evil, Anne, who bore without murmuring, the deprivations which she saw her young mistresses obliged to submit to, now, with tears, complained to Laura that her master's behaviour whenever he was intoxicated, was insufferably licentious towards her: and at length, both the sisters became convinced from their own observation, that it was absolutely necessary, for the girl's sake, and to save their father from disgrace, that Anne should quit the house.

Taking the advantage, therefore, of one of Mr. Vin* cent's long absences, Laura sent for Martha, and, after being condemned to listen to her abuse and threats of vengeance for some time, they at last had the satisfaction ofseeingAnnedepart safe under her aunt's protection.





Convinced that she had acted rightly, Laura bore, undismayed, all the storm of reproaches which her father, maddened with liquor and fury at his disappointment, levelled at her on his return; and, though it was then a late hour of the night, again the degraded man commenced his rambles, in search, as he said, of the comfort which was denied him at home.

Poor Laura and Marianne looked at each other in dismay. They had been all day nearly destitute of food and fire, though it was severely cold weather, and the tallow candle just waning in its socket, threatened them with being left in darkness, if they did not retire to bed.

Thither, therefore, cold and faint, they crept together; and, in attempts to sooth Marianne, and project plans of relief, should their fatherI continue his present cruel conduct, Laura tried to forget her own wants and sufferings.

The morning dawned, but Mr. Vincent did not make his appearance; and the poor girls terrified at the prospect of actual starvation, renewed their consultations as to what could be done.

Their personal ornaments had never been very valuable ones, and all that had been supplied them at the time of the projected marriage, had been taken away from them by Mrs. Vincent, by order of their father. The few they had, however, were collected together, and after various struggles of pride, hope of their father's return, and the ufgent necessity of procuring food, the two sisters, about the middle of the day, set off to endeavour to dispose of them.





It was the first time they had ever traversed the streets of London alone, and this circumstance joined to the humiliating consciousness of their errand, and their indecision how to carry it into effect, caused their cheeks to glow with anxiety, and their whole jdemeanour to appear confused and irresolute. They were in deep black, and purposely as much in dishabille as possible, that they might pass unnoticed. Yet scarcely a person passed them whose eyes were not rivitted by their lovely faces; and though they passed hastily neither sister could be insensible to the admiration which each considered the due of the other.

"Who would suppose," thought Laura, as she gazed on the vermilion tint which heightened every moment on Marianne's cheek, and gave the most dazzling lustre to her deep blue eyes, " who would imagine that the dear girl is almost fainting for want of food!"

"What a lovely colour you have, Laura," observed Marianne, looking at her sister, "I never saw you look so handsome in my life!"

Laura smiled; though her eyes were filled with tears ;—and at this moment they perceived a jeweller's shop.

"I must not stand to think about it!" exclaimed Laura, in a hurried voice, "Will you come in, or will you wait for me V

Marianne's timidity induced her to prefer waiting; and Laura entered the shop, before she was aware that there were two or three gentlemen purchasing or examining articles in it.

Whether her flurried appearance, or her manners, impressed the shopmen with no great respect for such a customer, was uncertain; but she stood unnoticed, except by inquisitive looks, while they attended to the gentlemen present, one of whom, (a tall, dark man, who was looking at a watch,) from time to time, glanced a look of curiosity at her blushing face, though he endeavoured to avoid her observing it.





"Allow me to hand you a seat, madam," he, at length observed, in a gentle tone. ,

Laura, whose whole frame trembled, so that she could scarcely stand, sank into the chair he offered.

"You had better attend to this lady first, Mr."

he continued, " I am not hurried," and he laid the watch down, and walked to the door. -. . i ".

Laura, in a low voice, and in as few words as possible, mentioned her business. --.!.

"Oh! we do not buy second-hand goods, ma'am," returned the shopman aloud and in a very contemptuous tone, " besides, those are all old-fashioned things, such as we wouldn't give shop room to."

Laura rose, and silently closed the case, which con4ained the rejected articles.

"Have you tried the pawnbroker, ma'am?" continued the flippant shopman, winking and smiling at one of his fellows; but the tall, dark gentleman, who, though he could not have heard Laura's offer, had comprehended it sufficiently from the reply it met, was at her side, and his stern, contemptuous look repressed the farther remarks of the unfeeling and insolent shopman, if! ":- . ii.

"Will you allow me to look at those jewels, madam V observed the gentleman, "I sometimes,-—that is, I am a judge of those sort of things; and in short, if I like them I will purchase them." -- .





Laura tremblingly laid them on the counter; and the gentleman, in a low voice, demanded of the shopman what was the value of them.

"Oh, sir, they are old-fashioned and"

"^-hat would you ask for them, if you were offering them for sale??' -- - - ,..--- ' -.-

The man took them up, and looked at them slightly.

"I really dont know; I suppose they might fetch five or six pounds altogether."

"Is that sufficient?" said the gentleman, turning to Laura.

"Oh, yes, I do not want so much. It is only a

temporary embarrassment," exclaimed Laura, recovering, in some measure her self-possession;" - - »---»

The gentleman folded two bank-notes together, and presented them to her.

"You may, probably, wish to reclaim these trinkets," he observed; " I will, therefore, leave them in the care of the jeweller for the present ; or stop,—there is my card, it will, perhaps, be as well that you should not be exposed to the mortification of coming here, but assure yourself that any application you may make to me, shall be immediately attended to."

The last words were spoken with an emphasis which Laura could not misunderstand; they were dictated by the purest spirit of benevolence, and Laura's heart responded with gratitude. She took the card, curtsied with the deepest emotion, and was upon the point of quitting the shop, unmindful of the sneers and titters which had been circulating through those present, when her eye was suddenly arrested by the name of "Carleton" on the card which the stranger had given her. She stopt suddenly,—raised her eyes to his faces and was instantly convinced it was the uncle of Julian who stood before her.





"Forgive me, sir!" she exclaimed, " your name is Carleton; Is that of Vincent unknown to you?"

The brow of the stranger clouded, while strong curiosity was apparent in his manner, as he replied,—

"It is not unknown to me; but you are not—surely you cannot be the daughter of that man."

Laura could scarcely suppress her tears as she rephed.

"I am, indeed, sir! but do not condemn all for the faults of one. Julian would, I am sure, acquit Laura Vincent of a thought which would injure him."

Mr. Carleton seemed greatly affected at her manner.

"I am not so unjust!" he returned. "But do you know where Julian Carleton is to be found?" "u. Not exactly," returned Laura, " yet I think I could giveyou a clue, by which you may probably find him."

Mr. Carleton wrote Mr. Austin's address; and then putting the trinkets which he had laid on the counter, into her hand, he observed,—

* From me, M'ss Vincent need not hesitate at receiving what, from a stranger, would probably be considered an obligation. I cannot now consent to keep your pledge, but I am happy I have had it in my power to be of temporary assistance to you."

Laura was about to reply, when the sight of Marianne, who, with cheeks glowing like crimson, and her whole appearance betraying the greatest agitation, rushed into the shop, arrested the words she was about to utter.

"What is the matter, my dear girl!" exclaimed Laura, flying to her.





*' Nothing, only Pray come home, pray come

home!" and then glancing her eyes back to the door, Marianne continued: "Oh no! we cannot go yet!— What shall we do?" and bursting into tears, she sat down, seemingly unconscious what she was doing.

In the. persons of two fashionably dressed young men, who were now, with the most impertinent freedom, reconnoitring through the shop door, Laura instantly discovered the cause of Marianne's terror and confusion; and fixing her bright expressive eyes on them, with a look of the most extreme contempt, she said,—

"Surely my dear Marianne is not so weak as to be alarmed at two such insignificant beings as those."

"This is your sister I presume,Miss Vincent ?" said Mr. Carleton, regarding her lovely blushing face with evident interest and admiration.

Laura replied in the affirmative; and Mr. Carleton continued.

"If you will accept of my protection, I will take care that no one shall molest you."

Laura frankly accepted his offer, and Marianne, at her signal, timidly took his offered arm, and they all quitted the shop together.

At a little distance stood the two young men whose pertinacious importunities had so disconcerted and alarmed Marianne they had retreated at Laura's contemptuous look, and on seeing them both now come out so guarded, and observing Mr. Carleton's stern regard bent on them, with a look which said they should not be insulted with impunity, the two dandies turned off with an affectation of great non-chalance.

"Do you live far from here?" enquired Mr. Carleton.





Laura was on the point of naming the place of their residence, but a second thought reminded her that she might injure her father by so doing, and she therefore replied in the negative to his question, adding,

"We are very much obliged indeed, sir, for your kind interference; and will not trouble you farther as we shall get home very well now we are rid of Marianne^ tormentors."

Mr. Carleton seemed to comprehend the motives of her reserve.

"You need not be under any apprehensions from me, Miss Vincent, fori several days ago relinquished all proceedings against your father, on his representations of the distress to which he is reduced, and which I am sorry to see verified by the transactions of this morning; however, I will not press you on the subject, only promise me that should you be exposed to the like necessity again, that yon will let me be the first to whom you make an application."

Laura gave the desired promise, and Mr. Carleton, having called a coach from the stand which they were passing, saw them safe into it, and left them without waiting to hear whither they directed it.

"Who is that, Laura?" demanded Marianne, who had been anxiously contemplating his features, during the time he was speaking to her sister.

"Cannot you guess who it is?" returned Laura, smiling.

"Julian's uncle, Mr. Carleton; Is it not V Laura replied in the affirmative, and then repeated with pleasure, the generosity of his behaviour to her.

"By the bye!" she continued, " I have never looked at the notes he gave me."





They were produced; and, to the astonishment of the two girls, they proved to be each of the value of five pounds.

This is double the value of the trinkets," observed Laura, " even if he had kept them; but it would, I am sure, pain his generous heart to refuse them;—and who knows" and she sighed deeply "how sooir such a sum may become indeed a treasure!"

The coach stopt at the end of the street in which their residence was situated; and having discharged it, they proceeded towards their home, without observing that another vehicle, which had followed them all the way, drew up at the moment they alighted.

"I am so faint I can scarcely walk," observed Marianne, whose feelings having been less excited than her sister's, did not afford her that support which rendered Laura almost forgetful that it was nearly thirtysix hours since they had tasted food.

"Lean on me, my dear girl!" exclaimed Laura, observing, with alarm, the extreme paleness which had superseded the rose in her lovely countenance. "Come cheer up !" she continued, "we are within sight of home, and in a few minutes you shall have some refreshme-nt."

Marianne made no reply; but when they came within sight of the house, Laura started as she beheld the two men who had annoyed Marianne at the door of the jeweller's shop, crossing over as if to intercept them.

Marianne was too ill for her sister to think of disappointing their views by delaying to enter the house; but in vain did she attempt to awe them into silence by her fix«d contemptuous look. They advanced close to them, and one of them, with the most provoking look of self-satisfcation, exclaimed,—" So we have ferreted you out, my amiable divinities, in spite of that tremendous old Cerberus, who thought to guard the golden fruit so carefully for his own plucking."





"Let me pass instantly, sir!" exclaimed Laura, as they stood blocking up the narrow footway, and regarding her and her sister with the most licentious insolence; "let me pass, if you have the common feelings of humanity," she continued, with vehemence, feeling Marianne become every instant more unable to exert herself, " My sister is ill, and if I do not get her home"

She was interrupted by Marianne's falling senseless into her arms; and terrified at her own inability from weakness and emotion to support her, she shrieked loudly for help.

Somewhat alarmed at what they beheld, one of the intruders now proffered his assistance: and while the other in vain endeavoured to prevail on Laura to lean on him, the former raised Marianne's slender form in his arms, and followed to the house, the door of which in her terror, Laura could not unlock, and therefore, was compelled to give the key into the hands of her officious attendant, and in a moment they were both in the little parlour, which was their only sitting room.

The application of hartshorn and water soon restored Marianne's recollection; and Laura became only anxious to get rid of the two men who had thus taken advantage of this unfortunate occurrence to introduce themselves: and though their manners betrayed considerable anxiety for Marianne, they.seemed disposed to consider themselves quite upota familiar term* as soon as she recovered. "Is your sister subject to these attacks?" enquired one of them, as he stood at the looking-glass, arranging his hair, which his unusual exertions had discomposed. Laura replied,—





"No! She has been exposed to much agitation this morning, and has taken no refreshment. She will soon be quite recovered, I trust; and now, gentlemen, you must excuse my saying that your presence here will be productive of serious inconvenience to us, if you remain longer.

"Surely, you wont drive us out of the house in this uncivil way; besides I cant answer to my conscience -leaving you thus alone. You look, too, almost as pale as your sister did just now, and it is my belief, have as much need of refreshment. Have you nobody you can send for any thing. Some wine and jellies now would do us all good!" and he drew his purse from his pocket, and throwing up the sash, called to a woman who, as well as two or three other people, had been attracted by curiosity at seeing a female carried into the house in a state of insensibility, was still loitering about to learn what had occurred.

** I beg—I entreat—I insist!" exclaimed Laura, almost breathless with vexation, " I insist you quit this house instantly. I will not suffer such insults!—Oh! that my father would but return home and protect his children."

"Psha! observed the most forward of the strangers, "we will protect you better than all the old fathers in Christendom, and why should you be angry at my offering to send for some refreshment."

At this moment, a loud knock proclaimed the approach of Mr. Vincent: and Laura, while she rejoiced in his appearance, which she trusted would put an end to the persecutions which had so alarmed her, yet trembled lest, if he should be intoxicated, he should commit any violence, or, perhaps, be inclined to consider her and Marianne as blameable as their tormentors.





She flew, however, instantly to the door; and the first glance of her father convinced her that part of her fears at least were true, for his looks proclaimed that he had been paying his usual devotions to Bacchus.

"Where the d—1 have you been ?" was his first salutation, " I have been here twice, and could notget in."

"Anne is gone," returned Laura, "her aunt fetched her away yesterday morning; and we had nothing in the house, not even bread; therefore, we were obliged to go out."

"Anne gone!" muttered Mr. Vincent, as he stood, or rather leaned against the wall in the passage;" then the little hussey kept her word. But I shall find her out; yes, yes, I'll be even with her,/ and her cunning old aunt, too. But how dared you let her go without my leave!"

Laura replied that she had no power to detain her; and Mr. Vincent staggered forward into the kitchen, instead of turning, as Laura expected, to the parlour. There was not a moment to be lost, Laura felt, in order to prevent the uproar which, in her father's present state of mind, she knew would be the consequence of his discovery of the strangers; and, therefore, hastily putting her head in at the parlour door, she signed ta them instantly to be gone.





The loud, harsh tones of Mr. Vincent had, it appeared, made some impression on the fears of the two dandies, who, though they could not be deterred from the pursuit of their frolic by the terror which their conduct occasioned to two innocent and helpless girls, yet had consideration enough for their own safety, to be alarmed at the idea of encountering their father; and, accordingly, as silently and speedily as possible, they made good their retreat, heartily rejoiced, no - doubt, at escaping so well.

Relieved thus of her principal fear, Laura attempted to pacify her father, who continued to rail against Anne, Martha, and all who had aided and abetted them, intermingled with reproaches to his daughters, for having gone out without his permission, until, overcome by fatigue and inebriation, he fell asleep in his chair, and Laura, thankful for the termination of all her difficulties, stole out, with her basket in her hand and her bonnet pulled down to conceal her still flushed and agitated countenance, to purchase necessary provisions.

The woman at the little shop which she entered, a few doors from their own habitation, seemed to view her with great curiosity, though she was very civil, and Laura having finished her purchases, gave her one of the notes which she had received from Mr. Carleton.

"I cant give change for this, ma'am," she observed "but I'll send my little girl to the public house with it. Pray what name must I put on it?"

Laura wrote her own name on it, and the woman then observed,—

"You live at No. 19, I think ma'am?"

Though feeling somewhat impatient at all this scrutiny, Laura replied in the affirmative; and while the girl was gone for the change, the mistress of the shop, after hoping that she should have Mr. Vincent's custom for the future: and assuring Laura of the geniwineness of the articles she sold, observed,—





"There was two fine young gentlemen came in here to-day, miss, and asked a lot of questions about you, how long you'd lived in this street, and what trade your father followed, and whether you had many visitors: but I Was very close with them, for, says I, I never makes it my business to watch my neighbours; and as to the old gentleman, why I believe he's seen better days, and the young ladies, poor things, seem very moloncholly, and never hardly stir out, and I fancy they're in mourning for their mother;—and as to company I dont believe they keep any, for I never see any body go there, only their brother, a goodlooking young gentleman, in black.

"Oh! the devil, there's a brother too, is there?" said one of the gentlemen. So they talked a great while together in French and Latin, I take it; for I could not understand them; and when they found they could get nothing out of me, they went away."

Laura could scarcely suppress a smile at this observation, as it was very plain that the garrulous shopkeeper had told them all that she knew, and had only been prevented by absolute incapacity from extending her intelligence further. She, however, thought it necessary to thank her for her caution, and to request that should the inquisitive strangers again make their appearance, she would give them no satisfaction, but hint that both the father and brother of the ladies whom they had so impertinently intruded





on, would seriously resent their attempts at any further rudeness."

"There!—I thought you didn't encourage them; and so I said," observed the woman, in a triumphant tone; "though there was two or three that came into my shop that were crying out as how it was a shame to see how you imposed upon your father, and had been out in a coach rambling about, while the poor old gentleman was shut out in the street and, when he came home, the two young chaps, they said slipped out of doors like two thieves, without his finding out they were in the house;—but I was sure as two modest nice young ladies——"

Laura proudly interrupted her to thank her for her good opinion, but at the same time to hope that she would never think it necessary again to enter into any discussion of an affair which could concern only themselves.

"Certainly ma'am!—to be sure,;—so I said t: Mbs. Jackson, and Sally Taylor, and"

Laura took the change from the child, who just then entered, and throwing down the amount of the articles she had purchased, quitted the shop, leaving the woman half-startled and half-offended, at the dignity of her new customer.

"They are but poor gentry after all!" she ejaculated* turning up her nose, as Laura passed the window, " and needn't take sich airs."

Laura caught the look, though she could not accurately define the meaning of it; but she returned home, her heart swelling with vexation and sorrow at being thus degraded into the subject of gossip for a chandler's shop.





"All the world-s a stage,

And all the men and women merely players."

Shakbpeare.

THOUGH husbanded with the strictest economy, Julian's small stock of money glided fast away, without his having met with any opportunity or prospect of recruiting ft.

Too difHdent to assume to himself the various accomplishments which some required; and too proud to stoop to the servile assiduities which was enacted by others, as the price of their favour, he often returned in despair from the applications which he had made for employment; while not unfrequently bis total want of recommendation, or as it was usually termed,'satisfactory reference' as to character, abilities, &c. occasioned him to be dismissed with contumely.

Quite hopeless, at last, of obtaining any employment suitable to his wishes, he began to turn his thoughts towards the proposal of his friend Richard Stanfield, from whom he had received one letter highly eulogisting his situation and companions, and predicting to himself, to use his own expressive phrase," a brilliant career in the higher walks of the drama."





"I have bat one wish ungratified, my dear friend," concluded this genuine son of Tbespis, in his florid and circumstantial epistle, " that wish need I name?—it is that you were with me, sharing my success,—triumphing in my glory. My companions here «re good fellows enough, but they are mere creatures of this world* "plain honest souls" with nothing of sentiment about them. Orlando St. Clair calls himself my friend, but he knows nothing of friendship but the name. Damon and Pythias, Orestes and Pylades, would be a riddle to him, and I think I hear him, were I to recite to him those ancient examples of the divine anion of souls, replying to me, with his squeaking discordant voice,—

* Why all that may be vary true mister, but after all the man that dont look to number one first, is but a fool in my eye.'

'Fawgh! it is odious!' as Othello says, ' By the bye, I play the Moor to-morrow night at a town twenty miles off. We shall start at break of day, and I should have no doubt of making a hit, for you know it is one of my favorite parts, but that 1 have such a Desdemona!— fancy to yourself a tall (five feet ten,—andl 'hear-it n6t ye gods!' eight inches lower) lean damsel of fifty-five, whistling the tender endearments and impassioned pleadings of the lovely Dasdemona, through an aperture, I will not call it a month, Wrinkled up to the very smallest possible /mension, like.a close drawn purse, to prevent the audience finding out that she has only two teeth and a stump left,—.

1 O horrible! moat hoirible-.





But to return to affairs which concern us nearer and dearer. Do not forget your promise to me, but write immediately, and say if you will make one in our party. I will not promise that all will be fair weather and sunshine, but

Come what—come may,

Time, and the hour, run through the roughest day.

Your's eternally,

Richard Stanfield."

There was nothing very promising m this description of the society of which the enthusiastic Richard wished his friend to become a member; but Julian felt that almost any change from his present disconsolate situation would be for the better ; and after numerous struggles between pride, inclination, and necessity,Julian conquered his repugnance, to the thoughts of becoming the associate of Messrs. Timothy Lamp, Orlando St. Clair, and Co., and wrote to his friend Richard to say, that he had at length decided to embrace the dramatic profession, and should join him in a few days.

Having thus taken the prefatory step, Julian's next care was to raise the means of travelling with decency; and all but those clothes absolutely necessary to the prosecution of his new scheme, were devoted for this purpose ; but this disagreeable task was deferred till the last moment, and having made up the parcel, and taken a farewell look at the few books which remained of Stuart's parting present, he sat down to reflect on the melancholy past, and the unpromising future.

From a deep reverie, in which the image of Marianne Vincent was the most prominent object, he was aroused by (he entrance of his landlady with a letter which she said had been left for him by a man who went away immediately, observing that it required no answer.





Julian took the letter in surprize. It was directed in a hand totally unknown to him; but his surprise encreased, when on opening it, he discovered that it contained a bank note for ten pounds, in a blank inclosure.

Who could be the generous donor, who, as if at that moment anticipating his wants, had thus delicately relieved them, was his first reflection. His thoughts wandered from Mary Hamilton to Stuart, yet the writing on the cover did not resemble either the bold manly writing of the latter, or the neat delicate Italian hand in which Mary always penned her epistles to him.

Miss Poppleton next recurred to his thoughts: but he recollected that he had never given his address there, and therefore it was impossible it could be her to whom he was indebted for this seasonable generosity.

The affront, too, which he had received upon his return to her house after his interview with Mr. Austin, forbade his imagining that could she have discovered his residence, Miss Jemima's generosity could have overcome the evil impression, which Julian could not doubt had been given her of his conduct and connections by the mistaken Mr. Austin, who had undoubtedly considered that he was doing his duty in repeating to her his own erroneous convictions of their impropriety.

To Mary Hamilton, therefore, he felt it most probable he was indebted; for he would not admit it possible that Stuart would have employed any hand but his Own in such an affair, when he was so anxious to conceal all traces of his former connections.





From conjectures, however, as to whom he was indebted for it, his mind wandered to the use he should make of his unexpected acquisition; and he almost repented that he had been so hasty in acceding to his friend Stanfield's proposition.

Before this should be exhausted, he might meet with something more suitable to his ideas and feelings, he considered, as he sat turning and twisting the note in his hand, without observing that the woman of the house, who had remained in the room dusting the furniture, and putting all to rights, as she said, bad been all the time diligently scrutinizing his looks and actions.

"Do you go to-morrow, sir V she at length demanded, in a tone which seemed to say, " I suppose that letter has made some alteration in your sentiments."

Julian started from his reverie.

"Yes, certainly! I told you I was going into the country!" he observed, instantly comprehending the motives of her question, and feeling somewhat vexed that she should suppose his intended removal had been actuated by poverty.

"Yes, sir!—but I did not know whether you had altered your mind," she replied, somewhat saucily.

Julian made no answer, and she quitted the room; —^while, thus decided, not to retract from his resolution, Julian proceeded to reinstrate in his portmanteau all that had been destined to provide the means of travelling, and discharging his trifling debt for lodging, &c.





The conscious exultation that he should be able to appear among the company which he was about to join with respectability and comparative independence, was somewhat checked, by his reflection on the source from which he derived these advantages.

"Am I for ever doomed to be loaded with obligations, and unable to free myself from the galling slavery of dependence!" he observed, as he carefully' deposited in a pocket-book the blank envelope of the note, with the vague hope and wish that at some future period he might discover and reimburse the generous donor.

Having made every necessary arrangement for bis departure, Julian walked out with the intention of getting cash for his note, which he did not chuse to give to the woman of the house, in consequence of her observations at the time he received it.

He found this, however, a much more difficult matter than he expected, and he would have made some trifling purchase, but no one seemed willing to change such a large note; and he at length concluded that he must take one of the tradesmen's advice, (whose shop he entered) and go to the bank with it.

To his great disappointment, however, when he arrived there, it was past the hour of business.; and he was returning home, when he suddenly encountered Ryland in Fleet Street, and to his enquiries, without reflection, replied, that he had been to the bank.

"To the bank!" repeated Ryland,—" lucky dog! —then I suppose you are brim-full of money 1"

Julian, with his usual frankness, related his errand thither'; and Ryland, after a few minutes' hesitation, said,—





"If you're anxious to change your note, I've got a friend close by will do it to oblige me; so give it me, and just step into this pastry-cook's till I come back, —I shall not be above ten minutes gone."

Julian unhesitatingly gave him the note, and observed that he would cross over and look at the prints in an opposite window, till he (Ryland) returned.

"Do as you like about that," returned Ryland, "only dont go out of the way, for fear I should run away with your note. Have you got the number, that if I do, you may stop it and me too V

"Not I indeed"! replied Julian, " so you may be off as soon as you like.

Ryland walked away with a smile, and Julian stood at the print shop till he had ascertained the beauties or defects of every picture in the window; he then walked slowly towards the way Ryland had taken, and in a few minutes the latter appeared, quite out of breath, and with the note in bis hand.

"I am out of luck!" he exclaimed, as he approach-ed, " my friend had left the office ten minutes before 1 arrived."

Julian thanked him for the trouble he had taken, and they walked on together towards the lodging of the former. Considering that as he was on the point of quitting London, perhaps never to return, it was no longer necessary to preserve that distance and reserve towards Ryland, which prudence had prompted since the character of the latter had appeared in so doubtful a light, Julian made no objections when he proposed going home, to have, as he said, a little friendly chat.

"What will Mrs. Ryland say, though V observed Julian, "if I keep^you out!"





w Hang Mrs. Ryland!" returned her affectionate bus, band, with vehemence. "I hare given her the slip, the go-bye^ these three weeks past; and if'I keep in the humour I am in, I'll never go near her again!"

"I am sorry to hear you say so," observed Julian, gravely 5 " for whatever her fault* of temper may be, I have no doubt but she was truly anxious for your welfare; and I fear m deserting her, you have deserted your best interest."

"One would think she had inspired you!" replied Ryland, half angrily," for those are the devilish words, "welfare and true interest," that she was dinning in my ears from morning till night; but I've done with her, f tell you, and she may blame herself, for she led me a life like a dog."

Julian saw it was no use to argue with his obstinate companion, and they walked em in silence, until Ryland, affecting to recollect that he had an engagement at six o'clock, which he must attend to, suddenly darted off, promising to call on Julian in the course of the evening.

Julian looked after him with pity and sorrow, for he felt convinced that if (which appeared but too probable) he had returned to his former companions and their practices, he was in the high road to ruin and disgrace.

With this impression, he felt by no means sorry that the evening passed away without his imprudent companion making his appearance; and having, through the medium of his landlady, exchanged his note, and discharged the trifling debt he had contracted, he retired to bed for the last time previous to his entering upon new scenes, and new occupations.





The coach by which he intended to^travel was to start from Aldersgate Street, at half-past six. Long therefore, before the people of the house, in which he lodged, were aceustomed to rise, Julian, with his portmanteau on his shoulder, took his departure, and calling a coach from the first stand, was soon driven to the inn from which he was to start. It wanted, however, yet half an hour of the appointed time, and having secured his place and deposited his portmanteau in the coach-office, he walked out into the as yet almost empty streets, preferring his own melancholy reflections to the noise and bustle which prevailed in the inn, from which two or three coaches were preparing to depart.

Scarcely thinking where he was going to, he turned down a narrow street, at a short distance from the inn, but he had proceeded but a few paces, before his eye was caught by the figure of a female in deep blacky who was fastening the parlour shutters of a small house, on the opposite side of the way.

He could not accurately distinguish the features, but the profile, the form, and the step so strongly resembled Laura Vincenjt's, that he darted forward with impetuosity, almost convinced it was. her. Before, however, he could reach the door of the house it was closed, and the lady had disappeared.

With all the keenness of disappointed hope, Julian looked round for some one who could giwe him the desired information who were the inmates of the house, but no person appeared;—not a shop was open, and after pacing backwards and forwards before the windows for several minutes, he began to reflect that it was scarcely probable that it could be Laura, and to recollect that if he staid much longer he should be in danger of losing both his place and his portmanteau, and after ell, perhaps, in pursuit of a shadow.





That word—perhaps I how often did he repeat it before he reached the inn door, and beheld the coachman with the reins in his hand, on the point of mounting the box.

"Here's the gemman!" exclaimed one of helpers,. who had just closed the coach-door, and made all right, as he said.

♦* Well, better late than never! but you'd like to have been a day arter the fair," observed the jolly falfaced coachman, as Julian placed himself by his side on the box.

Julian acquiesced in silence to this remark; and for some time the heavy rattling of the carriage, over the stones, suspended all attempts at conversation*

At length they emerged from the thickly crowded suburbs into a smooth road and frefcher air: and the coachman turning round in his seat, to have a fall view of Julian's face, and twisting the Wall flower which he held in his month, to the opposite corner of it, observed,—

•i Now, I'd bet a guinea to a shilling, I eould tell in two guesses, what kept yoti so long, and put me Ave minutes behind time this morning."

Julian started, and blushed deeply, as he replied,—

"I very much doubt it, for I can scarcely tell myself."

"It was a petticoat, for sixpence. Come now, never flinch!" exclaimed the garrulous Jehu. Julian blushed still more as he acknowledged he was right, and the coachman proceeded,

"Oh, never be ashamed of it, man! She's a fine creter as ever I saw, and I've known the time when I should have forgot coach and horses and every thing in the world, to have had another glimpse of such a bonny black eye!"





"Of whom are you speaking?" exclaimed Julian, in surprise.

The coachman laughed.

"Oh, you did'nt think, then, 1 see'd ypu making two steps and a jump across the street, to get a nearer look at that handsome girl that was opening the shutters. She riddled you though,for she whipt in in a moment: but she's worth waiting to look at I can tell you, for [ often sees her as I comes down to the coach; but she's as timid as a hare, and I think she's proud too, by her looks, and arnt been used to that sort of work, for her hands are like snow, though its plain they keeps no sarvant, or she wouldn't be forced to open the shutters, and take in the milk, as I see her doing."

Julian's heart beat furiously. It must be Laura, he thought, as he listened to this description of the female who had so forcibly excited his euriosity. Where, then, was Marianne? Was she separated from her sister, or did she share in these menial offices?"

He regretted that he had left the neighbourhood without ascertaining the truth or falsehood of his conjectures; and ten times he was on the point of stopping the coach, and relinquishing his journey, but he was prevented by the idea of the laugh this would create among his fellow passengers, who had already appeared greatly diverted at the coachman's elucidation of the causes which had kept his passenger behind.

For the remainder of the journey, Julian's thoughts were solely occupied with his adventure of the moraing, and in despite of the laugh it occasioned between the parties, (a female and two young men) who sat behind him, and to whom the coachman directed all his significant winks and contortions of countenance' which supplied the place of more direct animadversion he renewed the subject again and again, and at length promised he would give five shillings, if in the course of the week, Jehu wouldfind out the name of the lady who had made so deep an impression on his fancy , and leave it, written on a sealed paper,at the bar of the inn at which they should stop, at the town which Julian was destined for.





"Well, but how must I direct it V demanded the coachman.

"I will write my name on this card," replied Julian, " and I will leave the five shillings in the hands of the landlord or landlady, provided you will be upon honour that you will not deceive me."

"Oh! honor bright, to be sure ["returned the coachman; "If I deceive you I wish I may be hanged. l{o no!—love's a delicate thing, and in case, you know, you was to hang yourself in your garters, as the song says, or any thing of that there sort, I should expect you'd be haunting me of a dark night, or summat of that sort."

The laugh this attempt at wit had created, still wrinkled the faces of Julian's light-hearted companions, when their thoughts were driven into another channel, by the coachman's observing to one of the young men, who sat behind him, and who seemed well known to him,—

"So, Mr. Railson, you've got the player folks down among you, I hear."





"Yes," replied Mr. Railson, with a contemptuous sneer. "I wonder Justice Goodwin should suffer such a set of vagabonds among us. Why I dont believe their manager, as they call him, has got as good a coat on his back as the scare crow in our ten-acre field; and you'd die a laughing to hear Nat, the carpenter, who let them his shop for a theatre, (as they style the trumpery place) describe the shifts they're obliged to make, to rig themselves out every night."

Julian's heart sunk at this delineation of his future associates; but it was now too late to recede: he was already within a few miles of his destination, and though he felt half angry with his friend Richard for deceiving him, he determined at least to see the latter, and judge for himself of the actual state of affairs, ere he made his final election.

Fearful, however, of being even suspected of any connexion with those, whom his fellow traveller continued to place in the most ludicrous light, by various anecdotes which he professed to have derived from the most authentic sources, Julian carefully surpressed every appearance of interest in the people whom he heard thus unmercifully ridiculed; and when some curiosity was manifested as to his business at B—, the (town to which they were approaching) he hinted, his stay in all probability would not exceed a few days.

"Oh ! if that's the case, where's our bargain about the lady's name you know !" observed the coachman sharply.

Julian looked confused, and felt ashamed of the littleness which his dread of redicule had seduced him into. He endeavoured, however, to appear unconcerned as he replied,—





"I shall stay long enough, I hope, to receive your communication, and perform my promise."

"Well, that's all right then ; so, as soon as ever I go back to town I shall try to start the game !" observed the coachman, " and remember if it should be a match I shall expect cake and wine, and a pair of gloves at the wedding."

Julian smiled, as he replied that that condition also should be fulfilled; and to his infinite satisfaction, in a few minutes the young man behind him proclaimed that they were in sight of the town, which was to be the end of their journey.

Julian looked round with some anxiety, as he alighted from the coach, for he dreaded to see his free friend Richard appear, and thus proclaim his alliance with those who had been the subjects- of so much ridicule to his fellow passengers.

From this fear, however, he was relieved: for, on the coachman enquiring for one of the females belonging to the house, he heard the hostler reply,—

"Oh, she be gone to the play along wi' some of her cronies. D—n the play, I say, for it turns all the girl's brains, I believe."

Julian walked into the house, and having taken a glass of negus and a biscuit, he enquired of the waiter whereabouts the theatre was situated.

The man grinned.

"Lord bless you, sir," he replied, " its nothing but a barn, as one may say, and a set of poor strollers, not worth a gentleman, like you, looking at, who's been used to see London players. I've been to Drury Lane and Common Garden myself, and these are no more to compare"





"I do not expect that," interrupted Julian, more than ever ashamed of the compact he had entered into, "I do not go for entertainment only, but I wish to see the company."

The man looked surprised; but a glance at Julian's well-filled portmanteau and another at the sovereign which he tendered in payment for his refreshment, seemed to dispel the half-formed suspicions which Julian's hesitating manner and confused looks had created.

"I'll get a boy to shew you the way, sir!" he replied, "for you'll never find it out by my directions."

Julian acquiesced, and in a few moments, he sat out with his guide, for the place, which was to witness either his future glory or degradation.

"Do you know what the play is to-night?" he demanded of the boy, as they waded through a dirty lane with stabling on one side, and pigstyes on the other.

The boy pulled out a crumpled bill from bis pocket, observing, that would tell him all about it, and then pointing to a building, very little superior to the habitations of the four-footed animals, who alone formed the surrounding neighbourhood, he added,—

"That's the playhouse, sir, and they be begun the play, for I can hear 'em."

Julian gave his informant sixpence ; and the boy, with exultation, remarked that he should see the play himself, for they'd let him into the gallery for threepence.

The gallery!" repeated Julian, somewhat comforted by hearing this intimation, that the house was fitted up in due order," Which way must I take, then, to the pit?"





"Oh, it's all the same way!—but I'll show you;" and he marched gaily up the dark passage, about the middle of which a fat comely lady sat, with a table and a candle before her, to receive the money.

"Here, I've brought a gentleman to see the play:" whispered the boy, loud enough for Julian to hear. "You must let me go in for threepence, you know.?"

The lady nodded assent. Julian paid his two shillings; and, according to her directions, entered the door at the top of the passage, and found himself in the front of the stage, just as his friend, Richard Stanfield, was commencing Macbeth's soliloquy, "Is this a dagger which I see before me"—&c.

Unwilling to give him any disturbance, Julian stood still where he was: but Richard's quick eye had already discovered him, and the smile of pleased recognition (which it appeared he could not suppress) somewhat impaired the effect of what was really, in every other respect, a very creditable performance.

The eyes of all around had been turned on Julian at his first entrance; and it was some time before he could collect confidence to take a survey of the theatre, but when he did, his heart sank, at the rude accommodations, and the scantiness of the audience, which did not consist of more than fifty persons, of whom two thirds were in what was stiled the gallery, but which was merely the back part of the pit divided by a few planks, from the seats appropriated to the more polite part of the spectators.

An offensive smell of oil, from two dirty lamps placed on the ground for stage lights, and whose brilliancy was threatened every moment with extinction by the gusts of wind which blew with unpitying violence through the chinks which time had made in the crazy building, and the dampness of the ground under his feet, contributed to chill all Julian's expectations and hopes, though they had never been very sanguine. Yet he could not avoid acknowledging the merit of two or three of the performers, independent of his friend Dick, who, elated with the appearance of one whom he considered capable of appreciating his talents, and emulous to impress him with a favourable opinion of himself and his colleagues, laboured strenuously to get through the entertainments of the evening with eclat.





Nature had been very unfavourable to poor Richard, in allotting to him a person very ill calculated to second his histrionic powers, and features which defied even his powerful efforts to mould them into any thing like expression. Yet, even with these defects, he often contrived to make a deep impression on his audience ; and when he took the sock instead of the buskin, Julian acknowledged to himself that the manager had a right to consider him a very valuable acquisition to his company.

Much, however, as Julian was surprised and entertained, he could not be blind to the paltry shifts and contrivances which were continually exciting the derision of the genteeler part of the audience, some of whom having, probably like the waiter at the inn, been to London, appeared to entertain a profound contempt for the luckless beings who were labouring so hard to entertain them.

The deficiencies among the subalterns, both in talent and clothing, were never-failing subjects for satire; and Julian more than once recoiled from the idea of becoming a subject of criticism to these merciless gentry, who seemed disposed to find no amusement but in discovering defects.





They play was at length over. Richard, by a signal, invited Julian to come round to him, and in another minute he found himself in the midst of the whole assembled company behind the curtain, who viewed him with the most inquisitive looks.

"This is my friend, Mr. Carleton, sir!" said Richard, addressing a dirty little mean-looking man, who was engaged in snuffing out the two or three pieces of tallow candle, which were stuck against the wall.

Mr. Timothy Alphonso Lamp (for it was the great man himself) bowed down to the ground in reverence, k appeared, of Julian's fashionable coat, waistcoat, &c for his eyes dwelt with rapture on them, as he muttered,—

* Really glad to see you, sir!—excellent figure !— good stage face! Extensive wardrobe, I presume?"

"Oh, yes!" returned Richard, observing Julian at a loss how to reply to this singular address. " I told you before, Mr. Lamp, that my friend possesses every requisite."

"Dear, dear, well to be sure!—I am very happy: but I wish we had known, we ought to have announced— 'A young gentleman, being his first appearance on

any --'»

"Oh ! my friend will wish to rest anight or two, and see something of the business," observed Stanfield.

Julian anxiously seconded this proposition, and the manager, though with evident reluctance, acquiesced.

Richard now disencumbered himself of his robes, and without removing the paint from his face, declared his readiness to attend him.





"(Where have you left your paraphernalia, my boy V he demanded.

Julian replied at the inn where the coach stopt; and Stan field immediately proposed to fetch it to his lodgings, where he had secured his friend a bed.

Julian, however, shrank from this exhibition; and after some discussion, one of the underlings, who overheard the dispute, offered his services, and with a low obeisance pocketed the shilling, to which, but for Stanfield's remonstrance, would have been added another.

"Why you are as prodigal as if you had your pocket full of money!" observed Richard, as arm in arm, they left the theatre; "yet, from your last letter, I should imagine stocks must be pretty low by this time, and the portmanteau not very heavy."

Julian related the circumstance of his unknown friend's gift; and Richard instantly fixed on the beautiful woman whom he had seen in the coronetted carriage, on the Highgate road, as the generous donor.

Julian was inclined to believe he was right, but he ilid not enter into any minute discussion ; and at his suggestion, Richard proceeded to request the company of Mr. Lamp, Mr. Orlando St. Clair, and two or three of the other gentlemen, who all lodged in the same house, to partake of the bowl of punch which J ulian provided for them.

A formal recognition of Mr. Carleton as one of the members of their society now took place; and Julian, while he sometimes glanced an eye of pity and surprise at the threadbare habiliments and gaunt forms, which spoke more forcibly than words could express, the cares they had suffered, and the privations they had undergone, was still more surprised at the lightness with which they treated all their sorrows and mortifications, and the zest with which they appeared to enjoy the present moment of joviality.





In the fullness of his heart, at having secured so valuable an addition to his corps, as Mr. Carleton, the manager ordered a second bowl of his favorite beverage; but his diminutive form seemed to shrink into a still less compass, when, with inflamed looks and a coarse voice, entered a lady behind the waiter, whom Julian instantly recognized as the money-taker, and whom it appeared Mr. Lamp had the honour of calling his spouse.

"You're a keeping it up, I thinks, here!" she observed, with a threatening look at her husband," while I havn't moistened my lips with any thing stronger than pump water to day."

Stanfield hastily filled her a glass; and, somewhat mollified, she took her seat among them, and, to Julian's infinite surprise and disgust, continued to take her share in the bowl, and join in all the, sometimes not very delicate sallies, it excited; until the landlord's often repeated admonition that it was time to part, was at length enforced by a refusal to let them have any more liquor, and each took their way to their separate bedrooms.





""Tis quenchless (hirst

Of ruinous ebriety that prompts

His every action, and imbrutes the man!"



Cowper.

DOUBTFUL of the manner in which their father might receive the intelligence of their interview with Mr. Carleton, Laura and Marianne were silent on the subject of all that had occurred during his unfeeling neglect of them; and, apparently ashamed of his conduct, he did not seem to wish to make any enquiries into the means by which they had supplied those necessities, which even in the midst of his folly and inebriation, he could not entirely banish from his memory.

For some days he remained at home, sullen, silent, and apparently bitterly regretting the follies he had committed; bnt in vain did the two amiable girls endeavour to render his home pleasant and comfortable to him. In vain did Marianne, suppressing all her own melancholy and sorrowful feelings, try to amuse him with singing every air which she could recollect he had ever been pleased with; while equally fruitless were Laura's attempts to beguile him into conversation, or force a smile upon his lips, by her arch delineations of the new class of people among whom she was sometimes obliged to mix.





Books they had none, but if they had, Mr. Vincent was no reader; and from walking out with his daughters he was deterred by the fear that they should meet and be recognized by some of those who had known him and them in their days of prosperity.

Thus heavily dragged the time along; but Laura had a secret source of uneasiness, which she did not impart even to her sister.

Possessing more confidence, or at least, less timidity than Marianne, and at the same time wishing to spare her beloved sister from humiliation, Laura undertook the disagreeable task of fetching every article they stood in need of from the shops in the neighbourhood; and twice while thus employed, she encountered one of the intrusive strangers who had occasioned them so much uneasiness on their visit to the jewellers.

In vain had she tried to avoid him, and repel his advances by the most determined silence : he had followed her from place to place, with the most persevering importunities; and when she refused to answer his enquiries respecting her beautiful sister, who it appeared was the magnet that attracted him, he had in a moment thawed all her reserve, and transfixed her with astonishment, by whispering in her ear the name of " Alfred Huntly."

"I am right, then!" he observed, fixing his saucy eyes on her blushing face, "and you see you can no longer plead my being a stranger, as a bar to my wishes."





Laura recovered her self-possession. "If, as it appears, sir, I am known to you, though I am utterly unconscious of having ever beheld you before, you ought to have known also that respect was due to our misfortunes. No friend of Alfred Huntly's would, I am certain, behave with insult to Laura or Marianne Vincent."

"I am sure I mean no insult," replied the stranger, "but I am dying—desperately in love with your sister, who is the loveliest creature I ever beheld. But as I see I can make no impression on your flinty heart, I shall try whether Alfred cannot assist my cause: I know that he will be ready to worship me for having discovered your retreat."

A sensation of anger crimsoned Laura's cheeks at the idea that Alfred should have made such an apparently dissipated and frivolous being the depository of his hopes and wishes; but with as much indifference as she could assume, she observed,—

"You are mistaken, sir, in supposing that your friend, Mr. Huntly, has any influence with me; and if you do not wish me to regard you with more anger and vexation than I do at present, you will refrain from mentioning my name to him. I have no wish or intention to renew any intercourse with Mr. Huntly's family."

The stranger regarded her with evident surprise; but she had nearly reached her father's door; and having again, in vain, attempted to extort a promise from her, that she would prevail on her sister to see him and listen to his suit, he was compelled to leave her.

Laura returned home, her bosom throbbing with a





thousand tumultuous sensations, which the name of Alfred Huntly had kindled.

Resolutely she had refrained from asking a single question, or betraying the slightest curiosity to hear how Alfred was situated'; yet that he was still unmarried she could not doubt; for presuming and licentious as the stranger appeared, he certainly would not hare dared to speak of him in the manne r he did, or have talked of employing his interest, had he known him to be the husband of another.

Laura felt at once pained and flattered by this constancy of his love, for to no other reason could she attribute Alfred's opposition to his uncle's will and his father's wishes; and though she feared that his interest would suft-er, it was but natural that her heart should be gratified by this proof of his love.

Still, however, she determined to maintain her resolution not to be the voluntary means of injuring him or his family; and she determined to conceal even from Marianne what she had heard, well knowing that the latter would plead the cause of love and Alfred, rather than that of prudence.

The fear that the stranger should, in defiance of her serious injunction, impart to Alfred her present residence, for some days so occupied her mind, that she started at every unusual sound, and a sudden knock at the door would throw ber into a state of agitation and terror, which she in vain attempted to disguise from her sister's observant eyes, and which, more than once, became so apparent even to her apathized father, as greatly to excite his surprise, and draw from him a remark, expressed with some severity, that had h» less confidence in Laura, he should suspect she was engaged in some clandestine intercourse, which she feared would be discovered.





Poor Laura blushed deeply; and Marianne, with surprise, observed that she did not (as was usually the case, from her quick feelings and resentment of any thing like unjust accusation) enter into any defence of herself; but she was still more surprised, when, in the course of conversation, alluding to their adventures on the memorable morning of their excursion to the jewellers, she spoke of the impertinence of the two fops who had been so intrusive, she beheld Laura's confusion and absence.

Could it be possible, that Laura had so soon forgotten Alfred, and had conceived any prepossession in favor of either of those insignificant fine gentlemen.

Such we-re Marianne's reflections, as she gazed upon her sister, and became every moment more and more convinced that Laura had some secret cause of anxiety concealed from her.

At length, however, the mystery was unravelled. Mr. Vincent, after nearly a fortnight of retirement, again returned to his old habits, and the second day of his absence, bad arrived, when the sisters were startled, while engaged in earnest conversation on the melancholy prospect that threatened them, by a loud rap at the door.

"It is my father!" exclaimed Marianne, throwing down her work, and trembling lest he should be in the state in which he now too often returned to his home, "Shall I go to the door V she continued, observing that Laura sat pale and motionless.

Laura recollected herself,—it might be her father, and if it were not





In another minute she was at dievdoor, and clasped in the arms of Alfred Huntly, who wild, with rapture, hurried her into the room, where Marianne, scarcely crediting what she heard, had remained in silent amazement.

"Cruel, unkind girl}" exclaimed Alfred, looking reproachfully at Laura, " thus to conceal yourself from my anxious search. Oh LaHra! what have I not suffered from the uncertainty of your situation, and my longing desire to see you again :—but I have found you, and that is a happiness so great that it repays all past pain."

Laura could not suppress her tears at the strong emotion which her lover betrayed; yet fearful that she was doing wrong in thus encouraging him to suppose that she would consent to a renewal of the ties which bad been broken between them, she faintly articulated,—

"And to what purpose should Alfred Huntly wish to see one, whom it is necessary he should banish from his recollection for ever V

Alfred impatiently interrupted her?—

"Not unless Laura Vincent has changed her mind, is it necessary!" he observed. "If, indeed, she no longer retains those sentiments towards me, she once so candidly and unaffectedly avowed, it were better we had never met again, for in absence I might still have been consoled by the flattering idea that though fate might divide us, our hearts and affections remained inseparable."

"And you the husband of another woman!" observed Laura, reproachfully. "No, Alfred! ever since we have been separated, I have been schooling my heart to regard you in no other character than as the husband of Miss Jefferson."





"Which before I would become I would perish!" interrupted Alfred, with vehemence. "No, Laura! you only will ever be my wife!"

"But your father,—your uncle!" said Laura, scarcely breathing from agitation, " they will never consent—"

"They know that I will not be forced into an union so abhorrent to my feelings," returned Alfred; " but I rest my hopes on a more secure foundation than the idea of being able to persuade Mr. Bernard into a concurrence with my wishes. Charlotte Jefferson dislikes me as much as I do her. She has, I am well convinced, formed some clandestine attachment, and it is her influence with her father that has protracted the necessity of my making the final declaration which I have determined on, that I will not marry her. I know that in this she consults less my feelings than her own, for she is dreadfully piqued at my insensibility to her charms, though she has candidly told me she would sooner die than become my wife. In fact, I have no reason to feel at all grateful for the decision which leaves me free, for I know that she is trying, by every means in her power, to ruin me in the opinion of her father (for so I suppose I must now call Mr. Bernard) in order to make her own cause good with him."

Laura heard this explanation with considerable emotion; for again it revived those hopes which she had considered it her duty to renounce for ever.. But she glanced her eye round their meanly furnished apartment,—she recalled to her memory the actual situation of her father, at that moment involved in the deepest disgrace, overwhelmed with poverty and sinking every day lower and lower, from the effects of his own imprudence and intemperance.





Tears of regret and deep humiliation, checked the speech in which she would have pointed out to Alfred the improbability that even his father, independent of their rich and unfeeling relative, Mr. Bernard, would ever agree to his espousing the portionless daughter of the ruined and dishonoured Vincent; and Alfred, conceiving that in discovering the retreat of his beloved he had overcome the principal difficulty, did not, or would not see aught that offered opposition to his wishes.

"How did you discover where we lived?" demanded Marianne, when tranquillity was a little more restored.

Alfred smiled.

"1 am indebted to your charms, Marianne," he replied; and, by the bye, I am very ungrateful to my friend Vernon, whose cause I promised to plead, and, in the fulness of my joy, should probably have forgotten, but that your question has reminded me that he is now awaiting, with the greatest impatience, the success of my negociation. Do you then, Marianne, compel him to utter despair, or will you allow him to plead his own cause at your feet?"

Marianne was astonished,—but Laura soon explained; and with equal candour and simplicity, the former desired Alfred to assure his friend that her heart was irrevocably given to another, and therefore she begged he would trouble her no more on the subject."





Alfred looked very grave?

* i do not wish to be intrusive or impertinent, Marianne," he observed, " but I take for granted that it is Julian Carleton to whom you refer, as the possessor of your valuable heart."

Marianne's silence and blushes only assented, and Alfred proceeded to ask if she had seen or heard from Julian lately.

She replied in the negative; and Laura, who instantly saw that something more than mere curiosity instigated Alfred's questions, added,—

"We have never seen Julian since that eventful day which released Marianne.from the intended marriage."

"Then I am sorry to pain your feelings," returned Alfred, "but it will be most fortunate if you never behold him again, for sorry I am to say, that his conduct has of late been such as to reflect the greatest disgrace on all connected with him."

Marianne sank, half fainting, on a chair; and Laura anxiously required Alfred to explain his meaning, and say from whence he had derived his intelligence; but her heart sank, and her countenance changed, as he proceeded to state, that Julian had left Mr. Austin in a most mysterious manner, and that the latter had soon after discovered that he had returned to his former associates, men of the most infamous character, but of whose pursuits he (Julian) had previously pleaded entire ignorance. Mr. Austin, he said, had been most unwilling to believe it possible that his late pupil, for whose welfare he was so anxious, could be so depraved, but he had at last had occular demonstration, having met him by accident at the house of a lady of fortune, but old enough to be his mother, who had been foolish enough to conceive an attachment for him, and would have certainly married him, had not Mr. Austin exposed to her his real character, and the certain ruiu that must result to her from a connexion with one who was the voluntary companion of thieves and swindlers. In consequence of this exposure Julian had been dismissed from the lady's favor with contempt; and so apprehensive was she of the consequence of his having been familiar with her house and affairs, and therefore, might, with his abandoned companions, take some advantage of it, that she had actually gone off to Brighton, to get out of his way."





Julian abandoned and depraved in his habits!— Julian false to his vows to her, and addressing an old woman for the sake of her money!—Marianne would not, she could not believe it; and trembling between passion and terror, she loudly declared that it was all a fabrication, and only invented to ruin Julian in her estimation.

"Is it thus that your friend Mr. Vernon thinks to ingratiate himself with me V she observed, with a look of keen reproach.

Alfred assured her that she was mistaken. Vernon knew not that such a person as Julian Carleton existed ; he had but lately arrived from Cambridge, and he appealed to Laura if she did not recollect his having often spoken of Frederic Vernon, whom he expected would visit London for many months before he did so.

Laura acknowledged that she had often heard him speak of his friend, and regret his absence ; but she hinted she should never have recognized, in the exquisite gentleman, who had introduced himself so unseasonably to her and Marianne, a single characteristic of the young man whom he had described as his intimate friend and associate.





"A large fortune which has fallen to Vernon's lot, has, I allow, not improved him;" returned Alfred, "but believe me, he is incapable of acting as Marianne insinuates. In feet, he knows not that he has a rival for having learnt, from indisputable authority, Julian's total unworthiness of the place he has hitherto held into her affections, I thought it best when Vernon came to confide his penchant to me and gladden me with the news of your retreat, to be silent on the subjeet."

"From whom, then did you hear this dreadful intelligence V demanded Laura, while Marianne Lid her face in despair. ,i

"From Mr. Austin himself," returned Alfred. "I went there in hopes of discovering, through Julian, whither you had retired, but he was gone; and after some hesitation, which seemed to be occasioned by the remains of strong attachment to his unworthy pupil, the kind-hearted apothecary imparted to me all that 1 have told you."

Marianne sobbed violently .during this recital; and Alfred, compassionating her situation, almost repented that he had been so unreserved in his communication.

Laura also was deeply affected, for independent of her sympathy in her beloved sister's feelings, she had ever regarded Julian with the affection of a sister;— she had felt proud of his talents and integrity; and even the rashness and imprudence which had made him an alien to her father's house, and thrown him, unprotected, upon the world, to carve his own fortune, had rather added to than diminished her admiration of his spirit and independent mind.





To find him., therefore, so utterly lost and abandoned as Alfred represented him, was worse than to have heard he was dead: and, in her deep sorrow for this event, Laura almost forgot the satisfaction she derived from Alfred^ presence and repeated vows of everlasting constancy.

Marianne was still drowned in tears, and deaf to the voice of consolation, when the well-known rap at the door proclaimed their brother Edward's approach, and trembling at the insults with which she knew he would load the unhappy Marianne, Should he discover the cause of her grief, Laura persuaded her to retire- to her chamber, while, with ill-concealed agitation, she prepared to admit him.

"Where's your father ?" he exclaimed, as he entered with his usual roughness, " and what were you about, that you kept me so long at the door?"

Laura replied that her father was absent; and at this moment Edward discovered who was the person who, with his hand extended, advanced towards him.

"Good God! Mr. Huntly!" he exclaimed, starting back and turning pale, but instantly recollecting himself, he added, " I am very happy to see you, though I little expected it would ever be our lot to meet under such circumstances," and he cast a look of mortified pride round the confined apartment and its scanty furniture.

"Pshaw! what does it matter, Ned f" returned Alfred, with a good-humoured smile, " at what time or place friends meet? we shall all five, I trust, to rejoice in this re-union; but I am angry, very angry with you for the deception you have practised towards me,—Did you not assure me that your sisters were many miles from London, when I last saw you." "At the time I said so they were,'' returned Edward, "Laura will tell you that they were even on board the vessel which was to «onvey them to America."





"Then blessed be the event, whatever it was, that brought them back !" exclaimed Alfred," though 1 would have followed them to the uttermost ends of the earth.''

Laura blushed deeply, for she was convinced from this speech, thajt Alfred was but imperfectly acquainted with her father's disgrace; and Edward seeming also solicitous to change the subject, enquired after the rest of the Huntly family.

Alfred replied that they were all well; and the conversation then took a desultory turn, though the latter, as his eyes fondly followed Laura, while she was employed in preparing the tea, which her brother requested her to make, as he was tired to death, more than once seemed to forget every thing but his happiness in being reunited to the object of his ardent affection.

A violent head-ache was the excuse for Marianne's not joining them at the tea-table; and Alfred, fully comprehending Laura's intelligent glance, was totally silent respecting what had passed previous to Edward's arrival.

The time passed swiftly away. Edward Vincent was in better humour than Laura ever remembered to have seeu him, though he occasionally seemed lost in deep thought: but his questions respecting his father's absence grew more importunate as the evening advanced, and Laura was at length compelled to acknowledge that he was often in the habit of remaining absent the whole night, and in fact had not at the present time been at home tor two days.





Edward bit his lips with vexation; and Alfred expressed his surprise that Mr. Vincent should be so thoughtless as to leave Laura and her sister so totally unprotected.

"But you have a servant of course, have you not?" he observed, with an enquiring look.

Laura replied evasively that their servant had recently left them, and Edward, darting a look of anger at his sister, observed,—

"Then why do you not get another? I am sure your father does not object to it."

Laura could have said much on the subject, but she restrained her feelings; and, after waiting in vain till nearly midnight for Mr. Vincent's return, Alfred, with reluctance, took his leave, and with Edward, who had several times shewed signs of impatience at being detained so long, departed.

Hopeless of her father's return, Laura retired, but not to rest: for Marianne's bitter lamentations at the conviction of Julian's unworthiness, combined with her regrets and the various feelings which her unexpected interview with Alfred had aroused in her bosom, effectually banished sleep from her pillow: and at an early hour she arose, and was in the act of opening the shutters, when she, to her utter astonishment, beheld on the opposite side of the street the very person who had chiefly occupied her thoughts for so many hours.

It was Julian who darted across the street towards her; but all Alfred's assertions were fresh in her. memory, and shuddering at what might be the conscquences, should his arts entangle Marianne in his snares, she hastily retreated and closed the door before he reached her, leaving him in doubt whether it was her he beheld, and totally unsuspicious that she had recognized and purposely avoided him.





Scarcely had Julian disappeared, before Laura had reason to congratulate herself on her prudence in avoiding him, for Mr. Vincent almost immediately knocked at the door, bearing in his whole appearance but too evident marks of the scenes of intemperance in which he had been passing his time, and with all his usual asperity, encreased to absolute ferociousness by the reproaches of his conscience, the irritation consequent upon drunkenness, and the prospect which stared him in the face, of not being able long to avoid the complete ruin which his own imprudence was daily accelerating.

To Laura's gentle enquiries whether he had breakfasted, he returned a surly negative : adding, after a few minutes' pause,—

"I suppose you want money to get breakfast."

Afraid of avowing that she had money, Laura hesitatingly replied in the affirmative; and throwing halfa-crown on the table, he observed that he supposed that was all she wished to see him come home for.

Laura burst into tears at this unjust accusation ; and as soon as she was able to speak, replied with considerable animation,—

"No, sir, I wish to see you for your own sak«, rather than mine."

"My own sake! what do you mean by that?" returned the surly tyrant, " dont let me hear any more of those insinuations, or I w*»nt oome back at all the next time. What right have you to make any remarks on my absence."'





Laura suppressed the reply that was rising to her lips, and busied herself in preparing the breakfast, while her father, after muttering for a long time about insolence and extravagance, neither of which qualities Laura thought could appertain to her, at length, overcome with fatigue and heaviness, fell asleep, and the kiud-hearted girl instantly stole up to Marianne's chamber, with the tea and toast which she had prepared for her.

Marianne had heard her father's voice, and trembled at the idea of meeting him in her present low spirits: she, therefore, acquiesced in Laura's proposal, that she should, under the plea of illness, keep her room for the remainder of the day ; and congratulating herself that she had thus prevented the possibility of her sister's descrying Julian, should he return in the course of the day, Laura returned to the breakfast-table, and quietly awaited her father's awakening.

After sleeping nearly two hours, he awoke somewhat better tempered, and Laura, who expected every moment to see Alfred Huntly appear, ventured, while he was drinking his tea, to inform him that he had called the preceding day.

Mr. Vincent did not look displeased, though he was greatly surprised: but after a few moment's silence, he said, without glancing at his daughter,—

"Pray is Alfred married yet?"

Laura replied in the negative; and Mr. Vincent added,—

"Nor is it likely to be, I suppose, at least to the Creole."





Laura hesitatingly replied, she believed not. "You believe not;—you ought to know, I should think before you encourage him to come here," observed her father. "1 tell you what Laura,'' he continued, after a long pause, " It is no use to deceive you, both you and Marianne must hit upon some means of supporting yourselves soon, for I find it impossible that 1 can do it. If, therefore, you can make sure of this young man, dont let the opportunity slip, for it's your last chance I can assure you."

A deep flush of indignation banished from Laura's cheeks the paleness which the outset of her father's address had fixed there, and in a low voice, but with firmness, she said—

"I can never take advantage of Alfred Huntly's generous attachment to—"

"You are a fool, a d d fool," exclaimed Mr.

Vincent with violence. "What! have you not suffered enough already for your romantic notions ? but act as you like: I tell you, and I swear it, that want, absolute starvation," (and he seized her by the arm, and lowered his voice, while his features became almost convulsed with agitation,) "yes, downright starvation, will be your lot, unless you can help yourself."

Laura trembled as she withdrew herself from his grasp, but she did not lose her recollection or her firmness.

"Whatever may be my fate," she observed, "it shall never be embittered by the consciousness of having deserved it."

Mr. Vincent uttered a vehement execration of her folly, but he was interrupted by her observation,—

"That is Alfred at the door, I know his knock; shall I admit him V





"Admit him! yes, certainly, to be sure,'' returned Mr. Vincent, smoothing his brow, and endeavouring to banish from his countenance all traces of-his recent violence.

Alfred entered, and Mr. Vincent received him with such cordiality of manner, and threw such a plaintiveness into his voice, and so much real or affected humiliation into his looks, that the former forgot all the dislike with which he had formerly regarded him, and the neglect with which it was evident he treated his children in his wish of consoling him for the reverse of fortune under which he was suffering.

Laura's looks betrayed the contending feelings which still heaved her bosom, but Alfred conjecturing it to arise from the communication which he had the preceding day made respecting Julian, did not seem to entertain a suspicion of the real cause, and he exerted himself to the utmost to create a smile on the lovely face which was pallid alike from the retrospection of the past as from the fears of the future.





CHAPTER THE THIRTY-SECOJfD.



"Stern and erect his brow was raised,

Whate'er the grief his soul avow'd,

He would not shrink before the crowd."



Btrok.

WE left Julian just about to commence bis probation in the new way of life which he had embraced. During the evening, or rather morning, for their vigils had extended long beyond the space to which the former denomination is generally applied, and while engaged over the mirth-inspiring bowl, many of the prejudices and secret forebodings with which he had engaged in the scheme had vanished, or at least been greatly softened, but with the morning came sober reflection ; and, as Julian viewed the care-worn faces and tune-worn garb of most of his new associates who were assembled in the room appropriated to their use, when he descended from his chamber, he felt that it needed all Richard Stanfield's enthusiasm to reconcile him to so precarious a life.

Richard, however, was most sanguine in his predictions that his friend would attain to the very highest pinnacle of histrionic fame, and Mr. Lamp appeared equally convinced of the merit of his new acquisition





though he conceived it necessary at the same time to throw in some hints which his long acquaintance, as he observed, with the business, warranted,

Julian at first received these hints in good part, but he felt somewhat surprised at their frivolity, and he at last felt greatly relieved, when Stan fie Id proposed taking him out to see the town, and he got rid of his sage preceptor.

"Well! you see 'how merrily we live that soldiers be !'" observed Richard, as arm in arm they strolled down the principal street.

Julian replied by a cold affirmative, and Richard stared in his face as if he wished to read there the ;cause of his apparent indifference. The fact was, that Julian had that moment espied, and been mutually recognized by his fellow-traveller, the very man who had spoken so emphatically contemptuous of the players and their appurtenances to boot, and the stare of surprise with which the latter glanced from him to Stanfield at once proclaimed his recognition of the latter, and the consequent alteration of his sentiments towards his fellow-traveller.

At this moment the young man was joined by two of his acquaintances, and the. only half-suppressed titter which reached Julian's ear in a moment sent the proud blood in torrents to his cheeks.

Richard beheld with surprise the glances of defiance which his usually pacific young friend shot forth towards the insolent trio who were standing in the very middle of the path-way, apparently determined to intercept their passage; and, in alarm, he whispered—

*' For heaven's sake, Julian, do you know these men ?—Do not affront them, one is the son of the magistrate who has given us licence.'*"- ;-: l"





"I do not care if he is the son of the king of Eng* land !" returned Julian, indignantly, " I will not be insulted by any one with impunityJ...-> i...

"Nonsense! come this way I tell you; only let me speak a few words to you calmly, Julian. You would not wish to ruin yourself at once, would you?" and Richar'd still endeavoured to force Julian across the street, while the latter, still keeping his intelligent eye fixed with proud disdain on the laughing trio, as resolutely persevered in keeping on his straight unbending course. .. i

"Good morning, gentlemen," said Riehard, findingi it useless to contend with his determined com* pan ion, and willing to compensate, by the politeness of his own address, for the sufficiently intelligent hauteur of the latter. "Good morning," he repeated; dragging by almost main force the unbending Julian past them. ' --.- . »-- - - »

No direct reply was made to Stanfield's civil salutation; but as if addressing him aside, one of the party observed- to -the former,— - -Sv * "'-—.'!

"A new importation, eh! Stanfiekl," winking at Julian. i- .. .I .... i i , - y.:

"Yes, sir, a London star;" returned Stanfield, in a low tone, "a particular friend of mine; who will oblige me by playing for my benefit." - --.

"Indeed! who is he?" demanded the young man, his saucy look softening into an oblique glance of curiosity. -' - - - i - - - - --. ii —

"Oh! that must remain a profound secret, because he is under strict engagement not to play; but I can promise you ar-treat,-" Will you take tickets?" and without moving a muscle of his counfehahce, he produced the cards fiwn.flis packet; »: nrn.v -u y.(





Each were now anxious to Secure admission jf -ah'd Stanfield pocketted the money fdr ten pit tickets, at the same time whispermg that he h^d but ftfw left to dispose of, as all who were in the secret, had-been beforehand. "- -n - "r:: f..m." :r.i\u - ,.1u-\ i:r-

Julian, in the mean time, had stood at a short distance, at once atigry. i-ohfouhded, and surprised-at-the sudden attraction visible in the looks of thetbrde strangers jaWd the total blHrdfiess» wbJcn»fris- friend- Richard had displayed to their former insults}- .;! -'':

"My fortune is made!" exclaimed the-latter, as soon as he rejoined him, " that is, Julian, if you will be resolute and true to me.". ,. ... - .

Julian required an explanation; -;;

"Well, then, only make it a condition of your engagement with bur manager, that ybfr shall play the first night for my benefit, only stick to that, and as I said before, my fortune is made."

Julian was willing to accede to any thing thaT woiitd advance his friend's interest; but-he could hot conceive how the appearance of such an unpretending novice as himself could be of such material consequence. "- -'"-- !.h"r-1'

* ieave it to me," returned Richarti; " to-make it so; only promise, or I dare noit pr6ceed» with niy scheme:**' "-' -.,i- -/ ] :h

Julian did promise; and he then, in intiighant ierm-s animadverted on the insolence of the persons they 'had just met, and declared that he-would knock tWe first man down, who dared to repeat the insults which he had in this instance borne for his (Stanfield's) sake.





And which you roust learn to bear for your own sake if you mean to get forward in your profession," observed Richard, coolly.

Julian's anger increased at this observation, and be declared he would sooner die than submit to any man.

"Psha! that is proper stuff!" returned Richard, "but hush; here comes my Juliet. Now prepare for a scene."

Two young ladies were now advancing towards them, the one a fresh-looking buxom girl, the other a little crooked damsel, but with a pretty interesting face, and a pair of dark eyes, that were by no means deficient in expression.

"Oh! were those eyes in Heaven,

They'd through the airy region shine so bright,

That birds would sing, and think it were—"



"'Oh! Romeo! Romeo !—wherefore art thou Romeo?'" interrupted the last mentioned young lady, before Stanfield could conclude his address. "Oh, Mr. Stanfield," she continued in a tender tone, "papa has heard that you were seen speaking to me the other night, and he vows he'll lock me up, if ever I have any thing to say to you again,"

Cruel inexorable man !" replied Stanfield, with great emphasis. "How could I exist, should he put in practice his harsh decree. No, adorable Rachel—" "Oh! dont caH me by that odious name; you know I cant bear it!" exclaimed the young lady. "But I dare not stop now. If you will be in the place we first met, at seven this evening, papa will be gone to his club,—and"





"Till then, adieu, most lovely of thy sex," interrupted Richard, who seemed glad to end the conference so quickly. " At seven," be continued, " I shall fly on the wings of love to my Zephalinda."

The young lady waved her hand with a graceful and tender air; and Richard scarcely able to contain his laughter, hurried Julian down the street, in an opposite direction to that which the ladies took.

"In the name of goodness, who is this romantic princess?" demanded Julian, as soon a9 they were out of hearing.

"One whom I mean to cure of romance, by making her my wife, in sober earnest, if I can but persuade her to it," returned Richard. * She is the only daughter of a rich old tradesman, and has three thousand pounds, independent of him, when she comes of age."

"Think of that, Master Page, think of that."

"Why it is worth thinking of, certainly," replied Julian, smiling, " but the incumbrance"

"Is a very trifling one," interrupted his friend. "She is a good-tempered, warm-hearted little soul, and if I could persuade her out of an idea she has imbibed, from the novels and romances she has studied, that a long siege is absolutely indispensable, and that no heroine yields till she has tried her lover's constancy in half a thousand different ways, I should have no fears of embarking on the voyage of matrimony with her to-morrow."

"And does she know your real situation?" demanded Julian, in surprise.

"Psha! I am a gentleman reduced in fortune, it is true, but of noble birth and great expectations. What further qualifications would you have for a hero of romance?" 1 f .-.;-- - »





"But surely the girl will nerter be so imprudent«" said Julian. . -.'1 - .

M Prudence is a quality which she despisfcs as much as I do; but no more dampers, my* dearfell 6w, for-! think my star is in the ascendant: and before another moon has filled her horns, the lovely Rachel——I beg her pardon, Zephalinda will be mine/'

Julian looked at him with astonishment. With such a face and figure, was it possible that he could be on the point of wedding a heiress? Yet he could not doubt the evidence of the soi-disant Zephalinda's eyes, and they had discoursed of love most intelligibly, in the short time that he had had an opportunity of observing her.

They returned home, and Julian, with great perseverance, commenced his study of the parts assigned for his first appearance by Richard, who took npou himself the office of Mentor,—they were those of young Marlow, in " She Stoops to Conquer," and Delaval, in "Matrimony.". . » .i.:.!. . r.....'

He was thus engaged when Mr. Lamp entered, and Richard had only time to whisper, " Remember your promise," before the litjtle great man commenced his attack, by hoping that Mr. Carleton would be induced to alter his determination, and allow him to announce him for the next night. .. , K, .> .

Mr. Carleton, however, was quite impenetrable, 4o all persuasions 5 and Mr. Lamp convinced, from what he had observed, of the strength of his new ally's At nances, that he should not be able to starve him into compliance, was obliged to concede the contested point and. agree that Mr. Stanfield's benefit should take place on the next but one playing night, as he expressed it.





Mr. Lamp next announced the arrival of the new lady, and Stanfield congratulating himself on this circumstance, also whispered to Julian,—

K Tliereis a tide in the affairs of men,

Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune."



"This, my friend, is the crisis of my fate, and, oh! ye gods! be but this once propitious; but pray Mr. Lamp—"

Mr. Lamp was gone, but he soon returned leading in the lady who was henceforth to be the prima donna of the establishment.

"Gentlemen, give me leave to introduce to you Miss AHingham. Madam, — Mr. Stanfield, — Mr. Carleton."

Julian, who had, at the moment she entered, stooped to pick up the book which had fallen under the table, now raised his head, and a mutual cry of surprise burst from both their lips.

"Julian!" exclaimed the lady.

"Mary—Miss Hamilton!" faltered Julian, " by what strange coincidence do we meet here?"

"Dear, dear, quite a scene I declare, never saw better acting in my life," muttered Mr. Lamp, rubbing his hands with pleasure.

Richard, however, though he had not at first recognized the beautiful lady whom he had once before seen in the coronetted carriage, was convinced there was no acting in the emotion which each had testified at the sight of the other, and naturally concluding that





ihe explanations, which must ensue, would be as well given without witnesses, he drew Mr. Lamp out of the room under pretext of consulting him on the only subject which he could comprehend,—some professional business.

For some minutes after they had left the room, surprise had so paralized all other sensations that neither could express themselves in coherent language, but at length, pleasure, at so unlooked and unhoped for an event, became the predominant feeling in Mary's breast; and with an expressive look at Julian, she said,—

"How unexpected is this happiness; but an hour since, and my chief and indeed only regret at the hasty step 1 had taken, was that in all propability it would separate us for ever; but fate has for once dealt kindly with me, and thus united me by new ties to the only one on earth, whose feelings are congenial with my own."

Julian made but a confused reply to this florid speech. He felt that he was by no means obliged to his destiny for having thus thrown in his way one whom he at once feared, despised, and yet felt it impossible to hate, or even behold with indifference.

Mary seemed to penetrate his feelings, and with tears of mingled passion and anguish, she exclaimed,—

"Fool that I am! how often am I to be reminded that the prudent discreet Julian Carleton can have no feelings in common with the unhappy being whose fervent gratitude to him can never be shaken, even by his coldness and cruelty.

"You are unjust, Mary," replied Julian, with warmth; "were I what you stile prudent or discreet, you would not now behold me here; but it is useless





*o "enter into a vindication for which there exists no veal necessity;—that I am your friend your own heart must tell you, though as yet I have had but few opportunities of proving it, the time may come when more than words shall convince you of it. But a truce to this subject. Tell me, (for I am still lost in amazement) how and with what views you are come hither?"

"According to all appearances, on the same errand as yourself," returned Mary, attempting to smSe; "to carve my way to fame and fortune. In plain terms, I am engaged lo be the heroine to your hero, for I understood from the manager that a Mr. Carleton was to make his debut on the same night as myself. My heart beat when he mentioned the name, but I -thought it was egregious folly to suppose it could be you, and, therefore, was as little prepared to see yoo, when I entered the room, as if I had u ever heard the «ame.".

"But how came you to renounce the—the"

faltered Julian.

"Rather wonder," interrupted Mary, with anima-tion " how I ever embraced such a life, or how I have «o long sustained it. No, Julian; think of me as you will, despise me as you will, bo assured Mary Hamilton was never born to be the mereeuary slave of a wretch. But I will not say all I could on this subject;—you ask me how I came Itfre,—accident introduced me to a person, who was a kind of -agent to this man, this Mr. Lamp. He fancied I had talents, and I was struck with the opportunity of not only emancipating myself from my bondage, but possibly attaining fame and independence. The terms which he proposed were not very splendid, but as I ftni in.no want of ready money, and k may lead the way to something better, I resolved to accept bis proposition. 1 should say, most happy am I that I did so; but 1 fear I should be selfish, fpr that brow of anxious reflection tells me, that you do not feel your happiness increased by a circumstance that would compensate to me for every privation end care which may ensue from the life I have chosen."





Julian felt happy that he was released from the necessity of a reply to this home-thrust, by the entrance of Stanfield, and Mary had just time to whisper, remember my lame is Allingham henceforward, before he approached, and with peculiar significance congratulated Julian on having the advantage of a prior claim on the friendship of a lady to whom he himself hoped hp should shortly be better known.

No one mot e fully possessed than Mary Hamilton the power of assuming that dignified reserve, which, without any apparent effect, checks and awes a too familiar intruder into his proper station, and never was the effects of that power more visible than in the present instance, -for Richard, in spite of all his assurance and his fancied understanding on the subject of Julian's intimacy with the lady in question, shrunk back abashed, and forgot all the jokes which he would have levelled at their a- propos meeting, and the scenes which would for tUe future in all probability unite their feelings and interest. .v .

The care of the manager had secured Miss Allingham, as she was now to be called, a tolerably decent lodging, and thither Julian attended her, while Stanfield, after an explanatory whisper, proceeded to keep his appointment with his Zepbalinda.





The woman, who, by the inducement of nearly double the rent her room had ever fetched before, and a month in advance, bad been prevailed on to take a profane play actress into her house, looked very sour at Julian; but he soon relieved her of the evident constraint which his presence inflicted, und wishing Mary every happiness and comfort, departed: and once more sat down to his studies, which had been so unexpectedly broken in upon.

In a short time Richard returned ; and, after testifying his surprise at finding him there, he whispered,—

"Give me joy, my boy, the day's^y own,—the lovely Blouselinda—Zounds! what am 1 saying. Zephalinda's mine."

"Indeed," replied Julian, " this is something sudden, is it not? but how is it to be achieved? you will of course he obliged to give up your engagement, and that will be a sad derangement of all my plans."

"Oh, never fear; I have got something in my eye: besides it can't take place till after my benefit and your debut, for the very cogent reason that I've got no money, so I must make a grand push, get all I can at my benefit, and then, hey! for Gretna-green. It wouldn't do, you know,-to be obliged to ask one's Caro at the very outset for money, though 1 know the little . puss has got plenty."

A Julian thought it would be very mortifying at any "iBjjgwol the proceedings, but he did not wish to .damp ins companion's spirits, and he, therefore, only replied, by wishing him success and happiness.

The eventful night af length came; and Julian, with anxious trepidation, made his first bow to the audience. Stanfield's stratagem had succeeded to his tnV most wishes, the house was crammed full, and every eye was anxiously fixed in expectation of the veteran London Star, who was to eclipse all the bumble efforts of the strollers. Mary had previously made her appearance-, and her elegant figure, the beauty of her features, and the splendour of her dress had procured her unbounded favour; but poor Julian had no such resources to rely on, for he was not vain enough to place any reliance on the' manager's assurances that bis appearance would be quite sufficient to ensure him success. He was, therefore, astonished when the moment he made his entrk he was saluted with thunders of applause; but, instead of inspiring him with confidence, he was s.o disconcerted by this reception, that had not Stanfield (who, in the character of Tony Lumpkin, was on the stage with him) entreated him to summon up all his resolution, and given him the cue, he must have failed in the attempt to deliver his first speech.





The play, however, proceeded, and he recovered gradually his self-possession, though be could not avoid hearing the sound of voices in earnest contention in the front of the pit, and sometimes raised so high as to call forth universal reprobation from the audience.

It appeared that the noisy parties were engaged in deciding who the new actor really was. One lady, whohad recently returned from London, avering that she

knew him perfectly well, it was Mr. of Drury

Lane, the handsomest man on the boards. While«another was equally positive that she had seen all the principal performers at all the London theatres, and this gentleman was not one of them. The dispute was not confined to the ladies themselves, each had their friends wh6 espoused their opinion, and the arguments eft

K





'both sides ran so high that Julian's voice was not unfrequently drowned in the content.

The party which so confidently avered that he was

the handsome Mr. was by far the strongest, and

their opponents, enraged at the prospect of defeat, revenged themselves upon the unfortunate object of their contention, whom they declared an impostor, and no actor; and not satisfied with this swinging decision, they, on his next appearance, saluted him, before he could utter a word, with a tremendous hiss.

Appalled at so unexpected a tarn of affairs, Julian stood a moment motionless, while those, who, in his

supposed character of the handsome Mr. , espoused

his cause, endeavoured by the loudness and vehemence of their applause, to drown the unjust attack of his enemies; and as all the unprejudiced part of the audience were on the side of the plaudits, their opponents were, after some contest, silenced; and Julian, having recovered his self-possession, and become animated with the desire of convicting his enemies of prejudice and disingenuousness, proceeded with so much warmth and real feeling, that eventually be converted all but the lady, who still maintained the accuracy of her theatrical knowledge and judgment, into sincere admirers; and the announcement of Shakespeax's play of " As You Like it," the partof Orlando by the gentleman who had this night taken the character of Young Marlow, for the next evening's performance was received with shouts of approbation.

For the first time, Julian tasted the intoxicating draught of popular applause. All his doubts and fears and regrets were forgotten in the new delight he felt, and he retired, convinced in his own mind, that be had at length got into the right path to fame and fortune.





Impressed with these ideas, he did not at first observe the coolness with which he was received by his companions on his return to their general rendezvous, while, from Mary Hamilton, who appeared to rejoice more in his success than her own, he received tbe most sincere congratulations.

Richard Stanfield was absent,? and Julian rightly concluded that he was occupied with his Dulcinea in arranging the manner of their intended flight, and he would scarcely have missed him, had not he found that when Mary had retired to her lodgings, he could find no one who appeared willing to enter into conversation with him, or who did not appear to shrink from speaking of the occurrences of the evening with contempt.

Totally unable to comprehend the motives of this reserve, and with a mind too pure to suggest that those who had so kindly encouraged the novice, could be suffering the pangs of envy and jealousy at his unexpected success, Julian, after the first emotion of surprise, relinquished the attempt of conciliating them, and, as soon as he had fmished his supper, retired to bed, where, with the sound of clapping hands, and reiterated bravos in his ears, he slept, till awakened by his friend Stanfield, who could not wait till morning to utter his congratulations, and impart his own flattering prospects.

"Two little days, my friend," he exclaimed, " and the lovely—Psha '. I mean the wealthy Zephalinda will be mine. I shall once more have the pleasure of witnessing your triumph ; yes, for your sake and poor Mr. Lamp's, (who would be ruined by my desertion) 1 shall go through with my character of Jaques; and then, when the mimic scene is closed, commences my adventures. A post-chaise is to be in waiting at the end of the lane, my inamorata will be at the theatre, and, instead of returning to her father, is to pretend that she will sleep at her friend's, the plump, cherry-cheeked damsel whom you saw with her. By the bye, Julian, as Mrs. Page says, in the * Merry Wives of Windsor,' if it were not for one trifling respect, you might come to such honour ;—the aforesaid damsel is in love with you, as the fat old knight says,—' I can construe the uction of her familiar style, and the hardest voice 'of her behaviour, to be English'd rightly, is,—I am Julian Carleton's!' Now if you could but resolve to cast away certain recollections, ' of no use to any one but the owner', and would make a guarrelletto of our matrimonial duet"





** Psha!" interrupted Julian," go on with your own story, and dont talk nonsense."

"Nonsense! why she has five or six hundred pounds at her own disposal, and a reversion to—''

"If she had the whole world in reversion," interrupted Julian, " it would not make the slightest impression on me, even were the girl so foolish as to indulge the ideas you represent, which I do not believe.'' "Oh, the father! how modest you are. But it is wasting time and good words to talk to you: so 1 will only tell you that you will miss a good opportunity of making your fortune; for as sure as eggs are eggs, you may persuade her to go off with you."

Julian uttered an impatient " tut \" and Stanfiekl dropt the subject, and fell asleep.





The intermediate days, before Julian's second appearance, were devoted to study his new character; and he made no observations ; in fact, he scarcely observed the coolness with which he was viewed by all but the manager and Stanfield; but when they, as usual, attended rehearsal, he was struck with surprise at tbe impediments which they attempted to throw in his way, instead of (as in the first instance) affording him assistance and encouragement.

Stanfield smiled when he mentioned his observations to him.

"They cannot pardon your success," he observed, ** had you failed, they would have all sympathized with you, and have been for the most part sincere in their pity, as it is, they detest you, and I warn you to beware for you know not the lengths to which envy and jealously of superior talents will carry people."

Julian could scarcely believe that he could have excited this feeling, but he smilad at the idea of being on his guard against the effects of -such a trifling passion as this must be, though it perhaps increased his emulation to prove that he was not unworthy of the favour he had met with.

Again he was welcomed on the stage by the applause of a crowded house, and, with a heart swelling with gratified pride, he went through his first scene in a style that surprised even his partial friend Stanfield.

In the wrestling scene, he achieved his conquest so much to the satisfaction of the audience, who, for the most part, were probably better judges of this kind of merit than any other, that the house echoed with cheers; but they had scarcely subsided ere two men whom Julian did not recognize as belonging to the establish





waent, as Mr. Lamp would have styled it, rushed forward, and seized him roughly by the collar. Startled, yet unable to comprehend the motives of this attack Julian hastily endeavoured to free himself from their grasp, while a part of the audience supposing this a new claim upon their favour, renewed their vociferations.

"it's no use, young fellow!'' exclaimed one of his assaulters, " we've got you safe enough, so come along; d'ye hear ?»'

"Who are you? what do you want with me?'' demanded Julian with indignation.

"Oh! we know you well enough, Master CarleIon," returned one of the men, " and you know us too; it ar'nt the first time 'we've met, though you've given us a long dance after you this time.''

Julian's unfortunate destiny had rendered him but too familiar with the myrmidons of (he law not to recognize, in these rude intruders, some gentry of that description, yet scarcely could he believe the evidence of his senses that he could be the object they sought.

"What am I charged with?" he exclaimed with violence, M -or by what authority am I thus treated I"

During this parley, the manager, ever recollectful of the propriety of the stage effect, had contrived to lower the curtain, while he stepped before to apologize for aa occurrence which must necessarily curtail their entertainment, though he could neither comprehend or explain the causes of it.

Symptoms of disapprobation were very unequivocal during this stammering attempt at apology, and, at its conclusion, the uproar became universal. "What has 4he young fellow done f Let him fmish the play!" was the general cry: and, at length, finding no answer given to their remonstrances, some of the most determined jumped upon the stage; they were followed by others; and, in a moment, Julian found himself surrounded by a crowd, all anxiously enquiring the cause of his seizure, and expostulating with the officers that they might as well have let him gone through the play.





"Yes, and given him an opportunity of playing harlequin with us," observed ene of the officers rudely, "and gone neck and heels through a window, or some other juggling trick, and 1 wonder what we should have got by it. No, no, young man; you must play the rest of the play in Newgate. So make haste, and get your toggery together!"

The proud consciousness of innocence had usurped the place of that consternation which had at first paralysed Julian's every nerve, and with a calmness that seemed to excite universal surprise, he began to pull off his theatrical dress, at the same time requesting Stan field, who stood quivering with terror, and looking the image of despair, to bring him his clothes, as the gentlemen seemed unwilling to trust him to fetch them himself.

Now it was that Julian beheld verified the effect which his friend had described of his previous success, on the narrow and jaundiced minds of his companions: every eye beamed with triumph and exultation at his fall; and while the manager continued to mutter his despair at the ruin of his establishment, a contemptuous smile passed from one to another, and a shrug of the shoulders accompanied the pretended consolation, that somebody might be found to supply Mr, Carle ton's place.





Julian uttered not a single word: his cheek from which he wiped the paint, which had given additional lustre to his eyes, and expression to his features, was deadly pale; but his fair, open brow was more erect and expanded than ever: it seemed to invite the inspection of those who were intently observing him, and to defy their suspicions.

At length all was ready for their departure Julian wrung his friend Stanfield's hand, and was leaving him without uttering another word, when the recollection of Mary Hamilton suddenly darted into his mind, and turning to Stanfield, he said, id a low voice,—

"Is Mary acquainted with this event?"

Stanfield did not know; and Julian, though unable to account for not seeing her, felt glad that hw was relieved from the painful ceremony ttf parting with her under such circumstances.

At the moment he was stepping into the chaise (which it appeared was ready in waiting at the door of the theatre) he recollected his portmanteau; and turning to one of his conductors, demanded if he could not take it With him.

* Oh, you needn't consatn yourself about that. It's safe, strapped on behind."

Julian felt surprised, but he said no more; and that moment, as he put his head through the window to repeat his adieu to Stanfield, the Words "Forgery," and " Forged Note," circulating through the crowd, struck on his ear.

"He is innocent, 1 would forfeit my life!" exclaimed Stanfield, vehemently.

The carriage rolled on, and Julian heard no More:





but the words he had heard were sufficient to petrify him. For some moments he felt as if he were choking, but at length subduing his emotion, he said, calmly,

"Of what crime am I accused? there can be no necessity, I suppose, now for mystery."

"Oh, no! there's no mystery about it," returned one of his companions. "I dare say you know all about itc You dont recollect, I dare say, getting nine pounds odd, good money, for a piece of paper not worth one farthing V

"I do not know what you mean," returned Julian, with unfeigned astonishment.

"Well, then," said the other man, who appeared much more civil than his companion, " in plain terms, Mr. Carleton, you are accused of having knowingly uttered a forged note of the value of ten pounds. Your connexion with a notorious gang of men, who have for three or four years been defrauding the public, is but too well known, and I am sorry to say that the proofs in this casenre so strong that I am afraid it will go hard with you, without you can give a good account how you came possessed of the note."

"I never changed or had but one ten pound note in my possession," returned Julian, as soon as the horror and surprise he felt at this explanation would allow him to speak, " and that was sejit to me in a blank cover, I know not by whom."

It was too dark for Julian to distinguish the expression of his companion's faces as he said this, but the entire silence of the one, and the significant" hem" of the other, sufficiently betrayed to bim how little credit was gh^en to his assertions; and shuddering with horror and despair at the abyss which appeared to open before him, he threw himself back in the corner of the carriage, and uttered not another word.:





"Do you know that your old friends Stuart, Ryland and Crawford are all in custody ?"- demanded one of the men, after a short pause. <

Julian started almost off his seat, " Good heavens! for what?" he exclaimed, in accents of terror.

"Psha! as if you did not know very well!" returned the man, in an incredulous tone. "Do you think we are so green as to believe that you were not up to their tricks?"

Julian's scorn and indignation at this broad insinuation kept him silent; and during the remainder of their hasty journey, he forbore as much as possible, all intercourse with these men, whose prejudice and preconceived opinion of his guilt, rendered it impossible for them to give an impartial hearing to his assertions.

For some hours his mind was a chaos of conflicting feelings; at one moment relying on the consciousness of perfect innocence to dissipate the dark clouds which now hung over him; at the next, shuddering at the snare in which he was entangled so fast that he saw no possibility of escape. From himself, his thoughts wandered to Marianne Vincent, and fervently he thanked God that she was removed beyond the probability of hearing of his wretchedness.

Even she would, perhaps, scarcely believe it possible that I am innocent, he mentally exclaimed, while a burning blush rushed into his pale cheeks at the bare idea that Marianne could be brought to despise him, and an involuntary groan escaped his lips; but he soon conquered these symptoms of agitation, and endeavoured to resolve upon what was most advisable to be done in his situation.





He knew not a single friend to whom he could apply for assistance. Mr. Austin, indeed, came into his thoughts, but the sickening conviction that his mind was poisoned by the misconceptions of the cause of his (Julian's) quitting him, effectually prevented any application to him.

"He would, perhaps, confirm the accusation of my persecutors," thought Julian, " and add his testimony to crush me to the ground."

The morning dawned, and found Julian still irresolute and wretched; but want of rest and refreshment, added to his evening's exertions and the fatigue of the journey, at length overcame the disorder ofhisttlmd, and he sank into a deep sleep, from which he did not awake, till the meridian sun was beaming in all its lustre, and he found himself rattling over the stones of London.





CHAPTER THE THIRTY-THIRD.



"And what is she ?—

A lady of " a certain age," which means,

Certainly aged.—What her years might be,

I know not."



Byron.

FOR several weeks Marianne Vincent continued to droop under the conviction that all her hopes of happiness were for ever blasted by the worthlessness of him on whom her heart doated, while Laura suffered both for her sister and herself. Alfred continued his visits, and Mr. Vincent seemed somewhat restrained from the habits he had of late indulged in, by his presence.

But although this was a most desirable circumstance, and although Alfred's affection seemed not only unshaken, but increased by the difficulties that had prevented its consummation, still Laura was unhappy. She felt degraded in thus receiving Alfred's clandestine visits, for though he tried to evade the subject, various circumstances combined to prove that he was desirous of preventing his intercourse with them from coming to the knowledge of his family.





There were times, too, when in despite of his usually cheerful habits and manners, a deep gloom would overspread his features, and involuntary sighs betray the uneasiness of his mind. While, instead of, as at first, speaking with positiveness and decision of his union with Laura as an event near at hand, he now only spoke of his hopes, and declared that without her life would be a misery to him.

In vain, however, did Laura endeavour to reason with him on the folly and uselessness of indulging hopes and wishes which it appeared very plain it was highly improbable could ever be realized.

"I could never consent," Alfred, she one day observed, " nor could you, I am well convinced, ever wish me to enter into your family clandestinely, and what chance can there be, even if your uncle, which you seem to think possible, should renounce his project of marrying you to his daughter, what probability can there exist that your father and mother would be brought to consent to your uniting your fate with one so destitute as me."

Alfred could not but acknowledge that it was scarcely probable his parents should be so disinterested; and he even went farther, he owned that his own prospects were not such as to render it advisable to act in-contradiction to his friends; yet he could not bear, he said, to hear Laura so coolly speculate on possibilities, and talk of submission to his fate, as if her own feelings and happiness was not blended with his.

Laura's tearful eyes and glowing cheeks bore witness that, however she might for his sake, endeavour to persuade him to submission, she deeply felt and





lamented the painful necessity, but Alfred's impetuosity restrained her from giving vent to those feelings, and she endeavoured to give a turn to the conversation, by speaking of Marianne's situation, and lamenting at once the dreadful depression that had succeeded her first violent anguish and the unhappy cause of it.

At Laura's request, Alfred had waited on Mr. Austin, to learn if he knew the present situation of his supposed unworthy pupil; but Mr. Austin could only say that Julian had suddenly left his apartments, to which he had accidentally traced him, and that he understood it was with the intention of going into the country.

Laura was surprised at this information: she knew that Julian had not, when he left her father's house, a single connexion or even acquaintance out of London, but she sighed, as she reflected that he might have formed many since that period.

The conversation was interrupted by the entrance of Mr. Vincent, accompanied, to Laura's great surprise, by an elderjy woman, whom he, not without some apparent confusion, introduced as Mrs. Briggs, an old friend, whom he had not seen for some years.

"Ah! it's a good many years, indeed, Eddard—

Mr. Vincent, I mean, since you and I Well, to be

sure, time does pass away, like as if-so-be it had wings, as they say; why Betsy will be twenty-nine, come next Febevery, aud yet it seems but t'other day since you and I was boy and gal, as one may say. So this is your eldest darter; she's taller by a head than Betsy: but she's something like her about the eyes and complexion."

Laura turned a somewhat sarcastic look upon Alfred but the garrulous lady did not seem to observe it, and sbe continued,-.—





"My Betsy and her will be nice company for one another, for I assure you she's had the best of educations: my poor Mr. Briggs was as fond of her as if she had been twenty times his own, and he spared no expence to make a lady of her."

Mr. Vincent had blushed up to the ears for his old acquaintance, during this speech; and Laura pitying her father's evident confusion, though she could not comprehend why he should feel so deeply as he appeared to do on so slight an occasion, endeavoured to give a turn to the conversation, by asking Alfred if there was any news.

"Lord! you should have my Betsy to tell you the news," interrupted the indefatigable Mrs. Briggs, "she reads- all the news in the paper every morning, and I often tells her her head's like an almanac, for she remembers every thing that's happened all the year round."

During this and several similar speeches, which seemed to place Mr. Vincent in purgatory, Laura was occupied in surveying and trying to guess what or who this friend of her father's younger days could be.

She was a short thick woman, with a pair of confident black eyes, and features that might once have been handsome, but their beauty was now greatly obscured by a scorbutic eruption, which gave her a most flaming appearance, and had enlarged her nose to nearly twice its natural size; the loss of all her front teeth, too, was no improvement to the beauty of a rather wide mouth; and her hands, from which she had carefully drawn a pair of white silk gloves, which she deposited in her pocket as soon as she was seated from their coarse and ruddy appearance, betokened that she had not led a very idle life.





Her dress was suitable to her looks:—rich, yet gaudy; expensive, yet without the smallest pretensions to gentility or elegance.

A green sarsnet gown, flowered with deep black lace, was relieved by a silk shawl, boasting all the colours of the rainbow: and a handsome leghorn bonnet was disfigured by being loaded with a tawdry ribbon, while from the side hung, what appeared from the manner it was put on, to be a very useless appendage, a rich black lace veil.

Such was the lady for whom Mr. Vincent appeared by his depecrating looks at his daughter, to be particularly interested; and the latter, though she could scarcely suppress a smile at the heterogeneous jumble of finery and vulgarity, suppressed her feelings out of respect to the parent who little deserved it at her hands.

"Well, and pray where's your sister, miss?" enquired Mrs. Briggs. "I've seen your brother afore, so I know that young gentleman ar'n't him; but 1 suppose if he ar'n't akin now, he will be some day!*— He, he! he!"

Laura blushed and sighed as she replied, that her sister was too unwell to leave ber room.

"Well, then, I must go and see her there arter tea, I spose," observed Mrs. Briggs, with the greatest composure.

Laura started.

Could it be possible that this was an invited guest, and that her father expected her to wait on this igno





rant and vulgar being, this Mrs. Briggs! and prepare her tea.

Hitherto she had felt no degradation in the menial offices she had been obliged to submit to: she had even performed them cheerfully, and had prided herself on the consciousness that her father had never had reason to complain of neglect or inconvenience from the deprivation of his servants; but she recoiled from the idea of appearing in so humble a light to this new or rather old acquaintance of her father's, and her expressive countenance assumed somewhat of the disdain she felt, when Mrs. Briggs observed that she hoped miss wouldn't make no stranger of her, but do just the same as if she (Mrs. Briggs) was not there.

"You need not put yourself to any extra trouble, Laura," observed Mr. Vincent, with a look between mortification and reproach.

Alfred arose, and walked to the window, participating in all Laura's feelings, and enraged at her father for having caused them; and then, as if determined he at least would not be a witness of her humiliation, he caught up his hat, and hastily wished Mr. Vincent good evening.

"Will you not stay to tea ?',' demanded the latter, while the lady, in a tone of pique, observed that she hoped she didn't drive the gentleman away.

Without making any reply to either of these observations, Alfred darted out of the room, and seizing Laura's hand, who had followed him to the door, he exclaimed,—

"Laura, this must be altered. I foresee that this is but the beginning of humiliation and vexation; but something must be done, and that quickly, to relieve you from this situation."





Laura shook her head with a desponding smile ;— and haying first visited Marianne, and described to her the unpleasant visitor her father had brought home with him, she proceeded to the kitchen, to prepare tea.

While thus employed, some broken sentences reached her ear from the next room, (which was only divided by a thin wainscot) which excited at once surprise and curiosity in her mind, and induced her to pay more attention to what was passing between her father and his old acquaintance than she would otherwise have done.

"Why, as to what you say, Eddard" returned the lady, in reply to some observation of Mr. Vincent's, "you must acknowledge you played me a dirty trick, and many a woman would have been ruined by it. Thank God, 1 had conduct enough to keep up my character, though that's neither here nor there; the tables are turned, however, for here am I well to do in the world, and you"

Mr. Vincent interrupted her, but in so low a voice that Laura could not distinguish what he said; but the lady replied in a manner that showed her not displeased by what he had been saying.

"Ah! you've got just the same sinivating ways as you always had, but I shant be hurried into nothing; to be sure, as you say, it's only doing justice to Betsy, seeing she's as much right to be called by"

Laura again lost the conclusion of the sentence, Mr. Vincent contriving to make some noise, which drowned her heightened voice; and in a few minutes he came himself into the kitchen to hasten the preparations for tea.





Laura, with a mixture of pity and contempt, saw that her father dare not raise his eyes to hers: and he spoke in a subdued tone, and expressed bis hopes that it would not be long before she would be relieved from such menial offices.

Laura made no reply, for her heart was too full to allow her to utter a word, and, in silence, she followed him into the parlour with the tea-tray.

"Well, I declare, miss is quite handy," observed Mrs. Briggs, who had taken off her bonnet and shawl, and seemed to have quite established herself at home. "I don't know," she continued, " what my poor Betsy would do if she was left in sick a predickyment, for she's so delicate and nervous, and has been so used to be coddled and waited upon, that she's as helpless as a babby, God bless her."

Neither of the parties addressed, seemed inclined to dilate on the subject of Betsy's nervous feelings; and Mrs. Briggs had all the conversation to herself, for a mere monosyllable was Laura's general reply to her questions and observations, and Mr. Vincent was in no talking mood.

u Well," (the general term with which she prefaced her sentences) " well, now we've done tea, I'll just go and have a peep at your 'tother darter; for I want to see if she's as like you as this one, and another that shall be nameless. You- understand me!" and she winked very significantly at Mr. Vincent, who absolutely blushed again at this broad inuendo.

Laura blushed too, and there was something of anger and vexation, mingled with the shame she felt*





It was impossible for her to doubt the nature of the connexion which had formerly subsisted between her father and Mrs. Briggs; and the idea that that father should introduce to his children his former mistress, and one, too, so totally insensible to all feelings of shame, or even common decency, was inexpressibly painful; summoning, however, all her spirit to her aid, she stopt Mrs. Briggs as she was advancing, by assuring her, her sister was too ill and low to be able to see strangers.

"Fiddle faddle of your lowness, and all that!" exclaimed the determined Mrs. Briggs, "it will do her good to have somebody to talk to her, and rouse her up. I know well how it is with my Betsy; why sometimes you'd think she was dying, but if company comes in, why Lord bless you, she's as live as a lobster in a minute."

"My sister's complaints are, unfortunately, not of the same class as Miss Briggs's, madam," replied Laura, with a look of disdain.

"Miss Briggs! Lord bless you, she's no more Miss Briggs than you are !" returned the incorrigible dame, bursting into a laugh, and again winking at Mr. Vincent; "your father can swear that, cant you?"

Mr. Vincent made her a sign not to proceed with the subject, and she murmured,—

"Well, well, do as you like, but the truth must out some time or another, and it's as well at first as at last, for what I can see."

Satisfied with having, as she hoped (evaded Mrs. Briggs's intention of visiting Marianne, Laura reseated herself, and produced her work.





"What's that you're doing, Miss Lorry? demanded Mrs. Briggs; "making a gownd?"

"Only altering one, madam," replied Laura.

"Well, I'm glad you can make yourself so handy, you'll be quite a treasure: for manty-making costs a deal o'money in a family. I often tells Betsy, it isn't the buying a gownd, but the making of it as I grudges."

Laura paid but little attention to this speech; and after a few minutes conversation, carried on in whispers, Mr. Vincent said, in a low voice, to his daughter,

"Laura, Mrs. Briggs and I are going out a little way, on some business; we shall be back to supper, so you'll get us something, any thing that will give you little trouble,—a bit of ham and a few oysters will do. She knows how we are situated, and will make allowances."

Laura's looks expressed the disdain she felt for what Mrs. Briggs might think; and Mr. Vincent, apparently afraid of hearing her observations, moved quickly away to join his companion.

"Dont go to put yourself out of the way for me, my dear," observed Mrs. Briggs, as Mr. Vincent gallantly assisted her to put On her shawl.

Laura's " I do not mean it, madam," was sufficient to have convinced Mrs. Briggs of the contempt in which she was held, if she had possessed common penetration; but she was too happily wrapt up in her own fancied importance, to suspect the possibility of such a feeling towards her: and, therefore, familiarly nodding a good bye to Laura, she took Mr. Vincent's arm, and walked off, apparently not a little pleased with the figure they cut. Laura thought that she had never seen her father look so contemptible. His conduct had never been such as to impress her with any great respect for him, still, an her father, she had felt it her- duty to pass over his faults as lightly as possible, and to put the best interpretation on every thing that admitted it; but now there was something so contemptible in the manner of his attempts to ingratiate himself with a woman, whom it was evident he had both despised himself and had abandoned to the contempt of others; and that now merely because she had acquired a little of that dross, which, though it might gloss over her character in the eyes of the world, could add nothing in reality to her respectability.





It was some hours after their usual supper time, before Mr. Vincent and his companion returned: and Laura discovered, with en creased disgust, from the flushed face, thick utterance, and the strong smell of spirits, which overpowered even the bergamqt with which she had scented her handkerchief, which she held to her mouth, that Mrs. Briggs added to her re-» pellant qualities that of intemperance. Mr. Vincent, too, was considerably elevated; and Laura having uebered them into the room, and ascertained that there was nothing more wanted, begged to be excused sitting down to supper, and without waiting for an answer, retired to her sister, to give vent to the feelings of regret and degradation, which her father's conduct created.

To Marianne, however, (who thought there could exist but one cause of sorrow, and whose whole thoughts were engrossed by one object) tears and sighs were so familiar, that she saw nothing unusual 25 4 E .





in-Laura's indulgence ofrthem on the present occasion, until the latter, starting up, and forgetful of her determination not to add to her sister's sorrows by an exposure of their father's unworthiness, exclaimed,—

"He cannot, surely he cannot be so barbarous, so lost to all sense of feeling and decency!"

"Who—what? have you seen him, Laura?" exclaimed Marianne, starting from her pillow. "Oh J tell me! is he, indeed, so depraved,—so utterly unworthy?"

"I harve seen nobody, my dear girl," returned Laura, in a melancholy tone. "I was thinking on a totally different subject."

Marianne laid down again; there was no other subject which could interest her: and Laura conceived that it would be quite time enough to relate her fears to her when she had further conviction they were well founded.

Suppressing, therefore, her feelings, she hastily undressed herself, and retired to bed, but not to rest, for tbaf the loud revalry of her father and his companion, (which was extended till a late hour in the morning) completely prevented it.

Mr. Vincent's countenance, when he met his daughter the next morning at breakfast, presented a singular compound of shame, and a determination to vindicate his conduct, should she presume to speak of it.

Laura, however, was too well convinced ofhertotal want of influence with her father, to venture any remarks unsolicited, and she felt no regret, when slie observed him preparing to go out, and heard that he should not return till night.



i





Much to Laura's disappointment, however, Alfred came not. It was the first time he had absented himself for a Whole day, and it was at this time peculiarly provoking; for to whom but him could she communicate the fears which Mrs. Briggs's manner and visit had created, or from whom seek advice as to the means of counteracting what she feared were his intentions.

Marianne, too, appeared, for the first time since her hopes and affections had received such a deadly blight: she on that day left her room, and, supported by Laura's arm, came down stairs for the express purpose of seeing Alfred, and in her present weakened state, every trivial disappointment swelled into magnitude.

Mr. Vincent returned home earlier than Laura had expected : and the first glance at his countenance convinced Laura that he had something of importance to communicate, and she trembled lest his assumed good nature should but prove preparatory to something which would turn it into a storm. She did not, however, dare to refuse when he desired her to sit down, and she replied, with as much composure as she, could, when he enquired how Marianne was, she was happy to say, getting better.

"That's right!" he replied, with seeming satisfaction; " poor thing, she has suffered a great deal! and so have you, Laura, we have all, indeed, been vety unfortunate of late; but times will mend L hope. Indeed, I have some prospect which "he paused a

moment, and then, with an evident effort, said,—

"Well, Laura, what do you think of the lady you saw yesterday?"





Laura crimsoned with agitation. "Think of her, sir!" she repeated, not knowing what to say.

"Yes, think of her!" he reiterated, rather angrily. "It is easy I should suppose to answer my question. Is she not a good-tempered lively woman?"

"Your experience, sir, may probably warrant that opinion; for myself I coufess that I did not see enough of her to enable me to decide on her merits."

"You will see more of her, then, soon," observed Mr. Vincent, with the air of a man, who having made up his mind to a disagreeable thing is determined to go through With it. "We are going to remove to her house in a week or twe-."

"To her house, sir!" repeated Laura, in dismay.

"Yes, to her house," returned Mr. Vincent. "One would think you could do nothing but re-echo my Words to-night."

"I could do more, sir!" said Laura, summoning up all her spirit, " font that I am unwilling to hurt your feelings. I could tell you that I fear you are flying from one evil into the jaws of an infinitely worse. I would implore you to consider the disgrace and ultimate ruin you will bring upon your children by forcing them into an association with a woman who—"

"Who what?" added Mr. Vincent, seeing she paused. " Who what V he repeated, fiercely. "What do you know of that woman that is disgraceful?"

"Her manners, her conversation," faltered Laura. ''My dear fatlie-r, youmust yourself acknowledge, they are not sucb as can beflefit your children."

"Oh! my children must lay aside their squeamishness," he replied," since they have no longer the means of indulging it. I have no more to say than that if you do not like a residence with Mrs. Briggs, you must provide yourself with another; for I shall remove there on Monday next."





tie took a candle and retired to his room as he concluded this speech; and Laura, almost broken-hearted, crept to her sister, and passed the remainder of the night, meditating on the fate which^ she felt but too well convinced was not to be avoided by any exertions on her part.

Three days passed away without Alfred's visiting the unhappy Laura, who felt his desertion the more keenly, as she had no one but him on whose counsel she could have relied,or to whom even she could communicate the extent of her uneasiness.

To Marianne she had imparted her father's intention to remove, but to Marianne all places were now alike, she did not ask a single question, nor express either pleasure or regret at the circumstance; and Laura considering that it would be quite time enough for her to meet trouble when it came, forbore to say a word on the character of Mrs. Briggs, or the suspicions she entertained of her and Mr. Vincent's intentions.

The day before that appointed for their removal, Mrs. Briggs came again, to assist in making the necessary preparations; and much as Laura detested her, she could not but acknowledge that on this occasion she was of considerable service.

Marianne, however, (who now saw her for the first time) seemed to shrink with abhorrence from her coarse and low jests, and the extreme familiarity which evidently subsisted between Mr. Vincent and her. A more immediate subject for uneasiness, however, pressed heavily on Laura's mind; and Marianne herself^as ihe hour their of departure drew near, could not help frequently expressing her surprise that Alfred did not come.





At last, however, the surprise vanished; for just as they were about to retire for the night, he made his appearance.

His first words were an apology for his absence. His father had taken him off unexpectedly into the country, under a pretence of a journey of a few hours only, but had contrived to keep him as many days, and would have prolonged it to weeks, but that he had forcibly broken his confinement, and rode off to town.

Laura felt very sorry to hear the conclusion of his otherwise satisfactory excuse; but her remarks were prevented by his exclaiming, upon observing the packages which were placed for removal, and the general confusion that prevailed in an abode which had always been distinguished for its neatness,—

"What, in the name of wonder does all this denote?"

"Only that we are going to live with that lady you saw here the other day," returned Laura, in a'sarcastic tone.

Alfred recoiled back with surprise.

"That lady do you call her," he exclaimed: but at that moment, Mr. Vincent's half mortified, half furious look met his eyes, and softening his voice, he added,—

"But what has caused this sudden determination, Laura?"





"My will, sir!" observed Mr. Vincent, sternly.

"I beg your pardon. sir," replied Alfred, submissively. "I thought that as you have- at least tacitly allowed me to consider myself as one of your family, the question would not be considered impertinent or intrusive."

"1 began to doubt almost, Alfred, whether you had not almost ceased to consider yourself one of the family," returned Mr. Vincent, relaxing his severity; "but I am glad you claim my confidence on this score, for there is nothing I have more at heart, than to see you the husband of Laura."

Laura's countenance sank; and Alfred apparently somewhat disconcerted at this open attack, replied that he was equally impatient as himself for that happy period, which he trusted would not now be protracted much longer.

"1 am glad you speak so unequivocally," returned Mr. Vincent, "since it will completely remove a difficulty which I foresaw would arise: Mrs. Briggs would, perhaps, have Objected to your visits; but as the intended husband of Laura, the case is of course altered, she cannot—"

"Mrs. Briggs !" reiterated Alfred, interrupting him, while Laura's face crimsoned with anger and confusion, "Mrs. Briggs!" he repeated, " Pardon me sir, but surely that vulgar woman is not to be the arbitress—"

"I will hear nothing sir, disrespectful of Mrs. Briggs," exclaimed Mr. Vincent, trying to conceal his confusion by assuming a peremptory tone, " she is a person whom I have every reason in the world to respect, though her manners are, perhaps, not quite so polished as those who have had greater advantages."





"Have you always respected her so much, sir?" demanded Laura, sarcastically. But she almost immediately repented her temerity, for Mr. Vincent's face was distorted with passion, and with a look which made her tremble, he darted out of the room.

Alfred now received from Laura an explanation of all that had come to her knowledge, suppressing only, from delicacy, her suspicions of the nature of Mrs. Briggs's connexion with her father in early life ; but Alfred was too penetrating not to pierce through the mystery which this veiled, and he exclaimed loudly and indignantly against her father, for thus daring to Intrude his former and probably present mistress on his children.

"I wish the present tie may be one so easily broken," observed Laura, blushing.

"Why you cannot suspect, surely, that he would make such a woman his wife!" exclaimed Alfred, in astonishment.

Laura made no reply, but her looks were sufficiently expressive; and Alfred uttering an impatient exclamation of astonishment, remained for some time lost in deep thought.

"Does your brother know all this, Laura?" he at length demanded.

"Edward has quite deserted us, I fear," she replied: " I have not seen him for the last three weeks, . though I believe my father sometimes meets him, and I suppose has acquainted him with our intended change of residence. Whether he has communicated all his reasons for it, I know not."

Alfred again appeared to be buried in a profound





reverie; and after taking Mrs. Briggs's address, No.— Sherrard Street, Golden Square, be departed.

The important morning came ; and Mr. Vincent, who bad gone out without condescending to exchange a word with his daughters, soon returned in a hackney coach, which he informed Laura was to convey her and ber sister to their new residence.

"But you will go with us, sir," said Laura, shrinking from the idea of making her appearance without his introduction.

"No," he replied, coldly. "Mrs. Briggs is prepared to expect you, so there is no occasion for it. I dare say you have plenty of frippery to load the coach with, and I shall be there almost as soon as you."

Laura saw it would be useless to remonstrate; and as she readily guessed her father wished to spare himself the confusion of witnessing her and Marianne's first introduction to Miss Betsey, she did not feel so much surprised as she otherwise would at his conduct.

During their ride to Sherrard street Laura attempted in some measure to prepare the timid Marianne for the disagreeable scenes she would probably have to encounter; and the latter, though she evidently heard her sister with dismay and consternation, promised that she would exert all her spirit, and not suffer herself to be alarmed or oppressed by the domineering manners of Mrs. Briggs.

"But what right can she have, Laura?" demanded Marianne, .

Laura shook her head despondently ; and Marianne, apparently afraid to investigate farther the cause of that melancholy look, restrained from any farther enquiry, only murmuring to herself, " To me it will be *5 , 4 E





of little consequence, 1 shall 9oon be——, but poor Laura!"

Laura, who heard without affecting to hear, this apostrophe, was obliged to put her head' out of the coach window, to hide the effect it had on her already agitated spirits, and as she withdrew it, and fixed hereyes on the pallid countenance and attenuated form of the suffering Marianne, she could not help acknowledging to herself that it was but too probable that a short period would remove her beyond the reach of such petty sufferings as the connexion with Mrs. Briggs could inflict.

The coach stopped at the door of a respectable and apparently well-furnished house, and they were immediately ushered into a handsome parlour, where Mrs. Briggs waited to receive them.

"Well, I'm glad you're come," she observed, " for Betsey and I have had a bit of a tiff, and she has took herself off for the day; but M let her know I'll be missus of my own house, and do as I like in spite of her."

Laura could not but express her hopes that it was not on their account Miss Briggs had felt herself offended. She was, indeed, she said, fearful they should be intruders.

"Lord, my dear, that's all nonsense you know: and as to Miss Briggs, why the truth may as well out at once ;—her name isn't Briggs, nor mine neither, not now: her name's Win centkas well as yours, and I changed mine for the same yesterday morning. I was young and foolish, you see, once, and your father—"

"You may spare any farther explanation, madam,** interrupted Laura, coldly, though her whole frame trembled with emotion. "Your daughter, then, is also my father's, and you are his wife."





"Yes miss, and my darter is your sister too, and I am your mother," returned the quondam Mrs. Briggs, apparently highly offended at the manner in which her information had been received; while Marianne, repeating the word, mother, which so strongly brought to her recollection, the mild inoffensive being who had so recently borne that title, burst into an hysterical flood of tears.

"I dont know, miss, that you've got much to cry for !" continued Mrs. Briggs, or, as we must now call her, Mrs. Vincent, " it's a pretty goqd change, I think (and she looked round with conscious pride) from your poor little poking place to this, where you'll be able to enjoy a little of life, and live upon the best of every thing."

Laura was for some moments silent, but her good sense represented to her that it was folly to make an enemy of this woman in the outset, by indulging useless resentment; and she, therefore, with as good a grace as she could assume, observed that Mrs. Vincent must pardon emotions which the unexpectedness of the event, and the recent loss of their beloved mother had given rise to : at the same time she requested leave for herself and sister to retire to their room for a short time. "-„-; .

The bride resumed the smiling face which she had worn while announcing her change of condition, and rising, she said,—

"Yes, to be sure; I suppose you'll want to make yourself a bit smart, for I've asked a few friends to dinner, and Whether Betsy comes home or not, a sulky thing! it shan't baulk my pleasures if it had been any body else, indeed, but her own father—Lord! well if there ar'n't somebody come a'ready,—1 must go and get my things on," and she bustled out of the room, followed by the two dismayed and desponding girls, who shrank with terror from the idea of exhibiting themselves to the new-made Mrs. Vincent's company as the daughters of her husband.





Before, however, they could reach the room appropriated to them, their father's voice was heard in the passage; and the bride, hastily pointing out the door they were to enter, retreated to her own room, to settle her cap as she said.

The door was no iooner closed than the two sisters threw themselves into each other's arms, and in a flood of tears, lamented their unfortunate lot.

Laura, however, soon regained her fortitude; and observing, that conciliation must, at least for the present, be the course they must pursue, she entreated Marianne to dry up her tears, and proceed to make some alteration in her dress.

Marianne obeyed her sister: but they both, though they agreed on the propriety of so doing, with the greatest reluctance, exchanged the black dresses (which they had worn ever since the death of their mother) for others more suitable to the gaiety of the party, if not of the occasion of it.

Attired, however, in plain white, with no ornaments but their own glossy ringlets, the sisters awaited the summons, to dinner, suppressing their feelings as much as possible, and each trying to inspire the other with cheerfulness, though the tears that filled their eyes from time to time belied their efforts.





At last the bride put her head in, and desired to know if they were ready to go down.

Laura replied in the affirmative; and after scrutinizingly examining them, she observed,—

"Well, I declare you look as well in them plain muslins, as if you was drest in silks and satins. But have you got no necklaces, nor ear-rings? if you like I'll ask Betsy to lend you some, she's come home, and is a dressing, and she's got loads o'trinkets."

Laura civilly declined; they had ornaments, she said, but having only now laid aside their mourning, did not think it proper.

"Well, just as you like,'' replied the lady, surveying her cap in the glass, and then, apparently very well satisfied with the contrast which her lace and ribbands, silks and flowers, with the addition of ear-rings of an immoderate size, and rings on every finger, presented, she led the way to the dining room.

A large party were assembled: but Laura, for a miuute or two, saw no object but her father, who, with a look in which conscious shame, distress, and an attempt to appear very much at ease and contented with his situation, were curiously blended, approached, and taking a hand of each, led them forward.

A general introduction, performed with singular grace by Mrs. Vincent, followed; but Laura in vain looked round for her new relative, Miss Betsy, and the dinner was announced before she swam into the room as much loaded with finery as her mother, though in a much more fashionable, and, in fact, becoming style.

Laura almost started, as Mrs. Vincent led her up to her daughter, for never had she seen so striking a resemblance as the vaunted Betsy bore to her father.





It was not only his handsome black eyes, the hooked nose, and the sallow complexion which she inherited, but there was the same indication of a tyrannical disposition, the same look of malicious cunning, and the stiff ungraceful manners that rendered him so repulsive.

Her form, however, was the counterpart of her mother's short, round, and vulgar shape, and nothing could have been more strongly contrasted than Laura's tall and elegant, and Marianne's light and sylph-like figure, with her heavy set form, as they all stood together.

She was evidently unprepared for the superior manners and appearance of the sisters, and, for a few minutes, conscious inferiority kept her silent; but a glance at her own expensive dress, (a rich lilac sarsenet loaded with trimmings, and her hair, neck, and arms, covered with ornaments) and from that to the plain muslin frocks, and simply curled hair of her new associates, restored the balance in her own favour, and, with great complacency of tone, but with a malicious expression of eye, she expressed her pleasure at being introduced to such amiable companions, "and relations too !" she added, in a low voice.

Laura's silent bow was not very complimentary, and the young lady proceeded,—

"I dare say you were not much pleased, any more than me, at this match. I'm sure my mother has made herself very ridiculous, and so I told her."

"Betsey, my dear!" interrupted the blooming bride.

"Lord, mamma! I wish you would leave off calling me by that vulgar abbreviation, as Mr. Johnson says. If you cant bring yourself to say Elizabeth, surely Eliza would not be too difficult for you."





"Well! but it's more natral like to call you Betsey, child."

"But I wont be called Betsey, nor I wont answer to it neither !" replied the dutiful daughter.

Dinner interrupted this interesting discussion: but Laura and Marianne soon discovered that this was the general style of conversation between the mamma and her darling Betsey, and they anticipated, with dread, the life which they should lead in such society.





CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FOURTH



"On he moves,

Careless of blame, while his own heart approves.



Then to the place of trial, and alone,

Alone, before Iris judges in array,

Stands for his life."



Rogers.

WE will now return to the unhappy and unfortunate Julian, whom we left just awakened to the full consciousness of his wretched situation, and fast approaching to the termination of his journey.

"What's o'clock?" demanded one of his companions to the other.

"Half-past ten," was the reply; " so the office will be open, and we may as well go there at once.

Julian's heart throbbed with violence: but he considered that it was as well that he should be kept in as little suspense as possible ; and he still trusted he should be able to convince an unprejudiced magistrate of his entire innocence of the charge brought against him.

In a few minutes they were at the door of the police office in Bow Street.

A man charged with murdering his wife had just





been brought up for re-examination, andimKtoasie Numbers of people were collected together round the doorsJulian at first shrank with dismay frow #»» thronging heads and eager glances which awaited his descent from the chaise; but in a moment a loud u*urmur of "who is he ?—what has he dose f" with the pitying accompaniments of " Dear* what a pity, such a fine young man," and a wise assurance from one old lady, that "we're all bora, but we ar'n't dead, and nobody knows what's in store for him?' distinctly reached his ear, as with difficulty he pressed on through the crowd.

"How few hours are passed," he thought, "since I was equally the object of attention to a gaping multitude; but with what different sensations did they behold me: then, envied and applauded to the skies^for merit which I was unconscious of possessing, and now the object of pity and condemnation, for a crime of which I am innocent. Sie transit gloria tnundi!" he repeated, almost involuntarily, aloud.

A gentleman, who was pushing his way into the office, and assuring those who intercepted him that hemust get in, as he was a witness against the- murderer, turned suddenly round at Julian's exclamation; and the latter, with a feeling of degradation more acute and powerful than he had yet felt, instantly averted his head. But it was too late: Mr. Austin (for it was indeed him) could not be eluded-* and, uttering a deep groan, as his eye rapidly glanced on the two officers, who were now, fearful of their prey escaping in the coafusion, holding Julian by the arms, the good doctor forgot all his anxiety to get forward, and dropping hehind, gave way to his feelings in a manner, which* contrasted with Ins former bustle and petulance at tbe obstructions he had met with, occasioned considerable surprise among the surrounding throng.





"Poor youth!" he exclaimed, "poor, mistaken, illfated lad, and is thy career, then, so quickly closed V

"Do you know that young man, sir?" said a dark, commanding-looking man, who had kept his eyes earnestly fixed on Julian's open and now glowing countenance, and had overheard Mr. Austin's exclamation.

"I wish I had never seen him !" repeated the warmhearted apothecary, hastily wiping his eyes.

"Has he then injured you ?" enquired the gentleman.

*i No—Yes; You are very curious, sir," replied Mr. Austin, angry at his feelings having been noticed.

"Excuse me,—I do not mean to intrude: but his features so strongly resemble two of the dearest friends

I ever had on earth, that I am anxious Can you

tell me his name, sir?"

"His name is—Why should I care about it ?—it will be in all tbe public papers !—Carleton, Julian Carleton,—that is his name."

"Good God!" exclaimed the gentleman, in a tone of agony.

Mr. Austin looked up, but the stranger was gone: and the next minute he beheld him forcing his way into the magistrates room.

At the same moment the name of Austin was loudly called, and the good man conceiving it was Julian, who required his presence, darted eagerly forward.

But one object occupied his eyes or his thoughts, when h&found himself standing before the magistrates, ftiitl when he heard himself called upon to describe the Mate in which he had found the deceased, (to whom he had been professionally ealled) bis cheeks became blanched with terror; and it was not till the question was repeated, and his eye caught the ferocious look of the prisoner under examination, that he-could collect himself, and remember the cause for which he had been summoned thither.





His deposition, however, was clear and decisive. The man was committed for trial: and as be was led away, Julian Carleton was led forward.

Mr. Austin drew hack, but so that he could still keep his eye on Julian's countenance. .. .

"Who would not think him innocent!" he murmured, as be gazed on the now pale, but still open ingenuous brow of the culprit.

"And do you doubt it ?" exclaimed a voice between indignation and agony.

Again Mr. Austin beheld the tall, dark stranger, who had before interrogated him, and struck with the agitation which deformed his fine though furrowed countenance, he replied,—

"What interest have you in the youth, that you thus question me?"

"The interest of one who hoped to find in him a worthy representative of two of the most amiable beings that God ever created. I am his uncle." 1

"Then I am sorry fer you," returned Mr. Austin, dryly, but in a voice choking with internal agitation.

"Ha!—Then he is guilty!" exclaimed the impetuous stranger, "then I will leave him to his fate!"

Mr. Austin caught his arm, as he was about to quit the room.





"1 am not his uncle, yet 1 will not desert him, bat hud*"

Mr. Carieton suffered the worthy apothecary to rer tain M» arm, and the examination proceeded,—

Mr. Austin wiped the cold damp from his forehead two or three times, while the charge was being made by Alice Ghreen, with whom it appeared the prisoner had lodged, and who deposed that he had given her the note in question, late in the evening of the 7th. of the present month, in payment of a trifling debt: that he 'had left his lodgings at day- light the next morning, and that she had, upon offering the note to her landlord, in payment of her rent, discovered that it was forged.

A great many acrimonious observations on the cruelty of cheating a poor woman, and an account of her suspicions "all along that he was no better than he he should be" were curtailed by the magistrate, who, from time to time, cast a look of pity at the noble ingenuous countenance which so powerfully contradicted the imputation of guilt.

The Bank inspector proved the note to be forged, and Julian was called upon to state if he eould say how he became possessed of the note.

"I received it on the morning of the same day that I paid it away, in this envelope," he replied, producing the paper from his pocket.

Mr. Austin relinquished the arm of Mr. Carieton, and pressed eagerly forward; while the magistrate, having looked at the paper, shook his head, and returning it with an incredulous look and manner, observed,—





"This is any thing but satisfactory, sir, cannot you bring any proof who was the person that sent this to you V

Julian was about to reply in the negative, when Mr. Austin, scarcely able to speak from emotion, presented himself to the attention of the court, and, with eagerness, exclaimed,—

"It was me! I sent it to him, and I am ready to give every explanation of my motives, and how I became possessed of the note."

"Are you prepared to swear that this is the identical note you enclosed in this-envelope, sir ?" demanded the magistrate, tendering them both to Mr. Austin.

He took them with eagerness, examined the note, and then drawing from his pocket a memorandum book, eagerly turned to the leaf on which it appeared he had written the number of the note.

A deadly p:\le succeeded the bright glow which hope and gratitude had raised in Julian's cheek, for he read rn Mr. Austin's quivering lip and trembling hand, as he silently closed his book, that the investigation was not satisfactory.

"Can you swear, sir," repeated the magistrate, with anxiety.

"I cannot," returned Mr. Austin, turning away and hastily covering his face with his hands, to avoid seeing Julian again.

"And you persist this is the note you received,'* said the magistrate to Julian.

"Yes—no,—I this moment recollect a circumstance exclaimed Julian, eagerly.

Mr. Austin rushed back again, and fixed his eyes intently on Julian-s face, while he related his meeting with Ryland in the city—the offer of the latter to get the note changed, and his returning, aa he supposed, the same note, expressing his regret, that he could not see his friend, who would have changed it for small notes.





« Damned rascal S he changed it," exclaimed Mr. Austin, eagerly.

"Hush, hush, sir, that language is very unbecoming," observed the itiagtstrtte. "Let us proceed coolly, and we shall, perhaps, come to the bottom of this business."

He then enquired who this Ryland was, and what connection Julian had with him.

Julian related, without hesitation, the circumstances of their first meeting, and, in fact, every prominent transaction of his life, from that time to the present, slightly glancing over his reseue of Mary Hamilton, and totally suppressing her connexion with Stuart.

He was heard with the deepest attention. Mr. Austin alone uttering exclamations indicative of his feelings, which even the peremptory "Silence, sir!" from the officers of the court could not entirely suppress.

• Do you know that the persons of whom you have spoken, Stuart, Ryland, and two others are already in custody, on a charge of forging and uttering notes to an immense amount?" demanded the magistrate, when he had concluded.

"I was told by that person, said Julian, pointing to one of the officers, who had accompanied him to town, that they were in imprisonment, but not the specific nature of the charge. -.

The magistrate consulted with another.

"It was you, I think," addressing a man who stood behind Julian, " who apprehended Ryland."





The man replied in the affirmative ; eddiilg, very eagerly,— 3.. . v

"There was a good ten-pound note, your worship, in one of his packets, and it was the very day that this young gentleman met him, very likely that was his note."

* Have you the note in your possession?" demanded the magistrate.

"Yes, ypur worship, it is at home, sealed up in a different parcel from the three bad ones.'^

"Fetch it, then. You have the number of your note, sir, I think," addressing Mr. Austin, who replied in the affirmative;

The man was not gone ten minutes, but it appeared an hour to Julian, who, feeling that his fate, his reputation, the good opinion of him whom he valued more than all the rest of the world, the kind-hearted Mr. Austin, all hung upon this note, felt the keenest agony of suspense.

Mr. Austin looked earnestly at him; he read all the workings of his mind, in his intelligent countenance: and after a moment's pause, eagerly seizing his hand, he exclaimed,—

"Julian Carleton, I have wronged you! forgive me, let the issue of this business be what it will, 1 feel that I have Wronged you, and you are all I ever thought."

Julian could not speak, but he pressed the friendly hand that grasped his, with warmth, and at this moment the officer returned with the note.

He opened the paper before them.

"What was the number of your note, sir?" he demanded.





Mr. Austin repeated the figures: and the man replied,—

"That is right; this is the note."

He handed it to the magistrate, and he having compared it with Mr. Austin's memorandum, declared himself perfectly satisfied.

"And you, my good woman," he continued, turning to Mrs. Green, Julian's landlady, "are you satisfied, that this young man had no intention of defrauding you?"

"Yes, to be sure, your worship ; and I'm sure if Mr. Carleton had but have told me as how"

"Then, I trust we are all satisfied," he added, looking at the Bank inspector, "and I may dismiss the charge."

"Certainly," was the reply, delivered in a tone of cheerfulness, which proved the entire conviction of Julian's innocence.

Julian, however, though conscious of his complete dismissal, and, of course, exulting therein, could scarcely attend even to the joyful congratulations of Mr. Austin, for his eye had caught the features and countenance of Mr. Carleton, bending on him a look of the most intense yet benign interest, and the striking resemblance of the latter to the fond parent, whose features were yet fresh in his memory, struck Julian so forcibly as almost to obliterate all other feellings.

Could it be possible that it was his father, risen from the grave? Alas! no. Julian remembered but too well all the circumstances of his loss, to indulge such a hope, but he was not long suffered to continue in suspense, Mr. Carleton advanced, and in a low voice





broken with emotion, exclaimed, "Julian, my poor boy, severe indeed have been thy trials; but from this moment I trust they are ended. Come then, poor wanderer, to a home which would have been valueless without you: come and enjoy the fortune, which, if you had proved worthless, would have been useless to me."

"My heart tells me it is my uncle; the brother of my beloved, my ever lamented father!" returned Julian, respectfully pressing the hand he held to his lips; but his utterance failed him; for the recollection of all he had suffered, since he had lost the protector of his youth, the kind benignant friend, who would have shielded him, at the hazard of his life, from every evil, rushed upon his memory, and rendered him insensible to the happy change in his fortune, which had illumined Mr. Austin's friendly face with smiles of pleasure.

"But why did you run away from me, my dear boy i" exclaimed the latter, who read, in Julian's quivering lip and tearful eye, the feelings that oppressed him, and wished to give a turn to his thoughts.

"If I refuse still to answer that question," returned Julian, half smiling, "do not again, my dear sir, judge hardly of me: to my uncle I will explain all my feelings, if he requires it; but to you, forgive me if I decline explaining, what I am sure would not add to your satisfaction."

Mr. Austin looked at him in silence for a few minutes; and then, fervently grasping his hand, exclaimed,—

"Carleton! you are a noble-hearted fellow. I see now where the land lies; and 1 must have been a dolt and an idiot, not to have seen it before; but I will be even with her: yes; by the Lord Harry I'll make he feel it!"





Julian was about to interrupt this denunciation of vengeance; when his attention was attracted by a bustle at the door of the room, to which, by the civility of one of the officers, they had been shown, until a ooach could be procured, and the well known accents of Hi chard Stanfield exclaiming,-^

"I tell you I must and will see him!" distinctly reached his ear. .

"That is a friend of mine," he anxiously observed; and before he could reach the door- to request that he might be admitted, Dicky came tumbling headforemost into the room, having had recourse to manual strength, when he found his arguments disregarded, and his anxiety scoffed at:—the man, who, by trippiag up his heels just as he had got the door open, had occasioned bis precipitate entrance, hastily followed to renew the contest; but Julian's interference soon set the matter right, and the latter retired, though with somewhat of a sneer, as he observed, "that he should never have suspected the gem'man was a friend of the gem'man'a."

Richard's appearance, indeed, never very elegant, was upon the present occasion, far from prepossessing. On his return to the public house, which was the head quarters of the company, after the sudden breaking up of the evening's entertainments, he had sat for some minutes, lost in melancholy reverie on the fate of his friend, and revolving in his mind the course he should pursue, when his attention was attracted by a conversation between the host and a man in livery; by which he learnt, that the latter was in the service of a gentleman, named Caileton, who had recently returned from the East Indies: that his roaster had been visiting Cheltenham, but was now gone off to London, and that he had just received orders to follow hiua there, with two saddle horses, which had been left behind under his care.





The man (who was much intoxicated) had, it ap- peared, spent so much time on the road, that he was under the necessity of riding on all night; and he was expressing a wish to the landlord, that he could meet any tidy fellow, that wanted a lift towards London, to ride the 'other horse.

"I will go with you!" exclaimed Richard, starting up.

The man stared; but when Richard added that he had most pressing business with Mr. Carleton, and, to prove his knowledge of that gentleman, mentioned his connexion with the Vincents', &c, but above all, when he hinted the business regarding Mr. Carleton's nephew, whom the man knew his master had been most anxious to discover, he immediately agreed to the proposal: and even accommodated him with an extra great coat; which, though it would have easily held two such diminutives as Richard Stanfield, and was, moreover, more conspicuously than elegantly adorned, with red collar, capes, cuffs, &c, was still, as he sagaciously observed," better than nothing, of a rainy night."

Thus equipped, Richard mounted Little Joey, as the horse was called; but whether he was aware of the inexperience of the rider he had on his back, or whether he had made up his mind, it was better to go to London without any rider at all, certain it is, that Little Joey speedily began to display signs of uneasiness, which, at length, ended with his fairly depositing poor Richard in a soft bed of mire, collected by the side of the road.





Richard, however, was not to be daunted by this disaster; his hat was irrecoverably lost, but he had a night-cap in his pocket, and having drawn that on, with the assistance of his friend, the groom, he mounted once more, and only, as he said, had one more tumble before he reached London! the last, however, had added to his other improvements, the beauty of a black eye, and sundry deep scratches across his face, which, joined with the natural rubicund glow of his complexion, gave him almost a ferocious appearance.

Such was the plight in which he reached London; and, having alighted from his mettlesome steed, he quitted his companion, with a promise of meeting him at the stables (to which the latter was going with the horses) as soon as ever he (Richard) could purchase a hat, get some of the mud, with which he was plastered from head to foot, removed from his clothes, and his hands and face washed.

Scarcely, however, had he lost sight of the friendly groom, before he suddenly recollected, that in the pocket of the great coat, which he had returned to his friend, he had deposited all his worldly wealth, without which, it was useless to look for a hat or any other accommodations: and he, therefore, immediately ran off to the stables, which he entered just as the groom bad dismounted, and was receiving a volley of reproaches from the coachman, for the manner in which he had brought in "the poor beasts."

"Master's gone to Bow Street a'ready," he observed, "about a fellow that desarves tucking up: and I'm sure, if he'd teed you come in, in this here manner,—





Stanfield waited not to hear the conclusion of this sentence, though he darted a look of tremendous fury at the man, who he imagined spoke of Julian; but without ever reclaiming the money he had come after, he bolted out of the stable, and ran off with all the speed possible, never even bestowing a thought upon his appearance, and in this condition was, as we have related, ushered into the presence of Julian and his friends.

"Thank God, thank God!" he exclaimed, you have got your friends all about you, my dear fellow. I should have gone to your house, sir," (addressing Mr. Carleton) "but I found you were here, and therefore, followed you without waiting a moment."

"So, it appears, my good friend," observed Mr. Carleton, surveying him with great curiosity; u But how you knew me, or that I -"

"All shall be explained hereafter," interrupted Richard, "let us now think what is to be done for our friend here," looking at Julian: who, wishing to show his uncle and Mr. Austin, the real worth of the strange little object before them; observed, with an assumed air of despondency,-— - -

"Nothing can be done for me my kind friend; the facts are too conclusive, and I must make up my mind to meet my fate."

"Lord have mercy oh me V exclaimed Richard, in a solemn tone, his face becoming pallid with terror, and his knees knocking together, that he was obliged to catch hold of Mr. Austin to support himself. "But —but—but you are innocent, Carleton ; I am sure you never oommitted any crime: I wont believe it ;" and he raised bis voice, and seemed to gather courage as he proceeded.





Julian was about to reply, but Mr. Carleton prevented him,—

"Make yourself easy, my good fellow: my nephew is only trying the extent of your attachment to him; he is perfectly exonerated from the charge against him, and you shall go home with him in a few minutes."

Julian's heart vibrated with joy at the sound of home! and Richard, bursting into tears, bagged Julian in his arms, unable, by words, to express his raptures.

The coach was now announced, and the whole party entered it, not without some amusing strictures and conjectures, from the assembled crowd, on Richard's appearance; to which, however, he was totally deaf, and which only created a smile on the countenances of the rest of the party.

'* If I mistake not, I have seen you before, sir," said Mr. Austin, addressing Richard, who replied in the affirmative.

"On that occasion you made some admissions, that still grate on my recollection," resumed the doctor. *' I mean as to your having assumed more than one name, &c.: you recollect, I dare say.'*

"Perfectly," said Richard: "but what has this to do »

"My dear sir, my friend alluded to theatrical change of names," interrupted Julian, smiling; his proper appellation is Stanfield, Richard Stanfield ;[the nephew of—of a person you must recollect," he continued, lowering his voice from the agitation which that remembrance inspired in his own bosom.





"I beg you a thousand pardons," said Mr. Austin, "for my suspicions ! but I have some news to impart, which will make amends for the injustice of them. Your uncle is dead, without a will, and you are sole heir to all his property."

It was now Julian's turn to rejoice in the prosperity of his friend, who, though he was too sincere to affect any grief, observed, that he should have been much better pleased, if the old man had voluntarily given him a part of his riches.

This declaration evidently cncreased greatly both Mr. Carleton's and Mr. Austin's respect for him; and by the time the coach reached the former's elegant residence in Portman Square, the whole party felt as cordially inclined to each other, and as happy as it was possible for congenial souls to be.

Leaving the friends together in the drawing room, Mr. Carleton hastened to give some necessary orders for his nephew's reception ; and then it was that Dicky (or, as we, of course, must now call him, Mr. Stanfield) became first sensible of the incongruity of bis appearance, with the splendour by which he was surrounded. Catching a view of himself in one of the pier glasses, he started back with such a ludicrous expression of countenance, that Julian could not forbear smiling, and Mr. Austin laughed outright.

The night-cap was instantly deposited in his pocket; and, with a woeful look, Richard surveyed his disfigured face, and the piteous state of his clothes: but Julian soon contrived to withdraw his attention from these subjects, by speaking of the recent occurrences; and drawing Richard aside, he demanded if he had seen Miss Hamilton, previous to his setting off for London.





Richard replied, that he had not,—and that he believed her sudden disappearance at the moment he (Julian) was seized, had excited universal astonishment : he had heard, just as he was mounting the horse 'which had brought him into such a situation, (and again he turned to the glass) that she was in bed at her lodgings, greatly indisposed.

Julian sighed deeply;—he could not entertain a doubt, but that Mary had been deeply implicated in the nefarious practices of her associates: and for a time his heart became insensible to the happy change in his own prospects, in contemplating the gloomy and disgraceful fate of two beings, so gifted with the means and talents for ornamenting society, as Stuart and Mary.

The return of his uncle dissipated, in some measure, the cloud which hung on his intelligent brow; but still his heart could not forget that such things were; and, in the midst of the happiness which ensued, when his uncle declared his intention of not only adopting him as his own son, but rendering him immediately independant, by giving up to him what appeared to Julian a fortune, splendid beyond his utmost wishes, still Julian heaved a secret sigh, and often felt a shudder creep over his frame, as he contrasted his situation with those who were now pining in a gloomy prison, from which, perhaps, they were only destined to be freed by a disgraceful death.





CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIFTH.



* And soon her look-s the rapturous truth avow;

Lovely bcfore,^-oh! say how loveiv now i

She flies not, frowns not, though he pleads his cause;

Nor yet—nor yet, her hand from his withdraws;

But by some secret power Surprised, subdued,

(Ah 1 how, resist ?—nor would she if she could,)

Falls on his neck, as half unconscious where,

Glad to conceal her teal-s, her blushes there.



Rogers.

THE different current into which Marianne Vincent's thoughts were thrown by the circumstances of her father's new connexion, appeared to have a favorable effect upon her health; for from the time she entered Mrs. Briggs's (or rather Mrs. Vincent's) house* she every day improved in appearance; and with her bodily strength, returned, in some measure, the energy of her mind.

Her dislike of the woman, whom her father had»' set in authority over them," wastoo strong to be concealed; while from Miss Vincent (as Miss Betsy was now invariably called) both sisters shrank with terror; for though she preserved tolerable civility towards them, her outrageous and tyrannical conduct towards her mother, sufficiently betrayed what she was capable of. £6 4 H





On the second day of their residence, Alfred Huntly visited them: and Laura felt rejoiced that neither the young lady nor the old one were visible during the time he stnid.

At dinner time, however, Mrs. Vincent said, addressing Laura,—

"So, miss, 1 find you've had your sweetheart here a'ready. I wonder you didn't ax him to stay dinner."

"Dear me, mamma," interrupted Miss Vincent, " if I was to ask every young man that calls upon me to stay dinner, you would not be very well pleased, I dare say, without consulting you first."

"No, child, hut there's a difference between——"

"Between me and Miss Laura Vincent, I suppose," returned the young lady, drawing up her neck with a supercilious air, and glancing a look of contempt at Laura and tier sister.

"No, I didn't mean that, because you, of course, as the eldest darter, have a right"

"I beg, madam," interrupted Laura, with a contemptuous smile, " that it may be understood, I totally disclaim every intention of entering into any competition with Miss Vincent, whose rights to all kind of priority and superiority are quite undeniable.''.

"Well, I'm sure that's very pretty of you, Miss Laura; and I dont know what Betsy would have, if that wont satisfy her,'' observed Mrs. Vincent, who comprehended nothing but that Laura meant to " give up,'' (as she would have termed it) to her daughter.

The latter, however, more penetrating than her mother, coloured violently; and then, in a half mutter, observed, that " No doubt all Miss Laura said or did was right and pretty with some folks."





Alfred had joined heartily in the chagrin which Laura and Marianne expressed at their father's marriage, but he had otherwise appeared in better spirits than usual, and, at parting, he requested the sisters' to keep up their spirits, and bear with patience evils which he trusted would soon be removed, as lie-bad reason to think a very important change would speedily take place in bis situation.

A fortnight passed over, and Laura arid Marianne felt every day more irksome than the last, and, but for Alfred-s visits, would have given themselves qufte up to despair. i

Miss Vincent had at first attempted to commence a violent flirtation with Alfred, but finding her advances treated with coolness and reserve, she changed her plan, and endeavoured, by the most premoditated insolence, to drive him from the house. To her cost, however, she found she was provoking two enemies, whose cool well-bred sarcasms were more than a match for her malevolence, and her hatred and enmity increased in proportion towards those whose attachment and consequent happiness she envied.

At Mrs. Vincent's often repeated request, Alfred one day accepted her invitation to join a party of friends who were to dine the next day with her, but Miss Vincent's eyes expressed her triumph, when, after keeping the dinner back half an hour, no Mr. Huntly came.

Laura was sorry, for she felt, that Alfred, if he had afterwards repented his engagement, ought at least to have apologized, but her vexation was soon converted into surprise, when, just as the cloth was beiug removed, Alfred entered the room, and, witbou. noticing the flood of reproaches and " so sorrys" which the lady hostess began to pour, requested instantly to apeak with Mr. Vincent.





"Well, what the dickens is the matter?" exclaimed Mrs. Vincent, as soon as the door was shut on them, "I think, howsoever, Mr. Huntly might have said as how he was sorry be hadn't come afore, I shant order the dinner back, I'm sure.'*

"Oh! I'd have a fresh one cooked to suit his hours," observed Miss Vincent, "though upon my word, mamma, you do keep abominable vulgar hours; nobody that knows any thing about gentility dines before six or seven o'clock."

A summons to Laura to attend her father, interrupted this conversation; and upon her entrance, she found both him and Alfred greatly agitated.

"Here's a singular piece of business, Laura!" observed the former, u Edward has eloped with the lady, who was to have rivalled you with Alfred."

"Yes! your brother has carried off Charlotte Jefferson—Barnard, I should say," added Alfred, "and is by this time her husband. My uncle does not, as yet, know who she has eloped with; and if I can but conceal it till after our union, Laura, all will be right." He told me, just now, that I had his free consent to marry you; and that the arrangements he had made for my benefit, should remain in full force, the same as if I had married his ungrateful und undutiful daughter; Now if you, Laura, will, but for once, lay aside your pride and prejudices, and return with me, my father and mother will receive you with open arms, and my uncle will not he able to retract, even if the secret should come to his ears before we are married: which, if you will listen to my ardent solicitations, for a licence can be procured to night, and to-morrow , .





Laura interrupted him.— :, f

Stop! stop, Alfred! do not let your fancy run away with you in this manner. What would your uncle, your friends, think of me, to act in this hasty manner?"

"Think! They would think as I do; that Laura Vincent is superior to affectation," returned the sanguine Alfred;"but at this moment, the conference was at once broken up, by a summons to Alfred to return home immediately, Mr. Barnard having broken a bloodvessel, in a paroxysm of rage, and being considered in imminent danger. ... .

Alfred turned pale; but he staid not to utter a single word of comment: and Laura and her father were left together.

"This will be a good thing for you, probably, Laura," observed Mr. Vincent, after a few moments' silence, ** but it will be a sad job for Ned, for he will, most likely, have saddled himself with a wife, without making any thing by it.'' i

"Alfred will act honorably and generously, I am sure,'' returned Laura, coolly; "but Miss Barnard, or Edward's wife, ("as I suppose she now is) possessed more than a moderate fortune in jewels, which 1 dare say they have taken care to secure."

"They were fools else," returned Mr. Vincent, "but come, the company will wonder what keeps us; though I suppose it will be-as well for the present to be silent."

Laura eagerly assented to this, and requesting her father to send Marianne to her, left him to frame what excuse he pleased for her absence.





To her great surprise, with Marianne came Miss Vincent; who, endeavouring to veil her curiosity under the pretext of sympathy for her clear Laura, came to hope nothing unpleasant had occurred to MrHuntly or his family.

Laura, who properly appreciated the motives of this sympathy, briefly replied, "that she was not at liberty, at present, to speak of Mr. Huntly's family affairs;" and the young lady, after two or three ineffectual attempts to the same effect, at length returned to the company, with a hope expressed, but not meant, that Laura and Marianne would speedily follow her.

Laura, however, was too agitated to think of encountering the curiosity which she knew would reignamongst Mrs. Vincent's company; and Marianne, gladly assented to her proposal,that they should remain together.

Mrs. Vincent, however, in a short time, made her appearance; and, on Laura's pleading that some circumstances had occurred, which rendered her and her sister unfit for company, she appeared violently offended; and, in a very angry tone, remarked, * that she did't think it was pretty in young girls to give themselves such airs, and have so many secrets."

"And as to your father, miss, I assure you," she continued, " L assure you, I sha'ntput up with no nonsense! He took me for better or worse; and if he's to have wisitors and underhand doings, and I'm to be kept in the dark and made look like a fool, for the sake of his children,"

Laura interrupted her, impatiently.—





"Any thing you have to say about my father, madam, will be better said in his presence: but with regard to myself, I assure you, my wish of remaining in my own room does not arise from any disrepect towards you or your company; but that I am really flurried and unwell."

"Well, Miss Laura, I'm sure I dont wish to force you," returned the lady; "but I think it would do you more good than sitting mumping up here by yourselves: howsomever, I'll send you some tea if you pur gists."

Heartily glad to get rid of her, Laura, with all due thankfulness, accepted the offer of tea ;,but before it was concluded, Alfred was announced to be waiting in the parlour to see her, and Laura immediately ran down.

"My dear Laura!" he exclaimed, "my uncle is dying: and, it appears, the only wish he has ungratified, is that of seeing us united. It is a whim for which he can give no reasonable motive; but it is a happy one for me, if you will consent. His physicians do not think he can live many days; and he himself thinks death still nearer. Will you then consent to my former proposal, and let to-morrow morning, unite us beyond the power of fate to separate us."

Laura hesitated, blushed, and trembled; but, at length, agreed to be decided by her father.

With more alacrity than she had shewn for some months, Marianne flew to fetch her father; and he immediately acceded to Alfred's proposal.

It was therefore settled that Mr. Vincent should go with the latter, to procure the licence, at once, without noticing his intention to any one ; and that at nine the next morning, Alfred should bring his sister Caroline in Mr. Barnard's carriage to fetch Laura and Marianne, while Mr. Vincent was to meet them at St. James's church, to witness the ceremony.





They departed; but Mrs; Vincent had been too closely on the watch, not to discover, instantly, that her Hsband, as she called him, was gone out without notifying his intentions to her; and, with her red face, rendered still more flaming by rage, she rushed into the room, and loudly demanded where Mr. Vincent was gone to.

"My father will inform you when he returns, madam," replied Laura.

This answer, far from pacifying, encreased the lady's rage; and in the most vulgar and abusive terms, she proceeded to accuse Laura and Marianne of caballing with their father, and setting him on to do things he ought'nt to do without consulting her.

"And who's he most right to strive to please, miss," she concluded " me or you ?—me that took him and you both into my house, when you hIul'nt a place bigger than a pigstye to put your heads in: and here am I, keeping you both in idleness, and treating you like my own darter,»

"Ah J you're properly punished," interrupted the dutiful daughter, whom her mamma's vociferation had brought to her elbow. "You've brought an old house over your head; and serve you right too, for making a fool of yourself at your time of life!"

Mrs. Vincent's rage was now transferred to her gentle daughter, and Marianne and Laura, both took advantage of the violence of their contention, to escape to their own room, the door of which they locked, and





remained silent, even to the entreaties of Miss Vincent, that they would let her in for a moment only. .»

The company had all departed, before the loud knock and ringing of the bell, announced Mr. Vincent's return; but he was no sooner in the passage than the storm, which had been gathering in Mrs. VinceYit's bosom, commenced.

Laura listened, not without soma anxiety, to the war of words, in which she plainly distinguished Miss Vincent's voice, raised to a pitch, nearly equal to her mother's; but, at length, the parlour door opened, and she beard her father say,—

"You are not going to put me in leading strings* I assure you; so I'll be if I give you any satisfaction on the subject." He then hastily ascended the stairs. Laura closed her door; and, tapping at it as he passed, he exclaimed,— '.

"Laura, my girl, all's right! mind you're ready in the morning."

Laura uttered a faint, " yes!" and he proceeded to his chamber, whither Mrs. Vincent, after a short consultation with her daughter, followed, and silence was once more restored.

Neither Marianne or Laura, however, felt inclined to rest: the latter, in the suddenness of the event which was at hand, could scarcely bring herself to believe in its reality; while the former was divided between smiles and tears; the one of rejoicing for her beloved sister's happiness, the other deploring her own hopeless fate.

Some few feminine anxieties too, about the style of dress they should assume, occupied their attention. Marianne would have persuaded her sister to wear the dress which had been provided for a former occasion; but Laura considered that they would be too showy: and it was at length concluded, that they should wear plain white gowns, and the white satin hats and veils, which had never been worn since the eventful morning of the intended marriage with Mr. Stanfield, only laying aside the feathers.





Tho/time was nearly arrived, and Marianne, who was already dressed, was trying to rally Laura out of her pensive thoughtfulness, when a parcel was brought op, which the maid said, a servant in livery had just brought, and, opening it, Marianne displayed to her sisters two most valuable and elegant Indian shawls, with a note for Mrs. Huntly, begging the sisters would accept and wear them on the present happy occasion.

"This is quite a fairy gift," exclaimed Marianne, as she threw the shawl over her sister's. graceful form. At this moment, Miss Vincent entered, and her colour faded with envy as she in afaultering tone, observed,—

"Are you going out so soon as this, and so dressed too? but I suppose those are not real shawls.

"Lord! Betsy, you must be blind to doubt that," exclaimed her mama, who had followed close behind her : "they're real Ingy; and as to going out so soon, why, perhaps, you would, like to go out too on sic A a arrand."

The nod and wink which accompanied this speech explained, more than even the words, the purport of the unusual preparations she beheld, and Miss Vincent, throwing herself into a chair, gave way to a violent floods of tears, while she declared.. that it was cruel and shameful to treat her with such contempt, and not let her attend her sisters to church.





Laura remained silent; and, at this moment, the carriage stopt at the door, and Mrs. Vincent hustled down to receive Mr. Huntiy* Miss Vincent ran to the front window to look at the carriage, almost forgetting her mortification, in the gratification it gave her pride to see such a beautiful equipage standing at" mama's" door, and all the neighbours staring.

Her tears, however, returned, when Laura, as she passed the room-door, politely wished her good morning, and, to her interrogation of

"Why, you're coming back, arn't you?" replied,

"I believe not. 1 rather think we go directly to Mr. Huntly's."

** What, and don't you invite any of your friends?" exclaimed the young lady, in a tone of angry disappointment.

Laura replied in the negative, and hastily descending the stairs, was, in a moment, seated by her friend Caroline, without waiting to reply to the philippic which Miss Vincent commenced against " shabbiness," "ill treatment,'* and " ingratitude."

The clergyman was already in waiting, the ceremony was performed, and, in a few minutes, (the family having removed with Mr. Barnard from the city to St. James's Square,) Laura found herself in the midst of the Huntiy family, all vieing with each other who should receive her with the warmest welcome.

"How is my uncle?" was Alfred's first inquiry.

"He appears somewhat stronger, and anxiously waits your return, which I will now announce to him," replied Mrs. Huntiy.





In a short time she returned, and beckoned Laura and Alfred to follow her.

The dying man was raised in bed, and Laura trembled at the ghastly expression of his countenance, but she approached at his signal.

"You are married then," he observed, in a faint voice.

Laura blushingly replied in the affirmative.

"There then, take this;" and he put a paper into her hand, "but mind, I charge you with my last breath, not to let that vile hussey, my daughter, have one sixpence, if she should starve in the street."

Laura shuddered at this implacability; and at this instant a noise of violent contention was heard in the passage, the door was thrown forcibly open, and Charlotte, the reprobated daughter, rushed in.

"You only want to keep me from my father for your owp purposes j" she exclaimed with vehemence, "but I will see him, and hear from his own mouth,—"

Mr. Barnard raised himself up in the bed with a supernatural strength.

"Take her away," he exclaimed, "the vile deceitful serpent! I will strangle her with my own hands if she comes near me!"

Alfred endeavoured to prevent her approach; but a scream from Laura recalled his attention to the invalid, and turning, he beheld him gasping in the agonieji of death.

The daughter, whosa violence had precipitated this event, stood motionless and horror-struck; while the family, alarmed by the exclamation of Laura, all crowded into the room, and with them Edward Vincent, who, acting the deepest sympathy for his newlymade relative, advanced to offer his assistance, if it could be of any avail.





The dying man fixed his eyes sternly upon him, and Alfred, in a low voice, entreated him to leave the room and take Charlotte with him.

Edward looked fiercely at him :— i'

"I know not, sir, who can be so proper to attend Mr. Barnard as his daughter 5 but you probably have your reasons—"

Laura eagerly interfered.—

"Edward, be not unjust. Alfred is incapable of such views, and we are now one family; pray be guided by him."

Edward reluctantly led his wife from the room, and in a few moments Mr. Barnard breathed his last.

The grief which Charlotte thought necessary to display on this information, was soon superseded, by her earnest desire to learn how her deceased parent had disposed of his immense property, and her rage was only exceeded by her husband's, at finding that, with the exception of bills, to the amount of five thousand pounds, which the paper contained that he had put into Laura's hands, the whole was left unconditionally toMr. Huntly senior, who, however, immediately declared his intention of bestowing on her what any one else would have considered a very handsome fortune; but it was plain that Charlotte bitterly regretted the sacrifice she had made to her passions, and it was equally clear that Edward, who had no other view in marrying her than her fortune, was little disposed to compensate, by tenderness, for her disappointment. He, however, dissembled his feelings with ^ much more skill than his unruly bride, and took his leave, with many expressions of grRtitude to Mr. Huntly for his intended generosity.





The decease of Mr. Barnard, rendered it necessary for Laura and Marianne to return to their disagreeable home, for a few days; but the anxiety Miss Vincent felt, to be introduced, through their means, into company superior to any she had ever yet associated with, induced her to dismiss all her airs, and assume the most servile civility, while her mama took every opportunity of enforcing, on both Laura and Marianne, the claims which her near relationship gave her; but her disappointment and her daughter's were both at the height, when they found the bride and bridegroom intended to leave London for some weeks, as soon as the funeral was over, and the marriage, which was for the present kept secret, acknowledged; and not a hint was given of the company of either mother or daughter being required.

It was in vain, however, that Mrs. Vincent exerted her interest with her husband, to prevail on him to refuse his consent to Marianne's accompanying her sister. In vain she reproached him with indifference, and even cruelty, to his own and first-born child, his darter Betsy: Mr. Vincent was too well pleased with the prospect of getting his daughters so well off his hands, and being rid of the perpetual, though tacit reproach, their looks and manners conveyed, when contrasted with those of his new connexions, and he therefore, without the least hesitation, agreed to Alfred's proposal, that Marianne should, so long as she was single, reside with him and her sister.

The sight of a handsome brilliant ring, which Laura presented her with, somewhat dissipated the cloud which obscured Mrs. Vincent's features; but not even an elegant gold and turquoise suite, could reconcile Miss Betsey to the exaltation of those whom she disliked, with all the malignity that little narrow minds ever feel towards those who excel tbem in mind, manners, and accomplishments.





She therefore beheld the preparations for the sister's removal, with a dissatisfaction sbe could not conceal, and when the carriage drew up to the door, which was to convey them to Mr. Huntly's, she shut herself up in her chamber, and remained sullenly silent, when her mother called to her to come and bid her sisters good bye.

"Thank heaven!" exclaimed Laura, when the carriage drove from the door, "we have bidden farewel, I hope for ever, to Sherrard street." .

The character of Mr. Barnard had been such, as to call for very little beyond the outer semblance of mourning from bis relatives; and the natural solemnity which death inspires in the human mind, bad indeed depressed the spirits of the family, while the remains of their relative continued unfouried 5 but with the last service they could render him, this feeling vanished, and never perhaps had a happier family party assembled than the Huntly's, on the morning appointed for their departure from town ;the elder ones to take possession of the beautiful seat in Devonshire, which had fallen to them as the heirs of Mr. Barnard ; and the younger party, including Alfred, his bride, and Marianne, on a tour of pleasure to the Lakes, previous to their rejoining Mr. and Mrs. Huntly at Bamard Hall, as their relation had ostentatiously named his newly acquired residence, which it appeared he was doomed never to inhabit.





The carriages drew up to the door, and Mr. Huntly observed,—

"Well, we have nothing now left to do, but say good-bye to one another, I believe, if Edward Vincent would come: I appointed to see him at eleven: but I believe it is now past that hour."

Alfred looked at his watch.—

"It is just eleven, sir; Edward will be punctual, I dare say."

At this moment a servant announced a gentleman to speak with Mr. Huntly; and the latter supposing it was Edward, observed,—

"What is the whim for not sending up his name, I wonder? Shew him in here, James; there needs no reserve among such near relations," he continued, speaking to Mrs. Huntly, "and Edward can feel no humiliation, in receiving from me the same provision I have made for my own sons."

The door re-opened before he had well done speaking; and Julian Carleton, his face glowing with health and happiness, and his whole appearance betokening the complete renovation of his hopes and circumstances, entered the room. ,.

Mr. Huntly, seeing a stranger, instead of him whom he had expected, advanced towards him, and Marianne, uttering a faint scream, threw herself into her sister's arms. - - -. .

Julian darted toward* her.—

"Marianne here!—this is beyond my hopes! but will you not speak to me, Marianne ¥ What is the meaning of this?" he exclaimed, while shuddering with horror. Marianne withdrew her hand from his eager grasp: "Laura too, cold and silent!" he con





tinued, looking at the latter; "how have I deserved this?" .. .. m v:

"Does not your own heart tell you, Julian?" observed Laura, with severity, "If it does not, take this assurance from me, that Marianne disclaims all connexion with a profligate and a hypocrite."

"Who dares beside yourself call me either?" exclaimed Julian, with vehemence, and glancing his proud eye round on Alfred, who, with a look of equal defiance, advanced towards him. At this moment Edward Vincent entered the room, and Julian's suspicions were instantly transferred to him. He darted towards him.—

"Is it to you, sir, that I am indebted, for the vile fabrications which have procured me this reception from your sisters?" he impetuously exclaimed.

Edward looked astonished; but before he could answer, Alfred interposed.

"It is to me, sir, that you are to address yourself, for it was from me that Laura and Marianne Vincent received the caution which was intended, and, I am happy to say, succeeded in guarding them against your arts."

Julian's whole frame trembled with passion,—he could scarcely articulate the words,—

"It is well, sir, very well:" and then, in a low tone, he added,—" Your name is—*!

"Alfred Huntly," returned the latter, and Julian was about to leave the room, as hastily as he entered; but Marianne, springing from her sister, threw herself before Ifim.





"Julian!" she exclaimed, "I cannot, I will not believe you guilty; clear yourself then from these dreadful imputations. There are none here but friends and relations,—none who will not rejoice with me to find you innocent."

"To you, Marianne, I will hereafter prove it;" be replied, with comparative calmness, "but I acknowledge no other person's right to question my conduct. Farewel! and with a look to Alfred, which seemed to say, "Our business ends not here !" he rushed out of the room.

"He is innocent,—I know he is! he has been grossly slandered," exclaimed Marianne, with vehemence, and looked reproachfully at Alfred, who seemed lost in thought.

Laura's pale cheek and quivering lip, shewed how deeply she partook of her sister's feelings, not unmixed with feelings of another kind, which she hesitated to own.

She had observed the threatening glances which passed between the two impetuous young men, and her heart thrilled with terror at the ideas they had suggested. Her present attentions, however, were all called for by Marianne, whose feelings became so aeute, from the suspence she suffered, that it required all Laura's alternate soothing and remonstrance, to aUay them.

"It is very odd," muttered Edward Vincent, turning from the window, to which he had walked on Julian's disappearance.

Mr. Hundy asked to what be alluded.

"Only the appearance that my cousin Julian makes.'" returned Edward, " He is mounted on a most beautiful horse, and followed by a livery servant." . »:





"There is nothing wonderful in that:" observed Alfred,, contemptuously, "People of his profession

assume a variety of characters;—he is now playing the gentleman."

This observation was received in silence, for more than one in the room, began to think that Alfred's severity was misapplied, and that Julian would eventually clear himself from the imputations thrown on him.

Mr. fluntly now entered into the business for which he had requested Edward's attendance ; and the latter beheld, with numerous professions of gratitude,' and very evident surprise, a deed, by which, in right of his wife, he became possessed of five hundred a year, and Alfred received a similar gift.

All was now arranged for their journey, but Marianne still continued so dreadfully agitated, that it was found necessary to postpone it for a few hours, and the family were still together, when Alfred was called out on business.

Laura examined his countenance when he returned with the greatest anxiety: but all there was unmoved and serene, and he laughed at her, when she acknowledged that she had feared some unpleasant communication from Julian.

/ To his father only, he apparently, after some minutes of reflection, communicated what had transpired, and the latter himself announced that they must finally delay their journey till the morrow, as some unexpected business called for Alfred's attention.





Laura was now quite satisfied, she was sure, that Mr. Huntiy would not be Alfred's confident, if any mischief was intended; and she retired for the night, without the smallest uneasidess, leaving Alfred writing in the library.





CHAPTER THE THIRTY-SIXTH.



"Then comet those full confidings of the past;

All sunshine now, where all was overcast:

Then do they wander till the day is gone,

Lost in each other."



Rogers.

BOILING with rage, Julian returned from bis interview at Mr. Huntly's, whose residence he bad accidentally discovered, and bad visited with the hopes of learning what had become of his uncle Vincent and family.

Of Laura's marriage, he had not heard, and therefore felt still more enraged at what he considered unwarrantable interference on the part of Alfred.

From Mr. Carleton he had received permission to make such proposals to Mr. Vincent, that it was not in the scale of probabilities, the latter, with all hismalignancy, would refuse him the hand of his daughter, and Julian, therefore, felt the greater disappointment, from the sanguine hopes he had entertained, that all his difficulties would cease, the moment he could discover his Marianne's retreat.





Aware of the light in which Julian would be beheld by the Huntly's, Mr. Austin had taken upon himself to see them first, and make the necessary enquiries, but a fit of the gout had seized him; and Julian impatient of the delay, and unconscious of their prejudices, resolvedto wait no longer for his friend's recovery, but without ceremony, call in St. James's Square himself.

The result we have related.

Anxious to save his kind uncle from all unnecessary uneasiness, Julian assumed a cheerful look when he returned home.

In the drawing-room he found Mr. Austin and Richard Stanfield, the first having contrived to hobble there on crutches, and the latter having just returned from a visit to his new estates.

Julian received them both with welcome, and they readily agreed to stay dinner at Mr. Carleton's request.

Richard had a great deal to communicate to his friend, Julian, and together they walked into tbe library.

"Well, I have been down to see my Zephalinda," observed Richard, "and found the poor little thing pining to death, at my disappearance."

I carried with me sufficient documents to introduce me to the old man, and he has consented to receive tae for a son-in-law, for of course I would not fly from my engagements, merely because I no longer wanted the poor girl's fortune. I think she really loves me, and will make a good wife, and that, yon know, is every thing.

Julian cordially congratulated him, and commended his honourable conduct, and Richard then commenced an enquiry, as to how he had succeeded with Marianne.





** Can yon keep a secret?" demanded Julian, " I have need of your assistance, but I cannot trust yon without a solemn promise, that"

"' By this pale queen of night, I swear 1*" exclaimed Richard, interrupting him.

H Psha! this is a serious business ; so leave off trifling,'1 returned Julian.

Richard gave the desired promise, and Julian related all that had passed at Mr. Huntly's, concluding with,

"There is but one mode in which I can act ; and, as my friend, I must beg you to convey a letter from me to that insolent young man, and make proper arrangements with him."

Richard's fiery face faded into a deep purple hoe, and his cheek chattered with fright.

"The Lord have mercy on me!" he exclaimed; "Going to fight a duel, and make me accessary. Do you think I can bear it,—do you think I could stand to see you shot?"

"Then 1 must go without you,'' replied Julian, gravely, " but remember your promise.''

Richard most reluctantly remembered it: but all his rhetoric failed to alter Julian's resolution; and at length, piqued at his sarcasms on bis pusillanimity, Richard accepted the office Julian forced on him.

Properly instructed, therefore, and with a solemn promise that he would offer no concessions, Richard waited on Alfred directly, and a meeting was arranged to take place at day-break.

During the evening, Richard's uneasiness was so evident, as to excite repeated remarks from.Mr. Carleton, and Julian, in spite of his efforts to appear cheerfill, was unable sometimes to repress tke heavy sigh which arose from his reflections on what the morning might produce. His principles, the precepts of his revered father, all rose up in array against the course he had adopted: but he stifled the voice of conscience, and when he parted with Richard at night, his manner was firm and determined, as he observed,— "Remember my friend, five o'clock."— "I shall engage a surgeon to attend us," replied Richard, in a trembling voice.





"If you know one you can depend on," returned Julian.

Richard nodded assent, and they parted.— At the appointed hour, Julian left his uncle's house undiscovered, and, at the bottom of the street, found Richard and another gentleman in a post-chaise waiting for him ; the latter so muffled up, that it was some time before he discovered his friend Mr. Austin.

"What does this mean?" he exclaimed angrily to Richard.

"It means that I am come to see justice done you!'' returned Mr. Austin, in a firm tone.

"Then you are welcome," replied Julian, with animation.

Richard looked at Mr. Austin with surprise: it was evident he had anticipated a different result from his manouvre, in engaging him for the attending surgeon, and he could not conceal his disappointment and consternation, as they advanced towards the appointed spot on the Uxbridge road.

In a few minutes Alfred and his second appeared, and Mr. Austin, who had remained in the chaise, insisted, in spite of Julian's remonstrances, on alighting;





and, propped «n his crutches, awaited tfceir arrival Richard, with a doleful look, standing beside him.

Alfred bowed slightly, and Julian as haughtily returned his salutation; but when <he former's eye glanced on Mr. Austin, he started, and in a tone of astonishment, exclaimed,—

"Good heavens I-—Mr. Austin here!"

"Yes r* replied the latter, "the real culprit in this affair stands before you. To Mr. Huntly, I firstacknowledge, that every word L uttered derogatory to Julian Carleton's character, I have since found to be false; and to you, Julian, I offer the only reparation in my power, my sincere contrition : if that is not sufficient, I will give you a chance of blowing my brains out."

"My respected friend!*-' exclaimed Julian, seizing his hand, "1 know you have neveu voluntarily calumniated me,—and to error we are all liable."

"We are indeed," said Alfred, advancing and tendering his hand to Julian. "I entreat, Mr. Carleton, I may be included in this amnesty, for most sincerely do I regret my injurious language towards you."

A loud huzza from Richard, prevented Julian's reply; but he took with cordiality the pledge of peace thus ingenuously tendered, and as soon as they could moderate Richard's transports, who danced, sung, and then wept for joy, it was agreed they should all return as quickly as possible, to prevent their absence occasioning alarm to their connexions.

To Richard Stanfield was entrusted the task of reflating the events of the morning to Mr. Carleton; while Julian and Mr. Austin, with Alfred, hastened to Mr Huntly's.

The moment the chaise stopped, Laura, with ter ror in bet looks, appeared at the door; but when she discovered Alfred and Julian seated together, she clasped her hands with rapture; and, but that Alfred sprung to her assistance, would have sunk on the ground.





A burst of tears, however, quickly relieved her; and most cordially she returned Julian's embrace.

Mr. Huntly at this moment entered the hall, and Alfred learnt with pleasure, that his mother and sisters knew nothing of his absence, Laura having heroically concealed her terrors from all but the anxious father.

"My presentiments were right:" said Mr. Huntly, s miling benevolently on Julian, "My son has discovered that he was misinformed, and Mr. Carleton has accepted his apologies."

Julian bowed, and the happy party proceeded to the breakfast room, where they were soon joined by the female part of the family; who, though somewhat curious to know how the reconciliation had been brought about, did not appear to have any suspicion of the hostile intent with which the parties had met that morning.

Laura left the room ; and Julian, with a throbbing heart, watched the door, in hopes of seeing her return.

At length she returned, but alone; and Julian's countenance betrayed his disappointment. Laura smiled archly at him as she whispered,—

"When you are quite at leisure, there is a person in the next room, who"

Julian waited not to hear the conclusion, nor to offer any apology; but instantly rushed from the room, and the next moment his beloved Marianne, trembling, blushing, but yet happy beyond the power of expression, was encircled in his arms.





The language of lovers is seldom either very interesting or very intelligible to any but themselves. It is sufficient, therefore, to say that Marianne found Julian's eloquence irresistible, and the latter was made supremely happy, by her promise to be his the moment her father gave his consent, and proper arrangements could be made.

Time passed so rapidly and unobserved, by. the happy pair, that Laura was at length compelled to remind them, that it was necessary they should remember there were others in the world beside themselves; and Julian, leaving the sisters together, returned to ttte breakfast room, where he received an invitation to spend the evening, Mr: Huntly having, during his absence, considerately proposed to postpone their journey for another week.

Mr. Carletonreceived his nephew with feelings he could not conceal, for he had learnt from the overjoyed Richard, the peril to which he had been exposed, of losing this only object of his hopes and affection.

He listened with complacency, to Julian's rapturous expressions of his happiness, at being thus restored to Marianne's affection, and acknowledged that, from what he had himself seen of her, in his casual encounter at the jeweller's shop, she was quite deserving all his nephew's admiration.

On the following morning, Julian waited on Mr. Vicent; and with the most servile expressions of pleasure, at the alteration in his (Julian's) situation, and hopes of his future happiness, the former accepted him, unconditionally, as the husband of Marianne.

Mrs. Vincent was profuse in her civilities, and seemed to think the exaltation of her husband's daughten reflected some credit on herself; but her daughter Betstty, swelled with envy and malignity, as she sat at the window, alternately glancing from the elegant young man, to the splendid carriage which waited for him, and heard that they were both to be Marianne Vineent's, whom she had, but a few weeks before, looked down upon with so much contempt.





Julian was heartily glad to be released from this unpleasant interview; but his spirits rose, and his countenance resumed its usual animation, when he beheld Marianne, her cheeks restored to their bloom, and looking even more beautiful than he had ever beheld her, waiting his arrival, alone, in the drawing room at St. James's square.

The whole of Mr. Huntly's family, including, of course, Laura and Marianne, were engaged to dine with Mr. Carleton ; and Julian had the supreme pleasure of conveying his lovely cousins, together with Alfred Huntlv, thither in his own carriage, for snch Mr. Carleton's liberality had made it.

"I will not have your feelings towards me clogged, by the consciousness of dependance:" he observed, a few days after his first interview with Julian, "by that deed you are your own master. If you marry I shall double the sum mentioned, and at my death you will find youf possessions farther encreased. No thanks, Julian; in your society and affection, I shall find sufficient compensation."

The gift thus unostentatiously bestowed, Julian found, amounted to a thousand a year; and with gratitude beyond the power of expression, he accepted what sit far exceeded his most sanguine wishes and expectations.





Mr. Carleton received Marianne, with evident admiration, and eyes glistening with tenderness; and Julian's fond heart swelled with transport, as his uncle placed her at the head of the table, observing, " that a very few days would, he hoped, render that her permanent station."

Marianne's cheeks were dyed with the deepest crimson; but her sparkling eyes evinced, that this would not be retarded by her.

Julian's happiness might now be considered complete. Yet there was one subject that dwelt heavy ou his mind. He had that very morning received a letter from Stuart, requesting to see him in Newgate ; and he had learned, that there scarcely existed a probability, that either Stuart or his companions would be saved from an ignominious death. Unworthy as they were, Julian could not reflect on the hours they had passed together, the talents which Stuart possessed, and above all, the kindness the latter had always shewed towards himself, without feeling the deepest, affliction at the state to which the former was reduced.

On the following morning he visited the prison, accompanied by his uncle.

Stuart attempted to receive them with calmness and fortitude: but his pale countenance and quivering lip mocked the effort, and Julian's agitation was excessive.

"I have one request to make, Carleton," he said, "and I have no friend in the world beside yourself. I have married an amiable girl, and though she will not need pecuniary help, she will want consolation and direction when I am gone. Promise me then"

"I do most solemnly," returned Julian, greatly affected, "I will do all that you wish; but I hope—*•





"I have no hopes!" interrupted Stuart, with quickness, yet in a solemn tone, that showed he felt what he said; "I have long foreseen that to this conclusion it must come at last, and I am prepared for the worst. From one crime I am thankful I am spared. When 1 first met with you, Carleton, it was my intention to have made your ingenuousness and ignorance of the ways of the world, subservient to my purposes. I planned to make you my dupe in the first instance, and then, by degrees, initiate you into the mode by which, for some years, I had been enabled to indulge in idleness and luxury; but your virtues awed even me into respect, esteem, and forbearance, and you escaped."

"And how, Stuart, could such a heart as your's become so vitiated in the first instance," said Julian, gazing with feelings of the deepest pity and commiseration, at the almost convulsed countenance of the selfcondemned culprit.

A smile of the deepest irony banished from Stuart's face the expression of melancholy retrospection and future hopelessness, which had, but a moment before, rendered it so interesting.

"It is impossible, Carleton, for me now to unfold to you the minute causes which led me first to feel that every means which would enhance my own fortune were excusable. Mary Hamilton has, I have no doubt, given you a detail in her own colours, of the early part of my life. Well, let that pass ;—your countenance tells me you think me a monster. Yet, there was a time when my heart was pure and ingenuous as your own, and as sensible to every impression it received. That they were such as soiled and defaced the tablet, is attributable to the carelessness and negligence of those, who, should have guarded and watched over my early years, truly might I say with one, whom, in misfortune, if not in talent, I have resembled—





« ———— No mother's care

Shielded my infant innocence wilh prayer;

No father's guardian hand my youth sustained,

Call'd forth my virtues, or from vice restrain'd."



To the father of Mary Hamilton I was certainly indebted, (as she no doubt has told you) for education and support; but beyond this he had nought to give. He was a weak, credulous being, ever yielding to the impulse of the moment, and the most unfit in the world to have the guidance of one who needed a firm and an enlightened mind, to conduct his first footsteps in this scene of fraud and folly, which I am so soon to quit."

Stuart paused,—and wiped the cold dew from his brow, which, in spite of his attempt at calmness, his last reflection created.

Julian averted his head, to conceal the tears, which, in spite of manhood, forced their way; and after a short pause, Stuart proceeded,—

"I was unfortunate, Carleton, in the very onset of my life. I became a dupe to the artifices of a woman on whom my soul doated with feelings such as none since could awaken. She was unprincipled, unfeeling! she was a fiend, but it was veiled under the form and graces of an angel. I cannot enter into circum* stantial details: suffice it to say, that to her blandishments and my subsequent discovery of her worthlessness, I owe my ruin. From being preyed upon, 1 learnt to prey on others; from being deceived, I learnt to doubt even truth itself. My experience has confirmed the maxim which was taught me, that mankind are divided but into two classes, knaves and fools ; and that the latter are the proper prey of the former. There are some incongruous mixtures, indeed of both in one person, and there are a few exceptions: you, Carleton, without flattery, I rank among the latter, and there needs no other proof than my being here, to place him who first introduced you to my notice, the sapient Mr. Ryland, in the first class, but he will suffer for it,—yes, thereisone comfort, I shall not go alone, and hewilldiedespisedby all, for his cowardice and.treachery."





There was an expression of malice and revenge in Stuart's face, as he uttered these words; which made Julian tremble, and turn away with a feeling of abhorrence; but Stuart soon dismissed this theme, and in a melancholy tone, resumed :—

"Retrospection, Carleton, is, I feel, alike useless and wrong. I will therefore devote the few remaining moments, before we part for ever, to the subject that is nearest my heart.

When I parted from you, in consequence of some discoveries which Ryland's folly had made, I retired, by a circuitous route into Wales, and there, under the character of an artist engaged in taking views of the surrounding scenery, I passed my time in as much security as the total absence of suspicion in those by whom I was surrounded, and the utmost precaution on my part, could afford me.. ,

Here I became acquainted with one whose virtues, even had I been more depraved than I was, must have fixed my esteem, while her beauties excited my warmest admiration. She was the daughter of a deceased artist of eminence, and was attending her mother in a slow recovery from a long fit of illnesss, for which she had been induced to try the pure air of South Wales. 1 was occupied in sketching the features of the surrounding landscape, when her mother and herself aeoidcntally strayed to the spot where I was seated. My avocation interested them both, and the elder lady instantly entered into conversation on 4 subject which railed forth a thousand tender remembrances on her part, and some sincere commendations-on mine, of the merit of him she regretted.





Emily listened, with a smile on her lip, and a tear in her eye, and I who had learntto read the heart of woman in its roost secret wiles could easily see that she thought as much of the living artist as the dead one.

I accompanied them to their lodgings, and became the instructor of the youthful Emily in the art of which her father bad taught her the rudiments. Her mother was delighted at herproficieney, but she soon discovered that Emily was learning another lesson: in short, that the pupil and the master were both deeply in love with each other. 1 frankly avowed that I had no fortune but my pencil. But Emily's father had b egan the world with no better prospects, and he had been enabled to leave a handsome fortune behind him. The good old lady thought highly of my abilities, and she believed she confirmed her child's happiness, Lit bestowing her on the man of her heart.

It was now, Carleton, that I felt true remorse. You were the first who made me wish that I was indeed all you believed me, but the sentiment was transitory: your eyes were -in part-opened, and with exposure 28. 4 M





vanished my oompuuetion. But Emily's innocent affection,—her mother's trusting confidence, wrung me to the heart. A thousand times I was on the point of betraying myself,—of exposing to them the wretch, whom they believed all that was exalted and honourable ; but shame on the one hand, and my ardent passion for Emily prevailed over the dictates of my conscience, and I became the apparently happy, but in reality, the wretched, despairing husband of one on whom 1 would have conferred a diadem, had I had it in my power.

I now stedfastly resolved on a total relinquishment of all my former habits and connexions, and as far as my future conduct was concerned, determined to leave my Emily no reason to repent her choice ; but I still trembled from the fear of detection of my former habits, though 1 was somewhat consoled at finding from the papers, that Ryland and the other confederates had for the present escaped, from insufficiency of evidence against them.

After having, therefore, on various pretexts, protracted our stay in the country as long as possible, I consented to my mother-in-law's wishes, who pressed for our return to London, that she might introduce me to the friends and patrons of her late husband. The contumely of the whole world could not have produced the remorse aud compunction in my breast which the kindness and liberality with which I was treated on all hands, now excited. My talent for the art, which was to be my future profession, was extolled to the skies; and the mother of Emily was congratulated on her alliance with one who was destined to inherit her husband's fame as well as fortune. There was a time when I should have laughed at the success of my deception, but that time was gone, and I often wished to shrink into the earth, from these undeserved commendations. - j





There were other fears, too, which continually haunted me,—the dread of being recognized by some of my former confederates. I pretended to be devoted to a picture I was finishing for exhibition at the Royal Academy, and avoided as much as possible going out of the house. .

Emily's tender fears took the alarm:—her father had accelerated his death by intense application; and with gentle force, she insisted on my laying aside my pencil, and accompanying her to places likely to divert my mind.

I attended her to the theatres, &c, and by degrees my terrors abated. I saw none of my former associates, and I began to flatter myself, that feeling themselves insecure after the suspicions that had been raised against them, they had withdrawn from the metropolis. But this security lasted not long. You know how I was awakened from the flattering dream, by the conversation which you overheard between two of the unfeeling and unprincipled wretches, whose recognition I so much dreaded.

It seemed as if my evil genius was determined to pursue me to perdition. I had scarcely left your lodgings on, the day you sent for me, to warn me of my threatened danger, before I encountered the very men I was so anxious to avoid. They pounced upon me like kites upon a trembling sparrow. In vain I tried to prevaricate or to compromise,—they would hear of nothing but the full performance of an engagement we had once entered into, that all the property either became possessed of should be brought jinto the common stock; and they demanded still worse—that they should be introduced to my wife and her connexions, and be allowed to take advantage of the respectability of the latter, to advance their own interests.





Those who have been similarly entangled can alone imagine my feelings. I parted from them in a state approaching to madness; yet obliged to dissemble and acquiesce, in appearance, with all they required.

The next morning was appointed for our meeting again : but little time, therefore, remained for me to deci le how I should act. At one time I resolved to return no more to the innocent victim of my selfish passion. But the fear that my wretched associates might introduce themselves under some plausible pretext, and while they exposed my character, and ruined me in her esteem, establish themselves in her confidence, withheld me.

After walking about for two or three hours in a state of distraction, I resolved upon a desperate step. I wrote a note to my Emily, requiring her instantly to meet me at an inn in the city, and without entering into any further explanation, told her to bring'a change of clothes lor herself and me, as I was obliged to go into the country for a week or so: at the same time I enjoined strict secresy, and above all that she Would come alone.

As I feared, however, the anxious, affrighted mother came with her daughter. Emily threw herself into my arms in an agony of terror, exclaiming, 'That she was ready to go with me to the world's end!' But her more cautious and penetrating mother insisted that I should explain the cause of my mysterious proceedings, before she would consent to her daughter's going with me.





I tried to conceal my confusion under an affected air of resentment.

'Your daughter, madam, is my wife, and a duty paramount to that she owes you •

'Is she your wife, Charles ?" interrupted the old lady, with a piercing; look, in vvhioh her fears were but too visible.

I saw instantly the suspicion she had imbibed, and while I solemnly assured her that she wronged me in »indulging them, I let fall some expressions which induced the idea that pecuniary obligations, contracted before my marriage, induced my mysterious conduct.

Emily's colour returned to her cheeks, and her mother recovered her confidence.

'If it is money that you want, why not say so before, observed the benevolent old lady, ' I can instantly raise a thousand pounds, and if that is not sufficient——'

She paused for my answer, and with as much calmness as I could assume, I replied, that it was no debts of my own, that caused my embarrassment; and if she would have patience and confidence in me, all would yet be well.

'Will you go with Emily and me, dear madam, It. will be only a temporary inconvenience, and you have got a trusty housekeeper to whom a note will be sufficient to explain your absence?'

She hesitated,—and I again pressed her. Emily too, pleaded, and her mother yielded, and sat down to write the uecessary instructions to her servants, whil e I ordered the horses to be put to the post-chaise, which I had before bespoken.





'Where is it to go to, sir?' demanded the landlord.

1 had scarcely thought of this, but a moment's reflection induced me to prefer the sea-side, from whence I might make a retreat to the continent, if necessary, and I, therefore named Southampton.

While I was speaking, a man entered the house whose appearance led me to believe that he was an officer of the police: and with trembling steps, I returned mto the room in which I had left my wife and her mother.

Several mmutes elapsed and 1 began to hoDe his errand did not concern me. My Emily, with smiles of renewed confidence in my integrity, was already prepared for her journey, and talking with pleasure of a former visit she had made to Southampton ; and her mother, though serious and pensive, seemed disposed to believe in my assurances, that we should soon return, with an increase of health and happiness, from our hasty expedition, when the door opened, and the postillion booted and spurred, announced that he was ready.

I gave one arm to Emily, and the other to her mother, and prepared to follow him; but when I reached the door, two men, whose looks proclaimed their errand stood ready to intercept me. I felt as if the ground sank beneath me; but they left me not a moment in suspense. One of them instantly seizing me by the collar, exclaimed,—

'Mr. Stuart you know our business! We arrest you in the king's name, on a charge of forgery.'

Emily's hold relaxed; and with a scream that still rings in my ears, she sank on the ground. Her mother threw herself beside her, aad I saw them no more, for my inhuman conductors hurried me instantly away.





I found that, as I feared, my former partners in guilt, aware of my intentions, had tracked all my proceedings, and given the information which led to my seizure. But they will have their reward, though their time is not yet come."

Julian's feelings were painted on his countenance; but he forbore any remark on this disclosure; and Stuart, after giving him his wife's address, wrung his hand in silence, and motioned him to depart.

It was some hours before Julian could compose his mind ^sufficiently to. beareveu the conversation of his beloved Marianne; and while in secret he lifted up his heart to the Disposer of all good for his escape from the snares which had encompassed him, he_ forgot not the most ardent solicitations for mercy toward those, who were now suffering the penalty of their crimes and machinations.

The same newspapers which conveyed to the world the intelligence of the marriage of Mr. Julian Carleton, the heir of. the wealthy Mr. Carleton, late of Bengal, to Miss Marianne Vincent, his lovely and accomplished cousin, was filled with details of the trials of Stuart and his accomplices, the former of whom was sentenced to expiate, by the forfeiture of his life, his manifold offences against the laws of his country, while to the latter, mercy was only granted on condition, of perpetual expatriation. Fortunately Mr. Carleton arranged so well, that Julian was kept in ignorance, that the fate of his former guilty and wretched companions was decided; and immediately on their return from the altar, where Marianne and Julian had solemnly ratified those vows, which had long bound them to each other, they bade adieu to the metropolis for some months, and, with Alfred Huntly, and the happy Laura, proceeded to the seat of Mr. Huntly senior, from whence, after a few days stay, the whole party, including Mr. Carleton, and Richard Stanfield and his bride, embarked for Paris, where the beauty of the fair Englishwomen, and the splendour of their establishment, alike excited the admiration of the gay inhabitants of that capital.





Julian's happiness, however, was incomplete, until his return to his native country, where, by the princely bounty of his uncle, he was enabled to form an establishment and to his most sangume wishes, and of which his adored Marianne still continues the life, the light and ornament, while, every adverse circumstance softened by the mellowing hand of time, Julian reviews his past life with feelings only of gratitude to the supreme Arbiter of events, who suffers the wicked only to flourish for a time, and often suffers their own machinations to be the means of their detection.

Of the other characters, whom we have introduced to our readers, it will; perhaps, be satisfactory to give a brief account.

Within a few month of Julian's marriage Mr. Vincent fell a victim to his own intemperance, and thus, fortunately for her, saved the foolish woman who had married him, and her daughter, from the ruin which his extravagant habits gave them but too much reason to dread. His last hours were cheered by the kindest attentions on the part of Laura, Marianne, and Julian; while his worthless son, Edward Vincent, and his thoughtless wife, still continued, undisturbed the ca





reer ef dissipation and extranagaaoe into whiehi they had launched immediately aftec tbeie- marriage, and which haa ultimately reduced them to the utmost penury and distress. Edward is saw a clerk in as Atn torney's office, to the salary of which, Julian makes a handsome yearly addition; and the kin da ess of Marianne and Laura to his wife and numerous family, are unbounded; yet nothing can confer either happiness, or respectability, on this unworthy couple.

The contrast between them and Richard Stanfield* and his warm-hearted, though simple partner, is pleasing. The wealth which they inherited from their relatives, enables them at. once, to enjoy happiness themselves, and confer it on others.

The debt of gratitude which Julian owed to his humble friend, James the gardener, was not the last wbiub, he hastened to discharge. Disguising, however, the change in his situation, Julian determined to make one more trial of the attachment which the honest fellow had ever evinced towards him, and, therefore walked* unattended, to the gardener's cottage.

Every thing there, however, bore the appearance of neglect and decay. The qnce neat little garden was overgrown with weeds, and the windows broken and plastered up with paper, gave sufficient indication, of the poverty of the inhabitants.

Julian's knock at the door remained for some time unuoticed; but on a second summons, James himself, (but so pale and emaciated that the former scarcely recognized his once hale hearty friend) opened the door.

A glow of pleasure illumined his wan cheek, when he beheld Julian, and the latter, conceiving that it would be cruelty to sport with his feelings, in his present state, hastened to cheer him with the promise of permanent assistance, at the same time taking from bis pocket a well-filled purse, he placed it in the hand of the astonished and overjoyed invalid.





A long conversation ensued. Julian circumstantially related to his humble friend all that had occurred since they had parted, concluding with an expression of sorrow at the alteration which was visible in James's appearance, as well as the apparent absence of all the little comforts which were so necessary in his situation.

James's narrative was a melancholy, though a very common one. He had been seized with fever, just at the time his wife was confined with her first childThe family who employed him were on the continent* and an unfeeling steward had discharged him, without the smallest provision. His recovery was slow, and his wife continued weakly, while the care of her child prevented her doing any thing towards their maintenance.

One by one, all their little superfluities, and even their clothes had vanished, before they could stoop to ask for relief from the parish; but that very morning their honest pride had yielded to necessity, and his wife was gone with her infant to the overseer.

Julian heard this ricital with tears of commiseration; but sorrow was soon vanished by the joyful recollection that lie had it in his power to banish the fiend poverty from this once comfortable abode.

Iu a few weeks James was put in possession of a neat house and extensive garden grounds: his health and activity soon returned, and be is now a flourishing gardener, supplying the London markets with the produce of his own ground, the very finest, however, being always selected for his benefactor, whea business orpleasure induces the latter to reside for a few weeks in London . - Y,'J", ?jf(:».v h.u: .-!--- t.-vi\tou:a





The wife, . too, convinced of the folly of ingratitude, studiously teaches her children to pfay for Messing* oh the*head of him whom shp once treated with s*r much scorn, and James adds his solemn amen! to the benediction, with an emphasis that shows> it springs not from the head, but the heart; -: 1 J' :R>

The felicity, too, of Laura and Alfred' Huktly» founded on the firmest basis, that of natural worth and natural affection, has been hitherto as great as can fall' to the lot of frail mortality. »"";-:

In the society of Julian and Marianne, and their rising family, Mr. Carleton finds a compensation for all the privations of his former life; while Mr. Austin forgets his domestic troubles, in the respect and love with which he is ever received by his grateful pupil, as he still delights to call Julian. - —

We turn, with reluctance, from the pleasing contemplation of human felicity, to the darker traits of human suffering, which truth obliges us to sketch. : ' The youthful and deceived wife of Stuart, fell a victim to the intensity of her affection far one, Whom, in the midst of shame, and anguish, and despair, she still clung- to.- - J'J' »'>{o.:l>.Tr>

The same hour that beheld him perish ignominiously on a scaffold, closed her eyes for ever on a world, which had nt>w lost every charm to her.

Her friends had refused to permit Julian to see her, when they found that he came from the man whose sufferings they overlooked in th eir resentment at the deception by which he had gained an entrance into their family, but nothiag could defeat the determination of an attached though injured wife,—she eluded even her mother's watchfulness, and while they believed her safe kin bed, under the influence of an opiate, winch had been administered to lull her into forgetfulaess, with unequal steps and distracted looks she was making her way to the prison, to see him ouee morej to to whom her every thought was devoted.





She came too late •>—the fatal signal was given, and in the arms of pitying strangers, the distracted wife breathed her last sigh, entombing with her the child, which 1 ad it lived, could have had no inheritance, but its mother's sorrow and its father's shame.

The fate of Mary Hamilton, at once the victim and the companion of Stuart's vices, was for some time buried in mystery. Julian learued that she had privately left the theatrical company on the very morning after bis constrained departure, but all efforts to trace her route weae fruitless, till Julian nearly three year's after, received a note, written with apparent difficulty entreating him to visit and cheer, by his presence, the dying moments of one who, under any other circumstances, would never have intruded on his happiness: it was signed Mary Hamilton; and Julian putting it iftto his wife's hand, instantly followed the bearer, who conducted him to the parish workhouse. Yes;, in that last refuge of human woe, surrounded by those whose own miseries, their ignorance or depravities had rendered callous to feeling for any but themselves, the once blooming, elegant and accomplished Mary Hamilton, breathed her last. The sight of Julian was fatal to her weakened franie? she gazed on him for a moment, with rapture in her eyes; tnjtt her voicp w»* gone; and, clasping his trembling hands between her own emaciated ones, she expired.





The tears which Marianne mingled with her husband's to the memory of this unfortunate victim of imprudence and passion, were pure as those which angels shed over the errors and miseries of frail mortals; and if a sigh ever mingles with her fond raptures, as she contemplates the opening beauties of her own lovely children, it is from the recollection, how insufficient in the instance of Mary Hamilton, was the possession of beauty, talents, and grace to insure happiness.

"When fierce temptation seconded within,

By traitor appetite, and armed with darts,

Temper'd in hell, invadea the throbbing bread."





FINIS.





lii Nos. at (W. or in parti at 8». twill, uiuamtnted with Elates descriptive of interesting Sceuei among the Natives, taken on the Spot,

A Jfew Edition, revised and corrected, of the

VOYAGES of CAPTAIN COOKE, F.R.S.

To which is added, '-



An ACCOUNT of the EXPEDITIONS of

m IPftBlft^ Arid ©moi&aski

To discover a North-west Passage, &c. tic.



The VOYAGES-of CAPTAIN COOKE are so full of interest that all persons fond of reading must be interested in perusing them. This edition possesses peculiar advantages, being printed in a smaller type, so as to comprehend for the charge of Sixpence, twice the quantity of reading-whreh other publishers of Voyages have given; at the same time the type is sufficiently clear and distinct to suit every class of readers.

*t*rttrrirtrj*r***t********rt**+<' ************************ t**rt**rt***t******tt*t*trt*****trt*

To be completed in about 25 Numbers, price 6d. each, or in Parts at 2s. each, embellished with Engravings from original Drawings,

THE FORGED NOTE;

- . .. OR, . »

Sultan anO fKarianne.



BY Mrs. H. M. JONES, Authoress of the Wedding Ring, .$-c. $c.



The FORGED NOTE is a Ttt,e replete with interest and instruction. The difficulties and dangers to which youth is exposed, when thrown upon the world without guide or protector, are delineated with a truth and boldness of colouring that bespeaks the Author to have painted from life; and while the distresses of the hero of the story cannot fail to interest, nor the variety of character introduced to amuse, we are gratified by the tr iumph of nature and real feeling in the person of the gentle heroine, over the allurements and blandishments of her more dazzling but less amiable rival. The ailtinctton between true and genuine love, and selfish passion, is well defined: and all who «ve read this work, hive considered it the best production of this interesting writer.

It ,tlt l********************************************* trt* t*ti *l ************** ii ****************

Completed in Eighteen Numbers, price Sixpence each, accompanied with Engravings,

THE LIFE of the Rev. J. WESLEY.



By Dr. COKE And Mr. MOORE.



Thi» Edition of the LIFE of that eminent and indefatigable divine, the Ret. J. WESL1 U printed from the original, in a neat pocket size.





Jofues and Wright's New Catalogue—13* Paternoster Rot.



In 87 Not. at 6d. each, with elegant Engravings,

The MYSTERIES of St. GLAIR;

OB,

BY MRS. CATHERINE G. WARD,

Authoress of The Horn of Claremont—Mysterious Marriage—Orphan Boy—Family Portraits—Cottage on the Cliff, Ire.



The MYSTERIES OF ST. CLAIR abounds with beautiful and chaste imagery, and blends instruction with amusement. It is a work that cannot fail of exciting the most ItVefy interest in the bosom of the reader.

In Twenty-four Numbers, with Engravings, price Sixpence each,

Tk* extraordinary Life and Adventures of



FREDERIC BARON TRENCK;

CONTAINING All ACCOUNT OF His,

CRUEL AND EXCESSIVE SUFFERINGS DURING TEN YEARS IMPRISONMENT /A' THE CASTLE AT MAGDEBURG.



The LIFE OF BARON TRENCK will ever continue to be read with admiration by all

who feel interested in, the marvelous, it beiug a relation of iactJ.. so. surprising, that if their truth were not attested by history, they might be supposed to hare had their origin in fiction!

Ii - 11, it rrt*itt*itit it*****t****t*****i**r***r!f**t*******lt*********f**w***l***************

Irt Thirfy Nos. price Sixpence each, with Engrarings,

DODD'S DISCOURSES to YOUNG MEN;

Addressed particularly to his Pupils. Wih Supplementary Anecdotes from

Ancient and Modern History, and other works.



Dr.. DODD'S DISCOURSES are replete with Instruction. The Anecdotes attached to etch Sermon, illustrate the different subjects and enforce the doctrine inculcated, at the same time that they afford a continual fund of amusement.

n nil ri It t*************************** ****t******* ***"***** ************************Jtlttrt*** In 30 Numbers, at 6d. each, embellished with Engravings,

Dr. DODD'S THOUGHTS IN PRISON;

WMTTEff JJV JCEWOATE. Containing Reflections on his Imprisonment, viz. The RETROSPECT—Op PUBLIC PUNISHMENT—On HIS TRIAL—On FUTURITY.

Also his LAST PRAYER, written on the Night before his Death; The CoNVfcT's Address To ms Unhappy Brethren, and other MfsceHaneons Pieces To which is added, His Life, &c.

Aix lovers of poelry have delighted in reading DODD'S THOUGHTS IN PRISON. The

Circumstances which gave rise to the work, and the incidents described, are in language «o affecting, &s cannot but recommend it to recders in geueral. . _ ',
