HERBERT-LODGE; 

A 

NEJV'FOREST STORY, 

IX THREE VOLUMES. 
BY 

MISS WARNER^ 

OF BATH. 



VOL. 



" Know, we are bound to cast the minds of youth 
" Betimes into the mould of heavenly truth, 
" That taught of God, they may indeed be wise, 
'* Ncr, ignorantly wandering, miss the skies." 

COWPER. 



PRINTED BY 

RICHARD CRUTTWELL, ST. JAMES'SnSTREET, BATH} 

AND SOLD BY 

LONGMAN', IIURST, REES, AND ORME, PATfiR- 
NOSTER-ROW, LONDON, 

1808. 



8^3 



HERBERT-LODGE. 



CHAPTER I. 



*^ T^l 7HEN awakened from insensl- 
^ ^ bility to life and sense, 1 found 
myself stretched upon a bed, in a strange 
apartment, suffering the most agonizing 
pain, and only retaining an indistin6l 
remembrance of the horrors that were 
passed. 

•' By the side of the bed I beheld a 
decent looking Avomau employed in 
knitting, who answered my impatient 
enquiries by informing me, " that I 

VOL. II. B 



t 2 3 

liad been conveyed to her cottage on the 
preceding evening ; that the man who 
brought me told her he had discovered 
me by the side of the road, murdered as 
]ie supposed, though my purse was un- 
touched, and my watch in my pocket; 
that finding I still breathed when he 
brought me to her house, he said he 
would go to the adjoining town, and 
fetch a surgeon to my assistance ; that 
the medical gentleman had been there, 
extra61ed a ball from my shoulder, and 
poured a composing draught dowa my 
throat, which had thrown me into a 
sweet sleep ; but that the man who con- 
veyed me thither, had returned no more. 
* And now, sir,' ^he added, * seeing as 
how you have recovered your senses, 
you will be pleased to tell me, mayhap, 
where I may send to your friends, or 
your wife, if you have one, who would 
be mahily troubled, if she knew how 
mortal bad you were.' 



I 3 ] 

'• The poor woman had undesignedly 
struck a chord that vibrated to the very 
core of my heart. 

^' ' Wife!' I repeated, staring wildly 
round; ' Ah, where is she? where is 
the dearest treasure of my soul; my 
sweet, my gentle Adelaide?' making at 
the same time a violent but useless effort 
to rise in my bed. 

^' My attendant seemed greatly alarm- 
ed at the vehemence of my manner, and 
incoherence of my language, and told 
the surgeon, who at that moment arrived, 
* she believed that the poor gentleman 
had not vet recovered his wits/ 

*^ Mr. took no notice of her re- 
mark, but drawing near my bed, and 
feeling my pulse, congratulated me on 
the good effe6i:s of his own skill and 
medicines, asked a few questions, and 
proceeded to examine my wound. 

'* ' A pistol ball/ he said, ' had passed 
through my arm and breast ; and though 
B 2 



14] 

lie did not believe the injury woidd be 
mortal, yet he assured me all his endea- 
vours to effe6l a cure would be unavail- 
ing, unless I assisted them by endea- 
vouring to comj)ose my agitated spirits.' 

/' Whilst he was speaking, a horrible 
idea crossed my fancy, and with v/ild 
impatience I demanded of him, *^ whe- 
ther, if any one had been supporteil 
within my wounded arm, that person 
would have been injured by the ball that 
was lodged in my breast ?" 

*' ^Injured, sir,' replied h*e, with a 
look that expressed a doubt of my ha- 
ving recovered my senses; •' injured with 
-a vengeance, I believe. Man, woman, 
or child, the person is now as dead as a 
stone ; for the ball could not have 
reached your breast but through his or 
her body. " 

*' He continued speaking, Caroline, 
but his additional words conveyed no 
meanino: to mv mind. . ' The ball could 



[ 5 ] 

not have reached your breast, but thro' 
her body.'. This sentence alone rang in 
my ears, and occupied all my imagina- 
tion. It represented to me my Adelaide 
sinking from my grasp, bleeding and 
expiring under the stroke that unnerved 
tlie supporting arm of her husband ! — ■* 
My wife and promised offspring writhing 
Avith the agonies inflicted by a murderer's 
hand; or cold and lifeless w^eltering in 
their blood ! 

'* The idea was too horrible for reason 
long to struggle with ; my brain was 
inflamed to madness, and a raging deli- 
rium destroyed for a time tbe agonizing 
recollection of my woes. 

*' In this state of mental derangement 
I lay for some Aveeks; but at length by 
the kind care of the good woman of the 
house, the attention of my medical friend, 
and the aid of a naturally-strong con- 
stitution, I gradually recovered ; my 
bodily disorders began to disappear, my 



C 6 J 

tliind recovered its powers, and a certain 
degree of tranquillity returned to nie ; 
thougli the composure of my spirits was 
rather the stiUness of despair^ than the 
6weet calm of resignation. 

'^ I brooded over my sorrows in sullen 
silence, and dwelt with gloomy pleasure 
on the sad particulars of my fate, far the 
horrid purpose of confirming in my 
tosom schemes of dire revenge. 

** It was now clear to my mind, thai 
Vincent had abused the confidence I so 
Tashly had placed in him,^ and betrayed 
ine to my brother and the Marquis, who 
had concerted with him the plan of in-* 
tercepting and carrying off my Adelaide; 
feut that meeting with a resistance which 
they did not expedl, they had, in their 
endeavour to eife6l their purpose, com- 
mitted the horrible deeds I have de-» 
scribed. 

'' Yes, I will acknowledge to my sister, 
that the idea of offering up the ruthless 



[ 7 ] 

wvetches, as vi6lims to my slanglitered 
wife, was a cordial to my soul. Every 
holy precept and mild instruction of that 
departed saint, our honoured mother^ 
was banished from my mind. My ima- 
gination rioted on fancied scenes of 
blood, and the first use which 1 resolved to 
make of my returning strength, (pardon 
me, Heaven 1 the dire determination,) 
was to saci'iiice the fiends who had mur- 
dered my Adelaide.. 

*' But, blessed be the Providence 
which spared me this inexpiable guilt ; 
and brought me, by still further trials, 
to an acquiescence in his holy will. 

'* One evenmg, as I was sitting at 
the little window of my humble abode, 
feasting on the dark designs of my 
wounded spirit, I saw a man approack 
the door, who, notwithstanduig it was 
quite dusk, and his being muffled up in 
a^o-reat coat, I knew immediately, to be 
Vincents 



[ 8 ] 

*' To describe my emotions at this 
liorrible vision, would be impossible. 
The most savage fury filled my soul; and 
rushing from the room, I sprang upon 
him with a tiger's rage; exclaiming in 
a tone scarcely human, * Have I again 
found you, thou damned betrayer of my 
confidence, thou infernal destroyer of 
my peace? Ah! where is my wife; my 
Adelaide ; my murdered saint ?' 

'* At the same time I attempted to 
tear him to the ground. But, alas, 
weakened by a long confinement, I was 
no match for the athletic ruffian ; who, 
after a short struggle, threw me on my 
back, and placed his knee upon my 
breast. 

''In a moment the passage was filled 
with men, one of whom introduced a 
gag into my mouth, whilst a second 
secured my hands with a rope. 

'' But, Heavens ! what sketch of fancy 
can for an instant comprehend my sen- 



[ 9 ] 

sations, when I heard the voice of Fitz- 
mordaunt order the chaise to draw up, 
and at the same time assure the poor 
woman of the house, who stood trem- 
bling with surprize, that I was ^ an high- 
wayman and a murderer, whom he and 
his assistants were authorized to appre- 
hend and convey to the county gaol.' 

'* I gave an involuntary shriek at the 
petrifying sound that assailed my ear; 
a dizziness seized my brain, darkness 
veiled my eyes, and death appeared to 
have at length commiserated and ended 
all my sorrows. 

*' But, aleis, my sister, I was doomed ^ 
to further suffering. After a long stu^ 
pefadion, sense again returned; and I 
perceived that I was in a post-chaise, 
gagged and bound, between two men, . 
whose persons were entirely unknown to 
me, and who preserved a gloomy silence, 
except when with bitter imprecations 



[ 10 ] 

they ordered the driver to quicken his 
pace. 

'* It was now night, and the darkness 
in which we were involved, and the wind 
that roared around \\s^ seemed but too 
faithfully to correspond with my dismal 
and mysterious fate. 

** After a rapid journey of some hours,, 
the sound of the rolling surge announced 
to me that we approached the sea-shore- 
In a few minutes I was taken from the 
chaise, and put on board a boat, accom- 
panied by my conductors, which shortly 
brought us to a vessel lying in the offing., 

*' I cannot pretend to detail to you, 
Caroline, the circumstances of our em- 
barkation, nor the occurrences of several 
subsequent weeks. 

'* Bodily weakness and agony of heart 
seemed to have made a desert of my 
mind, and no distincl ideas were im- 
pressed upon it for a considerable time. 



[ n J 

** The gentle influence of a tropic?^ 
climate, however, within which we had 
soon arrived, gradually invigorated n^y 
feeble frame ; and I became capable of 
making observatians on the particulars 
of my situation. 

*' I now found that I was on board ar 
cutter, apparently calculated for hostile 
service, vrith a crew^ whose language and- 
nianners might reasonably have led me 
to suppose them inhabitants of the in- 
fernal regions, rather than beings of the 
same species with myself. 

*^ Of the wretch who^ commanded^ 
them I have seen no parallel. He seem- 
ed to have been raised to his superiority, 
merely by his pre-eminence in wicked-' 
»ess. Every enquiry which Lput to him 
respe6ling my destination, was answered 
only by oaths and abuse ; and on fifty 
occasions he had tlie audacity to exe- 
crate me ' for not dvino; when I came 
on board, that he might have got his.-, 



[ 12 ] 

reward, without the trouble of carrying 
a land-lubber half round the world.' 

*' Though I was perfedly careless of 
life, and indeed longed ardently to quit 
its sorrows, and join my Adelaide in a 
happier state ; yet I could not avoid 
feeling some curiosity to discover the 
meaning of those words, which this sea- 
monster so frequently repeated. 

" Happily his mate was not quite so 
far removed from humanity as himself; 
and of him I learned, that our vessel 
was a smuggling-cutter, which had been 
hired at a great expence to convey me 
to the settlement of Surinam in South- 
America; — that I was represented to 
have been a desperate and abandoned 
profligate, who had dishonoured his fa- 
mily, and committed a thousand crimes; 
that every measure having been tried 
to reclaim me, without eife^i:, it was 
deemed expedient by my relations to 
send me to a state of servitude in a dis- 



t 13 ] 

taut climate, where all possibility of my 
further injuring or disgracing them 
would be effedually prevented. 

'^ From this man I further learnt, that 
his captain, as he called the lawless ruf- 
iian who commanded, had undertaken 
to deliver me as a slave to a Dutch 
planter on the banks of the Paramaribo, 
unless I should die before the completion 
of the voyage, in which case the reward 
w^as to be the same. 

'' Will you believe it, Caroline, that 
I received this dreadful intelligence with- 
out horror ? Nay, let me rather say, I 
heard it with a kind of gloomy satisfac- 
tion. My mind was callous to sufferings 
and dwelt with a feeling that approached 
to pleasure, on the idea of passing the 
wretched remainder of my days in a 
climate far distant from that land where 
dwelt a monster so horrible to my fancy 
SIS Fitzmordaunt, who had completed his 



' [ M I 

injuries to me by this superlati^^e instance^ 
of malice and revcnrrc. 

*' Ah ! little did I know the horrors- 
of the state to which I was to be intro- 
duced, and in which I dragged on six 
long, tedious years. 

*^ But let me not wound your feelings, 
Caroline,, by attempting to paint those 
particulars, of which all the colourings 
.of language could give but a faint idea. 
It was a bcene, at the contemplation of 
which humanity must shudder; a scene 
which my memory would gladly blot from* 
its tablets tor ever. 

** Not that with selfish sorrow' I 
groaned for my own calamities alone : 
not that 1 dropped the unmanly tear for 
the frequent lash that tore my flesh at 
the capricious command of the barbarian^ 
to whom I was consigiied. No: I was- 
msensible to personal suffering. Fate 
liad done its worst, in depriving me of 



[ 15 } 

A delaide, and no corporal infliftion gouM 
reach my heart. 

*^ No,. Caroline; it was the afflidiou 
of my sad companions in slavery, whicli 
bade my sorrows floAV. It was the wanton 
cruelty exercised upon tliese '^ injured 
sons of Afric," that caused my soul to 
sink within me.. 

^' Daily did I behold the harmless- 
natives of a distant clime, who had been 
basely seduced, or forcibly torn froin all 
the tender ties of country and of kindred, 
bleeding beneath the whip of a relent- 
less overseer, or writhing under the still 
more terrible inflidions which ingenious 
cruelty had invented for the punishment 
of the most venial offences. 

'* Whatever enormities uncontrouled. 
pov/er in the hands of the profligate and 
the ignorant may be supposed to com- 
mit; whatever inhuman excesses, unre- 
strained passion, stimulated by intem- 
perance, and divested by voluptuousness . 



[ 16 ] 

of pity, may be imagined to suggest; 
such were daily exemplified by the un« 
relenting planter, and his ferocious 
assistant.^ 

'' Hourly did the surrounding woods 
echo to the groans and cries of the tor- 
tured slaves ; hourly were the fields of 
labour moistened by their tears and 
blood. 

*' It was late in the evening, after a 
scene of horrible punishment infli6led 
upon six of the negroes for a trifling 
transgression, that I had crept to my 
wretched pallet to meditate in solitude 
and silence on this cursed system of 
oppression. 

" A6live fancy sketched my former 
happiness, and contrasted it with my 
present w^oe; the gentle form of Ade- 



* See « Stedman's Surinam ;'* and alternately blush 
and sigh for humanity. 



[ 17 ] 

laide, and all the hopes of lasting joy 
with her, which I had fostered, passed 
])efore my imagination, and wxre suc- 
ceeded by the recolle6tion of the loss of 
my beloved, and all the dismal catalogue 
cff ills which followed that event. 

''The bloody scene of suffering inno- 
cence and triumphant villainy which I 
had just witnessed, recurred to my me* 
mory, and filled up the horrid canvas. 

*' My heart was bursting with a thou- 
sand sorrows; I seemed unable to endure 
my feelings; existence appeared intole- 
rable to me ; and, oh, dreadful thought ! 
the impious idea of escaping further 
wretchedness by self-destru6iion pre- 
sented itself to my mind. 

*' In an instant I had resolved, and 
seized my knife (pardon me, heaven, 
the deep guilt of the intention) to exe- 
cute my purpose. 

' *' As I raised it to my breast, the 
chamber-door burst open ; a negro with 



[ f8 J 

.a light rushed in, and throwing from his 
bloody hand a letter on my bed, bade 
me * dire^ly read it, and follow liim.' 

'' The paper was from the overseer, 
and contained these words. — * English- 
man, your slavery i& at an* end. An 
hour since your master was- stabbed by 
the negroes; and I am at present only 
spared for a more lingering death. Be- 
fore I die, however, 1 am willing to 
do the last good deed within my power, 
and render some recompence for my 
cruelty to you. The note inclosed will 
make you knowa to my friend at Para- 
maribo, and procure you a safe return 
to yoiu' native land. Delay not your 
departure from this scene of blood, nor 
neglect to pray for the lost — Van Dort.' 

'^ Oh, my sister, how wonderful are. 
tlie ways of Heaven 1 Kow just are its 
decrees, how wise its retributions ! 

*' The punishment of these unhappy 
tyrants^ so appropriate to the crimes. 



[ li> ] 

they had committed; the sudden inter* 
ruptlon of my purposed deed of guilt, 
fraught with eternal destrudion and de- 
'spair; the unexpeded gift of freedom, 
where only irremediable slavery was 
before my eyes ; these united wronders 
flashed a sudden convi6tion upon my 
soul, of the goodness and wisdom of that 
Providence, who watches over his crea- 
tures with an eye that neither slumbers 
nor sleeps. 

*' In a moment, I felt my baseness 
and ingratitude in distrusting his mercy, 
and rebelling against his behests. Re- 
morse smote upon my heart ; contrition 
filled my bosom ; I w^as an altered man. 
I saw in its proper light my own igna- 
ranee, guilt, and impotency ; and the 
silent prayer for mercy and pardon,^ 
which my spirit sent up to heaven, was 
accompanied with a vow of future 
humble resignation to its. unsearchable 
decrees. 



[ 20 ] 

'^ The remainder of my story may be 
dispatched in a few words. 

^^ I followed the negro to the creek, 
where a boat was waiting to carry myself 
and another white man to Paramaribo. 
I delivered the letter to the friend of 
Van Dort, and in a few days embarked 
on board a Dutch trader for the port of 
London. 

*' Repose from the intolerable toil of 
the plantation, and the kindness of the 
captain of our vessel, did much towards 
the restoration of a frame, which was 
now reduced to a skeleton by the usage 
I had received. But ah, what can cure 
a wounded spirit? The form of my lost 
angel still ever floated in my imagina- 
tion ; and though I did not murmur, I 
could not forget. 

*' After an auspicious passage we 
arrived in the Thames, and the ensuing 
day I was landed at the Temple stairs. 



[ 21 ] 

'^ For a moment natural feeling tri- 
umphed ov^er sorrow , and my heart 
bounded within me when I once more 
placed my foot on the soil tliat had given 
-me birtli. But it was a transient, trea- 
cherous joy, that only lent additional 
bitterness to the associations by which 
it was succeeded. 

*' Fitzniordaunt dwelt in the city where 
I then was ! 

*' The idea was like the stroke of 
•death, and a cold thrill ran through 
every vein. I seemed bewildered, and 
wandered from street to street, without 
any plan of what I should do, or 
any observation of what was passing 
around me. 

'' At last, unconscious whither I had 
strolled, I found myself in the street 
where my brother lived, and was accosted 
by a man, whom I immediately recol- 
lected to have been my father's butler. 



[ 2^ ] 

^' Tlie poor fellow expressed the ut- 
most astonishment and joy at seeing 
me alive, since it had been generally 
understood he said, that I had long 
jsince pei-ished abroad. 

*^ From him I learned that Fitzmor- 
daunt was married, and then with his 
lady in France, where he generally re- 
•sided. From him also I gathered a 
general outline of your history, my dear 
Caroline, -since our separation. He 
dwelt with indignation on the w^orthless- 
ness of Herbert, and with rapture on 
your own excellence and exemplary con- 
du6l. He told me that whilst your liber- 
tine husband rioted in selfish dissipation, 
you were employed in imparting happi- 
ness and comfort to all around you. 

^' To your retreat I instantly resolved 
to fly. My sick heart panted for the 
consolation of that tender sympathy, 
whose healing balm 1 knew I should 
receive from you. 



[ 23 ] 



iC 



After a slight, therefore, and in 
some particulars, a ii(5litious account of 
any adventures, (without which the cu- 
riosity of the old man could not be 
pacified) and enjoining him to secrecy 
on the subje6l of my return, I left him, 
and repaired without delay to the inn 
from whence the Southa;mpton mail 
sets out. 

^' I reached that tov/n early on the 
ensuing morning, and having procured 
a liorse, and dire6lions to the Lodge, I 
turned with a palpitating heart towards 
the residence of my sister, the dearest 
treasure that now remains on earth to 
the widowed heart of Henry. — You, 
Caroline, know the rest." 

They, and they ojili/j who have been 
lessoned in the school of sorrow and 
suifering, can properly estimate the 
soothing power of sympathetic friend- 
ship, — that consolation which is reserved 
by heaven for the children of affliclion: 



[ 24 ] 

that cordial drop poured by Providence 
into the cup of human woe, to corre6l 
its bitters, and prevent its effeds from 
being deadly. 

The story of Henry powerfully excited 
in the affectionate bosom of his sister 
this tender sentnnent; and she mingled 
in sweet consolatory participation her 
si^rhs and tears with his. 

Henry felt the influence of this heal- 
ing balsam. He had unburthened his 
sorrows to a heart of kindred feelings 
with his own ; a heart alive to his suf- 
ferings, and solicitous for his welfare^ 
anxious to console, and willing to share 
his griefs. 

It was not long, therefore, before this 
secret charm of sisterly aife6lion had 
wrought a visibly favourable effe6l upon 
his mind ; peace once more revisited it; 
and the storms of sorrow by which it had 
been agitated, were softened down into 



[ 25 3 

llic holy calm of a tranquil, pleasing 
melancholy. 

The interesting attachment, too, of 
Edmund and jNIary to him, contributed 
to his amusement and returning serenity. 

Their own little pursuits seemed to be 
forgotten, in their desire to promote the 
comfort of their uncle. Upon all occa- 
sions their ready service was at his com- 
mand ; and in his frequent rambles 
thro' the Forest, they were his constant 
companions. 

Henry was deeply aife6ted by these 
artless proofs of aifedion ; and soon loved 
them with a father's fondness. He dwelt 
with a rapture nearly equal to his sister's 
on their opening virtues ; and contem- 
plated with delight the fair hope of 
future worth, which their present dispo 
sitions promised. 

A secret sympathy, however, seemed 
to draw his heart more particularly to- 
wards IMary, (whose history Mrs. Her- 

VOL. II. c- 



[ 26 ] 

belt had related to her brother;) wliilst 
the regard she displayed for him, could 
only be equalled by the fond love which 
she entertained for the only mother she 
had ever known. 

Nor was the benevolent re6lor of 
Rosewood backward in aifording both 
consolation and advice to the unfortu- 
Bate Henry. 

At her brother's rC/quest, Mrs. Herbert 
had communicated to Dr. Fairford the 
particulars of his story, which immedi- 
ately excited the good man's warmest 
interest in the sufferer's case. 

From that moment, the conversations 
between himself and Henry were long 
and frequent, nor did they ever close, 
without Mr. Fitzmordaunt feeling his 
mind strengthened, his piety increased, 
and his resignation confirmed. 

it was after one of these interviews, 
and during an evening walk from the 
Redlory, whither he had accompanied 



C 2r 3 

his sister, that Mrs. Herbert ventured 
to ask her brother, * whether he had 
directed his attention to any plan for his 
future occupation in hfer' 

" Your question," returned he, '^ my 
dear Caroline, is a very natural one; 
and I am happy to say, I can answer it 
satisfactorily. 

*' When I first sought this retreat, it 
was with the intention of burying myself 
in the gloom and stillness of some lone 
abode in its neighbourhood, and of pass- 
ing my days in silently brooding over 
my sorrows, or pouring them into that 
heart, which has since with a sisterly 
affedion both participated and relieved 
them. I considered myself as a solitary 
being amongst mankind, useless to so- 
ciety ; with no duties to perform on the 
theatre of life; and consequently, as 
authorised to waste my days in the man- 
ner most agreeable to ni}" feelings, 
c £ 



*' But these Erroneous notions are now 
dispersed. The excellent man from 
whom we are just separated, has given 
me new views of myself and my obliga- 
tions. He has convinced me that I have 
duties to fulfil in society; that I am a 
being created for a6lion, and appointed 
to perform a certain part amongst my 
fellow men ; to lend my aid, small as it 
may be, towards the diffusion of human 
happiness; and the removal of that 
burthen of infelicity which is common 
to our nature. 

'^ He has called me to a recolledion 
of my responsibility as a rational crea- 
ture, and to the obligation imposed upon 
me of employing the talent with which 
I am entrusted, to the glory of the Donor, 
and the Q-ood of those around me. 

^^ Nor has our amiable friend confi'ned 
his counsels to the improvement of my 
heart, and the rectifying of its mistakes 
alone; he has also sketched a plan for 



[ 29 ] 

my future conduct, by adopting which, 
I may realize the truth of his reasoniii4»^8 
and carry his advice into execution^ 

** He has clearly pointed out to me 
the impropriety of my remaining longer 
in a country, where I may be liable to 
meet with that villain who has blasted 
all my happiness, and heaped upon me 
such an accumulation of suffering. 

** But atrocious as the conduct of Sir 
Charles has been, the diabolical art and 
consummate caution with which he ha* 
managed it are such, as must effe6lually 
preclude all hope of legal redress, even 
if I were to forego my feelings, and have 
recourse to the laws of my country for 
justice or revenge. 

** Being thus prohibited from further 
personal intercourse with the little circle 
at the Lodge, M^iich comprises all that 
now can interest my heart, I have de- 
termined to adopt the additional counsel 
of the Dod;or, to quit England, and 



[ 3© 3 

settle in America; to join either my 
friend Frederick, or my maternal uncle 
Morton, who, you know, is fixed at 
Philadelphia; to draw for the purchase- 
money of my commission, which I have 
no doubt is safe in the honourable house 
at Calcutta where I invested it; and 
embark it in the way which either of 
those friends may think most eligible. 

*' Should it please Providence to direct 
such reverses in our family, Caroline, 
as might remove all obstacles to my re- 
turn to England, assure yourrself I will 
then fly with transport to spend my, 
remaining years with my sister and her 
children. But if I must continue to be an 
exile from the country that gave me 
birth, we will soothe our separation from 
each other by a constant interchange of 
letters; and it will be an additional solace 
to my banishment, and a further spur 
to my industry, to think that I am ac- 
quiring the means of independence for 



[ SI ] 

your little adopted daughter Maiy, wha, 
I confess, lias wound herself round my 
heart, hy a tie which never can be 
loosened ; and Avho I could Avdsh to share 
with Edmund and JNIatilda whatever I 
may acquire and leave behind me, 

** I know, my dear Caroline, what 
you would express by that ch earing and 
intelligent look. I am aware, that you 
would, even yet, dire(5l my fancy to the 
flatterer Hope, and bid me indulge the 
dear idea, that Adelaide is living, and 
that my enquiries after the lost partner 
of my soul might still be rev/arded by 
her restoration. But, alas ! my sister^ 
there is now no ground for imagination, 
with all its powers of delusion, to sketch 
so bright a pi61ure. Read this fatal 
paper, and then judge whether any pos- 
babilities exist of meeting my beloved 
on this side the grave." 

Saying this, Henry took from hisbosorn 
a small locket, and opening it, presented 



t 32 ] 

to his sister the following paragraph from 
a newspaper, whicli he told her he had 
met with at the cottage whither he had 
teen carried after the rencontre in the 
Forest. 

* On Thursday evening last, as a 
gentleman and his lady were passing 

through lane, in a post-chaise, 

they were stopped hy three highwaymen, 
one of whom, on a slight resistance being 
made by the gentleman, discharged a 
pistol at his head, the ball of which, 
having passed through the bod}^ of the 
lady, entered the shoulder of her com- 
panion. The former was killed upon the 
spot, and the latter, we hear, has since 
expired. The strictest search is mak- 
ing for the perpetrator of this horrid 
inurder.' 

The perusal of this mournful piece of 
intelligence at once quenched every 
fond hope which Mrs. Herbert had in- 
dulged on this subject; but suppressing 



[ 33 ] 

as well as she was able tlie emotion she 
felt, ' M}' clearest Henry,' she replied, 
' I will not now attempt to offer any 
objection to your purposed plan, or oppose 
your quitting that country where your 
suiferings have been so great. 

' Whatever dreams my fancy might 
have formed of happiness and success 
from a diligent search after Adelaide, 
they are now dispersed; and nothing 
remains for my beloved brother but a 
calm resignation to the will of that 
Being, >vhose every dispensation flows 
from v/isdom and mercy, and therefore 
must eventually be salutary and be- 
neficial. 

* Had it pleased Him to have conti- 
nued to me the comfort of your society, 
my earliest, dearest friend, I should 
have received the blessing with the live- 
liest gratitude. It would have blunted 
tjie poignancy of many a solitary sorrow, 



[ 34 ] 

and been a cordial to a heart, that is 
too often wounded in its tenderest part. 

* But I submit without a murmur to 
his decree; and only bless his name for 
the good He has bestowed in the unex- 
pe6ted restoration of a brother, whom 
1 had long despaired of ever meeting- 
more. 

* Yes, my dear Henry, I am now 
reconciled to your departure; pursue 
your projected plan, and may that Pro- 
vidence which has hitherto protected 
and supported you, continue to be your 
guard and consolation. 

' We still may hold a frequent though 
distant intercourse ; nor will it be giving 
too free a rein to imagination, to foster 
the hope, that heaven may again indulge 
us with another meeting. Oh ! may it 
be more permanent than that which now 
must cease.' 

But however necessary the adoption 
of this measure might be, and fair as the 



[ 35 ] 

prospers were of his success in the plan 
he was now entering on, yet it required 
all the fortitude of which Henry was 
possessed, to carry it into execution. 

His widowed heart had felt a solace 
since his residence at the Lodge, to 
whicli for years before it had been an 
utter stranger ; new aife<5lions had arisen 
in his bosom ; lie owned a parent's love 
for ]\Iary and her companions, , and the 
thought of tearing himself away from 
ties like these, the only springs from 
whence he now could taste a joy, was 
almost overwhelming. 

Nor did the last adieu excite less 
painful emotions in the breasts of those 
Avhom Henry left behind. 

Tears and sobs at once expressed and 
relieved the children's grief; whilst Mrs. 
Herbert, whose distressing task it was 
to assume a tranquillity which she could 
not feel, suffered all the agony of smo- 
thered sorrow. But the claims of duty 



[ 36 ] 

were paramount to every thing else in 
the mind of this exemplary woman. It 
was these which supported her under 
the pains of the parting scene with her 
brother ; and strengthened her to com- 
fort the children, when they had lost their 
afFe6lionate friend. It was these which 
soon enabled her to resume all her cus- 
tomary employments; and, after a short 
time, to convert the Lodge from the 
house of mourning into the residence 
of cheerfulness and pqace. 



[ 37 ] 



CHAPTER IL 



HERBERT- LODGE, though situated 
in the bosom of the New-Forest, 
was neither a gloomy nor a sohtary 
residence. 

Built in the reign of tlie fourth Ed- 
ward, it wore indeed an air of antique 
grandeur; but as later possessors had 
thinned the aged oaks which before 
completely embosomed it, its appearance 
was rather venerable than solemn ; and 
though it still retained the dignity of a 
baronial mansion, it possessed at the 



C 38 ] 

same time the airy dieerfulness of 
more modern residences. 

The declivity of a swelling hill had 
been chosen by the architect as a situa- 
tion at once healthy and beautiful. 

Its front, which was fanned by the 
fresh breezes of the west, commanded a 
view of considerable extent. Towards 
//i^/ point, the liorison was bounded by 
the undulating high lands of the Isle of 
Wight, and the sea which washed its 
eastern shores. 

A varied scene of towns and villages, 
cultivated lands, and wild commons, 
filled up the intermediate distance; 
Avhilst the nearer vhw was composed of 
solemn woods of antique oak, an ocean 
of foliage, over which the eye roved 
uninterruptedly for the space of three 
or fourmiles, and at length reposed itself 
still closer on a rich natural lawn, (stud- 
ded with hollies and mountain-ash,) 
^vhich at a small distance from the house 



i 39 1 

was divided into several verdant glades, 
that soon lost themselves in the deep 
recesses of the Forest. 

On every side majestic Avoods afforded 
that shelter which its elevated situation 
required, through whose dark shades, 
neat little cottages, thatched and white- 
washed, occasionally caught the eye, 
and completely precluded every idea of 
melancholy solitude. 

For many preceding generations this 
mansion had been the favourite residence 
of the Herberts, and the abode of bene- 
volence and hospitality. 

The late possessor, however, dying 
whilst his only son was yet an infant; the 
whole neighbourhood, and particularly 
the poor, had lamented, during a long- 
minority, the absence of that festivity 
and munificence, which the Lodge had 
for ages been accustomed to display ; 
and looked anxiously forward to the day, 
when it would again become the resi- 



C 40 ] 

dence of another Herbert, in whom they 
)iad no doubt of discovering the same 
virtues as had dignified the former heads 
of that respectable family. 

Severe, however, was their disappoint- 
ment, when they understood that the 
heir did not intend to make the Lodge 
the place of his customary abode. 

The termination of his minority ap- 
proached, and no preparations were 
anade there for celebrating the event. 
The tenants, peasantry, and poor look- 
ed in vain for the expected rejoicings, 
for the revival of ancient customs, 
and the re-appearance of former hos- 
pitality. The place was still silent^ 
and many months elapsed after the 
young heir had come into possession of 
his property, before he even conde- 
scended to visit the residence of his 
fathers. 

Mr. Herbert had, indeed, no taste for 
the beaivties of nature; nor a heart that 



t 41 ] 

could be gratilied by the indulgence oV 
the benevolent aifedions. 

A modern education, concluded with 
tiiC false polish of a foreign tour, had 
made him entirely an artiiicial character ; 
'depraved, though specious ; selfish and 
insensible, though elegant and accom- 
plished. 

But as he had adopted, on coming to 
liis estate, the character of a dashing 
man, it was necessary he should sup- 
port it in all its parts, however discord- 
ant they might be with his favourite 
pursuits; and accordingly, his trained 
horses at Newmarket soon excited as 
much conversation amongst the know- 
ing ones t/ie?'e, as his stud and fox- 
hounds at Herbert-Lodge were cele- 
brated by the sportsmen of the Forest. 

The latter branch of his establishment 
drew him of course, during the hunting- 
seasons, to the dwelling of his ancestors; 



[ 42 ] 

and it was only at these times tliat he 
could endure its gloom and sequestration. 

But as he always came attended by a 
large and mingled party, composed of 
staunch sportsmen, and of men like 
Iiimself, who thought it necessary to 
their cliara6ler to affect an enthusiastic 
fondness for an amusement in which 
they had no real enjoyment, his presence 
contributed little to the pleasure of the 
neighbouring families, or to the comfort 
or relief of the surrounding poor. 

After his marriage, however, Mr. 
Herbert discontinued these annual scenes 
of revelry and riot at tlie Lodge ; and 
with the exception of the one or two 
short summers which he spent there with 
his wife, neither visited nor attended to 
this romantic residence. It remained 
therefore negle^led and unimproved, 
till it became the place of Mrs. Herbert's 
fixed abode. 



t *3 ] 

Her elegant taste soon materially 
changed its appearance, and by some 
judicious alterations, in which the cha- 
ra6ler of the country, and circumstances 
of the situation, were properly attended 
to, she converted Herbert-Lodge into 
one of the most beautiful seats of the 
neighbourhood. 

The lawn was now surrounded by a 
beltof flowering shrubs, which concealed 
the paling that preserved its velvet ver- 
dure from the encroaching deer. A 
small opening to the left let in upon the 
eye a narrow vale, at the upper end of 
which, stood the Dairy, Dame Wheat- 
ley's neat habitation. Towards its bottom 
the brick-built spire of the village-church 
rose above the dark shade of a vast yew, 
'^^'hose sj)reading arms could not entirely 
conceal from the view the ivy-mantled 
redory-house. The rooks wxre again 
invited to their ancient habitation at the 
back of the Lodge, from which they 



L 44 ] 

hail been scared by the wassails of Mr. 
Herbert's batchelor's parties ; and by 
thinning a copse to the right, and re- 
moving some pollard elms, iVlrs. Herbert 
caught a pleasing glance at the residences 
of the only two neighbours which were 
immediately near her. 

The first of these was the mansion of 
Sir Nimrod Heartley, a staunch fox- 
hunter, and thorough sportsman, who, 
since the loss of his wife, had devoted 
himself entirely to the pleasures of the 
chace. The other was Sta;imore Manor- 
house, the seat of Mr. Stan more, a coun- 
tiy magistrate ; a man of excellent sense 
and benevolent heart; who passed the 
whole of his time in this delightful re- 
treat, with an amiable wife, and Harriet, 
their only child, a sweet and interest- 
ing girl. 

It was in the intimate intercourse of 
the last-mentioned family, and of the 
excellent reftor; in the pursuits of bene- 



C 4o ] 

ficence; and in an uninterrupted atten- 
tion to the improvement of Mary's mind, 
that j\Irs, Herbert both oceupied and 
beguiled her time ; as year after year 
rolled on, and saw her still disappointed 
in the hope of the return of Matilda 
from the continent, or of any reforma- 
tion in the behaviour of her husband. 

Of Henry, who had settled himself 
in commercial concerns with his uncle, 
she had regular and satisfactory accounts; 
in Edmund, (who was now a student at 
Oxford,) she discovered all the traits of 
character that could give a parent plea- 
sure ; and Mary, whom she had long 
loved with a mother's fondness, returned 
her attachment by every mark of filial 
respect, and every endeavour to promote 
her happiness. 

In the cultivation of the virtues and 
accomplishments of this amiable girl, 
Mrs. Herbert found an occupation which 
was hourly more interesting to her, as 



[ 4G ] 

the progress of her pupil was every day 
more obvious. 

The attention of the preceptress called 
forth a proportionate exertion in tlie 
young scholar; who evinced her feelings 
of gratitude by that condu6l which she 
knew would be most gratifying to her 
benefa6lress, in an ardent thirst after 
excellence, and a strenuous endeavour 
to improve. 

But whilst Mrs. Herbert, by the most 
encouraging commendations, both re- 
'svarded Mary for her diligence, and 
animated her to fresh exertions; she 
carefully strove to guard every avenue of 
her young heart against the entrance 
of vanity ajid conceit, those contempti- 
ble emotions which rob beauty of all 
its powers to charm, and render supe- 
rior acquirements an useless if not a 
dangerous possession. 

She did not indeed attempt to conceal 
from her those personal attraftions which 



[ 47 ] 

would be the passport to general admi- 
ration when she mingled in society; nor 
the perfedion she had attained in the 
accomplishments that the world regarded 
with esteem ; but she taught her at the 
same time to consider them both as sub- 
ordinate to the beauties of the mind, 
the charms of virtue, and the ornaments 
of intelle6l. She led her to consider 
herself as a rational and immortal being, 
whom moral excellence alone could make 
really estimable, and only pra6lical piety 
could render truly happy. 

Mary's person, indeed, was not per- 
haps such as might be stiled strictly 
beautiful; for she wanted that exa6l sym- 
metry of feature, which seems necessary 
to entitle the countenance to this claim 
of beauty^ and which is generally pos- 
sessed at the loss of expression. But her 
face was exa<5lly that which might be 
denominated lovely ; every feature had 
its characteristic charm; and over the 



[ 48 ] 

toute ensemble was thrown tlic most enr. 
chanting expression. ': 

The child of simplicity and candour, 
every emotion played in her speaking 
blue eye, as it arose in her soul; and the 
delicate feelings of a heart, innocent and 
pure as the driven snow, but tremblingly 
alive to every amiable sensibility, gave 
a lustre, animation, and intelligence, to 
her face, which defied art to imitate, or 
the pencil to pourtray. 

The attractions of ^Miss Wheatley's 
person, however, were still less fascina- 
ting than the native charms of her dis- 
position, and the delightful sweetness 
of her manners. 

Her modesty, gentleness, and diffi- 
dence, fixed the impressions that her 
loveliness inspired, and rendered her 
superiority in mental proficiency more 
an object of admiration than envy. 

It was these which engaged the esteem 
and attachment of her associates ; which 



[ 49 ] 

tirade her the universal favourite of the 
visiters of the Lodge; which riveted the 
heart of Harriet Stanmore to her, in 
bonds of the stri6lest friendship; and 
improved the tender friendship that 
Edmund had ever possessed for his 
adopted sister, into the warmest and most 
disinterested love. 

About this period that storm was fer* 
nienting in France, Vv^hich has since 
convulsed all Europe, and introduced 
such changes into the political system 
of the civilized world, as the records of 
history cannot parallel. 

As the clouds gradually deepened, 
the rumours of approaching revolution 
reached the peaceful habitation of Mrs. 
Herbert, and excited fears of the most 
distressing nature for the safety of 
Matilda, from whom it was long since 
she had received any satisfa<5'tory in- 
telligence. 

VOL. IT. u 



[ 50 ] 

Whilst under the impressions of this 
painful suspense respeding a daughter, 
whom, notwithstanding her long ab- 
sence, she still loved with the sincerest 
fondness; she was one morning exceed- 
ingly surprized by the appearance of Sir 
Charles Fitzmordaunt at the Lodge, of 
whose arrival in England she had not 
before heard. 

It was now several years since they 
had last met, but so great a change in 
his appearance and features had taken 
place during the interval, that had not 
the servant announced her brother by 
his name, she would scarcely have recol- 
le6led his altered physiognomy. 

The gloomy frown and chilling cold- 
ness of his countenance, which she could 
not but observe at their last interview, 
were now deepened into an expression of 
the darkest ferocity; and associated as 
it naturally would be, in Mrs. Herbert's 
mind, with a recollection of his detest- 



[ 51 ] 

able cruelty to Henry, it struck such a 
damp upon her heart, as for a moment 
deadened every other feeling than that 
of horror at his sight. As he approached 
her, she involuntarily shuddered; and 
the welcome she would liave pronounced 
died away upon Jier lips. 

A few moments, however, restored 
her presence of mind, and after the in- 
terchange of the customary compli- 
ments, she enquired with an earnestness 
of manner, in which the mother only 
was visible, '' where he had left Matilda, 
and why she saw him unaccompanied by 
the beloved child, or Lady Antoinette?" 

Sir Charles coldly replied, they were 
both on the road, and would be at the 
Lodge on the following day; but as 
Lady Antoinette's health was in a decli- 
ning state, and she unable to travel so 
rapidly as he wished, he had come on 
by himself, and left Herbert (v.'ho had 
for some time been with them, and ac- 

UNIVERSITY Of 
^^^'NOIS LIBRART 



[ 52 ] 

companied them from France) to escort 
the party to the Forest. * As my own 
stay,' continued he, 'can be but short, 
a day was a matter of consequence to 
me, pressed and hurried as I am, by a 
thousand calls upon my time and at- 
tention.' 

Relieved by this account from her 
painful solicitude, Mrs. Herbert pro- 
ceeded to question her brother on the 
person and improvement of Matilda ; 
but his answers were vague and unsatis- 
fadory, till at length, as if wearied by 
a subje6l in which he felt no interest, 
he peevishly exclaimed, ' Pr'ythee, no 
more of this ; 7ni/ mind has been too 
painfully occupied, to attend to the pro- 
gressive improvement in a girl's educa- 
tion ; but doubtless Lady Antoinette 
has performed her part, and spared nei- 
ther pains nor expence in the accom- 
plishments of your daughter, ' 



[ 53 ] 

** I fear," said Mrs. Herbert, siglnng 
deeply, and fixing her penetrating but 
mournful look on Sir Charles, '' you 
must have witnessed many painful and 
distressing scenes both of public and 
private calamity." 

' Who can remain long in this world,' 
replied the baronet, with a countenance 
in which fierceness and melancholy were 
blended, ' without, not only zvilnessing^ 
but also feeling many heart-rending 
woes ?' 

'* Alas!" returned Mrs. Herbert, ''ge- 
neral experience, I fear, will confirm tlie 
truth of your remark. But still, no 
doubt, the dispensation is wise and good; 
and I cannot help considering the afflict- 
ions which we suffer, as salutary chas- 
tisements, intended to wean us from a 
state that is but transient, and to prepare 
lis for one that is to be as durable as. 
happy." 



[ 54 ] 

' Dreams of the nursery, child,' said 
the baronet; ' as well might you attempt 
to make me believe that deadly poison 
is prod udive of health and vigour, as 
that suffering and sorrow should be sain- 
fary to the wretches who are submitted 
to their attack.' 

At this moment tlie door opened, and 
the light and elegant form of IVIary 
tripped into the room ; her complexion 
heightened by the air, and exercise of a 
long walk; her eyes sparkling v.'ith ani- 
mation ; and a sweet smile playing over^ 
her features, the genuine offspring of 
an innocent and cheerful lieart A native 
grace seemed to regulate every motion 
of her person, and her whole appear- 
ance indicated health, tranquillity, and 
liappincss. 

Mrs. Herbert immediately introduced 
her to her brother, as the little orphan 
wliom he had formerly honoured with 
some marks of his attention; and Mary 



[ 55 ] 

approached him with alacrity, to bid 
liini welcome to the Lodge. 

The appearance of the baronet, ho\r- 
ever, repressed her steps. A sudden 
paleness overspread his countenance; 
an universal tremor shook liis frame; 
and clapping his hand to his forehead, 
he turned abruptly to tlie window. 

jMary, alarmed at these symptoms of 
extraordinary emotion, stood fixed in 
astonisliment; whilst ^Mrs. Herbert ten- 
derly enquired ** wlietlier he were indis- 
posed? and what she might offer to liim 
for his relief?" 

The questions seemed at once to re- 
store him to recollc(5lion ; lie I'eplied, 
that he had been long subject to attacks 
of a spasmodic nature, M'hich affe6ted 
his head in a violent manner; that hap- 
pily they were not of long duration, but 
were soon relieved by air and quiet ; he 
-would therefore take a few turns in the 
garden by himself, and join the party 



[ ^s ] 

at dinner: by which time he had no 
doubt of being- perfectly recovered. 

Mrs. Herbert and Mary accordingly 
quitted the room, and left Sir Charles 
to himself, who on his re-appearancc 
seemed to have regained in some degree 
his serenity. His countenance, how- 
ever, was still gloomy and severe, his 
manner absent, and his conversation 
abrupt; so that it was not without some, 
satisfaction, that they heard him give 
orders for his horses on the ensuing 
morning, that he might proceed to Fitz- 
mordaunt-castle, to transaCl some busi- 
ness there before he returned to France, 
where his presence was indispensably 
necessary. 

The hoped-for pleasure of embracing 
her long-lost child entirely occupied 
the mind of Mrs. Herbert, and her 
heart beat quicker, as the hour cf her 
arrival approached. T\Iary too looked 
forward with delight to the promised 



C 57 ] 

iiieetino; Avitli one of her earliest and 
dearest friends; and Edmund, who liad 
reached home on the preceding evening 
from Oxford, participated in the pleasure, 
and sympathised in the feehngs of botiv. 
The anxiously wished-for time at 
length arrived. The gay equipage of 
Lady Antoinette drove up the lavv^n. All 
a mother's sensibilities were throbbing 
in the bosom of Mrs. Herbert, when the 
carriage stopped at tlie gate, and in a 
moment she pressed Matilda to her 
breast. 

Tears mingled with kisses welcomed 
the child to a home, to Avhich she had 
been so many years a stranger; whilst 
the ardent embrace of IMatilda seemed 
to evince, that her aifedion for her 
mother had not been lessened by time 
and distance. 

While Mary waited impatiently for an 
opportunity of claiming her share in 
these tender endearments, she gazecl 



[ 58 ] 

with admiration cm tlie ,beauty of Ma- 
tilda's form, and the inimitable grace of 
her air. 

In her lovely features, and sweetly- 
toned voice, she recognized the aifec- 
tionate companion, whose nursery she 
had shared, and in whose pleasures she 
liad been a partner ; and warmed Avith 
the recolle6lion of their infantine enjoy- 
ments, which her heart assured her 
would be more deliglitfully supplied by 
the intercourse of maturer friendship, 
she advanced towards Matilda, and 
gently taking her hand, pressed it fer- 
vently to her lips, whilst the tear of sen- 
sibility and joy trembled in her eyes. 

Miss Herbert instantly quitting her 
mother, turned towards Mary, and coldly 
drawing her hand from the pressure of 
that of her old play-fellow, with affe6ted 
surprize and genuine hauteur, begged 
to be informed, *' who the young lady 



[ -^9 ] 

iiiiglit ])e, tliat had so much the a(l\aii- 
tage of her in ]}oint of recolledionr*' 

Mary's mortification and disappoint- 
ment, at tliis unexpected disavowal of 
former intimacy, were extreme; but could 
not exceed the astonishment of Mrs. 
Herbert, nor tlie chagrin of Edmund. 

* What, iNIatilda, ' cried he, with quick- 
ness, * is it possible you should have 
forgotten the friend of your childhood, 
the companion. of your early yeari; that 
aife6lionate little Alary, whom you once 
so dearly loved, and who returned your 
love with even a still warmer attach- 
ment?' 

" Why, indeed, "replied Matilda, after 
a short pause, *'Imust confess that a 
faint recollection of these circumstances. 
does revive in my mind, now you have 
mentioned them. But the fa6t is, my 
time has been so differently employed 
during my long absence from Herbert- 
Lodge, to what It was before I left it;, 



[ 60 J 

and my thoughts engaged in such an 
endless variety of interesting and agree- 
able ways; that I hope I may be pardoned 
if the adventures of the nursery^ Edmund,, 
should have faded from my memory." 

^ The errors of recolle6lion, Matilda,, 
may be readily excused, ' returned Ed- 
anund, ' provided they are not the off- 
Spring of extinguished feeling. But the 
//(?^af must not be pardoned at theexpence 
Qf the heart; and nothing can justify 
an oblivion of the tender ties of early 
friendship. It is possible, indeed, that 
vanity and folly, ever hostile to the 
charms of simphcity, and the joys of 
sensibility, may affect an ignorance which 
they do not labour under; but far be it 
from me to apply the observation to my 
sister, or to suspe6l for one moment 
that a French education should have 
destroyed or perverted those hne feelings 
which she once possessed, and to lose 
which would b^ to part with all that is 



I 61 ] 

most lovely and estimable in her cha- 
racter.' 

'' Upon my Avord, su," cried Matilda, 
with a contemptuous sneer, *' you do 
me infinite honour by your good opinion 
of me. I feel also highly gratified by 
your solemn observations. But, I must 
confess at the same time, that 1 am not 
particularly partial to moralizing ; and 
therefore, I fear, the sense of my obli- 
gation to you on the occasion is not 
quite so great as such a valuable leclur@ 
deser\'es." 

Further conversation was prevented 
by the enti^nce of Lady Antoinette into 
the room, very much to the satisfa6lion 
of ]Mrs. Herbert, who perceived that it 
would have been carried on with acri* 
mony, and probably ended in a quarreU 

She had, indeed, already heard suffi- 
cient to render her exceedingly unhappy;, 
to confirm every fear which had arisen, 
in her mind when Matilda left her, of 



[ 62 ] 

the sad effecls that would arise from a 
foreign education; and to perceive that, 
••with all the glitter of accomplishmentj 
there was still wanting in her daughter's 
chara(5ler those features which Mrs. 
Herbert prized far beyond the tricks of 
art, — natural simplicity, aiFe6li on ate feel- 
ings, and serious principles. 

But Ito' attention was not allowed to 
dwell long on this cruel disappointment 
of the pleasure slie had promised herself 
in the return of Ma.tilda ; Lady Antoi- 
nette, supported by Mr. Herbert, now 
tottered towards lier; and ]\Irs. Herbert, 
kindly pressing her hand, welcomed her 
to England, and led her to a sopha. 

But, all! what a frightful change didi 
she remark in the perjson of her sister- 
in-law. 

Her beautiful face was emaciated by 
disease, and lier fair form bent with 
debility; her eye languid and hollow; 
and her voice deep but feeble, interrupted 



[ 63 ] 

by the frequent cough, unci a constant 
laboured respiration. ;\n ap])earance of 
fretful discontent sat upon her brow, 
the consequence of her incapacity to 
j)artake longer in those pleasures, which 
had hitherto been the business of her 
life, and the only obje6ts of her attention; 
whilst the influence of yanity on her 
chara6ler was still visible, in the profu- 
sion of paint on her face and neck, ia 
ihe fashionable pattern of her dress, and 
the variety of ornaments that decorated 
her person. 

'^ j\Iy dear Lady Antoinette," said 
Mrs. Herbert, with a look of real concern, 
*' I cannot express how much the plea- 
sure which your presence affords me, is 
lessened by the appearance of your in- 
valid state. I trust, however, the air 
of the Forest will be of service to you, 
and the quiet of our retreat soon restore 
you to your former health." 



[ 64c ] 

'Oh,' cried Flerbert, who had before 
greeted his lady with a nod, and now 
looked at her with a significant and severe 
air, * mere fatigue from the jolting of 
your cursed Forest roads. Why, one 
might as well travel through a marble 
quarry. The trifling indisposition which 
the latter part of the journey has occa- 
sioned, will quickly be removed, and 
Lady Antoinette be sufficiently refreshed 
forany schemes of pleasure this dull place 
may offer to her. 

' Quiet, indeed ! pray don't think, Ca-^ 
foline, that we are come to mope and 
coo amongst the trees like turtle-dovea 
in a covert. No ! you must shew us all 
the lions of your neighbourhood, make 
us laugh at your squires, quiz your old 
unmarried Sylvan goddesses, fit up the 
saloon for a concert-room, and hire a 
set of strolling- players for our evening- 
amusement in the pi6ture-g,allery.' 



r 65 ] 

*' I protest, my dear sir," exclaimed 
Matilda, '* I am quite delighted to hear 
\vhat you say. The moment I entered 
the Forest, I was seized with a nervous 
attack; and when 1 got to the Lodge, 
the gloom and stilhiess of every thing 
around quite petrified me. Heavens 1 
what a Siberia must the place be in win- 
ter. But you, I know, sir, will endeavour 
to convert it into something support- 
able; and if we can't have the enjoyments 
of Paris here, we shall be able, with 
your assistance, to extradl some amuse- 
ment from the boors by which we are 
surrounded." 

* Yes,' said Lady Antoinette, her 
cough interrupting her as she spoke, 
* Yes, ma chere Caroline, we are just 
come from the very centre of bon ton 
and pleasure, and left Paris in the height 
of its gaiety ; you will therefore, I am 
sure, do all you can to recompense us 
for such a sacrifice. You must give oux 



dear Matilda frequent opportunities of 
shewing her grace in a cotillon; and 
you'll not deny me, I dare say, a party 
at cassino every evening. I shall soon 
shake off the slight cough that troubles 
me at present, which I think has been 
increased, if not occasioned, by your 
vile English air.' 

'' You are right, my dear Lady An- 
tionette," answered Mr. Herbert, '* ours 
is a wretched Baeotian climate, fraught 
with nothing but colds, agues, and blue- 
devils; but you'll soon become more ac- 
customed to it. However, M^ith all its 
abominable qualities, it has not been 
able to impair your looks, for I think I 
never saw ilic?n more enchanting than 
they are at present.'* 

The compliment was received by the 
lady to whom it was addressed, with a 
complacent smile of self-satisfa6iion, 
which proved that no doubt was enter- 
tained of its truth ; but the impression 



[ G7 ] 

which it made on some others of tlie 
party, Avas of a far different and more 
melancholy nature. 

To Mrs. Herbert it was sufficiently 
evident that Lady Antoinette had reached 
the last stage of a consumption; but 
that, afraid to contemplate }ier real situ- 
ation, she tried by every art of delusion 
to banish the conviction of it from lier 
mind ; and to delay, if not ward off, the 
fatal summons. 

^Vit]l every faculty of enjoyment worn 
out and exhausted, she still continued 
to pursue the phantom pleasure with all 
licr cu^tomaiy eagerness; not for the 
gratification it could afford her, ])ut be- 
cause it prevented lier tlioughts from 
being directed to an event, v/hich she 
could anticipate only with alarm and 
horror. 

Her mind, continually occupied vv^itli 
the follies and vices of a fashionable 
life, had lain up no stores of consolation 



[ 68 ] 

foY those clayk hours when worldly joy» 
lose all their power to charm ; and she 
was now far advanced in an incurable 
disease, unprepared Avith any means of 
comfort and solace, under the torturing 
certainty of its progressive increase, and. 
inevitable fatal termination. s 

The pupil and the vidim of dissipation^, 
she had lost, at the early age of six and 
thirty, not only the sprightliness of" 
youth, and the vigour of health, but 
also all.tlie power, of her understanding, , 
and all the energies of her mind. Ac- 
customed only to the unrestrained indul- 
gence of her inclinations, she had never 
been called upon for mental exertion,, 
nor afforded the opportunities of moral 
improvement. 

The smooth career of pleasure in which 
she had passed her days, had left no time 
for the cultivation of her judgment, the 
exei'cise of laudable affeftions, the form- 



[ 69 ] 

ation of good principles, or the acquire- 
ment of useful knowledge. 

Her heart, first debilitated, had at 
length become corrupted, by tlie gay 
round of a fashionable life; every social 
feeling was converted into a base selfish- 
ness, which studied its own gratifications 
alone; her temper, impatient of contra- 
diction, was peevish and fretful; and her 
miiid, without resources, eagerly thirsted 
for successive amusements, which, tho' 
often repeated, and as frequently dis- 
missed with disgust, yet were again 
resorted to, to prevent that dismal men- 
tal vacuity, or those more intolerable 
reflc6lions on her approaching fate, which 
their absence produced. 

Mrs. Herbert clearly saw the situation 
of her sister, and sincerely pitied it; but 
it was out of her power either to corre6^ 
the fatal causes of it, or avert its certain 
consequecices. 



t 70 ] 

The kindness of her heart, however, Im- 
iiiediately di6lated every means of aiford- 
ing that pleasure to Lady Antoinette 
which she was capable of experiencing; 
and amongst other little schemes of 
amusing occupation, she proposed a visit 
to Netley- Abbey, as soon as her lady- 
ship should have recovered from the 
fatigue of her journey. 

The proposal was received with the 
highest satisfa6lion by all the party, and 
seemed to difFuse a degree of good hu- 
mour even over those who were least 
accustomed to the feeling. 

Lady Antoinette pressed the hand of 
!Mrs. Herbert, and assured her she had 
'' always considered her as the most 
amiable of women." 

Mr. Herbert spoke with great kind- 
ness to his son, and even bestowed some 
handsome compliments on Mary's man- 
ner and appearance; whilst Matilda, 
descending a little from the haughtiness 



C 71 3 

of her first behaviour, assumed an ap- 
pearance of civihty towards the orphan, 
which, if it did not meet tlie warmth 
of her own feehngs, was, at the same 
time, less distressing to her heart, than 
the repelHng coldness of I\Iiss Herbert's 
first return to her aifeclionate welcome. 



[ 72 ] 



CHAPTER III. 



T N tlie course of a few days the party 
•*• for Netley-x'\bbey was assembled at 
breakfast at Herbert-Lodge, prepared 
to set out on the intended expedition. 
It consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Herbert, 
their children, and guests ; Dr. Fairford, 
the Stanmore family, and Sir Nimrod 
Heartley. 

After a ride of an hour and half they 
were at the place of embarkation. The 
day was remarkably fine, a gentle breeze 
swelled their sails, and the sun played 
upon the rippling surface of the waters. 



[ 73 ] 

The receding shores alternately pre- 
sented a rich variety of views, whilst 
the ample bosom of the river on which 
they were embarked, *^ studded thick 
with many a sail," afforded a variety in 
the objeds before them, of the most 
interesting nature. A band of music 
followed in another boat at a proper dis- 
tance, whose harmony swelling on the 
breeze, and re-echoed by the woods that 
cloathed the banks, which they occa- 
sionally approached, diversified their 
amusements, and increased the anima- 
tion of their feelings. 

After a sail whicii they had purposely 
len9;thened till towards the afternoon, 
the party landed, to partake of some 
refreshments, and examine the beautiful 
remains of Gothic archite6lure which 
the dilapidated abbey displayed. 

A table had been spread in the open 
area of the building, covered with an 
elegant cold collation, and the music 

VOL. JI. E 



[ 74 ] . 

disposed behind a vast fragment of waH 
t)vergrown with ivy, which at the same 
time concealed the performers, and mel- 
lowed the sounds of the instruments into 
the softest harmony. 

As the party sat at their repast, they 
caught a beautiful view of the river 
through the great western window, which 
time seemed to have despoiled of its 
stone- work in order to admit the inte- 
resting scene; whilst dire6ling their eyes 
to the opposite point, the vista was ter- 
minated by the exquisite traceiy of the 
eastern window, still preserving all its 
archite6tural elegance, and rendered 
more piduresque by the foliage of dif- 
ferent trees which had shot their branches 
through its various apertures, and pre- 
vented a more distant view. 

Broken columns, rich capitals, and 
mutilated sepulchral effigies, lay scat- 
tered around them in ruinous confusion; 
monuments at once of art and barbarism, 



C 75 ] 

of superstition exerting herself for the 
honour of heaven, in two opposite cli- 
re^iionSj equally mistaken and perverse. 
*' I think, Dodlor," said Mr. Stanmore, 
turning to the re6lor, '' you men of taste 
should consider yourselves as very much 
ohliged to Henry the Eighth, and Oliver 
Cromwell, for furnishing you with such 
rich, numerous, and beautiful subjeds 
for your pencils, in those ecclesiastical 
and military ruins which they scattered 
through the country." 

* Why, my good friend/ returned 
the re6lor, ' as abstrad objecls of taste ,. 
I confess to you, my fancy always dwells, 
upon such scenes as these with delight;, 
but when I associate with this contem- 
plation the circumstances of cruelty, 
distress, and confusion, that attended 
the destru6tion of these fabrics, a very 
considerable portion of my pleasure is 
destroyed. The undistinguishing fury 
©f religious persecution, and the unspa- 
E 2 



C 76 1 

ring atrocities of civil convulsions, are 
not very agreeable subjeds for the ima- 
gination to dwell upon.' 

'' Right, my clear sir," replied Mr. 
Stanniore, the same idea has always 
presented itself to my mind, when a 
ruin like the present has been before me; 
and I apprehend, could we analize the 
feeling, that a great part of the melan- 
choly impression which the refle6lmg 
mind experiences on the view of similar 
objeds, may originate in the association 
you have just alluded to. 

'^ But," added he, ^' another painful 
consideration with me, respeding these 
remains, and which applies particularly 
to dilapidated religious houses, is the 
prodigious injury the poor have sustained 
in the loss of those constant and large 
eleemosynary donations which were dealt 
out to them from the charitable inmates 
of these consecrated dwellings. How 
many of the children of poverty, for 



[ 77 ] 

instance, were dally supplied with the 
means of subsistence from the gate of the 
very abbey in which we now are ? Me- 
thinks 1 can see at this moment the rosy 
lay-brother, who filled the otiice of butler 
to the brotherhood, dividing amongst 
the aged and the infirm the superfluities 
of the abbot's hospitable board; and 
hear the blessings and the prayers of 
gratitude, which the generous boon drew 
forth from those who had received it." 

* A pleasing pi6lure, I must confess,' 
cried the Dodor, * which only wants 
the circumstance of triUh to make it 
quite enchanting. But I am afraid, my 
excellent friend, if 3'ou had employed 
reality instead of imagination to sketch 
your canvas, the result would not have 
been quite so favourable to this part of 
the monastic system as you have repre- 
sented. 

' Had the members of these relio-ious 

o 

houses direded their attention to the 



[ 78 ] 

minds instead of the bodies of the poor 
around them ; instru6ied them in their 
duties as creatures of Gob, rational be- 
ings, and members of society; encou- 
raged them in habits of industry, and 
taught them to supply their own wants 
by the a6tive exercise and proper direc- 
tion of those powers which Providence! . 
had bestowed upon them; they would 
have contributed infinitely more to the 
happiness of the poor, and the benefit 
of the community, than by their indis- 
criminate daily alms, which only served 
to foster indolence, and to render all 
exertion unnecessary. They would have ^ 
implanted in the subordinate classes, the 
valuable principles of self-respe6l and 
honest shame, which scorn the disgrace 
of dependence upon others, whilst the 
energy of their own industry can supply 
their wants; and though, by such an 
alteration the board of the cottager 
might not have been so delicately or 



[ 79 ] 

largely supplied as before, yet the coarse 
morsels whicli it presented would have 
been accompanied by a sauce^ whose 
relish would have made ample amends 
for the deficiency, — the convidion of 
their having been procured by honest 
and industrious labour, 

* Indeed, I cannot help thinking, that 
if more regard were paid to this principle 
of ?no?'al improvement^ in our present 
pauper system, we should be a much 
happier people than we are ; and I am 
convinced, unless it be recognized very 
speedily, the evils of the poor's-law will 
kecome intolerable.' 

*' Very true, Do6lor," exclaimed Sir 
Nimrod from the bottom of the table, 
" those cursed poor-rates will do us up 
at last. Why, they've increased from 
four-pence to three shillings in the 
pound here in our parish, even since 
I can remember. Every six weeks I'm 
put into the devil of a passion by that 



L 80 ] 

scoundrel Spriggings the overseer call- 
ing upon me, and whistling through his 
spe<5lacled nose, * I'm come for another 
poor-rate, your honour/ Rabbit it, I 
wish I'd lived in those times when no 
such things were yet invented, " 

* What then, Sir Nimrod,' said Ma- 
tilda, * you would have had no obje6lion, 
I presume, to have w^orn the mitre of 
this monastery, and been the lord-abbot 
of Netley?' 

'* None at all, fair lady, if I could 
have had such an abbess as yourself. But < 
don't think I'd have bargained for the 
company of a parcel of old stupid monks* 
only, and shut out female charms from 
my convent. No, no; poor-rates \wo\\\i\ 
be better than such a dull life as that." 

* Our sex is much indebted to you for 
the compliment, Sir Nimrod ; and I feel 
pleased that I have the honour of being 
in the same opinion with yourself respe6l- 
ing these gloomy and unsocial mansions. 



[ 81 ] 

I confess I detest the very thought of 
them. They seem to have been formed 
for the very purpose of extinguishing 
human happiness. Declaring war against 
all the pleasures of life, all the delights 
of fashion, and all the charms of the boii 
ton, they are only tit for your sentiment- 
alists; for those discreet and sober-minded 
persons, (casting a glance at iNIary, ) who 
can regulate their condud with the pre- 
cision- of clock-work, and have as much 
feeling as the automaton chess-player." 

' You entirely mistake the nature of 
these conventual institutions, Matilda,' 
cried Edmund ; ^ they were intended as 
retreats for those who had not discretion 
and sober-mindedness enousrh to resist the 
temptations of the world ; not for such 
as they wlvose wisdom and prudence were 
sufficient securities for behaving well ia 
the midst of them.' 

** That is, sir," replied Matilda, co- 
louring deeply, and evidently much 



[ 82 ] 

piqued^ *' convents were intended, I sup- 
pose, as places of security for thoughtless 
creatures like myself? (Edmund smiled 
and bowed.) But I thank heaven, the 
times are passed, when such abominable 
tyranny could be exercised over our 
sex. No ! the rights of women are now 
not only understood, but allowed; and 
the same range of thinking, and free- 
dom of a6lion, which lordly man had 
hitherto exclusively confined to himself, 
are now dispensed to his companion and 
equal in creation." 

' Bravo, young lady!' vociferated Sir 
Nimrod. ' What will Master Edmund 
say to thatf I'll bet my best hunter 
against Herbert's wall-eyed coach-horse, 
that you'd beat him out and out at fair 
argument any day; and that let him say 
as much as he would, you'd still have 
the last word,'' 

A general laugh succeeded this speech, 
which seemed to allay the warmth that 



C 83 3 

Edmund's remark had excited In Ma- 
tilda; and called up a smile even in the 
dejeded countenance of Lady Antoi- 
nette, who had hitherto appeared to be 
insensible to the animation of the rest 
of the party, and lost in vacant absence, 
except when adjusting the curls upon 
lier forehead, or giving a fresh tint to 
the rouge on her cheeks, by the assist- 
ance of a little etvvis-case which she- 
carried in her pocket. 

It was, however, only a transient 
gleam of mental sunshine; she soon re- 
lapsed into her former gloom; and at 
leno'th beo-o-ed that Mrs. Herbert would 
let her retire from the hideous place in 
which they Avere, the proper residence 
of bats and hobgoblins, where she had 
been almost petrified with cold, and 
killed with ennui. 

In compliance with the wish of Lady 
Antoinette, a general move now took 
place, sorely against the approbation of. 



t 84 ] 

Sir Nimrod, who thought it a sort of 
sacrilege to quit the ruins without finish- 
ing another bottle to the memory of the 
last jolly abbot who had presided over 
them. 

'* Odd's heart," cried he, " I'd give 
up the finest 06lober morning for a scent 
that ever I was out in, to stay another 
hour in this delightful place ; I mean, 
(added he, looking at Matilda, ) if my 
ladi/ abbess would remain with me. I 
must bargain too for a little more sport 
with the young squire. I tliink if she 
were to start him again, she wouldn't 
quit the game till she'd run him fairly 
down. 

** But come, my little heroine, if w^e 
must be going, do favour me so far as 
to accept of my arm to the boat ; it 
won't sink under you, I promise you." 

Matilda gaily gave him her hand, and 
warbling delightfully, as she quitted 
the ruins, ** Adieu, thou dreary pile, 



[ 85 ] 

where sorrow ever dwells !" tripped 
lightly on with the baronet to the river 
side. 

As the evening dews had begun to fall 
before the party left the boat, it v/as pro- 
posed that Lady Antoinette should take 
a seat in Mr. Stanmore's coach instead of 
returning in the phaeton, in which IMr, 
Herbert had driven her down in the 
morning to the place of embarkation. 
This being assented to, Matilda gladly 
relinquished her seat in the close car- 
riage to her ladyship, and ascended her 
father's phaeton, under the auspices of 
Sir Nimrod, who begged the honour of 
driving her to the Lodge. 

Mr. Herbert, resigning the reins to the 
baronet, mounted Sir Nim rod's horse, 
and accompanied Henry, who had rid- 
den his owa favourite poney to the 
water side. 

The carriages drove briskly on, and 
Mr. Herbert purposely suffered them to 



[ 86 ] 

get considerably before him on two 
accounts, that he might not interrupt 
the conversation of SirNimro4 with his 
daughter, who, he perceived, with con- 
siderable satisfaction, had been much 
struck by her beauty and animation; and 
in order to obtain some private conver- 
sation with Edmund, on a subje6i of 
considerable importance to his own 
security and interest. 

They were now just losing &ight of 
the phaeton, by the bending of the road, 
when Edmund observed, " Upon my 
honour, the baronet and Matilda seem 
to be as intimate as if they had been 
acquainted for years. Were she five 
and twenty instead of nineteen, and he 
twentyyears younger than he is, I should 
TK)t despair of soon calling him my bro- 
ther-in-law." 

* Why, Edmund,' replied his father, 
* I do not see any improbability in your 
numbering Sir Nimrod amongst your 



[ 87 ] 

relations, ev^en without such changes 
taking place in the dates of their nativi- 
ties. He is a very worthy character with 
a very noble estate, and would keep your 
sister in a style which both her accom- 
plishments deserve, and her expectations 
demand. As for myself, I confess I 
should be extremely happy if Sir Nimrocl 
were to make her an offer.* 

^' Heavens, sir," cried Edmund, ^^you 
astonish me. Sir Nimrod Heartley the 
husband of IMatilda ! Consider the dis- 
parity of their ages, the difference in 
their sentiments, the inequality of their 
education, the " 

' Pho! pho r interrupted Mr. Herbert, 
* all absurd prejudices and antiquated 
notions. Of what consequence are such 
trifling circumstances as these, when 
compared with the important ones of a 
large estate and an ancient title? What 
reasonable woman, or man either, regards 
any objed; in forming a matrimonial 



[ 88 ] 

alliance, but its eligibility in a pecuniary 
point of view? Every other particular 
in ay be considered as an indifferent one. 
As to age, the older a girl's husband is, 
the sooner she gets rid of him, and is 
ready for another; and with respe6l to 
a congeniality of sentiment, as it is called, 
why people live so much in public, and 
so little with each other, that it cannot 
be of the least consequence whether 
they harmonize or not in this respe6l/ 

*^ But surely, sir," returned Edmund^ 
'' you cannot suppose that a girl of Ma- 
tilda's strong understanding could feel 
the least esteem ^ov a man of such infe- 
rior endowments and qualifications as 
Sir Nimrod ; and 1 presume that neither 
you would wish her to be united to, nor 
would she herself consent to marry, a 
person whom from his inferiority of 
mind she must necessarily despise,''' 

'Sir,' resumed his father, * that very 
understanding which you have just com- 



[ 8J J 

plimented, would teach her to adopt the 
step that so decidedly meets your disap- 
probation. ]\Iatilda has been educated 
in, and is well acquainted with, the world. 
She possesses the most liberal and en- 
larged notions, and has vanquished all 
those prejudices which keep more com- 
mon minds than hers in awe. Her spirit 
too is high; she loves power, and is form- 
ed to enjoy it. The inferiority^ there- 
fore, of Sir Nimrod's understa?iding woukl 
be no objedion to your sister. On the 
contrary, she would consider it as a most 
desirable circumstance, since it would 
inevitably give her such an ascendancy 
over him, as would make her complete 
mistress of her own condu6l, and allow 
her the undisputed regulation of his.' 

*^ But could such an usurped dominion 
as this, my dear sir," said Edmund, 
'^ make amends for what she must sa- 
crifice to obtain it; the absence of all 
the delightful charities of the conjugal 



[ 90 ] 

state, reciprocal respe6l and esteem, 
mutual condescension and forbearance, ^ 
the exquisite joys of sympathy, and the 
elysian pleasures that flow from disin- 
terested love ?" 

* And pray, young gentleman,' re- 
turned his father, ' to answer one ques* 
tion by asking another, of how much 
avail would be all these most dele6lable 
produdSj, of what, in your vocabulary, 
Avould be called an happy marriage, in 
the absence of a good estate, a noble 
jointure, the charms of high life, and 
the gaiety of bon ton ^ Absurd and non- 
sensical reasoning, fit only for the nur- 
sery of Herbert-Lodge, and your mothe7'\ 
pupils. I am glad, however, the con- 
versation has taken this turn, as it has 
given me an opportunity of expressing 
my sentiments in a concise way, respect- 
ing the principles which should regulate 
young people in forming the marriage 
union; and will ^ave me a great deal of 



[ 51 ] 

trouble in explaining and enforcing a 
proposition of that nature, which 1 am 
commissioned to make X.o yourself,'' 
Edmund started and coloured. 

* Nay,' pursued his father, 'you need 
not be alarmed at the offer that is made 
you ; I believe there is no young man, 
circumstanced as you are, who would 
not be delighted with it. You know 
Charlotte Monson.' 

** Yes, sir, I have seen her once or 
twice." 

* And what may your opinion be of 
her?' 

*' Why indeed, sir, her toute ensemble 
was so little interesting to me, that no 
sufficient impression remains upon my 
mind to enable me to give any decided 
opinion of her. I think, however, she 
is neither handsome nor agreeable; and 
certainl}' not the woman I would choose 
for a wife." 



[ 52 ] 

' Oh, sir, if those be the only objec- 
tions which can be urged against the 
lady, let me assure you they are of very 
little importance. In a mistress 1 would 
willingly allow their weight, but in a 
wife they are not worth a thought. The 
same pretty face at the head of your 
table is a toy that one soon becomes 
tired of; and as for the agreeahles in a 
wife, why the very circumstance of a 
woman's being wedded to you, would 
quickly cure her of that quality in your 
estimation. But to be serious, Edmund; 
Mr. Monson has proposed uniting our 
families together, by giving you his 
daughter Charlotte. lie is willing to 
make a most handsome settlement upon 
her immediatelv; and as she is an onlv 
child, and her father exceedingly rich, 
she must eventually prove a prodigious 
fortune to you, I have promised for 
your acquiescence, and I cannot for a 
moment suppose that your good sense 



[ 93 ] 

will permit you to hesitate confirming 
your father's engagement.' 

*' Marry Charlotte Monson! Impos- 
sible, sir ! My afFe6tions are ah-eacly — 
I — I would say, it is not in our power, 
sir, to command our aiFe6lions; they 
cannot be regulated by the cold motives 
of prudence, nor dire6led by the mer- 
cenary pro3pe61s of interest. Were I to 
offer her my hand, my heart would refuse 
to accompany the proposal; and every 
principle of feeling, and ev^ery law of 
honour, forbid me to make vows, which 
n\y soul tells me I could never perfjrm." 

^Absurd rhapsody, Edmund; the weak 
prejudices vrhich you picked up in child- 
hood, when you were tictl to your mo 
ther's apron-string; and have since 
nourished in the romantic shades of the 
Forest, whilst playing the Damon with 
her little sentimental protegee. I have 
often repented that I sutlcred you to 
remain so long under maternal tuition, 



r 9i ] 

and permitted all your vacant time to 
be spent in the same enervating society, 
instead of sending you out into the 
world. But regret on this head is now 
too late. However, sir, let me not find 
that amongst her other excellent lessons 
Caroline has taught you to forget your 
duty to your father. Though your uncle 
Jerningham, with an infatuation that 
marked him for a madman, put you in 
possession, at the age of eighteen, of a 
property that sets you above want; yet 
you will recolle6l it neither exempts you 
from your filial obedience, nor can 
prevent your interests from being mate- 
rially injured, if you incur my displea- 
sure. Nay, sir, do not attempt to make 
any reply. I will admit of no compro- 
mise. I expe6l Monson and his daughter 
at the Lodge, in the course of a fort- 
night ; and according as your behaviour 
is agreeable or contrary to my wishes, 



[ 95 ] 

will depend the terms on which your 
father and yourself are in future to live.' 

Having said this with great vehe- 
mence in tone and manner, he spurred 
his horse, and set off at a full gallop 
to overtake the rest of the party. 

Edmund's distress at his father's con- 
cluding declaration could only be equal- 
led by the surprize which he felt on his 
first mentioning the subject. 

As Mr. Herbert had spent a consider- 
able part of his time on the continent 
with the Fitzmordaunts. and when in 
England was rarely and for very short 
periods at the Lodge, it was not to be 
expelled that his son should entertain 
for him the finer feelings of filial^ affec- 
tion; which, though they have their 
foundation in nature, can be kept alive 
only by the frequent interchange of mu- 
tual a6l3 of kindness and love. 

But though he acknowledged none of 
those sentiments of rapturous attach- 



I 96 ] 

mentto him, which he felt for his mother; 
yet tiie principles she had instilled into 
his mind, had impressed it with high 
ideas of the importance of filial duty and 
respect; and he shuddered at the pros- 
pe6t of an incurable breach even with a 
father from whom he had received 
scarcely any marks of parental fondness. 

On the other hand, the idea of sacri- 
ficing his happiness to an arbitraiy man- 
date, and connecting himself for life 
with a woman he could neither esteem 
nor love, was not for a moment to be 
tolerated ; and any alternative seemed 
preferable to that, which would interfere 
as much with principle as with incli- 
nation. 

Besides, another reason lurked in his 
bosom, which opposed itself to an acqui- 
escence in his father's will, though he 
had not mentioned it amongst the ob- 
jedions which he urged for his non- 
compliance. He had no heart to dispone 



[ 97 ] 

of; it ^vas surrendered to Maiy Wh^at;^ 
ley. She reigned over his affe^i ions with 
undivided sway, and her empire had 
been too long established to be shaken 
by any other claimant, whatever her pre- 
tensions mio-ht be. 

It is true, indeed, he had never de- 
clared to tlie obje('*l of it a passion, 
which, planted in childhood, had grown 
up with youth, and been strengthened 
by the contemplation of IVIary's more 
perfed: charms, and niaturer virtues ; 
nor perhaps had he ever till now clearly 
understood the extent of an attachment, 
which had been so gradual inits progress 
as to render its increase scarcely per- 
ceptible to the bosom that fostered it. 

But the moment the sacriiice of his 
affections was demanded, lie discovered 
how completely they were in the posses- 
sion of another; and found how deeply 
the felicity of his future life was con- 
cerned in the return of similar senti» 

VOL. If. F 



[ 98 ] 

fheiits, from the obje6l who had capti- 
fvated his heart. 

Another alarm, however, was sug- 
gested to his bosom by the review which 
he now took of its feelino-s. 

He was yet unacquainted with the 
•state of Mary's opinions with respe6l to 
himself. He knew not if she regarded 
him with more than a sisterly friendship ; 
and whether her heart might not ac- 
knowledge some other prepossession fatal 
to his hopes. 

He had been much absent from the 
Lodge, and she was universally admired: 
what then could be more probable, than 
that a fortunate rival should have ob- 
tained that place in her aifedions, which 
he had never attempted to secure by 
disclosing to her the state of his o^vn ? 

Occupied in these distressing medita- 
tions, Edmund rode slowly on without 
attendinp' to the lateness of the hour, so 



t 90 ] 

that it was nearly supper-time when he 
arrived at- the Lodge. 

On his entrance into the parlour, he 
found only his mother and Mary ; Lady 
Antoinette having been so much fatigued 
by the expedition, as to be under the 
necessity of retirins: to her dressing;- 
room, whither Herbert and Matilda had 
attended her, in order to amuse away 
an hour by reading to her a new novel, 
which had just been received from 
London. ^ 

Mrs. Herbert was busied in arranocine: 
her weekly accounts, and Mary in finish- 
ing some sketches of the abbey, which 
she had taken in the course of the day. 

The ladies rallied Edmund on the late- 
ness of his return, and begged to be 
informed what adventure had occurred, 
to prevent them from having the honour 
of his escort ; dra^ving a comparison be- 
tween the gallantry of the married gen- 
tlemen, who had been their humble 

f 5a 



[ 100 ] 

sel'vants through the dangerous shades 
of the Forest, and the want of it in the 
only bachelor of the party. 

Edmund endeavoured to answer in the 
same strain of sportive gaiety, but in 
vain ; his tongue faltered, and his man- 
ner was embarrassed. An awkward 
apology only served to excite their real 
curiosity; and the inattention which he 
paid to their questions, and the unusual 
absence that marked his conversation, 
convinced them that something parti- 
cular had a6lually happened on his 
ri^turn home, to disturb and agitate his 
mind. 

All their enquiries, however, produced 
no satisfadory information ; he would 
only confess that '^ a violent pain in the 
head had rendered him exceedingly 
stupid ; and, as he was convinced, that 
such a dull companion could add nothing 
to their amusement, he would take his 
his leave o^ them till the morrow, when 



[ 101 3 

he hoped he should be found less dis- 
agreeable than he must be at present." 
Saying this, he took his candle from the 
side-board, and bidding the ladies an 
atfedionate adieu, retired to his chamber. 



[ 1^2 1 



CHAPTER IV. 



.^ DMUND's sluml^ers were neither 
long nor refreshing. He rose early 
in the morning, after a restless night, 
(luring which he had been alternately dis- 
turbed by distressing dreams, and agitated 
by the most painful waking thoughts. 

A solitary walk seemed to promise 
composure to his spirits, and passing over 
the lawn in the front of the house, he 
turned into one of the glades of the 
adjoining forest. 

He had not proceeded many steps^ 
when he observed, at the other end of the 



[ 103 ] 

Opening, a female form coming towards^ 
him. In a few minutes he perceived it 
to be Miss Wheatley, but Avhat was his 
mortification^ when he found, that in- 
stead of meeting him, as she had hitherto 
been accustomed to do, she turned from 
the path the moment she discovered 
him, and was lost in the surrounding 
wood. 

Surprize riveted him to the spot, and 
for an instant he remained in doubt, 
whether he should follow IMary, or suffer 
her to escape him without requesting an 
explanation of her unusual behaviour. 

** Ah !'^ whispered he to himself, ** it 
is as my heart foreboded ; Mary dwells 
in secret on the fond idea of some 
favoured youth, whose happier stars have 
given him that interest in her affections, 
which I do not possess. But let me not 
be tbiC vidim of suspense. I witi learn 
from her own lips the fatal truths and 
having heard my doom, will endeavour 



t 104 ] 

to subdue an hopeless passion, by eternal 
absence from the object of it.*' 

Saying this, he struck into the thicket; 
and walking briskly towards the spot 
Avhere Mary had disappeared, soon o> er- 
took her. 

At the noise of his approach, sh« 
turned her head, and discovered a coun- 
tenance of the most pensive kind, on 
whicli. the tear still glistened that had 
lately fallen from her eye. 

'' Heavens!" cried Edmund, seizing 
her hand, and pressing it to his lips, *^you 
weep, my Mary ; what can have occa- 
sioned this cruel agitation r" 

Averting her face, she blushed deeply, 
and was silent. 

*' Oh!" continued he, '^ do not har- 
row my soul by this cruel refusal to gra- 
tify my painful curiosity. Inform me, 
1 conjure you, of the cause of your dis- 
tress. Nothing can wound my Mary's 



t lOi I 

bosom, without deeply interesting that 
of Edmund." 

* 1 weep, my brother,' replied the 
gentle girl, * because — I see that you 
are unhappy,'' 

*^ And is it possible," returned Ed- 
mund, ** that you can take so deep, so- 
kind an interest in my feelings? May 
I indulge the dear, the transporting 
hope, that Edmund's happiness can be of 
any consequence to Mary ? May I en- 
courage the flattering idea, that the 
sentiment which has so long filled my 
bosom has found' a synipathetrc one in- 
yours .^" 

Mary looked tenderly at him, and her' 
head sank upon his shoulder. 

* ' Oh, inestimable girl, " returned Ed- 
nvund, '^ how shall my heart thank you- 
for this condescension? How shall I 
prove my gratitude and love? Yes-, 
Mary, long has my bosom acknowledged' 
the influence of your excellences, and: 



[ 106 ] 

secretly felt your unrivalled controul 
over its afFe6lions. It is true, indeed, 
I have never ventured to declare its im- 
pressions in zvords, however my looks 
may have unfolded them; nor should 
even now have broken rudely in upon 
your solitude, to tell you how much I 
adore your virtues, had not a circum- 
stance occurred last night, which renders 
it necessary for me to be more abrupt 
than delicacy would otherwise have 
diaated." 

He then proceeded to inform her of 
the conversation which had passed be-* 
tween his father and himself during their 
ride on the preceding evening, and 
■which had occasioned his embarrassed 
and absent manner after his return to 
the Lodge. He declared his determina- 
tion to hazard the anger of Mr. Herbert, 
by instantly assuring him of his resolu- 
tion not to accede to Mr. Monson's hate- 
ful proposal; and hinted that the most 



[ lor ] 

efre6tual way of putting a stop to any: 
further trouble on that account, would 
be for him to solicit the hand of her who 
already possessed his heart, as soon as 
his minority should have elapsed ; an 
event which would take place in the 
course of a few months. 

'' You know, my dearest Mary," con- 
tinued he, *^ that my uncle Jerningham's 
generosity has put me into the present 
possession of a sum, that would enable 
us, with oeconomy, to enjoy all the real 
blessings of life; and beyond these nei- 
ther of us would form a wish." 

* Alas!' replied Mary, after a pause, 
whilst the tear trembled in her eye, and 
a deep sigh burst from her bosom, ^ it 
must not be. No ! generous youth, ill 
should I deserve that good opinion vvitli 
which you are pleased to honour me, 
and which I will candidly acknowledge 
I am proud to possess, if I could for a 
moment listen to the selfishness of my 



r 108 ] 

affe6lion, and permit you to sacrifice, for 
iiiy sake, the regard of your father, and 
your future prospe6ls in life. Ill would 
it become a friendless orphan, beggar 
in all but virtuous principle, to turn 
viper in the generous bosom that had 
fostered her, and wound it in so ten- 
der a part as the destru6iion of a son's 
felicity. No, Edmund, my honour for- 
bids the thought ; and let me add, my 
regard for yourself, and my devotion to 
that angel your mother, who has been 
jny tenderest benefa6lress, friend, and 
parent, loudly prohibit such base in- 
gratitude.' 

** Oh! Mary," exclaimed Edmund 
with violent emotion, ** forbear to utter 
such distressing words. If any regard 
for my felicity has influenced this deter- 
tnination you have just expressed, recal 
it, I beseech you ; for, here I most so- 
lemnly declare, that if the cruelty of 
my fate should make it impossible for 



[ 109 1 

me to call you min€y I would instantly 
and for ever renounce that country 
which contained a treasure that I had 
long enjoyed in iclea^ hut of which ma- 
lignant fortune had denied me the real. 
possession. Yes, hewitching girl," con- 
tinued he, drawing a pidure from his 
bosom, which she perceived was a minia- 
ture of herself, " believe your faithful 
Edmund, the most delightful visions of 
his heart have long been those which 
had the original of this portrait for their 
t)bje61. It was penciled by myself, 
when first I quitted home for the Uni- 
versity, and has ever siuce been the con- 
stant companion of my bosom. Not 
that my faithful memory required such 
a monitor to keep alive its recollection of 
your charms and virtues r no! the image 
of the bright original had b^en too long- 
and deeply impressed upon ray heart for 
either time or distance to obhterate it; 
but th€ dear resemblance has often 



[ im ] 

soothed the pains of separation, and lent 
strength to fancy, when her thoughts 
have stretched to Herbert-Lodge. Nor 
think, angehe girl, that my dearest 
mother would oppose the union of those 
whom she so fondly loves : no, I know 
too well tjie generosity of her soul, to- 
believe for a single moment that any 
false ideas of worldlv interest would 
raise an obstacle to our happiness. She 
estimates the value of your excellence 
too well to allow the vain and accidental 
circumstances of birth and fortune to 
weigh a grain against their solid worth. 
Listen then to your devoted Henry, and 
allow him to hope that you will accept 
his vows." 

The aiFe6iing fervour of Henry's man- 
ner was irresistible; Mary's bosom throb- 
bed with tender emotion ; her tears 
flowed fast; and whilst he pressed hep 
to his breast, she softly whispered — 



[ HI ] 

* Edmund, my heart \s yours — would It 
were more Avortby of your love.' 

The candid declaration was received 
by the generous youth Avith grateful 
rapture; Edmund, in terms of extacy^ 
acknowledged the inestimable value of 
the gift, and vowed eternal attacliment 
to the idol of his soul with an honest 
ardour that was to Mary a sufiicient 
pledge of its sincerity. 

As they returned towards the house^ 
Edmund undertook, at Mary's request, 
to communicate to Mrs. Herbert the re- 
sult of their conversation, as soon as his. 
father should set oif for London, which 
he intended to do in a few days; for she 
considered it to be the duty of them 
both not to conceal a matter of so se- 
rious a nature from her knowledge, but 
at the same time found herself utterly 
unable to the task of disclosing it. 

It is probable, however, that Mrs. 
Herbert would have discovered the cir- 



i: 112 } 

cumstat! ce, even before Eelmund had 
caught an opportunity of apprizing her 
of it, from the embarrassed manner of 
Mary and himself, had not her attention 
been entirely engrossed by tlie alarming 
situation of Lady Antoinette. 

The fatigue of the party on the pre- 
ceding day, it appearexl, had been too- 
much for her enfeebled state ; and in- 
duced a restless feverish night, which 
had been succeeded towards morning by 
a succession of fainting fits, pronounced 
by the medical gentleman who was called 
in to be the harbingers of quickly ap- 
proaching death. 

All, therefore, was bustle and confu- 
sion, when they returned to the Lodge. 
Mr. Herbert, half distra6led at the pros- 
pect of losing an objetl, who had for 
years secretly enjoyed his aifed-ions, and= 
returned the sentiment, hurried wildly^ 
over the house in search of means to 
arrest that fate, which, though conscious- 



f 113 ] 

it could not be averted, lie ^vas still un- 
able to contemplate as certain. 

]\Irs. Herbert, with unaffedted sorrow 
at the situation of Lady Antoinette, 
calmly gave the necessary dire^^tions, 
and kindly administered those attentions 
which she thought would most conduce 
to the solace of the sufferer ; whilst Ma- 
tilda sat by her bed-side, endeavouring 
to divert her mind from the thoughts of 
that awful event which she well knew 
must soon take place, with her custo- 
mary gay conversation, agreeable sallies, 
and lively remarks. 

But, alas ! they had now no charm for 
Lady Antoinette ; she tried to listen to 
them, indeed, that her attention might 
be occupied, and her thoughts diverted 
from a subjed on which she had never 
hitherto allowed her refle6lion to dwell; 
but all in vain. Nature and conscience 
imperiously demanded their tribute ; and 
whilst the one presented to her imagiua 



[ 114 ] 

tion the sorrows of separation from all 
that she had loved, and valued, and es- 
teemed; the other arrayed before her 
soul the dreadful views of a hereafter^ 
and the terrors of that punishment which 
her licentiousness and folly had so well 
deserved. 

With a force which her emaciated state 
could scarcely have been thought to sup- 
ply, she grasped the hand of Matilda, 
as if anxious to be saved from the seizure 
of that frightful spe6lre, whose contem-^ 
plation, whenever it had accidentally 
crossed her fancy, had only excited 
images of horror ; and whose near ap-« 
proach she now beheld with unnutter* 
able dread. 

Her eye, which glared with despair, 
was turned on Airs. Herbert, (who had 
entered the room, and stood at the bot- 
tom of the bed,) with a look that at once 
evinced the tempest of her soul, and 
seemed anxiously to solicit for means of 



[ 115 ] 

relief. In tl^e mean lime all her efforts 
to express herself in Avords were ineiFec- 
tual, and only died away in feeble moans; 
whilst every moment her respiration be- 
came more laboured and distressing. 
. Mrs. Herbert, exceedingly affe6led at 
the 3cene, approached the head of the 
bed, and gently taking the other hand 
of Lady Antoinette, dropped upon her 
knees, and offered up her prayers for 
mercy and acceptance^ 

The dying patient gazed at her with a. 
■\yild enquiring stare, which evinced how 
unacquainted she had been with this 
branch of a creature's duty to its God. 

Every moment she still breathed, 
deeper, quicker, and with greater pain;' 
large drops of sweat accumulated on her 
brow — she sank gradually lower in her 
bed ; and a livid paleness crept upon her 
hitherto burn in q^ cheek. 

At this instant the door opened; Her- 
bert rushed into the room, and threwi 



[ 1'6 ] 

back the curtain at the bottom of 
tiie bed. 

The sudden noise roused Lady Antoi- 
nette from the lethargy of dissolution; 
for the last time she opened her clouded 
lids, and directed them towards the spot 
from Av^hence the noise proceeded. Her- 
bert caught her eye — for a moment she 
stared at him with horror, affright, and 
detestation, and then uttering a piercing 
scream ; fell back upon her pillow, and 
expired . 

It was not till the evening of the same 
day, that any of the family saw Mr. 
Herbert, who had shut himself up in his 
room, as soon as he had discovered that 
Lady Antoinette was dead, and remained 
there without suffering any one to ap- 
proach him. 

At tea-time, however, he again ap- 
peared, and telling Mrs. Herbert he 
should set off early on the ensuing 
morning for London, he desired Ed- 



C 117 ] 

itiund would prepare to accompany him ; 
adding, that he would bring him down 
into the Forest again, as soon as the 
funeral of Lady Antoinette had taken 
place. 

However disao-reeable such an intima- 
tion might be to Edmund, under his 
present peculiar circumstances, he did 
not hesitate a moment complying with 
his father's wish. On the ensuins: mora- 
ing he was ready at an early hour; and 
having bidden an affectionate adieu to 
Mrs. Herbert and Mary, and promised 
to write to them in the course of a few 
days, he followed him with apparent 
readiness into the chaise, and drove oif 
for London. 

In obedience to the dire6tions of IMr. 
Herbert, the funeral of the late Lady 
Antoinette was conducted with the utmost 
pomp, and the corpse conveyed to Fitz- 
mordaunt- Castle, in order to be en- 
tombed in the family vault. 



t 118 ] 

The plumes nodded on the hearse, th« 
banners waved in the air, and as the 
procession moved slowly on, the gaping 
multitude, which the sight had colle6led 
together, gazed in stupid wonder at the 
scene ; but no tongue pronounced a 
blessing on the memory of the deceased ; 
no orphans wept in her a departed pa- 
rent; no poor man consecrated her bier 
^vith the tears of gratitude, for kind- 
nesses bestowed by her hand; no widow 
sighed out that in Lady Antoinette she 
had lost her friend, protedress, or sup- 
port. It was all chill admiration of the 
gaudy pageant; or silent contempt of 
the pride that dictated such senseless 
extravagance; the mortifying termina- 
tion, as well as reward, of spendid vanity, 
and high-life profligacy. 

" How envy'd, how admlr'd, avails thee not; 
" To whoni related, or by whom begot. 
** A heap of dust alone remains of thee ; 
** 'Tis all thou art, aod all the proud shall be.*' 



[ 119 ] 

Tor several days after tlieir arrival in 
London, Edmund saw lictle of his father. 
Business of some important nature ap- 
peared to occupy his mindentiicly, which 
called him from home from the moment 
after breakfast to a late hour at night; 
arKl even tlie short intervals of time that 
he spent with his son, were rendered 
exceedingly distressing to him, by the 
unusual taciturnity and unaccountable 
absence which he could not but perceive 
in jMr. Herbert. 

As Edmund, however, had acciden- 
tally met with an old Oxford friend, on 
the very day of his arrival in the metro- 
polis, the unpleasantness of his situation 
was greatly lessened by his passing a 
great part of that time, which would 
otherwise have been spent in the gloom 
of solitude, in the agreeable intercourse 
of an University companion. 

They had pursued their studies toge- 
ther at Oxford, and Edmund had left 



I 120 ] 

his friend Harcourt there a few weeks^ 
before, preparing himself for becoming 
a member of the Inner Temple; but cer- 
tain family misfortunes having occurred, 
which rendered it necessary to alter his 
plans for the future destination of his 
life, Harcourt, since their parting, had 
dropped all thoughts of the bar, purchased 

a company in the regiment of foot, 

and was now come to town on a short 
leave of absence, to take leave of his 
friends, previously to his sailing in the 
Lively transport with his company for 
Bombay. 

At the lodgings of this gentleman 
Edmund had one day been dining tet^- 
a-tetiy and talking over past adventures, 
and future plans; when, after a loud rap 
at the door, a message was delivered to 
him, that Mr. Herbert wished instantly 
to see him at home on particular business. 

Edmund obeyed the summons, and 
harried to Grosvenor-squarCj revolving 



[ 121 ] 

in his mind as he went, the probable cause 
of being thus suddenly sent for. 

Since their arrival in London, his fa- 
ther had scarcely mentioned the name 
of the Monsons, so that he had begun to 
flatter himself, that the decided mannet 
in which he obje6led to the match, had 
induced Mr. Herbert to relinquish all 
idea of such a conne6lion : his fears, 
however, now again revived; and he could 
not help apprehending, that the message 
was in some way or other associated with 
the detested subjeft. But he determined 
to acl with the same firmness as before, 
and risque every thing, rather than sa- 
crifice his principles and his love. 

It was evening when he entered the 
hall of his father's house, which, instead 
of being gaily lighted up as usual, re- 
ceived only a faint glimmer, *' a dark- 
ness visible," from a small candle that 
stood on the table ; it afforded, however, 
sufficient light for him to distinguish 

VOL. II. G 



[ 122 ] 

the figures of two or three ill-looking 
fellows, who were talking together in the 
middle of the hall, and whose appearance 
convinced him in a moment that they 
were not of the number of his father's 
smart domestics. 

'* Mr. Herbert, sir, is in the library," 
said the footman who let him in, with a 
tone and manner that convinced him all 
was not well. Edmund accordingly 
dire6ied his steps. to that room; and as 
he approached it distinctly heard his 
father talking loudly to himself, execra- 
ting his fortune, and pacing the apart- 
ment with furious steps. 

He rapped gently at the door. * Who 
is there?" exclaimed Mr. Herbert, in a 
voice half-choaked with agitation, 

* Your son, sir,' replied Edmund. 

'*Ah," returned his father, unlock- 
ing the door, and catching him in his 
arms; ''welcome, my guardian angel ; 
welcome, thou only hope that now re- 



L 123 ] 

mains to thy wretched father, of succour 
and salvation." 

Edmund's astonishment at these words 
rendered him for a few moments speech- 
less; nor was the appearance of his father 
calculated to allay the wonder excited 
by his exclamations. His eye was M'ild 
and staring; his hair dishevelled; his 
waistcoat was open, and his handkerchief 
had been thrown from his neck. Frag- 
ments of letters, torn in the wildness of 
passion, were scattered over the carpet, 
and on the table lay a brace of cocked 
pistols. 

'' For heaven's sake," cried Edmund, 
*' compose yourself, my dear sir, and 
explain to me the occasion of ail this 
agitation and confusion ; you must be 
well assured, that whatever my little ser- 
vice can efFe(5l is at your command." 

' Charming youth!' exclaimed Her- 
bert. ^ Yes, I am convinced, my Edmund 
Mill not disappoint my hopes; nor he- 



C 124 ] 

sitate a moment to give his father life, 
liberty, 2iv\d peace. Oh 1 Edmund, Avith- 
out your aid I am ruined, blasted, and 
sunk for ever. My person is at this 
moment under arrest, and my goods in 
execution. Two days more must expose 
my situation to the town ; my other cre- 
ditors will c^ome upon me ; my estates 
will be foreclosed, and I shall be com- 
pleatly beggared. One door of escape 
still remains unshut, and yoii have the 
power of preventing it from being closed. ' 

*' Name it," criedEdmund, very much 
aifecled. 

' Charlotte Monson !' replied his father, 
and pausing for a moment, proceeded ; 
^ Yes, Edmund, your consent to accept 
the hand of this young lady would at 
once relieve me from every embarras- 
ment. Her father is my principal cre- 
ditor; but anxious for the match between 
his daughter and yourself, he is willing, 
on its completion, to liquidate the whole 



t 125 ] 

of his demand upon my estates, in lieu of 
part of Miss IMonson's marriage portion, 
as well as to advance me an additional 
sum to discharge the execution which is 
just levied on my person and property. 
Tell me, Edmund ; may I hope that you 
will save your father?' 

** That I sympathise most feelingly in 
your distress, my dear sir, j-eturned Ed- 
mund, * heaven, which knows my heart, 
can witness; and that I would gladly 
relinquish even my life, to rescue you 
from ruin, I can with the most solemn 
truth assert; but——." 

' Don't drive me to d^istra6lion,' ex- 
claimed Herbert, ' by a refusal. By 
heaven, I cannot bear it.' 

'* JV/ii/ then, sir, will you impose a 
condition on me that I cannot fulfil? 
Why will you ask a proof of my obedi- 
ence to you, which it is impossible for me 
to grant. My principles forbid the act; 
they will not suifer me to make a vow, 



[ U6 ] 

which my heart cannot confirm ; for that, 
sir, is ill the possession of another." 

* As my mind foreboded,' interrupted 
Mr. Herbert, whilst his eyes flamed with 
indignation, and rage rendered his voice 
almost inarticulate; ' that syren Mary 
has stolen your afFe6tion from your fa- 
ther, and extinguished every principle 
of duty in your bosom. Curses light on 
her dissembling witcheries!' 

*' Oh! sir," cried Edmund, interrupt- 
ing his father; *' forbear, for heaven's 
sake, to couple Mary's name with base- 
ness or dishonour. Her soul is generous 
as heaven itself, and pure as the spotless 
snow; nor is there a virtue that can adorn, 
her sex, which does not burn, in all its 
lustre, within her gentle bosom. These 
are the only witcheries she possesses; but 
they have riveted a chain around my 
heart, that nothing can dissolve. No! 
sir; if fortune, life, and all that's dear, 
depended on the sacrifice of Mary, rea- 



[ 127 ] 

dily would I renounce them all, rather 
than relinquish her." 

Herbert's whole frame shook with agi- 
tation; his face was pale, and convulsed 
with passion ; and for a few moments he 
seemed to be incapable of utterance: 
but a storm of imprecations at length 
burst forth, involving himself, and every 
one conneded with him; and concluding 
with the most bitter oaths, that he would 
not survive the infamy and disgrace of 
the publication of his ruin. 

* Yes. cruel, ungrateful son, ' said he, 
pointing to the pistols on the table; 
* though your unkindness will not save 
your father from dishonour, there still 
remains a road by which I may escape 
the consciousness of my situation. That 
instrument shall settle all my difficulties. 

^' Good God!" cried Edmund, with 
liorror and astonishment; '^ is it possible 
my father should for a moment entertain 
an idea so dreadful ? What, sir, would 



C 128 ] 

you rush uncalled into the presence of 
your God ? Would you cut off, by self- 
destru6lit)n, all chance of better prospects 
here, and every hope of happiness here- 
after ? Dismiss, for heaven's sake, sq 
horrid a resolve; nor perpetrate, even in 
imagination, an a6l irreparable an4 
unpardonable. Surely, sir, there must 
yet be means by which your dishonour 
may be prevented. Is the ruin too wid^ 
to be repaired? Is there no one to whom 
you can apply for a temporary arrange- 
ment of these present difficulties, and 
thus get time for a complete adjustment 
of your affairs?" 

* Alas!' returned Herbert, apparently 
much affe6led by the speech of his son, 
^and calling to his assistance a flood of 
hypocritical tears; * alas! where can I 
look for refuge and relief? Your poor 
parent, Edmund, has no friend to whom 
he could even confide his sorrows; much 
less to whom he could apply for the 



[ 129 ] 

large sum of six thousand pounds, which 
his necessities demand.' 

** Yes, sir," replied Edmund, after a 
short silence, during which his bosom 
seemed to be agitated Avith different 
emotions. ^^ Yes, sir, you have a friend, 
wlio both can and will assist you. You 
know, sir, the amount of my uncle's 
legacy exceeds by some few hundreds 
the sum which you require. Six thou- 
sand pounds of that are now at your 
disposal. Cheaply will a father be saved 
from suicide at the price of such a suml" 

* Oh, generous youth,' returned Mr, 
Herbert, once more throwing his arms 
around Edmund's neck, whilst his eye 
recovered its fire, and his voice its na- 
tural tone, ' forgive me for doubting for 
a moment your filial duty. No, no, 
your heart has never been estranged from 
me. Edmund is still my son, my noble 
son, who eV'Cr has deserved, and always 



[ 130 ] 

shall possess my love. Oh, how shall I 
express the gratitude I feel?' 

'^ Sir," replied Edmund, with a firm 
and solemn tone, ^^ refrain, 1 pray you, 
fi'om acknowledgments ; I have only 
done that which my heart told me it 
was right to do. The performance 
of duty is not merit, but obligation ; and 
therefore has no pretension to thanks. 
Had I not made this sacrifice to a father's 
wants, my conscience would not have 
acquitted the omission. I have now 
satisfied the most imperious claim, the 
claim of dutyi and though it has ship- 
wrecked my own hopes, yet whilst I 
lament their destruction, I cannot regret 
that act which has occasioned it. Here, 
sir, is an order on my banker for the 
sum you want; but you must pardon me, 
if I at present retire, and endeavour 
to recover in solitude that tranquillity, 
which the events of this evening have so 
much disturbed," So saying, he quitted 



[ 131 ] 

the apartment, took his hat, and walked 
out into the street. 

It was not till after Edmund had paced 
for some minutes in solitude up and 
down the square ; that he was perfectly 
sensible of the greatness of the effort, 
and the importance of the sacrifice he 
had made ; nor clearly discerned that 
the consequences of it Were beggary to 
himself, and the complete prevention of 
his union v/ith Mary. 

The full result, however, of the trans- 
a6lion soon presented hself to his mind: 
He perceived the total destru6fion of all 
his golden hopes; the dispersion of every 
dream of happiness on which his imagi- 
nation had fondly revelled, ever since 
he had discovered the enchanting secret 
that his passion was returned. 

He saw also the necessity of his 'itn- 
mediately adopting some employment 
for his occupation and support, as he 
felt it to be impossible that he should be 



[ 132 ] 

tlependent upon a father, ^vhose affairs 
were so embarrassed, and whose conduft 
had been so unwarrantable. 

After much deliberation, one path, and 
only one, presented itself, which seemed 
to suit the circumstances of his situation ; 
and whilst it gave him present subsist- 
ence and employ, held out the dim but 
pleasing prospe<5l of his being able, at 
some future time, to claim the promise 
of his Mary's hand. 

He had still a few hundred pounds 
remaining in his banker's hands; and 
Harcourt had informed him, there was 
an ensigncy in his own company to be 
disposed of. In an instant he resolved 
upon its purchase, and late as it was, 
immediately dire6ted his steps towards 
his friend's lodgings, whom he fortunately 
found within. 

Harcourt being apprized of his situr 
ation and resolution, engaged with the 
utmost satisfaftion to manage the pur- 



[ 133 ] 

chase. This was effe6leGl on the ensuing 
morning, and by the post of that day, 
an order came for the captain and his 
new ensign to join the regiment at 
Chatham, and embark for Bombay. 

To leave his country, perhaps for ever, 
without the benedidion of liis mother^ 
and the farewell of Mary, was a wound 
to Edmund's heart, that gave him more 
acute pain than any of those circum- 
stances had done which made his ab- 
sence necessary; but the same principles 
of duty and honour that had borne him 
through the trying scene with his father, 
supported him under the pain of a sepa- 
ration, unsolaced by the blessings of his 
dearest friends. 

Having therefore written in the most 
aife6lionate and cheering manner to 
Mrs. Herbert and Mary, accounted for 
his sudden entrance into the army by 
the loss of his property, (the nature of 
which, however, he did not explain,) and 



[ 134 ] 

acquainted them with his destination, 
and the name of the transport in which 
he sailed; he bade his father adieu, 
(whom he had apprized of his purchase,) 
and left the metropolis, with his friend 
Harcourt, for Chatham and his regiment. 



[ 135 ] 



CHAPTER V. 



nr^HEYonly who have experienced the 
-*- sudden and bitter disappointment 
of their dearest hopes, can conceive the 
shock that Mrs. Herbert received, and 
the grief that wrung the tender bosom 
of INIary, when the fatal packet from 
Edmund reached them. 

The news at first seemed too terrible to 
be true, and for a few minutes they were 
inclined to doubt the reality of an event, 
whose severity their worst fears could 
not have anticipated. 



I 136 3 

But, alas, reflexion soon convinced 
them of its certainty, and at the same 
time suggested to their bosoms all the 
sad variety of circumstances that accom- 
panied and aggravated it; the dangers 
of the element on which he was em- 
barked, the risks of the profession in 
which he had engaged, the chance of 
battle, and the fatal climate of the 
country whither he was bound. 

Mrs. Herbert, however, had been too 
well disciplined in the school of sorrow, 
and drew her consolations from too high 
a quarter, to sink under the shock, 
affli6live as it was; and Mary, animated 
by her example, and conscious of her 
obligations to support the spirits of her 
inestimable friend, endeavoured to imi- 
tate her resignation, and compose her 
own mind. 

Edmund had not even hinted in his 
letters, at the tender tie of mutual 
affection by which the hearts of himself 



C 137 ] 

and his adopted sister were united ; and 
tliis she considered as a tacit injundion 
that she too should be silent on the 
subject. 

Her bosom assured her there would be 
110 breach of duty or of her gratitude 
to Mrs. Herbert, in forbearing to men- 
tion a circumstance, which, if divulged, 
might only occasion an additional pang 
to her protedress. To her own breast, 
therefore, she determined to confine it; 
and conceal the y-rief that her soul ex- 
perienced in the unexpected deprivation 
of the objed of its most sincere at- 
tachment. 

Matilda was incapable of sympathizing 
in the feelings of her mother and Mary 
on the present occasion. Vanity had 
benumbed every sensibility of her bosom.; 
and an arrogant aifectation of singula- 
rity, and an avowed contempt of the 
common principles of human conduCl^, 
rendered her as unequal to the kind 



[ 138 ] 

oflfice of solacing her friends, as she was 
incapable of sharing their affli6lion. 

Indeed, her attention was at present 
too much engaged in concerns of her 
own, to allow her to pay the least atten- 
tion to those of others. 

Matilda had left the continent to 
accompany Lady Antoinette to England, 
with the utmost unwillingness. Her 
heart had there formed an attachment 
to a young English nobleman, violent 
as it was romantic, which endeared her 
favourite Paris more than ever to her, 
and increased the disinclination she 
would in any case have felt to quit its 
splendid dissipation. 

The correspondence which they had 
settled with each other before their sepa- 
ration, had in some degree relieved her 
under the sorrows of it; but she still 
found a sad vacuity of mind in her New- 
Forest retreat, which neither letters nor 
meditation could eife<?lually remove. 



[ m 1 

As some refuge from thrs state of 
terrible ennui, she determined to amuse 
herself in exercising the power of her 
charms on one of the few obje6ls which 
offered an opportunity for the attempt; 
and soon singled out Sir Nimrod Heart- 
ley for her purpose; as a character^ in 
her opinion, the most capable of any 
around of being; made ridiculous. 

The Netley party had. enabled her to 
commence her operations, since which 
time she had carried them on with so 
much success, that the baronet was now 
become her professed admirer and con- 
stant attendant. 

Indeed it is not to be wondered at, 
that Sir Nimrod, whose intelle6l was of 
the commonest kind, and incapable of 
distinguishing between specious and solid 
excellence, should quickly have owned 
himself the willing slave of a fascinating 
female, who put forth all her charms to 
ensnare his heart. 



[ 140 ] 

Matilda, now nineteen, possessed all 
the attradions of beauty, and every 
grace, with which accomplishment could 
heighten their efFe<5l. Her form was 
perfe6i symmetry, her face and features 
faultless. She played, she danced, she 
sang, with exquisite skill. She spoke 
fluently all the modern languages; ex- 
celled in painting; and in the fanciful 
produdlions of ornamental work, disr 
played a taste which was not to be 
equalled. 

Her conversation too was lively and 
entertaining, illuminated by the corrus- 
cations of a ready wit, seasoned with 
sauce piquant of irony and repartee, and 
rendered striking by a freedom of prin- 
ciple and boldness of remark, which, as 
they are happily but rarely met with in 
the female character, have an air of ori- 
ginality that renders them, for a short 
time, agreeable as well as imposing. 



[ 141 ] 

The beauties of Miss Herbert's mind, 
however, bore no proportion to the 
charms of her exterior. 

The fine talents with which nature had 
endowed her understanding, had been 
either wasted or perverted; frittered 
away in minute attention to personal 
graces, or diffused upon subjects which 
gave a false dire6lion to her principles, 
whilst they strengthened her passions, 
and debilitated her mind. 

She had read much, but her reading 
had been of the worst kind ; either those 
sickly works of fancy, the mushroom 
growth of affectation out of the ruins of 
nature, which, robbing the heart of 
every genuine feeling, implant in its 
room all the extravagances of a surrep- 
titious sensibility; or those still more 
dangerous works of superficial philoso- 
phy, which under the delusive promise of 
emancipating the mind from prejudice, 
secretly sap the foundations of morality 



t H2 ] 

and religion; inspire a contempt for all 
the established notions of propriety ; and 
demolishing all the received criterions of 
right and wrong, submit the dire6lion of 
the conduct of life to the wildness of 
passion, the eccentricity of imagination^ 
or the crude determinations of a per^ 
verted reason. 

Quickly after Matilda's arrival at the 
Lodge, had Mrs. Herbert clearly per- 
ceived and deeply deplored these fatal 
consequences of her daughters misma- 
naged education. To others, however, 
who were less observant, and less inte- 
rested in her happiness, they were not 
so apparent; and the general sentiment 
of the neighbourhood pronounced Miss 
Herbert to be an enchantino: p-irl. 

Sir Nimrod's opinion of her was too 
obvious to be mistaken; and the artful 
return which Matilda made to his atten- 
tions, convinced not only the baronet, 
but every body else also, that his senti- 



[ 1^3 ] 

iiicnts had found a favourable reception 
in liei' heart. 

My. Herbert, who now returned to the 
Lodge, after some weeks absence, (du- 
ring which he had contrived to dissipate 
a large proportion of the sum he had 
received from Edmund, and was almost 
as much necessitated as before,) rejoiced 
at the appearanceof an attachment, which 
he had no doubt of being able to convert 
to his own advantage; and gave every 
possible encouragement to its growth. 
Successive invitations and constant par- 
lies brought Sir Nimrod and his daugh- 
ter together almost every day ; and as 
the hunting season had now commenced, 
and Matilda, who was an admirable 
horse-woman, frequently accompanied 
the baronet in the chace, his^admiration 
of the lady gradually increased into a 
sort of adoration. 

Herbert immediately perceived that it 
was time to bring bis plans into a<^ion: 



[ 144 ] 

he therefore in a tete-a-tete dinner with 
Sir Nimrod gave him an opportunity of 
declaring himself; and having promised 
him the acquiescence of himself and 
Mrs. Herbert, and all their influence 
with the young lady, observed, that it 
was his wish to do every thing that might 
be considered as liberal on his daughter's 
marriage; he had therefore determined 
to divide his estates between his son, and 
daughter Matilda, after the death of 
himself and wife ; and in the mean time, 
if he could purchase two farms in the 
neighbourhood of Herbert Lodge, that 
estate (which was intended for Matilda's 
share) would be hereafter incalculably 
more valuable, to Sir Nimrod and his 
heirs, than it was at present. The pur- 
chase-money* could not be more than ten 
thousand pounds; and if Sir Nimrod 
would advance it to him, he might have 
any security for the same most agreea- 
ble to himself. 



[ 145 ] 

The baronet, who was a monied man, 
.and in a temper at present not to regard 
pecuniary concerns, readily agreed to 
make the advance; receive Mr. Her- 
berts bond as a security; and pay tlie 
money on the day of his marriage with 
his daugliter. 

Full of triumph at the success of his 
schemes, Mr. Herbert made his excuses 
to Sir'Nimrod for an early departure, 
and repaired to the Lodge, in order to 
prepare ^Matilda for a formal declaration 
of the baronet's proposals, and to ensure 
iier consent to the match. 

She was alone in the parlour when he 
returned, engaged at her tambour-frame, 
tracing a beautiful pattern over the mus- 
lin that was stretched upon it. 

*^ What," said Herbert, entering the 
room, '' are you preparing your wed- 
ding-gown, Matilda? and meditating in 
solitary sadness, at the a])proaching 
. chanQ:e in your situation-'" 

VOL, TI. II 



€ 146 3 

^ No, sir; my vestal robe, for the state 
of celibacy, to which I perceive I am to 
be doomed, amongst the stags and hinds 
of this bewitchuig foresL' 

'*I should rather be inclined to be- 
lieve, Matilda, you mean it for the zveb 
of Penelope; a projed to delay the nomi- 
nation of him who is to be the happy 
man, out of the numerous impatient 
suitors by whom you are surrounded." 

' Why, indeed, sir, the croud of dying 
swains is so large and so importunate, 
that I find it absolutely necessary to 
adopt some device, to continue to pre- 
serve the free agencij of an unmarried 
life.' 

'*True, Matilda: I have perceived 
ever since my return to the Lodge, your 
embarrassment in this respe6i, and there- 
fore earnestly recommend to you, as the 
deed of matrimony must be perpetrated 
sooner or later, to plunge into the gulph 
immediately; and rid yourself of farther 



[ 147 ] 

ijlao'ue and trouble, bv cominissioniiiii 
Sir Nimrod Heartly to do tlie honours of 
dismissing all your other admirers." 

* Admirable advice, Sir, I must ac- 
knowledge ; and were it to my taste to sit 
at the head of a table of noisy fox-hunt- 
ers, to preside at village card-clubs, 
and dance the first minuet at sessions 
balls, I would most willingly adopt your 
hint, and name Sir Nimrod for my own 
true knight/ 

'' And a very desirable pre-eminence 
too, I think, 3>Iatilda. Why, child, an 
union with Sir Nimrod would lift you 
into the highest rank of New-Forest 
fashions; and in due time, I have no 
doubt that you would see yourself at the 
county assizes in the envied situation of 
the Sheriff's Lady. But to lay aside the 
joke in which we have been indulging, 
I confess to you, my dear, it has not 
escaped my observation, nor has it given 
me a trifling degree of pleasure to ob- 
n 2 



[ lis ] 

serve, that Sir Nimrod's attentions to* 
you evince the most sincere attachment, 
and that you receive them witli a very 
flattering satisfa6lion* To be candid 
with you, he has confided his sentiments 
respe6lingyou to me^ and authorized me 
unequivocally to declare them to you." 

*Ha! hal ha! the old widower does 
me infinite honour, indeed; and I feel 
the most profound gratitude for the ex- 
quisite obligation which his good opinion 
imposes on me. But as I feel no violent 
inclination to spend my days in the 
agreeable employment of a wz^r^d*, I must 
beg leave unequivocally to wave the 
compliment he intends me.' 

** Sprightly enough, I must confess, 
child; but not quite to the purpose. 
Indeed, I wish you now to be a little 
serious ; and as your behaviour to Sir 
Nimrod has convinced me that his at- 
tentions are decidedly agreeable to you, 
I feel ver}^ anxious that my worthy friend 



[ 149 ] 

may be made luippy, by bearing a cir- 
cumstance tbat would be so gratifying 
to Iiim, confirmed Ijy your own lips." 

* Upon my word, sir ; you have the 
compleatest command of countenance, 
that any one was ever blest with.' 

^' I tell you, Matilda," replied Mr. 
Herbert, with much warmth, *' I am 
most solemnly serious in what I say : and 
that I think your present levity highly 
unbecoming." 

* And is it possible, sir,' returned Ma- 
tilda, * that you have not been jesting all 
this time? Could you for a moment 
entertain the monstrous idea that Sir 
Nimrod Heartley should be agreeable to 
Matilda Herbert?' 

*' What else could I infer," cried her 
father, in an elevated tone, *' from the 
complacency with which you have re- 
ceived his attentions ?" 

* My dear sir,' said Matilda, 'it sliould 
seem from this question, that you were 



[ 150 J 

not aware that coquetry is the privilege 
of our sex; and that women have a 
right to amuse ourselves with the Hjeak- 
ness of their tyrants^ whenever they have 
an opportunity of doing so; surely this 
is but a fair return for the despotism 
they exercise over us, as soon as we place 
ourselves under their controul.' 

*' Matilda," exclaimed Herbert, ''I 
will not be trifled with ; neither can I 
allow my daughter to amuse herself at 
the expence of my friend. You have 
given Sir Nimrod every reason to think 
he has rendered himself agreeable to 
you. Tliis encouragement has engaged 
his affe6lions. He has made to me the 
most honourable and advantageous pro- 
posals; and I insist upon it, that no 
senseless levity on your part may now 
prevent me calling him my son.'' 

^ What, sir,' returned Matilda with 
spirit, ' do you wish me to believe, that 
you would force the inclinations or a 



[ 151 J 

uuinan in such an important afliair as 
inatiiniony; and degrade her to the level 
uf a horse at a fair, to be sold to the best 
bidder, and led away with a bridle in 
her mouth ? Is this consistent with those 
principles which 1 have so often heard 
you assert, of the rights of women, the 
independency of our sex, and its equa- 
lity in society with your OAvn ? Assure 
yourself, sir, I have formed juster esti- 
mates of the dignity of our character, 
and know too well the natural right 
we have to dispose of our hearts and 
hands according to our inclinations, to 
allow any authority to supersede the 
privilege.' 

]\Ir. Herbert coloured with indigna- 
tion, but curbing his displeasure as much 
as possible, he replied, ^' where you have 
acquired such notions as these, Matilda, 
I do not know; certain I am, however, 
you never heard from me any thing 
that might teach you to think lightly of 



[ 152 ] 

a father's power. This power I now 
mean to exercise: and I give you solemn 
warning, that if in the course of three 
days you do not acknowledge it, by 
a6ting on the present occasion, in con- 
formity to my wishes, this house shall 
no longer harbour such an ungrateful 
and insolent child." 

Saying this, he darted a fierce and 
threatening look at her, and hastily 
quitted the apartment. 

Matilda knew her father's disposition 
sufficiently well, to be fully satisfied that 
he was serious in what he said, and would 
without hesitation execute the threat 
he had thrown out. 

It was therefore necessary she should 
determine quickly on some plan of con- 
dud, that might avert the dreadful alter- 
natives by which she Avas surrounded ; 
eitlier of being an outcast from her 
father's house, or (a still more horrible 
evil) of becoming Sir Nimrod's wife. 



[ 133 ] 

To a mind like bers, dissimulation was 
soon suggested as an efFeclual resource ; 
and she resolved to conciliate Mr. Her- 
bert, by pretending to have been wrought 
upon by what he had said, and to agree 
to receive Sir Nimrod as her professed 
admirer, reserving to herself the right 
of nominating the period when the 
union should take place. 

By adopting this plan, she was aware 
that slie sliould at least gain time; and 
as Mr. Herbert talked of returning to 
Paris early in the ensuiug year, she 
flattered herself that some accident or 
other might, in the interval, put an end 
to the engagement between Sir Nimrod 
and herself; and enable her to go back 
with her father .to that enchanting spot, 
in which her hopes, her affections, and 
her happiness had long been centered. 

Should she, however, be disappointed 
in the expectation of Sir Nimrod's attach- 
ment dying gradually of itself, or being 



[ 154 ] 

scared away by her adopting such con- 
du6l as she should discov^er would be 
most calculated to alarm hhii ; or if she 
found that her father and the baronet 
pressed her for an earlier completion of 
the union than she should herself ap- 
point; she then determined upon the last 
resource of a persecuted virgin, to fly 
from her oppressors at home, and to 
throw herself into the prote6ling arms 
of her own true knight at Paris. 

Before the time fixed for forming her 
final resolution, Matilda communicated 
to Mr. Herbert her determination to re- 
ceive Sir Nimrod as the person intended 
for her future husband, and authorised 
him to impart the same to the baronet. 

However gratified her father might be 
with the information, his satisfa6lion 
was but a cold emotion, when compared 
with the exultation of Sir Nimrod upon 
the occasion. It seemed to have elec- 
trified his whole system, and infused into 



C 155 ] 

him immediately a spirit of animation 
and gallantry, that gave him the appear- 
ance of a new man. It even induced 
him to relinquish for upwards of a week 
his favourite sport, and to spend every 
day at the feet of the fair mistress of his 
aifedions. 

The Lodge now became a scene of 
constant festivity. All the neighbour- 
hood, far and near, were colle6ted toge- 
ther by Herbert's vanity, in parties 
quickly succeeding each other, to meet 
his son-in-law, the wealthy Sir Nimrod 
Heartley; and to envy the happiness of 
his daugliter, who was shortly to become 
mistress of seven thousand pounds per 
annum. 

The prospe6l of the secret advantage 
which he was to derive from the event, 
put him into the highest spirits, made 
him lavish in his expressions of affection 
to Matilda, and even drew from him 



[ 156 ] 

occasional symptoms of kindness and 
complacency towards Mrs. Herbert and 
Mary. 

Little, however, did they avail to 
cheer the spirits of his wife and her 
adopted daughter, or to banish the pain- 
ful recollections that filled their bosoms. 

Their thoughts were still direded to- 
wards the absent Edmund; and whilst 
the tenderest parental anxiety pressed 
down tlie heart of Mrs. Herbert, the 
soft sentiment that Mary entertained 
for the departed youth sank her gentle 
spirit into a state of depression, that none 
of the gaieties could interest or remove. 

She carefully, however, endeavoured 
to conceal the emotions of her bosom 
from every one, particularly Mrs. Her- 
bert, who, she perceived, already suffered 
her full share of sorrow. But this sup- 
pression of her feelings, with the effort 
of appearing cheerful under the pangs 



r 157 ] 

of a wounded spirit, now became too 
much for her strength; and her fond 
prote6lress liad the additional pain of 
perceiving that the estimable girl was 
gradually sinking into a state of health 
at once distressing and alarming. 

Mrs. Stanmore, who, with her family, 
frequently visited at the Lodge, made 
the same observation ; and, (at there- 
quest of her daughter Harriet, v/ho was 
exceedingly attached toMary Wheatley) 
proposed to Mrs. Herbert that her young 
friend should accompany them in an 
excursion to Bath, where Mr. Stanmore 
was to take them for two or three months, 
in the ensuing week. 

Mrs. Herbert heard the proposal with 
the utmost satisfadion, and though Mary 
would rather have remained at the Lodge 
to indulge in secret that melancholy, 
whose source she could not disclose; yet 
as she perceived that Mrs. Plerbert 



[ 158 ] 

wished her to accompany the Stanmores, 
she immediately accepted the offer with 
every expression of gratitude for the 
kind friendship that had prompted it. 



I 



[ 1^9 ] 



CHAPTER VL 



T^ VERY necessary aiTangement being 
-*^ soon compleatecl, Mr. and Mrs. 
Stanmore, Harriet, and Mary, quitted 
the manor; and after a long and not 
unpleasant journey, arrived in Milsom- 
street, where apartments had been en- 
gaged for their reception. 

The change of air, and theu se of the 
waters, produced an almost instantaneous 
alteration for the better in Mar. 's health; 
an effect which the novelty of the scene 
also greatly assisted in promoting. 



r 1^0 ] 

It was now the commencement of the 
gayest season in this region of gaiety; 
and to her who had never been accus- 
tomed to the sight of other objeds than 
those presented to her notice in the 
Forest, Bath afforded perpetual sources 
of wonder and admiration. 

The elegance and taste of the buikl- 
iiigs which comprized the modern part 
of the city ; the pi61uresque scenery of 
tlie surrounding vallies ; the variety and 
splendour of the public amusements; and 
the polished society to v/hich she found 
herself introduced ; presented to her 
mind a combination of pleasing novel- 
ties, that awakened new trains of ideas 
in it; gave wings to the passing hours; 
and left her nothing to wish for, except 
the society of her dear protectress, from 
whom she was now for the first time 
separated ; and the presence of that 
youth, whose ima^e was never absent 
from her heart. 



t 161 ] 

Amongst the numerous visiters who 
welcomed our little party to Bath, was 
Mr. Fortescue, a gentleman Mary had 
occasionally seen at Herbert- Lodge, du- 
ring the period of her childhood ; but 
of whom she had almost lost the recol- 
ledion, as he had been absent from 
England some years on his travels. 

The memory of Mr. Fortescue, how- 
ever, was not so treacherous. 

His heart immediately recognized the 
full-blown perfe6lions of that form and 
mind, whose budding beauties had 
charmed him even in their earliest 
shoots; and he instantly became their 
willing captive. 

Possessed of a fine and highly-culti- 
vated understanding, joined to a most 
pleasing form, Mr. Fortescue was also 
endowed with an excjuisite sensibility, 
which rendered him peculiarly suscep- 
tible of tender impressions from the 
lovely and the amiable; accompanied, 



however, by a refined delicacv, severe 
ill exad:ing all those gentle qualities, and 
modest retiring virtiUM^ which are the 
proper charadteristics of the female sex, 

He had travelled much, and lived long 
in foreign countries; circumstances that 
served to confirm his previous sentiments 
on this subjeft, and made him a fasti- 
dious observer of the minutest points of 
female condu6l; so that though he had 
frequently been led by his quick sensi- 
bility into sudden admiration, he had 
never, till he saw Miss Wheatley, disco- 
vered, on a nicer inspedion of its obje6lj 
that all those excellences M^ere centered 
in it. which he deemed essential to the 
chara6ler of perfe6l loveliness. 

Mr. Fortescue's mind being stored 
with a fund of useful and entertaining 
information, the result of much obser- 
vation and elegant study, he could not 
be otherwise than a most agreeable acqui- 
sition to Mr, Stanmore's party. 



[ 16-3 ] 

To I\Iary his attention was particu- 
larly directed ; whilst she, in the artless 
simplicity of an unsophisticated heart, 
acknowledged the pleasure and gratifi- 
cation which his conversation afforded 
her, with an animated gratitude, that 
was construed by the enthusiastic For- 
tescue into a preference in his favour; 
and confirmed more strongly in his 
bosom that tender sentiment for Miss 
Wheatley, which the beauty of her per- 
son and the amiablencss of her disposi- 
tion had already inspired. 

Mrs. Stanmore also, from the apparent 
pleasure with which Mary listened to 
Mr. Fortescue's conversation, and the 
friendly familiarity of her manner to 
him, began to entertain the idea that 
he was not indifferent to her affeftions; 
and as her knowledge of him convinced 
her of his worth and excellence, she was 
sincerely desii'ous that she might not be 
mistaken in her opinion. 



[ m ] 

Aware of his particular and refined 
notions on many subjects conne6led with 
conjugal fehcity, she believed he must 
necessarily be unhappy, if he formed an 
union with a female, whose mind was not 
as pure as the snow ; her manners soft 
and feminine; and her every sentiment 
delicate and intelle6lual. 

In these particulars Mary was every 
way qualified to suit him ; and on the 
other hand, as Mr. Fortescue's fortune 
was considerable, and her young friend's 
situation dependent, she thought herself 
authorized secretly to indulge an hope, 
that a connexion might take place, 
which appeared to be so desirable for 
both parties. 

As this point, however, was one of 
the utmost importance, and intimately 
conne6led with the future happiness of 
Mary's life, she avoided every attenipt to 
bias her inclinations on the subje^l; and 
endeavoured as well to conceal her suspi- 



[ I6i ] 

cion of Mr. Fortescue's attachment, as 
her anxiety that the fair obje6l of it 
might accept his proposals, if offered. 

Thus days and weeks passed on in 
rapid succession ; each as it arrived 
bringing with it some fresh engagement 
either in public or at home. 

But every succeeding one seemed less 
agreeable to Mary than the former. 

Repetition robbed them of their no- 
velty; and deprived of this, they wxre 
stripped of every charm. 

She began to compare her present 
occupations with those she had left be- 
hind her at Herbert-Lodge ; the fantastic 
follies of art and fashion, with the joys 
and employments of rural simplicity and 
genuine nature ; and secretly languished 
to retire from scenes, Avhere folly and 
vice, contending for empire, were so 
often blended, that a superficial observer 
would often find it difficult to determine^ 



[ \66 ] 

to which of the tyrants they might be 
said to belong'. 

Even the theatre, which she had oc- 
casionally heard represented as the school 
of pure morals, chaste taste, and proper 
sentiment, appeared to Mary's ideas to 
hav^e entirely changed its character, and 
perverted its original intention. 

Folly, instead of being scourged or 
ridiculed, seemed here to rule with abso- 
lute dominion; too frequently waving 
her cap and jingling her bells, in open 
defiance of decency and common-sense; 
whilst virtue, indignant at the neglecl 
which she so long experienced, had fled 
the place, with Shakespeare's muse, and 
resigned her seat to pantomime absurdi- 
ties, and the gaudy hopus-pocus of genii 
and fairies. 

Perhaps, however, the distaste and 
weariness which were thus gradually 
creeping on her mind, had more secret 
causes than the dulness of frequently- 



[ m J 

repeated pleasures; and might be iii a 
still o-i'eater de^-ree attributed to the 
painful state of suspense by which her 
bosom continued to be agitated, from 
the uncertainty of Edmund's present 
situation. 

, Of late, too, her anxiety had been in- 
creased by the unusual silence of her 
only correspondent Mrs. Herbert; as she 
had now been several weeks absent from 
the Lodo'e, and durino- the last fortnio-ht 
no letter hiid reached her. 

This two-fold solicitude preyed upon 
her spirits ; and she would gladly have 
avoided entering into those an.usements 
which were now become irksome to her, 
had she not perceived it was impossible 
to decline accompanying her friends, 
without making them partakers of the 
uneasiness which she endured. 

The change in her feelings, indeed, 
had not entirely escaped the penetration 
of Mrs. Staumore, who was nearly as un- 



C 168 ] 

easy at Mrs. Herbert's silence as Mary^ 
but had forborne, like her, to speak upon 
the subje6l. 

One evening, however, when the fa- 
mily party, which now constantly inclu- 
ded Mr. Fortescue, had assembled round 
the fire, having observed an unusual de- 
gree of though tfulness on the brow of her 
young friend, which seemed to shed its 
influence over the rest of the company; 
Mrs. Stanmore proposed that they should 
try by the power of music to dissipate 
the sombre cloud, preparatory to their 
appearance at Lady Ponto's route, where 
she assured them ^'such ^lelpomene 
countenances were not likely to render 
them welcome Q-uests." 

With too much diffidence to obtrude 
her accomplishments. Miss Wheatly was 
at the same time unacquainted with that 
aifedation which delays compliance, 
merely that it may enhance the obliga- 
tion; and therefore, with the utmost 



readiness and good-humour, drew her 
harp towards her, and threw her fingere 
over its strings with wild but exquisite 
taste, as a prelude to her harmony. 

Instead, however, of the lively airs she 
had been accustomed to indulge them 
with, and which would best have ac- 
corded with Mrs. Stanmore's wishes; she 
yielded to the impulse of the moment, 
and poured forth with the most affecting 
pathos the following lines : 

<* Amynta, mistress of my faithful heart, 

*< Deep on its folds thy image is impress'di 
<* Tho' never yet I ventur'd to impart 

** The fervent passion glowing in my breast: 
« The sentiment, ^tis tme, ne'er liv'd in speecli ; 
** For words refuse to paint what mocks expression's 
<' reach." 

The words and air were both composi- 
tions of Edmund, and Mary recollecting 
how often she had sung them accompa- 
nied by his flute, felt her spirits painfully 

V L. 1 I . I 



[ iro ] 

agitated by these recalled images of the 
past. 

A sigh heaved her bosom; her eyes 
were suffused with tears; and she struck 
the chords of her harp with a feeling 
that vibrated on the hearts of her audi- 
tors, and kept them still in mute atten- 
tion, even after the harmony had ceased. 

Mr. Fortescue, who had been leaning 
on the back of her chair in silent rap- 
ture, suddenly starting from his position^ 
passionately exclaimed: 

** By heaven it is the most exquisite 
melody I ever heard. These indeed are 
^ sounds that take the prison'd soul, 
and lap it in Elysium.' Charming Miss 
Wheatley," added he, pressing her hand 
to his lips, ** true, too true it is, that 
words can but faintly express the senti- 
ment j/om were born to inspire." 

His voice faltered : and drawinor his 



e» 



handkerchief across his eyes, he turned 
to the window to conceal his emotion. 



C J71 ] 

'^Faitli," whispered Mr. Stan more to 
Mary, *' it requires but little penetration 
to discover the havock you have made in 
that poor fellow's heart. 

*' Were he an every -day lover, I 
should advise you to relinquish this woe- 
begone countenance for your accus- 
tomed Hebe smiles; but so romantic is 
the taste of Ferdinand Fortescue, that 
the tear of sensibility possesses charms 
for him, which he Av^ould never find in 
the dimpled cheek of the laughter-loving 
dame; and in fa6l, my dear girl, were I 
to give you ten thousand lessons, you 
could net render yourself more attra6l- 
ive or more amiable than you are at 
present." 

Mary was prevented from replying to 
this speech by the entrance of a servant, 
who announced the carriage to be in 
waiting; and by IMrs. Stanmore imme- 
diately summoning the party to attend 
their evening engagement. 
I 'Z 



[ 172 I 

The blaze of splendour that issued from 
the apartments of Lady Ponto's elegant 
mansion ; the superb decorations of the 
rooms, and the brilliant assemblage of 
beauty and fashion which they con- 
tainedj diverted for a moment Mary's 
attention from those subjects \yhich had 
lately occupied it. 

Notwithstanding, however, the gaiety 
that surrounded her, and the efforts she 
made to rally her spirits, she soon again 
felt them to be oppressed by a weight, 
which she was equally unable to account 
for or resist. 

. She followed Mrs. Stan more through 
the crowded rooms, with pensiveness and 
indifference; nor could the multitude of 
apparently happy countenances which 
she saw on every side, inspire her with a 
single chearful idea. 

The present serious frame of her mind 
coonnunicated a tint ofgloom to, the 
scene before her, which seemed to rca- 



[ 173 ] 

lize the melancholy but admirable pic- 
ture that the poet had painted of these 
motley assemblies: 

" The rout is folly's circle — 

" And 'tis a fearful spe<5tacle to see 

" So many maniacs dancing in their chains. 

" They gaze upon the links that hold them fast, 

<' With eyes of anguish; execrate their lot, 

« Then shake them in despair, and dance again.'* 

Two antiquated female figures, whose 
wrinkled brows and palsied heads might 
liave entitled them to be considered only 
as a memento mori to the surrounding 
groupe, were engaged together at whist 
against a clergyman, who, with his 
partner, formed as striking a contrast 
to their antagonists in appearance, as 
they were opposite in reality. 

Mrs. Cassino, thouQ:h not vounsf, was 
still beautiful, and a perfect adept in the 
science to which she had long been 
devoted; and Dr. Shuffle, whose sacred 
funftiom could not shield him from the 



[ 174 J 

fascinating influence of play, being 
equally versed in all its necessary myste- 
ries, few were found who would engage 
so formidable a couple at the card-table. 
Their present adversaries, hovvever, 
were of the number of those unfortu- 
nates, who, having outlived all the 
transient advantages of youth and 
beauty, without providing against that 
period when less perishable qualities are 
requisite to prevent the female chara6ter 
from sinking into insignificance, have no 
other sources of comfort but cards and 
scandal, and are content to purchase- 
the privilege of being admitted into the 
circles of elegance and fashion, even at 
the risk of no inconsiderable pecuniary 
loss. 

, IVIary stood for some time observing 
this extraordinary group, and while she 
contemplated the novel charader of 
a clerical gambler, sincerely lamented; 
that one whose office it was to regulate 



t 175 ] 

the conducl of others, should make 90 
public au exhibition of vice iu his own. 

Turning at length with disgust from, 
this party, her attention was attracted by 
another not less remarkable, though of 
a different description. 

At this table two young and vxry 
lovely girls were engaged at cassino with 
the most earnest avidity. 

The star and the ornamented ribbon 
that decorated their respe^live partners, 
marked their superior rank ; whilst their 
captivating smoothness of manners, sig- 
nificant glances, and studied attentions, 
sutiiciently evinced, that their designs 
were aimed at the persons, and not the 
purses, of their fair opponents. 

The stake was high, the game at the 
most interesting point, and the appa- 
rently successful female already exulted 
in certain victory ; when ireaclicrous 
fortune, shifting her smiles, decided at 
one stroke in favour of her adversary. 



I 176 ] 

The gentlemen, whose thoughts were 
bent on more important conquests, be- 
trayed no symptom of surprize at this 
sudden reverse; but the countenances of 
the fair combatants underwent an instan- 
taneous metamorphosis. 

Triumphant pleasure now illuminated 
those features, which, a moment before, 
had expressed only anxiety and vex-- 
ation ; whilst anger darted from the eye, 
and had it not been pre-occupied by 
rouge, would have flushed into the cheek 
of the loser, whose quivering lip scarcely 
refrained itself from uttering the rage 
and disappointment with which her 
heart seemed bursting. 

** By St. Patrick, now," exclaimed an 
old Irish officer, who stood near IMary, 
** there is nothing in nature to me so 
hateful as the sight of a young and pretty 
female pouring over those bits of painted 
papei\ 



[ 



[ 177 ] 

*^A card-party, like the cave of Tro- 
phonius, instantly converts the cherub 
smiles of the dare creatures into a gravity 
of countenance that belongs only to their 
great grandmothers. 

'*7\rrah, now, how z^;g"/j/ does 'd.heaiitiful 
girl appear, when she is either grieving 
at her own losses, or triumphing over 
those of her less fortunate fi-iend." 

* Although 1 certainly agree with yoiv 
as to play in general, Sir O'Cailaghan,' 
replied an elderly gentleman, (whose 
benevolent countenance and urbanity of 
manners had already attraded the notice 
of our party;) ' yet as those persons who 
liave no resources in their own minds, 
must have occupation of some sort, I 
think there are exceptions to our rule; 
and that cards may in some cases be al- 
lowed to be an innocent amusement. 
• * Nay, indeed, I will go further, and 
assert, that they may now and then be; 
made u^^w/also* 



[ 178 3 

* In support of my theory, I have at 
this moment a case in point; and will 
propose a pool at Commerce, where 
the winner shall be entitled to a w^ork 
of ingenuity, the performance of one of 
the most engaging women in the world, 
(without any disparagement to the pre- 
sent lovely circle,' added he bowing 
gracefully,) ' and who has this additional 
claim upon our notice, of being unfor- 
tunate also. I hope, Sir O'Callaghan, 
in a case like this^ you will neither 
contradi6l my reasoning, nor counteract; 
my plan.' 

' ' Now, Winburne, " returned the other, 
^^ don't you mane the pretty emigrant 
who supports the old priest by the la- 
bour of her own delicate white fingers?" 

Mr. Winburne answering in the affir- 
mative, the knight continued. 

'* Oh! gentlemen, and ladies too, you 
will not, you cannot refuse your half- 
guineas on this occasion. 



C 179 ] 

*^ Even I, who have given up playing, 
at all, at all, becase 1 believe in my 
conscience that cards are one of the en- 
gines which the divil he wields for the 
destru6lion of us poor mortals; yet I 
will join the party. 

'^Och! did you know the swate an- 
gel, you would not stand shill-I shall-I 
about it?^' 

' The charms of Madame Henri's 
mind,' replied Mr. Winburne, ' her en- 
gaging modesty, and unaifected elegance 
^ of manners, are even superior to the 
beauty of her person.'" 

*' Ah, my good friend," said Sir 
O'Callaghan, '' if our young ladies knew 
the fascinating power that same modesty 
you spake of gives to beauty, they would, 
I am sure, bestow some little pains in its 
cultivation, instead of being so desirous, 
as too many of them saam to be, to root it 
out of their characters entirely, as a vul- 



C 180 ] 

gar weed, unfit for polished society, and 
gentale life. 

*' By my conscience, I hardly know 
what to do with my eyes, when I get 
amongst the modern female fashionables; 
they are enough to shame a dacent man 
out of countenance. Why they wear 
no more clothes than a mermaid." 

As he spoke. Sir O'Callaghan, by an 
arch glance, direded the eyes of his 
auditors towards the ladies of the Cassino 
party, whose style of dress too evidently 
proved they had little claim to the pos* 
session of that quality which the worthy 
knight deemed so estimable, 

* Hush, hush,' cried Mr. Winburne^ 
smiling, ' were your observations to be 
generally heard, they would efFe6lually 
ruin my pool of commerce. 

* Here^ however,' added he, turning 
to Mrs. Stanmore and her party, * there 
is no danger of your having injured the 
cause of pity. You see, ladies, I pre- 



[ 181 3 

sume to hope for your san61ion and 
assistance.' 

Never deaf to the call of beneficence, 
I\Irs. Stan more immediately acquiesced; 
and declaring, that on such an occasion, 
slie could not even objedl against Mary 
and her daughter deviating from general 
rules, she followed the philanthropic ]\Ir, 
A\'inburne to a comm.erce-table, Avhere 
the prize was handed round for general 
examination. 

It was a small work-box, with an ex- 
quisite pamting on the lid, representing 
the parting of He6lor and Andromache. 
A wreath of withered laurel surrounded 
the inside of the cover, and in th€ centre 
appeared an elegant female form, recli- 
nino: aQ'ainst a broken Gothic column. 
At her feet lay a faded rose-bud, un- 
timely snapped from its parent stalk. 
One of her arms resting on the pillar 
supported her head,, wdii 1st the other h,eld 
a scroll with this inscription : 



[ 182 ] 

<« Her He6lor lost, the Trojan widow mourns, 
*« Yet in her infant's smiles has comfort left j 

** Nor child, nor husband, e*er to me returns,, 
«* Of hope and happiness alike bereft." 

Powerfully interested by the afFe6ling 
circumstances of the decorations of the 
box, and struck with the masterly style 
of their execution, Mary dwelt with 
silent delight on its examination. 

She again closed the lid, and looking 
iipon it once more with increased atten- 
tion, thought she perceived a resem- 
blance in the features of He6lor, to a 
face whose recollection was always pre- 
sent to her fancy. 

'* Surely," said she to herself, '' 'tis 
the face of Edmund Herbert." 

The discovery at once interested her 
in the fortune of the game; and she, 
who, but a moment before, had thought 
only of the benefit Avhich Madame Henri 
would derive from the disposal of this- 



[ 183 3 

baojatelle, now became anxiously desi- 
rous of possessing it herself. 

Fortune seconding her wish, Miss 
Wheatley was in a short time declared 
the winner of the pool, and with infi- 
nitely more satisfaction than she ever 
imagined such a circumstance would 
have afforded her, she took possession 
of the prize. 

The stake of five guineas was in the 
mean time delivered to Mr. Winburne^ 
who, having undertaken to convey it to 
Madame Henri, gave the following par- 
ticulars of her situation to Mrs. Stan- 
more, as Mary and the younger part of 
the commerce-players were admiring 
and commenting upon the beauty of the 
box. 

*' I have already described this unfor- 
tunate female," said he, *' as one of the 
most elegant and amiable of women. 
She has certainly passed the meridian 



t 184 ] 

of beauty, but is a lovely interesting 
Mad on a. 

*' An attachment to a young English- 
man in early life, it seems, drew on her 
the heavy displeasure of a despotic father, 
who with savage cruelty separated the 
affe6lionate pair, and immured his 
daughter in a convent. 

** She remained in a state of cheerless 
captivity, until the late revolution let 
loose a lawless multitude, who restored 
her to liberty, by destroying the convent 
in which she was confined. 

** But liberty had lost all its sweets to 
Madame Henri; and the world was but 
a desert to one who was probably torn 
for ever from all her soul held dear. 

'* At this jun6iure, an old priest who 
had been the confessor of the convent, 
proposed to her to accompany him in his* 
flight to England, where many of bis 
brethren liad already takea refuge. 



[ 185 ] 

" Circumstances were urgent, and a 
prompt decision necessary. 

*' TNladame Henri therefore immedi- 
ately acceded to his proposal, and the 
refugees in a few days were landed at 
Southampton. 

** From that town thev came to Bath, 
in the hope of being able to procure a 
maintenance, by the confessor teaching 
French, and Madame Henri disposing 
of the productions of those accomplish- 
ments, which in happier days were only 
her amusements. 

'' For a short time their plan suc- 
ceeded, but at length the poor priest 
fell sick, (the consequence of mental 
anxiety and bodily fatigue,) and became 
incapable of any further exertions for 
his support. 

'^ Since this period, the generous wo- 
man has not only laboured with incessant 
diligence to procure the means of main- 
taining liim, but has also attended hina 



[ 18S ] 

with the most afFe6lionate solicitude; 
and though ill-health, and a naturally 
peevish and timid temper, render the 
old man at times but a melancholy 
charge, yet never for a moment has she 
relaxed in her attention or attachment 
to him. 

'' Indeed, I have reason to believe, 
that she not unfrequently denies herself 
many little comforts, for the pious purpose 
of procuring those indulgences for the 
priest, which she thinks his advanced 
age and infirmities require. 

** He is now much reduced, and can-' 
not probably long survive. 

*^ It will be an affefting stroke to 
poor Madame Henri whenever it hap- 
pens, as she will lose a very early and a 
very sincere friend ; and, alas, she has 
none to spare, 

*' However/' added he, his counte- 
nance glowing with benevolence, ^* there 
is one human being, I trust, who has 



[ 187 ] 

both the inclination and ability to 
shelter this tender plant from the rude 
storms of the world, and to prevent her 
sinking under the pressure of distress. 

*' But I have already, I fear, tres- 
passed too long on your time and pa- 
tience ; yet," continued he, \' if I have 
been so fortunate as to interest a lady 
of Mrs. Stanmore's merit and respecta- 
bility in favour of my fair friend, I shall 
scarcely repent having drawn her atten- 
tion from her party, who, I can readily 
believe, would on any other terms find 
it ditficult to pardon my selfishness." 

Whilst Mr. Winburne was yet speak- 
ing, Mary had unavoidably overheard 
part of a conversation between a group 
of politicians near her, who were dis- 
cussing with great earnestness some re« 
cent important intelligence. 

The words " transports, Bombay, pri- 
soners, slain, sunk, &c."hadl)oth caught 
her attention, and awakened her fears ; 



[ 188 ] 

and feeling unable to repress a curiosity 
which her anxiety on Edmuncrs account 
occasioned, she requested Mr. Fortescue's 
assistance to obtain the particulars of 
what she had so partially heard. 

He accordingly joined the circle, 
which was now every moment increa- 
sing, and there learned, that a private 
letter had been received by one of the 
gentlemen, which, in addition to some 
public news from the continent, men- 
tioned also, that the fleet in which the 
late expedition sailed, had been attacked 
by the enemy, that a report prevailed 
of a smart a6lion having taken place 
between the Lively and a French sloop 
of war, in which the latter was obliged 
to sheer off, after having killed and 
wounded several of the Liv^ely's cre\f. 

Mary could scarcely support herself 
whilst Mr. Fortescue related these par- 
ticulars. 



[ 1«9 ] 

The Lively was the vessel which had 
conveyed Edmund from his native shore; 
and her heart sunk, and the colour for- 
sook her cheek, when the possibility of 
his being included in the list of the slain 
or mutilated flashed upon her fancy. 

Mrs. Stanmore observed the change 
in her countenance, and immediately 
enquired with anxious solicitude the oc- 
casion of her apparent indisposition. 

Unwilling, however, to disclose the 
fears of her bosom, Mary attributed it 
to heat and fatigue, and requested that 
she might be permitted to return to 
^lilsom- street; a wish Mrs. Stanmore 
instantly complied v/ith, having first 
thanked Mr. Winburne for his interest- 
ing account of Madame Henri, and 
obtained a promise to be introduced to 
this amiable woman. 

On reaching the lodgings, Mary re- 
tired to her chamber, where in silence 
and solitude the dreadful purport of 



r 190 ] 

the conversation related to her by Mr. 
Fortescue pressed Avith tenfold weight 
upon her mind. 

Whatever amusement she had derived 
from the various incidents of the even- 
ing, whatever interest had been excited 
by the httle history of the unfortunate 
emigrant, however gratified she had felt 
on her unexpe6led acquisition of the 
desired prize, all were for a time annihi- 
lated by the news she had heard, 

*' Many had been killed and wound- 
ed;" and was it not probable that the 
ardour and gallantry of Edmund, for- 
ward in every service of honour, would 
compel him incautiously to expose him- 
self, and thus render him more obnox- 
ious to danger? And ah, if the fate of 
battle should have laid him low; (dread- 
ful, insupportable idea!) whither then 
would his disconsolate mother turn for 
peace and comfort ; and how would her 
own happiness be for ever blasted 1 



[ 191 ] 

The bursting sigh and quickly falUng 
tear evinced how deeply IMary's bosom 
was agitated by the fearful anticipations 
which her fancy had created. 

She in vain tried to compose herself, 
and banish images that possibly had no 
existence in reality. 

A vague and indistin6l dread of im- 
pending evil continued to obtrude itself 
upon her mind; and when at length 
'^ tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy 
sleep," weighed down her eyelids, the 
colours of her waking thoughts still 
tinged with their gloomy hues her short 
uneasy slumbers. 

Sometimes she beheld Edmund stretch- 
ed at her feet, breathing out the last 
remains of life in torturing agony; liis 
mother weeping by his side; while liis 
eye beamed upon them botli the last 
look of affection, and his parched lips 
murmured an eternal adieu. 



[ 19^2 ] 

On a sudden, with that incoherence 
which marked tlie visions of the night, 
she found herself wandering in solitude 
amidst a dismal waste. 

Whilst she trembled with secret horror 
at her forlorn situation, a lovely form 
appeared ; 'twas Edmund's self. Hrs 
eyt spoke rapture, and his melodious 
voice bade her banish fear. She sprang 
forward to embrace him; he uttered a 
piercing groan, and sank lifeless in her 
arms. 

Mary shrieking, awoke in horror; and 
for a moment, bewildered reason made 
her doubtful whether the sad visions she 
had seen, were merely the eife(5i; of a 
disordered imagination, or had their 
foundation in horrible truth. 

The last sigh of Edmund still seemed 
to vibrate on her ear; and wdth ** her 
mind's eye," she yet contemplated his 
breathless corpse. 



r 193 ] 

Divesting herself, however, as much 
as she could, of the effeds which these 
phantoms of the brain had produced, 
she dressed herself, and descended to 
the breakfast parlour* 



VOL. !!• 



[ iM 3 



CHAPTER VII, 



MRS. Stanmore was waiting below to 
receive her amiable young friend, 
and anxiously enquired, as soon as she 
saw her, whether her indisposition was 
removed. 

Mary answered with a smile; but her 
countenance too plainly declared, that 
it was a forced one, and not the genuine 
offspring of her heart. 

She, however, made every effort to 
jessen tjie solicitude of her friends on 



[ 195 3 

her account; and had in a great degree 
dissipated the gloom, with which her 
foreboding fears and frightful dreams 
had overcast her mind, when a letter 
arrived, that in a moment converted 
imao-inarv evil into real affliction : and 
plunged her into a state of equal per- 
plexity and distress. 

The letter, which was a very long one, 
came from John Wheatley, who had 
written it to ^liss Wheatley, in his mo- 
ther's name, and at her desire and 
di6tating. 

It began with many apologies for the 
liberty she was taking, and excusing it, 
by saying, that as Dr. Fairford was absent 
from home, she had no one to whom she 
could apply under the present unhappy 
circumstances: it proceeded as follows: 

'* Alas! dear and dearest Miss Mary, 
how can I, ignorant and unknowing as 
I be, find words to tell you what my 
worthy good lady has suffered ? 
K 2 



[ 196 ] 

'' To think that such an angel of a 
woman should be so affli6led, it almost 
breaks my heart. 

' ' 'Tis only the day before yesterday, 
when I was crying by her side, that she 
bade me dry my tears, and said, * Hav^ 
I received good at the hands of the 
Lord, and shall 1 not receive evil also 
with Christian resignation ? Believe me, 
Dame, that for myself I feel but little. 
My childi^en, indeed, and dearest Mary 
— and here she stopped, and sighed as? 
if her heart would break. 

^^ Oh, dear miss, what shall, what 
ca7i I do? 

^' But to go on with the dismal story 

*^ You know, that soon after you set 
out on your journey to Bath, the squire 
was taken ill. In short, (for madam did 
not like to make the worst of it to you,) 
as he was coming home from that Sir 
Nimrod Heartley's, (who he intended 
should marrj Miss Matilda, but there 



C 1.97 ] 

slie didn't like 'en, and no wonder, sure,) 
a' was sadly in liquor, and fell from liis 
horse, and bruised himself almost to a 
mummy. 

*' Madam was despartly frightened, 
but tended 'en with as much afledion, 
as if a' had been the best husband upon 
earth; sat by his bedside, gi'd him all his 
physic, bore all his ill-humours with pa- 
tience, and would so smile on the servants 
Avhen master was swearing at their awk- 
wardness, and assure 'em it was his great 
pain that made 'en so cross. Oh, she's 
a saint from heaven, that's sartain. 

*^ Well, miss ; when a' lay at the worst, 
(for a' was in a burning fever, from the 
bad state of his blood,) and we did net 
know but 'a would die, what does Miss 
I\Iatilda do, but i^uns away with some 
great gentleman, w^ho, they say, has 'a 
carried her back to France. 

*^ Ah, 1 thought no good would come 
of sending the poor child beyond sea, 



C m ] 

before she knew, as a body may say, 
her right hand from her left. 

*' Well, off she went; and a terribly 
to do the squire made about it; and, no 
wonder ; but then a' should not blam43 
t/oUj nor abuse ?}ie for what I couldn't 
know or prevent. 

'* Yes, if you'll believe me, dear miss, 
he sent for me to his bed-side, and told 
me, with such a glaring look as I shall 
never forget, that I was a wicked woman 
ever to have brought you to the Lodge; 
that your example (a' said, a wicked 
man !) had corrupted Miss Matilda; that 
you'd sedueed away Master Echnund 
fiom his duty to 'en; and a' swore with 
a terrible oath, that you should never 
enter the doors of the Lodge again. 

^' Lord! I thought I should a' died 
when a' talked in this way; and was so 
choaked with tears, that for some mi- 
nutes I could not speak. 



[ 199 ] 

** However, I thought 1 would try to 
mollify 'en a little, and began to tell 'en 
what a sweet child you had always been; 
but he wouldn't hear me, but ordered 
the old canting dcvil^ as a' called me, to 
be turned out of the room. 

^' There, God forgive 'en ; I'm sure 
I do, though I didn't think at my time 
of life to be called such profane names. 

** In a day or two, the squire began 
to mend ; whilst poor madam, almost 
dead with fatigue and grief, (for a' had 
told her the same as me, ) looked piceously, 
and could hardly get about, though she 
wouldn't complain, nor gi' up tending 
master Avith the same care as ever. 

'* One morning slie had brought 'en 
his breakfast, and carried 'en at the 
same time a letter, which I believe came 
from Lunnon. 

'* Poor madam and I only were in the 
room, and to be sure I never was so 
frightened in all my life. 



[ 200 ] 

^' lie no sooner read 'en, than his face 
grew all manner of colours ; he swore 
the most bitter oaths that ever were 
heard, beat his head wi' his fists, and at 
last fell down in a fit. 

** I rang the bell, and sent for the 
potecary, while madam rubbed his tem- 
ples with hartshorn, and got 'en into bed, ^ 

** But nothing would keep 'en there, 
as soon as he came to himself; and tho' 
the dodor told 'en his life depended 
upon being quiet, a' swore a' would dress 
himself, and go immediately post to 
Lunnon. 

" After much persuasion, however, 
he consented to defer his journey till the 
next day, and took the composing 
draught that Mr. Phial prescribed, be- 
cause, a' said, it might perhaps make 'en 
stronger for his journey. 

*' Madam hoped, and so indeed did 
the do6i;or, that he would forget his 
intention,; but not a bit of it ; he next 



[ 201 ] 

day ordered post-horses, and sure enough' 
set olT for town. 

^^ As soon as my poor dear lady heard 
the orders given, she tottered into the 
squire's room, leaning on my arm, for 
she was so weak she couldn't walk alone ; 
and begged with tears, that a' would 
not think of going in the state he was, 
or at least allow her to accompany him. 

^' Lord ! my dear miss, what it is to 
be wicked, and to have a bad conscience. 

'* I'm sure I never saw so dreadful a 
countenance as the squire's, when he 
cried, ' No, no,_ I've ruined you already; 
stay where you are. Don't think of fol- 
lowing: me: for I'm resolved never to 
see you again, unless I can retrieve what 
I have lostj and save my family from 
heggari/,' 

" Ah, my dear miss, nobody likes to 
speak out, but we a' all along suspeded, 
that the squire was a ruined man. 



[ 202 ] 

'^ Mrs. Herbert had done all she could 
to save 'en ; and I am pretty sartain dis- 
posed of all her family jewels for that 
purpose. 

*•' The horses and carriages too liave 
been sold since you went ; but the neigh- 
bours say he's so much in debt to Jews 
and gamblers, that all his fortune would 
not clear 'en oiF. 

*' Well, to Lunnon the squire went 
the day before yesterday, and left poor 
dear madam in a terrible state. She 
makes no complaint indeed, but looks 
so piteous, that it wirings my heart to 
see her. At nights too she's quite deli- 
rious, and rambles on for hours about 
Mister Edmund and you. 

*^ The do6lor calls the complaint nar- 
vous, and says she will be better soon ; 
but I'm frightened out of my wits at 
the very thought of losing her ; 'twould 
kill me, I'm sure, and many more 
besides. 



[ 203 ] 

** 'Tis as (rood as a sarment to hear 
her talk of God's goodness in sending* 
tis atiiidion in this Avorld, that he may 
spare ns in the next, and make us happy 
for e\Qi\ 

** Her chief trouble indeed is about 
you, and how you'll bear the sad news 
she must soon acquaint you witli. 

*^ She has to-day been wishing she 
were able to write to you, and means it 
as soon as she can* But I was willing 
to be before hand wi' her, particularly 
as the doctor thinks it would go a great 
way to recover her, could she see one 
that she loves so much as yourself. 

'* But this isn't all our grief. For our 
John heard a report at market, this 
morning, that the ship Mister Edmund 
"went.out in, was sunk or taken, orsom'at 
as bad, by them there vile enemies of 
every thing thats good, the Prench, 

" I pray God it mayn't be true, tar 
'twtJuld kill dear madam outright, la- 



[ 204 ] 

cTeed a much less matter than that might 
now do it. 

'''So no more at present from your 
lovino- friend and humble servant till 
death, 

'VMartha and John Wheatley. 

'' P. S. I hope his reverence Dr. Fair- 
ford (God bless 'en!) will come back 
soon ; we want 'en mainly just now. 
Jenny desires her duty." 

Every sentence of this simple letter 
was a dagger to the soul of Mary. 

As she proceeded in its contents, a 
giddiness seized her head, her face be- 
came deadly pale, an universal trembling 
shook her limbs, the fatal paper dropt 
from her hand, and she fell back sense- 
less on the sopha. 

Mrs. Stanmore and her daughter ran 
towards her in the utmost alarm, and^ 
Avhilst the former applied hartshorn to 



[ 205 ] 

lier temples and nostrils, Harriet in an 
agony of grief seized the passive hand of 
her insensible friend. 

It was cold as ice. A death-like stupor 
sealed up all her faculties; far more af- 
feding than the most violent grief. No 
beating pulse indicated the remains of 
life; the heart was still; the lip wa& 
pale; the eye wajs closed. 

^' For pity's sake, speak to me ; look 
on me, dear Mary!" cried Harriet Stan-^ 
more; *' do not kill me by this horrible 
silence I" 

' Do, my sweet girl,' interrupted her 
mother, who had cast her eye over tha 
contents of the letter, ^ exert your pow- 
ers, I beseech you. For our sake, for 
your own sake, for the sake of our 
affli6led and incomparable Mrs. Herbert, 
rouze yourself, and look upon us. She 
is already sinking under a weight of 
sorrow ; oh! do not kill her quite!' 



[ 205 1 

At the name of her beloved protectress 
Mary awakened to sense and recolleelion.^ 

She raised her heavy eyes, and per- 
ceived Mrs. Stanmore hanoins:. over her 
with tlie most afFedion ate solicitude. 

She felt her tears drop upon the cheek 
she kissed; and saw her daughter also 
kneeling at her feet with clasped hands, 
and weeping eyes lifted up to heaven in. 
silent ejaculation. 

The affe6ling sight operated like a 
charm upon- the genej-ous girl.. 

A full sense of the sufferings of these: 
tender friends ; a; convi(!]tion of Mrs. 
Herbert's lamentable situation ; and the 
jiecessity there was of exertion on her 
own part, rushed at once into her 
mind.. 

She instant'ly rose, and tlirowing her- 
self into Mrs. Stan more's arms, ^^ Forr 
give^ this weakness, dearest madam!" 
she cried,, and burst into a salutary flood: 
.of tears. 



[ 207 ] 

Scarcely liad the atllicted grouj3 re- 
covered any degree of composure, wlieii 
the door opened, and Mv. Fortescue wa.s 
announced. 

■Mary, unable entirely to conceal her 
emotion, moved towards the passage, 
with an intention of retiring to her 
apartment; but was prevented by IMr, 
Fortescue^who, approaching her, respecl- 
fully took her hand, and with an agita- 
tion in his manner and countenance, 
^vhich he had never before manifested, 
said, '' Do not fly me, dear Miss 
Wheatley — Heavens, you are in tears'- 
Oh ! tax me not with presumption, if I 
intreat that I may know and share youp 
sorrows!" 

Silently end<?avouring to disengage 
herself, Mary for a moment withdrew 
the handkerchief that concealed her face, 
and cast a supplicating look at Mrs. 
Stanmore, who addressing Mv. Fortescue 
entreated he would at present allow lier 



[ 208 ] 

young friend to retire ; adding in a lower 
tone, * Miss Wheatley has received some 
distressing intelligence from Hampshire, 
which makes it necessary that she should 
immediately return thither.' 

'*0h! then," replied Fortescue, with 
additional emotion, and in a more hur- 
ried tone, ' * the more loudly am I called 
upon to avow those sentiments, which I 
long have entertained for your angelic 
friend." 

^'Yes," continued he, turning ta 
Mary, '* I must speak; my happiness^ 
depends upan it. For heaven's sake, 
quit me not, most amiable girl, till I ac- 
count for thus abruptly declaring to you 
the secret of my soul. Within this hour 
has a summons reached me to repair to 
a dying relative, and receive his last 
injun6tions ; and the chaise now waits to 
carry me from Bath. But ignorant wher^ 
and where I should again have the hap- 
piness of meeting you, I could not tea® 



[ 209 ] 

myself away, without first seeking an 
opportunity of acknowledging the love, 
the adoration, which my bosom cherishes 
for Miss Wheatley; and intreating her 
permission to offer to her the purest vows 
of a heart on which her image is engra- 
ven, and to throw myself and fortune at 
her feet." 

Mary, in speechless agony, hid her face 
in Mrs. Stanmore's bosom; who, pleased 
with the unexpe6ted avowal which Mr. 
Fortescue had just so generously made> 
and perfectly ignorant of Mary's at- 
tachment to her adopted brother, se- 
cretly hoped this silent agitation of the 
lovely girl might not be an unpropitious 
omen to the wishes of her friend. 

Mr. Fortescue, with the ardour natural 
to his chara6ter, drew a similar conclu- 
sion from her behaviour, and once more 
clasping Mary's hand, 

'^ Enchanting Miss Wheatley!" he 
exclaimed, ''again let me sue to yoiv 



[ 210 ] 

for pardon on my presumption. Again 
let me intreat you to believe, that my 
rashness would never have impelled me 
to so sudden a disclosure of my senti- 
ments, had not this inevitable and un- 
locked Ibr separation from jou deprived' 
me of all self-command. But let me not 
longer distress your delicacy; or further 
press a subje6l at present, which may 
increase an agitation, that I would give 
the world to soothe. I go, dearest girl ; 
chearedwith the hope, that when 1 have 
fulfilled the duties which call me hence, 
1 may be allowed to solicit of Mrs. Her- 
bert her consent to an union whicli can 
alone make existence desirable to me.'* 

^ Leave me not, Mr. Fortescue ; leave 
me not, I intreat you, in so dangerous 
an error;' replied Mary, still unable to 
suppress her tears, yet struggling to speaH 
with some appearance of (composure. 

* For worlds I would not deceive you, 
most estimable man. Believe me, my 



C 211 ] 

heart swells ^\•it]l gratitude for tliis in- 
stance of disinterested goodness; but — 
alas! what return can a child of misery, 
as I am, make to so much generosity?' 

*' Dearest I\Iary, I ask but your love ; 
nor could the world bestow a richer 
treasure." 

^ LoveF she emphatically repeated, 
* to a heart oppressed like mine, love, 
Mr. Fortescue, must be a stranger. My 
friendship; my esteem ; my every feel- 
ing that gratitude can inspire, are yours 
for ever; but press me not, I intreat, 
I beseech you, for any return, which I 
cannot make.' 

With these M^ords she hastily broke 
from his grasp, and instantly quitted the 
room. 

To Fortescue, whose sens.ibility and 
delicacy were extreme, and Avhose at- 
tachment was as ardent and exalted as 
he painted it, this rejection of his ad* 
dresses seemed a trial almost overwhelm- 



[ ^12 1 

ing, and for a moment lie determined 
to banish himself for ever from Miss 
Wheatley's sight. 

Mrs. Stanmore, however, who saw and 
pitied his distress; and who a6lually 
attributed the decisiveness of Mary's 
language to the agonizing state of her 
present feelings; endeavoured to soothe 
him again into hope, and to convince him 
that nothing she had said could be con- 
strued into a positive refusal* 

She explained the circumstances that 
had taken place at the Lodge, and the 
effeds they had produced on the sensi- 
bility of Mary; which accounted very 
naturally for the hurry and agitation of 
her spirits, and might also, not unrea- 
sonably, be supposed to have had some 
influence in suggesting her concluding 
words. 

Mr. Fortescue gladly availed himself 
of Mrs. Stanmore's hint; and with feel- 
ings if possible of still greater admira- 



[ 213 ] 

tlon of Miss Wheatley than before, he 
determined to continue those atten- 
tions, v/hich additional motives now im 
peiled him to hope might be eventually 
successful. . 

At present, however, he saw the im- 
propriety of further urging his suit; and 
having engaged. Mrs, Stanmore to be 
his wiihng advocate with her young 
friend, he took his leave with a flattering- 
anticipation of future happiness, which, 
rising from the ashes of his late disap- 
pointment, shed a cheering ray in the 
gloom of this necessary separation from 
the obje6l of his wishes. 



END OF VOL. II. 



Prifitcd by Richard Cruttwe'J, St. Jamc«'s-ftrect, Bath. 
